TPOPOSALOGI'A: Tropes and Figures; OR, A TREATISE OF The Metaphors,
Allegories, and express Similitudes, etc. contained in the Bible of the Old and
New Testament.

To which is prefixed, Diverse ARGUMENTS to prove the Divine Authority of the
HOLY SCRIPTURES Wherein also it is largely evinced, That by the Great Whore,
[MYSTERY BABYLON] is meant the Papal Hierarchy, or present State and Church of
Rome.

Philologia Sacra, The Second Part.

Wherein the Schemes, or Figures in Scripture, are reduced under their proper
Heads, with a brief Explication of each.

Together with a TREATISE of Types, Parables, etc. with an Improvement of them
Parallel-wise.

By B. K

Oration Metaphorica est perspicua sensibus, and ad animum affectusque movendos
aptissima. Burgersd. Log. lib. 1. Hos. 12.1. I have used Similitudes by the
Ministry of the Prophets. Gal. 4.24. Which Things are an Allegory, etc. Heb.
8.5. Who serve unto the Example and Shadow of heavenly Things. LONDON, Printed
by John Darby, for the Author. MDCLXXXII.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THou have here a Multitude of Scripture-Metaphors, Types, Similies, and other
borrowed Terms, opened, and practically improved, which ('it is hoped) may tend
to the Advantage of all who love to read the Holy Scriptures, and long after
Knowledge, either Natural or Divine. The wisest of Men tells us, that the great
Lesson his Father taught him, was to get Wisdom and Understanding, because it is
the principal Thing. Where to find this invaluable Jewel, we are informed by
the Son of God, Search the Scriptures, etc. Which, John 5.39.
as the great Apostle says, are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through
Faith in Jesus Christ. How to obtain it, we are elsewhere told, We must ask it
of God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given to us.
James 1.5.
In a word, It is to be cried after, sought as Silver, Prove. 2.3, 4.
and searched for as hid Treasures. He who sincerely gives up himself to
frequent Prayer and Meditation, and resolves to be in the continual Pursuit of
this chief of Blessings, may assure himself of Success, having the Promise of a
faithful God, who cannot lie, for his Security. The Means are plain, and the
Encouragement great, beyond comparison: It is therefore the Interest of every
Christian to converse with the Word of God, in order to obtain a Purchase so
eminently dignified with the Title of Principal Thing.

No Age since the Infancy of Christianity had greater Advantage to arrive at
Scripture-Knowledge than we enjoy; nor does the Light of the Gospel shine with
more eminent Luster in any Nation, than in England at this time, (which causes
Satan, and his Hellish Emissaries, to strive to darken or eclipse its Glory, by
introducing Popery, Superstition, and Error amongst us.) England, and
particularly its famous Metropolis, is the very Butt of Antichristian Spite and
Fury, because it is indeed thought to be the main Bulwark of the true
Protestant Religion throughout the World. We have the Scriptures translated in
our Mother Tongue, which the sacrilegious Adversaries of Truth locked up in
Languages unknown to the Vulgar. We have the Comments and Expositions of the
Learned, instead of the pestilent and Heretical Glosses of Rome; we have still,
notwithstanding all the Machinations of the Enemies of the Gospel, a painful,
powerful, preaching Ministry. And if we improve not all these Mercies to the
acquisition of this divine and sublime Knowledge, how inexcusable shall we be,
and how just in God, should he in one day deprive us of all?

It was said by the Learned Illyricus, In sacris Literis amplissimus and
instructissimus Thesaurus paratus est, -- ut nos inde omnia nobis necessaria,
ac salutoria Remedia hauriamus: In the holy Scriptures a vast and most immense
Treasure is provided, from whence we may be furnished with whatsoever is
necessary and wholesome. Here is a large Field of spiritual Employment. I adore,
says Tertullian, the Fullness of the Holy Scriptures. What a vast Number of
Commentaries, Expositions, and Elucidations are extant! yea, one single Verse
affords a most learned and procopious Theme for a whole Volume; yet there is
Work enough still left, and the learned and profitable Labors of those eminent
Worthies that have gone before us, do not prohibit the Additions of subsequent
Ages, nor render them unnecessary. All sorts of Knowledge are improvable, and
that which is divine, calls for the most earnest and sollicitous pursuit,
because all other Sciences are vain and useless without it; and is
comprehensive (in as much as it gives a full Discovery of Christ) of what is
necessary to Salvation, 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 5.8. This renders it universally
good; and Good is communicative. It is a Talent that calls for Improvement, to
the Profit of Communities. It is called Light, the Nature of which is perfectly
diffusive of its Radiance, and bright Illustrations; and it is not to be put
under a Bushel, but in a Candlestick, to enlighten the whole House. Every
Christian is to improve and stir up the Gift that is in him: And tho a Work be
not done so well by one Man, as it might by another, who has greater
Accomplishments, (were it set upon his Heart to undertake it) yet may the
Profit to some Souls countervail the Labor, and the Whole bless the World
more, than not to have it done at all: Besides, what Man, in this nice and
censorious Age, can give Content to all?

These Considerations seemed so weighty, as to incline me to employ some of
that Time and Talent the Lord has entrusted me with, to complete this Work.

It Is obvious to every one's Observation, that the Holy Scripture abounds with
Metaphors, Allegories, and other Tropes and Figures of Speech. Similitudes are
borrowed from Visible Things, to set forth and illustrate the excellent Nature
of Invisible Things; yea, heavenly Things are often called by the very Names
that material or earthly Things are called, which is not to obscure or hide the
meaning of them from us, but to accommodate them to our Understanding; God by a
gracious (...), or Condescension, conveying the Knowledge of Himself, and
spiritual Things, by preaching them by their respective earthly Similitudes,
etc. If I have told you of earthly Things, and ye believe not; how shall ye
believe, if I tell you of heavenly Things? John 3.12. And tho the Style of the
Holy Scripture is not varnished with that Delicacy of superficial Ornament,
that jingling Cadency of Sounds, and Fancy-pleasing Trifles, as the pompous
Oratory of Greece and Rome is beautified with; yet it has Qualities far more
excellent: It Is grave and masculine; it has a magnificent, commanding
Elegance, peculiar to it self, suitable to the lofty Things it treats of, which
no other Writing can imitate; reaching the inner Rooms of the Soul, and
stirring up Affections, in so spiritual and sublime a kind, as the artificial
Bravery of Cicero, or Quintilian's Elocution, could never do. There are
Mysteries, which Nature, as such, (however adorned with Philosophical Notions,
or Metaphysical Speculations,) cannot comprehend: They are like the Waters of
the Sanctuary, where a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim: A weak
Christian that is gracious, may go through, were the unsanctified Schoolman may
be plunged and overwhelmed: They are so plain and easy, that a Babe in Christ
may understand them; and some Places so difficult, as to find Work for the
utmost Study and Inquisition of the most knowing.

This is the Second, and Last Volume, and perfects our whole Design, which I
thought at first might have came into one entire Book. That which was promised
at first, concerning the Divine Authority of the Scripture, and the Whore of
Babylon, you will find here. And tho there is one Thing omitted, or left out,
which was in the Specimen, viz. Demonstrations touching the Validity of our
Translation, which we lately found done some time since by the Learned Dr.
Owen, and others: Yet you have in the room of it a Treatise of Types, which I
am persuaded will be more acceptable to most Men, and has been much more
laborious and chargeable to complete, it containing diverse Sheets. A Treatise
of Types under the Law, carefully opened, we have ground to believe, will be
very serviceable, especially to those in the Ministry: And such has been my
Care, that I have not run one Parallel concerning Types, but what I have had
the Opinion of the most learned Typical Writers upon; so that I readily
confess, it is rather theirs than mine.

And tho there is a great difference between Metaphorical or Allegorical, and
Typical Scriptures; yet we thought an Essay to open the most eminent Types
found in the Old Testament, would well suit with this sublime Subject: And
because some, for want of Study or Learning, may not readily understand the
Difference that is between them, we will give you here the Sense of the Learned
upon it, See Mr. D^rham of Glasgow, Key to his Clavis Cantici.
particularly between what is Allegorical and Typical, (we take Allegory here
as Divines do, who take it not as Grammarians or Rhetoricians, for a continued
Discourse of many Figures together) properly, or strictly taken: For sometimes
an Allegory may be taken largely, and so may comprehend whatsoever is
figurative, whether Typical, Tropological, Analogical, etc. as the Apostle has
it in Gal. 4. speaking of Abraham's two Sons, Isaac and Ishmael, which is yet
properly a Type, differs from Types, or Typical Scripture, thus:

1. Types suppose still the Verity of some History, as Jonah's being three Days
and three Nights in the Fishes Belly; when it is applied to Christ in the New
Testament, it supposes such a thing was once done, etc. Allegories again have
no such necessary Supposition, but are as Parables, propounded for some
mystical End. Thus whilst it is said, Mat. 21. A certain King made a Marriage
for his Son, planted a Vineyard, etc. Those Places suppose it not necessary as
to the being of the Allegory, that ever such a thing was; but a Type cannot be
without reality in the thing, as Fact, which is made a Type.

2. Types look only to Matter of Fact, and compare one Fact with another, (as
Christ being slain, and lying three Days in the Grave, to the Paschal Lamb, and
Jonah's lying so long in the Whale's Belly): But Allegories take in Words,
Sentences, Doctrines, both of Faith and Manners, as in the former Example is
clear.

3. Types compare Persons and Facts under the Old Testament, with Persons and
Facts under the New, and is made up of something that is present, prefiguring
another to come: Allegories look especially to Matters in hand, and intend the
explaining some hidden and mystical Sense upon the Words, which at present they
seem not to bear.

4. Types are only Historical, as such; and the Truth of Fact agreeing in the
Antitype makes them up: it being clear in Scripture, that such things are
Types; for we must not forge Types without Scripture-Warrant: But Allegories,
etc. are principally Doctrinal, and in their Scope intend not to clear or
compare Facts, but to hold forth and explain Doctrines, or by such Similitudes
to illustrate, and make them the better understood, and to move and affect the
Heart the more, or the more forcibly to convince the Conscience; as Nathan made
use of a Parable, when he was about to convince David.

5. Types in the Old Testament respect only some Things, Persons, and Events;
as Christ, the Gospel, and the spreading thereof, etc. and cannot be extended
beyond these: But Allegories, Similitudes, etc. take in every thing, that
belongs either to Doctrine, or Instruction in Faith, or Practice, for ordering
of one's Life. Hence, according to the Judgment of the Learned, Metaphors,
Allegories, etc. are more extensive and comprehensive in their Meaning and
Application, than Types; tho it is not denied, but that care ought to be had
that they be not run beyond the Analogy of Faith; and many times it behooves to
see we go not beyond the Scope of the Text, which plainly shows the whole Mind
of the Spirit, in making use of such Similitudes, for Illustration sake; and we
hope we have kept within a due compass in this respect, and avoided whatever
may give just cause of Offense to any.

You had in the First Volume a Treatise of Tropes, reduced under their proper
Heads; and here you have the Schemes or Figures in Scripture handled after the
same manner. And because there is some difficulty to understand Allegorical
Scriptures, or to know what Places are to be taken metaphorically, we shall
show, See, Key to Clavis Cantic.
(as it is noted by the Learned) 1. What an Allegory or figurative Scripture is.
2. When it is necessary to understand a Scripture figuratively, or in an
Allegorick Sense.

For the first, there is a great difference betwixt an Allegorick Exposition of
Scripture, and an Exposition of Allegorick Scripture: The first is that which
the Fathers and Schoolmen fail in, i. e. when they allegorize plain Scriptures
and Histories, seeking to draw out some secret meaning, other than appears in
the Words, and so would fasten many Senses upon one Scripture. This is indeed
unsafe, and is justly reprovable; for this makes clear Scripture dark, and
obtrudes Meanings on the Words never intended by the Spirit: As suppose one
speaking of Goliah's Combat with David, should pass by the Letter, and expound
Goliath to be the Flesh, or the Devil; and David, to mean the Spirit or Christ.
Such Expositions may have some pleasantness, but very little solidity; and such
who commonly thus interpret Scripture, often fall into Errors, and guilty of
this Fault Origin is thought to be.

2dly, An Exposition of ^llegorical Scripture is the opening and expounding of
some dark Scripture, (wherein the Mind of the Spirit is couched and hid under
Figures, etc.) making it plain and edifying, by bringing out the Sense
according to the meaning of the Holy Spirit in the place, tho at first it seems
to bear no such thing. So Mat. 13. Christ expounds that Parable or Allegory,
(for tho Rhetoricians make a difference between Metaphors, Similes, Parables,
and Allegories, yet in Divinity there is none, but that Allegories are more
large and continued) calling the Seed the Word, and the Sower the Son of Man,
etc. This way of expounding such dark Scriptures is both useful and necessary,
and was often used as edifying by our Lord Jesus to his Disciples. Now it is
this we speak of, which teaches how to draw plain Doctrines out of Metaphors,
Allegories, etc. and not to draw Allegories out of plain Histories.

Secondly, it may be asked, When we are to account a Place of Scripture
figurative or allegorick, and seek some other meaning than what at first
appears.

Answ. 1. When the literal proper meaning looks absurd-like, or is empty,
nothing to Edification; as when it is said, Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man, etc. This is my Body, etc. And so those Scriptures that command to
pluck out the right Eye, and cut off the right Hand, take up our Cross, etc.
All which, if literally understood, were absurd and ridiculous; and therefore
the mistaking such Scriptures, has occasioned many grievous Errors, as that of
the Anthropomorphites, attributing Members viz. Head, Hands, Feet, etc, to God;
and Passions, yea, Infirmities, as Anger, Repenting, etc. because the
Scriptures in such places, speaking after the manner of Men, metaphorically
attribute such things to him.

2. Those Places of Scripture are to be accounted Metaphorical or Allegorick,
which reach not the Scope of Edification intended by them, if literally
understood; as, when Christ spoke of Sowing, Mat. 13. the Disciples thought,
something more was intended than at first appeared, for his Aim could not be to
discourse of Husbandry to them.

3. When a literal Sense would obtrude some Falsity on the Scripture, then such
Places are to be taken Allegorically; as when Christ said, Destroy this Temple,
and I will build it up again in three Days: Which if understood of the Material
Temple, Christ's Words would not have had their Accomplishment; But he spoke,
figuratively, of his Body. So when Christ said, Except a Man eat my Flesh, and
drink my Blood, he cannot live; it cannot be understood literally, because many
who have obtained Life, never did so eat his Flesh, etc.

4. Any Scripture is to be accounted Figurative or Allegorical, when the
literal Sense agrees not with other Scriptures, and is repugnant to the Analogy
of Faith, or Rules of good Manners; as when we are comman^ed to heap Coals of
Fire upon the Head of our Enemy; now we being required not to avenge our
selves, it follows clearly, this Scripture is not properly or literally
understood.

5. When a literal Sense answers not to the present Scope of the Speaker, and
the Speaker would be thought impertinent, if his Words were properly taken;
then it ought to be expounded in a figurative Sense. So Mat. 3.10. when John is
pressing Repentance, he says, Now is the Ax laid to the Root of the Tree, etc.
And the Parable of Christ, Luke 13.7. If these Places were only properly to be
understood, they would not enforce Repentance.

And now, Reader, had we not had good Encouragement from diverse worthy
Ministers in this City, this, as well as the former, had never seen the Sun;
but the readiness of diverse Persons, upon the coming out of the First, to
subscribe for this, has midwiv'd it into the World, where we expect it will
meet with different Entertainment; but I hope by this time, through the Grace
of God, I have learned not to be concerned, either about the Praise of some on
the one hand, or Dispraise and Contempt of others, on the other hand: not
doubting, but that this, or the succeeding Age, may receive Advantage by it,
and many bless God for it: And if it bring Glory to God, and Profit to his
Church, I have my chief End, and shall be content, tho I pass under the
Censures of captious Men, etc. I must confess, it is not all of my own
compiling; I have made use of some help from others, partly to expedite the
Work, and partly for want of some Literature. And now, Reader, that I may not
retain thee longer at the Door, I shall commit Thee and the Work to the
Blessing of the Lord, heartily begging an Interest in thy Prayers, engaging not
to forget thee in this evil and perilous Hour, subscribe my self,

Thy Servant for Jesus's sake, BENj. KEACH.
London, August 9. 1682.
A TABLE OF The Heads of those Metaphors, Similes, borrowed Terms, Types,
Figures, and other chief Things, insisted upon in this Book.
THe Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture asserted and vindicated, Page j, to
xvj
The Fifth HEAD of Metaphors, Similes, etc.
GRace compared to Salt, Page 1 Truth compared to a Girdle, Page 3
Righteousness a Breast Plate, Page 9 Faith a Shield, Page 13 Faith more
precious than Gold, Page 15 Hope an Helmet, Page 22 Hope an Anchor, Page 25
Love compared to Death and the Grave, and to Flames of Fire, Page 30, 31 Love
compared to Wine, Page 32 Baptism a Burial, Page 35 The Lord's Supper, Page 38
Christ our Passover, Page 45
The Sixth HEAD, etc. concerning Angels, and the Soul of Man.
Angels Watchers, Page 50 Angels Morning-Stars, Page 52 Angels Sons of God,
Page 53 Angels God's Host, Page 55 Angels compared to the Face of a Man, a
Lion, an Ox, and an Eagle, Page 57 Angels compared to the Wind, and Flames of
Fire, Page 61 Angels called Horses, red, white, speckled, etc. Page 63, 64 Soul
of Man compared to a Ship, Page 64 Spirit of Man a Candle, Page 67 Conscience a
Witness, Page 69
The Seventh HEAD etc. concerning God's Church.
CHurch a City, Page 76, to 85 Church compared to the Moon, Page 86 Church the
Temple of God, or the Antitype of Solomon's Temple, Page 87 Church the
Antitype of the Second Temple, Page 89 Church called an Olive Tree, Page 91
Church compared to an Inn, Page 92 Church a Vine, Page 93 Church compared to a
Dove, Page 94 Church compared to the Body natural, Page 97 Church a Vineyard,
Page 99 Church called a Virgin, Page 102 Church a Wife, Page 103 Church
compared to a Bush on fire, Page 106 Church compared to a Mother, Page 109
Church a Garden, Page 112 Church a Lilly among Thorns, Page 115 Church compared
to a Merchant-Ship, Page 118 Church a Golden Candlestick, Page 120 Church
called a Flock of Sheep, Page 121 Church compared to an House, Page 123 Church
a Family, Page 128
The Eighth HEAD, etc. concerning, 1. Men in general, 2. Good Men, 3. Wicked
Men.
MAn compared to Earth, Page 133 Man compared to a Worm, Page 135 Man compared
to a Flower, Page 138 Concerning the Saints, or Good Men.
Saints called Babes, Page 140 Saints Children, Page 142 Saints Heirs, Page 145
Saints Eagles, Page 146 Saints Soldiers, Page 148, to 161 Saints Runners, Page
162 Saints the Salt of the Earth, Page 166 Saints Merchants, Page 168 Saints
Pilgrims, Page 170 Saints compared to Palm Trees, Page 175 Saints compared to
Wheat, Page 178 Saints compared to Light, Page 180 Saints compared to Cedars,
Page 182 Saints compared to Myrtle-Trees, Page 184 Saints compared to Willows,
Page 185 Saints why called Vessels, Page 186 Saints why called Lions, Page 188
Saints compared to Gold, Page 190 Saints compared to Doves, Page 192 Some
Saints like Lambs in a large Place, Page 193 The Heart of a Saint compared to
an Heart of Flesh, Page 194 Saints Stewards, Page 195 Saints why called Jewels,
Page 196 Saints why called Kings, Page 199 Saints called Priests, Page 200
Concerning Wicked Men.
Wicked Men Captives, Page 201 Wicked Men why called Sluggards, Page 209 Wicked
Men Fools or Idiots, Page 211 Some wicked Men like painted Sepulchers, Page 215
Wicked Men compared to Swine, Page 216 Wicked Men Debtors, Page 219 Wicked Men
why called the Red of God, Page 221 Wicked Men compared to Tares, Page 222
Wicked Men compared to Chaff, Page 223 Wicked Men compared to Thorns, Page 224
Wicked Men compared to Mountains, Page 225 Wicked Men dead in Sin, what meant
thereby, Page 227, 228 Wicked Men mad, or besides themselves, Page 231 Wicked
Men called Dogs, Page 232 Wicked Men called Bulls, Page 235 Wicked Men called
Lions, Page 237 Wicked Men compared to Foxes, Page 241 Wicked Men compared to
Goats, Page 243 Wicked Men compared to Thieves, Page 245 Wicked Men naked, Page
247 Wicked Men Vipers, Page 248 Wicked Men poor and miserable, Page 250 The
Heart of a Wicked Man like a Rock Page 251 Wicked Men why called Eagles Page
253 Wicked Men why called Devils Page 254

The Ninth HEAD, etc. concerning True Ministers, False Ministers, and False
Churches.
TRue Ministers why called Angels Page 256 True Ministers Stars, why so called
Page 258 Christ's Ministers called Laborers Page 259 Christ's Ministers called
Watchmen Page 265 Christ's Ministers why called Trumpeters ibid Ministers
Christ's Spokesmen Page 267 Christ's Ministers why called Clouds Page 269
Christ's Ministers why called Fathers Page 271 Christ's Ministers called
Planters Page 273 Christ's Ministers called Shepherds Page 281 Christ's
Ministers Ambassadors Page 282 Christ's Ministers called Rulers Page 287
Concerning False Teachers.
False Teachers why compared to Wolves Page 291 False-Teachers called Foxes
Page 293 False-Teachers called Wells without Water Page 293 False-Teachers why
called Clouds without Rain, Page 294 False-Teachers called Deceivers Page 294
False Churches.
Mystery Babylon, or the Great Whore, proved to be the present State and Church
of Rome Page 297, to 330

The Tenth HEAD of Metaphors, concerning Sin and the Devil.
SIn why called a Thief Page 331 Sin a Debt Page 335 Sin an heavy Burden, Page
343 Sin a Sting, Page 344 Sin a Wound, Page 345 Sin a Plague, Page 349 Sin
compared to deadly Poison, Page 350 Sin a Sickness, Page 352 Sin compared to an
abominable Vomit, Page 354 Sin an Uncleanness, or nothing so loathsome as Sin,
Page 355 Sin compared to Gray-Hairs, Page 357 Concerning the Devil.
The Devil why called the God of this World, Page 359 The Devil why called a
Prince, Page 360 The Devil a Hunter, Page 361 The Devil a Fowler, Page 362 The
Devil why called a Lion, Page 363 The Devil why called a Dragon, Page 364 The
Devil a Serpent, Page 365

The Eleventh HEAD, etc. concerning the Means of Grace, and Providence.
THe Day of Grace, what, Page 367 Means of Grace compared to Summer, Page 369
Means of Grace compared to Harvest, Page 369 Godliness called a Trade, largely
opened, Page 371, 376 Of Providence and Afflictions.
Afflictions compared to Clouds, Page 377 Afflictions compared to Fire, Page
378 Afflictions why called a Rod, Page 379 Afflictions compared to a Furnace,
Page 381 Afflictions compared to Winter, ibid Afflictions compared to Darkness,
Page 383 Afflictions compared to Tempests, Page 385 Afflictions compared to a
Flood, Page 386 Afflictions compared to great Heat, Page 387 Afflictions
compared to Wormwood and Gall, Page 388 Afflictions called God's Arrows: God
has many sharp Arrows, Page 389

The Twelfth and Last HEAD, concerning the World, the Life of Man, and the four
last Things.
THe World compared to a Wilderness, Page 391 THe World a Field, Page 392 The
End of the World why called an Harvest, ibid Of the Life of Man.
The Life of Man compared to a swift Post, Page 393 The Life of Man compared to
a swift Ship, ibid The Life of Man compared to an Eagle hastening to her Prey,
Page 394 The Life of Man compared To a Weaver's Shuttle, Page 394, 395, 396 To
the Wind, Page 394, 395, 396 To a Cloud, Page 394, 395, 396 To a Flower, Page
394, 395, 396 To a Shadow, Page 394, 395, 396

Of Death.
The Body of Man in the Grave compared to Seed sown, Page 398 Death compared to
Sleep, Page 398, 399 Death a Departure, Page 400 Death a Rest, ibid
Of the Resurrection.
The Resurrection compared to the Morning, Page 401 The Resurrection compared
to an awaking out of Sleep. Page 402 The Resurrection-Day a Man's Reaping-Day,
Page 403 Resurrection-Day, a Saint's Coronation-Day, Page 405
Of the Judgment-Day.
The Day of Judgment called an Assize, Page 406, 407
Of Heaven.
Heaven called Paradise, Page 407 Heaven the Crown of Life, Page 409
Of Hell.
Hell a Furnace of Fire, Page 410 Hell utter Darkness, Page 411
Moses's Vail removed, OR, A Treatise of TYPES.
ADam wherein a Type of Christ, Page 413 Noah how a Type of Christ, ibid
Melchis deck a Type of Christ, Page 414 Abraham a Type of Christ, Page 415
Isaac a Type of Christ, ibid Jacob how a Type of Christ, Page 416 Jacob's
Ladder a Tyye of Christ, ibid Joseph in what respect a Type of Christ, Page
416, 417 Moses in how many things a Type of Christ, ibid Sampson a Type of
Christ, Page 418 David in ten things a Type of Christ, Page 418, 419 Solomon in
how many things a Type of Christ, Page 420 Elisha a Type of Christ, ibid Jonah
wherein a Type of Christ, ibid Zerubbabel a Type of Christ, ibid Aaron a Type
of Christ, Page 421 The High Priest a Type of Christ, Page 421, 422, 423 What
the Tabernacle was a Type of, Page 423, 424 The Vail of the Holiest, what it
was a Type of, Page 424 The Ark a Type of Christ, Page 425 The Mercy-Seat a
Type of Christ, ibid The Table of Shewbread what a Type of, ibid The
Candlestick what a Type of, Page 426 The Altar of Perfume a Type of Christ,
ibid The Altar of Burnt Offering a Type of Christ, Page 427 The Brazen Laver
what it was a Type of, ibid The Sacrifice of Beasts a Type of Christ, Page 428
The Burnt-Offering of Fowls a Type of Christ, Page 429 The Daily Sacrifice a
Type of Christ, ibid The Sin-Offering a Type of Christ, ibid The Meat Offering
what it was a Type of, Page 430 The Peace Offering, and what it was a Type of,
Page 431 The solemn yearly Sacrifice of the Bullock and He-Goat, a Type of
Christ, opened in nine Things Page 432 The Escape Goat a Type of Christ ibid The
red Heifer a Type of Christ, Page 433 Circumcision what it was a Type of, ibid
The Rock that was smitten a Type of Christ, Page 434 Pillar of Cloud and Fire a
Type of Christ, ibid Passover a Type of Christ Page 435

PHILOLOGIA SACRA. The Second Part. The Schemes or Figures in Scripture opened.
OF the Figures of a Word Page 1 Of a Paranomasia Page 3 Of Antanaclasis Page 4
Of the Figures of a Sentence in Logism Page 5, to 11 Of an Erotesis, or
Interrogation Page 12 Of Figures of a Sentence in Dialogism Page 14 Of other
Schemes of Sentences, and Amplifications, Page 15 to 25
A Learned Discourse of TYPES, PARABLES, etc. wherein you have,
1. The Definition of a Type, Page 25 to 28 2. The Division of Types; Page 28
3. Prophetical Types, and typical and symbolical actions, ibid. 4. Prophetical
and Typical Visions, Page 29 5. An Historical Type, and its first Division.
Page 31 6. Other Divisions of an Historical Type Page 41 7. Nine Canons or
Rules expounding Types, Page 41 to 45
Of PARABLES.
Wherein shall be given, 1. The Definition of the Word and Thing. 2. Its
Division. 3. Canons respecting it. Page 46, etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 35. for Faith, read Hope. P. 27. l. 29. for he undertook, read,
he has undertaken. P. 269. l. 2. dele for. P. 336. l. 27. dele viz.

Tropes and Figures; OR, A TREATISE of the METAPHORS, ALLEGORIES, TYPES, etc.
contained in the Holy Bible of the Old and New Testament.
The Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures asserted and vindicated, and the
groundless Cavils against the same detected and confuted.
THE main Scope of this Work, being to offer some Assistance toward the
explaining and finding out the true Sense and Meaning of the Holy Scriptures,
it will be convenient (according to our Promise in our Specimen of this
Undertaking) to premise something touching the Divine Authority of that blessed
Book. For tho it be commonly owned by Christians to be the Word of God, yet
since on the one Hand, there are (especially in this Atheistical Age) too many
amongst us, whose Love of Sin, and Resolutions to continue therein, tempt them
to seek for shelter in bold Contempt of, or subtle Cavils against those
Heavenly Oracles; and on the other hand, not a few poor Souls are sometimes
shaken with Temptations, and know not how to discharge themselves from the
ensnaring Questions that they are often attaqued with, touching the Divine
Original and Authority of those Sacred Records; Not so much for want of Assent
thereunto, as of a right Understanding or Consideration of the Grounds of that
Assent, and the true formal Reason thereof; Therefore that with a perfect
Security to our present and future Welfare, we may rely on that Book, as the
infallible Storehouse of Heavenly Verities, that great and only Revelation,
whereby God does Inform, Rule, and will Judge the World; we shall set forth some
Considerations evincing this most important Truth: But finding that diverse able
and worthy Men have of late wrote most learnedly and excellently upon this
Subject, we shall upon that account be the more concise; and tho we have said
but little, yet we hope enough to satisfy any rational considering Man, and
confute the vain Cavils of the Adversary; for all along in this Essay we strive
to join Perspicuity with Brevity, and to speak so plainly and familiarly, that
the weakest Capacity may with ease gather it up; (the neglect hereof having
rendered the Labors of some others on the same Subject less serviceable to the
vulgar unlearned Reader.) It being our great Design to endeavor the Help and
Establishment of the Unskilful, and to assist weak Christians; knowing, that if
Satan can once bring them into a diffidence of the Truth and Authority of God's
Word, he at the same Instant shakes the very Foundation of all their Hope and
Religion: And if the Foundations fail, what shall the Righteous do? Psalm. 11.3.

That the Scripture, or Book called the Bible, is of Divine Original, Inspired
by the Spirit of God, and therefore of infallible Truth and Authority, Appears,
1. The sublime Matter of the Scriptures show them to be Divine.
I. By the Contents, or Matters therein discovered and treated of, which are so
transcendently sublime and mysterious that they could never be the product of
Human Invention, or Discovery; and therefore tho written by Men, as
Instruments, must needs be revealed from above: for what Human Brain could ever
have imagined a Man. 28.19. 1 John 5.7.
Trinity in the Deity, or such an Existence of one simple Essence as this Book
acquaints us withal? It describes the Person of Christ, so plainly, fitly and
excellently, that if the Mind of Man consider it attentively, of necessity it
must needs acknowledge, it does far exceed the reach of a finite Understanding.
It discovers unto us the Misery and Corruption of Man by Nature, together with
that general defect of the whole Creation (which tho some of the Heathen had
some glimpse of) yet could never find out the Cause, nor how it came to pass;
No finite Intellect could ever have traveled into such Heights and Depths,
touching the Nature of God and his Eternal Counsels that stupendous
Contrivement for the Salvation of Man, that the second Person should descend
from Heaven, and assume Human Nature into a Conjunction with the Divine, take
upon him in his own Person the Sin of Mankind, and die for the World, thereby
making a satisfaction proportionate to infinite Justice, so that God may show
the utmost Act of Mercy, in a Conjunction with the highest Exercise of Justice:
Nothing less than an Infinite Understanding could have found out Expedients to
reconcile those two infinite Attributes, in his dealings with an Apostate
Creature. It unfolds the Covenant of Grace, which God made after the Fall, all
which can be drawn from no other Fountain but Divine 1 Cor. 2.7. Ephesians. 3 4, 5.
Revelation; it contains the Law of God, which is wise and just, the Gentiles
themselves being Dan 4 5, 6, 7.
Judges. In its Precepts shines forth its Divinity; 1. The surpassing
Excellency of the Act, requiring that we should deny our selves in all those
things which the corrupt Nature of Man cleaves to, and hates to forego. 2.
The wonderful Equity that does appear in every Command. 3. The admirable
strangeness of some Acts, which a natural Man would account Foolishness, and
yet prescribed as absolutely necessary; Joh. 3 36. and 8.24.
shows its Divine Original. 4. The manner how Obedience is required, viz. that
it proceed from a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned Deuteronomy. 6.5.
1 Cor. 13.1. 1 Timothy 1.4, 5.
: Take a view of the Ten Commandments, are they not plain, brief, perfect,
just, extending to all, binding the Conscience, and reaching to the very
Thoughts? And do not all these things commend unto us the Justice, Wisdom,
Holiness, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Perfection, and absolute Sovereignty of the
Lawmakers?

It Is a Book that comprehends an Universal History of the World, past, present,
and to come; Its Contents reach as far as the first Foundations of the Earth
and Heavens, give us an Account of God's Revelations to Man ever since his
first make, and the particulars of an Intercourse between God and the World,
for near upon two thousand and five hundred Years, before they were any where
extant upon Record; What other Book, since the World began, so much as
pretended to do this? A Book! which as it was sixteen hundred Years a writing
(for so long it was from the Time of Moses, till John closed it with the
Revelations); so the Matters it treats of, are of the most excellent Nature,
and highest Concernment.

To give the World a satisfactory Account not only of its Original, but of its
End too; To bring Man acquainted with his true Sovereign Happiness, and a most
wonderful and astonishing method of Reconciliation with his Maker; Its Promises
are everlasting Glory, and never-fading Crowns: Its Precepts, perfect Gal. 3.10.
Righteousness, and altogether such as tend most to the Honor of God, the
Happiness of a Man's Self, and the Quiet of the World: Its Threatenings are of
Miseries that are endless: Its whole Tendency is to a Prospect beyond the
Grave: what Heathen ever so much as dreamed of the Resurrection? Who but the
Lord could be Author of such Laws, that only can give eternal Life, and inflict
eternal Death? These things can move the Conscience of none, but such who
acknowledge the Precepts thereof to be divine. In a Word, its General Subjects
are Mysteries no where else to be heard of, and without such a Manifestation,
unconceivable. Now considering the Premises, what less than Infinite Wisdom,
can be the supposed Author of such a Book?

2. The Antiquity of the Holy Scriptures.
II. By its Antiquity. The Books of Moses, (wherein in Promises, Prophecies,
Types, and Shadows, the Sum and Substance of all the rest of the Bible is
comprised) were the first Writings in the World, (next to those by the Finger
of God on Mount Sinai.) This is fully proved by Justin Martyr, an ancient
Writer, that lived within one hundred and thirty Years after Christ, in his
Paroenetick to the Greeks; who comparing the Times of all Human Writers, Poets,
Philosophers, Historians, and Lawgivers, esteemed most ancient, demonstrates
them all to be but Punies to Moses. Eusebius also, who followed Justin Martyr
at about two hundred Years distance, in the 2d and 3d Books of his Evangelical
Preparation, prosecutes the same Argument at large, and from abundance of
Testimonies and Confessions, out of the best and most authentic Heathen
Authors themselves, undeniably evinces, That Moses was the most ancient of all
the Writers that were known or named amongst them. And Tertullian so
confidently upbraids the Gentiles in this matter, that we think it not amiss to
recite his Words, in the 19th Chapter of his Apology. -- Our Religion (says
he, speaking to the Heathens,) far out-does all that you can boast of in that
kind: For the Books of one of our Prophets only, viz. Moses, (wherein it seems
God has enclosed, as in a Treasury, all the Christian Religion preceding so
many Ages together) reach beyond the ancientest you have, even all your Public
Monuments, the Antiquity of your Originals, the Establishment of your Estates,
the Foundations of your Cities, all that are most advanced by you in all Ages
of History, and Memory of Times; the Invention even of the Characters, which
are Interpreters of Sciences, and the Guardians of all Things excellent: I
think I may say more, they are elder than your very Gods, your Temples,
Oracles, and Sacrifices. Have you not heard mention made of that great Prophet,
Moses? He was contemporary with Inachus, and preceded Danaus, (the ancientest
of all that have a Name in your Histories) 393 Years: He lived some Hundreds of
Years before the Ruin of Troy. [And Homer, the eldest Writer amongst the
Grecians, lived, as Pliny says, 250 Years after the Subversion of that City.]
Every of the other Prophets succeeded Moses, and yet the last of them was of
the same Age as your prime Wisemen, Lawgivers, and Historians were.

So that it is a Thing out of dispute, that for Antiquity, neither the Writings
of Orpheus, or Homer, or Trismegistus, or Pythagoras, or Berosus, nor any
other, can compare with the Pentateuch. These Gray-Hairs show them to be the
Offspring of the Ancient of Days; for Truth is always the Firstborn.

And if we consider, how low, mean, and imperfect all humane Inventions were in
those Times; and what foolish, irrational, and absurd Conceptions, both the
Egyptians and Grecians, (Nations most celebrated for Wisdom) had of Things
Divine, and the Duty and Happiness of Man; we cannot but conclude, That so
clear an Account of the World's Beginning, Depravation, Destruction by the
Flood, and Re-peopling; such a most excellent Law and Doctrine, in reference
both to God and Man, etc. could not be of Humane Extract, but must needs be in
truth, what it pretends it self to be, a Divine Revelation. Besides, who can
believe the first Religion should be the worst, or the most timely Notions of
God the falsest? Were this so, and the Bible not a Divine Book, but composed by
Impostors, then it follows, That the most primitive Account we have of Religion
is counterfeit; that the Devil set up his Chapel, before God built his Church;
that in the earliest Notices we have of God, of the World's Original, Man's
Fall, and the Way of his Recovery, the World is deceived and abused; and that
God suffered the Devil, in the first place, (and without any Thing publicly
extant from him, either before or since, to contradict it) in his Name, and
under pretense of his Authority, to delude and mislead Mankind, with a false
Account of all those Things which they are most concerned to know, and upon the
right Knowledge of which their present and future Happiness depends: All which,
as it is unworthy of God, so it is no less repugnant to the Dictates of Reason.
But on the contrary, it is most rational to believe, that God's Revelations were
as early as Man's Necessities; and that the Bible being the most ancient, as
well as the wisest Book in the World, is also the truest, and proceeded from
the God of Truth.

III. This Royal Descent, or Divinity of the Scriptures, further appears, 3.
The Majesty and Strangeness of the Style.
by that Majesty and Authoritativeness of the Spirit of God speaking in them,
and that extraordinary and inimitable Style wherein they are written. As it is
said of our blessed Lord, Mat. 7.28. That he taught as one having Authority,
and not as the Scribes: So the Scriptures teach with an awful Authority. See
the Epist. to the First Volume.
The Style of the Sacred Scripture is singular, and has peculiar Properties,
not elsewhere to be found; its Simplicity is joined with Majesty, commanding
the Veneration of all serious Men. Lib. 3. Confess. cap. 5.
Augustine says, That the Holy Scriptures seemed rude and unpolished to him, in
comparison of Cicero's adorned Style, because he did not then understand its (
interiora, or) inward Beauty: But when he was converted to Christianity,
declared, Lib. 4 de Doctrine. Christ. cap. 6.
That when he understood them, no Writing appeared more wise and eloquent.
Budoeus, lib. 5. de Ass, and partibus ejus. p. 754.
Greg. Nazianzen, a Man of prodigious Wit, Learning, and Eloquence, when he
came to study the sacred Scriptures, vilifies all Ornaments of Literature
amongst the Greek Philosophers, as infinitely below those Divine Oracles.
Illyricus says, That although we find not in the Holy Scripture that idle or
delicate Itch of Words, that external Sweetness or Allurement, that Numerosity
of Sounds, or those pleasing Triffes, which vainglorious Orators of Greece and
Rome beautified their so much famed Harangues with; yet we find there a grave
and masculine Eloquence, exceeding all others. And shall we indeed think, that
the great God would use Inductions, as Plato; Syllogisms, as Aristotle;
Elenchs, as the Carmeades; Epiphonema's, as Cicero; Subtilties, as Seneca; or
Words far fetched, joined together with an artificial Syntax, with respect to
Weight, Number, and Sound? If a Royal Edict were published in that kind of
Speech, consisting of School-Follies, every wise Man would laugh at it. The
more plain therefore the Word and Law of the great God is, it is (we say) the
more becoming the Author thereof, and an Evidence of his Divine Stamp and
Authority. Yet in that Humility of Style in Scripture, there is far more Height
and Loftiness, and more Profoundness in its Simplicity, more Beauty in its
Nakedness, and more Vigor and Acuteness in its (seeming) Rudeness, than in
those other Things Men so much praise and admire, etc. Easiness and Plainness
does best become the Truth. A Pearl needs no painting; it becomes not the
Majesty of a Prince to play the Orator. In the holy Scripture is a peculiar and
admirable Eloquence. What are all the elaborate Blandishments of Human Writers,
to that grave, lively, and venerable Majesty of the Prophet Isaiah's Style, as
the Exordium of his Prophecy shows, also in chap. 25, 26, etc. That which
Critics admire in Homer, Pindar, etc. singly, are universally found here, tho
not that Elegancy that tickles the Ear and Fancy, and relishes with the Flesh,
but the noble and immortal Part, viz. an illuminated Soul. Commandments are
here given forth, and Subjection peremptorily required, with great Severity,
and with no stronger Arguments than the Will of the Lawmakers. Promises above
likelihood are made; to allure of performance, no Reason is alleged, but I the
Lord have spoken Isa. 51.22. and 52.4.
: And to encourage against Difficulties, etc. divine Assistance is promised,
both as necessary and sufficient, in the manner of its Genesis 17 1. E^od. 12.
Josh 1.9.
Threats. Also the Divinity of the Style may be observed, that without respect
of Persons, all degrees of Men are concerned, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
Noble and Ignoble, Kings and Peasants, commanding what is distasteful to their
Natures, and forbidding what they approve; promising not terrene Honor, but
Life everlasting; threatening not with Rack and Gibbet, but eternal Pain, and
Torment in Hellfire.

Of all Writings in the World, the Sacred Scriptures assume most unto
themselves; they tell us, Ioh. 12.48. 2 Timothy 3.16 Rev. 2.29 1 Pet. 1.23. E^od.
20.1, 2.
that they are the Words of Eternal Life; that they are by the Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, the Testimony of Jesus Christ, the Faithful Witness; that they
shall judge the World; that they are able to make wise unto Salvation; that they
are the Immortal Seed, of which the Sons and Daughters of God must be begotten.
Their Tenor is, Thus says the Lord; and no Conclusion, but, The Lord has
spoken; Hear the Word of the Lord; He that has Ears to hear, let him hear,
etc. The Nature, Quality, or Composure of the Style or Phrase (we say) is
emphatically and signally different from that of all Humane Writings
whatsoever. Here are no Apologies, begging Pardon of the Reader, or insinuating
into his good Opinion by Devices of Rhetoric, but a stately Plainness, 1 Cor.
2.13.
and mysterious Simplicity. We also speak (says the Apostle) not in the Words
which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost, comparing, (or rather
suiting or fitting, (...),) spirituals with spirituals, (for so only the
Original runs, (...),) that is, Matter or Things, which for their Nature and
Substance are spiritual, Augustine.
with Words or Phrases which are spiritual also, and so suitable to them.
Hence, well says one of the Ancients, The Scripture so speaks, that with the
Height of it, it laughs proud and lofty-spirited Men to scorn; with the Depth
of it, it terrifies those who with Attention look into it; with the Truth of
it, it feeds Men of the greatest Knowledge and Understanding; and with the
Sweetness of it, it nourishes Babes and Sucklings.

4. Its design to promote Holiness. Lev. 11.44. 1 Pet. 1.15.
IV. That excellent Spirit of Holiness, which every where breaths in and from
the Scriptures, is another fair Lineament of the Hand of God in the framing
them. To this Holiness they most powerfully persuade Men, by express Commands:
Ye shall be holy, for I am holy. As he who has called you is holy; so be ye
holy in all manner of Conversation. And by Threatenings, Without Holiness no Man
shall see God. Heb. 12.14. And by a Multitude of Examples of holy Men, as
Abraham, David, and all the Prophets and Apostles, and especially of that
immaculate Lamb of God, the blessed JESUS. As on the other side, it sets before
us the dreadful Vengeance that attends all Profaneness, Unrighteousness,
Uncleanness, Pride, and worldly Lusts; requires not only an Abstinence from the
gross outward Acts of Sin, but searches the Heart, and condemns the very
Thoughts and Inclinations: He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer. He that
lusts after a Woman, has committed Adultery. The Doctrine taught everywhere
in this Book, is directly opposite to the whole Corporation of debauched and
wicked Men; destructive to all Impiety, and corrupt Doctrines and Practices
whatsoever, and perfectly ruinous and destructive to the Interests of the Devil
in the World: A Doctrine, that has visibly the highest Tendency to those two
great Ends of all Religion, the Honor of God, and Man's present and future
Happiness. What pitiful, crooked, and imperfect Lines have the wisest and best
of mere Men, as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Tully, Seneca, Plutarch, or any
others, drawn, in their fairest Documents, both Moral and Divine, compared with
this complete and transcendent Rule of holy Living! What undefiled Religion,
what pure and spiritual Worship is here! How suitable to the holy Nature of
God! What superlative Piety and Virtue, without any spot of Vice! What punctual
and perpetual Truth and Honesty is here required! yet without the least Taint
of base Means, or unworthy sordid Ends! No Vainglory! no Esteem of Men! no
corrupt Advantages! But on the contrary, what Charity is here required! What
repeated Commands not to offend weak Ones! What mutual Forgivenesses! What
Provocations to Love! With what Patience and Meekness, Justice and Modesty, are
we taught to behave our selves! In a word, It Is such a Doctrine as makes a Man
perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good Work; which brings Men to the best
Way of Living, the noblest Way of Suffering, and the comfortablest Way of
Dying. -- Now must not such pure Streams needs flow from the Fountain of all
Perfection? Does such a serious and effectual Advancement of Holiness in the
World, look like an Intrigue of polluted Man, or any unclean Spirit? How can we
better judge of a Law, that declares it proceeds from God, and is of Divine
Obligation, than by its Nature, Tendency and Influence on humane Life? Whether
it be suitable to those Pretensions, and such an adorable and unspotted
Original? And when we find so holy and excellent a Design, as appears
throughout this whole Book, for the Honor of God, and completing the
Happiness of Men, by Methods so agreeable, and yet above the reach of Humane
Invention; what can we judge, (unless we will be obstinately perverse) but that
such a Book's Testimony of it self is true, and that it is indeed of God, and
not of Men?

V. The sweet and admirable Agreement, Consent, Dependence, and Harmony, 5. The
Harmony of the Scriptures.
that we find in all and every part of Scripture, tho there are so many Books
thereof, written by so many different Persons, of various Conditions, many Ages
removed, in several Places, and in different Languages, yet all agreeing with
each other, and every part with the whole, which could not be foreseen or
contrived by any humane Wisdom or Cunning, in the writing of any one Part: For
all the Histories, Prophecies, Promises, Types, and Doctrines, in an orderly
Connection, tend to promote the same Thing; and every Age proves a fresh
Interpreter, and reveals to us more and more of this admirable Concord, which
could not be the Effect of humane Artifice, nor of any other Cause, but an
infinite Comprehension and Foresight, and that the several Writers of this
Book were in all Times guided in what they wrote by the Supreme Wisdom of that
one God, who is always constant to himself, and the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever.

VI. This further appears from the Credit and Sincerity of those that were the
Penmen. 6. The Credit of the Penmen.
If the Scriptures were not what they pretend to be, viz. the Word of God, and
dictated to the Writers thereof by his holy Spirit, it would be the greatest
Affront to the Divine Majesty, and the grossest Cheat toward Mankind, that
ever was put upon the World. But if we consider the Penmen thereof, we shall
find them all of undoubted Credit, generally esteemed holy and good Men in the
Ages they lived in, so no way to be suspected of Imposture. Some of them were
Kings, and of the deepest Learning, not likely to be guilty of such a
mean-spirited Baseness, as Lying and Forgery. Many of the Prophets, and most of
the Apostles were Men illiterate, of Parts and Education so mean, that of
themselves they seem no way capable to write so profoundly, or lay so deep a
Contrivance for deluding the World. And as it is incredible, that so many Men,
of such distant Times, Qualities, and Abilities, should all agree in the same
Imposture, and so harmonize in promoting it; so neither could any Interest or
Ambition prompt them thereunto: For as the main Tendency of this Book is, to
mortify Men's Ambitions and Lusts; so most of them exposed themselves, by
publishing these Writings, to great Hazards and Persecutions. Nor have several
of them been shie to record the great Failings and Imperfections of themselves,
or their Brethren. Thus Moses Exodus 3, and 4 chapters.
relates his own Infidelity, and Averseness to submit to the extraordinary Call
of God. In another place Numb. 11.21.
, he records the Shame of his Distrustfulness, or at least the Carnality of his
Conceit or Apprehension of the Power of God. Again, Numb. 20.12.
he inserts God's heavy Sentence, and the Ground thereof, against him. The same
Moses did not set up any of his own Posterity to succeed him in the Guidance of
Israel, but left Joshua to succeed him, etc. and placed the Kingly Superiority
over that People in another Tribe from his own, viz. the Tribe of Judah.
Indeed, throughout the whole Book there is a visible Antipathy to all
self-seeking Flattery or Compliance: God alone is exalted, and all Men's
Persons, Actions, and Reputations are laid in the Dust, in respect of his
Honor, and the Truths therein delivered. Besides, these very Writers appear
themselves to be under a subjection to the Doctrine they taught, and no way
Masters of it, as their own. All which plainly shows, that they were inspired
from above, and wrote not their own Words, or for their own Honor, but as
inspired, and for the Honor of God.

8. Scripture-prophecies, and their Accomplishments, prove it is divine.
VII. Another Demonstration or Proof, that the Scriptures are from God, is the
exact and punctual fulfilling of the Prophecies therein contained. To foretell
Events, is the Prerogative of God: Isa 41.22.
Let them bring forth, (says God, the Lord, expostulating with his People
about the Vanity of Idols) and show us, [What shall happen]: Show us the Things
that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. Now the Body of
the Scriptures is enlivened with the Spirit of Prophecy (almost) throughout.
That of Jacob, recorded by Moses, Genesis 49.10
That the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his Feet until Shiloh come; and to him shall the gathering of the People be:
was not completely fulfilled till well near two thousand Years after, tho made
good during a great part of that Time, viz. from the Entrance of the Tribe of
Judah upon the Government, in King David, until the going of it out again in
the Person of Hircanus, whom Herod slew, as Josephus testifies. But when the
Time appointed was expired, the Prophecy it self was completely fulfilled: For
when Herod, a Stranger, and of another Nation, had cut off the House and Line
of Judah from the Government of Jewry, then and at that Time Shiloh, the
long-expected Messiah, our Lord Christ, punctually came into the World: for
that by Shiloh is meant the Messiah, the Jewish Rabbis do not deny. Now at the
Time of Jacob's uttering these Words, there was little probability, that any of
his Posterity should have a Scepter, or any Kingly Power, being poor, few, and
in a strange Land: Or, if they should thrive so, as to become a Kingdom, or
Nation, why should Judah have the Government, seeing there were three elder
Brothers, Reuben, Simeon, and Levi? Nor was there likelihood of this Prophecy's
being accomplished, when Moses set it down in Writing; for then he himself (who
was of the Tribe of Levi) was in the actual Possession of the Government, and
put into it by God himself, who appointed for his Successor, Joshua, not of the
Tribe of Judah, but of Ephraim. Whence we have a notable Evidence of the Truth
and Sincerity of this Prediction; for had not Jacob really uttered it, we
cannot imagine Moses would have put such a Prophecy in Writing, to the
disparagement of his own Tribe. How accurately are the four great Monarchies of
the World described by Daniel? Dan 7.3.
so lively, as if he had lived under them, and had that experience of them all
respectively, which the World has since had of them. How wonderful is that
Prophecy of Isaiah, at the end of his 44th, and the beginning of the 45th
Chapter, touching Cyrus, delivered at least an hundred Years (some say, two
hundred) before he was born, wherein yet he is not only expressly named, Thus
says the Lord to his Anointed Cyrus; but it is foretold, he should conquer
Babylon, and rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem: which came to pass accordingly.
Nor can this Prophecy be suspected of Forgery, or to be supposititious in any
kind, since it was pronounced openly, as other Prophecies were, in the hearing
of all the People, and so divulged into many hands, before the Captivity, and
then also carried into Babylon, where no doubt it was perused by many, long
before the accomplishment of it. And that there was such a Man as Cyrus many
Years afterward, that conquered Babylon, and restored the Jews from their
Captivity, and furthered the Building of the Temple, all Heathen Authors, that
write of those Times, do affirm. And indeed one great Inducement of his
Kindness to the Jews, was, because he understood how his Successes had been
thus prophesied of, so long before, by one of that Nation. So that it appears
the said Prophecy was then publicly known, and its Truth and Authentickness no
way doubted of. How manifestly are the many Prophecies of the Old Testament,
concerning our Savior, fulfilled? And how dreadfully his Prophecy of the
Destruction of Jerusalem, was made good about forty Years after his
Crucifixion, we find in the History of Josephus, exactly corresponding to what
is foretold in Mat. 24. And how many other Prophecies of the New Testament, and
especially of the Revelations, do we daily find Verified in and by the
Apostasy, and wicked Usurpations of the Church of Rome? Since therefore to
foretell so plainly, Particulars and Events so remote, and depending on the
mere Motions and Acts of the Wills of particular Persons, yet unborn, is an
evident Mark of Omnisciency; we cannot but conclude, that the Scriptures, which
are filled with so many evident and certain Predictions, must certainly proceed
from the Finger of God.

VIII. Those Writings, and that Doctrine, 8. Miracles confirm its divine
Original.
which were confirmed by many and real Miracles, must needs be of God: But the
Books and Doctrines of Canonical Scriptures were so confirmed. Many and great
Wonders, such as Satan himself cannot imitate, such as exceed the Power of any,
yea, of all the Creatures in the World; such as the most malicious Enemies
could not deny to be divine, has the Lord openly wrought by the hands of
Moses, and the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, for the Confirmation of this
Truth. Numb. 11.9. Exodus 19.16. 1 Kings 17.24. Mark 16.20. Acts 5.12.
These Miracles are recorded and attested by Persons of unquestionable Credit,
that were Eye and Ear-Witnesses. The Things done, as raising the Dead to Life,
curing the Blind, etc. were Matters of Fact, easy to be discerned. They were
not done once or twice, but very often; not in the Night, or in a Corner, but
in the open Light, in the midst of the People, in the presence of great
Multitudes, who were generally Enemies to those that wrought these Miracles: So
that if the Relations of them were false, they would presently have disproved
them; or if there had been any Deceit, they would soon have detected it.

When God puts forth his Miracle-working Power, Dr. Owen.
in the Confirmation of any Word or Doctrine, he avows it to be of and from
himself, to be absolutely and infallibly true; setting the fullest and openest
Seal unto it, which Men, who cannot discern his Essence or Being, are capable
of receiving or discerning. And therefore when any Doctrine, which in it self
is such as becomes the Holiness and Righteousness of God, is confirmed by the
Emanation of his Divine Power in working of Miracles, there can no greater
Assurance, even by God himself, be given to confirm the Truth of it.

And as we have the Testimony of the Evangelists, to confirm the many Miracles
that Jesus did; we also plead the Notoriety of those Miracles wrought by him,
and the Traditions delivering them down to us: They were openly wrought, and
were all or most of them performed before the Eyes of Multitudes, who envied,
hated, and persecuted him, and that in the most knowing Days of the World, when
Reason and Learning had improved the Light of the Minds of Men to the utmost of
their Capacity; in and upon Multitudes, for sundry Years together, being all of
them sifted by his Adversaries, to try if they could discover any thing of
Deceit in them.

Besides, the very Enemies have not had the impudence to deny such notorious
Matters of Fact, as our Savior's Miracles; Josephus, in his Antiquity of the
Jews, makes mention of the mighty Miracles that Jesus did. See p. 400.
only they ascribe them to other Causes. Even to this Day, the Jews acknowledge
much of the Works of Christ, but slanderously and blasphemously father them on
the Power of the Devil, or upon the Force of the Name of God sowed up in his
Thigh; and such like ridiculous Stories they have. Even the Turks confess much
of the Miracles of our Lord, and believe him to be a great Prophet, though they
are professed Enemies to the Christian Name. Nor could all the Adversaries of
these Miracles and Relations, with all their Arguments or Violence, hinder
Thousands from believing them, and even exposing their Lives on that Belief, in
the very Time and Country where they were done. So that we must say, Either
they were Miracles, or not: If they were, why do you not believe? If they were
not, behold the greatest Miracle of all, that so many Thousands (even of the
Beholders) should be so blind, as to believe Things that never were, especially
in those very Times, when it was the easiest Matter in the World to have
disproved such Falsehoods. Indeed the Miracles of Jesus, and those of his
Disciples and Servants, in the Primitive Times, were in Fact so many, so
eminent, so visible, and lasted so long, (for they continued in the Church two
or three hundred Years) and the Account of them has descended down to us by
such a constant, uninterrupted written and unwritten Tradition, that scarce any
Man has assumed Impudence enough to gainsay them. Irenaeus (who lived about the
Year of our Lord 200) affirms, that in his Time the working of Miracles, the
raising of the Dead, the casting out of Devils, healing the Sick by mere laying
on of Hands, and Prophesying, were still in force; and that some that were so
raised from the Dead, remained alive amongst them long after. And Cyprian and
Tertullian mention the ordinary casting out of Devils, and challenge the
Heathen to come and see it. Remarkable are those Words of the latter,
Tertullian Apol. Ca. 23.
Let any one be brought before your Tribunals, who is apparently possessed with
a Devil, that Spirit, being commanded by any Christian, shall confess of truth
himself to be a Devil, as at other Times he boasts himself a God. And in his
Book to Scapula, the Procurator of Africa, Cap. 4. he repeats several
miraculous Cures done by Christians: Quanti honesti viri, etc. How many Persons
of good Quality and Esteem, says he, (for we speak not of the Vulgar Sort) have
been remedied either from Devils or Diseases? Severus himself, the Father of
Antoninus, was recovered by Christians, etc. So that here we have the best
Doctrine under the highest Attestation, God himself setting thereunto his
supernatural Seals, to convince us of the Truth thereof. And this was the great
Argument, whereby Christ all along convinced the World; for upon his beginning
of Miracles, at Cana in Galilee, he manifested his Glory, and his Disciples
believed in him Joh. 1.48.
. The Jews therefore enquired for Signs, as that which must confirm any new
Revelation to be of God Joh. 2.18.
. And tho Christ blames them for their unreasonable unsatisfied Expectations
herein, and would not humor them in each Particular; yet he continued to give
them Miracles as great as they desired. They that saw the Miracles of the
Loaves, said, This is of a truth the Prophet that should come into the World
Joh. 6 14.
. Many believed, when they saw the Miracles which he did Joh. 10.4^. Acts 4.16.
Heb. 2.4.
. If I had not done the Works that no Man else could do, ye had not had Sin (in
not believing) Joh. 15.24.
. And the Way of bringing Men to believe in these Days is expressed, Heb. 2.3,
4. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by those that heard
him, [There is the Evidence of Sense to the first Re^eivers, and their
Tradition to the next] God also bearing them witness, both with Signs and
Wonders, and diverse Miracles? Let us conclude this Argument with that smart
Interrogation of that blind Man, Joh. 19.16
Can a Man that is a Sinner do such Miracles? Natural Reason showing us, that
God being the true and merciful Governor of the World, the Course of Nature
cannot be altered, but by his special Appointment; and that he will never set
the Seal of his Omnipotency to a Lie, nor suffer the last and greatest
Inducement to Belief, to be used to draw Men to embrace Falsehood and Forgeries.

9. The wonderful Preservation of the Scriptures.
IX. To these astonishing Miracles we may fitly add, the Preservation of these
holy Writings for so many Ages, being it self little less than miraculous, and
such as is a great Argument, that they belong to God, as the Author and Parent
of them: It being reasonable to derive that from God, as a Book of his own
Dictates, about which he has exercised a peculiar Care. Were not the Bible what
it pretends to be, there had been nothing more suitable to the Nature of God,
and more becoming Divine Providence, than long since to have blotted it out of
the World: For why should he suffer a Book to continue from the beginning of
Times, falsely pretending his Name and Authority? How do learned Men accuse Time
of Injuries, for swallowing up the Works of many excellent Authors! and bewail
the Loss of diverse of Livy's Decades, and other choice Books, which are now no
where to be found! Nay, tho the Romans were so careful for the preservation of
the Books of the Sybils, that they locked them up in Places of greatest Safety,
and appointed special Officers to look after them; yet many Ages since they are
gone and perished, and only some few Fragments do now remain. Whereas on the
contrary, the Bible, notwithstanding part of it was the first Book in the
World, (as we proved in the second Argument) and tho the Craft of Satan, and
the Rage of Mankind, have from time to time combined utterly to suppress it;
yet it has born up its Head, and remains not only extant, but whole and entire,
without the least Mutilation or Corruption. Antiochus Epiphanes, when he set up
the Abomination of Desolation in the Jewish Temple, in the Days of the
Machabees, with utmost diligence made search after their Law, and wheresoever
he found it, immediately burnt or destroyed it, and threatened Death, with
exquisite Tortures, to any that should conceal or retain it. In like manner,
since Christ, the Tyrant Dioclesian, about the Year 300, with a full purpose to
root out Christianity for ever out of the World, publishes an Edict, That the
Scriptures should every where be burnt and destroyed; and whosoever should
presume to keep them, should be most severely tormented: Yet God permitted them
not to quench the Light of these Divine Laws. But the Old Testament, above two
hundred Years before the Incarnation of Christ, was translated into Greek, (the
most flourishing and spreading Language at that time in the World); and about
thirty Years before Christ, it was paraphrased into Caldee; and at this Day,
both Old and New Testaments are extant, not only in their Original Languages,
but in most other Tongues and Languages that are spoken upon the Face of the
Earth, which no other Book can pretend to. So that all Endeavors that have
from the very first been bent against it, have been vanquished; and remarkable
Judgments and Vengeance showed on all such as have been the most violent
Opposers of it. And further, whereas even those to whom it was outwardly
committed, as the Jews first, and the Antichristian Church of Apostatized Rome
afterward, not only fell into Opinions and Practices absolutely inconsiltent
with it, but also built all their present and future Interests on those
Opinions and Practices; yet none of them could ever obliterate one Line in it,
not even of those Places which make most against their obstinate Errors and
Defections: But for their own Plea, they both are forced to pretend additional
Traditions, (for the Mishua, Talmud, and Cabala of the Jews, and the Oral
Traditions of the Papists, all proceed from one and the same Ground, viz. a
wicked Pretense, that the Scriptures, tho divine Truths, and the Word of God,
yet do not contain all God's Will; but that there are these other unwritten
Verities handed down, one says from Moses, and the other says; from St Peter,
etc. by Word of Mouth.)

Since therefore the Bible has thus wonderfully surmounted all Difficulties
and Oppositions, for so many Generations, and in so many Dangers, and against
so many Endeavors to root it out of the World, we may (according to that Maxim
in Philosophy, Eadem est Causa procreans and conservans; The procreating and
conserving Cause of Things, is one and the same) conclude, That the same God is
the Author of it, who has thus by his special Providence preserved it, and
faithfully promised (and cannot Lie) that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but
one Iota or Tittle of his Word shall not pass away.

X. The Scriptures did not only Survive, but have Triumphed over, 10. The
Success of the Scriptures in converting the World.
all the Oppositions of the Devil and the World. That Success wherewith the
Gospel was attended even in its Infancy, the mighty and mavelous prevailings
of it wherever it came, notwithstanding the many and great Disadvantages it
was to encounter, are a strong and irresistible Argument that it was from
Heaven. That a Doctrine directly opposite to the whole corrupt Interest of
Human Nature, and to the Wisdom and Will of Man, 1 Cor. 1.21. Romans 8.7.
carried on and published by but a few, and those (to outward appearance) weak,
ignorant, and simple Persons, Illiterate Fishermen, Tent-makers, etc. without
any Force of Arms, or Temporal Support, but on the contrary against both VVind
and Tide, the Cruelties of raging Powers, and Affronts of vaunting Wisdom; A
Doctrine against which the whole World, Jews and Gentiles perfectly concurred,
those hating it as a Stumblingblock, and these counting it Foolishness; that
such an improbable and unpleasing, such a friendless, unwelcome, slighted,
opposed Doctrine, by such Instruments, and under such Circumstances, should
make its way in the World, and subject so many Nations to the Obedience of the
Cross, and make those who to Day persecuted it, to Morrow ready to lay down
their Lives in Defense and Justification of it; evidently shows it to be owned
by Omnipotency, and not to be of Human Extract.

XI. But besides these outward and more visible Trophies of the Sacred
Scriptures, 11. Their inward Efficacy.
how mavelous is their Empire, Efficacy and Power within; upon the Hearts and
Consciences of Men! it is this that Converts the Soul, Enlightens the Eye, Psalm.
19.7.
Discovers Sin, Romans 7.7.
Convinces Gainsayers, 2 Timothy 3.16
Kills and Terrifieth, 2 Cor. 3.6.
Rejoiceth the Heart, Psalm. 19.8. and Psalm. 119.103
Quickneth, Psalm. 119.50
Comfort, Rom 15.4.
Manifests the Thoughts, 1 Cot. 14.52.
Overthrows false Religions, Casts down Strongholds, and subverts the whole
Kingdom of Satan. What Consolations at some Times! What Terrors at others, do
proceed from this Sacred Book! How are the poor Souls of Men by it mightily
refreshed! Their weak Hearts wonderfully strengthened! Their dead Spirits
raised, and made to live again! Those that sat in Darkness, and the Shadow of
Death, are Enlightened! Many that were in Chains and Fetters, of Fears and
Terrors of Soul, are delivered and set at Liberty! Is it reasonable to conceive
that a Tree that bears such wonderful Fruit, was planted by any other Hand than
that of God? Who can speak Words that shall restrain and repel all the Powers
of Darkness, when falling in to make Havoc and Desolation in the Souls of Men?
That shall be able to give Laws to the Terrors of Death, nay Eternal Death,
when they have taken hold of the Consciences of Sinners? Are not all these
Wonders performed by the holy Scriptures? And do they not often, on the other
side, breath Thunder and Lightnings? throw down the Mighty from their Seats,
and destroy the Thrones of the Proud and Confident? Do they not turn the
Security of many into Trembling and Horror, and make their Consciences to burn
as if the Fire of Hell had already taken hold of them? These Things are evident
from the Experience of Thousands that have felt and undergone such powerful
Effects of the Word: Nay, I verily believe, there are few that have read the
Scriptures with attention and seriousness, but can more or less witness the
same: And whence should such Mighty Operations proceed, but because the
Almighty Author has endued them with such Virtue through the Spirit, whereby
they become the Power of God unto Salvation.

12. The Testimony of the Church and Martyrs.
XII. Add to all these Arguments, the Testimony of the Church, and her Holy
Martyrs, who have sealed this Truth with their Blood. By the Church we do not
mean the Pope, whom the Papists call the Church Virtual, nor his Cardinals,
Bishops, etc. met in General Council, whom they call the Church Representative:
But the whole Company of Believers in all Ages who have professed the true
Faith. The Penmen of the Scriptures, good, pious, honest, holy Men, delivered
it out as the Word of the Lord, and ever since there have been Thousands, and
Hundreds of Thousands that have believed and testi^ied the same down from Age
to Age in a continual uninterrupted Succession; The Church of the Jews, (to
whom were committed the Oracles of God) Romans 8.3.
professed the Doctrine, and received the Books of the Old Testament, and
testified of them that they were Divine, and in great Misery they have
constantly confessed the same; when as by the only denying thereof, they might
have been partakers both of Liberty and Rule. And remarkable it is, both, that
notwithstanding the High Priests and others of that Nation persecuted the
Prophets while they lived, yet received their Writings as Prophetical and
Divine; as also, that since the Spirit of Blindness and Obstinacy is come upon
Israel, and notwithstanding their great hatred to the Chri^tian Religion, the
Holy Scripture of the Old Testament is kept pure and incorrupt among^t them,
even in those places which do evidently confirm the Truth of the Christian
Religion, as Isa. 53.3. And as for the Christian Church, it has with great
Constancy, and sweet Consent, received and acknowledged the Books of the Old
and New Testament; for the Universal Church, which from the beginning thereof
until these times professed the Christian Religion to be Divine, did and does
also profess that these Books are of God: And the several Primitive Churches
which first received the Books of the Old Testament, and the Gospels, the
Epistles written from the Apostles to them, their Pastors, or some they knew,
did receive them as the Oracles of God, and delivered them afterward under the
same Title to their Successors and other Churches: And all the Pastors and
Doctors (who being furnished with Skill both in the Languages and Matters, have
tried and searched into them) and all pious Christians, who by Experience have
felt their Divine Operation, on their own Souls, have asserted the same. So
that whoever rejects the Bible, obliges himself to believe no other Books in
the World whatsoever; for since none of them have any such great and universal
Attestations, if he shall credit them, and not this, it will show apparent
disingenuity and peevish Obstinacy. And secondly, He that does credit the
Author of this Book, with the same Credit wherewith he credits other Authors,
whom he supposes Men of common Honesty that would not knowingly write an
Untruth, cannot then refuse to receive this as a Book Divine and Infallible,
upon as good Terms of Credibility, as he believes any the best Human Author in
its kind to be True; because they themselves tell us that it is so, (which were
it otherwise, without most apparent Falsehood they would not do); They affirming
that God himself inspired them to write it, and that it was no Product of their
own, but every part of it the Genuine Dictate of the Holy Ghost.

And this Argument is abundantly reinforced and strengthened from the
Consideration of that Glorious Company of Martyrs, those Innumerable
Multitudes, who in the Flames and Rage of Persecution, have with the loss of
their Lives maintained the Scriptures to be the Sacred Word of God, and had the
same in such Veneration, that in the Primitive Ages the Traditors (Deliverers
up of their Bibles to the Heathen to be destroyed) were always esteemed as bad
as professed Apostates. Since therefore they did so constantly, and with such
Hazards affirm this Truth, what shadow of Reason is there to suspect such a
Cloud of Witnesses of Folly, Weakness, Credulity, Wickedness, or Conspiracy
amongst themselves? (which such a diffused Multitude was absolutely incapable
of.) Nor can we suppose that Popular Esteem on Earth, and Vainglory could be
the Ground upon which they suffered, since they gave up their Lives for a
Religion, which both utterly condemned such Vanity, and was every where in the
World at that time odious and detestable, and whose Profession brought nothing
but outward Shame and Contempt.

XIII. But the Doctrines and Matters of Fact in the Scripture (which if true,
13 The Acknowledgment of the Heathen
its Divine Original will be undeniable) are not only avouched by its own
Votaries, but many most considerable parts of it acknowledged by its Enemies:
As appears by this brief induction of Particulars. The Creation of the World is
intimated by Ovid in his Metamorphosis, lib. 1. The extraordinary long Lives of
the Patriarchs in the first Ages o^ the World, by Manetho the Egygtian,
Berosus, the Caldean and others; who add, That they were ordained to live so
long that they might study Sciences, and invent Arts, especially that they
might observe the Celestial Motions, and enrich the World with the knowledge of
Astronomy; wherein (say they) they would have done little good, if they had
lived less than six hundred Years, because the great Year (as they call it) is
so long in going about and coming to a Period. The Flood is mentioned by the
same Berosus, whose Words are recited by Josephus, lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 4. Of
Noah (under the Notion of Bifronted Janus, because he lived in both Worlds,)
we read in Berosus and Herodotus: And of the Ark Sailing over America, and the
letting forth of Birds that found no dry Ground, in Polyhistor, and others. Of
the Destruction of Sodom; or the Asphaltick Lake, we have some Account in
Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 16. and Justin, lib. 36. That there was such a Man as
Moses, such a People as the Israelites; that this Moses was their Captain, and
led them out of Egypt, wrote their Story, and gave them Laws, is testified by
the most ancient Records or the Egyptians, Phoenicians, Caldeans, and Grecians.
And Manetho speaks very particularly both of their Coming into Egypt, and
Departure thence. Of Circumcision, Herodotus, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and
Tacitus, lib. 2. Of the coming of the Israelites into Canaan, Procopius, lib.
4. Of Solomon we read in Dionysius Cassius; of the Slaughter of Sennachcrib, in
Herodotus, lib. 2. The great Roman Historian, Tacitus, in his Annals, speaking
of the Christians being persecuted by Nero, on pretense of burning of Rome,
which he set on fire himself, says expre^ly, Author nominis ejus Christus, qui,
Tiberio imperante, per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.
Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
The Author of that Name or Sect was CHRIST, who, when Tiberius was Emperor,
was put to death by Pontius Pilate, the then Procurator of Judea. The Star that
appeared at our Savior's Birth, is taken notice of by Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 5.
But more particularly by Calcidius, an Heathen Philosopher, in his Comment on
Plato's Timaeus; whose Words, as I find them cited by Cardinal Baronius, that
learned Annalist, are these: Est quoque alia venerabilior and sanctior
Historia, qua perhibet de ortu Stellae cujusdam insolita, non morbos, mortesque
denunciante, sed descensum Dei venerabilis ad humanae conversationis, rerumque
mortalium gratiam: Quam Stellam cum nocturno itinere suspexissent Cald^eorum
profecto sapiences viri, and consideratione rerum coelestium satis exercitati,
quaesisse dicuntur recentem Dei ortum, repertaque illa Majestate puerili,
venerati esse, and vota Deo tanto convenientia nuncupasse. Bar. Tom. 1. p. 52.
There is another more venerable and holy History, which tells us of the Rise
of a certain unwonted Star, not threatening Diseases and Death, but the Descent
of the venerable God, to converse with Men, and mortal Affairs: Which Star,
when certain wise Men of Caldea saw in their fourney by Night, being
sufficiently acquainted with Astronomy, and consideration of Celestial things,
They are reported to have sought out this new Birth of God, and the Majesty of
this Child being found, to have worshipped him, and offered Gifts suitable to
so great a God. Herod's slaughtering of the Children is notorious, by that
Joque passed upon him on that occasion by the Emperor Augustus, recorded by
Macrobius, Cum audisset inter eos, quos in Syria Herodes Rex Judaeorum inter
Binatum jussit interfici, filium quoque ejus occisum, ait, Melius est Herodis
porcum esse quam filium. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 4.
When he heard, that amongst those Children under two Years old, whom Herod the
King of the Jews had commanded to be slain in Syria, his (the said Herod's) own
Son was slain also, he said, It Is better to be Herod 's Hog, than his Son:
Alluding to the Jews Abhorrence of Swines Flesh, which it seems Herod, tho not
of that Nation, yet pretending himself a kind of Proselyte, did likewise
observe. Touching the preternatural Defect of the Sun at our Lord's Crucifixion
it was with amazement seen and recorded by Dionysius the Areopagite. And
Tertullian, in his Apology, cap. 21. appeals to the Roman Records for the
certainty of it. And Origin affirms, that one Phlegon, Secretary to the Emperor
Adrian, did write thereof in his Chronicles. What an illustrious Testimony is
that extorted by Truth from the Mouth of an Enemy, I mean Josephus, a Jew in
Religion, as well as by Nation, (tho he wrote in Greek) born not above five or
six Years after Christ's Passion! In his 18th Book, and 4th Chapter, speaking
of the Reign of Tiberias, he has these Words: In those Days there was one
Jesus, a wise Man, (if it be lawful to call him a Man) for he was a Worker of
great Miracles, and a Teacher of such as readily receive the Truth, and had
many Followers, as well Jews as Gentiles. This is that CHRIST, who tho he was
accused by the chief of our Nation, and by Pilate condemned to be crucified;
yet did not they who had first loved him, forsake him; for he appeared unto
them the third Day alive again: The holy Prophets foretelling these, and many
other wonderful Things of him. And even to this Day the Christian Sect (so
named from him) continues. Nor is that less clear of Lentulus, in his Epistle
to the Emperor Tiberius, recited by Eutropius, in his Annals of the Roman
Senators, and now commonly extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum, Apparuit
temporibus nostris, and adhuc est, homo magnae virtutis, nominatus Jesus
Christus, qui dicitur a Gentibus Propheta veritatis, quem ejus discipuli vocant
Filium Dei, s^scitans mortros, and sanans omnes languores.
He thus begins, There has appeared in our Days, and yet is living, a Man of
great Virtue (or Power), named Jesus Christ, who is called of the Nations the
Prophet of Truth, whom his Disciples call the Son of God, a Raiser of the Dead,
and an Healer of all manner of Diseases.

To all which we might add the Prophecies of the Sybils, amongst the Heathens,
who most plainly foretold the Coming of Christ, the Son of God, into the World,
and expressed his very Name and Quality in certain Acrostick Verses, recited by
the great Augustine, in the 23d Chapter of the Ninth Book of the City of God.

XIV. He that disowns the Bible to be of Divine Authority, must either think
there is some Revelation from God to the World, how he will be worshipped, and
how they ought to conduct themselves; or he thinks there is none: If he thinks
there is none, he not only gives the Lie to the Christian and Jewish, but
generally to all Religion, that has been, or is in the World: For they all have
pretended, and do alledg the same as their Foundation. And besides, he must
confess, that God (who has made Man the noblest of Creatures, and Lord of the
whole World) has left him in a worse Condition, in the present Posture we find
him, than the meanest Creatures, to whom he has given sufficient Means to
attain the highest End of their Beings: But that infinite Wisdom should deal
thus, is absurd and unreasonable to conceive. If he grant, there is any-where a
Revelation from God to the World, let it be produced, and judge if it be any way
able to vie with the Scriptures, for all those glorious Characters and Marks of
Divine Authority, Power, and Excellency, which we have enumerated.

XV. If the Scriptures be neither the Invention of Devils nor Men, then it can
be from none but God: But they are not from Devils; for neither could they work
Miracles, nor deliver true Prophecies to confirm them; nor would it consist
with God's Sovereignty over them, or with his Goodness, Wisdom, or Faithfulness
of governing the World; nor would Satan speak so much for God, nor lay such a
Design for Man's Salvation, and against his own Kingdom, nor be so industrious
to draw the World to unbelief of it. Nor were the Scriptures the Invention of
Men; for they must be either good Men, or bad Men: Good Men they could not be;
for nothing could be more opposite to Goodness, nay, even common Honesty, than
to assume the Name of God falsely, feign Miracles, and cheat People with
Promises of another World. And then on the other side, it is as impossible ill
Men could be the Devisers of so holy a Book: For can any rational Man think,
that wicked Deceivers would so highly advance the Glory of God? Would they so
vilify themselves, and brand and stigmatize their own Practices? Could such an
admirable undeniable Spirit of Holiness, Righteousness, and Self-denial, as
runs through every Vein of Scripture, proceed from the Invention of the Wicked?
Would they ever have extolled their Enemies, the Godly, and framed such perfect
spiritual Laws? or laid such a Design against the Flesh, and all their worldly
Happiness, as everywhere the Scope of the Scripture does carry on? If we
cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles, then may we be assured,
that no ill Men had an hand in writing and promoting this good and holy Book.

16. Satan's Suggestions and Temptations against the Bible, argue it divine.
XVI. The Divine Composition of this blessed Book is not a little manifested by
the continual Rage of the Devil against it, which appears not only in stirring
up his Instruments utterly to suppress it, (for what Book in the World ever
met with such Opposition? as aforesaid) but also in those Temptations with
which he assaults the Hearts of Men, when they apply themselves to the serious
Study of it. We can read any other History, and readily entertain and credit
it; but when we once come to the Bible, strange Objections, Doubts, and
Curiosities arise, and presently we are apt to question the Truth and
Possibility of every Passage: These are the Suggestions of Satan, to render
that holy Book ineffectual to us, the Scope and Purport of which he knows tends
directly to the Overthrow of his Kingdom of Darkness.

Some of the most frequent Objections against the Bible, are these that follow.

Object. 1. How Men, in the respective Ages wherein the several parts of the
Bible were written, could know that they were written by an infallible Spirit,
and so distinguish them from other Writings?

Answ. Two ways: First, by the Quality of the Persons; and secondly, from the
Nature and Quality of the Matter. As for Moses, there could not be the least
Cause of doubting his being inspired by God, since he wrought such Miracles,
and had a visible and audible Intercourse with the Lord, as we read, Exodus
19.9. that the Lord said unto him, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick Cloud, that
the People may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. The
other Parts of the Old Testament were written by Prophets, and holy Men. And
tho several of them were not received and hearkened to as such, by the corrupt
ruling Part of the Jews, whilst they lived; yet they were acknowledged
afterward, as well for the Sanctity of their Lives, and the fulfilling of
those things mentioned, the Judgments which they foretold coming to pass, and
the Agreeableness of what they delivered to the established Worship of God. For
two ways God himself had provided, for discovering all Pretenses to Revelation:
First, If any such Pretender went about to seduce the People to Idolatry, he
was to be rejected. -- The Prophet that shall speak in the Name of other Gods,
shall die Deuteronomy. 19.20.
. Secondly; If the Matter came not to pass, as we have it in the next Verse
save one; When a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord, if the Thing follow
not, nor come to pass, that is the Thing which the Lord has not spoken, but
the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously. And a final Decision, what was to be
received for the Old Testament, God was pleased to make, after the Babylonish
Captivity, in the Days of Ezra, and that famous Synagogue, several of the last
Prophets being personally present, where, by a divine Direction, all the Parts
of the Old Testament were collected, and a Separation made, not only between
the Works of true Prophets and false; and such Writings as came by divine
Inspiration, from those that were of divine Extraction; and such as were to be
a perpetual Rule to the Church, from such as relating only to particular Cases,
were not so. And in this Settlement the Jewish Church did acquiesce, and from
that time to this have had no further Disputes, but received those very Books,
and none others, (for those called Apocrypha, which the Papists would obtrude
upon us, were never received as Canonical by the Jews.) Then as for the Books
of the New Testament, they were all written either by Apostles, or Apostolical
Men, known by their being called to that Office, and the Gift of Tongues, and
Power of working Miracles, to be guided by the Holy Ghost. And as the Writing
of the Old Testament ended with the Prophets, (for after Malachi, to the Time
of John the Baptist, which was near four hundred Years, there arose not a
Prophet in Israel); so the New Testament begins with the Accomplishment of
Malachi's Prophecy, by the Birth of the said John, predicted under the Type of
Elias, and ends with the Apostles; for John, who wrote the Revelation, outlived
all the rest of the Apostles, (for he died not till the Time of Trajan, in the
99th Year of our Lord, and almost thirty Years after the Destruction of
Jerusalem) and he closes the Canon of the New Testament with a Denunciation of
a Curse to any that should add thereunto Rev. 22.18
.

Object. 2. But how are we sure that we have now at this Day all the Books that
were anciently esteemed Canonical? It seems not: for there is mention made of
Solomon's three thousand Parables or Proverbs, and Songs an hundred and five 1
King. 4.32.
, of Nathan the Prophet, and of Gad the Seer 2 Chronicles. 29.29.
, the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and the Visions of Iddo the Seer 2 Chronicles. 9.
: And in the New Testament, of the Epistle to the Laodiceans Col. 4.16.
; now where are any of these extant?

Answ. Those Books mentioned in the Old Testament, were either Books of a
common Nature, and not divinely inspired; or else they are yet extant under
another Name: For how do we know, but the Books called Samuel might be written
partly by himself, whilst he lived, and partly by Gad and Nathan, after his
Death. And for the other Writings of Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo, they may very
probably be the same that we call the Books of the Kings. And for that Epistle
to the Laodiceans, the Original is, (...), [from] (not [to] as some
Translations would have it) Laodicea: And it is probable it was some Letter
written from the Laodiceans to Paul, wherein there might be something that
concerned the Colossians, and therefore the Apostle advised them to read it.

Object. 3. But the Papists say, That the very Fountains, the Hebrew and Greek
Originals themselves, are corrupted, depraved, and troubled; and if so, how
shall we be at any certainty?

Answ. It Is true, they do say so, but most falsely and wickedly, only to the
dishonor of the Word of God, to make way for their own Traditions, and the
Authority of their Church; tho by this Suggestion they blaspheme the Providence
of God, and also lay an insufferable Scandal on the Church: For if the
Scriptures were committed to her Charge, and she has suffered any part of them
to be either lost or corrupted, has she not grossly abused her Trust? But they
are not able to give one Instance where any such Corruption has happened. As
for the Old Testament, it is well enough known how strictly careful the Jews
were, and are to this day, to preserve it, insomuch that they took an account
how often every Letter in the Alphabet was used in every Book thereof. And Philo
the Jew, an ancient, learned, and approved Author of that Nation, affirms, That
from the giving of the Law to his Time, which was above two thousand Years,
there was not so much as one Word changed or varied; yea, that there was not
any Jew, but would rather die a thousand times over, than suffer their Law to
be changed in the least. And Arias Montanus, (a Person extremely skilled in the
Hebrew) in his Preface to the Interlineary Bible, assures us, That as in these
Hebrew Bibles which are without Vowels, we find a certain constant Agreement of
all the Manuscripts and Prints, and a like Writing in each; so in all those too
that have the Points added, we have not observed the least variation or
difference of pointing: Nor is there any Man can affirm, That he ever in any
place saw different Exemplars of the Hebrew Text. And indeed had the Jews ever
corrupted any part of it, no doubt they would have done it in those Texts that
plainly refer to our Savior; and had any Christians done it, the Jews would
soon have discovered the Forgery. But neither of these things have happened,
therefore to say the same is any way corrupted, is false. And for the New
Testament, it is true, there have in ancient Manuscripts some various Readings
been observed, but not such as to cause any Dispute touching the Sum or
Substance of the Doctrine therein delivered, or considerably to alter the Sense
of the Text.

Object. 4. But suppose the Originals be pure, how shall the Unlearned (who are
the far greater part of Mankind) be sure that the Translations they have, and
can only make use of, are well and honestly done, and do contain the Word of
God?

Answ. The Word of God is the Doctrine and Revelation of God's ^ill, the Sense
and meaning, not barely or s^rictly the Words, Letters, and Syllables. This is
contained e^actly and most purely in the Originals, and in all Translations, so
far as they agree therewith. Now tho some Translations may exceed others in
propriety, and signif^cant rendering the Originals; yet they generally (even the
most imperfect that we know of) express and hold f^rth so much of the Mind,
Will, and Counsel of God, as is sufficient, by the Blessing of God upon a
conscientious reading thereof, to acquaint a Man with the Mysteries of
Salvation, to work in him a true Faith, and bring him to live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present World, and to Salvation in the next.
The Translators generally, as they have been Men of Learning, so likewise have
they been honest, and for the most part godly Men, and therefore would not, for
their own Honors sake, and much more for Conscience sake, abuse the World with
any wilful false Versions, to lead Souls into Error in a Matter of that
importance: Or, if some should have ^een so wicked, others as learned, and of
better Principles, would soon have discovered the Imposture. Nor if we consider
how many Men of different Persuasions, have translated the Bible, and
harmoniously agree in all things of moment, is it possible to imagine they
should all combine, so impertinently, as well as wickedly, to put a Fallacy on
Mankind, which everry one, that has but bestowed a very few Years in the Study
of the Languages, can presently detect?

Object. 5. How can we think the whole Bible to be of divine Inspiration, when
some parts of it contradict others? The Divine Spirit cannot be contrary to it
self; yet is there any thing more opposite than the two Evangelists, in
reckoning up our Savior's Genealogy? St. Matth^w Mat. 1.16.
says, Jacob begat Joseph, the Husband of Mary; Luke 3.23:
and St. Luke says, Joseph, the Son of Eli.

Answ. The seeming Contradictions of Scripture (for they are really no more)
are an Argument, that in the writing of this Book there was no corrupt Design
or Confederacy to engage the Opinions of Men; and upon a due Scrutiny, there
will appear in them a deep and unthought of Concord, and an unanimous Tendency
toward the great End of the Whole. It Is our Inad^ertency, or shallow
Apprehension, makes us think the Scripture is at variance with it self. In the
two Texts cited, a natural Father is one thing, a legal Father another: For you
must know, that Joseph and Mary were both of one House and Family: he descended
from David by Solomon, she by Nathan, but in the Posterity of Zerobabel they
were divided into two several Families, whereof one was the Royal Race, and
that Lineage Joseph was of, which Matthew follows: The other Family Luke
follows, whereof Mary was, whom Joseph marries, and by that means is called the
Son of her Father Eli. So that here is no Contradiction, but on the contrary,
an excellent Discovery of our Savior's Line drawn down on b^th sides, whereby
it appears, that as he was Joseph 's reputed Son, so he had a Title to be King
of the Jews; and as he was born of Mary, so likewise on her Side he descended
from David, as was promised of the M^ssias. But for reconciling all such
seeming Contradictions, see Mr. Streat 's Book, entitled, The dividing of the
Hoof, a very useful Piece, and worthy Perusal.

I have but one Argument more to add, from a very learned Author, and then I
shall close up all with the Testimony of the Reverend and Learned Mr. John
Calvin.

17. The internal Evidence of the Spirit.
XVII. And now it may not be amiss to add one Thing more, which I could not pass
by, i. e. Notwithstanding the great Force and Strength of external Arguments
and Motives to evince the Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture; yet it is
absolutely necessary, to the stability and assurance of our Faith, in order to
eternal Life, to have the internal Testimony of the Holy Spirit upon our
Hearts, or the effectual Operations thereof; for if he does no otherwise work
in and upon our Hearts, but by the common Communication of spiritual Light unto
our Minds, enabling us to discern the Evidences that are in the Scripture of
its own divine Original, we should be often shaken in our Assent, and moved
from our Stability. Therefore considering the great Darkness and Blindness
which remains upon the Minds of Men, all Things believed having some sort of
Obscurity attending them, besides the manifold Temptations of Satan, who
strives to disturb our Peace, and weaken our Faith, and cause Doubtings; Happy
are such who can experience the powerful Establishment and Assurance of the
Holy Ghost, who gives them a spiritual sense of the Power and Reality of those
Things believed, whereby their Faith is greatly confirmed. This is that which
brings us unto the Riches of the full Assurance of Understanding Col 2 2^ 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
; and on the account of this spiritual Experience is our Perception of
spiritual Things, so often expressed by Acts of Sense, as Tasting, Seeing,
Feeling, etc. which are the greatest Evidences of the Property of Things
natural. It Is the Holy Spirit that assists, helps, and relieves us against
Temptations that may arise in us, so that they shall not be prevalent. And
indeed without this, our first prime Assent unto the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures will not secure us; but the Influence and Assistance of the Spirit
in the midst of Dangers, so strengthens the sincere Christian, that it makes
him stand as firm as a Rock, who has no skill to defend the Truth by force of
Arguments, against those subtle and sophistical Artificers, who on all
occasions strive to insinuate Objections against it, from its Obscurity,
Imperfection, Want of Order, Difficulties, and seeming Contradictions contained
therein, etc. Moreover, there are other special and gracious Actings of the
Holy Ghost on the Minds of Believers, which belong also to this internal
Testimony, whereby their Faith is established, viz. his anointing and sealing
of them, his witnessing with them, and his being an Earnest in them. Wherefore
although no internal Work of the Spirit can be the format Reason of of our Faith,
or that which it is resolved into; yet it is such, as without it we can never
sincerely believe as we ought, nor be established in believing, against the
Temptations of the Devil, and Objections of evil Men.

It has been already declared, Dr. Owen.
(says a Reverend Divine) that it is the Authority and Veracity of God,
revealing themselves in the Scripture, and by it, that is the formal Reason of
our Faith, or supernatural Assent unto it, as it is the Word of God.

It remains only that we enquire, in the second place, into the Way and Means
whereby they evidence themselves unto us, and the Scriptures thereby to be of
God, so as that we may undoubtedly and infallibly believe them so to be. Now
because Faith, as we have showed, is an Assent upon Testimony; and
consequently, Divine Faith is an Assent upon Divine Testimony; There must be
some Testimony or Witness in this Case, whereon Faith does rest; and this, we
say, is the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, the Author of the Scriptures. And this
Work and Testimony of the Spirit may be reduced unto two Heads, etc.

1. The Impressions or Characters, which are subjectively left in the
Scripture, and upon it, by the Holy Ghost its Author, of all the divine
Excellencies or Properties of the Divine Nature, are the first Means evidencing
that Testimony of the Spirit which our Faith rests upon, or they give the first
Evidence of its divine Original, whereon we do believe it. The way whereby we
learn the eternal Power and Deity of God from the Works of Creation, is no
otherwise, but by those Marks, Tokens, and Impressions of his Divine Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness that are upon them; for from the consideration of their
Subsistence, Greatness, Order, and Use, Reason does necessarily conclude an
infinite subsisting Being, of whose Power and Wisdom these Things are the
manifest Effects: These are clearly seen and understood by the Things that are
made, so that we need no other Arguments to prove that God made the World, but
it self, Psalm. 104.
etc.

Now there are greater and more evident Impressions of Divine Excellencies left
on the written Word, from the infinite Wisdom of the Author of it, than any
that are communicated unto the Works of God in the Creation of the World.
Hence David comparing the Works and Word of God, as to their instructive
Efficacy, does prefer the Word incomparably before them Psalm. 19.1, to 10.
Psalm 146.8, 9. and 19, 20.
. And these do manifest the Word to our Faith to be his, more clearly than the
other do the Works to be his to our Reason, etc. God, as the immediate Author
of the Scriptures, has left in the very Word it self evident Tokens and
Impressions of his Wisdom, Prescience, Omniscience, Power, Goodness, Holiness,
Truth, and other divine infinite Excellencies, sufficiently evidenced unto the
enlightened Minds of Believers, etc.

This is that whereon we believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, with a
Faith divine and supernatural. -- And this Evidence is manifest unto the
meanest and most unlearned, no less than unto the wisest Philosophers: And the
truth is, if rational Arguments, and external Motives were the sole Ground of
receiving the Scripture to be the Word of God, it could not be but the Learned
Men and Philosophers would always have been the forwardest and most ready to
admit it, and most firmly to adhere unto it; because such Arguments do prevail
on the Minds of Men, according as they are able aright to discern their Force,
and judge of them. -- But how apparent the contrary is, is evident: 1 C^r. 1.26.
You see your Calling, Brethren; Not many wise Men after the Flesh, etc.

2. The Spirit of God evidenceth the divine Original and Authority of the
Scripture, by the Power and Authority which he puts forth in it and by it, over
the Minds and Consciences of Men, with its Operation of divine Effects thereon:
This the Apostle expressly affirms to be the Reason and Cause of Faith, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25. -- And thus are the Secrets of his Heart made manifest, etc. It was
not the Force of external Arguments, it was not the Testimony of this or that
Church, nor was it the Use of Miracles, (that wrought upon them) v. 23, 24.
Wherefore the only Evidence whereon they received the Word, and acknowledged it
to be of God, was that divine Power and Efficacy in themselves: He is convinced
of all, and thus the Secrets of his Heart are made manifest, etc. He cannot
deny, but there is a Divine Efficacy in it, or accompanying of it. And thus the
Woman of Samaria was convinced of the Truth of Christ's Words, and believed in
him, i. e. because he told her all things that ever she did Joh. 4.29. 1 John
5.10.
. The Word of God is (as all sincere Souls find) quick and powerful, etc. so
that he that believes, has the Witness in himself. John 7.16, 17. Jesus
answered them, and said, My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any
Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self.

In a word, let it be granted, that all who are really converted unto God, by
the Power of the Word, have that infallible Evidence and Testimony of its
divine original Authority and Power in their own Souls and Consciences, that
they thereon believe it with Faith divine and supernatural, in conjunction with
the other Evidences beforementioned, (and largely demonstrated) as parts of
the same divine Testimony; and it is all I aim at herein.

This Testimony, tho it is not common unto all, nor can it convince another,
yet is it very forceable to those who experience the Virtue and Efficacy
thereof, which we, having in another place more largely opened, we shall
conclude this last Argument, entreating all to labor after a taste of its
divine, powerful, and Soul-changing Operations, and then they will need no
further Arguments to prove it is of God.

We shall therefore conclude this brief Discourse on this Subject, with those
excellent Words of a Learned Man upon the some occasion: -- Let this remain and
be received as an established Truth, That those whom the Spirit has inwardly
taught, do solidly acquiesce in the Scripture; And that the same is (...)
Self-credible, or for its own sake worthy of belief, and that it obtains that
Certainty which it justly deserves with us, by the Testimony of the Spirit: For
tho its own Majesty does of itself conciliate a Reverence, yet then only does
it seriously affect us, when by the Spirit it is sealed in and upon our hearts.
With whose Truth being enlightened, we no longer believe that the Scripture is
from God by our own Judgment, or that of other Men, but most certainly above
all humane Judgment, we are assured thereof no otherwise, than as if there we
beheld the very Voice of God, by the Ministry of Men, flowing from the Mouth of
God to us. No longer do we then seek for Arguments, and probable Proofs,
whereon our Judgment may rely, but subject our Judgment and Understanding
thereunto, as to a Matter already out of all doubt or debate; yet not so, as
wretched Men are wont to addict their captive Minds to Superstitions, but
because we find and feel the undoubted Power of God there to breath and
flourish; To obey which, we are drawn and inflamed, knowingly and willingly,
but more livelily and efficaciously, than either humane Will or Knowledge could
affect us. It Is therefore such a Persuasion as does not require Reasons, (and
yet it does not want them neither); such a Knowledge, to which the best Reason
appears and agrees, as being such as therein the Mind can acquiesce more
securely and constantly, than in any Reasons. It Is, in fine, such a Sense, such
a Taste, as can proceed from nothing, but a Revelation Divine. Nor do I speak
any thing but what every true Believer can bear witness to from his own
Experience, save only that Words are too short and unable to express a just
Explication of the thing. -- Calv. Instit. lib. 2.

BOOK IV. THE Fifth HEAD OF Metaphors, Allegories, and Similes, With other
borrowed Terms, Respecting the Graces of the Holy-Spirit, AND THE Blessed
Ordinances of the Gospel.
Grace compared to Salt.
Mark 9.50. Have Salt in your selves, etc. (...) etc.
TOuching the several Metaphorical Notations of this Term [Salt,] we shall
refer you unto the Eleventh Chapter of Philologia Sacra.

By Salt in this place, is meant the blessed and most precious Grace of the
Spirit.

Metaphor. Parallel. SAlt is of a searching quality; if it be laid or rubbed
upon Meat, it will pierce and search it to the very Bone. TRue Grace, or the
spiritual Operation of the Spirit, is of a searching nature; it will (when
received in Truth) infuse it self into every Faculty of the Soul: The Spirit
searches all things, yea, 2 Cor. 2.
the deep things of God. If there be any Sin hid, it will search and find it
out. Simile. Parallel. II. Salt is of a purging, cleansing, and purifying
nature; it will work out Blood, Filth, etc. as common Experience shows. II.
Grace is of a purging and purifying virtue; it will not only search Corruption
out, whether it be in the Heart or Life, but also in a blessed manner purge and
work it forth: He that has this Hope, 1 John 2.3.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. III. Salt has a preserving quality; it
will not only purge Corruption out of Meat, but also preserve Meat, and other
things, from Corruption and Putrefaction. III. Grace preserves the Soul from
all manner of Sin and Defilements; it will not suffer a Saint to run with
others to the same excess of Riot; 1 Pet. 4.4.
but teaches us to deny all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, and to live
righteously, soberly, Tit. 2.12.
and godly in this present World. How shall I do this thing, and sin against
God? IV. Salt seasons things, causing that to taste savoury, which otherwise
would be no way pleasant, wholesome, or good for the Body. Can that which is
unsavory be eaten without Salt? Job 6.6.
IV. Grace seasons a Christian; it makes him savoury to God, and to all good
Men, savoury in his Words, savoury in his Dealings and Commerce, savoury in all
his whole Conversation; not only savoury himself, but seasoning others also;
hence called the Salt of the Earth. Let your Speech be always with Grace, Col. 4
6:
seasoned with Salt: That ye may know how to answer every Man. V. Salt is of
universal use throughout the World; it is the one thing needful among Men; it
is said to season all things; we receive great Advantage by it. It is known to
be exceeding necessary both by Sea and Land. V. Grace is also absolutely
necessary; it is the one thing needful to Salvation, without which there is no
getting to Heaven. The Advantages all Believers receive thereby are wonderful.
All Men, of what rank or quality soever, stand in need of Grace; they were
better be without Gold, than without Grace. It is good in every Place and
Condition; Men need it as well at Sea as at Land, in Sickness and Health. VI.
Salt (as Pliny, and other Naturalists say) is exceeding good against the Sting
of Serpents, and will destroy Worms that breed in the Body, and has many other
medicinable Virtues in it. VI. Grace is a most Sovereign Remedy against Sin,
(that Sting of the old Serpent) and there is nothing like it to kill the Worm
of Conscience, that is bred by means of the Corruption of the inward Man, and
there gnaws, and greatly torments the Soul; and many other Soul-medicinable
Virtues it has. VII. Salt was made use of under the Law in Sacrifices: And
every Oblation of thy Meat Offering shall thou season with Salt. ^^v. 2 13.
With all thy Offerings thou shall use Salt. VII. Grace must be made use of in
all our spiritual Sacrifices and Offerings unto God. We must pray with Grace,
and sing with Grace, and do all in God's Worship with Grace in our Hearts;
nothing we do will be accepted without it. Mark 9.4.
Every one shall be salted with Fire, (or seasoned with Affliction) and every
Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt, viz. Grace. Metaphor. Disparity. SAlt is
natural, or else made by Art, of salt Water, Ashes, Fire, Plin. lib. 3^. p.
41^, 41^.
etc. Pliny says, that in India they have Salt out of Quarries of Stone. GRace
is supernatural. No Man has the Divine Influence and Operation of the Spirit
of God naturally, nor can he get it by any humane Contrivance or Art
whatsoever; Joh. 1.14.
it is the Gift of God. II. If Meat be quite corrupted, putrified, stink, and
is loathsome, Salt cannot recover it, nor make it savoury. II. But if the Soul
be wholly or in every Faculty thereof corrupted, stinks, and is loathsome in the
Nostrils of God, yet Grace can quickly recover it, and make it very savoury and
sweet to God and good Men. III. Salt may lose its Saltness or Savor, and
become good for nothing, but to be trodden under the foot of Men. III. Grace
cannot lose the excellent Savor thereof. Christians may lose much of their
Salt, or decay in Grace; but Grace, be it little or much, will never lose its
own precious Virtue. IV. Things may be over-salted or seasoned, so that they
may be spoiled, and become unwholsom to human Bodies. IV. But no Man can be
overmuch seasoned with Grace; never had any Christian too much of this
spiritual Salt in him. The more you receive and take in of this, the better you
will be seasoned thereby.

Inferences.
FRom hence we infer, That Grace is the principal Thing.

2. How unsavory are all graceless Persons? The whole World lies in
Wickedness. They are like putrified or stinking Carrion in a Common-Shore, (as
the Greek Word there signifies.)

3. This may stir up all ungodly Ones to look out and cry mightily for Grace,
the excellent Nature of which is set forth under the Metaphor Light, Vol. 1.

4. Let all who profess themselves Christians, examine themselves thoroughly,
whether they are salted with Grace, or not. Are you savoury Men and Women? What
is your Communication, your Speech, your Conversation? etc.

5. Take heed you lose none of this Divine Salt; you will soon become
unsavory, if you have not Salt in your selves.

6. You that should season others, should have much Salt in your own Hearts and
Lives. Ye are the Salt of the Earth.

The Girdle of Truth.
Ephesians. 6.14. And having your Loins girl about with Truth, etc.
A Girdle properly is a Belt or Girdle, used to be worn by Soldiers, to
preserve the Breast and Belly.

Truth has various Acceptations in the holy Scriptures, some of which
(according to Wilson and others) you may take as follows.

1. The most perfect Divine Essence, which is Truth it self, and the Author of
all Truth in his Creatures: Thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth, Psalm.
31.5.

2. Jesus Christ: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. John 14.6.

3. The Statutes, Precepts, and Promises of the Law of Moses: Thy Commandments
are Truth. Psalm. 119.151. v. 142.

4. The whole Word of God, both Law and Gospel: Thy Word is Truth, John 17.17.
Whereof you heard before, by the Word of the Truth of the Gospel. Col. 1.5.

5. The Light of Nature in Man since the Fall, to help him to know God so far,
as to leave him without excuse: Which withold the Truth in Unrighteousness.
Romans 2.18.

6. True Religion taught and contained in the Gospel: Who has bewitched you,
that you should not obey the Truth? Gal. 3.1. Tit. 1.1.

7. Truth of Grace, Sincerity, void of Deceit in Heart and Life. I have walked
before thee in Truth, Isa. 30.3. Thou love Truth in the inward Parts. Psalm.
51.6.

8. Fidelity and Faithfulness between Man and Man. Jer. 5.1, 2.

9. Judgment and true Justice, Truth is fallen in the Streets.

10. Most true, far from all Deceit, The Judgments of the Lord are Truth.

11. Truth signifies Sincerity from the Heart, with assent of the Mind, Psalm.
19.9.
as one truly purposes, etc. without Hypocrisy.

1. But that which is principally intended by the Girdle of Truth according to
Expositors, is, first, the true Doctrine of the Gospel, called the Word of
Truth.

2. Truth of Grace and Sincerity of Heart, called, 1 Cor. 5.8.
The unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

By Loins is meant the Mind, Gird up the Loins of your Mind, etc. A Christian
should be of a sound Judgment, he should be girt about (as with a Girdle) with
Truth and Sincerity; Hold the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience: 1 Timothy
3.9. Maintain the true Religion, and be sincere and upright in the Profession
of it. Why Truth in both these respects is compared to a Girdle, will appear by
what follows.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Girdle was of use in former times by Soldiers, it was
part of their Habit or Armor. THe true Doctrine of the Gospel, or the holy
Principles of Religion and Sin erity, are of great use among all Christ's
Spiritual Soldiers, in order to the arming of them completely. II. A Girdle
cleaves close to a Man when it is well girt to him, and it is not easily
unbuckled by an Adversary. II. So the Truth of Christ should be fastened in ^ur
Hearts and Judgments, that we may not be wavering in our Minds; Stand fast in
the Faith, etc. 1 Cor. 16.13.
Sincerity ought to cleave to our inward Parts, as a Girdle does to the Loins
of a Man. III. A Girdle compasses a Man about. III. So the Truth of Christ,
and Sincerity of Heart should compass Christians about, they ought to keep
always in the bounds of Truth and Uprightness; God has set Bounds to his
People, out of which they must never go: we must not swerve aside to the
Right Hand or Left, nor play the Hypocrite, for such that do so, cannot be said
to be girt about with Truth IV. A Girdle strengthens the Loins of a Soldier,
or him that is well girt therewith: Jer. 1.7.
Gird up thy Loins, and arise and speak unto them all that I command thee; 2 Samuel 22.40.
be not dismayed: as much as if God should say, Isa. 45.
be strong for thy Work: Thou have girded me with Strength, etc. Their Loins
shall be loosed; Job 12.21.
I will loose the Loins of the Kings: He weakeneth the Strength of the Mighty:
the Girdle of the strong; so the Heb. IV. The true Doctrine of the Gospel, or
that Religion that is according to Godliness, joined with Sincerity of Heart,
is the strength of every Christian, or Soldier of Christ; if he has not this
Girdle on, his Loins are loose and weak, and he is as unstable as Water, as
Jacob speaks of Reuben. Let Truth go, nay, Gen 49.2, 3.
one Truth go, and how does it weaken our Hands? or profess it with a false and
deceitful Heart, and how unable are such to stand against the Assaults of the
Enemy? On the other hand, when a Person is well girt with Truth in both these
respects, he is thereby made strong and courageous. V. A Girdle was used to
gird on the other parts of the Soldiers Armor; Let not him that girdeth on
his Harness boast himself, as he that puts it off: 1 King 20.11. V. Truth is
that which fastneth or girdeth on every part of the Christian's Armor,
Sincerity compleats and perfects all; what will a Man's Faith, Hope,
Righteousness signify without the Girdle of Truth, unless he keeps within the
Bounds of Christian-Doctrine, and is sincere and upright in the Profession
thereof. VI. Girding up the Loins, notes a Preparation for Battle and War. Thus
David spoke of Christ, Gird thy Sword on thy Thigh, Psalm. 45.3.
O most Mighty. Let not him that girdeth on his Armor boast, etc. VI. So the
Apostle would have Saints stand, or be ready to engage their spiritual Enemies,
Ephesians. 6.14.
having their Loins girt about with Truth. Such a Person is prepared to
encounter with all Adversaries of the Soul. We should be girt with the Truth,
and girt for the Truth; that is, as another Apostle speaks, to contend for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints. Jude 3.
We should be ready to dispute, fight, make War, as good Soldiers of Christ.
Opponents are like Combatants; Controversial Divinity, says Mr. Caryl, is
called Polemical Divinity. Caryl on Job 38. page 35.
Disputes are Word-Wars; and there have been as hot Wars made by the Pen, as
ever were by the Sword. Gird up now thy Loins, etc. says God to Job. The Lord
seems to send him a Challenge to the Battle, by a further Debate: Arm thy self
like a mighty Man, get ready for the Duel, for I am resolved to try what a Man
thou art in arguing. A Saint being girt with Truth and Sincerity, is fitted for
any Conflict. VII. We read of girding up the Loins for Travel, or when a Man is
to take a Journey. Thus Elisha said to Gehazi, 2 Kin. 4.29. Gird up thy Loins,
and take my Staff in thine hand, and go thy way. It was the Fashion in those
Eastern Countries, where they wore their Garments long, and ordinarily loose,
to gird them up, by which they could travel the better. VII. So Christians
should have their Loins girt about with Truth and Uprightness, that they may be
fitted and prepared to travel Heaven-wards. God's People are Strangers and
Pilgrims whilst in this World, and are traveling to their own Country; and to
have their Minds well girt up with Truth, will be a great Help to them in their
Journey. A Storm of Persecution may soon blow away the loose Garment of
Profession, if a Person be not girt with the Girdle of Truth and Sincerity.
VIII. There is mention made of girding up the Loins, in order to serving, and
attending on Business: Which of you, says Christ, having a Servant plowing, or
feeding Cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the Field, Go
and sit down; and will not rather say, Gird thy self, and serve me? etc. From
hence we may see, Girding is preparatory to Serving or Waiting: It also denotes
Preparation for our Labor or Work. VIII. Truth and Sincerity prepares and fits
the Mind for Christ's Work and Service: Let your Loins be girt about, Luke 12.35
and your Lights burning, and ye your selves like unto Men that wait for their
Lord. He is always well girt with Truth and Uprightness, that is ready to wait
upon, or do Work for the Lord Jesus. Careless, slothful, and unsound Persons
are ungirt, and so unblessed. A Saint in doing of his Work, whether it be
Heart-Work, or Hand-Work, ought to be well-girt, viz. perform all in Truth and
Uprightness. Ministers must preach nothing but Truth; and as they must preach
nothing but Truth, so they must preach in Truth, or in Sincerity of Heart. Some
preach Christ, says the Apostle, but not sincerely. Phil. 1.16.
Their Minds were not girt with Truth. All our Prayers ought to be put up in
Truth: God is near to all that call upon him in Truth. Psalm. 145.18.
All Works of Charity ought to flow from a pure Heart, viz. to be done in
Uprightness and Simplicity, according to the Direction given by the Lord in his
Word, both for matter and manner. IX. A Girdle is a great Ornament, used to be
put on uppermost, to cover the Joints of the Armor, which, if seen, would cause
some uncomeliness; for tho the Armor was closely knit and clasped together, yet
some gaping was subject to be betwixt piece and piece; and therefore they used
to put over these parts a broad Belt or Girdle, which did serve not only to
fasten the other Armor together, but it made the Soldier appear more comely in
his Harness and Accoutrements. IX. Sincerity is a glorious Ornament. A
Christian hereby appears very comely in the sight of God, and it greatly tends
to hide and cover all the Infirmities of his Life; for the Saints Graces are
not so close, nor their Lives so exact, but in the best are found Defects and
Weaknesses, which are as so many Gaps or Clifts in his Armor; but Sincerity
covers all, so that he is not put to shame by them.

1. Sincerity covers all outward Blemishes, or want of outward Beauty, that
great Idol of the World. Sincere Persons, if they be not so fair and comely as
some others, yet being holy and upright, sincere and virtuous Ones, how amiable
are they rendered hereby in the sight of all good Men! It covers all things that
seems to render a Saint dishonorable or uncomely.

2. Mean Parentage, or a low Descent, is much despised in the World; but how
base soever the Stock, and ignoble the Birth be, when true Grace and Sincerity
comes, it makes the House and Person illustrious, and very glorious: Since thou
were precious in mine eyes, thou have been honorable, Isa. 43.4. Sincerity
sets a Mark of Honor upon a Person, or a People. If you see this flourishing,
tho in a mean Cottage, it tells you a great Prince, nay, an Heir of Heaven
dwells there. Sincerity brings the Creature into Alliance with the most high
and glorious King of Heaven and Earth. Who dares say, a Child of God, the
Spouse of Christ, and Heir of Heaven is of an ignoble Birth and Pedigree?

3. It covers Poverty, which exposes to great Contempt. There Is none so rich
as a godly sincere Person; he is daily let into God's Treasury, Christ's
Storehouse is always open unto him: All is yours. 1 Cor. 3.22


4. To want Parts, and to be a Person of no Name, and of small Endowments,
exposes to disdain; none are more contemptible in the eye of the wise and
vainglorious World, than such. But alas! an honest Heart, one that is sincere,
excells beyond all comparison the proudest, most renowned and applauded for
human Wisdom, Parts, and Elegancy in the World.

5. It covers all sinful Uncomeliness, and all the Godly Man's Failings,
whether they be Sins of Omission or Commission; for Sincerity is that excellent
quality to which pardoning Mercy is annexed. It Is Christ in a proper sense that
covers all Sin, but he will cover the Sins and Failings of none but such as are
sincere: Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the Man whose Sins are covered, etc. The upright Man's
Righteousness is accepted through Christ, tho he be never so infirm, or
attended with Miscarriages: Tho God does not like his Sin for his Sincerity,
yet God will not un-saint him because of his Sin.

Ainsworth
X. The Priest under the Law wore a Girdle, which was made of fine Linen, and
of Blew, Purple, and Scarlet; the Hebrew Doctors say, it was about three
fingers broad; it was curiously woven, as Josephus observes, Josephus Antiquit.
Book 8. cap. 2.
with Pictures of Flowers. This Girdle (says Ainsworth) signified the girding
up the Loins of our Minds with Strength, Justice, and Virtue, Ephesians. 6.15. Also
we read of Christ's being girt with a Golden Girdle, Rev. 1.13. X. Truth and
Sincerity is not only an Ornament, but a most glorious Ornament, being that
which was figured out by the Priest's Girdle, rarely made with curious Flowers.
This is as a choice Golden Girdle, curiously wrought by the Spirit of God, 1
Pet. 2.5.
which all the Priesthood of Christ have on. It is made of a Complication of
every Grace. Sincerity is not alone; many choice Divine Flowers are interwoven
together, in making of the Girdle of Truth. Metaphor. Disparity. BEsides other
great Disparities betweeen other Girdles, and the Girdle of Truth, this is one,
viz. Other Girdles may be lost, or be corrupted; they may rot, and pass away,
like that which Jeremiah had, Jer. 13.1, 2, etc. which was marred, and
profitable for nothing. BUt the Girdle of Truth can never be lost. Sincerity in
the Heart of a Believer is so fast tied to him, or twisted about him, that he
can never lose it. I never yet read of a Man, that was perfect and upright in
Heart and Life in the sight of God, that ever lost his Sincerity, so as to die
an Hypocrite; tho he may in some things be guilty of Hypocrisy, yet he cannot
absolutely become an Hypocrite. This Girdle cannot rot, or be corrupted. II.
Other Girdles are only made for the Body. II. But Truth and Sincerity is a
Girdle for the Soul, by which the Mind is stayed and strengthened.

Inferences.
THis should teach every Professor to labor after (if they have not yet got)
the Girdle of Truth.

1. Because the Design of Satan is, to corrupt Men in their Judgments, and make
them zealous for false Ways. Paul's Jealousy of the Corinthians was, 2 Cor.
11.1, 2, 3.
lest the Old Serpent should beguile them through his Subtilty, and corrupt
their Minds from the Simplicity of the Truth.

2. Because of the damning Nature of Heresy and Hypocrisy, which our Savior, 2 John 9 10 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 2 Pet. 1.12 Gal. 4.1. Prove. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Pet.
3.15
as well as the Apostle, often warns us of.

3. Because those who are well girt about with Truth, are established Ones.
Deceivers are subtle, and false Doctrine is of a bewitching Nature; the wary
and established Soul nevertheless is not soon overcome. In vain is the Net
spread in the sight of any Bird. Be no more tossed about with every Wind of
Doctrine. Children are most in danger of the Poison.

4. And as false Doctrine is of a corrupting nature, so likewise is Hypocrisy,
hence compared to Leaven, Luke 12.1. As Sincerity leaveneth in a good sense, so
Hypocrisy is compared to Leaven in a bad sense, from that sowering, infusive,
and corrupting quality which is in it.

Directions about putting on the Girdle of Truth.
1. Take heed of a counterfeit Girdle; see that what you own and practice for
Truth have the Stamp of God upon it.

2. Take up nothing upon Trust: Do not receive this or that, because such and
such Men believe so, and practice so; neither Men nor Ministers are your Rule,
but the Word of God.

3. Put not this Girdle of Truth on in Notion only; what will the knowledge of
Truth signify in thy Head, if the Loins of thy Mind are not girt with it.

4. Take heed of being prejudiced against the Truth, because of the
Unworthiness of them who profess it.

5. If thou have not yet gotten the Girdle of Truth, buy it now; Prove. 23.23.
as Solomon advises, Buy the Truth, and sell it not. The Price of Truth may
quickly rise high.

6. Let Falsehood go, let thy Sins go, let thy own Righteousness go, in point of
reliance or dependence upon it, so as to trust in it for Justification and
eternal Life.

7. Come up to the Price of Truth; do not cheapen it only, but come up to the
Price, tho it cost thee a right Hand Lust of Profit; or a right Eye Lust of
Pleasure: Thou must deny thy self.

Labor to know the Excellency of TRVTH.
1. It is pure, Psalm. 119.140.

2. It will cleanse and purify thy Heart, John 17.17, 19. and cover all the
Infirmities of thy Life, as was hinted before.

3. It will make you free: Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make
you free. John 8.32.

4. It is strong; Truth is too hard and strong for all its Opposers; as the
young Man said, Great is the Strength of Truth. There is no breaking of this
Girdle.

5. Consider what God's People have suffered before they would part with Truth,
what Torments and Tortures they have endured.

7. There is no managing the spiritual War without the Girdle of Truth.

Marks of Sincerity.
First; Negatively.

1. He is not a perfect and sincere Christian, whose Heart is not changed, who
is not renewed, or who has not a Principle of Divine Grace or spiritual Life
in him.

2. He is not a perfect and sincere Person, that wants any essential part of a
Christian; as he is not a perfect natural Child, that wants an Arm, an Eye, or
a Leg. See Mat. 19.20. One thing thou lackest, if thou would be perfect, (or
approve thy self sincere) go thy way, and sell what thou have, etc.

3. He is not a sincere Person, whose Heart is lifted up in him. Hab. 2.4.


4. He is not a sincere Man, that is not upright in all his Dealings and
Converse with Men; if he want Moral Uprightness, his Religion is good for
nothing.

Secondly; In the Affirmative.

1. A sincere and upright Christian is known by the Way he goes in: Prove.
16.17. Job 1:2:
The Highway of the Upright is to depart from Evil.

(1.) He escheweth all Evil, the smallest, as well as the greatest.

(2.) He leaves it willingly, he hates it; he does not part with it as a Man
parts with his Friend, but as a Man parts with his most deadly and mortal
Enemy.

2. A sincere Person has a right Faith, and a good and well-enlightned
Judgment. Rotten Principles make rotten Christians. 2 Timothy 3.8
There are some Men who are of corrupt Minds, reprobate, (or of no Judgment)
concerning the Faith.

3. He has an holy and upright End, he desires to live to God's Glory, and to
serve him in Sincerity. Paul resolved, Christ should be magnified in his Body,
whether it were by Life, or by Death.

4. He walks by a true and an exact Rule: As many as walk according to this
Rule, Gal. 6.
Peace on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

5. He labors to keep all God's Commandments. Thus did David, Psalm. 119.9.
Luke 1.6.
who was a Man after God's own Heart; and thus did Zachary and Elizabeth, who
walked in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless, etc.

6. He desires to be sanctified, as well as to be saved; to be made holy, as
well as to be made happy.

7. He is as willing to do for God, as to receive from God; for the Work, as
well as the Wages.

8. He strives as much against the Evils of his Heart, as he does against the
Evils of his Life.

9. He is a Man always for God, in bad Times as well as in good Times.

10. He is the same in private as in public; he is at home what he seems to be
abroad.

11. He loves and prefers God and Christ above all. Thus David, Psalm. 73.25.
and Paul, Phil. 3.8, 9.

12. He can go on in God's Ways and Services with abundance of content, without
respect to any outward Profit or Applause, or being taken notice of by Men. His
Satisfaction consists not in the approbation of Men, but in the approbation
and commendation of God. His own Conscience gives Testimony and Evidence of the
Sincerity of his Heatt. Thus Paul, 2 Cor. 11.12. This is our rejoicing, 2 Cor.
11.12.
the Testimony of our Conscience, etc.

The Breast Plate of Righteousness.
Ephesians. 6.14. And having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, etc.
THere is a Moral Legal Evangelical
Righteousness.

Now a Moral or Legal Righteousness will not save or defend the Saint, or
spiritual Soldier of Jesus Christ, from his Enemy: Mat. 5.20
Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Paul valued not
his own Righteousness that was of the Law. All our Righteousness, viz. that
which flows not from Faith, or from a renewed Principle of the Spirit, is but
as filthy Rags. Therefore that cannot be the Righteousness here intended.

2. Evangelical Righteousness is twofold: 1. Imputed. 2. Imparted.


First; The Righteousness imputed is that which was wrought by Christ for the
Believer in the days of his Flesh, by his active and passive Obedience to the
Law of God, which is put upon the Soul by Faith, called the Righteousness of
God by Faith. Phil 3.9.


Secondly; The Righteousness imparted is that which is wrought by Christ in the
Soul; it is a supernatural Work, or a new Life planted in the Heart of every
Believer, by the powerful Operations of the Holy Ghost, whereby he is made
holy, and enabled to approve himself to God and Men, in all purity of Life and
Conversation.

By the Breastplate of Righteousness in the Text, we understand the
Righteousness of Sanctification is principall^ intended; for otherwise this
piece of Christian Armor would interfere with the Shield of Faith, which
comprehends the Righteousness of Justification. [See Shield.] It is (we say) a
Principle of new Life, which the Spirit works in the Heart of a Believer; hence
the several Graces of Holiness are called the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
Man by the Fall had a double Loss; first, the Love of God; secondly, the Image
or Likeness of God: Christ restores both to his Children; the first, by his
Righteousness imputed; the second, by his Spirit imparting the lost Image of
God to them, which consists in Righteousness and true Holiness. Who but a Man
can impart his own Nature, and beget a Child like himself? So who but the
Spirit of God can make a Creature like God, by causing him to partake of the
Divine Nature?

1. This is that Principle of new Life, viz. an inward Disposition, and Divine
Quality, sweetly, powerfully, and constantly stirring up and inclining to that
which is holy, and spiritually good.

2. The Work of the Spirit in this respect was not to recover what was dying,
Garnal.
but to work Life de novo in a Soul quite dead; hence called a creating,
quickening, forming, and renewing Work.

3. It is a supernatural Principle, by which we distinguish it from Adam's
Righteousness, which was co-natural to him, as Sin is to us. Holiness was as
natural to him, as Health was to his Body; they both resulted ex Principiis
recte constitutis, from Principles pure and rightly disposed.

Why Righteousness is called a Breast Plate, will appear by the following
Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Breast Plate is a main and principal Piece of Armor,
that belongs to a Soldier. RIghteousness in like manner is a principal thing
belonging to all Christians, who are called Soldiers of Christ: 2 Timothy 3 3.
Endure Hardness as a good Soldier, etc. II. A Breast Plate is a piece of
Armor that every Soldier ought to have on, when he engages his Enemy; he must
not come into the Field without it. II. Righteousness is so necessary for every
Believer, that he ought not, cannot be without it; there is no engaging any
Enemy of the Soul, without a Principle of Holiness be wrought in him. III. A
Breast Plate preserves the principal part of the Body, viz. the Breast, where
the very Vitals of a Man are closely couched together, and where a Shot or a
Stab is more deadly, than in other parts, that are more remote from the
Fountain of Life. A Man may outlive many Wounds received in the Arms or Legs,
but a Stab in the Heart is a certain Messenger of Death. III. Righteousness and
Holiness preserves the principal part of a Christian, viz. his Soul. Satan aims
to hit him there where he may dispatch him soonest. A Wound in a Man's Credit,
Estate, Relations, etc. hazard not the Life of his Soul; but Sin exposes it to
imminent Danger. This is that Dart, Prove. 7 23
that struck the young Man through the Liver, as a Bird hastes to the Snare,
that knows not it is for his Life. And this is that which Satan strives to
tempt, entice, and draw a Saint to yield unto. Hence he should be careful to
put on his Breastplate of Righteousness, which whilst he has on, he is safe
from the deadly Stab of the Enemy. IV. A Breast Plate is made and prepared for
a Soldier, before he puts it on. It is not his own Work, but the Work of a
skilful Artist. IV. Righteousness, which is the Saints Breast Plate, is wrought
in him by the Holy Spirit, who is a most wise and skilful Workman. Our own
Righteousness is good for nothing, hence called dead Works, because they are
Works from one dead in Sin, and spring not from a Principle of inward spiritual
Life. V. A Breast Plate much emboldens a Soldier, and makes him fearless, that
as he cannot be easily killed, so hereby he cannot be soon cowed. When a
Soldier sees himsel unarmed, he begins to tremble; but when he has on a good
Helmet, and a Plate of Proof on his Breast, he is not quickly dismayed, but
adventures upon the Point of the Sword. V. Thus Righteousness defends and
animates the Soul and Conscience, when a Man in the midst of the greatest
Danger can lift up his hands without spot. Holiness fills a Soul with Courage,
so that he can look in the very face of grim Death; whereas Guilt, which is the
Nakedness of the Soul, puts the stoutest Sinner into a shaking Fit of Fear. The
Wicked flee, when no Man pursues; Prove. 28.1.
but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion. No sooner did Adam see his
Breast Plate was off, and that he was naked, but he was afraid, and ran away,
to hide himself from God. VI. The Breast Plate and Girdle were both joined or
buckled together. VI. So Righteousness and Truth must meet, and be joined
together in every Christian; which is held forth by the Copulative [And] Stand
therefore, having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness. Which is taken twofold, as has been showed:
First, for the Truth of Doctrine, or a good and Orthodox Judgment; all the
Principles of true Religion, that are essential to Salvation. Secondly, Grace,
or Sincerity of Heart. In both these respects, Truth must be clasped to, or
joined with Righteousness, and a holy Life. Solomon says, Two are better than
one: So may I say here, a good Doctrine with a good Conversation, is better
than a good Doctrine without a good Conversation, or a good Conversation
without a good Doctrine; as a Man must have the one, so he must not be without
the other; Woe to him that is alone, for the Spirit will not be his Strength. An
evil and corrupt Doctrine may be of as dangerous a Nature as an evil and
debauched Life. See 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Who privily bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift Destruction,
etc. In vain is a Man's outward Holiness, or moral Sincerity, if he be tainted
with heretical and damnable Principles; and as vain is it for a Man to hold the
true Doctrine of the Christian Religion, if he be not sincere, and live a holy
Life.

Inferences.
THis may inform us, what need there is for every Christian to get and keep on
the Breast Plate of Righteousness; not only to get a renewed Principle of Grace
in his Heart, but also to maintain the Power of Godliness in his Life and
Conversation. This he ought strenuously to labor after, and that for several
Reasons.

First; In regard of God, whose main Design in giving Grace, and implanting a
Divine Principle in his People, is to make them holy; to this end he has put
this Breast Plate upon them.

1. In regard of the Design he has to bring them into Union with himself, and
in marrying them to Jesus Christ, which is, that they might bring forth Fruit
to God.

2. They are regenerated by the Spirit, that they might be holy: A new Heart,
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and a new Spirit will I put within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and keep my Judgments, and do them. We are his Workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has ordained that we
should walk in them.

3. It is the Design of God in all his Ordinances. The Word of God is both Seed
to beget, and Food to nourish Holiness begotten in the Heart. Every part of it
contributes to this Design abundantly. The Preceptive part affords a perfect
Rule of Holiness; the Promises present us with admirable Encouragements, to
entice and allure us thereunto; the Threatenings, or minatory part of the Word,
are to deter and keep back from that which is contrary to it.

4. It is the Design of God in all his Providence, to make his People more
holy. The Afflictions he brings upon them, are to refine and purify them: This
is the Fruit of all, the taking away of your Sin. See Refiner.

5. Saints are called God's Witnesses; they should from hence endeavor to
shine forth in their Testimony for him. What he speaks in his Word, touching
his Justice, Holiness, and utter Hatred of Sin and Ungodliness, they ought not
only with their Lips, but also with their Lives, bear witness unto.

Secondly; In regard of Satan, whose great Design is against the Holiness of
the Saints. How does it behove them to walk with all Circumspection, since they
are continually besieged and assaulted by so strong an Enemy? As God's great
Design is to further and prompt to Holiness; so Satan's great Design is to
hinder and obstruct it: And what should be our chief care to defend, but that
which our Adversaries Thoughts and Plots are most laid to assault and storm?

Thirdly; Saints should labor to have this Breast Plate on, viz. be holy, in
regard of the World: Ye are the Light of the World. Mat. 5.13, 14.
Let your good Works so shine before Men, etc.

1. If these Lights become Darkness, or are darkened, no marvel if Men stumble:
Woe unto the World because of Offenses; but rather woe to him by whom the Offense
comes. Ye are the Salt of the Earth: But if this Salt has lost its Savor,
it is no wonder if the World stink and be unsavory.

2. Wicked Men (says a worthy Minister) know not the Principle by which you
walk, they cannot possibly discern the Excellency of that Way and Religion
which you profess; but they can discern and make some Judgment of your
Conversations; nay, and their Eyes are upon you, they watch to see your
Failings. Spots are soon espied in your Coats; for tho they love not Holiness
themselves, yet they expect that those that profess themselves to be Saints
should be holy. How should this teach you to get on this Breast Plate?

3. This may greatly work upon the Ungodly, with whom you live and daily
converse; nay, those that will not be won by the Word, possibly may, and many
times have been won and converted this way. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.


4. This will however convince them, that you are the Servants of God, and
Heaven-born Souls; it will silence them, and stop their Mouths: 1 Pet. 3.16.
That whereas they speak evil of you, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your good Conversation in Christ.

5. This will leave the World without excuse in the Great Day.

Fourthly; You should labor after Holiness, in regard of the Gospel it self
which you profess. That will this way gain much Credit in the World. Nothing
brings Religion into greater Contempt, or causes it to be more slighted by the
Ungodly, than the loose, carnal, and unholy Lives of those who profess it.

Fifthly; You ought to labor after a godly Life, in regard of the sincere and
holy Ministers of the Gospel, and other faithful Saints and Soldiers of
Christ. What can comfort and delight their Souls more than the holy, humble,
and fruitful Lives of Believers? Psalm. 16.3.
The Saints, those excellent Ones, were all David's Delight; and Paul accounted
them his Joy and Crown. But if they are proud, peevish, covetous, carnal, and
walk like other Gentiles, what wounds and grieves them more! This made David
weep, Jer. 9 1.
yea, Rivers of Water to run down his Eyes; and Jeremiah to wish his Head were
Water, and his Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that he might weep day and night. Many
walk, says Paul, Phil. 3.18, 19.
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, They are Enemies to
the Cross of Christ; whose End is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose
Glory is in their Shame, who mind earthly things.

Sixthly; Christians, in regard of themselves, ought to labor after
Righteousness, and true Holiness; for this only will be the best Evidence to
them of the Truth of Grace received, and of their Interest in Jesus Christ.
What will all other Seize and Privileges signify, if they are not holy?

1. By this means they will be able to hold up their Heads in the Day of Trial:
For our rejoicing is this, 2 Cor. 1.12
the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not
by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have our Conversation in the
World, etc.

Isa 3.10.
2. These are the Men it will go well with, whatever comes: Say unto the
Righteous, it shall go well with them, etc.

3. These shall have Peace in Christ, tho they have Trouble in the World; Peace
whilst they live, Psalm. 37.37
and Peace when they die: Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright; the End
of that Man is Peace.

4. These need not fear the Assaults of Satan, they have Armor of Proof on, a
Breast Plate, Romans 8.1.
that will preserve their Souls from Death: There is therefore now no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit.

Seventhly; Christians should labor to have on this Breast Plate of
Righteousness, in regard of the Excellency of it. It is that which God himself
is clothed with; it is that which makes Angels to shine gloriously in Heaven.
A Man is hereby capacitated to have Communion with God: Psalm. 94 20
Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee? etc.

Eighthly, and lastly; In regard of the Necessity of it: For without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord.

Quest. How should we put on the Breast Plate of Righteousness?

Answ. 1. In Heart; we must be inwardly holy, Holiness must begin there. First
make the Tree good, etc.

2. In Life. Negative Holiness does not only consist in the leaving all gross
Sins, but in abstaining from all appearance of Evil, and to leave and abstain
from it from right Principles; and not only to leave it, but to loath it.

Again, it consists in keeping up all holy and religious Duties, viz.
Reading, Hearing, Praying, Distributing to the Poor, Conforming to all moral
and positive Precepts; to be holy at home, in the Family, in the Church, in the
World, to exercise a good Conscience toward God, Acts 24.16.
and toward Men. This is to put on the Breast Plate of Righteousness.

I might give many Directions about putting it on, and also show some of
Satan's cunning Stratagems, in endeavoring to make useless this blessed Piece
of the Christian's Armor, in laying Discouragements in the way of true Piety;
or by persuading Persons they have this Breast Plate on, when it is a
counterfeit one. He persuades Men, that Moral Righteousness will serve their
turn, and sufficiently preserve them from eternal Death. But this shall suffice
in this place.

The Shield of Faith.
Ephesians. 6.16. Above all take the Shield of Faith, etc.
FAith is a Grace, a most precious and excellent Grace of the Spirit of God,
whereby the Soul is enabled to believe, or go out of it self, and wholly to
rely and rest upon Christ crucified, or on his active and passive Obedience,
upon the Warrant of the Promise, for Justification and eternal Life.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Shield is a Piece of Armor that Soldiers were wont to
carry with them into the Field, when they were to engage their Enemies. FAith
is a part of a Christian's spiritual Armor. All Christ's Soldiers ought to
carry this Weapon into the Field with them, when they engage the Enemy of their
Souls: Above all, take the Shield of Faith. II. A Shield is a Piece of Armor
made for Defense. II. Faith is of excellent use to defend the Soul from all
spiritual Dangers, of Sin and Satan, and other Enemies. III. A Shield is not
for the Defense of any particular part of the Body, as almost all other Pieces
are. The Helmet is fitted for the Head, the Breast Plate is designed for the
Breast; so others have their several Parts which they are fastened to: But a
Shield is a Piece that is intended for the Defense of the whole Body. It was
wont to be made very large, for its broadness called (...) of (...), Gurnal.
a Door, because so long and large, as in a manner to cover the whole Body; to
which that place alludes, Psalm. 4.12. Thou, Lord, wilt bless the Righteous with
Favor, thou will compass him about as with a Shield. III. So the Grace of
Faith defends the whole Man, every part of a Christian. 1. Sometimes Satan's
^emptations are levelled against his Head, and if he can hit him there, he
wounds sorely. He will be disputing against this Truth, and that Truth, and
make a Christian doubt concerning them, if possible, because his own Reason
cannot comprehend them: As perhaps it may be about the Deity of Christ, or the
Holy Trinity, how they can be three, and yet but one; or about Satisfaction,
How the Debt is paid, and yet the Sinner freely pardoned? etc. Now Faith is as
a Shield to a Saint at this time, and interposeth between a Christian, and this
Arrow of Satan; it comes in to the relief of the Saints weak Understanding, as
seasonable as Zerviah did to David, when the Giant Ishbibenob thought to have
slain him. I Will trust the Word of God, says the Soul, rather than my own
purblind Reason: what I cannot comprehend, I will believe. Thus Abraham, not
being weak in Faith, Romans 4.19
considered not his own Body now dead, etc. Sense and Reason would have made
sad work at such a dead Lift, but Faith brought him off victoriously.

Secondly; Sometimes Satan strives to hit the Conscience, all his Assaults and
fiery Darts are at another season aimed at that, to wound that, to cause Horror
and Terror within, by setting the Evil of Sin, and of his own Heart, and the
Infirmities of his Life, before him. Satan sets our Sins before us, not to
humble us, but to wound us; he shows our Sins to us, but hides a Savior from
us. Satan has sometimes tempted gracious Persons to lay violent hands upon
themselves, when the heinous Nature of their Sin has appeared to them, and the
Danger they are in thereby; as it was with the poor Jailor, Acts 16. Acts 16.
But now Faith prevents and keeps off all the Danger, and quenches this fiery
Dart. Christ died for Sinners, for the chiefest of Sinners; and tho thou art a
Sinner, a great Sinner, the worst of Sinners, yet says Faith, Thou art but a
Sinner, and there is Mercy for such. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved; if thou can believe, and throw thy self on Christ, thy Sins
shall not be thy Ruin.

Thirdly; He labors to ensnare the Affections of the Soul, or deaden its
fervent Love to Jesus Christ, by presenting the Pleasures and Profits of this
World to it. Thus he served our Savior himself. But now Faith shields off this
Dart also, by showing the Excellency of the Lord Jesus to the Soul; and that
all things without him, and in comparison of him, are nothing, nay, less than
nothing; and also by setting the World to come, and the Glory thereof, before
the Eyes of the Soul. Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen.

IV. A Shield, tho heavy, and somewhat unwieldy, to such as have not skill and
strength to use it; yet it is a moveable Piece of Armor, which an expert
Soldier, with a watchful eye, can turn this way, and that way, to stop a Dart
or Blow from lighting on any part that they were directed to by the Enemy. IV.
Faith is a piece of Christian Armor, which unskilful Professors are not ready
to use, but an experienced Soul can turn it any way to keep off the Arrow and
fiery Darts of Satan from hurting or wounding him. He observes what part the
Enemy aims to hit, or how the Temptation is laid. It is a great point of
Christian Wisdom rightly to exercise the Shield of Faith; A Man must be sure to
have a watchful Eye upon his Adversary, or else for all his Shield he may soon
be wounded. V. A Shield does not only defend the whole Body, but it is a
Defense to other parts of a Soldier's Armor also; it keeps off the Dart from
the Helmet and Breast Plate likewise. V. Faith does not only defend the whole
Soul, but also it is a Safeguard to all the other parts of a Christian's Armor;
it is that which secures Hope, the Helmet of Salvation, for without Faith Hope
would soon be broken in pieces. Also it secures the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; for neither Christ's Righteousness, nor any inherent Holiness in
the Soul, will avail any thing without Faith. VI. A Shield has been of
wonderful advantage to Soldiers in former Times, when it was in use; it has
preserved them in the time of Battle from Death, and many mortal Wounds. Hence
God is pleased to call Himself a Shield, signifying thereby his sure and safe
Protection to his People in Time of Trouble and Temptation. Fear not, Abraham,
I am thy Shield. VI. Faith has been of wonderful use to the Saints of God in
all Ages; it is that which has preserved them when hard beset, in the greatest
Danger imaginable: I had fainted unless I had believed. Psalm. 27.13
If he at that time had not had Faith to shield him, he had been lost. All the
mighty Men of God (says Ainsworth) by the Shield of Faith in God and Christ,
Ainsworth on Cant. 4.4. p. 32.
have done many mighty Works, as the Apostle brings a Cloud of Witnesses in
to prove, Heb. 11. Heb. 11. 2 Chronicles. 11.10, 47. 2 Samuel, 8.7. Ezekiel. 27.11.
And hence Shields (says he) were hanged up in David's Tower, for Monuments
and Signs of Victory. Metaphor. Disparity. A Shield that Soldiers use in
Battle is an Instrument made by Man. FAith is a precious Grace or Fruit of the
Spirit of God: Gal. 5.22.
The Fruit of the Spirit is Faith, etc. II. A Shield is not used by Soldiers
in all Countries. II. Faith is of use by all spiritual Soldiers in every
Nation; and it is as much in use now by them who truly believe, as ever it was.
III. A Shield may be broken, and utterly lost. III. A Saints Faith may receive
some detriment, but it cannot be utterly broken and lost. I have prayed for
thee, Luke 22.23
that thy Faith fail not. IV. A Shield can only save and defend from temporal
Enemies. IV. Faith shields and defends the Soul from all the fiery Darts and
Assaults of Satan.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may infer, that Faith is an excellent Grace; and not only so,
but we may perceive the Necessity of it in all our spiritual Conflicts.

2. Labor to find out the right use of it in time of Temptation, and under all
the Assaults of Satan.

3. It shows how safe and happy all they are, who truly believe, or have
obtained the Faith of God's Elect; and how miserable such be as are without it.

4. Labor therefore above all to take the Shield of Faith; for tho all other
Graces are necessary, as the Girdle of Truth, the Breastplate of Righteousness,
etc. yet these and all other Graces have their efficacy, as they work, and are
in conjunction with Faith. We receive Benefit from them, as they receive Power,
and are influenced from hence; so that Faith has the precedence.

Faith more precious than Gold.
1 Pet. 1.7. That the Trial of your Faith being much more precious than Gold
that perishes, tho it be tried with Fire, etc.
THere are diverse Acceptations of the Word (...), Faith.

1. Faith or Fidelity, or Faithfulness in keeping Promise, whether respecting
God or Man: Shall the Faith of God be made of none effect?

2. It is taken for the Doctrine of the Gospel: Acts 6.6. Gal. 1.23.
Many were obedient to the Faith.

3. It is taken for the Dictates of Conscience, allowing of things indifferent
in themselves: Have thou Faith? have it to thy self. Romans 14.22. Acts 26.27.


4. Credence, or the Belief of the History of the Scriptures. King Agrippa,
Believe thou the Prophets? I know thou believe. This is called by some,
Historical or Dogmatical Faith; by others, the Faith of Credence.

5. A certain and steadfast Belief of some strange and wonderful Effects. Mark
16.17. 1 Cor. 13.2
These Signs shall follow them that believe: In my Name they shall cast out
Devils, etc. And tho I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and
have not Charity, I am nothing. This is called the Faith of Miracles.

6. A naked Knowledge of God, joined with an outward and bare Profession of the
Gospel. Even so Faith, if it has not Works, is dead. Jam. 2.17.


7. It is taken for a strong Belief or Confidence in Prayer. chap. 5.15.
The Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick.

8. It is taken for a holy, firm, and well-grounded Belief, and steadfast
Reliance upon the Merits and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for Justification
and eternal Life; or a going out of our selves, fetching all our Hope and
Comfort from him, and his glorious Undertakings. This is that most noble and
precious Grace, that is wrought in the Soul by the Spirit, which is compared to
Gold, etc.

Faith is as precious as Gold, nay, more precious; tried Faith is better than
tried Gold, than Gold tried or refined in the Fire.

Metaphor. Parallel. GOld is precious in some Countries upon the consideration
of the Scarcity of it; there is but little of it to be had, and that hard to
come by. Things are esteemed precious upon this account: In those days the Word
of the Lord was precious, there was no open Vision. TRue Faith is precious upon
the account of the Scarcity of it. Tho there is great talk of it every where,
it is in all Peoples Mouths, yet the right kind is very precious; few have so
much as one dram of it in their Hearts; it is very hard to obtain. II. Gold is
very desirable. Men that know the worth of it, search diligently for it; they
work in Mines, labor hard, undergo much difficulty to obtain it. II. All
understanding Men, who are convinced of the Nature and Usefulness of Faith,
seek for it, as for hid Treasure; they endeavor to improve all Opportunities
for the obtaining of it. III. Gold must be tried. Many take that for pure Gold,
that is counterfeit Metal, and thereby cheat themselves, or are deceived by
others. III. So Faith must be tried; for there is nothing Men are more mistaken
or deceived in. There is abundance of counterfeit Faith in the World. IV. Gold
is tried by a Touchstone; Men can soon discern if it be naught, when they prove
it that way. IV. Faith must also be tried by the true Touchstone, viz. the
Word of God. If a Man fear his Faith be not of the right kind, let him bring it
thither; i e. Examine the Nature and Quality of it, by the Marks laid down in
the holy Scriptures, and he will soon discover what Faith he has. V. The best
Gold is very precious, a most rare and choice thing, in respect of its own
intrinsecal virtue; and from hence it is so much prized and coveted by the
Children of Men. It is called precious, from the excellent nature and worth of
it. It is a most Sovereign Cordial. V. True Faith is a most precious Grace in
respect of its own intrinsecal Virtue, and from hence all true Christians
esteem so highly of it. The Price thereof is above Rubies, it is far more
precious than Gold that perishes; which will appear by the Induction of the
following Particulars.

1. In respect of the Names or Appellations given to it in holy Scripture. (1.)
It is called Lively Faith. (2.) It is called Effectual Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
(3.) It is called the Faith of God's Elect, Tit. 1.1. (4.) It is called
unfeigned Faith, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.5. (5.) It is called Faith that works by
Love, Gal. 5.6. (6.) It is called Faith of the Operation of God, Col. 2.12.
(7.) It is called precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. (8.) It is called holy Faith.
(9.) It is called the Faith of the Son of God. Its excellent Names set forth
its transcendent Nature.

2. Faith is precious in respect of the Means of its procurement, or the Price
that was laid down for the obtaining of it, viz. the precious Blood of Christ;
for had not Christ died, we should never have had one dram of it; it is given
to us as the Fruit and Effect of his glorious Undertaking.

3. Faith is precious in respect of the Fountain from whence it proceeds.

4. Faith is precious in respect of the Means by which it is wrought in the
Soul, viz. by the Word and Spirit of God in a wonderful manner, Ephesians: 1.19, 20.
even like as God wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead.

5. Faith is precious in respect of the Object it takes hold of, or fasteneth
upon, viz. God the Father, the Holy Spirit, but more immediately Christ
crucified. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

6. Faith is precious in that it joins or unites the Soul to Christ, it makes
us one with him, (as it were) Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of his Bone, a lively
Member of that Body whereof he is the Head. It Is that which ties the Conjugal
Knot between him and every Believer.

7. It is the Eye of the Soul; no Man without it can behold Jesus Christ, nor
the fulfillings of future Promises. Abraham by Faith saw the Day of Christ.

8. Hereby a Christian is made a Child of God. To as many as received him, Joh.
1.12. Gal. 3.26.
to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believed on
his Name. Ye are all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus.

9. It is the only way or means God is pleased to take, to deliver the Souls of
Men from Sin, Wrath, and eternal Death.

10. It is that which interests the Soul into all the sweet and precious
Promises of the Covenant of Grace. See Light.

11. It is the Instrument of Salvation. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved.

12. Faith is a most excellent and precious thing, upon the account of the
Fruits of it, viz. Life, Light, Peace, Purging, Boldness at the Throne of
Grace, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Hope, and good Assurance of eternal Life.

13. Faith is precious in respect of that glorious Power and Virtue that is in
it. It Is medicinable, and the most Sovereign Antidote and Cordial in the World.
(1.) It will expel Poison. (2.) 'Twill perfectly (as it applies the Blood of
Christ) cure a wounded Conscience. (3.) It will bear up and revive a fainting
Spirit; Mat. 8.23.
I had fainted unless I had believed. (4.) It is good against the Feebleness of
the Knees, and Weakness of the hands. (5.) It is a most excellent thing against
Fear, and Tremblings of the Heart. But when he saw the Wind boisterous, he was
afraid; and beginning to sink, Luke 8.23. Mat. 14.30
he cried, saying, Lord, save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his
hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little Faith! (6. Ezekiel.
36.26.
) It is a precious Remedy against the Stone of a hard Heart; it will dissolve
it, break it in pieces, and cure the Soul perfectly of it. (7.) It cures all
manner of inward Deadness, it may well be called lively Faith, or Faith of the
Operation of God. (8. Col. 2.12.
) It is good against the Dimness of the Eyes, it helps them that cannot see
afar off. (9.) It is a most Sovereign Thing against evil Spirits; it will
resist the Devil, and make him fly. (10.) It is excellent good to purge and
work out all those noxious and evil Humors of the inward Man, cleansing and
purifying the Heart. 11. It is good against the Falling Sickness. Believers
stand by Faith, but if through a Temptation they should fall, Faith will help
them up again. David and Peter had not so much Faith as to keep them from from
falling, yet they had enough to raise them up again when they were fallen. It
is an universal Remedy, it cures all the Diseases of the Soul; so that we may
say with the Woman, (let the Distemper be what it will) If I can but touch the
Hem of his Garment, I shall be healed.

14. Faith is precious, because it shields and gloriously preserves the whole
Soul from all Dangers; it is that which works with, and tends to the perfecting
of all other Graces in us.

15. It was by Faith that Saints, in every Age of the Church, Heb. 11.
were enabled to undergo and suffer all those hard and bitter Tortures and
Torments they met with for Christ's sake.

16. It is that which helps the Godly to overcome the World. 1 John 5.4.
He that is born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the Victory which
overcomes the World, even our Faith.

VI. Gold is often tried and refined in the Fire; we read of Gold seven times
refined: The Refining-Pot is for Silver, Prove. 17.3
and the Furnace for Gold. VI. Faith is often tried in the Fire or Furnace of
Affliction: 1 Pet. 3.12
Think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is to try you, etc. He
shall sit as a Refiner's Fire, Mal. 3.2, 3
and as a Purifier of Silver, etc. and purge them as Gold and Silver, etc. God
this way tried Abraham's Faith, together with the Faith of many others, of whom
we read, I will bring the third part through the Fire, and I will try them as
Gold is tried. Zech. 13.9
VII. Tried Gold is much better than that which is not tried, nor refined in
the Fire. VII. Faith that is tried is of wonderful value, much more to be
prized than that which was never brought under Exercise How excellently did
Abraham's and Job's Faith shine, when tried? The Trial of your Faith is much
more precious than Gold, tho it be tried in the Fire, etc. VII. Gold tried in
the Fire is of an enriching Nature; if a Man has much of it, it enriches him
greatly. We esteem him a very rich Man, that has great Store of tried Gold in
his own Possession. VIII. So Faith that is tried in the Furnace, is of a
Soul-enriching Nature; he that has much of this Faith is a very rich Man, a
rich Saint. James 1 5
God has chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom.

[See more of the Nature of Gold, in the Metaphor Gold, where the Word of God
is compared to it.

Metaphor. Disparity. GOld is naturally an earthy Sort of Metal, it is from
beneath, and therefore corruptible: Not with corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold, which perish. FAith is a divine and precious Grace, or a supernatural
thing; it is from above, wrought in the Soul by the Operation of the Spirit of
God, and therefore incorruptible; an heavenly Principle or Seed, that shall
never fail, till we receive the end of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls.
II. Tried Gold may make a Man renowned and great on Earth, and adorn the Body
or Habitation where he dwells; but it avails not the Soul any thing; it will
not enrich, or make honorable, or beautify that, etc. II. Faith, true Faith,
Faith tried in the Fire, makes Believing Men and Women renowned in Grace and
Godliness, and adorns the Soul, Church, and People where it is. None shine
forth in that Beauty and Splendour, as those do, who have much Faith. III. Tried
Gold may be utterly lost; a Man may have much of it to day, and none to morrow;
Thieves may rob him of it, etc. III. True Faith cannot be utterly lost. A Man
may lose somewhat of the Strength of it; he may decay in this Grace, as well as
in others; but he can never lose the Habit, the Seed or Truth of Faith it self.
I have prayed for thee, Luke 22.31, 32.
that thy Faith fail not.

Inferences.
FIrst, Information. How greatly are some mistaken about this precious and most
noble Grace? For we may infer from hence,

1. That true Faith is not a simple or bare believing there is a God; the
Devils have this kind of Faith; they also believe, and tremble.

2. That it is not a mere or bare believing the Truth of the holy Scriptures.
The Jews believed the Scriptures, and thought by them to have eternal Life, and
yet were Enemies to Jesus Christ.

3. That it is not a bare believing Christ died for Sinners; most ungodly
People in England believe that.

4. That cannot be a true Faith, which Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and
all other ungodly and profane Persons have.

5. That a Man may leave all gross Sins, and assent to many Truths of the
Gospel, and yet have no true Faith.

6. Nay, that a Man may be baptized, take upon him the Profession of the
Gospel, and suffer many things, and yet not have one dram of saving Faith; as
appears by the foolish Virgins, Judas, and Simon the Sorcerer, and many others.

7. Nay, a Man may seem to hear the Word with Joy, and yet have no true Faith.
A temporary Faith is not the Faith of God's Elect, or that Faith that is more
precious than Gold, etc.

Quest. How may a Man know true Faith from that which is common, and mere
counterfeit?

Answ. 1. There is in that Person, who savingly believes in Christ, a true
Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ, the true Savior; it takes hold on the
right Object. Do thou believe on the Son of God? Joh. 9.24. and 9.35. Romans
10.14.
Who is he, Lord? etc. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not
heard?

2. There must be a true Knowledge of, and a free and full Assent and Consent to
the Truth of that which is contained in the Holy Scriptures, concerning God,
Christ, and Salvation, and all other essential Principles of true Religion. It
is not enough to believe as the Church believes, as some ignorantly teach and
affirm.

3. He that has obtained true Faith, has had his Understanding enlightened, to
see what his State and Condition was by Nature; Acts 2.37. 2 Cor. 7.
he has been under Humiliation for Sin.

4. He sees also, that all his own Righteousness will avail him nothing in
point of Justification, and Acceptance with God. Without Christ, his Prayers,
Tears, Reading, Hearing, and Alms-deeds, will not save him. To trust to any of
these, he sees is the way to make Faith void. Romans 3.8. Romans 10.2, 3.
The Jews built upon this Foundation, and thereby missed of Salvation.

5. There is in that Soul where true Faith is wrought, or where the Seed of it
is sowed, a desire after Christ, not simply after his Merits, but also after
Union, and intimate Acquaintance with him. Yea, doubtless, I account all things
but Loss, Phil. 3.8.
for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, my Lord; for whom I have
suffered the Loss of all things, and do account them but Dung, that I may win
Christ, etc. A true enlightened Soul looks first to Christ's Person, as being
affected with his Beauty, and Sweetness of his Love; and then to the Goods and
Riches he possesses: As a Woman newly married, looks first to her Husband, and
then to the Inheritance, or else is little better than an Harlot.

6. But did I say, a Desire after Christ? Be not mistaken, to think that every
Desire after him is a Sign of true Faith. (1.) It is a fervent Desire; such
desire him more than all the World. That Soul pants after him, and Union with
him, Psalm. 75.25
more than after Heaven and Glory. It greatly endears Christ to the Soul. He is
the chiefest of Ten Thousand. (2.) It Is such a Desire, as in a hungry Man,
nothing will satisfy him but Bread; so nothing will satisfy a true Believer,
but Christ, the Bread of Life.

7. If a Man has true Faith, he knows the Time when he was without it; he
knows he was once blind, and without God and Christ. I will not say, he knows
the very Instant when God wrought it in his Soul; but he can say with the Man
whose Eyes Christ opened, Whereas I was blind, I now see. Jon. 9.25.


8. And not only so, but he knows the Way and Means by which he obtained it,
viz. either by Hearing, or Reading, or Meditating on the Word of God; either in
the free Tender of Christ to Sinners in general, or to dejected, burdened, and
heavyladen Sinners, in particular.

9. Faith is usually obtained of God in a constant and laborious seeking and
crying to him for it. What Pains has it cost you, Sirs? Precious Faith is not
easily obtained to. What Conflicts have you found within? Satan ever makes
strong Resistance, there is nothing he strives to obstruct or hinder more.

10. What Love to God has thy Faith wrought in thee? True Faith works by Love.
Mary believed, and loved much.

11. Has thy Faith purified thy Heart? Have thou seen its horrid Filth and
Pollution? and do thou long after Purity? not only to have thy Sins pardoned,
but also purged away, and the Power and Dominion thereof destroyed?

12. What Alteration in the Course of thy Life has Faith wrought? Faith made
Jordan go back. There is a Turning the whole Man to God, a glorious Change in
every Faculty, in Heart, and also in Life. Half my Goods, says Zacheus, Luke
19.8. Act. 19.19
I give to the Poor. And in the Acts it is said, Those that used unlawful Arts,
burned their Books. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.

13. Faith leads the Soul to receive Christ in all his Offices, not only as a
Savior, but also as a Sovereign: not only as a Priest, to die, and appease the
Wrath of God for us, but also as a Prince, to rule and reign in us.

14. What Obedience therefore flows from thy Faith? Do thou boldly and
visibly profess Jesus Christ, following him whithersoever he goes; not closing
in with one of his Precepts only, but obeying all of them from thy Heart, which
thou art convinced of, and know to be thy Duty. Then shall I not be ashamed,
Psalm. 119.6. Romans 5.1.
when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

15. What Peace has Faith brought to thy Soul? Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly; From what has been noted we may infer, There is an absolute
Necessity of Faith.

1. In respect of Gospel-Revelation. Without Faith it is impossible to please
God. Heb. 11.6.


2. There is no Salvation without it, Romans 3.26. Thou must be beholden to
another for a Righteousness, because thou have broken the Law, that pronounces
the Curse against thee; thou have none of thy own that will be accepted in the
sight of God. He that believes not, shall be damned. Unless ye believe that I
am He, Joh. 8.22.
ye shall die in your Sins.

3. There is a Necessity of Faith, because all Boasting is excluded. Romans 3.27
God's design in our Salvation is, wholly to exalt his own Free Grace. It is of
Christ's procurement, and thou must go unto him for it, or go without it.

Thirdly; If Faith be much more precious than Gold, then labor for it above
Gold; be not contented with a little of it, but wisely provide your selves with
good Store. Grow in Faith, get a strong Faith.

Quest. Will not a small or weak Faith save us, as well as a strong?

Answ. Yea, if it be of the right kind, tho never so small, the Person that
has it is as fully justified, as he that has the greatest degree nd measure
of it. Yet it concerns thee to get a strong Faith, for these Reasons following:

1. Because thou may meet with strong Assaults and Temptations from Satan,
and thou have no way to resist him but by the Shield of Faith, and it may be a
little Faith will not be sufficient to withstand those Exercises and Assaults
thou may meet with.

2. Because God expects much Faith of those he has afforded much Means unto: I
looked it should bring forth Grapes. Isa. 5.4.
God looks for Fruit, answerable to the Cost and Charge he has been at with a
People, or a particular Person.

3. Because God may bring you into such a condition, that you may have nothing
else to live upon, Hab. 3.17.
The Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither Fruit be in the Vines, etc. That is a
Time for the Saints to live by Faith; and if their Faith be small, what will
they do then?

4. Because as thy Faith is more or less, so will thy inward Peace and Joy be
in Christ Jesus. He that has but a small degree of Faith, is often at the foot
of the Hill, and under doubtings and becloudings in his own Spirit.

5. Because such as have but little Faith, will find the Way to Heaven harder,
and more difficult, than they who have much of it, or are strong in Faith. Weak
Folks are hard put to it to get up a high Hill.

6. Because it is a strong Faith that glorifies God most, as it appears in
respect of Abraham. Romans 4.19, 20.
He being not weak in Faith, considered not his own Body being dead. -- He
staggered not through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God.

Quest. But what is the Cause that some Christians are so weak in Faith?

Answ. 1. Some are but just brought forth, lately converted, they are like
newborn Babes: Can you expect a Child in the Cradle, should be as strong as
such as are twenty or thirty Years old?

2. Perhaps some have but little Faith, because they want the Means of it,
which others have; It may be they have more Law preached to them than Gospel,
more Terror from Sinai, than Joy from Mount Zion.

3. Again, some may be weak in Faith, because they pore more upon their own
inward Corruptions, than they meditate on Christ's Righteousness, more on their
own Emptiness, than on Christ's Fullness. They see their Debts, but have not
their Eyes upon their Surety, who has discharged and blotted all out.

4. Others may have little Faith, because they do not improve that which they
have, they are not industrious Traders, they do not labor after, and cry to
God for more Faith. The way to grow rich, is to be diligent. Lord, increase our
Faith.

5. Some have no more Faith, because they give way to Temptations, and let
their inward Corruptions too much prevail. Weeds will hinder the Growth of
precious Flowers: Self-Love, worldly Pleasure, Pride, and Passion, choke and
obstruct its Growth. Faith is a tender Herb.

6. Perhaps Christians have no more, because they mind not those precious
Grounds and Encouragements, which God in Mercy has offered for the increase,
strengthening, and growing of Faith.

Quest. How may I know a weak Faith from a strong?

Answ. 1. A weak Christian, one weak in Faith, looks more within than without,
grounds more on the good Desires and Heavenlinesses of his Affection, than the
Covenant and Promise of God: Joh. 14.19
Now a strong Christian looks to Christ. Because I live, ye shall live also.
It Is not because my Affections live, my Obedience lives, or I have Life in
Obedience, or performance of external Duties, but because Christ lives, By whom
I live. Gal. 2.20.

2. A weak Christian consults more the Power of the Enemy, than he does the
Strength of God, Christ, and the holy Spirit; and is much acted by Sense, in
respect of Means, how this or that should be done: Psalm. 78.19
Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? But a strong Saint believes in Hope
against Hope; a strong Faith takes up in the Power, Grace, and Sufficiency of
God: The Lord is on my side, Psalm. 56.4.
I will not fear what Man can do unto me.

3. A weak Faith grows weaker and weaker, and ready to let go its hold at every
discouragement. If a Corruption or Temptation prevails, all his Hope of Heaven
is almost gone presently. Thus it was with Peter, Help Lord, I perish. But
strong Faith is rather strengthened thereby; as appears in the Woman of Canaan.
You may judge of a strong Faith by its Power over the Enemy. I have written unto
you, 1 John 2.14.
young Men, because you are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and you
have overcome the Wicked One.

4. A weak Faith is much for doing, that so he may have Peace and Comfort
within: What must I do? etc. And as his Obedience to God is kept up, Acts 16.30.
so is his Comfort; (not but that great Peace is to them that keep the Law, and
that are found in the way of Obedience.) But a strong Faith, in all it does, is
kept up by Christ's doing, by Christ's Obedience; he sees his Acceptance comes
in through the Lord Jesus's Undertaking for him.

5. A weak Faith is subject to rest too much upon the Means, and outward
Ordinances. He performs Duty, and is found in the Appointments of Christ,
because of the Fat and Sweet of them, or some present Comforts of the Spirit in
the performance of them, rather than because commanded of God, and to manifest
his Obedience and Subjection unto him; and if he meets not with his
expectation, he is ready presently to faint, and be discouraged, and concludes
the Ordinances do not belong to him, or he is not a converted Person, etc. or
else thinks wholly to neglect them for time to come.

6. A weak Believer is ready to judge of his Justification, by his inward
Sanctification. When he finds eminent Power over Sin, then he begins to
conclude he may be in a saved State; tho I do not say, that a Man is actually
justified, before he is in some measure or degree made holy; where the one is,
the other will follow, as the Effect the Cause.

Quest. How may a weak Faith or Hand be strengthened, and feeble Knees confirmed?

Answ. 1. Consider, a weak Faith is precious, a little Gold is Gold, a little
Water is Water: Thou art a Believer, though thou art but a weak Believer.

2. A weak Faith, being true, may in time prove strong, and grow to be a great
Faith.

3. Tho thou have but a weak Faith, it will save; doubtless some weak Eyes
beheld the Brazen Serpent, and were healed.

4. Weak Faith, if it be true, shall never fail totally, nor be taken away: He
that is the Author of it, will likewise be the Finisher. Phil. 1.6.
Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good Work in
you, will perform it to the Day of Jesus Christ.

Hope compared to an Helmet.
Ephesians. 6.17. And take the Helmet of Salvation, etc.

1 Thessalonians. 5.8. And for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation.


AN Helmet is a Piece of Armor for the Head, commonly called a Headpiece.

[Hope] the Word is derived from (...) Havah, which signifies to expect, or
wait; and it notes a very vehement Intention both of Body and Mind, in waiting,
expecting, or hoping; when a Man waits (as it were) stretching forth his Spirit
or his Mind, putting himself out exceedingly to hope or wait for a thing.

Hope is a Divine and Supernatural Grace or Fruit of the holy Spirit, and may
be thus described:

First; It Is a patient and well-grounded Expectation of whatsoever God has
promised. God is the Author of it, called the Hope of Israel, and the God of
Hope. The Believer is the Subject of this Hope. The Object, in a strict sense,
is God, who comprehends all the Good that Saints dwell in the Faith and
expectation of: Psalm. 39.7.
What wait I for? my Hope is in thee: In a large sense, it is the Good of the
Promise not in hand, Romans 8.24
or already accomplished, but to be performed hereafter: Hope that is seen, is
not Hope; for what a Man sees, why does he yet hope for it? Futurity is
intrinsecal to Hope's Object, and distinguishes it from Faith, which gives a
present Being to the Promise, Heb. 11, 1.
and is (...), the Substance of things hoped for. The Good of the Promise has
a kind of Substance by Faith in the Soul; it is in Heaven (as it were) in an
Interview; it brings the Christian and Heaven together, as if he were there
already.

Why Hope is compared to an Helmet, will appear in the following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Helmet defends the Head, that eminent part of the
Body, from the Dint of Bullet or Sword. HOpe of Heaven defends the principal
Parts and Faculties of the Soul, from the dangerous Assaults of Sin and Satan,
particularly the Judgment, which most Expositors understand is intended by the
Head. What avails that Faith which Men have, without a well-grounded Hope of
future Life? Devils have a kind of Faith, they believe, but have no Hope. Faith
eyes the Promises; and Hope preserves the Soul from Satan's Wounds, keeping it
in a faithful and steadfast expectation of the fulfilling of them: By which
means a Saint is helped cheerfully to suffer the Loss of all other things, and
that in Judgment, hoping it will be made up again to him in another World: Like
as Hope causes the Husbandman to cast his choice and precious Seed into the
Earth: He that ploweth, ploweth in Hope; 1 Cor. 9.10.
he hopes for a greater Increase at Harvest. So a Merchant ventures much
Treasure to Sea, as far as the Indies, in Hope; for had he not good Hopes of
advantageous Returns, all would account him a Fool so to do. II. The Helmet
makes a Soldier fearless, and very courageous in the Day of Battle; for if
his Head and Heart be well defended, he is in no great danger of his Life. II.
In like manner, Hope of Heaven makes a Saint very courageous for Christ, and
his blessed Interest. Romans 5.5.
Hope makes not ashamed. It Is the Hope of Heaven, that causes Saints to
endure Afflictions and Persecutions with Patience, and not to fear the Faces of
their Enemies: for if the Judgment, Will, Affection, and Conscience of a
Believer be preserved from the mortal Wounds of the Adversary, he is safe, and
out of Danger, which is all done by this part of the Christian's Armor. How
confidently and daringly did Goliath come forth against Israel, with his Helmet
of Brass, and other Furniture, as if he had been so enclosed in his Armor, that
it was impossible any one should prevail against him. This made him carry his
Crest so high, and to defy a whole Host. Tho he was mistaken in his Armor, Isa.
49.23.
yet here is an Helmet, etc. that whosoever wears it shall never be put to
shame for his holy Boasting. God himself allows him so to do, and will bear him
out in the rejoicing of his Hope. Psalm. 27.3.
They shall not be ashamed that wait for me. Therefore says David, Tho an Host
should encamp against me, my Heart shall not fear, etc. My Head shall be lifted
above mine Enemies. Two things make the Head hang down, Fear and Shame; now
Hope eases the Christian's Heart of both these, and so forbids him to give any
sign of a desponding Mind, by a dejected Countenance, in the worst of Times:
Luke 21.28
When these things come to pass, then lift up your Heads, for your Redemption
draws nigh. III. An Helmet tends to the complete harnessing and setting out
of a Soldier, to meet his Enemy, by which means he is terrible to behold, as
Experience shows; for how fierce does an Army of Soldiers look, when armed
Cap-a-pe? And especially the Headpiece tends to do it. Many have been struck
with great trembling, by beholding an Army of Soldiers with Helmets on. III. A
well-grounded Hope of Salvation, and of Victory against the Enemy, tends to the
complete harnessing, or fitting out of every true Christian, to meet and
encounter with the Adversary, by which means also they are said to be as
terrible as an Army with Banners, which Mr. Ainsworth applies to this Armor. 2
Cor. 10.4.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of Strongholds, etc. Israel being completely furnished with Armor
of Proof, who were a People saved by the Lord, the Shield of their Hope, and
who was the Sword of their Excellency, God hereby put the Fear and Dread of
them upon all the Nations under the whole Heavens; who heard of the Fame of
them, and trembled not? Deuteronomy. 2.2. The People heard, and were afraid; Exodus
15.14, 15, 16. Psalm 48 5, 6.
Sorrow took hold on the Inhabitants of Palestina. The Dukes of Edom were
amazed; the mighty Men of Moab, Trembling took hold upon them. -- All the
Inhabitants of Canaan melted away, and Dread fell upon them. And thus will it
be again, when God brings forth the Sons of Zion against the Sons of Greece,
every way completely armed, with Shield and Helmet, as an Army with Banners.
Zech. 9, 13
IV. An Helmet, as well as other Pieces of Armor, must not be put off, or laid
aside, until the Battle be over. There are some Instruments and Engines used in
War, that are made use of but now and then; but the Shield, Breast Plate, and
Helmet, etc. are necessary continually, when Arms are employed. IV. So Hope,
the Helmet of Salvation, must be taken by every true Christian, and never laid
aside, until the Field is won, and all the Enemies subdued. Hence says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.13
Gird up the Loins of your Minds, be sober, and hope to the End, for the Grace
that shall be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 13.
ult. Heb. 6.11, 12.
Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity. We desire every one of you to show the
same diligence, to the full assurance of Hope, unto the end. V. A Soldier,
that has his complete Armor on, (as the having on the Helmet does import,
because it is usually the last Piece of Armor defensive that is put on) is
ready for Service, when his Captain commands him forth; and from hence he is
animated, and becomes very diligent, and does great Execution oftentimes upon
the Enemy; yea, and more is expected from him, than from one that is unarmed.
V. So a Soldier of Jesus Christ, having the whole Christian Armor on, is ready
for any Service or Suffering for his Captain, and waits but for the Word of
Command, and he adventures forth, as Abraham did, not knowing whither he went.
Hope of Salvation particularly makes a Man very active; it is called a lively
Hope; more is expected from him, than from one that is hopeless. Alas! he goes
on without any Heart, that has no grounded Hope of Heaven, and the blessed
Enjoiment of God and Christ for ever. Metaphor. Disparity. AN Helmet which Men
use in War, has been, may be pierced through, to the loss of the Life of the
Soldier that has it on. BUt this spiritual Helmet, called the Hope of
Salvation, which has God, and all Good both here and hereafter, for its
Object, against this there can be no Assault made, nor Force of Weapon used, to
the endangering of the Life of the Soul. II. An Helmet used in War amongst Men,
tho it may preserve the Head from Danger, yet it cannot preserve the Breast,
but that may be wounded by Sword or Dart. II. But a well-grounded Hope, the
Helmet of Salvation, does wonderfully preserve the Conscience, as well as the
Judgment, from being corrupted by the Wounds of Error, and rotten Principles,
carried on by the cunning Craftiness of Men, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. III. Men may have Helmets on, and yet notwithstanding lose the Day, be
overcome, and fly before their Enemies, with Shame and Disgrace. III. But he
that engages in this spiritual Armor, of which the Helmet is a part, Ephesians. 6.
(having on the whole Armor of God) does not only make a Christian to withstand
the Enemy, but also to stand against any Assault. Romans 5.5.
Hope of Salvation makes not ashamed.

Inferences.
FRom hence you may perceive, how exceeding useful Hope is to all true
Christians, in their spiritual Warfare with the Enemies of the Soul.

2. It shows that a Christian's Life is a Life of Hope or Expectation: The
Promises of God are not presently accomplished; he seems to stay long, ere he
makes good what he has engaged to give to them.

3. And tho he stays long before he performs his Promise to us, yet they shall
be accomplished at last, in the best time, to the eternal Joy of their Hearts.
Hope deferred makes the Heart sick, but when it comes, it is a Tree of Life.
The Vision is for an appointed Time, but at the end it shall speak, and not
lie, etc.

4. That tho God stays long before he performs his Word and Promise, yet it is
our Duty to wait patiently till it is fulfilled. Wait for it, because it shall
surely come, etc.

5. That Hope pacifies and quiets the Soul of a Believer, till the Promises are
accomplished and fulfilled.

It may also serve to caution every Christian to take heed he does not take a
counterfeit Helmet. There is a Hope that will prove like a Spider's Web. Tho a
true and lively Hope makes not ashamed, yet some Men will one day be ashamed
of their Hope, etc.

See Hope the Anchor of the Soul.

Hope compared to an Anchor.
Heb. 6.19. Which Hope we have as the Anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast; etc.
HOpe is not only compared to an Helmet, but also to an Anchor, as the Soul is
compared to a Ship, which Metaphor is opened under its proper Head.

Quest. What is this Hope that is called the Anchor of the Soul?

Answ. 1. Negatively. It is not a Hope of being rich, great, and mighty in the
World. They esteem not of things below at such a rate, as to make them their
Hope: If I have made Gold my Hope, or have said to the fine Gold, Job 31.24
thou art my Confidence, etc. Gold is put here (by a Synechdoche of the Part
for the Whole) for all earthly things; so that whereas Job says, If I have
made Gold my Hope, his meaning is, if I have made any good things on Earth my
Hope.

There is great difference (says Mr. Caryl) between hoping for Gold, and
making Gold our Hope; we may hope for worldly good things, but we must not make
any thing of this Life our Hope. And further he says,

'To make Gold, either gotten, or to be gotten, our Hope, implies these four
things:

1. An high Estimation of it, as that which can do great things for us, or
stand us in stead, beyond any other thing, to make us happy.

2. A longing Desire after it. There is always so much Desire of that we hope
for, that the thing hoped for is sometimes expressed by the Desire. Prove. 13.12.
Hope deferred makes the Heart sick; but when the Desire (that is, the thing
hoped for) comes, it is a ^ree of Life.

3. Utmost and unwearied Endeavors to obtain it. That which a Man makes his
Hope, he will make his Work, and never cease working till he has attained
it, or is convinced there is no possibility of attaining it.

4. To make Gold our Hope, implies much Trouble and Anxiety of Mind, when once
we see our Endeavors ineffectual and unsuccessful about the attaining of it.
If Hope deferred makes the Heart sick, (as was hinted before) then when Hope
dies, or as Zophar speaks, chap. 11.20. is as the giving up of the Ghost, the
Heart must needs die too.

2. It is not Hope of Length of Days: If I wait, the Grave is my House, etc.

But then, 2. Positively, it is a patient and well-grounded Expectation of the
Accomplishment of what God has promised. Faith sees the Promise, and beholds
it, tho afar off: Abraham saw my Day, says Christ: But then in comes Hope, and
keeps the Soul alive, in a well-grounded expectation of the fulfilling and
accomplishment of it. See the Description of it where Faith is compared to an
Helmet.

Why Hope is compared to an Anchor, may appear by what follows.

Metaphor. Parallel. AN Anchor is a good Stay and Security to a Ship in a
Storm. What would the Mariner do, had he not an Anchor to cast out of the Ship,
when he is in danger of Rocks and Sands? SO Hope in God, through Christ, is a
most excellent Stay for the Soul of a Believer, in a Day of Trouble and
Persecution. Heb. 10.34
They suffered joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing in themselves,
they had in Heaven a better and enduring Substance. We are saved by Hope, etc.
It stays the Soul, as an Anchor does the Ship. II. An Anchor takes hold of
something which is out of sight. II. So Hope, the Anchor of the Soul, takes
hold of something which is not seen with carnal Eyes, which is within the Vail,
etc. III. An Anchor, when it takes hold of a Rock, or firm Ground, fastens and
stays a Ship more steadily, preserving it from suffering Shipwreck. III. So
Hope, the Anchor of the Soul, taking hold of Christ, who is called a Rock,
stays the Soul in a perilous Time most firm and steadily, so that it is safe
from spiritual Shipwreck. IV. An Anchor would be of no use without the Cable to
which it is fastened. IV. So Hope without Faith is of no use, nor can avail the
Soul any thing in time of Need; those two Graces always cooperate, and work
together for the help and succor of a Believer. V. An Anchor, that it may be
of advantage to a Ship, requires Skill rightly to cast it. V. Hope, the Anchor
of the Soul, must be rightly cast, or else it will not profit a Saint any thing
in the Day of Trouble. It must be cast within the Vail, Heb. 6.
whither the Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, etc. Metaphor.
Disparity. AN Anchor is cast down into the Sea, River, etc. HOpe, the Anchor of
the Soul, is cast upward; the Saint's Hope is in Heaven. II. An Anchor may let
go its hold, or be broke, and so become useless to a Ship, by which means the
Ship may be lost. II. Hope, the Anchor of the Soul, is both sure and steadfast;
hence it is said, Hope makes not ashamed. If their Hope was not firm, or were
there any danger of its being lost or broke, the Saints of God were in a sad
Condition, and they might turn away with their Faces ashamed. If their Hope
should fail them, they would have no Refuge left. If Hope holds, all holds; but
it Hope be gone, all is gone. Neither is it to be thought, that the Hope of
holy Job, Heman, and others, who in Trouble spoke of their Hope being gone, and
perished from the Lord, was indeed utterly lost and perished, but that it was
only so in their own Apprehension, they being in great depths of Despondency,
and under sad Desertion of Spirit. Like as the Church was, when she said, My
God has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me; which God himself graciously
answers, It was not so, nor could be so. A Saint's standing in Christ is firm;
the Covenant is ordered in all things, and sure. But to confirm this glorious
Truth, and make it yet more clear, and that I may leave no room for an
Objection, that Hope is both sure and steadfast, etc. Consider the many strong
Bars that are cemented together, (as so many Bars of Iron) hammered by the
Spirit, to the making of this blessed Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast.

First; The Love of God is a sure Ground of the Saints Hope. Jer. 31.3. Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33.
I have loved thee with an everlasting Love, etc. If his Children forsake my
Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: Then will I visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their
Iniquity with Stripes. Nevertheless, my Lovingkindness will I not utterly take
from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail: My Covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing which is gone out of my Lips. Zeph. 3.17
-- The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will
rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his Love, he will joy over thee
with singing. I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to
come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. If the Love of God
be from everlasting to everlasting to them that fear him; if he rests in his
Love; if he will not remove his Loving Kindness from them, notwithstanding
their Sins and Infirmities; if nothing can separate them from the Love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: then the Hope that Believers have in God is
both sure and steadfast.

Secondly; God has chosen, elected, and predestined Believers in Christ unto
eternal Life. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, Romans 8.29, 30.
to be conformed to the Image of his Son. Moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. The same Persons that are predestined, are
called; and the very same that are called, are justified; and the very same who
are justified, are, or shall be glorified: -- Therefore the Hope that Believers
have, is both sure and steadfast.

Thirdly; Christ's Death is a sure Ground of Hope. Who is be that condemns?
It is Christ that died. I lay down my Life for my Sheep. Christ in an especial
manner laid down his Life for those which the Father gave to him, with an
absolute Purpose and Intention eternally to save them; and he shall not lose
his Purchase, nor miss of the Merit of his most precious Blood: Therefore the
Saints Hope is both sure and steadfast.

Fourthly; Christ's Resurrection is a sure Ground of Hope. Christ rose again
from the Dead, to justify all those who truly believe in him. Who shall
condemn? Romans 8.34
It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again. -- Who was delivered
for our Offenses, and was raised again for out Justification. Thus Christ, by
his Resurrection, does actually justify all that believe in him; therefore the
Saints Hope is both sure and steadfast.

Fifthly; The Intercession of Christ is a sure Ground of Hope. Romans 8.34
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for
us. Heb. 7.25. Joh. 17.24 Luke 22.31 1 John 2.1, ^.
Seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for us. Father, I will that those
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, etc. I have prayed for
thee, that thy Faith fail not. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Christ prays the Father, that all his
Children may be kept from falling, that their Faith fail not, that they may
have their Sins pardoned, and may be where he is, etc. And he is always heard
and answered by the Father: I know thou hear me always. Therefore the Saints
Hope is both sure and steadfast.

Sixthly; The Covenant of Grace is a sure Ground of Hope. 2 Samuel 23.5. Isa.
54.10.
Although my House be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure; for this is all my Salvation, and
Desire, tho he make it not to grow. For the Mountains shall depart, and the
Hills be removed; but my Kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy upon thee. The
Covenant stands in Christ, it was made in him, he undertook to perform the
Conditions of it by his Spirit, in behalf of all true Believers, as their
Surety. We stand not in Christ, in the New Covenant, as we stood in Adam, in
the Old. Adam was a Person, that might, or might not stand, it was in his own
power to stand or fall; but the Covenant of Grace is more firm and sure in many
respects, especially in regard of the Excellency, Power, Ability, and
Immutability of Jesus Christ, who, as the second Adam, and public Person, has
undertaken for all his Seed. If our standing was in the New Covenant, as Adam's
was in the Old, doubtless we should not continue in our stedfastness one
moment: For if he was overcome by Satan, that had no evil or depraved Nature in
him, for Satan to fasten a Temptation upon, how should we escape him, that have
such a Body of Sin and Death in us, even the Seed or Root of all Corruption,
our Hearts being like Tinder, ready to take with every Spark of the Devil's
kindling. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them, to do them Good: Jer. 32.^0.
But I will put my Fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
As God will not turn away from us, so he will not suffer us to depart from him.
This is not like the Covenant he first made. Therefore the Saints Hope of
Salvation is both sure and steadfast, an Anchor that will hold, and cannot be
broken.

Seventhly; The Fullness of Grace, which is treasured up in Christ for
Believers, is a sure Ground of Hope. It pleased the Father, that in him should
all Fullness dwell. Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.16. Phil. 4.19.
And of his Fullness have we all received, and Grace for Grace. Hence it is that
all the Wants of Believers are supplied: But my God shall supply all your
Needs, according to his Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus. Insomuch that when
ever any, tho the meanest and weakest Saint, is in need of Support or Help, in
time of great and imminent Danger, he may have not only Supply in one respect,
but a full and complete Supply in all respects, answerable to the various
Exercises that Believers meet with in their Christian Course, to the end they
may not miscarry, or suffer Shipwreck; for that in Christ they have a Fullness
of Wisdom to instruct and counsel them, a Fullness of Love and Care to guide
them, a Fullness of Power and Strength to hold them up, that they may be safe,
and to stay them from sinking, as he did Peter, who, when under the fear of
miscarrying, cries out to Christ for help; a Fullness of Pity and Comp^ssion, to
commiserate them in all their Distresses; and a Fullness of Grace and Mercy, to
pardon and fully blot out all their Sins and Failings, and be with them in all
their Sorrows and Sufferings. Therefore the Saints Hope of Salvation is both
sure and steadfast.

Eighthly; The Mercy of God is a sure Ground of Hope. If the Mercy of God can
fail, the Saints Anchor may fail; but the Mercy of God endures for ever.
Behold, Psalm. 33.18 and 52.8. Isa. 63.13.
the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his
Mercy. I trust in the Mercy of God for ever and ever. Where is the sounding of
thy Bowels, and thy Mercies toward me? Are they restrained? The Saints of God,
as appears from hence, trust in the Mercy of God, and that endures for ever
and ever. His Bowels to his People can never fail. Can a Woman forget her
sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? Yea,
they may, but I will not forget thee. Therefore the Saints Hope is both sure
and steadfast.

Heb 6.16, 17, 18, 19.
Ninthly; The Promise and Oath of God are a sure Ground of Hope. For Men verily
swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an End of all
Strife. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise,
the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set before us:
Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast. Tit. 1.2.
2 Cor. 6.16.
In Hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot lie promised, before the World
began. As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my People. If the Promise and Oath of God be not
enough to assure Believers of their safe and first standing in Christ, and of
their Assurance of Heaven, nothing is. Therefore the Saints Hope is both sure
and steadfast.

Tenthly; That Relation which Believers stand in unto God, is a sure Ground of
Hope. He is their Father, and they are his dear Children; he is their Husband,
they his Spouse: Will a dear Father suffer his dear Children to perish, and be
torn in pieces, if he has Power to help them? or the dear Husband his dear
Wife? The Love of God to his Saints exceeds the Love and Pity of either Father
or Husband; therefore Hope, the Anchor of the Soul, is both sure and steadfast.

Joh. ^0.27, 28, 29.
Eleventhly; The Power of God is a sure Ground of Hope. My Sheep hear my Voice,
and follow me, and I give to them eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand. My Father that gave them me is
greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand; --
who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation. If the Power
of God be sufficient to keep Believers from falling, and to preserve them to
his heavenly Kingdom, then their Hope is both sure and steadfast.



Object. But it is through Faith they stand, and their Faith may fail.

Answ. Christ, as I showed before, has prayed, that their Faith fail not; and
besides, Phil. 1.6.
he is the Author, Increaser, and Finisher of it. He that has begun a good
Work in you, will perform it unto the Day of Christ.

John 3.6. 1 Pet. 1 23.
Twelfthly; Regeneration is a sure Ground of Hope. That which is born of the
Flesh, is Flesh; that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Being born again,
not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, etc. Such as is the Seed, such
is the Product of it: The Seed being immortal, by which the Saints are
regenerated; sure this may be sure Ground of Hope, that they shall not perish.
There is in them an holy and Divine Principle, so that they cannot sin unto
Death, or lose eternal Life.

Let us now put all these together, and then doubtless we shall conclude, that
the Saints Hope of Heaven is no Fancy, but like an Anchor that is both sure and
steadfast.

Inferences.
FIrst; Examine your selves, what Hope you have; there is a false Hope, as well
as a true. What is the Ground of thy Hope?

1. Some Men ground their Hope of Heaven upon outward Prosperity. This is the
Worldlings Hope. They conclude God loves them, and will give Heaven to them,
because he has given them so much of the Earth, not remembering, that God gives
some Men their Portion in this Life: Psalm 17. Luke 16.
Remember, Son, thou in thy Life time receivedst thy good Things, etc.

2. Some ground their Hopes of Heaven upon Civility, and external
Righteousness: They live sober and honest Lives, and are not guilty of any
gross Sins. This is the moral Man's Hope, the Pharisee's, the young Man's in
the Gospel; the foolish Virgins had this Hope, and yet lost Heaven.

3. Some ground their Hopes of Heaven upon the Merits of their own Works. This
is the Papists Hope; for tho they place some Hope in Christ, yet they put
Confidence in their own Works. Now this is to cast Anchor on the Sands. First;
That which merits must be our own; but none of our good Works are our own. They
are our own subjective, because wrought in us, and they are ours in regard of
the Benefit of them; but in respect of the Original they are none of ours, they
are the Fruits of the Spirit; it is God has wrought all our Works in us.
Secondly; They must be complete and perfect, or not meritorious; but the best
Works performed by us are both impure and imperfect, more Dross than Gold.
Thirdly; That which merits must not be due upon any other account; paying Debts
is not meritorious: Now there is nothing that we do, or can do, but it is due,
it is a Debt we owe to God; we owe him all we have, are, or can perform:
Therefore says Christ, When you have done all, say you are unprofitable
Servants.

Secondly; It shows, that the Hope of Believers is a glorious Hope; the Apostle
says, a blessed Hope, that is the Stay or Anchor of the Soul, etc. Tit. 2.13.


Thirdly; All those that have not this precious Grace, are at present in a
hopeless Condition.

Quest. How may a Man know whether he has a true and well-grounded Hope?

1. If thou have a lively Hope, thou art born again; the new Birth entitles to
a new Hope. What Hope can a Man have of Heaven, if he be not converted? 1 Pet.
1.3. John 3.3.
Unless a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

2. A true and well-grounded Hope is attended with a Train of other Graces.
Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope,
Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
and Hope makes not ashamed, (why?) because the Love of God is shed abroad in
our Hearts by the Holy Ghost. Those that have the Grace of Hope, have the
Graces of Faith and Love, and all other Fruits of the Spirit, more or less, in
them.

3. Hope purifies the Heart: He that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself,
1 John 3.3
even as he is pure. If thou have an unsanctified Heart, never boast of thy
Hope; it makes not only the Heart holy, but the Life also.

4. Hope of Salvation is grounded upon the Promises of God. The Promises give
Interest, and upon Interest arises Hope; therefore he that has not took hold
of God's Promise by Faith, is destitute of Hope, the Anchor of the Soul. Psalm.
11^.49.
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.

5. Hope keeps the Soul in a steady and sure expectation of the Good of
Promises, under Affliction and Sufferings; a Saint is hereby stayed and
quieted, whilst he is exposed to the Loss of all other things for Christ's
sake. Heb. 10.34
They took patiently the spoiling of their Goods, knowing in themselves, they
had in Heaven a better and more enduring Substance.

6. True Hope makes a Christian very lively, and valiant for Christ, and his
Truth: It fills the Soul full of spiritual Activity, it is called a lively
Hope, it makes him bold, and not ashamed of the Cross, etc.

Love compared to Death, and the Grave, and to Coals and Flames of Fire.
Cant. 8.6. Love is strong as Death, Jealousy is as cruel as the Grave: The
Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, which have a most vehement Flame.

Verse 7. Many Waters cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it, etc.


THe Grace of Love which Christ has infused into the Heart of his Spouse, and
all gracious Ones, is compared by the Holy Ghost in these Scriptures to three
things, which are of a mighty powerful and prevailing Nature, against whom
there is no standing: First, Death; Secondly, the Grave; Thirdly, Coals and
Flames of Fire: Which show forth the vehement Power and Force of Divine Love to
Jesus Christ; Which cannot be quenched.

First; Love is compared to Death and the Grave.

Metaphor. Parallel. DEath and the Grave overcome the strongest Men, it
prevails over the most powerful, wise, and learned in the World; neither can
the most mighty Monarch encounter Death, or stand before it; there is no
discharge in that War. SO Love, that is in the Heart of a sincere Christian,
prevails against all Difficulties and Oppositions, Temptations, Afflictions,
and most cruel Sufferings and Torments, that can be exercised upon them, as
appeared by the blessed Martyrs. Nothing is too hard for Love, it cannot be
subdued, it overcomes all Sin and Suffering whatsoever. II. Death and the Grave
seize upon every part of the corporal or mortal Body. II. So Love, when shed
abroad in the Heart, seizes upon all the Faculties of the Soul. Hence it is,
that true Christians are said to love Christ with all their Hearts, and with
all their Souls. Metaphor. Disparity. DEath and the Grave put an end to natural
Life, and so cause all Motions or Actions from thence to cease. BUt Love has
that Virtue, as it is a Grace of the Spirit, that it sets all the Faculties of
the Soul upon Acts of a spiritual Life. None are so lively as those that truly
love Jesus Christ. II. Death overcomes and destroys that which we would (if
possible) keep, viz. our Lives, that are most dear to us. II. Love only
overcomes that which is offensive and contrary to us, or that stands in
opposition to the Soul's Union with Christ, making that which would be
injurious to Flesh and Blood, to become profitable and advantageous; yea, tho
it be to the Loss of Life, yet Love takes away the Fear of Death, and makes the
Soul willing to part with Life for Christ's sake.

Love is also compared to Coals and Flames of Fire.
Metaphor. Parallel COals and Flames of Fire are of a burning and consuming
Quality. THe Grace of Love kindled in the Soul of a Believer, burns up and
consumes that inordinate Desire which is naturally in the Heart, after the
Things and Vanities of this World; it eats up and consumes all carnal and
sensual Lusts whatsoever; all fleshly and combustible Stuff, or Things that
stand in the way, are burnt up and destroyed by it. II. Coals and Flames of
Fire are of a purging and purifying quality. II. So the Grace of Love purges,
cleanses, and purifieth the Soul; the Dross and Filth of the Heart and Life
being wasted away, a Christian is made holy, sanctified, and heavenly thereby.
III. Coals and Flames of Fire are of a melting and softning Nature; they make
things tender and pliable, meet to receive the Impression of a Seal, etc. III.
So the Grace of Love softens the Heart, and melts it, making it pliable, and
very fit and capable to receive the Impression and Divine Image of God. IV.
Some Fire is so vehement, that Water thrown upon it will not quench it, but
rather cause it to burn more fierce and vehemently. IV. The Grace of Love is of
such a strong and vehement Nature, that it is impossible utterly to quench or
extinguish it in the Soul, tho the Devil daily uses all his Strength and Skill
to do it. Many ways he continually assaults Believers; when Temptations of one
sort fail, he tries others: he offers worldly Pleasures, Honors, Riches, yea,
all the Goods (as I may say) of his House; but all is in vain, nothing will
quench this Divine Flame; the true Christian utterly contemns him, with all he
has. The grand Design of Satan's courting a Man, with all his Offers, All this
will I give thee, etc. is to gain his Love, or draw off his Affections from
Jesus Christ. If this Way will not do, he tries another, and brings Afflictions
and Crosses upon the Soul; but over these likewise is a Saint a Conqueror.
Which makes the Apostle break forth into this holy Triumph: Who shall separate
us from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, Romans 8.35, 36, 37,
38.
or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? No, none of these
things can: For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come; nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love
of God, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord. V. Fire has Light with it. V. So the
Grace of Love is attended with the Knowledge of Christ, who is the Object of
Love: Ignoti enim nulla cupido. VI. Coals and Flames of Fire afford Heat, they
are of a warming and reviving Nature. VI. So the Grace of Love heats our cold
and frozen Hearts, it warms and revives them with sweet and blessed Love and
Zeal for God, and his Glory. VII. Flames of Fire ascend, or tend continually
upwards.

See more of the Nature and Quality of Fire, where the Word of God is compared
to it.

VII. So the Grace of Love darts the Desires of the Soul Heavenwards: Such have
their Affections set on Things above. Col. 3.1, 2.
Metaphor. Disparity. FIre is from beneath, it is earthy, and one of the four
Elements. THe Grace of Love is from above; it is a supernatural Grace, it grows
not in Natures Garden: But the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, etc. II. A violent
Fire may be quenched, and all natural and elementary Fire shall be put out.
Mount Aetna shall not burn always. II. But the Grace of Love, this Divine Fire,
can never be quenched, it shall burn to Eternity. Charity never fails, etc.

Inference.
BY these Things, Works, and Operations, we may try whether we have true Love
to Jesus Christ or no. And for a further Help therein, see the following
Metaphor.

Christ's Love compared to Wine.
Cant. 1.2. For his Love is better than Wine.
WHereas Christ's Love is preferred to Wine, it is to be understood
Synecdochically; so Ainsworth. Wine here is put for the most pleasant, joyful,
refreshing, and cordial Things; as Bread by the same Figure is frequently put
for such things as strengthen, etc.

The Love of Jesus Christ is better than Wine, or whatsoever Men esteem to be
good, or to excel in Nature and Virtue.

Metaphor. Parallel. Wine is the Fruit of a good Tree, a choice and precious
Plant, and it is the best of natural Liquors. THe Love of Christ is the Fruit of
the choicest Plant that ever was planted. Men and Angels are not to be compared
to him. [See Vine.] And his Love is the best and choicest of Love. Wine is
natural, but his Love is Divine and supernatural. None ever loved, as Christ
loved. II. Wine is pleasant, delectable, and sweet to the Taste. II. There is
nothing so pleasant and delectable to a believing Soul, as the Manifestation of
Christ's Love; it excells all things for sweetness. III. Wine is to be had only
in some particular Countries; some People never taste of it as long as they
live. III. Christ's Love is not known to many that live in the World; diverse
never tasted of it, do not know how good it is, died without any sight or
assurance of Christ's Love. IV. Wine is highly esteemed and valued, when the
excellent Virtue thereof is known. IV. Christ's Love is esteemed by all that
know his Worth; they value him above Wine, or Gold, or the best of earthly
things. V. Men will not part with Store of the best Wine for Toys and Trifles.
V. Saints will not part with the Love of Christ for all the good things of this
World; they are but Trifles and Vanity, in comparison of his Love. If a Man
would give all the Goods of his House to a Saint, so that he would part with
Christ's Love, Cant. 8.7.
it would be contemned. VI. Wine is of a singular use to revive and make glad
the disconsolate Spirit: Vina parant animos. Ovid.
Give Wine to him that is of an heavy Heart. VI. The Love of Christ is the most
sovereign thing in the World, in the Manifestations of it, to revive and
comfort poor disconsolate Souls. Thou have put more Gladness in my Heart, Psalm.
4.7.
than in the Time when their Corn and Wine increased. VII. Wine causes a Man,
if he drinks freely of it, Cura fugit, dilueturque Mero. Ovid.
to forget his Sorrows. VII. The Evidence or Manifestation of Christ's Love to
a poor Soul, does cause it to forget all its former Bitterness, Terror of the
Law, Romans 7.10, 15, 18, 24, 25.
and Horror of Conscience for Sin, which possibly for a great while it lay
under. VIII. Wine, Naturalists tell us, repairs decayed Nature. A Man may faint
by some sudden Qualm, and need a Cordial; and that which may revive the Spirit,
may not recover a Man out of a Consumption, or one brought by a languishing
Distemper almost to the Grave. VIII. The Grace and Love of Christ will recover
Strength that has been lost. A Saint may faint, and need a Cordial, by means
of a Temptation, when Grace is not much decayed in him. A Draught of Christ's
Love, I mean, the Manifestations of it, will recover (in a spiritual sense) a
Christian that has been a great while consumptive, whose Vitals are impaired,
and he almost dead. IX. Wine was used in Legal Sacrifices in time of the Law.
IX. The Grace of Love, that Fruit of the Spirit which flows from Christ, is the
only Ingredient to stir up our Devotion. We can perform no Services acceptably
without Love: Let all your Works be done in Charity. And when the Soul has
sweet Manifestations of Chrst's Love to it, how sweetly does it go on in God's
Worship! X. Wine is good, as it may be used, to heal some sorts of Wounds. X.
The Love of Christ will heal a broken Heart. There is no Salve, both in the
Nature and Effects thereof, to cure a wounded Spirit, like Assurance of
Christ's Love. XI. Wine is good to stir up Courage in hostile Encounters; it
makes a Man brisk and valiant. XI. The Love of Christ breaking in upon the
Soul, makes a Christian courageous, and very valiant in that spiritual Warfare
he is engaged in; he is hereby animated to endure all manner of Hardness, and
over all is more than a Conqueror. Nothing shall separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. XII. Wine is used at Marriage-Feasts,
and in great Banquets. XII. The Love of Christ is more than a Banquet of the
greatest Varieties to a gracious Soul; it affords choice Food, a Feast of fat
things, of Wines upon the Lees; of fat things full of Marrow, of Wines upon
their Lees well refined. XIII. Wine may be taken to excess. XIII. But none can
have too much of Christ's Love. XIV. Wine daily drunk, without fresh Supplies,
will not hold out long. XIV. Christ's Love is like a Fountain of living Water,
or an inexhaustible Treasure. XV. Wine will decay by long keeping; it will wax
sour, and become nauseous and unsavory. XV. Christ's Love, the longer we enjoy
it, the sweeter it is, and sweetest of all 'twill be at the last.

Inferences.
BUt from whence is it that Believers do thus prize and esteem Jesus Christ,
and his Love?

First; From the Excellency of his Person. [ See Rose of Sharon, and Lilly of
the Valleys.] He is fairer than the Children of Men.

Secondly; From the sense of his great Love to them: We love him, because he
first loved us.

Thirdly; From the Consideration of those hard things he suffered for their
sakes.

Fourthly; Because of the Savor of his good Ointment. He has shed his Love
abroad in their Hearts, Rom 5 5.
by the Holy Ghost.

Fifthly; Saints value Christ's Love above Wine, because his Love is beyond all
comparison, most sweet and consolatory.

1. His Love was in him early, betimes, before ever the Earth was formed, or
the Foundations thereof laid; Prove. 8 31.
his Hearts Desire and Love was first set upon us.

2. His Love is of an attracting Nature, (that the Spouse knew well enough.) He
is like the Loadstone; Jer. 31.3. 1 John 4.19.
he draws all Hearts after him, that have a taste or touch of him.

3. It Is boundless; like Nilus, it overflows all Banks and Bounds; it knows no
Limits.

Prove. 8.30
4. It is a delighting Love: His Delight was with the Sons of Men. He takes
complacency in the Soul he loves.

Hos. 14.4. Ezekiel 16.3, 4, 5, 6, 9. Cant. 8.6, 7.
5. It is a free Love, without foreseen Merit or Worth in the Object. When Man
lay weltring in his Blood, loathsome and filthy, Christ loved him.

6. Christ's Love is hot and fervent; much Water cannot quench it: It has a
vehement Flame.

7. It Is a matchless Love, far beyond the Love of Jacob to Rachel, or Jonathan
to David.

8. It Is an incomprehensible Love, it passes Knowledge. You may sooner find out
the Depth of the Sea, the Height of Heaven, tell the Stars, or account the
Sands of the Seashore, than find out or measure the Love of Christ. It is a
lasting, abiding, and eternal Love. His loving kindness he will never take
away. This makes the Church so much to desire the Manifestations of the Love of
Christ, and in this is his Love better than Wine.

But who are they that thus prize and esteem the Love of Christ? Take some
brief Notes of them.

1. Such cannot tell how to praise Christ, nor set forth his Excellency, as
they would; they cannot sufficiently exalt him. 2. Such are in a longing and
languishing Condition, till they see him. 3. Cannot be satisfied, till they get
to some good and well-grounded Assurance of an Interest in him. 4. Christ runs
much in their Minds. 5. Such love Christ, what State soever they are in. 6.
Such keep his Word. 7. They love Christ above Husband, Wife, Children, etc.
nay, more than Life it self. 8. They love to hear of him, and often from him.
9. They highly value every special Token of his Love. 10. They rejoice in his
Presence. 11. They grieve and mourn at his Absence. 12. If they have grieved
him, cannot rest till they see his reconciled Face again. 13. They love his
Image wherever they see it; love all the Godly, the poorest Saint, as well as
the richest. 14. They love to be like him in Grace here, as well as in Glory
hereafter. 15. They are troubled when he is dishonored. 16. They are greatly
concerned for his Name, Kingdom, and Interest in the World. 17. They often
visit him in Closet-Duties. 18. Take great care to please him. 19. Will suffer
for his sake, when called to it. 20. Long for his Appearance.

Baptism a Burial. ROMANS 6.4. and COL. 2.12. Expounded, and Practically Improved.
Romans 6.4. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized ((...)) into Jesus
Christ, (that is, into the Profession of his Faith, Confession of his Name, and
Communion with his Church) were baptized into his Death.

Col. 2.12. -- Buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him,
etc.


FOr the opening of this Metaphorical Text, we will show, 1. The Literal
Signification of the Word Baptism. 2. The Metaphorical Signification thereof.
3. What Burying literally and tropically is. 4. Give a symbolical Parallel
between Baptism and a Burial. 5. Produce some Inferences from the Whole.


In showing the Signification of the Word Baptism, we will with all
Impartiality give the Judgment of the Learned. The Word is Greek, and we are to
seek its meaning from the Learned in that Tongue, of whose Writings we have
carefully examined the most noted, some of which are, Scapula, and Stephanus,
Pasor, Minshew, and Liegh's Critica sacra; Grotius, Vossius, Causabon, Seldom,
Mr. Daniel Rogers, Mede, Chamier, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Cave, Hesychius,
Budaeus, Beza, Erasmus, Buchanan, Luther, Illyricus, Zanchy, Glassius, etc. who
with all the Learned of any note, that are impartial, agree with one Voice,
That the primary, proper, and literal Signification of (...), Baptiso, is,
M^rgo, immergo, submergo, obruo, item tingo, quod fit immergendo; that is, to
drown, immerge, plunge under, overwhelm, as also to dip, which is done by
plunging. And it is certain the Ancients so understod it, as appears by their
constant Practice of dipping such as were baptized; as Tertullian says of his
Trine-Immersion, Ter mergitamur, that is, thrice are we dipped. And that the
Change of the Rite to Aspersion, or Sprinkling, was invented to accommodate the
tender Bodies of Infants, in these Northern Parts, when the Practice of
baptizing them prevailed, is ingenuously confessed by Vossius, and most of the
Learned.

In a less proper or remote sense, because things that are washed are dipped
in, or covered all over with Water, it is put for Washing, Luke 11.38. Heb.
9.10. Mark 7.4. And we dare modestly assert, That no Greek Author of any
Credit, whether Heathen or Christian, has ever put Baptizing for Sprinkling, or
used those Words promiscuously. The Greeks have a peculiar Word to express
Sprinkling, viz. (...), which they use when they have occasion; as might be
abundantly shown, if needful.

From this proper Signification arise some Metaphorical Notations: As,

1. From the Signification of Drowning, (they are the Words of A notione quae
merge^e significat, profluxit ea quae pro- affligere usurpatur, quia qui
affliguntur, calamitatum gurgite quasi mergantur.
Vossius, in These. Theol.) it is put for Affliction, because they that are
afflicted are as it were drowned in the Gulf of Calamities, Mat. 20.22. Mark
10.38. Luke 12.50. Baptismus non significat Afflictionem quamlibet, sed
vehementem, and forinsecus irruentem, ut sunt in Scripturis undae persecutionum
and tribulationum, quibus qui merguntur and abruuntur, baptizari videantur.
Estius ad 1 Cor. 15.2^. That is, Baptism denotes not every light Affliction,
but that which is vehement and overwhelming: As there are Waves of Persecutions
and Tribulations mentioned in Scripture; so such as are drowned and overwhelmed
by them, may seem to be baptized, Mat. 20.22, 23. Mark 10.38, 39. Luke 12.50.
The Reason of the Metaphor is taken from many and deep Waters, to which
Calamities are compared. Psalm. 18.16. He drew me out of great Waters. Psalm.
32.6. Psalm. 69.1, 2, etc.

2. It is put for the miraculous Effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles,
and other Believers, in the Primitive Church, because of the Analogical
Immersion or Dipping, (for so, as we have proved, (...) signifies): For the
House where the Holy-Spirit came upon the Apostles was so filled, that they
were (as it were) drowned in it: Or the Reason of the Metaphor may be from the
great Plenty and Abundance of those Gifts, in which they were wholly as it were
immerged, as the Baptized are dipped under Water. Acts 2.3. Mat. 3.11. Mark
1.8. Luke 3.16. John 1.33. Acts 1.5. and 11.16. When Fire is added, it is a
Symbol of external Manifestation.

3. It is put for the miraculous Passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea,
1 Cor. 10.2. which was a Type of Gospel-Baptism.

These Reasons of the Metaphor are evident and convincing Demonstrations, that
the Signification of Baptism is to dip or plunge; for Sprinkling can bear no
Analogy with them.

The Word is expressed in the Old Testament by the Hebrew (...) Tabal, which
the Septuagint (or the Seventy Learned Interpreters) render by (...), Baptiso,
to dip, as these Texts show, Genesis 37.31. Exodus 12.22. Lev. 4.6. and 17.14. and
6.51. and 9.9. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Numb. 16.18. 2 Kings 5.14. etc.

Hence also the Baptized are said to be dead and buried, in allusion to the
putting of dead Men into the Earth, and covering them therewith; to which we
proceed.

What Burial in a natural sense is, every Man knows; and in our Text it is a
Metaphor, the Symbolical Analogy of which with Baptism follows in the Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. WHen one is buried, it imports him to be dead, for none
but such ought to be buried. WHen one is baptized, he ought to be dead to Sin,
that is, converted by the Power of God's Word to Gospel Truth, which always
makes the Soul loath and detest Sin, and then that Soul may be said indeed to
be dead to Sin. This may be evidenced by this Consideration, That Baptism is an
illustrious Symbol of the Death of Christ our Savior, who died for us. I am he
that was dead, and am alive; behold, I live for evermore. The true
Administration of this Sacrament visibly figures it to us; and to that end it
was instituted, viz. to confirm that great and glorious Truth of his being
really a Man, and so cabable of suffering or passing through the Death of the
Cross, Romans 6.3, 4, 5.
into which Death we are baptized; and then being dead to Sin, and to this
World, we are to live in newness of Life amongst the Saints in the Kingdom of
God. II. When one is buried, he ought to be covered all over with Earth, else
it is no Burial. II. When one is baptized, he ought to be covered all over with
Water, or else it is no Baptism. Which fully appears, 1. From the Nature of
Burial. 2. From the proper and Metaphorical Significations of the Word, (as is
largely opened). 3. From Scripture-Practice, which always was by Dipping, as
all the Learned that are impartial acknowledge. 4. From the constant Practice of
Antiquity, who retained the right Form until Clinical Baptism, (viz. such who
deferred their Baptism till their sick Bed) came to be used about Cyprian's
time, in the third Century. These Clinici (so called, because (...) baptized in
their Bed,) were such as delayed their Baptism until their Deathbeds, because
they believed it would take away all Sin, and that there was no Pardon if they
sinned after receiving it; yet not daring to go out of the World without this
great Badge of Christianity, deferred it till they thought they were in danger
of Death: And since they could not without peril of Life be dipped, Sprinkling
was invented to serve the turn. For a like Reason (as was said before) they
changed the Mode of Administration with respect to Infants, when their Baptism
was introduced, out of regard to their tender Constitutions, especially in cold
Countries and Seasons. This was the Original of Sprinkling, and sprung purely
from the abuse of Baptism, and the Want of the right Subject; as (by Divine
Aid) shall be demonstrated in a particular Sheet, impartially, and from
undoubted Authority.

One may with as much reason be said to be buried, when Clay or Earth is thrown
upon his Head only; as to be baptized, when Water is poured upon his Head or
Face: And if the one be no Burying, it is as certain the other is no Baptism.
And he that affirms, that Sprinkling may represent or symbolically express the
Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, does at the same time speak without
color of Truth, Word of Sense, and against all the Reason in the World. As
breaking of the Sacramental Bread, visibly betokens that Christ's Body was
broke; and as the pouring forth of the Sacramental Wine, represents the gushing
forth of his Blood: so the Sacramental Dipping in Water, viz. Baptism,
represents his Death and Burial; and the coming from under the Water, his
Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4, etc.


III. Burial precedes the Resurrection, or raising of the dead Body to a State
of Immortality. III. The Immersion of the Party baptized, precedes his
Emersion, or coming out of the Water; which symbolizes or answers to two
things: 1. The Resur^ection of Christ, 2. Our rising again to Newness of Life:
Buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, etc. as in the
Text.

Inferences.
FRom the whole we may rationally conclude, That the Administration of this
great Ordinance by Sprinkling, (which comports not with the Literal nor
Metaphorical Signification of the Word, nor those great Mysteries represented
by it, viz. the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ) is disorderly, and
should be rectified.

2. It is a Motive to excite us to admire and reverence the great Grace and
Goodness of Christ, who has given us such a visible Symbol of his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection; not only to confirm our Faith, but also to prevent
our being deceived by any seducing Spirits.

3. It is not to be wondered at, that such as deny the Man Christ Jesus, but
preach up the Light within to be a Savior, should reject these two great
Ordinances stated in the Scripture, ( viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper)
because such as deny the Substance, are necessitated to deny the Sign. Persons
of this Judgment may be easily confuted: For when ever the Term Baptism is
mentioned, and God or Christ represented as the Agent, it must be understood of
the Baptism of the Spirit, in the Sense before spoken of. When ever Baptism is
mentioned as the Act of any Apostle or Minister of the Gospel, it denotes
Water Baptism, because these have neither Power nor Commission to baptize with
the Spirit, and with Fire. And when ever the Baptism of Blood and Suffering is
mentioned, it must be understood of Persecutors, or ungodly Men, who murder,
destroy, or afflict the Godly; for neither God (without Blasphemy) nor good
Men) without a wrong application of the Term) may be said to baptize that way.
So that when we meet with the Act of Baptism, as the Act of a good Man, we must
of necessity understand it of Water Baptism, in the same Method and Mode of
Administration, as was practiced by the Apostles and Primitive Christians; and
that being a positive Institution, (with respect to the Subject and Manner of
Administration) is not to be deviated from, upon any pretense whatsoever,
unless we will suppose the Laws of the Almighty to be in the Power of Man, so
as that he may dispense at pleasure with them; which is not to be done without
sufficient Authority from God himself, which is no where to be found.

4. If the Laws of the great unerring Sovereign of all things are to be
observed without variation, unless it be by his express Direction; then we are
to conform exactly to his Order, in this part of the Evangelical Law, and to
practice it no otherwise than he has prescribed, because it was once so
delivered to the Saints.

5. We would caution all that would approach to this sacred Evangelical
Ordinance, unless they be dead to Sin, that is, such as truly and really hate
Wickedness, and the empty Vanities of the World; and unless they have a
prospect of, and long to have an Interest in that never-fading Inheritance,
promised by our dear Lord Jesus to his Children; not to profane this blessed
Institution: Because, if they want the due Qualifications of serious and
converted Souls, viz. Faith, Repentance, and good Lives, they are hereby
entitled, not real Members of Christ, but Hypocrites, and incur as great a
Hazard, as such do who eat and drink unworthily of the Lord's Supper.

The Lord's Supper.
1 Cor. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered
unto you, That the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was betrayed, took
Bread:

Verse 24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this
is my Body which is broken for you: This do in remembrance of me.


THe Papists affirm, That after the Words which they call the Words of
Consecration, spoken by the Mass-Priest, the Bread is changed into the real
Body of Jesus Christ; and many of the blessed Martyrs, in Queen Mary's Days,
were burned to Ashes for denying this Transubstantiation. Which absurd and
monstrous Conceit of theirs has been learnedly confuted by many ancient and
modern Writers, so that it may be thought needless to add any thing here upon
that account; yet that we may make our way the more plain to these metaphorical
and figurative Expressions used by our Savior, when he instituted the holy
Sacr meant of the Supper, saying, This is my Body, something briefly we shall
offer, in confutation of their pernicious Doctrine; which may soon be done, for
they confute themselves, in saying, that the Sacrament is a Feast for our
Souls, and not for our Bodies: Now what is my Soul the better, when I eat the
very Body of Christ? Christ is eat and received spiritually: Whosoever eats my
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has everlasting Life; Joh 6.54.
and I will (says Christ) raise him up at the last Day. Therefore the eating
of Christ's Flesh cannot intend the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; for if it did, it would be a very easy way for the vilest Sinner to go
to Heaven.

But to come directly to the Business in hand: Either Christ spoke
figuratively, when he said, This is my Body, or he did not: And that the Words
cannot be taken in a proper sense, is evident; for it is impossible for Words
to express any thing more plainly, than that by this is meant the Bread. It is
said, that Christ took Bread, and brake it, and gave it, and said, Take, eat,
this is my Body; where this necessarily relates to that which Christ took,
brake, and gave. Also the Apostle says positively thrice in a Breath, that it
is Bread: 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread, etc. And whosoever shall
eat this Bread. 1 Cor. 1^.16. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion
of the Body of Christ? Also the Participation of the Sacrament is called,
breaking of Bread, Acts 2.46. and 20.7. which Popish Authors themselves
understand of the Sacrament. Now can any be so ignorant and foolish, to believe
it is Christ's proper and real Body, which the Holy Ghost calls so often
Bread, after it is blessed, etc.

Object. By this, say some of the Papists, is neither intended the Bread, nor
Christ's Body; Bellarmin. l e Euch. l. 3. c. 12.
but in general, this Substance which is contained under this Species.

Answ. What do they mean? are there any more Substances under those Species,
besides the Bread first, and afterward the Body of Christ? Do not they affirm,
as soon as ever it cease to be Bread, it becomes the real Body of Christ?
Then surely if it be a Substance, according to what they say, it must either be
Bread, or the Body of Christ, or no Substance at all.

Object. Christ's Body is there after the manner of a Spirit, taking up no
room, so that Head, Hands, Feet, are altogether in the least Crumb of the Host.

Answ. In arguing thus, as a learned Man observes, they plead for the Propriety
of Words, and destroy the Propriety of things. How can they say it is properly
a Body, which wants the essential Properties of a Body, which is to have
quantity, and take up room; take away this, and the Body may properly be a
Spirit, for it is that only which differenceth it from a Spirit.

But further, to show how idle and absurd it is to take our Savior's Words in
a proper Sense, we shall show that it is utterly against Sense and Reason, as
well as contrary to Scripture, as you have heard.

First; It is against Sense. What greater Evidence can there be of things, than
what Sense affords? But if this which the Papists affirm, about the
consecrated Bread being the real Body of Christ, be true, the Senses of all the
World are deceived: For since the great Argument for Christianity (as all
agree) was the Words that Christ spoke, and the Works which Christ did; now how
could we be sure he did so speak, or so work, if we may not credit the Reports
of our Eyes and Ears? This was St. Luke's great Evidence of the Truth of what
he wrote, That it was delivered to him by Eyewitnesses, Luke 1.1, 2. and St.
John's: What we have seen with our Eyes, and our Hands have handled of the Word
of Life, 1 John 1.1. And St. Paul's for the Resurrection, That he was seen of
Cephas, then of the Twelve, then of above five hundred Brethren at once, 1 Cor.
15.5, 6. Even Thomas his Infidelity yielded to this Argument, That if he did
thrust his hand into Christ's Side, he would believe, Joh. 20.25. Christ judged
this was a convincing Argument, when the Apostles thought they had seen a
Spirit: Handle me, and see: for a Spirit has not Flesh and Blood, as you see
me have. Luke 24.39.

But now if after the Words of Consecration, there is under the Species of
Bread, the Nature and Properties of Flesh, then are the Senses of the wisest of
Mortals deceived: And if our Senses be deceived here, Dr. Tillotson.
they are not (as a late Author observes) to be trusted in any other thing; no,
not when they are most sure that we see Father or Mother, or Wife, or Children.
Can we be sure, This is my Body, is written in Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1
Cor. 11.? For may not those Words be some other Words? why should we trust our
Eyes? What if we should tell the Papists, These Words, This is my Body, are
neither in this Chapter, nor any where else written in the New Testament, and
grow confident of it, and tell them the Words are, This is not my Body, It Is
the Bricks that were laid to build Babel, It Is the Gates of Solomon's Porch:
This is the Shewbread that Abimelech gave to David, the Bottles that Abigail
took from Nabal? If they tell us, We are strangely deceived, and the Sense of
all that can read will give it against us; may not we tell them as well, when
they say, This is the real Body of Christ, (when it is nothing but a
Wafer-Cake) That they are strangely deceived, and that the Senses of all, that
can either see, taste, smell, or feel, will give it against them? This being
so, what reason is there for them to burn us, because we cannot see the Bread
to be Christ's real Body, more than there is for us to kill them, because they
cannot see that it is the Gates of Solomon's Porch.

Secondly; It is against Reason. And shall any conclude, that is any Principle
of the Christian Religion, that is contrary to, and utterly against Reason? For
it would make us believe things that are absolutely impossible, and gross
Contradictions. Tho some things may be above Reason, yet they themselves
confess no Principle of Religion can be against it.

Object. But they say, We imagine many things impossible, that really are not
so; and further intimate, If we can prove any real Impossibilities, which this
Doctrine forces them to believe, they will yield to us: For they with us
condemn the Lutheran Opinion, See a Book called Scripture-Mysteries, p. 279.
That Christ's Body is every where, because it is impossible; and therefore
expound those Words, I am the Vine, I am a Door, etc. figuratively, (as we do)
because it is impossible for him who is a Man, to be a Vine, or a Door, etc.
[See Mr. Pool, p. 107.]

Answ. It is no less impossible for the Bread to be Christ's real Body. Why
might not the Vine, as well as the Wine, be by Transubstantiation converted
into Christ's real Substance? I think, says Mr. Pool, the Mother as good as
the Daughter: And especially since Christ says, I am the Vine, might not they
have devised another Transubstantiation, to make Christ's Words good?

But to proceed to show how irrational and absurd their Notion is, and what
they hold, as you heard, that Christ's whole Body is present in every Crumb of
the Bread, etc. and yet do affirm, Christ's Body is entire and undivided, and
also believe it is really in Heaven, in such a proportion or bigness as he had
upon Earth. Now then, says Mr. Pool, (according to their Doctrine) the same
Body of Christ is bigger than it self, and longer than it self, and which is
worse, Christ is divided from himself. I know not what can be more impossible,
than to say, That all Christ is at Rome, and all at London, and all in Heaven,
and yet not all in the Places between.

Object. All this (the Papists say) may be done by God's Almighty Power.

Answ. Then by the same Almighty Power, it is possible for any other Man to be
in so many places: for it matters not that Christ should be invisible in so
many places, and another should be there visibly; or that Christ is there in so
little a Bulk, and another must be in a greater. And if this be so, what
Monsters follow from hence? Can any devise greater Absurdities than they
believe, if in very deed they believe what they say, and daily affirm? Suppose
now John to be by Divine Power at the same time at Rome, at Paris, and at
London: where ever John is alive, it follows he must have power to move
himself, or else no living Creature. Then John at Rome may walk toward London,
and the same John at London may walk toward Rome; and so they may meet (shall
I say, the one the other) and you may be sure it will be a merry Meeting; it
were worth enquiring, how long they will be ere they come together. Then again,
at Rome all the Parts of John may be excessively hot, and at London excessively
cold, and at Paris neither hot nor cold. This is beyond all Romances that ever
were devised. Besides, John may be sorely wounded at Rome, and yet at London
may sleep in a whole Skin; John may be feasting at Rome, and fasting at London,
in the same moment.

Object. You talk at this rate, because you measure God by your selves, whereas
He can do more than you or I can do.

Answ. There are some things, which it is no dishonor to God to say he cannot
do them, because they are either sinful, (so God cannot lie) or absolutely
impossible. God himself cannot make a Man to be alive and dead at the same
time; God cannot make the Whole to be less than a Part of it; He cannot make
Three to be more than Threescore; He cannot make a Son to beget his Father; He
cannot make the same Man to be born at several times, (as Papist Authors
confess) and therefore in like manner he cannot make the same Body to be in two
several places, for this is not one jot less impossible than the other: But
they must believe, Christ may have Ten Thousand Bodies at one time, or so many
as there are Priests to consecrate the Bread, and distinct Congregations to
celebrate the Holy Supper.

Object. These indeed are great Difficulties to humane Reason, but Reason is
not to be believed against Scripture.

Answ. True; but this is their hard Hap, this Doctrine of theirs is against
Scripture, as well as Reason, in as much as it is highly dishonorable to
Christ, whose Honor is the great Design of Scripture. What a foul dishonor is
it to him, to subject him to the Will of every Mass-Priest, who when he
pleases can command him down into Bread! And what a Dishonor is it, That the
very Body of Christ may be eaten by Rats, ^um. quest. ^. Art. 3.
or Worms, and may be cast up by Vomit, and the like, as Aquinas affirms, and
that their Church in her Missals has put this amongst other Directions, That
if Worms or Rats have eaten Christ's Body, they must be burned; and if any Man
vomit it up, it must be eaten again, or burned, or made a Relic. And yet this
is no more than their Doctrine will force them to own: for if they will believe
Christ's own Words in one place, as well as in another, he assures us, That
whatsover (without exception) enters into the Mouth, Mat. 15.17
goes into the Belly, and is cast forth into the Draught.

Object. What dishonor is this more to Christ, than to have Fleas suck his
Blood when he was upon Earth.

Answ. Very great Dishonor! For tho in the Days of his Flesh it was no
dishonor to him, (as it was necessary for us that he suffered so many
Indignities, and died) yet now being risen from the Dead, he dies no more: And
it must needs be a great Wrong, Injury, and Dishonor to him, to be crucified
again, and to be brought back to those Reproaches which he long since left; and
all this to no purpose, and without any Profit to us. Again, the Scripture
approves and uses this Argument, that his Body cannot be in two places at one
and the same time. It is the Angels Argument, He is not here, Mat. 28.6.
he is risen; plainly implying, that he could not be here and there too. Or
must we say, the Argument used by the Angels of God is weak or deceitful, that
theirs may be strong and true?

Object. Have we not many Examples in Holy Scripture, See a Popish Book called,
The Fortraiture of the true Church. p. 152.
which show that Christ may be in diverse Places at one time? Was he not in
Heaven when he appeared to St. Paul, Acts 9.23. Paul says, he was seen last of
all of him, and yet was he not then in Heaven?

Answ. What Sight it was that Paul had of Christ, is not declared; however, it
is evident it was a Vision that he had of him, for so he calls it: but that
this proves the Body of Christ to be in two places at once, does not in the
least appear. Stephen also saw Christ; and if it should be granted, as some
affirm, that he saw his real glorified Body, does it follow, the Body of Christ
was then in two Places? The Heavens might be opened, and his Sight so
strengthened, that he might have a sight of the blessed Jesus, whom Stephen
said, he saw standing on the right hand of God. Acts 7.56.


Object. The Papists say, Christ's real Body is in the Eucharist invisibly and
so the Angels might mean, he was not there visibly, when they said, He is not
here, he is risen.

Answ. To this says Mr. Pool, If a Man being sought after, should hide himself
in some Corner or Hole of the House, and Pursuers should ask for him; could any
with a good Conscience say, he is not here, because he is invisible? (none sure
but a Papist, who is so well skilled in Equivocation, would give such an
Answer.) Our Savior every where makes these two Opposites, his being in the
World, and going to Heaven. John 13.1. the Hour was come, that he should depart
out of this World unto the Father. It seems they could have taught him the Art
of going thither, and remaining here at the same instant. They have an
excellent Faculty, as he had, who said, Since he could not give content in
going, nor staying; he would not go, nor stay: For they know how a Man may both
go from a place, and stay in it, at the same time. I know not what can be more
plain, if they did not wilfully shut their Eyes. Christ says expressly, Me you
have not always with you: That is, his bodily Presence; for as touching his
Divine Presence, so he is always with his People unto the end of the World,
Mat. 28. ult. Besides, their Doctrine destroys the Truth of Christ's human
Nature. We read of Christ, He was in all points like unto us, (Sin only
excepted.) His Body was like ours, and therefore impossible it should be in a
thousand places at once, (which according to their Doctrine it is.) This turns
Christ's Body into a Spirit; nay, indeed they make his Body more spiritual than
a Spirit; for a Spirit cannot be in several Places, divided from it self. The
Soul of Man, if it be entire both in the whole, and in every part of the Body;
yet it is not divided from it self, nor from its Body, nor can it be in two
Bodies at the same time, as all confess; much less can it be in Ten Thousand
Bodies at once. When ever any Angel comes to Earth, he leaves Heaven. So that
this quite destroys the Truth of Christ's human Body.

Object. Much of what we say here, the Papists say, was true of Christ's Body
in the days of his Infirmity; but when he was risen from the Dead, then he
received a spiritual Body, as it is said ours shall be at the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15.

Answ. This is but a Fig-leaf; for they ascribe these monstrous Properties to
Christ's Body before its Resurrection; for they say, the Flesh and Blood of
Christ were really in the Sacrament which the Disciples received whilst Christ
lived. Secondly; Christ's Resurrection, tho it heightened the Perfection, yet it
did not alter the Nature and Properties of his Body, nor gave it the being of a
Spirit; for after he was risen, he proves that he was no Spirit by this
Argument, Handle me, and see: for a Spirit has not Flesh and Blood, as you see
me have. Luke 24.39. By this it appears, that their Doctrine destroys the
Truth of Christ's human Body; at least it destroys the main Evidence of it
against those who affirmed that Christ had only a fantastical Body, namely,
that he was seen, and felt, and heard; for the Papists say, that Sense is not
to be believed. Again, this Doctrine of theirs destroys the Truth of Christ's
Ascension into Heaven; for he is not ascended, if he has not left this World,
but is here in the Sacrament. Nothing can be more clear, than that Christ did
visibly and locally leave this World, when he went up into Heaven, Acts 1.9,
10. That being once there, the Heavens must receive (or contain) him, until the
Time of the Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. And that at the last Day he
shall come visibly and locally from Heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. But that he should
come down a thousand times in a day, at the command of every Mass-Priest, (or
that he should have such power to make the Body of his Savior,) is such a
Dream as the Scripture speaks not one syllable of, nor can any rational Man
believe it. Besides, their Doctrine destroys the very Essence of a Sacrament,
which consists of two parts, an outward Element or Sign, and the inward Grace
signified by it.

These things being well considered, it is evident these Words, This is my
Body, are to be taken figuratively, i. e. This is a Sign of my Body, or this is
the Sacrament of my Body; so that from the manner of the Words spoken by
Christ, there is no necessity to take them as the Papists do, seeing it is so
frequent with the Holy Ghost to use Metaphors in this kind; I need not name
them, considering it is the Subject of our present Work. The seven Kine are
seven Years; the seven Ears of Corn are seven Years; the Stars are the Angels
of the seven Churches; the seven Heads are seven Mountains, etc. Christ is
called a Rock, a Lamb, a Lion, a Door, together with many other things, which
we have spoken unto. See the Second Head of Metaphors, Similies, etc.

The Saints are called Sheep, Branches, etc. 'The meaning of all this is,
(says Dr. Preston) They are like such and such things: But yet it is the
manner of the Scripture-Speech, Dr. Preston of the Saints Qualifications, p.
487,
and therefore (says he) it is not necessary that those Words should be taken
in a proper Sense, as they are by the Papists.

Object. But (says the worthy Doctor) you will object: Yea, but in matter of
this moment, as a Sacrament, the Lord speaks distinctly and expressly; there he
uses no Metaphor, tho in other Cases he does.

Answ. 'To this (says he) I answer briefly: It is so far from being true, that
he uses them not in the Sacrament, that there are none of all the Sacraments
but it is used, viz. in the Sacrament of Circumcision, This is the Covenant,
etc. In the Sacrament of the Passover, (which were the Sacraments of the Old
Law) the Lamb is called the Passover. In this very Sacrament, to go no
further, for instance, take but the second part of it, This is the Cup of the
New Testament in my Blood: Here are not one but diverse Figures. The Cup is
taken for the Liquor in it; the Wine in the Cup is taken for Christ's Blood;
This is the new Testament, etc. that is, the Seal of the New Testament. Here is
Figure upon Figure, (says Mr. Pool) and yet the Papists have the Impudence to
reproach us for putting in but one Figure, which they confess the Holy Ghost
frequently makes use of. Wonder, O Heavens! and judge, O Earth, whether these
Men do not strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels, etc.

This opens a Way for us to our next Work, which is to run the Parallel
concerning those figurative and metaphorical Expressions of the Lord Jesus
Christ, used at the Institution of the holy Eucharist, Mat. 26.26. Jesus took
Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to his Disciples, and said, Take,
eat, this is my Body.

Metaphor. Parallel. CHrist took Bread after he had supped, etc. THis, in the
Judgment of some Divines, notes God's choosing or taking Christ from among Men,
to be a Sacrifice for our Sins. II. Christ blessed the Bread: He took the
Bread, and gave thanks. II. Christ sanctified himself; he was set apart to that
glorious Work and Office he came to do. III. Christ brake the Bread. Corn, we
know, is bruised, or ground in a Mill, that so it may become meet Bread for our
Bodies. III. Christ was bruised or pierced for our Sins, he was broken as it
were in the Mill of God's Wrath, which was due to us for our Sins, that he
might become meet Food for our Souls: Isa. 53.
It pleased the Father to bruise him. IV. Christ gave the Bread to his
Disciples: He took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples. IV. Signifying not only his giving himself for us, but his giving
himself freely with all his Benefits to us. V. The Disciples took the Bread.
Note by the way, It Is called Bread when Christ took it, it is called Bread after
he blessed it, and it was Bread the Disciples took. V. Which holds forth our
taking or accepting of Christ the Bread of Life, as the only Food of our Souls.
VI. The Disciples eat the Bread. Bread will do us no good, unless it be taken
and eaten. VI. Unless we receive Christ by a lively Faith, and feed upon him,
that is, fetch all our Comforts from him, relying wholly by Faith upon him, he
will avail us nothing to eternal Life: Joh. 6.53.
Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no
Life in you. VII. Bread is the Stay and Staff of Man's natural Life: I Will break
the Staff of Bread. Ezekiel. 4.16
It is that which preserves the Life of the Body. VII. Christ is the Stay or
Staff of the Life of our Souls: When Christ, Col. 3 3.
who is our Life, shall appear, etc. Christ preserves the Life of our inward
Man: Because I live, ye shall live also. VIII. Bread is the best of earthly
Blessings; Isa. 55.1, 2
hence in Scripture it is sometimes put for all good things. VIII. Christ is
the best and chiefest Blessing that ever God gave to his People; he comprehends
all other Good: He that has Christ, has every thing. 2 Cor. 3.22.
All things are yours; why so? because they had an Interest in Christ, Christ
was theirs. Cant. 5.10
Hence he is called the chiefest among ten thousand IX. Bread is of a
satisfying Nature; hence God says, He will satisfy his Poor with Bread. IX.
Christ received by Faith, most sweetly fills and satisfies the Soul of a
Believer. Joh. 4.14.
He that eats of the Bread of Life, and drinks of the Water of Life, shall
hunger or thirst no more. Such have what they desire. X. Bread is made of Seed,
or Corn, which before it rises, or becomes fruitful, or yields increase, it is
sowed, Joh. 12.24
and dies. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a Corn of Wheat fall to the
Ground, and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much Fruit.
X. The Lord Jesus, like a Seed of Corn, was sown, did die, that so he might not
remain alone, (in the perfect enjoyment of himself) but for great increase,
viz. to raise up with him all his Elect; he was content, when his Hour was
come, to yield himself up to Death. He died, and rose again, and thereby
brings forth much Fruit. All that ever were, or shall be quickened, and raised
out of a State of Death by Sin, were, and shall be quickened by the Death and
Resurrection of Christ. Such has been the Fruit of the preaching of Christ
crucified, that Multitudes of Sinners thereby through the Spirit have been
converted to God, whence also has sprung forth a Seed to serve him, whom he
has accounted to the Lord for a Generation, of all which he will not suffer
one Grain to be lost, but will raise it up at the last Day.

A Parallel much like this might be run, in respect of the Cup, or Spirit of
the Wine. See Wine.

Inferences.
THe Apostle says, That what he received of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24,
25.
he delivered to the Saints: How the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, and blessed it, etc. And in like manner took the Cup,
when he had supped, etc. From whence we infer, That whatsoever we do in the
Worship of God, we must see we have a Command from God to warrant our Practice,
and also exactly to do it according to the Pattern he has left us, or
Directions he has given us; we must not add to, nor diminish from, nor alter
any thing of the Words of the Institution; if we do, God will not hold us
guiltless.

II. This rebukes the Papists, who deny the People the holy Cup of our Lord,
and give the Sacrament (or holy Ordinance) only in one kind, when that nothing
is more clear, than that Jesus Christ gave his Disciples the Cup, as well as
the Bread.

Quest. Why did Christ institute this holy Ordinance, and give it to his
Disciples, the very Night in which he was betrayed?

Answ. 1. To strengthen their Faith in an Hour of Temptation, that was just at
the Door, and ready to come upon them. When is a Cordial more necessary, than
when the Patient is ready to faint, and his Spirits fail? Christ saw what a sad
Qualm was coming upon his poor Saints, and therefore gives them this
Soul-reviving Cordial, to bear up their Spirits.

2. Because the last Words of a dying Friend are mostly kept in mind, or Tokens
of Love given by him are chiefly born in remembrance.

Quest. Who ought to partake of the holy Eucharist?

Answ. 1. None but such who are true Converts, or who sincerely believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ; for this is an outward Sign of an inward Grace received.
Those who have not spiritually received Christ by Faith, ought not to come to
the holy Supper of the Lord.

2. It appertains to none, but such Converts as are baptized. Acts 2.40, 41,
42.
Those that received the Word, were baptized; and They continued in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer. We read of
none that received the Lord's Supper, but baptized Persons.

3. Such who are fallen into any gross and scandalous Evil, and under the
Suspension or Sentence of the Church, ought not to partake of the holy Supper
of the Lord, until they have repented, and given satisfaction to the Church,
and are received again into Fellowship.

4. Those who cannot discern the Body of the Lord broken, so as to look unto,
and behold Jesus Christ crucified for them, but eat it as common Bread, ought
not to come to this Ordinance; such, amongst others, if they come, are unworthy
Receivers.

Quest. What is required of Persons who come to partake of this holy Ordinance?

Answ. They ought to examine themselves; it requires due Preparation, which
does consist in these four or five Particulars.

1. A sincere Confession of those Sins, which we find out upon diligent Search
and Examination.

2. Godly Sorrow for the same, manifested by putting away the Filth of the
Flesh. We must come with clean hands, and a pure Heart.

3. We oughtt to forgive those who have offended us. Christ commands us to be
reconciled to our Brother. The Apostle exhorts us to lay aside all Malice. We
must not eat with the ^^leavened Bread of Malice and Wickedness. 1 Cor. 5.8.


4. Faith in the Death and Bloodshedding of Jesus Christ.

5. We ought to do it in remembrance of his Death.

(1.) With an affectionate Remembrance. The Sight of our Eyes ought to affect
our Hearts.

(2) A sorrowful Remembrance, in contemplaton of what our Sins brought upon our
dear Savior: They were the Thorns (as I may say) that crowned him, and the
Nails that fastened him to the Cross.

(3.) With a Sin-loathing and self-abhorring Remembrance.

(4.) With a thankful Remembrance. Tho we have cause of Sorrow, considering the
Nature of our Sin, and horrid Evil thereof; yet there is great cause of Joy and
Thanksgiving, to behold a Savior, who in Bowels of Love died to redeem and
save us from them.

Quest. How may a Christian, with much comfort, upon examination, receive the
Lord's Supper?

Answ. 1. If there is no Sin in thy Heart or Life, which thou regardest, or
do allow thy self in, bear with, or connivest at.

2. If thou do loath Sin, as well as leave it; when it is not only out of thy
Conversation, but out of thy Affection also. To hate and loath Sin, is more
than to leave it; Persons never willingly leave or forsake that they love.

3. If thou can say in truth, that thou would be made holy, and do
labor after it, as well as to be made happy; to be thoroughly sanctified, as
well as to be saved; live to God here, as well as live with God hereafter; to
have Sin mortified as well as pardoned.

4. If Christ is most precious to thee, and has the chiefest Room in thy
Heart. If upon Trial thou find these things are in very deed wrought in
thee, thon may with much comfort come to the Sacrament.

Quest. Of what Use is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to us?

Answ. 1. It shows the horrid Nature and Evil of Sin, in that nothing could
expiate it, nor satisfy the Justice of God, or make a Compensation for it, but
the Blood of Jesus Christ.

2. It shows the wonderful Love of God to poor Sinners, in giving up his own
dear Son, to die the cursed Death of the Cross for us.

3. It shows the wonderful Love of Jesus Christ; who freely laid down his Life
for our sakes. Greater Love has no Man than this, Joh. 15.13 Romans 5.8, 10.
that a Man lay down his Life for his Friend; but Christ has laid down his
Life for us, when we were Enemies to him by wicked Works.

4. It tends to increase our Love to Christ, and our Faith in him.

5. It shows us that Christ is our Life, and how and by what means we come to
be saved.

6. It seals the Covenant of Grace to us, gives us (in the right use of it)
much assurance that Christ is ours.

7. There is a mystical Conveyance or Communication of all Christ's blessed
Merits to our Souls through Faith held forth hereby, and in a glorious manner
received, in the right participation of it.

8. It may animate and encourage us to suffer Martyrdom (when called to it) for
his sake.

Christ our Passover.
1 Cor. 5.7. For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
THe Passover, or Paschal Lamb, being a most eminent Type of the Messiah, of
which see our Sacred Philology, in the Chapter of Sacred Rites, where you have
the Reason of its Typical and Metaphorical Representation, we shall here run an
apt Parallel betwixt that illustrious Type, and the most holy Antitype.

Type. Parallel THe Paschal Lamb must be without blemish, entire, whole, sound,
not blind, nor broken, not sick, nor bruised. SHadowing forth the Perfection
and Innocence of Christ, in whose Lips were found no Guile: As a Lamb, without
blemish, and without spot. II. He was to be a Year old. II. Signifying the
Experience Christ should have of our Miseries, whereof even a Day's continuance
yields sufficient proof; as also that Perfection of Christ in like sort: And
that in fullness of time he should come and suffer; a Year being a perfect
Revolution of the Sun's Course. Guild. III. It was to be taken out of the
Flock. III. Christ was taken from amongst Mankind: Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, He also
himself likewise took part of the same, etc. IV. It was to be separated from
the Flock. IV. Christ was separate from Sinners. V. It was to be slain, and
that in the Evening. V. So Christ died (says Mr. Ainsworth) in that season,
viz. in the Evening of the Day; also in the Evening of Time, in the latter Age
of the World. VI. The Blood was to be sprinkled on the Lintel, Exodus 12.7
and Door-Posts, that the Angel seeing the same, might pass by. VI. Signifying,
that Christ's Blood must be applied by us; and where Christ is received, 1 Cor.
1.30
and the Soul sprinkled by Faith, Sanctification outwardly will appear in the
Practice of the Life. VII. The Lamb was to be roasted with Fire. Verse. 8.
VII. Moses unvailed, p. 62.
Signifying (says Mr. Guild) the Agony of Christ in the Garden, and the Wrath
of his Father, which he did endure both in Soul and Body. It was a Sign either
of the Spirit of God, which is compared to Fire, through which Christ offered
himself; or of the Fire of God's Wrath, Heb. 9.14.
which he suffered when he was made a Curse for us. VIII. It was to be roasted
with Head and Legs, and the Appurtenances thereof; that is, it must be roasted
all and whole, not cut in pieces. VIII. This signifies our full Communion with
Christ, whole and undivided. Ainsworth
1 Cor. 13. Gal. 2.20. IX. No Bone of the Lamb was to be broken. IX. Os nullum
illius Agni frangi voluit Deus, etc It signifies, that not a Bone of Christ
should be broken, as it was prophesied of him. X. The Lamb was to be eaten. X.
Christ is spiritually to be received, and fed upon. Joh. 6.55.
My Flesh is Meat indeed, etc. Verse 9.
XI. It was not to be eaten raw. XI. Noting, that we should be well prepared,
when we come to the Sacrament. Guild. XII. It was to be eaten all, and with
unleavened Bread. XII. Signifying, that in Christ nothing is unprofitable, or
to be rejected; and that we ought to eat with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity
and Truth. XIII. It was to be eaten with bitter Herbs. XIII. Which typified
forth the bitter Sorrows and Sufferings of Christ; and that we should eat our
Passover with a sense of, and bitter sorrow for our Sins, wherein we were
captivated. XIV. It was to be eaten in every Family, and each Family to this
purpose had a Lamb. XIV. Showing the Unity that ought to be among God's People,
they being all Fellow-Commoners in, and Partakers of the Privileges and
Blessings of Christ. Every Church and Family of the Faithful, yea, each
particular Soul, has a whole Christ. XV. The House was to be prepared. XV. To
signify how we should prepare our Hearts. 1 Cor. 11.28. XVI. If the House was
too little, the Neighbor's House was to be assumed; yea, the Strangers were to
partake, if they were circumcised. XVI. To signify, first, the superabundant
Virtue of Christ's Death, (for the House may be too little for the Lamb, but
not the Lamb for the House) as also the sweet Communion of the Saints in Love,
the joyful Vocation also of the Neighbour-Gentiles, and their Admission into
the Fellowship of the Faith, being inwardly circumcised, etc. XVII. They were
to eat it with their Loins girded. XVII. This signifies the girding the Loins
of our Minds with Justice, Strength, and Verity. XVIII. They were to have their
Shoes on. XVIII. This was to figure out the Preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, wherewith our Feet should be always shod. XIX. They were to eat it in
haste. The original word signifies to haste away, as with fear and amazement.
XIX. They that come to Christ, must be ready to walk in the way of Salvation,
with the Staff of true Faith in their hands, as Strangers and Pilgrims, to make
a daily progress toward the Land of everlasting Happiness. XX. Lastly; In that
the Blood of the Lamb was first sprinkled on them. XX. It shows, that first
Christ was made a Sacrifice to God, and then a Sacrament to us. Guild. Type.
Disparity. THe Passover signified Christ was to come. OUr Passover shows he
is come, and has been crucified for us. II. The Passover only fed the Body.
II. Christ spiritually feeds the Soul. III. The Lamb being slain and eaten,
perished, and nothing of it remains. III. But Christ, tho he was slain, and
became thereby spiritual Food for our Souls, yet he is no whit impaired
thereby, but lives and abides for ever in perfect Bliss and Happiness, and
remains as perpetual Nourishment to his Chosen. IV. That was a Type or
Shadow. IV. Christ is the Antitype and Substance of it.

Inferences.
GOd gave special Charge to the Israelites, concerning their eating the
Passover; He was greatly provoked by the Neglect of it. Numb. 9.13. But that
Man that is clean, and is not in a Journey, and forbeareth to keep the
Passover, even that Man shall be cut off from his People, etc. What then will
become of them who refuse to come to Christ, and eat of this spiritual
Passover? Also it may stir up such sincere and godly Souls to look about them,
and cause them to tremble, who live in the great Neglect of coming to the holy
Supper of our Lord. Surely there is as good Ground and Reason for you to obey
the Lord Jesus in this Ordinance, as there was for Israel to obey Moses in
keeping the Passover; nay, I may show much greater.

1. From the consideration of what the one was a Sign of, and what the other
shows forth, and is a Sign of.

2. From the consideration of the Excellency of Christ (whose Law this is)
above Moses, who received that Law, and delivered it to Israel.

3. From the Threats that are denounced against those who refuse to hear Christ
in whatsoever he shall say to them. If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast,
etc. If they escaped not, that refused him that spoke on Earth; how shall we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven?

And for further Motives, consider,

1. The strict and positive Injunction of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me.
He that said, Do not steal, do not commit Adultery, and. Repent, believe, pray
always, be holy, etc. said, Do this, etc.

2. It is a perpetual Ordinance, till Christ comes the second time. Paul
received it from Christ, after his coming in Spirit according to his Promise,
etc. And the Primitive Saints continued in it after that time likewise;
therefore the Coming he spoke of, must intend his second Coming at the last Day.

3. Consider the great Need there is to remember Christ's Death, and of those
profitable Instructions and Blessings comprehended in this Ordinance.

4. Is not the Neglect of a known Duty a great Sin?

5. Is not this in effect to set light by Christ, and to cast contempt upon his
Commands, and in effect to say there is no need of them? What signifies, say
some, the eating a little Bread, and drinking a little Wine? Will thou take
upon thee to teach Christ, and exalt thy own Wisdom above his, who is the most
wise God?

6. Consider how faithful and ready the Saints in former Ages were to walk in
the Commandments of God; and is it not left upon Record to their everlasting
Commendation? Moses did all things according to the Pattern showed him in the
Mount, etc. Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless.

7. Do thou know what spiritual Blessings thou losest by thy Neglect hereof?
Is not Loss of Communion with Christ a great Loss?

Psalm. 119.6 Joh. 14.15
8. Is not universal Obedience a Demonstration of Grace? Then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments.

9. Will not the Thoughts of a wilful Neglect of known and indispensible
Duties, be bad Deathbed Companions?

10. This preaches the Gospel to the very Sight of your Eyes; is it not
necessary to make use of all Means God has ordained for your Establishment in
the Truth of the Gospel?

11. Will not Omission of known Duties exclude Men and Women the Kingdom of
Heaven? Read Mat. 25. Is it not for Sins of Omission, that Christ will condemn
and sentence many Souls to eternal Burnings in the great Day?

THE Sixth HEAD OF METAPHORS, SIMILES, And other Borrowed TERMS, Mentioned in
the SACRED SCRIPTURES, Relating to the Holy Angels of GOD, AND THE Soul and
Spirit of Man, Wherein the Nature, Order, Office, and Ministration of Angels is
opened.
THe Creatures of God are divided into Invisible and Visible: The Invisible are
Spirits, (...), (asomatoi) without Bodies; and by them we understand Angels,
because being in their Nature incorporeal, they cannot be seen by humane Eyes.
The Visible, are whatsoever things have existence in the visible World, whether
simple or mixed Bodies. In what Notions Metaphors are taken from Good and Evil
Angels, see our Sacred Philology, Book 1. p. 101.

1. Angels then in their Natures are Spirits created of God.

2. Called Ministers or Angels, to show their Office.

Take Mr. Ainsworth's Description of Angels, Genesis 16.17.

Angels, so named of the Greek (...), Angelos, in Hebrew (...) Maleac, by
interpretation a Messenger or Legate, one sent and employed in any Work,
whether of God or Man. And those sent of God were sometimes Men, as Haggai is
called the Lord's Angel, (or Messenger) Hag. 1.13. and John Baptist, Mat. 3.1.
and generally the Lord's Priests under the Law, Mal. 2.7. and Christ's
Ministers under the Gospel, Rev. 1.20. Unto the Angel of the Church, etc. (that
is, the Minister or Pastor of the Church.) But in special, Angels are those
heavenly Spirits, and fiery Flames, that are wise, 2 Samuel 14.20. excel in
Strength, Psalm. 103.20. Which are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.7, 14. The Hebrew
Doctors Opinion of Angels is, That they are (essential) Forms, created without
any material Substance or Body. And whereas the Prophet says, he saw an Angel
like Fire, and with Wings, etc. it is also spoken of prophetical Visions, and
by way of dark Parables. Also that the Angels are lower and higher one than
another; it is not in the highness of place, as when one Man sits higher or
above another; but as we speak of two wise Men, which excel one another in
Wisdom, that that Man is higher than this. Likewise that there are ten Names
that Angels are called by, and accordingly ten Degrees of them; and the tenth,
called Men, are the Angels which spoke with the Prophets, and appeared to them
in Visions, for which they are called Men, as Maimon. shows in Misneh Jesudei
Ha^ovah, chap. 2. That there are are ten Degrees of Angels, the holy Scriptures
show not; but Degrees there are, as the Apostle mentions, Romans 8.38. Col.
1.18. Angels, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominions, etc. Howbeit, we are
warned not to intrude into those things which we have not seen, Col. 1.18.
Sometimes the Word Angel is given to Christ himself, who is the Angel of the
Covenant, and the Angel of God's (Face or) Presence, Isa. 63.1. In whom God's
Name is, Exodus 23.20. Thus Ainsworth. And in another place he says, That one
of the two Angels that appeared to Abraham was Jesus Christ, whom Abraham
called the Judge of all the Earth, Genesis 18.2. who is called Jehovah, v. 13.

It is the Opinion of some of the Learned, that every particular Saint has an
Angel to take care of him; Mat. 18.10
which they gather from that passage, Take heed ye despise not one of these
little Ones; for I say unto you, That in Heaven their Angels always behold the
Face of my Father, etc. And from that in Acts 12.15. Then said they, It is his
Angel. But others rather conclude, That the Saints have many Angels to watch
over them, and continually to minister to them. That the Godly are under the
Guardianship of the holy Angels, is not doubted or questioned by any worthy
Writer.

The Holy Angels compared to Watchers.
Dan. 4.13. I saw in the Vision of my Head, and behold a Watcher, etc.

Verse 17. This Matter is by the Decree of the Watchers, and the Demand by the
Word of the Holy Ones.


Metaphor. Parallel. A Watcher or Watchman imports such as sleep not, or but
little; their Business is to watch, which they cannot do unless they keep
themselves awake. ANgels are not subject to sleep, as Men are; they always are
awake, beholding the Evil and the Good, hence said to be full of Eyes. Ezekiel.
1.18
II. Watchers import such as have a Charge committed to them, of great
importance, which they are continually to look after. The Apostle speaking of
the Care of Ministers, Heb. 13.17
says, They watch for our Souls, etc. II. Angels have a great Charge committed
to them, they are employed about great and weighty Affairs; and that, First, in
reference unto God; Secondly, in reference unto Saints; Thirdly, In reference
unto wicked Men.

First; In reference unto God.

1. They are his Courtiers, attending upon Him continually for his Honor, and
to set forth his Magnificence. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, 1 Kings
22.19. Act. 7.33. Genesis 16.7. and 10.12. 2 King. 1. L^^. ^.26. Acts 10.3. and
1.11. and 8.26. and 27 24. Rev. 1.1.
and all the Host of Heaven standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left
hand.

2. They wait for his Word, and do receive Commandment from him.

3. They oft-times declare God's Mind and Will to Men. Thus they were employed
to give the Law on Mount Sinai, and to reveal God's Mind to Abraham, to Hagar,
to Lot, to Elijah, to the Virgin Mary, to the Shepherds, to the Apostles, to
Philip, to Paul, to John, etc.

4. To govern the Kingdoms of the World; for it is not to be doubted, but God
makes use of them upon this account. Hence they are called Princes, yea,
glorious Princes, and are much above the Kings and Potentates of the Earth,
Dan. 10.13. Eccles. 5.8.

5. They are God's Warriors, to execute his Decrees, whether of Mercy, as 2
Kings 6.17. or of Judgment, 2 Samuel 24.17. 2 Kings 19.35. Rev. 16.7.

6. They are continually employed in praising of God, crying, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of Hosts. Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. and 7.11, 12.

Secondly; In reference to the Church and People of God, they have a great
Charge committed to them, and much Business and Work to do. Psalm. 91.11
He has given his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

1. They are as Nurses, to bear up and to keep the Godly from Hurt: Psalm. 91.12
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy Foot against a
Stone.

2. They are as Stewards, to provide for the Godly in their Need. How
graciously was Elijah fed by Angels, with a Cake baked on the Coals, and a
Cruse of Water, 2 Kings 19.4, 5.
when he was faint, and ready to die!

3. They are employed as Physicians, as appears by that Passage, John 5.4.

4. As Comforters in Trouble. Genesis 21 17
How sweetly was poor Hagar comforted by an Angel, when she said, I will not
see the Death of the Lad! The like was the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 6.6, 7. Nay,
our blessed Savior refused not to receive Comfort from the Angels who
ministered to him, when he was in his bloody Agony in the Garden. Luke 22 43


5. They are employed as Soldiers to guard them; hence called God's Host,
Psalm. 34.7. 2 Kings 6.17.

6. They are Encouragers of the Saints in their Duties: 2 Kings 1.15.
And the Angel said unto Elijah, Go down with him, be not afraid, etc.

7. They are employed to rescue, and put the Godly out of Danger; as appears in
the Case of Lot. So concerning Daniel, when he was in the Lion's Den, Genesis
19.16 Dan 6.22. Acts 5.19.
the Angels shut the Mouths of the Lions, so that they did Daniel no harm. The
Angel of the Lord opened the Prison-Door, and brought Peter forth, and
delivered him out of the hands of his Enemies.

8. As Prophets and Instructors, to teach the Saints. Dan. 8.16. and 9 22.
And I heard a Man's Voice between the Banks of Ulai, which called, and said,
Gabriel, make this Man understand the Vision, etc. And he said, I will make
thee know what shall be in the last Day, etc. They open and reveal hidden
Mysteries to the Saints.

9. They rejoice with the Godly at the Conversion of Sinners. Luke 15.10.
Likewise I say unto you, There is Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God in
Heaven, over one Sinner that repents.

10. They have a Charge to convey the Souls of the Godly, when they die,
through the Territories of the Prince of Darkness, ( viz. the Air) and carry
them safe to Heaven. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, Luke 16.22.
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom.

11. To gather all the Elect together at the last Day.

12. To separate the Evil from the Good, the Chaff from the Wheat. Mat. 13.49
So shall it be at the end of the World, the Angels shall come, and sever the
Wicked from the Just.

Thirdly; They have a Charge committed to them, in reference to wicked Men.

1. To blind and infatuate them, that they cannot see how to effect that
Mischief they would otherwise do.

2. To stop them in their Carreer, that they cannot pursue their wicked
Purposes and Designs; as appears in Balaam's Case, Numb. 22.26.

3. To destroy and cut off the Ungodly, when they combine against the Church.
One Angel smote in the Camp of the Assyrians a Multitude of Men. 2 King. 19.35.


III. Watchers give warning of approaching Dangers. III. So the Angels gave
warning to Abraham and Lot, Genesis ^9.
of the approaching Judgment that fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities
about them. IV. Watchers are very useful, and oftentimes made a great Blessing
to Towns and Cities; many eminent Dangers by their means have been prevented.
IV. Angels are a great Blessing to the Church and City of God, and every
particular Member thereof. How secure was the Prophet, whilst he had those
fiery Chariots and Horsemen round about him!

Quest. But some may say, Why does God in the preservation of his People make
use of the Ministration of Angels?

Answ. Not for any Necessity; He is all-sufficient of himself to do all things
for them: But to declare his abundant Love to, and Care of his Children, in
making more excellent Creatures than themselves to be their Keepers.

Object. But God's People often fall into Danger, and many Inconveniences; how
then are they attended and kept by Angels?

Answ. They are delivered by them from many Evils and Dangers that they know
not of: For as we have many Devils about us, continually to do us Mischief; so
we have a Multitude of blessed Angels continually about us, to keep and protect
us. Psalm. 91.11


2. If at any time God's Children fall into Danger, it is because they are out
of their way, or rather God's way, and then the good Angels have no Charge over
them.

3. If they suffer in the Custody of the Angels, it is that they may be
exercised, tried, and made better thereby: For the Angels keep them from Evil,
or keep them in Evil, and at last deliver them out of Evil; so that they are
made Gainers by all, according to that Promise, Romans 8.28.

V. Watchers or Watchmen go up and down to see what the State and Condition of
Things is; they take strict Observation of Persons and Things. V. Angels go
about, or rather fly up and down in the Earth, to see what the State and
Condition of God's People more especially is. Hence they are said to have
Wings, which denote their Swiftness in their Work. Zech. 1.11
We have walked to and fro the Earth, and behold, all the Earth sits still,
and is at rest.

Inferences.
WHat infinite Grace and Favor does God manifest to his poor People, in giving
his Angels such a strict Charge over them, and to cause such glorious Creatures
to watch and keep them day and night?

2. What Honor also has God conferred on his Children hereby? Every Believer
has greater Attendance, yea, a more glorious Retinue, than the mightiest
Prince or Monarch in the World.

The Holy Angels compared to the Morning-Stars.
Job 38.7. When the Morning-Stars sang together, etc.
STars are taken two ways: First, Properly. Secondly, Metaphorically.


Some understand by Stars in this place, Caryl upon Job, chap. 38. p. 81.
the Stars which God has set in the Firmament of Heaven, or Stars in a proper
Sense: Others (as Mr. Caryl observes) the holy Angels, which, says he, may
well be called Stars, or Morning-Stars, by a Metaphor, etc.

Metaphor. Parallel. MOrning-Stars are full of Beauty, bright, and glorious.
ANgels are very beautiful Creatures, their Glory is wonderful. Hence Stephen's
Face was said to be as it had been the Face of an Angel; Acts 6. ult.
and very beautiful Persons are said to resemble or seem like Angels. Tho they
have not a visible bodily Beauty, yet they have a better Beauty than any Body.
II. Morning-Stars give Light; they are not only beautiful but shining. The
chief Morning Star, called Lucifer, signifies a Light-bringer. II. Angels are
not only very beautiful Creatures, but also full of Light. We read of an Angel
in the Revelations, that the whole Earth was lighted with his Glory. This shows
that Angels are very glorious and shining. Tho I understand that is not spoken
of a proper Angel; yet it shows that Angels are full of Light, and therefore
called Angels of Light. III. Stars are Guides to Mariners, by which they know
how to steer a right Course. III. Angels are and have been as Guides to the
Saints, and spiritual Mariners. They guided or gave direction unto Lot, to
escape the Flames of Sodom; and led Peter out of Prison, and thereby saved him
from imminent Danger. Abraham told his Servant, God would send his Angel to
guide, or prosper his Way, Genesis 24.40.

The Holy Angels called the Sons of God.
Job 1.6. There was a Day when the Sons of God came, and presented themselves
before God.

Job 38.7. And all the Sons of God shouted for Joy.


THe Chaldee Paraphrase is express, that the Sons of God here are the Angels:
The Armies of Angels shouted for Joy. And the Septuagint (as Caryl observes)
are as clear for it, saying, When all my Angels sung for Joy. To this do most
Expositors agree.

Object. But some object that Passage of the Apostle, To which of the Angels
said he at any time, Thou art my Son.

Answ. 1. Angels are not the Sons of God, as the Apostle there expresses, i.
e. as Christ is the Son of God, viz. by eternal Generation. For so, To which of
the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?
Jesus Christ is the Son of God from Eternity.

2. Angels are not the Sons of God by Regeneration, nor by Adoption, as
Believers are. The holy Angels need not Regeneration, they never fell from
their first Estate. Christ is not to them a Redeemer for their Restoration, but
only a Head for their Confirmation.

But why Angels are called Sons of God, will appear in the following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Son is the Offspring of the Father. ANgels are the
Offspring of God: Adam was called the Son of God by Creation; so may the
Angels, because created by God. II. A Son is greatly beloved by the Father. II.
Angels are greatly beloved of the Almighty. III. Sons attend, honor, and wait
upon their Father; they are about his Table, and at his Command. III. Angels
wait upon God, they stand about his Throne, and are always ready to obey his
Command, and seek his Glory. IV. Sons are greatly dignified; they are near to
their Father, and have great Power and Authority in the Family. IV. Angels are
greatly dignified; they are very near to God, Mat. 18.10
always beholding his Face, and are mighty in power. Mr. Caryl says, They are
called Sons of God because of Power, being called Principalities, and Powers,
etc. V. Sons serve their Father cheerfully, willingly, and readily; they obey
not as Slaves or Servants. V. Angels serve God with abundance of Cheerfulness
and Willingness; they go about their Work with a Filial or Son-like
Cheerfulness and Delight. VI. Sons are like their Father; they have some
Resemblance of him in Nature and Qualifications. VI. Angels have some essential
Likeness to God. God is a Spirit, and incorporeal; the Angels are Spirits in
their Nature, and incorporeal. Tho the difference between God and them is as
great as can be conceived in this respect; God is the creating Spirit, and they
are created Spirits; God is an infinite Spirit, they finite Spirits: Yet the
Angels bear (as the Learned observe) some resemblance to God in their Essence,
as well as in their Qualification, and may in this respect be called the Sons
of God likewise. VII. And lastly, Sons imitate their Father. Do good to them
that hate you, (says Christ) that you may be the Children of your Father which
is in Heaven: That is, Imitate God, as some Children do their Fathers; carry it
toward evil Men, as God does; and this will be an Evidence that you are the
Sons of God, and he will honor you with the Title of his Sons. VII. Angels
imitate God in Mercy, in Love and Compassion, as also in their good Works;
their Ways being all holy, just and good, pure and righteous; and showing much
Kindness and Tenderness to the Children of Men. They doubtless are patient
toward the froward and undeserving Mortals; they are of most excellent Natures
and Dispositions. No Creatures, do imitate God so plainly or fully as they do;
and from hence they may be called the Sons of God.

Inferences.
THis may teach us how to carry our selves toward God, our Father. We should
labor to be like the Angels. Our Savior has taught us to pray, That the Will
of God may be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. Mat. 6.10.
We who are God's Sons on Earth, should imitate the Sons of God in Heaven. We
should serve God as cheerfully, and with the like Alacrity of Heart as the holy
Angels; and labor not only to imitate the Angels, and be like them, but also
to imitate God himself; for He has set himself before us, for our direct and
immediate Example. Mat. 5.44.

And hereby God will not be ashamed to be called our God; He will not grudg us
the Honor and Title of Sons, which (as it appears by this) is a most glorious
Dignity and Privilege, even such a one that is conferred upon the holy Angels
of Heaven, etc.

The Holy Angels compared to an Host or Army.
Genesis 32.1. Jacob went on his way, and the Angels of God met him. Verse 2. And
when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's Host: And he called the Name of
that Place Mahanaim, (that is, two Hosts or Camps.)

Luke 2.13. And suddenly there was with the Angel a Multitude of the Heavenly
Host, praising God, etc.


ANgels (so named of the Greek, (...), Angelos, in Hebrew Maleac, Messenger or
Legate, one sent or employed in any Work) are in these Scriptures called God's
Host or Army, not that he needs them to protect himself, or suppress his
Enemies, being infinitely stronger than all the Armies he himself has, and
then what is the Strength and Force of all the Armies of his Enemies?

Therefore when God is said to have Armies, it is either to signify, First,
That he has all things at his Command, and is full of Power: Or, secondly,
That although he can do all things by himself, yet he will use the Agency of his
Creatures to effect his Purpose.

Metaphor. Parallel. AN Host or Army have a Prince or General, who is the Head
of them. THe Lord's Host, or Army of Angels, have a Prince or General, who is
their Head and Leader, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, who is c^lled the Head of
Principalities and Powers. II. An Host or Army consists of many Companies,
amongst which there are diverse Ranks and Orders, and yet all in Subjection to
their Prince, and chief Leader. II. Angels, the Lord's Host, consist of many
Companies or Legions: Mat. 26.53
Think thou, that I cannot pray to my Father, and he shall send me more than
twelve Legions of Angels? (Christ spoke in the Roman Phrase, who reckoned their
Armies by Legions, as we by Regiments.) Six thousand six hundred sixty six, was
the Number of a Legion; then the Number of twelve Legions was, Seventy nine
thousand nine hundred ninety two, a great Army: But how many more, no Man can
say. Christ pitched upon a great certain Number, to show (says Mr. Caryl) he
could have what Number he pleased, if he did but call for them. We are come
(says the Apostle) to an innumerable Company of Angels. The Lord's Camp is
very great. The Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand, even many thousands
of Angels. Psalm. 68.17
We read of many Degrees or Orders of Angels, which some account to be nine.

1. Cherubims, that is, Angels of Knowledge, as St. Hierom interprets the Word;
but others from Cherub, a Figure or Image. Others from Chi, a Note of
Similitude, and a Chaldee Word which signifies (Puerum and Juvenem) a Youth.
And so, as a learned Writer observes, they were usually represented in the
shape of a young Man; to show them to be intellectual Creatures; of a young
Man, to express their Vigor and Strength; with Wings, to declare their Agility
and Swiftness. These we read were placed at the East End of the Garden of Eden,
with a flaming Sword; Genesis 3.24. Exodus 25. 1 Kings 1.6. Ezekiel 10. Psalm. 104.4
and their Figures were appointed to be placed over the Mercy-Seat, in the
Tabernacle and Temple.

2. Seraphims, the Angels or Zeal. Their Name is from an Hebrew Word, which
signifies to burn, or burning, according to that of the Psalms, He makes his
Ministers a Flame of Fire.

3. Thrones, which are Royal Seats of Kings and Monarchs, in their Magnificence
and Glory.

4. Dominions, or Lordships. Col. 1.16.


5. Principalities, connoting special and peculiar Jurisdiction.

6. Powers, such as have Right to execute Authority by God's appointment, and
not by his Permission only.

7. Mighties. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.


8. Archangels.

9. Angels, etc.

Others account but seven Orders of Angels, and some but three. The holy
Scripture does not fully open and unfold the Mystery of Angels to us in this
respect, therefore it is good for us (as I said before) not to be wise above
what is written; tho no doubt but there is a most excellent Order amongst them.
And probably there are different Ranks and Degrees of them, and yet all are in
subjection to our Lord Jesus Christ, who is their Prince, and Supreme Head,
whom they all reverence, worship, and adore.

III. An Host or Army is raised to make War, and fight under the Banner of
their Prince and Sovereign, and many times do dreadful Execution, and make
great Desolation in the Earth. III. The holy Angels, God's mighty Host, are
employed to fight his Battles, and at his Command to fall upon his Enemies,
when all Terms of Peace and Reconciliation are rejected, and Sinners are grown
incorrigible, etc. What fearful Execution and Desolation have they made in the
World, when they have had Commission from the Almighty! Was it not this Host
that came against Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, Genesis 19 13 2
Kings 19 35.
We will destroy this Place. One of these Soldiers destroyed no less than an
hundred fourscore and five thousand Men in the Camp of the Assyrians. What
cause have the Enemies of the Church to tremble, when they consider what a
mighty and powerful Army is raised, and always in readiness at God's Command to
fall upon them! What is the Power of the proudest Monarch here below, when
compared to the Strength of the Lord's Host, or Christ's heavenly Army! IV. An
Host or great Army sometimes breaks in upon a People that are secure, utterly
destroying and spoiling them on a sudden. IV. The Angels of God come upon the
wicked Enemies of Jesus Christ, and his Church, sometimes on a sudden; in one
Night was that great Host of the Assyrians destroyed. Hab. 3.16.
When he comes up unto the People, he will invade them with his Troops. V. An
Host or mighty Army has many slaughtering Weapons; if one does not Execution,
another will. V. So the Angels of God have many slaughtering Weapons, or Ways
to dedestroy, sometimes by Famine, Ezekiel. 9.2.
sometimes by Plague, sometimes by the Sword, and sometimes make use of all
these three together, against a People that God resolves utterly to destroy.
VI. An Host, or victorious Army, sometimes meet with great Opposition, and are
fiercely engaged by stout and sturdy Enemies, that will not quickly yield, tho
at last they are forced to fly, being vanquished. VI. The holy Angels of God
are sometimes opposed by evil Angels, who are fierce, sturdy, and cruel Enemies
to them. And there was War in Heaven: Michael, Rev. 12.7.
and his Angels, fought against the Dragon, And the Dragon fought, and his
Angels, and prevailed not, etc. Metaphor. Disparity. AN earthly Host or Army,
tho never so victorious at other times, may yet meet with their Match, nay, be
sometimes worsted. THe Lord's Host was never worsted. Tho the evil Angels are
mighty in Power, and have been oftentimes too hard for the Saints; yet they are
not able to stand before the holy Angels of God. II. Soldiers of an earthly
Host are mortal Men, and may be put to the Sword, or lose their Lives by the
hands of their Enemies. II. The Angels of God are immortal Spirits, and cannot
sustain the least Hurt or Wound, much less be slain, in any Wars they are
engaged in against their Enemies.

Inferences.
WHat Comfort may this administer to the Godly! May I not say, with the
Prophet, Fear not; for they that be with us, are more than they that be with
them. 2 Kings 6.16.


2. And as it affords Comfort to the Saints, it may serve to terrify Sinners,
and such especially as are Persecutors of the Church of God. How sad is their
Condition, considering who they make War against! Can they stand before the
terrible God? God is their Enemy, Christ is their Enemy, and the Angels of
Heaven are against them, and their Enemies likewise.

3. Bless God, you that are in Covenant with him, for the sake of these Helpers.

4. This shows us also what great Glory is conferred upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, our blessed Mediator; He is the Head and chief Leader of all the
glorious Angels; they are all at his Command, and ready to engage in his Wars;
if he does but speak the Word, they come with slaughtering Weapons in their
hands, Ezekiel. 9.2.
to execute his Wrath and Displeasure upon the World.

The Holy Angels compared to the Faces of a Man, of a Lion, of an Ox, and of an
Eagle.
Ezekiel. 1.6.10. And every one had four Faces, etc. (that is, every one of the
living Creatures or Angels which the Prophet saw in the Vision.)
FOur particular Angels, as some conceive, which were chief over the rest of
the whole Host of Angels. Others, upon better Reason, rather understand it
relates to the four Parts of the World, East, West, North, and South; i. e. the
Work of Angels laid out in all those Parts. See Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel, page
85.

Observe. 1. God employeth glorious intelligent Creatures in his Service, in the
Ways and Workings of his Power and Providence in the World.

Observe. 2. That Angels are in all Quarters of the Earth, taking notice of Men's
Works and Ways; they perceive what is done in every Place, by the Just, and by
the Unjust. The Consideration of which should make us carry our selves wisely
and holily at all times, and in all Places.

And every one had four Faces, 1. The Face of a Man. 2. The Face of a Lion. 3.
The Face of an Ox. 4. The Face of an Eagle.


In some Pictures (says Reverend Greenhill) you may see several Faces so
drawn, that which way soever you look, a several Face is presented: So here,
before was the Face of a Man, behind the Face of a Lion, on the right side the
Face of an Ox, and on the left side the Face of an Eagle. There is not a Face,
but is compared to the Face of some principal Creature. Man is the chief of all
the rest, a Lion is the King of wild Beasts, the Ox is the chief of the tame
Ones, and the Eagle is the chief of the Birds. To these distinctly.

I. The Face of a Man.
Metaphor. Parallel THe Face of a Man notes Understanding, and the Excellency
of Reason, by which all human Actions are managed. ANgels have great Knowledge
and Understanding. By their Likeness unto Man, is laid before us the
Rationality, Knowledge, and Understanding of Angels. They are not ignorant
Creatures, but ipsae Intelligentiae, the most understanding Creatures in Heaven
and Earth. Greenhill.
The Woman of Tekoah said to David, He was wise according to the Wisdom of an
Angel of God, to know all things that are upon the Earth: That is, he was very
wise, 2 Samuel 14.20.
as Angels are, to search out Understanding, and discover things. Therefore
Jerome thinks they are called Cherubims, from their much Knowledge; Cherubims, as
it were, Rabbis, and Teachers of others. And this Office some Angels have
done. Gabriel, make this Man understand the Vision. Dan. 8.16.
I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy People in the latter
Day. Angels (says one) are good Philosophers, they know the Principles,
Causes, Effects, Life, Motion, and Death of natural things; they are great
Statists, and know the Affairs of Kingdoms. Dan. 10.13. says Gabriel, I
remained with the Kings of Persia, etc. They are said to be full of Eyes before
and behind, because they see what is past, and what is to come. Besides, they
have much revealed to them by God, by Christ, nay, and understand many things
by the Church, as concerning the Mysteries of the Gospel; so Ephesians. 3.10. 2 Pet.
1.12. Which things the Angels desire (says Peter) to look into, (...), the
Word notes, bowing down to pry heedfully into a thing. Cherubims were made
looking down toward the Mercy-Seat; so here, Angels look into the things of
Christ, (as it was there figured forth) in whom are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. Col. 2.3.
They have much experimental Knowledge, arising from things done daily in the
World, and in the Church; Angels love to be at the Congregation, to meet the
Saints; they understand partly by their Essence, and partly by Species
communicated to their Understandings, as to ours, etc. II. The Face of a Man
has much Awe and Majesty in it; nothing (as is observed by some Naturalists)
carries more Terror in it to sensitive Creatures, than the Face of a Man. II.
Angels are very Majestical Creatures; many have been greatly terrified and
astonished at the sight of them. How was Manoah's Wife, Samson's Mother, amazed
at the sight of the Angel that appeared to her. Judge. 13.6
Then the Woman told her Husband, saying, A Man of God came unto me, and his
Countenance was like the Countenance of an Angel of God, very terrible, etc.
III. The Face of a Man notes human Affections, as Mr. Greenhill observes. III.
Angels are of a loving Countenance, and most careful of Men; they have most
dear Affections to those they are sent to minister unto. IV. The Face of a Man
denotes Beauty. How amiable and lovely are some Faces of mortal Creatures to
look upon! It Is the Seat (as I may say) of human Beauty. IV. Angels are very
beautiful and lovely to behold; tho they have (says Mr. Caryl) no visible
bodily Beauty, yet their Beauty far exceeds the Beauty of Mortals. See
Morning-Stars.

II. The Face of a Lion.
A Lion is a Creature of great Strength, Prove. 30.30.
the strongest amongst Beasts, as was said before; he turns not away for any.
What is stronger than a Lion? Judge. 14.18.
said the Interpreters of Samson's Riddle. Angels are mighty in Strength. Rev.
18 21.
An Angel can hinder the blowing of the Wind, stop the Mouths of Lions, break
Iron Chains, open Prison Doors, and make Bars and Doors of Brass to fly. Hence
they are called mighty Angels. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7
Who can stand before the Angels of God!

III. The Face of an Ox.
I. An Ox accustomed to the Yoke is very tractable, not stubborn, kicking and
flying, like as untamed Heifers are. Ephraim is an Heifer that is taught, and
loves to tread out the Corn. An Heifer taught, delighting in her Work, does it
willingly. I. Psalm. 103.20.
Angels do the Work of God willingly, with much delight; they hearken to the
Voice of his Word, they set about their Work with much Cheerfulness, they are
very obsequious to God's Commands. If he says, Go, smite Herod for his Pride,
Balaam for his Covetousness, David for his vain Glory, Senacherib for his
Blasphemy, and Sodom for its Uncleanness, presently they go. II. An Ox does
faithful Service. Horses often deceive Persons in their Service, and throw
their Riders; but Oxen, either in plowing or carrying Burdens, fail not, nor
deceive their Owners. II. Angels are faithful in their Ministrations, they fail
not in the least Particular. Rev. 22.8, 9.
The Angel would not let John worship him. The Angel would not suffer Lot to
linger in Sodom. They never betrayed their Trust, as some of the Saints have
done. III. An Ox is a very patient and laborious Creature. They labor hard,
and carry heavy Burdens; and yet tho never such hard Service be put upon them,
they quietly and with much patience bear it, and never seem to complain. III.
Angels are patient in their Ministration, tho they meet with much Opposition.
Dan. 10.3.
The Prince of Persia (says Gabriel) withstood me one and twenty days, etc. In
the midst of all Opposition, whether from Men or Devils, and great Services,
they are not at all impatient; tho their Work never end, Rev. 4.8. yet they
never complain. IV. Oxen are very useful Creatures; much Increase was brought
in by them. No Creature (says my Author) is more useful to the Support of a
Family, Greenhill.
than the Ox; for of old all the Plowing was done by Oxen. See 2 Kings 19.19.
Job had Oxen plowing in the Field, he had five hundred Yoke of Oxen, Job 1.3.
no mention being made of Horses. There was a severe Law made against those
that stole an Ox, Exodus 22.1. David makes it one part of the Happiness of a
Commonwealth, that the Oxen are strong to labor. IV. Angels are very useful
Creatures; they are useful to God, they continually go on his Errands, execute
his Judgments at the Command of his Mouth. They were useful to Christ in the
Days of his Flesh; Luke 2.9, 10, 11.
they proclaimed the joyful Tidings of his Nativity, had the charge of him in
his Humiliation, whilst his Conflict remained with the evil Angels; they
ministered to him in his Temptations, and when he was in his bloody Agony; they
declared and made known his Resurrection, He is not here, he is risen. Mat.
26.6.
They witnessed to his Ascension, and to his second Coming; Ye Men of Galilee,
Acts 1.10, 11.
why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? The same Jesus which is taken from you
into Heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into Heaven. They shall come
with him, when he comes the second time, without Sin, unto Salvation: He shall
come in the Glory of his Father, with all his holy Angels. They shall attend
him on the Throne of Judgment, and as Officers execute his righteous Sentence,
viz. seize all condemned Sinners, and cast them into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, etc. Angels are useful to the Saints. We little think what great
Good we receive by the Ministration of Angels. See Watchers.

Inferences.
This should instruct us, we should be like Angels in many respects.

1. when God commands, or calls upon us to do any Service or Duty, how ready
ought we to be to do it! even say, with Samuel, Here am I, speak Lord, what
thou command I will do it.

2. It should teach us to be faithful to the Lord, as the holy Angels are.

3. To be patient under Burdens, Reproaches, and all the Oppositions we meet
with.

4. To be serviceable to God, and to one another, in the Places and Stations
wherein God has set us, etc. Angels in all they do, seek the Glory of God, and
the Profit and great Good of the Saints; let us in this imitate them.

III. The Face of an Eagle.
Metaphor. Parallel. I. An Eagle has a mighty quick Sight; her Eyes behold
afar off; from the Top of Rocks, out of Clouds, they are said to behold Fishes
swimming in the Sea. So strong is the Sight of an Eagle, that she can a long
time behold the Sun with open and steadfast Eyes. I. Angels are quick-sighted;
they, as you hear, have Eyes before and behind, as if they were all Eye; which
notes the Excellency of their Sight, and Knowledge of things. They soar aloft,
stand before God; they are said to behold the Face of God: Mat. 18.10
Their Angels always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven. 2 Samuel
1.23.
II. Eagles are swift in their Flight. Naturalists tell us, no Bird flies more
swiftly than the Eagle. II. Angels are swift Creatures; their Agility, Speed,
and Swiftness is extraordinary, moving (says one) like Lightning, from one end
of Heaven to the other; compared therefore to a Flame of Fire, Heb. 1.7.
and said from hence also to have Wings with which they fly, Isa. 6. Their
Quickness or Agility in Motion proceeds from their spiritual Nature, which is
not subject to Weariness; they cannot be hindered by any corporeal Substance;
they can pass over and through all Impediments. And besides this, their Agility
is much helped forward by their Promptitude and Readiness, Propensity and Zeal,
to dispatch their Errand and Ministry upon which they are employed. It Is not
here (says Ayston) Timor, but, Amor addidit alas. Their Swiftness is very
necessary, says Clark: 1. Because of the vast distance between Heaven and
Earth, betwixt which they often pass and repass. 2. Because many of the Saints,
whose Necessity requires present Relief, live far asunder. 3. Because the
Devils are swift to do Mischief, therefore they are swift to defend, succor,
and do us good. III. Eagles are fresh and lively always; Age and Sickness works
not upon them, as upon other Birds. The Eagle in her Age (says a great Writer)
is useful. Pliny says, they never die with Age, nor Sickness, but by Hunger;
her upper Bill grows so much over the under, that she cannot open her Mouth
to take in Sustenance, and so dies. Her Age is said to be renewed by often
changing of her Feathers. III. Angels never grow old, they are always strong
and lively, they know no Sickness, their Service does not wear them out. The
Cherubims before the Mercy-Seat, which represented the Angels, were without
Beards, to show their Vigor, Vivacity, and Youthfulness. Men soon decay, their
Strength and Activity many times on a sudden is gone. Sin has brought this
upon us; if Man had not sinned, he had never decayed, but retained an immortal
Vivacity: Angels sinned not, and so retain their first Liveliness.

Inferences.
FIrst; From hence we may infer, that Angels are fit for public and great
Service. They have four Faces, a Man's, a Lion's, an Ox's, and an Eagle's;
which show they have all that is requisite to great Undertakings. They have
Wisdom to consult, to contrive and manage the Affairs of the World
prudentially; they have the Strength of a Lion, to execute; they have the
Willingness and Faithfulness of the Ox, to rejoice the Heart of the Commander,
and Patience to undergo the Difficulties of their Work, and Usefulness of the
Public; they are quick-sighted, to discern and prevent the Designs of Enemies,
and speedily to dispatch much in a little time, and that with cheerfulness.
This is meant by their four Faces; which notes their Perfection, and Fitness
for Service in all Parts of the World; in regard of which they are said to have
one Face before, and another behind, and one on each side. God sets forth their
Serviceableness by these Creatures, both rational and irrational; they have the
Shapes of Men, Birds, and Beasts.

Secondly; That suitable Persons ought to be employed in public and great
Service. God employs Angels in the Government of the World, who are wise,
trusty, strong, and speedy; and you know what Men God calls for in the State,
Exodus 18.21. viz. Such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating Covetousness; and in
the Church, 1 Pet. 5. Bishops must not lord it over God's Clergy. They are not
Lords, but Servants: they ought not like Princes, to dwell in stately Palaces,
in Pride and Idleness; but daily to study, and preach God's holy Word, and
labor in God's Harvest, like as an Ox is faithful and laborious to his Owner;
not instead of Preaching, and striving to build up God's House, plot and
contrive Ways to pull it down; and instead of feeding, undo and ruin such as
are faithful in the Land.

Thirdly; Angels are noble and glorious Creatures, and yet disdain not to do
Service to them that are far beneath themselves. Man at first, when in his
Glory, was but a little lower than the Angels; but since he sinned, he is
degraded, and fallen as low as Hell; he has a vile Body, a defiled Conscience,
and a polluted Soul: yet the Angels, that are styled Gods, Holy Ones, Elect,
Psalm. 8.5.
that are of the Privy Council of Heaven, these blessed Creatures are not
ashamed to serve and wait upon us, tho we have the scent of the Earth and Hell
about us, and do often grieve and offend them with our Miscarriages; yet they
despise us not, but cheerfully minister unto us. What Pride is it then in Men,
that have Parts, Places, Honor, Greatness, Grace, etc. not to stoop to those
that are their Inferiors! They have not more Worth in them than an Angel, and
Angels condescend to serve us; Romans 12.16.
therefore let us not mind high things, but condescend to Men of low Estate,
and not be wise in our own Conceit.

Fourthly; There is one thing more remarkable touching their Faces, viz. the
Faces were stretched upward; so Montanus, and others read it, They looked up to
him that sat upon the Throne, which was Christ. The Cherubim's Faces, Exodus
25.20, 21. were toward the Mercy-Seat.

Fifthly; Observe, all Creatures depend upon the Lord Jesus Christ. These
Angels have the Face of Men, Lions, Oxen, Eagles, and look up to him. If there
were nothing in it but this, viz. Angels in their own Nature look up to Him, it
might convince us, that all inferior Creatures do depend upon Him, as well as
those noble Ones. But when they come in with the Faces of other Creatures
looking up, it is a clear Evidence that all depend upon Christ. By him were all
things created, Col. 1.16, 17.
that are in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible, whether Thrones, or
Dominions, Principalities, or Powers. All things were created by him, and for
him, and by him all things consist.

Sixthly; We are to learn from hence to be heavenly-minded, with the holy
Angels, to look up.

The Holy Angels compared to the Wind, and to Flaming-Fire.
Psalm. 104.4. -- Makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming Fire.

Heb. 1.7. And of the Angels he says, Who makes his Angels Spirits, and his
Ministers a Flame of Fire.


SOme of the modern Jews deny there is any mention made of Angels, in Psalm.
104.4. affirming, that the Subject the Psalmist treats of, are the Winds, with
Thunder and Lightning, which God employs as his Messengers and Ministers, to do
his Will and Pleasure. But that the Psalmist means the Angels, is evident from
the Design and Scope of the Words.

The Consent of the ancient Jews lies against the Sentiments of the modern;
both the old Translations, either made or embraced by them, expressly refer the
Words unto Angels; On Heb. 1.
so (Dr. Owen observes) do the Seventy; and so does the Targum, thus rendering
the Place: Who makes his Messengers or Angels swift as Spirits, and his
Ministers strong or powerful as a flaming Fire. The Supply of the Note of
Similitude makes it evident that they understand the Text of Angels, and not of
Winds; and of making Angels as Spirits, and not of making Winds to be Angels or
Messengers, which is inconsistent with their Words.

The Word (...) does usually denote the Angels themselves, and no reason can be
given why it should not do so in this place. The Apostle puts it out of doubt
positively, saying, And of the Angels he says, etc. That the Apostle speaks
not here of the Nature and Essence of Angels, but their Dignity, Honor and
Employment, is evident; upon which account (says our Reverend Author) he
prefers the Lord Jesus Christ before them.

Observe. God sends his Angels like the Winds, or like a Flame of Fire.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Wind is invisible, who can see it? ANgels are
invisible Spirits; we are daily attended upon by them, but see them not. II.
The Wind blows at God's Command; he is said to hold the Wind in his Fist. II.
Angels go at God's Command, He has them at his Beck. Psalm. 103.20.
III. The Wind is quick, piercing, and powerful in its Operation, the Cause of
many gracious Effects, tho sometimes sent as a Judgment. III. Angels are quick,
agil, and powerful in their Working; and many great and glorious Blessings
Saints receive from their Ministration, tho sometimes sent as a Scourge to
Nations, and particular Persons, to execute God's Displeasure, as on Sodom,
etc.

Flaming-Fire.
I. A flaming Fire is of a burning quality. I. Seraphims signify Burning,
noting that mighty Zeal they are attended with, in doing God's Will. II. A
flaming Fire is of a consuming, destroying, and devouring Nature. II. So have
the Angels of God been to many of God's implacable Enemies, as has been
hinted. III. A Flaming Fire is a good Defense in a howling Wilderness,
especially if it be round about such as dwell therein. III. The Angels of God
are a glorious Defense to the Church, whilst in the Wilderness of this World,
where they are daily surrounded by wicked Men, who are compared unto Beasts of
Prey. Psalm. 34.7.
The Angels of God encamp round about them that fear him, etc.

Inferences.
THis may comfort the Godly, who dwell among blood-thirsty Enemies; they are
surrounded with a Flame of Fire, viz. the holy Angels of God.

2. Let ungodly Ones tremble; can they stand before a flaming Fire, and not be
consumed? God can soon send his Angels to destroy them.

3. It should also stir up Believers to act with much Zeal and Fervency in the
Work and Service of God. The Angels for Zeal and Agility are like a Flame of
Fire. We should do the Will of God on Earth, as the Angels of God do it in
Heaven.

The Holy Angels compared to Horses.
2 Kings 6.17. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee open his Eyes:
And the Lord opened the Eyes of the young Man, and he saw; and behold, the
Mountains were full of Horses, and Chariots of Fire, round about Elisha.

Zech. 1.8. I saw by night, and behold a Man riding upon a red Horse, and he
stood among the Myrtle-Trees that were in the bottom, and behind him were three
red Horses, speckled, and white.


BY these Horses all Expositors understand the holy Angels of God are intended.
They are compared to Horses and Chariots of Fire, also to Horses of diverse
Colors. These things seem very dark and mysterious.

1. We shall briefly (however) hint a few things why they may be compared to
Horses.

II. Why to Horses and Chariots of Fire.

III. Why to red, speckled, and white Horses.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Horse is a strong, and a very courageous and fearless
Creature; which God himself elegantly sets forth, Job 39. v. 19, to 24. Have
thou given the Horse his Strength? have thou clothed his Neck with Thunder?
Can thou make him afraid? The Glory of his Nostrils is terrible. He rejoices
in his Strength. He goes on to meet the armed Man. He mocketh at Fear, and is
not affrighted; neither turns he back from the Sword, etc. ANgels are mighty
in Strength. One of them (says an eminent Writer) is stronger than all the
World. They are called mighty Angels, or God's mighty Ones, Angels of his
Strength. They are courageous, and void of Fear; their Necks may be said to be
clothed with Thunder; they turn their Backs for none. They fear not the
glittering Spear, nor the Shield. Who is able to engage or encounter with one
of the glorious Seraphims, or Cherubims? Are any of the Sons of the Mighty a
Match for him? What was Alexander, or Julius Caesar, or all the mighty
Champions that ever were, to the Angels of Heaven! II. The Horse is a very
useful Creature, useful to carry Burdens, and draw the Chariots of Princes;
useful to ride on, useful for War, etc. II. Angels are exceeding useful. [See
Oxen.] They bear up the Saints; they help, support, and carry them along in
their Journey to their everlasting Home; they carry their Souls into Abraham's
Bosom: The Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels, etc. The Chariots and
Horses of Fire, that parted the two Worthies, 2 Kings 2.11, 12.
(those Princes of the Prophets) and carried one of them to Heaven, were the
Blessed Angels of God.

II. They are compared to Horses and Chariots of Fire, to show how fierce,
agil, and swift they are in their Motion, and how destructive and amazing to
their Enemies.

III. They are set out by red, speckled, and white Horses, to note the
different Work and Office they are set about, whilst they are employed in the
Workings of Providence, in governing the World.

1. Red, signifies the Sufferings of the Church, together with the Blood and
Slaughter, or dreadful Judgments, that Jesus Christ has to execute on the
World by the Ministration of Angels, or a severe Dispensation.

2. Speckled, shows a mixed State or Dispensation of God's Judgments mixed with
Mercy.

3. White, notes Peace and Prosperity to the Saints, and the whole World, which
will be produced by the Providence of God, after the bloody and mixed State of
the Church is gone.

The Soul of Man compared to a Ship.
Heb. 6.19. Which Hope we have as the Anchor of the Soul, etc.
HEre observe two Doctrines; one implied, the other expressed.

Doct. 1. The Soul of a Believer (in the Judgment of some Divines) is and may
fitly be compared to a Ship.

Doct. 2. Hope, that noble and precious Grace of the Spirit, is and may fitly
be compared to an Anchor.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Ship is a rare and curious Piece of Workmanship; it
shows forth the excellent Wit and Invention of Man. THe Soul of a Believer is a
very rare and curious Piece of God's Workmanship. The Body and Face of a Man
does magnify the Wisdom and Glory of the Creator; but what is the Body without
the Soul? it is but the Cabinet without the Jewel. II. A Ship is a very costly
thing; a little will not build, rigg, and fit out a Ship to Sea, especially if
it be designed for a long and profitable Voyage, as to the East Indies, or the
like. II. The Soul of a Believer is a very costly and chargeable thing; God
has parted with much Treasure in building, 1 Pet. 1.18.
or rather rebuilding and fitting of it out, to sail through the Ocean of this
World, to the Haven of eternal Happiness; has parted with his Son, with his
Spirit, his Grace, his Gospel, etc. III. Some Ships are built for noble and
eminent Service, and are very profitable to the Owners. III. The Charge that
God has been at in building and rebuilding the Soul of a Believer, is for
renowned and eminent Service, viz. the Glory of God, and everlasting Happiness.
IV. He that builds and owns a Ship, does usually commit the Care and Charge of
her to another, who is to sail in her. IV. So does God Almighty commit the
Charge and Care of our Souls to us. We are employed but as Stewards, Deuteronomy. 4 9.
Prove. 4.23.
or Deputy-Owners, and must be accountable to God, if our Souls are lost. V. A
gallant Ship that is bound for India, or for some noble and eminent Service, is
richly fraighted, has diverse rare Commodities in her, etc. V. So the Soul of a
Believer, that it may make a blessed and glorious Voyage, is most richly stored
and fraighted with the precious Gifts and Graces of God's holy Spirit, etc. VI.
A Ship ought to have a good Bottom, or the Danger is very great. Whatever she
seems to be above Deck, tho never so stately and lovely to look upon; yet if
her Bottom be naught and defective, she will never make the Voyage. VI. So
ought the Soul of a Christian to have a good Foundation. If not built upon
Christ, if not sincere and firm at Heart, what Profession he may make, tho
never so glorious, will prove fruitless and vain, the Soul is in danger, and
will for ever unavoidably be lost. VII. A Ship cannot sail without Wind or
Tide. VII. The Soul of a Believer cannot sail Heavenwards in any Service, Duty,
or Suffering, without the sweet Movings and Gales of God's Spirit. VIII. A Ship
ought to have a wise and skilful Pilot. VIII. So ought the Soul of a Believer;
for if it has not Christ to guide and steer its Course for it, it is
impossible to escape the Danger of the Sea of Trouble and Temptation. IX. A
Ship needs often to be repaired, being very subject to spring a Leak. IX. So
does the Soul of a Christian need often to be repaired by Prayer and
Repentance, or else it will fall under sad and fearful Decays. Heb. 2.1.
The Soul is like pared to a leaking Vessel. X. A Ship is tossed upon the rough
and tempestuous Waves, and has its Ups and Downs, and seldom has rest or
quiet, till she has made the Voyage. X. Thus it is with the Soul; it is often
tossed upon the boisterous and tempestuous Seas of Temptation, sometimes
transported up to Heaven, Psalm. 107. v. 23, to 28.
and then by and by down again to the Depths, and all the Billows of God's
Wrath seem to run over it. XI. A Ship is in danger of being lost, and that many
ways, viz. by Rocks, by Sands, by the raging Waves, and by springing of a Leak,
etc. XI. The Soul also is in great danger. Never was Ship in more eminent
hazard than the Soul of a Christian, and that many ways, Zech. 4.7.
viz. by the Rocks and Mountains of great Opposition, the Sands of Despair, and
raging Waves of Persecution, besides the Leaks occasioned by indwelling Sin,
etc. XII. A Ship has a Compass by which she is steered from place to place,
without which no Man can or dares go to Sea. XII. So likewise the Soul must
have a Compass, unto which we are with care and diligence to look, and to be
well-skilled in all the Points thereof, viz. the Word and Spirit of God, 2 Pet.
2.19. XIII. A Ship is exposed to great Danger of being robbed (by Pirates) of
all her Treasure. XIII. So is the Soul of a Believer by that cursed Pirate
Satan, who sometimes transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and to trapan
the Soul, 2 Cor. 11.15.
puts out false Colors; pretends himself a Friend, when his whole Design is
Blood and Slaughter, and treacherously to ruin and spoil the Soul. 1 Pet. 2.1^.
The Flesh is another secret Sea-Thief, and the World; yea, and Sin is as arch
a Pirat as any. XIV. A Ship often meets with sudden Storms; and a good Mariner
does not only look for them, but also provide and prepare for them. XIV. So
must the Soul expect to meet with a dreadful Tempest or Hurricane. The Winds
will rise, and a Storm will come upon the Ship where Christ is. David was aware
of these Dangers, Psalm. 55.8.
and saw how to prevent and escape sinking. XV. It Is a rare thing to see a Ship
sail along before a fresh and prosperous Gale. XV. It Is a rare and lovely thing
to see a Soul carried swiftly along in the Work and Service of God, being under
the powerful Influences, a fresh and prosperous Gale or Wind of the Spirit.
XVI. A Ship is sometimes becalmed. XVI. So (alas!) it is too often with the
Soul of a poor Christian. XVII. It Is a Wonder to see a Ship to live in a
tempestuous and boisterous Sea. XVII. It Is a Wonder of Mercy to see how the
Soul of a Saint should live, be preserved, and abide with its Head above Water,
in such a disquiet and tempestuous World as this is. XVIII. Some Ships suffer
Shipwreck, are lost, and sink down to the bottom. XVIII. So does the Soul of
many a Professor, that sets out with much seeming Hopes of Heaven, suffer
spiritual Shipwreck, and sink down to Hell. 1 Timothy 1.19.
XIX. A Ship must be well looked to, and kept very clean within and without, or
she will not sail with any speed. XIX. So must the Soul be washed, and kept
exceeding clean, within as well as without, or it will go but slowly or heavily
toward the Haven, of future Happiness, the Mire and Clay, or Scum and Filth of
this World, is so apt to obstruct its way, as it passes Heavenward. XX. A Ship
has its Anchor, and if in the midst of a Storm it be rightly cast, and takes
good hold, the Ship is safe. XX. The Soul has its Anchor, Hope. Which Hope we
have as the Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast. Heb. 6.19.
This Anchor being rightly cast upwards, within the Vail, in the midst of the
greatest Danger, the Soul is safe. Metaphor. Disparity. A Ship is a lifeless
thing built of Timber, etc. by Man. THe Soul of Man is a Spirit created by the
Almighty: Zech. 12.1
He has formed the Spirit of Man within him. II. A Ship is a thing visible to
corporeal Eyes. II. The Soul of Man is an invisible Substance, i. e. it cannot
be seen with fleshly Eyes. III. A Ship may utterly be destroyed, nay, and
cannot continue long. III. The Soul of Man cannot lose its Being; that will
live when the Body is dead, either in Joy or Misery; it can never be destroyed,
so as to die, Mat. 10.28.
and lose its being, or suffer annihilation. IV. A Man that has a Ship, may
lose it, yet may not be undone; he may have his Loss repaired, and may get
another Ship better than the former. IV. That Man that loses his Soul is undone
for ever. No Man has more than one Soul, and he can have no more; that being
cast away, he is eternally ruined, there is no reparation for him, no making up
his Loss. V. A Ship, tho it has never so good a Pilot, may miscarry, and be
cast away, such Winds and Storms may arise, or by means of unknown Rocks,
Sands, and Shoals it may hit upon. V. The Soul of a Believer that has Christ
for its Pilot cannot miscarry; the Sea and Winds obey him; he makes the Storm a
Calm, so that the proud Waves are still; he will carry it through all the
Dangers it meets with, Psalm. 107.28, 29, 30.
and bring it to its desired Haven.

Inferences.
IS the Soul fitly compared to a Ship, that passes through the troublesome
Ocean, or tempestuous Seas? Then this shows us, that the Life of a Christian is
attended with many Difficulties, and eminent Dangers, and that we must expect
to meet with sudden Storms in our passage to our eternal Port. Every Believer
must resolve to sail through the Straits Mouth, and expect to meet with those
cursed Algerines, those mortal Enemies of Christians, I mean the Spirits of
Darkness, if ever he would arrive at the Holy Land.

II. Let it be the Care and Endeavor of every Man and Woman, to set out in
this Voyage for Eternity, whilst the Wind of the Spirit blows. My Spirit (says
God) shall not always strive with Man.

III. Caution. And let each Man from hence take heed of his Soul, this
Spiritual Ship, lest it be lost. He is but entrusted with it, and must give an
account to the great Owner. Besides, the Soul is of very great Worth, far
beyond all the Ships that sail on the Ocean; nay, what Value may be compared to
the Soul of Man, the Excellency of which we shall briefly hint here, to caution
all to take heed.

1. It is capable of Divine Meditation and Contemplation, by which means we
come to know there is a God. For the invisible things of Him, Romans 1.20
from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, etc. I am fearfully
and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy Works; Psalm. 139.14.
and that my Soul knows right well. By prying into the Nature and Glory of
the Work, the Soul finds out the Being, Nature, and Glory of the Workman.

2. It Is capable of Divine Inspiration. But there is a Spirit in Man, Job 32.8.
and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him Understanding. Also of Comfort
and Delight, and that when Multitudes of Thoughts are or would be disturbing
the Mind.

3. It Is capable of Divine Impression, to receive the Image of God, Psalm. 94 1^
as it is rebuilt in Christ Jesus.

4. It Is capable of Divine Union and Communion with God.

5. Nothing save God himself can satisfy it. The Heathen by this found out the
Excellency of the Soul.

6. The Soul must needs be excellent, if we consider the Excellency of the
Body, which is but the House or Tabernacle for the Soul. If the Cabinet be of
so great a value, and so curiously wrought; then of what transcendent Value
must the Jewel be!

7. The Price paid for it was no less than the precious Blood of Christ, Psalm
49.8, 9.
the Redemption of the Soul is therefore precious; its Value and Excellency
from hence is beyond comparison.

8. The Robes it wears are a Demonstration of its great Worth and Excellency.
O what Cost and Charge is God at, (to speak with a holy Reverence) in clothing
and adorning of it! He puts on Robes of Righteousness, and Garments of
Salvation, and adorns it with the Ornaments of Grace, and Divine Virtue.

9. From the Charge given us to look to it, and keep it: Only take heed to,
Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and keep thy Soul diligently.

10. From Satan's hunting after it, to destroy it.

11. That it is exceeding excellent, appears, in that the Martyrs parted with
all, rather than they would wrong, defile, and lose it for ever.

12. It is more worth than all the World: Mat. 16.26.
What shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

13. It Is immortal; it cannot die, nor be annihilated. Mat 10.28
Fear not them that kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul.

The Soul of Man compared to a Candle.
Prove. 20.27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord.
Metaphor. Parallel. A Candle is made to give Light unto Men in the Night. THe
Spirit of Man, is formed by the Lord, to give Light unto him whilst he lives in
the Night of this World. II. A Candle must be lighted, or receive Light from
some other Light, or it will light no Man. II. The Spirit of Man receives its
Light from God, who is called Light. There is a Spirit in Man, Job 32.8.
and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him Understanding. III. A Candle is
but a small Light, in comparison of the Light of the Sun; it gives Light but a
little way, and discovers things but darkly. III. The Spirit of Man is but a
small Light, in comparison of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, and the Light of
the glorious Gospel, that discovers those things that the Light of natural
Conscience will not.

1. The Spirit of Man will discover unto him, by the help of the visible
Creation, Romans 1.20
that there is a God that made the World; but it cannot discover that there is
a Redeemer, who died to save the World, which the Gospel does.

2. The Spirit of Man will discover Man's Duty in Morals, to do as he would be
done unto; but it cannot teach him in all things his Duty toward God, viz. his
Divine Laws and Institutions, and how he ought to be worshipped.

3. The Spirit of Man will convince him of some Sins, but it will not convince
him of Sin, because he believes not in Jesus Christ; for this the Spirit of
Truth, and glorious Gospel only convince Men and Women of.

4. The Spirit of Man discovers to him that he must die; but it cannot discover
to him, without the Light of the written Word, a Resurrection.

IV. A Candle is oftentimes put out. IV. So is the Light or Candle of the
Wicked. God in a way of Judgment, when Men have abused their Light and Knowledge
they have had of Him, gives them up to vile Affections, as he did the
Gentiles, so that they sin without control; Conscience is seared, and asleep
as it were, and reproves them no more. The Candle of the Wicked shall be put
out. Prove. 24.20.


Inferences.
THis reproves those that say, The Light which is in every Man that comes into
the World, is God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit; whereas it is evident it is
Man's Spirit, and called but the Candle of the Lord, and in it self no more
than the Light of Man's natural Conscience.

II. It reproves them also for saying, It is sufficient to make known or
discover unto Men all things that are necessary to Salvation; and that they
should have known by the Light within, all things which the Holy Scriptures
declare of Christ, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, if the Scriptures had never
been written. Which is easily detected; (1.) By considering of that great
Darkness, that is in those Heathen Nations and People that have not the written
Word of God, concerning Christ and Salvation; for tho they have the Light of
this Candle, viz. the Light of their own natural Consciences, yet know nothing
of Christ, who was born of the Blessed Virgin, nor of his Death and
Resurrection. (2.) By considering the absolute Necessity there is of
Gospel-Revelation, and Ministration, to make known to Men those glorious
Mysteries, according as it is held forth in diverse places of Scripture; for if
Man's chief and only Teacher were within him, what need was there for Christ to
ordain and send forth his Apostles and Ministers, to preach the Gospel to the
World? and why is Faith said to come by hearing the Word preached. (3.) They
are disproved by this, viz. they cannot make known any of those other things
which Christ did, that were not written.

III. From hence we may perceive what the Substance is, which the Light of
Man's Spirit will do; it searches all the inward Parts of the Belly, i. e.
makes known the very Thoughts and Intentions of the Heart unto him, and
reproves him for not living up to the Light God has afforded him.

IV. What Fools are they (these things considered) who plead for a
Candlelight, and choose rather to be lighted and directed by it, when the Sun
is risen, and shines clearly (blessed be God) in our Horizon?

Conscience a Witness.
Romans 9.1. I speak the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me
Witness in the Holy Ghost, etc.

1 John 3.20. If our Hearts condemn us, God is greater, and knows all things.

Romans 2.15, 16. Their Conscience in the mean while accusing, or else excusing,
in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel.


COnscience is in these Scriptures called a Witness. We shall, 1. Show what
Conscience is. 2. Run the Parallel.


First; Conscience is a natural Power, with which God has endued the Soul of
Man by Creation; for his Comfort, if he walk uprightly; or for his Torment, if
he walk in evil Ways. We do not imagine, that Conscience came not into the
World until Adam's Fall; for this were to suppose Adam in Paradise to be a Man
without Conscience. Conscience indeed, as an Accuser and Condemner, came not in
until then; for as long as Adam obeyed the Commandments of God, there was no
cause that Conscience should accuse him; but as sooon as he had sinned,
Conscience flew in his Face.

Secondly; Conscience we (1.) say is a natural Power, which the Soul of Man
has, Mr. Lockier.
etc. Now (says one) whether this Power be in the Understanding only, or
partly in the Understanding, partly in the Will, I find controverted amongst
the Learned, (some speak of it as a distinct Faculty.) This Power we speak of,
I conceive (says he) to be a reflect Act of the practick Understanding only
transcendently. (2.) By the Power of the Holy Ghost. St. John confirms, that it
is a reflect Act of the practick Understanding only, where speaking of this
Power in the Soul, he says, And hereby we know that we know him, if we k^ep
his Commandments: 1 John 2 3.
That is, as if you should say, We do view our Ways by the Word of God, which
is an Act only of the Understanding; and finding them to be in some measure
level with the holy Rule, we have this comfortable Reflection back upon our
selves, That our Faith is not a Fancy, but a Faith that works by Love, and also
sincere and saving. Paul confirms the second, That it is a reflect Act of the
Understanding, transcendently seconded by the Power of the Holy Ghost: My
Conscience bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost: That is, My Conscience,
transcendently s^conded and assisted by the Holy Ghost, does strongly testify
to my Soul, that I am full of Bowels toward my Kinsmen after the Flesh, and
could do any thing, or suffer any thing for their Good. The Order according to
which the Holy Ghost strikes in with Conscience is this;

The Understanding makes a double Proposition, one grounded in the Word of God,
the other in the Heart of Man; as thus: He that keeps the Commandments of
God, truly loves God; but I do keep the Commandments of God: This is grounded
in the Heart of Man, and then draws a Conclusion from both, Therefore I do love
God truly. This Conclusion, whilst holy, and drawn from Divine Premises, to
wit, the Word of God, and true Grace in the Heart, the Spirit of God strikes in
with the Soul in making of it, and assists the weak Soul, so that he concludes
with strong Confidence, he is sincere, or loves God in truth; and not only
secretly assists, but seconds him, and says the same thing to Man that his own
Spirit does: Romans 8 16
The Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God. If
the Premises be corrupt which the Understanding makes, (for the Heart makes
Propositions suitable to the Light that is in the intellectual Part) then the
Devil, that lying Spirit, strikes in, and seconds the Soul in that corrupt
Conclusion, which he collects from corrupt Principles concerning himself,
thereby to ruin and undo the Soul in Ignorance and Unbelief.

Thirdly; This Faculty or natural Power, called Conscience, only appertains
to Men, and not to any irrational Creatures. Brutes want Reason, and therefore
are not capable Subjects of Conscience; yet against Reason and Conscience Men
oftentimes do worse than a Beast.

Fourthly; Conscience is a natural Power in Man, which compares his Ways and
Thoughts by some Rule; and according as his Ways agree or disagree with that
Rule, so answerably does it bear witness with or against him.

If the Understanding be enlightened with Truth, to wit, the Word of God, then
Conscience compares the Ways of a Man by a perfect Rule. But if the
Understanding be enlightened with natural or moral Principles only, then
Conscience compares a Man's Ways according to those Principles only, and so by
an imperfect Rule.

So far Mr. Lockier, and others, as to what Conscience is.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Witness gives in Testimony according to his Light, or
that Knowledge he has of things; and if he has a perfect Knowledge of this or
that he speaks and testifies, his Testimony is good, and ought to be received.
SO Conscience gives in Testimony according to that Light and Knowledge that is
in the Understanding, for it only speaks and makes Propositions according to
its Light; if it be misguided by Satan, or corrupt Nature, or false Principles,
his Testimony is not good, nor to be regarded, but deceives and abuses the
Soul, as a false Witness does, who appears to speak in the behalf of a guilty
Person. And on the other hand, he may, for want of a clear Light and
Understanding, condemn such as he should clear. And hence many that are very
wicked and vile, both in Practice and Principle, are very confident that their
State and Condition is good, and their poor deluded Souls are peremptory many
times, and wiser in their own Conceit, than seven Men that can give a Reason.
In them is fulfilled that of the Apostle, Their Minds and Consciences are
corrupt. And on the other hand, for want of a little Light, some good Men by
the Testimony of their Consciences are ready to condemn themselves, and give up
all their Hope, notwithstanding their being justified and accepted by Jesus
Christ. II. A Witness therefore must be thoroughly examined, to find out how or
by what means he comes to know this or that he gives Testimony of. II. So must
a Man strictly examine his own Conscience, how it comes to have knowledge of
things, of which it either accuses, or excuses; for this ought always to be
received as an undoubted Truth, That the Word of God is the very Rule and Guide
by which Conscience should be steered, and by the clear Light of which it ought
at all times to give in its Testimony, either for or against a Man. Saul
thought he ought to have done many things against the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth; his Heart did not witness against him, when he contented to Stephen's
Death, because his Conscience wanted Light, it had not perfect knowledge of
things: And hence he says, that what he did, he did it ignorantly, in
Unbelief. But should another Man, 1 Timothy 1.13.
who knew that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, and those persecuted
People were the People of God, have done so, Conscience would have been Witness
against him, and have flown in his Face, yea, condemned him for it, without
Repentance, to the lowest Pit of Hell. III. A good Witness, one that has
perfect knowledge of all things laid to a Man's Charge, if he can make it out
that he is wronged, how is such a Witness to be valued! III. So a good
Conscience, I mean a Conscience rightly enlightened by the Word of God, if it
gives in Testimony for a Man, that his Heart is sincere, and his Life holy, and
that he truly loves and fears God, notwithstanding the false Charge of the
Enemy; how is the Testimony of such a Witness to be valued by a Christian!
Hence Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.12
This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our Conscience. IV. A good and
faithful Witness will speak the whole Truth, and clear the Matter, so far as he
knows, or can speak to it, upon all occasions. IV. So a good and well-guided
Conscience will speak all the Truth, and clear the Matter between God and the
Soul, so far as he has Light; and will deceive no Man or Woman, if they do but
hearken to him. V. A good and faithful Witness will not be bribed or daunted,
but speak in behalf of a Man who is falsely accused, and to the utter Shame and
Conviction of the guilty Person. V. So Conscience, rightly guided by God's
Word, will speak Peace to a godly and sincere Person, let who will condemn him;
and will speak Terror to the wicked and impenitent Sinner, let who will speak
Peace and Comfort to him. Conscience will deal plainly, if it may be heard, and
be not stifled, or put out of a capacity of bringing in its Testimony. VI. A
just and impartial Witness is greatly dreaded by a wicked and guilty Person.
VI. So Conscience, who is an impartial Witness, is greatly dreaded by some
ungodly Souls. O how fain would they fly from those terrible Accusations of
their own Consciences, if they knew how! Some from the Horror that arises from
hence have hanged themselves, and others cut their own Throats, and some have
several other ways laid violent hands upon themselves.

So poor Conscience (who is known and daily found to be a true and faithful
Witness, one that will not be bribed or corrupted by Frowns or Flatteries, who
knows all the secret Lusts, Pride, Malice, Treasons, Thefts, Adulteries, that
lie in the Heart, and all manner of Wickedness, that vile Sinners are guilty
of, and lays it daily to their Charge) is hated, and much struck at; nay,
such is the Wickedness of Men, they endeavor to stifle it, and fear its Tongue
with hot Irons; nay, and put out his Eyes; nay, so far as they can they
endeavor to murder it, that it may not be able to witness against them any
more, but that they may sin without control. Of these the Apostle speaks: Ephesians.
4.19.
Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto all manner of
Lasciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with Greediness. -- Having their
Consciences seared with a hot Iron. 1 Timothy 4.2


VII. A great and faithful Witness, who has perfect Knowledge of things, and
will not be bribed, who can and will (as it is believed, and found by
experience) speak fully to a Cause, tho it be to the utter Shame and Ruin of
all guilty Persons, is many times grievously abused by malicious Men, who hate
that their abominable Deeds should be brought to Light, or laid at their Doors;
nay, not only so, but some have been stifled, strangled, and traitorously
murdered; as the ever renowned Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was by bloody Papists,
the 12th of October, 1678. whom they knew could witness many things against
them, to detect their cursed and never to be forgotten Hellish Plot. VIII. It
is a very great Wickedness, to lay violent hands, or treacherously to abuse and
stifle the King's faithful Witnesses, especially when called to give in their
Evidence in Matters of great Moment, wherein the Honor and Sovereignty of the
King is greatly concerned. VIII. So it is a great and horrible Wickedness, for
any Soul or Sinner to go about to stop the Mouth of, or treacherously to abuse
poor Conscience, who is the great Witness of the King of Heaven and Earth, in
this lower Court, and that in Matters wherein his Honor, and glorious Right
and Sovereignty is much concerned; nay, not only his Witness, but Judge, to sit
upon the Bench, to hear and determine all Causes, if rightly informed,
according to the great Law-Book of the Gospel, and to pass Sentence of Life and
Death, or to acquit and discharge. IX. A Witness is required to speak the
Truth, (when he comes before a Court of Judicature) the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth; and he that is a true Witness will do it. And hereby
many times most horrid Evils are brought to light, and publicly detected; yea,
secret things are discovered, that the guilty Person thought would never have
been known, which makes him ashamed and confounded for ever. IX. So Conscience
in the Day of Judgment will speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Truth. Tho now oft-times he is blinded, and at a great Loss, for want of
Light, or by being mis-guided, he gives in false Testimony, and quits the
guilty, and condemns the innocent; but in that day it will recover such perfect
Light and Knowledge, that it will decide the Cause clearly the right way, and
will by this means bring to light all the hidden things of Darkness, 1 Cor. 4 5.
even all those cursed Abominations of the Heart, all secret things, that it
and God Almighty were only privy to, and will lay open all the horrid Evils
that have been done in the dark. Then Men shall be forced to confess their
secret Adulteries, Murders, Treacheries, Theft, Self-Revenge, together with
all their bloody and black Combinations, ConspiracieS, and Hellish Plots,
carried on in secret Cabals, managed by ungodly Papists, or others,
notwithstanding all their Oaths of Secrecy; Conscience (if it comes not to
light before) will in that day lay all open before the Eyes of Men and Angels,
to the Shame and eternal Confusion of all ungodly Ones. X. A just and impartial
Witness, that clearly and very fully gives in Testimony against a Person, in a
fair Trial, finally stops his own Mouth, and the Mouths of all others, and
leaves the Cause clear, for the Judge to pass Sentence against him. X. So the
Consciences of wicked Men, in the great Day, will give in such clear and full
Evidence against them, touching all the Evils they shall then be charged with
by the just Judge of Heaven and Earth, that all Flesh shall for ever be
silenced, and God shall be clear when he judges. Romans 2.15, 16.
Which show the Works of the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences
also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts in the mean while accusing, or else
excusing one another, in that Day when God shall judge the Secrets of all Men,
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. And hereby all the Mouths of
Unbelievers will be stopped, and they all be found guilty before Christ.

Inferences.
THese things being considered, it may stir up all Persons to take heed how
they carry it, at home and abroad, when they go out, and when they come in,
when they lie down, or rise up, because Conscience observes all that is said or
done, nay, is privy to all the thoughts of our Hearts, and one day will witness
for us, or against us.

II. Let Christians, whatever they do, labor to keep a good Conscience. A good
Conscience is better than a good Name, it is better than a good Trade, it is
better than a good Estate. And for further Motives to this needful Duty,

1, Consider, Conscience keeps a Register of all thy Thoughts, Words, and
Actions; what you forget, and is quite gone out of your Memories, is set down
in the Book of Conscience.

2. Consider, Conscience is a Witness, an impartial Witness, an Accuser of
Evil; and tho he lies still a great while, he will rouse up at last, and with
his cruel Charges and Accusations accuse the Soul; as in the Case of Joseph's
Brethren: And they said one to another, Genesis 42.21
Verily we are guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the Anguish of his
Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this Distress
come upon us.

3. Conscience is not only a Witness, but a Judge, and has power to condemn the
wicked and the guilty Soul; it sits upon the Throne, as God's Attorney General,
to award Life or Death, as the States and Conditons of Men are. If thy Heart
condemn the, 1 John 3.20, 21.
God is greater, etc.

4. Conscience does often the Work and Office of a Tormentor; woe to them that
fall into his enraged hands here, but much more sad will it be with them whom
he shall torment in Hell. It Is he that is the gnawing Worm that never dies,
Mark 9.44.
where the Fire shall never be quenched. But,

5. There is no bearing in this World the Pain and Torment of an accusing
Conscience. Tiberius the Emperor was so followed with Grief and Horror by his
own Conscience, that he confessed in the Senate House he suffered Death daily;
and Charles the Ninth of France, that Monster of Mortals, after the dreadful
Massacre, could never endure to be awaked in the Night without Music, such was
the dreadful Anguish and Horror he found in his own Conscience. Francis Spira
also may be here recited among the rest, whose Conscience terrified him at that
rate, that the Account of his fearful Case is left to Posterity. It was
Conscience that put Judas into such an Amaze, and forced him to hang himself,
after he had betrayed our Blessed Savior. And many other Examples, both
ancient and modern, we meet with, both of Men and Women, that have destroyed
themselves, as not being able to bear the cruel Torments of an accusing
Conscience; and others from hence have confessed their Guilt, and so delivered
themselves into the hands of Justice.

6. That Man can never have good Days, that keeps an evil Conscience.

7. On the other hand, he that has a good Conscience needs never be sad, nor
can he be without good Days; for as Trouble and Horror of Conscience is the
greatest Trouble, so Peace of Conscience is the greatest Joy. That Man can
never want Music (says Mr. Caryl) that speaks in Consort, and is harmonious
with himself. A good Conscience is the poor Man's Riches, and the rich Man's
chiefest Jewel, a Jewel worth keeping. It is (says one) the best Pillow to
sleep on, and the best Dish to feed on. A good Conscience is a continual Feast;
so the Geneva-Translation. Prove. 15.15. Dan. 5.5.
A good Conscience with a Dinner of Herbs, is all Varieties; but a bad
Conscience makes all Feasts and Pleasures like the Handwriting on Belshazzar's
Wall.

8. Labor to get and keep a good Conscience, because an evil one spoils all
the good and best Actions of thy Life, it renders thy Prayers to be sinful.

9. Consider, Conscience is privy to all thou think, knows what Evil has
been done by thee in private, sees all the Evil thou have committed, and all
the Good thou have omitted the doing of; and one day, if evil, Romans 2.15
it will lay all open before the Eyes of God, Angels, and Men, and come in as a
Witness, to charge and condemn thee for ever. O therefore get a good Conscience.

10. Take heed how thou carriest thy self toward Conscience, because it has a
Regal Power in thy Soul, a Commission either to accuse or excuse: and if he
condemns thee as an Unbeliever, or as a false Hypocrite, by the Light and
Authority of God's Word, 1 John 3.20.
God will also (assuredly) condemn thee (unless thou do repent) in the great
Day.

11. Consider what a glorious Mercy it will be, to have such a Friend as
Conscience witness for thee, when thou art wrongfully accused and condemned by
Men. This was that which bore up Job, and holy Paul, in their Troubles. Job
27.6. 2 Cor. 1.12.
My Heart shall not reproach me, etc. This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of
our Conscience.

Quest. Some possibly may enquire here, How a good Conscience may be known, or
what Characters may be given of it?

Answ. I shall give you some Rules to judge of a good Conscience, both
Negatively and Positively.

First, Negatively.

1. A blind, ignorant, and misguided Conscience is not a good Conscience. Some
think that God concerns not himself with their Actions, takes no notice of
their Hearts, Words, or Lives. Others think that God is made up wholly of
Mercy, and tremble not at his Justice, and so conclude it is an easy thing to
get to Heaven. One (that I have heard of) said, That if it were as easy to get
the Riches of this World, as it was to get Heaven, he would not care; or to
that effect: not remembering that it is as hard to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, (especially for rich Men) as it is for a Camel to go through the Eye of
a Needle, Mat. 19.23 1 Pet. 4.18
and that the Righteous shall scarcely be saved. Others think, that those Men
are Fools that make such a Stir and Ado about Religion, thinking that is the
best Religion that is easiest to the Flesh, and is most free from outward
Trouble; whereas the Scripture says, 1 Timothy 2.12
that whoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution. Some
think the Laws of Men must be their Rule in all Matters of Faith and Religion;
and whatever Magistrates command, must be done, etc.

2. A drouzy and sleepy Conscience is not a good Conscience. A Conscience that
is not thoroughly awakened, will let a Man alone in Sin; such can sleep upon the
Brink of the greatest Danger, tho they are just falling into the Gulf of
Eternity; yea, can sleep under the most awakening Ministry; tho Hellfire be
thrown (as it were) in their very Faces, yet Conscience gives them not one Jog.

3. A guilty Conscience is not a good Conscience, when Conscience flies into a
Man's Face for this or that Sin, Tit. 1.15.
some horrid Pollution or other, loved, and lived in.

4. A seared Conscience, a Conscience that has no feeling in it, is not a good
Conscience.

5. A despairing Conscience is not a good Conscience. Such as think their Sins
are greater than God can or will forgive, Mat. 12.31
notwithstanding Christ has said, All Sins and Blasphemies against the Father
and the Son shall be forgiven unto Men; and those, that believe not there is
Life for them in Christ, make God a Liar.

Secondly, Positively.

1. That Man has a good Conscience, that walks uprightly and faithfully to his
Light, according to what he knows. If he has only a natural Light, and walks
up faithfully to that, then he has only a natural good Conscience; there is
Moral Sincerity spoken of in the holy Scriptures, Joh. 20.4.
as well as Godly Sincerity. Abimelech in this respect had a good Conscience:
In the Sincerity of my Heart, and Innocence of my Hands, Genesis 20.5.
have I done this.

Here I might show how a natural good Conscience may be known from a Conscience
evangelically and spiritually good; take two or three Hints.

(1.) He whose Conscience is only naturally good, is usually a proud Man; Lord,
I thank thee, Luke 18 11.
I am not as other Men, etc. Such seek their own Glory, they sacrifice to their
own Net, and burn Incense to their own Drag; all centers in Self, the Principle
of their Action is Self. A Saint, when his Gifts are highest, his Heart is
lowest; when his Spirit is most raised, his Heart is most humble.

(2.) A Man that has only a natural good Conscience, his great endeavor is to
still the Noise, and stop the Mouth of it; but never looks to have the Guilt
removed, and Filth washed away by Christ's Blood; he sees no need of a
Savior: I was alive once without the Law, Romans 7.11
etc. He is like a Child that has got a Thorn in his Flesh, who wipeth away
the Blood, but takes no notice or thought how to get out the Thorn. If bare
Performance of Duties, whether natural or divine, will still or quiet the
Conscience, the Conscience is but naturally good.

2. When Conscience compares a Man's Ways by the perfect Rule of God's Word, by
which he walks, and finds it agreeable thereto.

3. An evangelical good Conscience finds a Man as careful of his Duty toward
God, as he is of his Duty toward Man; and as careful of his Duty toward Man,
as of his Duty toward God. Acts 24.16
Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of Offense
toward God, and toward Man.

4. An evangelical good Conscience always stirs up to Obedience and Conformity
to God's Word, from the sight of the Excellency of it, and Purity that is in
it: Thy Word is very pure, Psalm. 119.
therefore thy Servant loves it.

5. He has a good Conscience, whose Conviction and Trouble for Sin is
universal, when it is deep, when the Spirit searches into the bottom: Come,
says the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4 29, 39.
see a Man that has told me all that ever I did. And they were pricked in
their Hearts.

6. He has an evangelical good Conscience, who is troubled for Sin, not simply
because of Shame, or because of inward Guilt, or fear of Punishment, but
because God is and has been offended, his Spirit grieved, and his Soul
defiled, and made unlike God; his Trouble rises from the sense of the heinous
Nature of Sin.

7. When Conscience finds that no Conviction, either of Sin or Duty, is
slighted by the Soul, Psalm. 119.80.
but tenderly nourished.

8. When a Man will suffer any Punishment or Loss, before he will offer
violence to his Conscience, and sin against God.

9. When Conscience cannot find any Sin hid, spared, born with, or connived at
in the Soul, no sweet Morsel under the Tongue.

10. When Conscience finds a Man the same in private that he is in public, and
that he is not of a Pharisaical Spirit, does nothing to be seen of Men, or for
vain Glory's sake.

11. When Conscience cannot find any Duty or Ordinance, which the Soul is
convinced of, to be neglected, tho he is exposed to Reproach thereby. To obey
God in Baptism, is called the Answer of a good Conscience; Conscience calls for
obedience to this, and to all other Ordinances of the Gospel, when convinced of
them.

12. And lastly; When Conscience bears Testimony to a Soul, that it loves
God and Jesus Christ above all things in this World, etc. He that hates not
Father and Mother, etc. cannot be my Disciple. That is, if he has not a lesser
Love to them; for the lesser Love in Scripture is called a Hatred, which our
Savior opens in another place, He that loves Father or Mother more than me,
is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not
worthy of me, Phil. 3 9, 10.
etc. Yea doubtless I account all things but Loss, etc.

Quest. How shall a Man get and keep a good Conscience?

Answ. 1. He must get his Heart sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, etc. See that you experience that the
Blood of Christ has as effectually purged your Consciences from dead Works,
Heb. 9.14.
as the Blood of Bulls and Goats sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh.

2. He must take heed of all such things as offend his Conscience; Conscience
is a very tender thing, the smallest thing will make it bleed.

3. He must take heed of evil aad corrupt Principles; an erring Conscience is
not a good Conscience.

4. Labor to fit under a Soul-searching Ministry.

5. Take heed of vain Glory, and all secret Evil; Conscience prieth into thy
most inward Thoughts; beware of speculative Sin.

6. Labor to keep thy Tongue. Whosoever keeps his Mouth, and his Tongue, keeps
his Soul from Trouble.

7. Labor to bring thy Heart into every Duty, beware of Hypocrisy.

8. Do not grieve or offend thy Conscience in any thing; tho the Matter may be
in it self lawful, yet thou must not do it, if thou have a doubt in thy Spirit
about it: Romans 14.23.
He that doubts is damned, that is, condemned in his own Conscience. But much
more take heed of doing that which is by all owned to be utterly unlawful.

9. Labor in all Acts to be sincere. Conscience has power to give in
Testimony concerning thy Integrity; if thy Heart be unsound, and not upright,
Conscience will soon discover it, and reproach thee for it, and thou will not
be able to hold out to the end: and sad will it be to have thy own Conscience
witness against thee, when thou come to lie on a sick Bed; an evil Conscience
will be a bad Deathbed Companion.

O how does this reprove those that sin, and regard not the Checks and Rebukes
of their own Hearts! Conscience in the great Day will be more than ten thousand
Witnesses against them.

THE Seventh HEAD OF Metaphors, Allegories, and Similes, WITH Other Borrowed
TERMS, Relating to the Church of GOD.
The Church called the City of God.
Psalm. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Selah.

Psalm. 46.4. There is a River, the Streams whereof shall make glad the City of
God, the holy Place of the Tabernacle of the Most High.

Isa. 26.1. We have a strong City, etc.

Isa. 33.20. Look upon Zion, the City of our Solemnity, etc.

Isa. 62.12. And they shall call them the holy People, etc. And thou shall be
called a City sought out, not forsaken.

Mat. 5.14. Ye are a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid.


IN these places of the Holy Scripture, Sion, or the Church of God, is called a
City. Sion was a Fort or Mount in Jerusalem, and the Temple was built upon it;
hence the Church of the Jews was called (as some conceive) by this Name Zion,
because there they assembled: but after it was a Name or Title given to the
Church, whether Jews or Gentiles, Heb. 12.12. Ye are come to Mount Sion, to the
City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.

God's People may be called by the Name of Sion, or Jerusalem,

1. Because we were naturally like Jerusalem, the Forts of the Jebusites, viz.
Sinners and Enemies to God.

2. Because by Grace we are overcome and conquered, (like as Jerusalem was) by
the true David.

3. Because the Church is fortified by the Almighty for his own use, and chief
Place and Residence in this nether Creation.

4. In respect of her Renown and Glory. As Jerusalem was renowned above all
Cities, so God's Church is now above all People and Societies in the World.

5. Because it is viewed and gazed upon by all Strangers; she may well be
compared to a Looking-glass, as Zion signifies.

6. In respect of her Laws; for as the Law and public Worship were at
Jerusalem; so Christ's Laws and public Worship are maintained in the Church.
Hence God is said to love the Gates of Zion, more than all the Dwelling-Places
of Jacob. Psalm. 87.2:


Observe. The Saints, or Church of God, is the City of God, or may fitly be
compared to a City.

In opening of this Metaphor, we shall show the Nature, Trade, Government,
Privileges, and Glory of the City of God.

Metaphor. Parallel. A City is a Place built by Men, for a People to inhabit,
or dwell in. THe Church is built by Christ, for a Habitation for God: Mat. 16.18
Upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. In whom ye are builded together
for an Habitation of God, through the Spirit. Ephesians. 2.22.
II. A City is usually compassed about with Walls, that it may thereby become
more safe and secure to dwell in; and some Cities have two or three Walls, to
make them more impregnable. II. The Church of God has strong Walls about it.
We have a strong City; Isa. 26.1.
Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks. The Church has a threefold
Wall about it.

First; The Wall of God's Providence. Have not thou made a Hedge (or Wall) about
him? As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem; Job 1. Psalm. 125.2
so the Lord is round about them that fear him, etc.

Secondly; The Protection of the holy Angels: Psalm. 34.7.
The Angels of the Lord encamp round about them that fear him, etc.

Thirdly; God, in an extraordinary manner, is as a Wall of Fire round about
her; Zech. 2.5.
every one of his Attributes is a gracious Defense to the Church.

III. Some Cities are bravely situated, they are built upon a Hill. III. The
Church of God is famous upon this account: Beautiful for Situation, Psalm. 48.2.
the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Zion; on the sides of the North, the City
of the great King. Mat. 16.18
Ye are as a City set upon a Hill. IV. A City is built of many Materials, and
in it are many Buildings or Houses, set in rare Uniformity, curiously joined
and compacted together. IV. The Church of God is built up of many living
Stones, consisting of diverse particular Societies, or spiritual Houses. Now
therefore ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.
but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God: And are built
upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief Cornerstone: In whom all the Building fitly framed together, grows
to an holy Temple in the Lord, etc. In whom ye also are builded together for an
Habitation of God, through the Spirit. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is
compact together. Psalm. 122.3
V. A City has its particular Laws, Institutions, and Customs, by which it is
governed. V. The Church of God also has special Laws, Institutions, and
Customs belonging to it, by which it is in all things governed, which are
contained in the holy Scripture, the great Charter and Statute-Book of the
Church. VI. A City has a supreme Governor in it, who rectifies all Disorders
and Confusions, that otherwise would be therein, considering the Multitude of
its Inhabitants. VI. The Church of God is not without a good Government, and a
Supreme Magistrate, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the chief Judge and
Lawgiver, or Head of this spiritual Corporation. VII. A City has, besides the
chief Governor, and principal Magistrate, diverse inferior Officers, for
Administration of Justice, and well governing thereof. VII. So the Church of
God has inferior Officers under Jesus Christ, which the Citizens by the
appointment of Christ are required to substitute and ordain, to govern and keep
all things in good Order. And he gave some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, etc.
VIII. A City has some special Trade belonging to it, by which its Inhabitants
are enriched. VIII. The Church or City of God has a spiritual Trade belonging
to it, which all the Citizens do and ought always to follow, by which they are
also greatly enriched. IX. Many Cities have Merchants in them, who trade into
remote parts of the World, and fetch their Merchandise from afar. IX. The
Saints or Citizens of Zion are all Merchants, who trade daily to Heaven; they
fetch their blessed Merchandise from thence: Phil. 3.20. Prove. 41.
Our Conversation is in Heaven. Hence the Church is by Solomon compared to
Merchants Ships. [See Merchants Ships.] Saints have (like other Merchants)
their Correspondent, Jesus Christ, who makes glorious Returns of all they
venture, or send to Heaven: For every Duty rightly performed, he makes Returns
of Mercy; for Tears of godly Sorrow, he returns them the Oil of Joy. Thou will
(says holy David) put my Tears into thy Bottle. By which means the spiritual
Citizens grow rich in Faith, Hope, Experience, etc. [See the Parable of the
Merchant-man.]

Now touching the Trade, Traffic, or Merchandise of this City, upon which its
Wealth and Prosperity does wholly depend, take what follows.

First; Their Trade is heavenly. Wherefore, holy Brethren, Heb. 3.1, 2
Partakers of the heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession, Jesus Christ. And as they are all Merchants, and use one Trade, so
they all deal with one and the same Benefactor, from whom they have quick
Returns; they fetch their Goods from afar. Something touching the Excellency of
the Trade of the City of God, I shall hint in a few Particul^rs.

Secondly; As touching her Commodities, or the Merchandise which her Citizens
deal in.

First, Negatively;

1. They are not prohibited Goods.

2. They are not counterfeit Goods.

3. They are not temporal and corruptible Goods.

Secondly, Affirmatively, and more directly, they are,

1. Soul enriching Commodities, things that are of very great worth and value.
The Merchandise of Wisdom is better than the Merchandise of Silver, Prove. 3.14
and the Gain thereof than fine Gold.

2. They are needful things, such things as we cannot be without. Some things
that Merchants of a City deal in, and fetch from afar, tho they are of great
value, yet we may very well subsist, and live comfortably without them, as
Pearl, and precious Stones, etc. But there is an absolute Necessity of all
those things the Citizens of this City trade in and for.

3. They are such Commodities as will make the Nations and Persons that buy
them happy for ever; and indeed there is no true Happiness without them.

Quest. What is the Traffic of this City of God?

Answ. The first thing that I shall mention, is the Truth; this she offers to
Sale: Buy the Truth, and sell it not, Prove. 23.23. The Church is called the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Truth is only to be found in this
City, or in the Warehouses of the Citizens of Zion, viz. the Word of God, and
the Hearts of Believers.

The second thing, is a Soul-converting Gospel, and blessed Ordinances. The Law
goes forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Mic. 2.4.

The third thing they deal in, are the Gifts and Soul-enriching Graces of the
Spirit, Hope, Love, Humility, etc. things of very great worth.

The fourth is Justification; every true Sinner makes it his Business to get
this precious Treasure.

The fifth thing is the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, one of
the rarest Commodities in the World.

The sixth thing is, Union and Communion with God. 1 John 1.3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

The seventh thing is, Peace of Conscience: Herein do I exercise my self, Acts
24.16
to have always a Conscience void of Offense, toward God, and toward Men.

The eighth thing is, Sanctification, or a holy Life; they who trade not in
this Commodity, are none of the true Sons and Citizens of Zion.

Ninthly, the Pearl of great price, worth more than ten thousand Worlds.

Tenthly; The last thing that I shall mention is, Eternal Life, 1 Pet. 1.4.
a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

X. A City whose Commerce lies principally in a Foreign Trade or Merchandising,
has usually a navigable River belonging to it, by which Means their
Commodities, or those Goods they deal in, are brought home to their very Doors;
as we see by experience. What infinite Profit does the River Thames yield this
famous City! and what would its Trade be worth, were it not for it? X. The City
of God, whose Trade lies in spiritual Merchandise fetched from afar, has a
most glorious River belonging to it, which may indeed be said to run through
every Street thereof, viz. the holy Spirit, and Word of God. The Spirit in
several places of Scripture is called a River, and by means of these blessed
Streams are all divine and sacred Commodities (which the Godly deal in) brought
home to their very Doors, viz. Gifts, Graces, Pardon, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, etc. wh^^h are very excellent Merchandise. And were it not for this
River, what would become of this City? we should soon be impoverished and
undone. It is the holy Spirit that enriches and chears the Hearts of all
gracious Souls. There is a River, the Streams whereof make glad the City of
God, Psalm 46.4.
the holy Place of the Tabernacle of the Most High. It may not be amiss here to
consider, 1. From whence this River comes. See River under the 3d head of
Metaphors etc.
2. The Nature of the Water. 3. The diverse Streams thereof.


First; The River comes, 1. From a Rock, Numb. 28.8, 11. This Rock was first
smitten, and then the Water came out abundantly.

2. It comes from an infinite inexhaustible Fountain; Rev. 22.1.
it is said to proceed from the Throne of God and the Lamb.

Secondly; Touching the Nature of this River; tho we have spoken of it under
the Third Head of Metaphors in the first Volume, yet we will touch a little
upon it here. It has, besides other Properties of spiritual Water, these
diverse Qualities.

1. It will heal all the Diseases of the inward Man; it will soften, and make
very tender and pliable, and break in pieces a hard Heart.

2. It will cure the Soul of spiritual Blindness; nay, it will open the Eyes of
him that was born blind.

3. It will infallibly cure all spiritual Consumptions, that spiritual Waste or
Decay of Faith, Love, Zeal, Hope, etc. which seizes sometimes upon many
Christians.

4. It will bring down the Tympany of Pride, and make a Man very humble, and
little in his own Eyes; the more of the Spirit, the more humble.

5. It will cure all manner of spiritual Deadness or Deafness, making a Man
very lively and diligent to hear good Counsel and Instruction, as Lydia
experienced. Acts 16 14


6. It is good against the Tremblings of the Heart, and will make a Man bold
and courageous in the Cause of Christ, in evil Times. We cannot but speak the
things which we have both seen and heard. Acts 4.20.


7. It is an excellent Remedy to purge out all noxious and evil Humors of the
Soul, from whence many Distempers flow, making a Man sound at Heart, and holy
in Life.

8. It will effectually restore a lost Appetite, and make a Man relish well the
Food of God's Word, causing it to be sweeter to him than Honey, Psalm. 119.103.
or the Honeycomb.

9. It will preserve from the Plague of Sin, of what sort soever it be, tho a
Christian be amongst infected Persons every day.

10. It will revive a fainting and drooping Spirit.

11. It will set and make whole all broken Bones, Psalm. 27.13
as David and thousands others have found by experience.

12. It will cure the Leprosy, and all old running Ulcers, and also all fresh
Wounds of the Soul, tho never so deep, stinking, and loathsome.

13. It is good against Weakness of the Hands, and Feebleness of the Knees. 1 Thessalonians 5.14. 2 Pet. 1.9.


14. It is sovereign good against spiritual Barrenness, making the Godly to
bring forth much Fruit.

15. It will clear the Sight, and make a Man to see afar of.

16. It infallibly cures the sleepy Disease, or the spiritual Lethargy of the
Soul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6
so that they shall not sleep as others do.

17. It cures all Diseases of the Tongue and Mouth, and an unsavory Breath,
Jam. 3.5, 6.
that common Sign of a foul Stomach.

18. It cures all spiritual Lameness; it causes a lame Man to leap as an Heart,
Isa. 35.6.
and never halt any more between two Opinions.

19. It perfectly cures all Distempers of the Head, occasioned by Error, and
erroneous Principles, that corrupt the Understanding.

20. It is Water of Life, he that drinks of it shall never die. Joh. 4 14.


Thirdly; This River has three special Streams, 1. The Stream of Ordinances.
2. The Stream of heavenly Graces. 3. The Stream of Divine Promises. Sinners
come to these Waters, O come before the Stream be turned another way. See River
and Water of Life.

XI. In a glorious City usually is the King's Palace, or his chief Place of
Residence, which tends much to its Honor and Renown. XI. The Church is the
Habitation of God. The Lord dwells in Zion, Psalm. 9.11. Isa. 8.18. Psalm.
76.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 132.13, 14. Isa. 57.15.
in Judah is God known; his Name is great in Israel; in Salem also is his
Tabernacle, and his Dewlling Place in Zion. This is for the everlasting Honor
and Renown of the Church. The Lord dwells in Zion. Sing praises, for the Lord
has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my Rest for
ever; tho he be the high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, yet he
dwells with them that are of an humble and contrite Spirit. The special and
most gracious Presence of God is with his People. XII. A City has some certain
Privileges, Freedoms, and Immunities belonging to it, which Strangers have
nothing to do with; Foreigners may not dwell within the Walls of some Cities.
XII. So the Church of God has many glorious Privileges and Immunities
belonging to it, which unconverted Sinners have no Right to.

The first Privilege, or part of that Freedom that belongs to the City of God,
is Pardon of Sin. Isa. 33.24.
The Inhabitants shall not say, I am sick; the People that dwell therein shall
be forgiven their Iniquity. 1. This is a glorious Privilege and Freedom, if we
consider the abominable and heinous Nature of Sin, which is opened in the first
Volume, under the third Head of Metaphors. 2. Because of that which is couched
and comprehended under the Blessing of Pardon; when God absolves a poor Sinner,
he not only forgives, but also forgets, their Sins and Iniquities he remembers
no more. 3. Because it is a Freedom from the Guilt of it. 4. Because it is a
Freedom from the Power and Dominion of it. 5. It is a Freedom from the
Punishment of it, Romans 6.14.
Romans 8.1. 1 John 5.24. 6. Because it is a purchased Freedom, it was obtained by
a great Sum, viz. the Sum of God's great Love and Grace, with the Sum of
Christ's Blood. Remission is through Christ's Atonement. 7. Because it is a
sealed Freedom, it is made over to the Soul by the King's own Seal, the Spirit
of God, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
that great Seal of Heaven. 8. Because it is a lasting Freedom; the Sins of
Believers are forgiven for ever, they shall never be laid to their Charge.

The second Privilege of this City is, Gospel-Fellowship, free Access to the
Lord's Table, and Communion with the Saints: Ephesians. 2.6.
They are made to sit down together in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus.

The third Privilege is Right to the Ministry; they may all lay claim to the
Ministers and Ministry of the Word: Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, all are
yours. 1 Cor. 3.27, 28.
They, and all their Gifts and gracious Endowments, are the Saints.

The fourth Privilege is, their undoubted Right to the City-Stock, or the
Churches Patrimony.

1. The Stock of Prayers; sincere Souls have a Right to all the Prayers of the
Church.

2. To that Store and spiritual Provision, viz. the Bread of Life, Psalm. 132:15.
etc. that is laid up in her. God will bless the Provision of Zion, and satisfy
her Poor with Bread.

3. The Stock of Promises. God has promised to bless, comfort, strengthen,
beautify, build up, and save Sion, and consequently every Saint and Member
thereof; for all those, and many more like Promises, are directly made to every
sincere Soul or Citizen of Sion.

The fifth Privilege is, free Access to the Throne of Grace. Ephesians. 2.18.


Sixthly, a Dewlling Place there. This is a glorious Privilege; they dwell near
the King, behold him in the Galleries every day; they dwell in God's Courts,
nay, in his House: Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still
praising thee. Psalm. 84.1. Psalm. 92.13
Selah. They that are planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God, they shall bring forth Fruit in old Age, etc.

1. It Is a strong and sure Dewlling Place: He shall dwell on high, Isa. 32.18.
Isa. 33.16.
his Place of Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks.

2. It Is a rich and glorious Dewlling Place.

3. It Is a pleasant Dewlling Place.

4. It Is an honorable Dewlling Place.

5. It Is and shall be a peaceable Habitation. Look upon Zion, Isa 33.20:
the City of our Solemnities: Thine Eyes shall see Jerusalem, a quiet
Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the Stakes
thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the Cords thereof be broken.

Seventhly; They have a Right and Privilege to choose their own Officers; every
free Citizen has his Voice at every Election. No Minister, Bishop, or Deacon,
may be imposed upon them without their own free Consent.

Eighthly; They have Right to all the Blessings and privileges of the River,
the Streams whereof make glad all the Inhabitants, the Nature of whose Water
you have heard.

Ninthly; They have a Right to the City-Guard, which always attends them,
whithersoever they go, or whatsoever they do, when they are about their proper
Work, which are the good Angels.

Tenthly; The last Privilege I shall mention is, Sonship. Joh. 1.12. Gal 4.6.
But to as many as received him, to them gave he Power (or Privilege) to become
the Sons of God. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

XIII. Some Cities have a common Stock in them, out of which the poor decayed
Citizens are often supplied and helped in their Distress, and thereby delivered
from utter Beggary. XIII. The Church has a common Stock or Storehouse
belonging to it, called the unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3 8.
out of which all poor decayed Christians have their Wants supplied. That Grace
that is treasured up in Christ, is always ready to be given forth to his poor
Children; and by this means they are kept from Ruin, and being utterly undone.
My God shall supply all your Needs, according to his Riches in Glory, by Christ
Jesus. Phil. 4.19.
XIV. A City has also a strict Watch appointed to keep the Gates, and to see
that no Accident happen in it, to the hurt and detriment thereof. XIV. The
Church, or City of God, has also a strong and faithful Militia, or spiritual
Watch, which are the holy Angels. These are called Watchers, Dan. 4.23.
or Watchmen; and in other places, the Lord's Host, or the Armies of Heaven,
who are mighty in Power, one of them being able to destroy all the Churches
Enemies. These keep the Saints day and night; they encamp about them, and see
that no Evil comes unto them. Besides them, God is said to watch over his
People continually, who is called, the Watchman of Israel, and the Savior
thereof in the Day of Trouble. Psalm. 127.1, 2.
Unless the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. Besides, Psalm.
127.1. See 6th head of Metaphors
there are the Ministers of the Gospel, who are called Watchmen. XV. A great
and famous City has Towers and Battlements belonging to it, not only for
Ornament, but also for Strength, and Security from Evil. XV. The City of God is
famous in respect of its Towers, and Places of Security. Walk about Zion, Psalm.
48.12, 13, 14.
and go round about her; mark well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye
may tell it to the Generation following: For this God is our God for ever and
ever, and he will be our Guide until Death. The Name of the Lord is a
Strong-Tower, etc. Everyone of the blessed Attributes of God are as so many
Towers of Safety to his Church. [See Strong-Tower in the First Head of
Metaphors.] XVI. In a City, notwithstanding the many noble and honorable
Personages, or worthy Patrons, that dwell therein, yet there are some ill and
unworthy Members that get a being there, which tends much to its Blemish and
Reproach. XVI. So the City of God, notwithstanding all the holy and eminent
Saints and Servants of God who dwell therein, yet has in it some wicked and
ungodly Ones, who by Craft and Hypocrisy get a being there, tho when known they
are turned out, as the incestuous Person, Hymeneus, and Alexander was. 1 Cor.
5. 1 Timothy 1.20 Jud. 4.
For there are certain Men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained
to this Condemnation, ungodly Men, turning the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, These
ill and loose Professors bring a great Reproach upon the Church of God; but
there is a Day coming, when the Church shall be freed of them. Zech. 14.21.
There shall be no Canaanite in the House (or City) of God. XVII. The Citizens
of a great and glorious City are much affected with, and highly esteem and love
the City where they dwell. XVII. So the Citizens of Zion have an honorable
respect, and high esteem for God's Church, as appears particularly in David: If
I forget thee, O Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.56.
let my right hand forget her Cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my Tongue
cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chiefest
Joy. Many Reasons may be given, why the Godly are so much taken with Zion.

1. Because it is the place of their Birth; they were born, or rather born
again in her. And of Zion it shall be said, This and that Man was born in her,
Psalm. 87.5, 6.
and the Highest himself shall establish her. Verse. 6. The Lord shall count,
when he writes up his People, that this and that Man was born there.

2. Because it is the City of their Father, and so their blessed Inheritance;
all the glorious Immunities thereof are theirs.

3. It is a City redeemed or purchased by Christ's most precious Blood, Acts
20:27. 1 Cor. 6. Psalm. 87.2.
he gave himself for it. Ye are bought with a Price

4. It Is built by God, and for God; it is the Place that he has chosen, he
esteems highly of it. He is said to rejoice in Zion, he loves the very Gates
thereof, more than all the Dwelling places of Jacob.

5. It is a splendid and most glorious City; her Foundation is laid with
precious Stones, yea, the choicest Saphires; her Streets are paved with that
which is more rare than the purest Gold.

XVIII. Some Citizens who are industrious, grow very rich, and attain to great
Honor among their Neighbors; and those are quickly known, and taken notice
of; they may be discovered in diverse respects. XVIII. So some of the Citizens
of Sion, who are diligent and industrious in the Improvement of Grace, and the
Means of Godliness, grow very rich in Faith and good Works, rich in spiritual
and divine Knowledge, rich in heavenly Experience. Prove. 10.22.
The diligent Hand makes rich, with the Blessing of God. And these rich Saints
are also soon discovered, and taken notice of. 1. Rich Men, wealthy Merchants,
can trust, or stay a great while for their own, when poor Men must have all
presently paid down. The clearest Promise, or firmest Covenant, will not serve
their Turn, without some considerable part presently paid. 1. So those who are
spiritually rich, Jam. 2 5.
rich in Faith, rich Merchants of Mount Zion, the City of God, can trust, they
cand stay patiently, in expectation of the Good of the Promise, (as Abraham,
Romans 4 20
who was strong or rich in Faith) when others cannot rely upon a bare Promise,
or take God's single Word for the accomplishment of this or that. 2. Rich
Citizens have a great Stock lying by them. 2. So those who are rich Citizens of
Sion, rich in Grace, have a Stock of blessed Experience, (as David had.) They
have a Stock of Faith, much Faith, when others have but a little; a Stock of
good Works, having done much for God, and for his Church, etc. 3. Rich Citizens
have abundance of precious Things, rare Merchandises to delight in, as Gold,
Silver, and many other rich Commodities. 3. So rich Citizens of Sion have
abundance of rare and precious things in their Ware houses, ( viz. their
Hearts) as Love, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Gal. 5 22.
4. Rich Men do not live upon their Labor, as poor Men do. Some rich Men work,
and take as much pains as the poorest Man in the City; but their Work is
pleasant, and more delightful to them, than the Labor of one that is very
poor. 4. So rich Citizens of Sion, tho they work hard for God: 1 Co^. 15.10.
I labored more abundantly than they all. Yet their Work is sweet and pleasant
to them, because they work not for Life, or for a Livelihood; Gal. 2.20.
they rest not upon doing, but live by Faith: but poor Saints live more upon
doing than believing; they have but little of that, or any other Grace. 5. Rich
Men go finer, or are generally more richly adorned, than the Poor; you may know
a rich Citizen by his costly Ornaments, by his rich Robes, and Chains of Gold
about his Neck. 5. So rich Saints are more adorned with the Garment of
Humility, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.3.
with the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great Price. They can deny themselves, are patient under Sufferings, endure all
things contentedly for Christ's sake; they have much Wisdom, Prove. 1 9.
as an O nament of Grace upon their Head, and Chains of Gold about their Neck.
6. Rich Citizens do usually bring up their Children more nobly, and give them
more Learning, and better Education, than the Poor generally do or can. 6. So
rich Saints, such as have much Grace, who are great Dealers, and have got much
by Trading in spiritual Things, bring up their Children more virtuously, Genesis
18.19 Ephesians. 6.4.
and give them better Education; they give them better Counsel, better Examples
than others; they train them up in the Fear and Admonition of the Lord, taking
God for a Pattern herein, Psalm. 94.11, 12.
who makes the Word and Rod a Blessing to his Children. 7. Rich Citizens live
high, keep a good Table, in comparison of what the Poor do, or are able. 7. So
those who are spiritually rich, have many precious Morsels, yea, blessed
Variety of choice things; they are often feasted by Christ, and are with him in
the House of Wine, Cant. 2.4.
and delight themselves in Fatness; their good Conscience is to them a
continual Feast. Prove. 15.15.
8. Rich Citizens can bear Burdens, Taxations, and Losses, better than the
Poor. 8. So those who are spiritually rich, can best bear up under cross
Providence, Persecution, and Losses for Christ's sake. 9. Rich Men can do for
others; poor Men can do but little for their poor Friends or Neighbors, when
the Rich can do much. 9. So those that are rich in spiritual Experience, in
Faith, and good Works, can do much for weak Christians by Prayer, by Advice,
and good Counsel. Exodus 17.11. Jam 5.16.
Moses did mighty Things by Prayer for Israel. The fervent Prayer of a
righteous Man avails much. 10. Rich Men can best strive with Difficulties,
and live in Years of Scarcity, when others who have but just from hand to
mouth, are in such times in danger of starving, or to be reduced to great
Extremities. 10. So those who are strong, and very rich in Faith, and all other
Graces, are helped to bear up and pass through a Difficulty, in Time of Want
and Scarcity, better than weak or poor Christians will; only God has for their
Comfort and Encouragement promised to supply their Wants, Phil. 4.19.
and will (if sincere) also relieve them, Psalm. 84.11
that they shall not faint or perish in the Years of Famine. XIX. Some Cities,
tho rich, yet are in a comparative sense but small, but little Cities. XIX. The
City of God, in comparison of great Babylon, is but a small City,
notwithstanding all her Glory, Grandeur, Luke 12.32. Eccles. 9.14. Rev. 17.18
and Greatness, (as you have heard) she is but little: There was a little City,
and few Men in it. This City is the Church of God, etc. Babylon is a great
City. In comparison of the Wicked, Christ's Flock is but a handful of People,
as it were. XX. A City, tho very strong, yet is sometimes besieged, and has
many Enemies. XX. The City of God, this little City, is besieged; Isa. 1.8.
The Daughter of Zion is left as a Cottage in a Vineyard as a Lodge in a Garden
of Cucumers, as a besieged City. And mavelous it is, so small a City should
hold out so bravely unto this Day, especially considering what mighty Enemies
have, and do besiege her.

Object. But here it may be objected, Has it not been overcome? is it not
said, The Holy City was trodden under foot? Rev. 11.2.


Answ. It is only the outward Court. God has had his Church in all Ages, tho
forced for a time to fly into the Wilderness, from the Face of the Dragon.
Rev. 12 6.




Quest. By whom is this City besieged?

Answ. 1. By the Devil, called a great King, and the King of the Bottomless
Pit. Eccles. 9.14. Rev. 12.


2. By Antichrist, the Firstborn of Satan. He has for above twelve hundred
Years laid Siege against it, using all manner of Engines, Craft, and Cruelty,
to batter her down, and finally to destroy her.

3. She is besieged by the World, by wicked Men, Men of earthly and carnal
Principles, who abhor Zion, and say, Let her be defiled, raze her, Psalm. 137.7
even to the Foundation thereof.

4. She is besieged by Sin, and the Flesh, a secret Enemy, who fain in a
clandestine way would betray her; this Enemy does her the most Mischief.

5. She is besieged by a Multitude of false Teachers; 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
these likewise have done great Hurt and Damage to the Church of God, who
labor by evil Doctrine to poison all her Inhabitants.

6. And besides all this, there have been sad Divisions within her also; she
has been as a City divided, and yet she stands.

7. There have been sad Breaches made in her Walls, so that many have been let
in that way, who should have been kept out.

8. Many that seemed to be for her, have deserted her, and joined with the
Enemy, and yet still she holds out.

9. And, which is worst of all, few of those who have been in the City have
bravely acquitted themselves, by Zeal and Holiness, to defend her, and yet she
holds out still.

Quest. From whence is it that she is helped to bear up against all these sore
and grievous Assaults, Batteries, and Calamities?

Answ. 1. This City (as you have heard) is built upon a Rock, it has a sure
Foundation, which cannot be removed. Mat. 16.18.


2. The Lord of Hosts has fought for her; it is he that has been on her side,
he has defended Mount Zion, and the Hill thereof; he has took part with her,
Psalm. 125.2 Isa. 31.4, 5
and does at this day.

3. She holds out, because God has decreed her Standing, Zech. 12.8, 9.
and that her Enemies shall not prevail.

4. She is defended, because she is the Place which the Lord loves, Psalm. 74 2.
and has purchased with the Blood of his own dear Son.

5. Because it is the Place where God's Honor dwells: Psalm. 26.8.
I have loved the Habitation of thy House, the Place where thy Honor dwells.

6. Again, she still remains, because she is (tho a little City, yet) a strong
City: We have a strong City. She has strong Fortifications, strong Walls and
Bulwarks. Isa. 26.1. Psalm. 31.21. and 135.21. Zech. 2.5.


7. It Is because God's own Habitation (as you have heard) is in her; God is a
Wall of Fire round about her, and the Glory in the midst of her.

8. She is defended by reason of the Strong-Tower she has in her; so long as
her Tower stands, how can she be battered down? And her Tower is impregnable.
The Enemy may sooner pull the Sun out of the Firmament, than undermine or
batter down, deface or demolish the Tower of Zion, which is the Name of the
Lord. Prove. 18.10.
See Strong-Tower.

9. She is defended, because in her are the Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, Isa.
2.3.
and holy Institutions of her King, the Lord Jesus, where he is worshipped and
adored in Spirit and Truth.

Inferences.
HEnce all that dwell in Zion may be provoked to a diligent Improvement of
their great Privileges, to the end they may be enriched with all those
spiritual Riches, and dignified with that Honor that appertains to a true
Denizen thereof.

2. Take Comfort and Encouragement also, whatever the Attempts of the Enemies
are, yet about all her Glory shall be a Defense. All those whose Feet stand
within her Gates, may read Honor, Safety, Isa. 4.5.
and Salvation as it were written upon her Walls.

3. Let it be your Delight to prefer her above your chiefest Joy; as she is
called the holy City, so be ye also holy, Psalm. 137.6
that you may declare your selves unto what City it is you do belong.

4. How may this call home all those that are gone astray, and invite all that
profess good Will unto Sion, to let their Feet stand within her Gates, for the
Lord has desired it for his Habitation. Holy David made this his one thing
desirable, Psalm. 27.4.
viz. to dwell in God's House, to be a Denizen of this City; and why should not
you?

5. Let it be a Warning to all Sion's Enemies, to take heed how they lift up
their hands against her, or reproach God, and them that dwell in Heaven; let
them lay down their Arms, and fight against her no more. The Lord shall roar
also out of Zion, Joel 3.16.
and utter his Voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and Earth shall shake: But
the Lord will be the Hope of his People, and the Strength of the Children of
Israel. So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy
Mountain, etc.

The Church compared to the Moon.
Cant. 6.10. She is fair as the Moon.
THe Moon is called in Hebrew Lebanah, of her Whiteness, and bright Shining.
The State of the Church, all Expositors agree, is signified hereby.

The Church may in many respects be compared to the Moon.

Simile. Parallel. NAturalists affirm, the Moon receives her Light from the
Sun. THe Church has all her Light from Christ, the Sun of Righteousness. Mat.
4.2.
II. The Moon receiving Light by the Beams at the Sun, she shines forth, and
gives Light to the World. II. So the Church receiving Light from Christ, she
shines forth in Brightness and Glory. The Sun gives Light, but receives none;
the Moon both gives Light, and receives Light: So Christ, as God, has his
Light in himself; but as Mediator, has his Light from the Father, to
communicate it to the Church, that the Church may give Light to the World. Ye
are the Light of the World. Mat. 5.14.
III. The Moon gives Light to the World only in the Night. III. So the Church
gives her Light forth to enlighten Sinners, whilst the Night of this World
lasts. IV. The Moon, tho very fair and bright, yet (as Naturalists observe)
has her Spots. IV. So the Church, tho pure and holy, yet in her self is not
without Spots of Sin. No Saint is without Blemishes. If we say we have no Sin,
we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. 1 John 1.8.
V. The Moon has her various Aspects: sometimes she is in the Full, and
sometimes in the Wane; sometimes she shines more glorious, and sometimes less;
and yet still the same Moon. She does not (says an ancient Writer) always show
her Light in her full Orb: she sometimes so decreaseth, that there seems to
us not to be any Moon; yet she is not then destitute of the Sunbeams, tho it
seem otherwise to our Sight. V. So the Church is under various States and
Changes. She does not always shine as at Full Moon, or send forth a full
Brightness, but is sometimes so obscured, that she appears hardly visible; she
was forced into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.6.
from the Face of the Dragon, and Romish Beast: yet it is certain, the Church
is always in being. Posse putes nobis persuadere, eum esse Ecclesiae statum, ut
obscurari nequeat, ut nil Perfidia, nil Hosts, nil Antichristus valeat? Delere
hi quidem Ecclesiam nunquam possunt sed in angustias compingere, and compellere
in latebras possint, says Whitaker. Think thou that thou can persuade us,
that the State of the Church is such that it cannot be obscured, so that the
Perfidiousness of Enemies, and Antichrist, can do nothing against it? They
cannot indeed destroy the Church, but they can bring it into a narrower
Compass, and drive it into Holes. The Church (says Augustine) is like the Moon,
which sometimes shines wholly, being enlightened with the Sunbeams, and
sometimes is deprived of a great part of her Light; so the Church shines
sometimes most gloriously, and sometimes is so obscured that she hardly appears
at all.

Inferences.
HEnce we may learn to look, and earnestly expect to receive all our Light as
well as Life from Christ, the Light of the World, and earnestly pray with
David, Psalm. 4.6.
that he would lift up the Light of his Countenance upon us, that forasmuch as
we have no Light but what is communicated from him unto us, he would dart
continually his glorious Beams into our Hearts, Mat. 5.16.
that we may indeed be as shining Lights in this dark World.

2. This may also humble the most glittering Saints, to consider that they
cannot shine so bright in this World, but that their Spots may be discernible
to themselves and others, which may excite them to apply themselves daily to
the Sun of Righteousness for cleansing. Mal 4.2.


3. To keep clear, and shine as much as possible, that the poor, benighted,
dark World may obtain Benefit by them, and confess it to the Glory of God. Mat.
5.16.
Let your Light so shine, etc.

4. Take Comfort from hence, notwithstanding your various Changes, Ebbings, and
Flowings in this World, for that the Enemy may as soon change the Ordinances of
the Moon, as make an utter end of God's Church, as you have heard.

5. What a dreadful Doom will such be sure to have, that love Darkness so, as
that they do not only contemn, oppose, and endeavor to pull the Moon, viz. the
Church, out of her Orb; but so wicked are they, they slight and contemn the
Sun, from whence she receives all her shining Brightness. Let such read, Job
5.14. They meet with Darkness in the Daytime, and grope in the Noonday, as in
the Night: To whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ev^^, 2 Pet. 2 17
except Grace prevent by giving them Repentance.

The Church the Temple of God.
1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God.

2 Cor. 6.16. For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will
dwell in them, and walk in them, etc.


THe Church is the Antitype of Solomon's Temple, and we shall therefore run
the Parallel with respect to that.

Type. Parallel THe Temple was built with costly Stones, well hewed, squared,
and polished, before they were laid into the Building. SO the Church of God is
built with spiritual Stones, 1 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Acts 2.40, 41.
who are well hewed and polished by the Word and Spirit, before added to, or
laid into the heavenly Building, II. In the Building of the Temple there was no
Noise heard of Hammer or Ax; and the House, when it was in building, was built
with Stones made ready before they were brought thither; 1 King. 6.7
so that there was neither Hammer, nor Ax, nor any Tool of Iron heard in the
House, whilst it was in building. II. So in the building of the Church, there
should be no need of the Hammer, or the Ax, to square and hew by Repentance the
Stones of this Building, being every way prepared, and made fit before.
Conversion is the polishing Work, and those that receive unconverted Persons,
violate the holy Rule of God's Word, for that makes Work for the Hammer and Ax
in the Temple. Hence Solomon says, Prepare thy Work without, Prove. 24.27.
and make ready thy things in the Field, and after build thy House. III. Others
besides Solomon were concerned in the building of the Temple, as Hiram King of
Tyrus, and the Zidonians, who hewed the Timber for it. III. To show, that in
the building of the Church of God, the Gentiles as well as the Jews, are
concerned; they all concur together, Ephesians. 2.^1.
to build up a holy Temple in the Lord. IV. The Temple was a most rare and
glorious Structure; 1 Kings 6.21.
it was overlaid with fine Gold upon carved Cedar. IV. To show the Beauty and
Glory of the Church, which is adorned with the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit.
The Church is inwardly pure, very rich and beautiful. Hence the King's Daughter
is said to be all glorious within. Psalm 45.17
V. In the Temple were many Windows, 1 Kings 6.4.
to let in Light abundantly. V. So in the Church, the Light of the Gospel, and
the blessed Spirit, shines gloriously; these let Light in in great abundance.
VI. In the Temple were several Degrees of Galleries or Lofts, each one above
another, and larger each than other. VI. So in the Church God has placed
Degrees of Officers, some greater and higher in Glory than others; as Apostles,
Ephesians. 4.11.
Pastors, Teachers, etc. VII. The Walls of the Temple were covered round about
with Cherubims, Palm Trees, and Flowers. VII. To note (says Mr. Guild) the
Protection of the Church by the Ministry of Angels, tho they are not seen, and
its peaceable, victorious, and flourishing State under the same. VII. Solomon
consecrated the Temple unto the Lord. VIII. Joh. 17.
So did Christ his Church unto the Father. IX. There was Music used in the
Temple. IX. Which signifies that Joy of Heart, Ephesians. 5.19.
and heavenly Melody, that is in the Church, amongst the faithful and sincere
Converts thereof. X. In the Temple was the Ark of the Testimony, and in the
midst of the House it is said he set it. X. So in the Church is God's Word and
Covenant of Grace, born by Christ, and by his true Ministers, by preaching and
publishing the same. XI. The Glory of the Lord filled the Temple; God promised
to dwell therein, and hear the Prayers that should be there made. I have
hallowed this House, 2 Chronicles. 7.15.
(says God) that thou have built, to put my Name there for ever; and mine Eyes
and my Heart shall be there perpetually. XI. So the glorious Presence of Go is
in his Church, he dwells in Sion, and from thence the Perfection of Beauty
shines forth, and the Promises of blessed Grace, Peace, Pardon, and Acceptance,
is made to them who dwell therein. His Eye is always upon the Righteous, his
Ears open to their Cry, 1 Pet. 3.12.
and his tender Compassion is ever toward them. Type. Disparity. THe Temple was
built with dead and senseless Stones. THe Church is built with living, 1 Pet.
2.5.
sensible, and lively Stones. II. The Stones were polished and hewn by the
hands of Men. II. These Stones are hewn and polished by the hand of the Spirit.
III. The Temple that was built by Solomon, was utterly destroyed by the
Babylonians. III. The Church of God can never be destroyed; the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.
so as utterly to overthrow it: tho it is not denied, but the outward Courts
have been trodden down by the Popish Gentiles. Rev. 11.2.


A Parallel between the second Temple, built in the Days of Nehemiah, and the
Church of God Built in the latter Days.
Metaphor. Parallel. THe Temple that was built in the Days of Nehemiah, was
first destroyed by the literal Babylonians. SIgnifying the Church of God should
be greatly defaced and spoiled, and the outward Courts trodden down by the
mystical Babylonians, Rev. 11 2, 3
and afterward rebuilt, or rather, repaired again. II. The Temple was built in
a troublesome Time; they wrought with one hand, and held a Sword in the other.
II. Signifying, that the Church of God should be rebuilt in a troublesome time,
and that great Opposition should be made against them. III. The Temple was
rebuilt by such as had been for many Years in the Babylonian Captivity. Neh.
4.13.
III. Signifying, that the rebuilding of God's Church should be by such as had
been a long time in spiritual Captivity, under the mystical Babylonians, or
Mother of Harlots. IV. The Builders of this second Temple were looked upon as
poor, weak, and contemptible Persons, in comparison of Solomon, Neh. 4.2.
and those that built with him. IV. Signifying, that those whom God would raise
up to repair the waste Places of Sion, in the latter Days, should be poor,
weak, inconsiderable Persons, very unlikely to perfect so great a Work as
Reformation is. What was Luther, and others whom God employed, to the holy
Apostles, who were the first Builders? V. The Builders, of this Temple were
greatly mocked and jeered. There were Sanballat, Gesham, Tobiah, and others,
who in reproachful manner said, What will these feeble Jews do? Neh. 4.2, 3, 4.
will they make an end in a Day? If a Fox go up, he shall even break down their
Stone-Wall. V. So the Rebuilders in these latter Days have been greatly
reproached and contemned by the Enemies of Christ; those that are truly
religious, called feeble, weak, and foolish Ones, etc. nay, Heretics,
Schismatics, and many other reproachful Names have been, and still are daily
given to them, and their Work much slighted and despised also. VI. The Builders
of this Temple had much Rubbish to remove, Neh. 4.2.
before they could go on with their Work. VI. So the Builders of God's Church,
in these latter Days, have had much Popish Rubbish to remove, much Filth of
humane Inventions, and Traditions of that Church being in their way; some
Stones being almost quite lost amongst this Rubbish, and others ready to
mistake, and instead of a Stone of Sion, they take a Stone of Babylon. VII. The
Builders of this Temple were hindered, and for a time the Work ceased. VII. So
the Builders of God's House, or Reformers in Religion, have often been hindered
or obstructed in these latter Days. VIII. Many People were very backward about
rebuilding the Temple, Hag. 1.2.
in the Days of Haggai and Nehemiah, crying, the Time was not come that the
House of the Lord should be built. VIII. So have many Souls been very backward
about the Work of Reformation, or repairing the House of God; they have dwelt
in their cieled Houses, and let the House of God (as it were) lie waste. IX.
Tho many cruel Enemies endeavored to hinder the rebuilding of the Temple, yet
the Work went on, and was finished in some Time, to the Joy of the Faithful.
IX. So the Enemies now, as in former Times, strive to hinder the repairing of
God's House; yet the Work of Reformation shall in due time be perfected, to the
Joy of all sincere Christians. X. That Work was carried on, not by Might, Zech
4 6.
nor by Power, but by the Spirit of the Lord. X. So the Work in these Days goes
on, not so much by the Power of Men, or human Help, as by the Power of God, and
his Spirit. XI. God promised, that the Glory of the second House should exceed
the Glory of the first; Hag. 2.9.
which some conceive was made good by Christ's coming, whose personal Presence
in the Temple greatly added to its Glory. XI. So the Church of God in the
latter Day, will be far more glorious than it was ever yet since the beginning
of the World, which will be accomplished, as will be showed in respect of these
things following.

1. God will destroy all the Enemies of his Church. 1 Samuel 2.10. Psalm. 37.10,
11.
The Adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces, out of Heaven God will
thunder upon them; for evil Doers shall be cut off. Yet a little while, and the
Wicked shall not be, but the Meek shall possess the Earth, etc. And all that
lift up a hand against Zion, shall be torn in pieces. God will plead the
Controversy of his Church, and undo all that afflict her. The Stone cut out of
the Mountain without hands, zech. 12.2. Dan. 2.34.
shall smite the Image upon his Feet, that were of Iron and Clay, and break
them to pieces: Then the Iron, and the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the
Gold, shall be broken together, and become as the Chaff of the Summer
Threshing-floor.

2. God will utterly destroy all Idolatry, and all false Worship, and by this
means will restore his own Appointments, in the purity of them. Rev. 14.8. Rev.
18.1, 2, 3, 21. Isa. 60.1, 2. and 25.6, 7. and 58.12.

3. God, to make her glorious, will unite all her Children together in Love:
They shall serve the Lord with one Consent; and no more Divisions shall be
amongst them. Isa. 11.13. Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, 19. Zeph. 3.8, 9. Zech. 14.9. There
shall be one Lord, and his Name one.

4. God will enlarge her Borders. The Children of the Barren shall say again in
my Ears, The Place is too strait for me, give me Room that I may dwell. Isa.
59.20. The Fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in, they shall come like
Doves to the Windows. Isa. 60.3.4, 5.

5. The Jews shall be called, and both Jews and Gentiles shall make but one
Sheepfold: And there shall be one Sheepfold, and one Shepherd. Ezekiel. 37.22.
John 10.16. Isa. 19.19, 20, to the end.

6. The Glory of the Church will be great in respect of Knowledge. All the Earth
shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as the Waters cover
the Sea. Numb. 14.21. Isa. 11.9. Hab. 2.14.

7. Her Glory shall be great in respect of the Abundance of Peace which shall
be in the World in that Day: God will make Wars to cease to the ends of the
Earth; such a Day never was in the World yet. Psalm. 46.8, 9. and 72.7. Isa.
2.4. Mich. 4.3, 4.

8. The Mountain of the Lord's House shall be exalted above the Mountains,
Mich. 4.2. Isa. 2.12.
and lifted up above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. The Saints
in that Day shall possess the Gates of their Enemies. Jer. 30.20.

9. The Glory of the Church will be great in respect of Holiness. God will
bring his People into the Fire, and make his Church very pure. Isa. 1.25, 26,
27. Mal. 3.2. Psalm. 110.2, 3. Zech. 13.8, 9. There shall be no Canaanite in the
House of the Lord, no unclean Person shall dwell therein.

10. Her Glory shall be great by Christ's coming to her: Psalm. 2.6.
Thine Eyes shall see the King in his Beauty. Isa. 33.17. He shall be King over
all the Earth. I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. God will dwell
with Men in a more glorious manner than he ever yet dwelt with them.

11. In that her Glory shall abide, and the Kingdom shall not be left to
another People. Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.27.



Inferences.
LEt us pray for the Day of Sion's Glory, and never give God rest, until he
has made Jerusalem a Praise in the whole Earth: Thy Kingdom come, etc.

2. Let not the Godly be discouraged, whatever Troubles they are now attended
with; Clouds of Darkness shall soon fly away: At Even-tide there shall be
Light. Zech. 14.7


The Church compared to an Olive Tree.
Hosea 14.7. His Branches shall spread, and his Beauty shall be as the
Olive Tree.
The Church of God is compared in this place to an Olive Tree.

Simile. Parallel. PArt or the Beauty of the Olive Tree consists in its
Greenness, it is always green; few Trees that bear Fruit are like the Olive in
this respect. SO the Church of God, and every sincere Soul, is green and
flourishing. Greenness notes Life and Sap to be in the Branches; the Branches
of the Divine Olive, viz. the Saints, are never without spiritual Moisture, or
the Sap of Grace in their Hearts and Lives: Psalm. 1.3.
His Leaves shall not fail. Hence David said, He was like a green Olive Tree in
the House of the Lord. Psalm. 52.8.
II. The Olive Tree is renowned for Fruitfulness, it abounds mightily with
Fruit. Pliny says, If care be not taken, its Fruit so loads it, that it even
breaks it down. II. The Church is fruitful now, but shall be much more fruitful
unto God hereafter; her Beauty shall be as the Olive Tree in this respect. She
shall abound in Children, and abound in Grace, and true Holiness. III. The
Olive Tree bears not only much Fruit, but also profitable Fruit. Olives are
rare things. What Tree brings forth better Fruit than the Olive Tree? Its Fruit
is mollifying, feeding, strengthening, healing; its Oil makes your Lamps to
burn. III. So the Church brings forth good Fruit, not only a great quantity,
but Fruit that excells in its Nature or Quality, viz. Faith, Love, Meekness,
Patience, Charity, Gal. 5.22.
etc. even all the Fruits of the Spirit, (or as they are in another place
called, the Fruits of Righteousness. Jam. 3.17.
) Grace is of a mollifying, feeding, strengthening, and healing Nature; Grace
makes the Lamp of Profession to burn clear, whereby others see, or have much
Light. See Oil. IV. The Branches of an Olive Tree were formerly used to signify
Peace. IV. A Saint is for Peace. They are Peacemakers; they desire nothing
more than Peace with God, and Peace with Men: I am for Peace, says David.
Psalm. 120.7
He that has the Fruit of the Olive, viz. Grace, shall soon see the Dove, viz.
the Spirit, bringing the Olive Branch: but, as Noah's Dove did not bring the
Olive Branch, till the Waters were abated; so the Flood of Iniquity must be
abated, the Waters of Wickedness sink and be dried up, before a Man can receive
a sure Sign or Token of Peace and Reconciliation with God.

Inferences.
HEnce let Saints, who are planted in the House of the Lord, labor to be like
the Olive Tree, not only to bring forth much Fruit as to quantity, but good and
right Fruit, in respect to its quality.

The Church compared to an Inn.
Luke 10.34. -- And brought him to an Inn.
BY the Inn, most Expositors (that I have met with) understand that Christ
means the Church, which may be fitly compared to an Inn.

Metaphor. Parallel. AN Inn is a Place to entertain Travelers, whilst they
pass from one Country or City to another. SO the Church is a Place to entertain
Christians, whilst they pass through the Wilderness of this World, to the Land
of Promise; or through the Valley of Tears, to the Mount of Joy. In an Inn is a
Host, who is to take care of Strangers or Travelers that come thither, and to
help them to whatsoever they need. II. In the Church are Pastors, or faithful
Ministers, who wait to receive all poor Sinners, who come to take up their
Lodging there, and make them very welcome. III. An Inn is a Place of Refreshment
for Travelers, where they meet with convenient Food, and sweet Repose in their
Journey. A Man may have in some Inns what Food he pleases, either Milk or
strong Meat, choice of Diet. III. So the Church is a Place of Soul-refreshment
to all spiritual Travelers and Pilgrims. There is both the sincere Milk of the
Word, and strong-Meat, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Heb. 5.12.
all things ready the Soul needs. Some are for one sort of Diet, some for
another. In the Church also is sweet Repose, there Christ gives Rest to the
Weary. IV. An Inn sometimes lodges (unknown to the Host) evil Persons,
Thieves, and Deceivers. IV. So the Church, notwithstanding all the Care that is
taken by her Officers, does sometimes receive or take in false Professors, such
as are unsound at Heart, Hypocrites, and deceitful Workers. V. An Inn is a very
desirable Place to Men in their Journey. V. So is the Church of God; hence
David longed after the Courts of God's House. Psalm. 84.2.
VI. An Inn is not a Place to abide long in; the Traveller takes up his Abode
in it but a Night or two, and he is gone. VI. So the Church Militant is no long
abiding Place; Christians stay in it but for a short time; it is a Place of
Refreshment (as it were) for a Night. Psalm. 30.5. Heb. 13.14
Here we have no continuing City, we are Strangers, as all our Fathers were;
when we come to Heaven, we shall abide with the Church Triumphant for ever.
Metaphor. Disparity. IN an Inn there is little to be had without Money; if a
Man has not Money or Credit, he is no Guest for them. THe Church is a Place
for the Poor, for such as have no Money, they are welcome thither. The Doors of
this Inn are always open to all sincere Souls, whether they be poor or rich.
II. A Man that comes to lodge in an Inn, tho he has never so good
Entertainment, yet he is not contented to stay there, he makes ready in the
morning to go forward in his Journey. II. But he that comes to take up his
Lodging in the Church, or spiritual Inn, if he be sincere, desires not to go
out from thence any more; he desires to dwell therein as long as he lives:
tho our abiding in this World is but compared to a Night. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, Psalm. 27.4.
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the Days of my Life. III. An Inn
may be so full of Guests, that a weary Traveller, especially if he come late,
can have no Entertainment, but is forced to seek it elsewhere: Luke 2.8.
There was no Room for them in the Inn. III. The Church was never yet so full,
but that there was Room for all those that were weary and heavy-laden. All that
ever truly traveled toward Sion, have found Entertainment there; nay, Mat. 22
3, to 14.
tho the Servants of the Lord have been sent into the Streets and Lanes, to
fetch in the Poor, and the Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind, and they do
accordingly, yet there is Room. As there can be no want of any Accommodation,
of spiritual Food, so there is no want of Room. All that have been called by
the Word and Spirit, and compelled by Grace to come in, in all Ages, have had
blessed Entertainment; and as God has enlarged and increased Converts, so he
has enlarged and increased the Church, by three thousand at a time. Acts 2.40.
IV. Commonly those that lodge in an Inn are Strangers and Foreiners, and
staying but a night, or a very short time, have no acquaintance with any that
dwell therein. IV. But the Saints that are in the spiritual Inn, the Church,
Ephesians. 2.19.
are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but therein make their abode: for tho it
be said, it is but for a Night, or a Day, etc. yet it is as long as they live;
and they get very great Acquaintance with those that dwell therein.

Inferences.
BLess God, that he has provided such a Place of Refreshment for poor weary
Travelers.

2. You that look upon your selves to be Strangers and Pilgrims in this World,
may learn from hence where to take up your Lodging.

3. Also it may inform God's People, and faithful Ministers, what care they
ought to take in receiving Men and Women into the Church: Innkeepers will
examine all suspicious Persons.

The Church compared to a Vine.
Psalm. 80.8. Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt; thou have cast out the
Heathen, and planted it, etc.

Verse 14. Behold, and visit this Vine, etc.

Cant. 2.15. -- For our Vines have tender Grapes, etc.

Hos. 14.8. -- And flourish as the Vine.


The Church is compared to a Vine.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Vine is no beautiful Plant, yet very fruitful; it
abounds with inward Sap. SO the Church, although she does not seem so beautiful to
carnal Eyes, yet she is very fruitful to God. Psalm. 104.6
The Trees of the Lord (that is, the Saints of God) are full of Sap, full of
Divine Virtue, or good Fruits. II. A Vine spreads forth its Branches, and
accordingly grows much in a short time. II. So the Lord's spiritual Vine has
in former times exceedingly spread her Branches forth; the Mountains are said
to be covered with the Shadow of it, and the Boughs thereof were like the
goodly Cedars: Psalm. 80.8, 9, 10, 11.
She stretched out her Branches to the Sea, and her Boughs unto the River.
Israel, God's ancient Vine, grew wonderfully; and so did the Gospel-Vine, how
did it in a little time spread forth its spiritual Branches, Eastwards, and
Westwards, over many Nations and Kingdoms! She extended her Bouhgs into
Parthia, Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Pamphilia,
Lybia, Spain, Italy, England, etc. III. The Vine must have much Pains taken
with it; it needs Pruning often, or else it will decay. III. So God takes much
pains with his Church; it is pruned and purged, Joh. 15.2.
that it may bring forth the more Fruit. IV. The Vine is in it self but a weak
Plant, and therefore needs Under-propping. IV. So the Church is in her self but
weak, and needs to be born up by Christ. God is the Strength of his People;
they are wholly supported by Him. V. Tho the Vine has many Branches, yet all
have a Sufficiency of Sap and Nourishment from the Root, to make them fruitful.
V. So the Church, tho she has many Members, yet all receive a Sufficiency of
Grace and Divine Virtue of the Root, ( viz. the Lord Jesus) to make them
fruitful. VI. The Vine, if it be barren or unfruitful, is the most unprofitable
of any Tree, and fit for nothing but the Fire. Son of Man, what comes of the
Vine-Tree, above all other Trees, and of the Vine-Branches, which is amongst
the Trees of the Forest? Shall Wood be taken thereof, to hang any Vessel
thereon? Behold, it is cast into the Fire to be burnt. VI. So are the Members
of the visible Church, if unfruitful, good for naught, but to be cut down, and
cast into the Fire, as our Savior himself shows, John 15. Therefore thus
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 15.6.
As the Vine-Tree that is amongst the Trees of the Forest, which I have given
to the Fire to be consumed; so will I give the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: I will
set my Face against them; they shall go out of one Fire, and another Fire shall
consume them: And ye shall know that I am the Lord, etc.

The Church compared to a Dove.
Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, that art in the Clifts of the Rock, etc.

Psalm. 74.19. O deliver not the Soul of thy Turtle-Dove unto the Multitude, etc.


THat is, thy Church and People, who worship none but Thee, as the Turtle-Dove,
that never entertains Conjunction with another; and who in their Affliction,
like a Dove, express their Grief in Sighs and solitary Groans to thee; and
which is unarmed, weak, simple, and meek, like the Turtle-Dove, which is
esteemed the least among the Species of Doves, as Aristotle says. The Chaldee
renders it, The Soul of such as learn thy Law, (that Word (...) a Turtle-Dove,
being of some affinity with (...) Law.) Christ calls his Church a Dove, by
which Metaphor, says Glassius, its Simplicity, Chastity, etc. is denoted.

Doct. That the Spouse of Christ, or a gracious Soul, is or may fitly be
compared unto a Dove.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Dove is a meek and harmless Creature: Be ye innocent as
Doves. THe Saints of God are injurious to none, they seek the hurt of no Man,
they are and ought to be harmless, Phil. 2.15.
the Children of God, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation. II.
The Dove makes her Nest in the Rock; Cant. 4.14
her Safety, and Place of Abode is in the Clifts of the Rock. II. The Saints
make their Abode in the Rock Christ; they build only in him, Exodus 3^.22.
and upon him; and indeed in the Clifts of this Rock they rest, viz. in the
Wounds, Piercings, Dyings, and Crucifyings of the Lord Jesus Christ. III. The
Dove is a Creature that feeds not upon Carrion, as Eagles, Ravens, and other
Fowls do, but only upon pure Grain. III. Gracious Souls, or sincere Christians,
do not feed upon the sensual Pleasures, and carnal Delights of this World, as
the Ungodly do; Psalm. 119.104, 128.
nor will they feed upon, or receive in the detestable Carrion of Men's
Traditions; they hate Idolatry, false Worship, and every evil Way, and only
feed and live upon the pure Grain of God's holy Word. IV. The Dove is a
Creature much molested by all Birds of Prey. IV. The Saints of God are
persecuted and molested by all the Sons of Belial; they are chased like a Dove
or Partridge upon the Mountains. 1 Samuel 26.20.
V. The Dove has no other Defense, when molested, but by Flight. V. The Godly
have no other way, when molested by Satan, and wicked Men, but to fly to God:
At what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Psalm. 56.3.
VI. The Dove thinks not her self secure, till she be got into the Rock. VI.
The sincere Christian looks not upon himself as secure, until he is got into
Christ. Prove. 18.10
The Name of the Lord is a Strong-Tower, the Righteous run into it, and are
safe. They, like Noah's Dove, fly to the Ark. VII. The Dove is a Creature very
chaste, and true to its Mate. VII. The sincere Christian, and Spouse of Christ,
is very chaste to the Lord Jesus, will own no other Head or Husband, they defy
the Pope, that Firstborn of Satan, and all others who pretend to Headship, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over their Consciences. VIII. The Dove has a
lovely Eye, and it is always fixed upon her Mate. VIII. The Saints of God have a
single and lovely Eye in Christ's Sight: they strive to be like the Dove,
resisting Pride, Lust, and Wantonness, and to be adorned with Meekness and
Modesty, having always their Eyes upon Jesus Christ; not daring to lift up
their Eyes to other Lovers, Isa. 8.17. Psalm. 25.15
but by holy Intention wait upon him alone in all their Devotion. IX. The Dove
loves to accompany with Doves; they will gather together by great Numbers, if
they can. IX. God's Children love Communion and Fellowship one with another,
that they may mutually be comforted and edified in the Faith: They fly like a
Cloud, Isa. 60.8.
and as Doves to their Windows, that is, to the House or Church of God. X. The
Dove mourns when she has lost the sight of her Mate X. A gracious Soul mourns
when it has lost the Sight of Jesus Christ; Isa. 38.11, 14. Ezekiel. 7.16
Thou hiddest thy Face, and I was troubled, (says David) I did mourn as a
Dove, (says Hezekiah) mine Eyes fail with looking up. I shall not see the Lord
in the Land of the Living. They shall be on the Mountains, like Doves in the
Valleys, every one mourning for his own Iniquity. XI. The Dove is a very
fruitful Creature, having Young almost every month in the Year. XI. The Church
is also very fruitful to Christ, (1.) In respect of bringing forth Children:
Psalm. 87.
This and that Man it shall be said was born in her. (2.) In respect of
bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit, and good Works. XII. Doves love to be
by the Rivers of Water. XII. Christians, or gracious Souls, love to be by the
sweet Streams of living Water, Psalm. 23.3, 4.
by that River that makes glad the City of God; they love to drink of the
Promises and Consolations of the Spirit. XIII. Doves have Feathers of diverse
colors; Psalm. 68.13.
and it is observed, when the Sun shines, their Beauty appears most, as if their
Wings were covered with Silver, and their Feathers with yellow Gold. XIII. The
Saints are gloriously adorned with the Righteousness of Christ, and with the
Gifts and Graces of the Spirit; and when the Sun of Righteousness shines, Psalm.
45.
and sends forth his splendent Beams and Rays upon them, then their Graces
appear and shine most glorious. XIV. The Dove was appointed by the Lord under
the Law for a Sacrifice, and no other Bird or Fowl of Heaven but the Dove. And
hence you read in the Gospel, that there were those that sold Doves in the
Temple, Mat. 21.12.
which was (as it is thought) to accommodate such as came to offer Sacrifice.
XIV. The Godly are required to offer up themselves, both Body and Soul, as an
acceptable Sacrifice unto God; Romans 12.1.
and many of them have been commanded, and readily have yielded themselves up
to God, in a way of suffering, for Christ's sake; Prove. 15.8.
and none but those who are God's own sincere Children, are accepted in
offering up themselves, either in a way of doing or suffering. XV. The Dove is
said to be silly, and without Heart, Hos. 7 11.
wants Courage, etc. XV. The Saints of God are of themselves in many things
silly and foolish, wanting that Heart, Courage, and Magnanimity of Spirit, to
stand up for God, his Truth, Interest, and People, as they ought to do.

Inferences.
IS Christ's Church, and so consequently every gracious Person, compared to a
Dove, being meek, humble, harmless, chaste, and single-hearted to the Lord Jesus
Christ? etc. Then we may assure our selves, that she that delights in Prey,
Rapine, and Blood, as does the Romish Church, is none of the Dove or Church of
Jesus Christ.

2. Are the Eyes of a Dove by the Rivers of Water? do they delight in Springs,
Fountains, and pure Rivers? and in this are they an Emblem of the Godly, who
hate all filthy, loathsome, and detestable Traditions of Men, and delight only
in the pure, unmixed, and Crystal Streams of God's holy Institutions? Then all
those, who, like Ravens, and other foul and unclean Birds of Prey, delight in
Ditches, and in long-standing, stinking Pools of this false Church, (where they
defile themselves in searching for the detestable Carrion of Idolatry) are none
of Christ's Dove-like People.

3. And let those that are the People of God, labor to be like the Dove, who
is neat, and will not defile it self; let them see they keep their Hearts chaste
to Christ, and avoid all Pollution of Sin in their Conversation. 2 Cor. 7.1.


5. This also may inform the Godly, that it is no marvel if they are persecuted
and molested by the Wicked.

5. And in the midst of all their Afflictions, Persecutions, and Temptations,
this may comfort them: God has prepared for his poor Doves a strong Place of
Defense and Shelter, viz. the Rock Christ, whither let us in all Times of
Danger fly by Faith and Prayer.

The Church compared to a natural Body.
1 Cor. 12.13. -- All baptized into one Body.

Ephesians. 2.16. -- Both unto God in one Body.

Ephesians. 4.12. -- For the edifying of the Body of Christ.

Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the Body, the Church, etc.

Verse 24. For his Body sake, which is the Church, etc.


THe Body, (...), (Soma) is frequently put for the Church or People of God, the
Explication of which Trope is concisely opened in the following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. EVery natural Body has a Head. SO the Church of God has
a Head, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 1.22.
He (God the Father) has put all things under his Feet, and gave him to be the
Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body, the Fullness of him that
fills all in all. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
Col. 1.17, 18.
Verse 17. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, etc. II. The natural
Body has many Members, 1 Cor. 12.14, 20.
and tho many Members, yet all make but one and the same Body. II. The Chureh
of Christ consists of diverse Saints, called the Members of his Body: Now ye are
the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27.
and Members in particular; and tho many, yet all make but one and the same
mystical Body. III. In the natural Body are Members different in Strength,
Usefulness, and Honor, as Arms, Legs, Eyes, Feet, Hands, Fingers, etc. But the
weakest, and those that seem least honorable, are very useful, and the Body
cannot be without them. III. So in the Church, the mystical Body of Christ, are
different Members, both with respect to Honor and Usefulness; as Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers; Ephesians 4.11. 1 J^h. 2.13, 14.
or, as the Apostle John has it, Fathers, young Men, and Children. All are not
Apostles, all are not Prophets, all are not Teachers, etc. But yet the weakest
and most feeble Saints or Members are useful to the Church. As in the Body
natural, 1 Cor. 12.20, 21, 22, 23.
tho the Eye is of greater use than some other Members, yet the Eyes (or
Ministers, who are as useful as Eyes to the Body) cannot say to the Hand, (or
such to whom God has given the Riches of this World to distribute unto
others,) We have no need of thee; nor can the Head say to the Feet, I have no
need of you. Nay, and those Members of the Body, which seem to be more feeble,
are necessary. IV. In the natural Body, if one Member suffer, all suffer with
it. IV. So in Christ's mystical Body, when one Saint suffers, all do
sympathize and suffer with him. If one suffer, 1 Cor 12.26.
all suffer; and if one Member be honored, all the Members of the Body rejoice
with him. V. All the Members of the Body natural, take care of, and seek the
Good of the whole Body, and of each Member in particular. V. So in the Church
of God, every particular Saint does, and ought always to seek the Welfare of
the whole mystical Body of Christ: 1 Cor. 12.25.
That there should be no Schism in the Body, but that the Members should have
the same care one of another. VI. All the Members of the natural Body have
their Nourishment from the Head. VI. So all the Members of the mystical Body
receive Nourishment from Christ, who is the only Head thereof; and from hence
the Apostle condemns those false Professors, and counterfeit Christians, who
pretended to much Piety and Religion, but did not receive their Doctrine and
Principles from Christ, nor were they united unto him by Evangelical Faith. Not
holding the Head, Col. 2.18, 19.
from which all the Body by Joints and Bonds having Nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the Increase of God. VII. In the natural Body,
betwixt the Members and the Body there is a mavelous Nearness, or blessed
Union. VII. So there is a wonderful Nearness, and blessed Union between Jesus
Christ, and every Member of his mystical Body: For we are Members of his Body,
of his Flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and of his Bones. VIII. The Body natural increases in Strength, Bigness, and
Beauty; according to the Age of the Body, is the Perfection and Excellency of
it. VIII. So the Church increases in spiritual Strength, Bigness, and Glory.
The Church is but small and weak now, in comparison of what she shall be, when
she is come to her full Growth, and perfect State. There will be a great
Addition to the Church in the latter Day: The Lord shall rise upon thee, Isa.
60.2, to 9.
and his Glory shall be seen upon thee; and the Gentiles shall come to thy
Light, and Kings to the Brightness of thy Rising. Lift up thine Eyes round
about, and see; all they gather themselves together, they come unto thee; thy
Sons shall come from afar, and thy Daughters shall be nursed at thy side, etc.
to the end of the Chapter, compared with chap. 66.8, 9, 10. where you may read
of the Multitude that shall be added to her, and of the Abundance of her Glory.
And as she shall grow in Bigness, so likewise she shall increase in spiritual
Knowledge, Faith, and Godliness. Hab. 2.14.
For the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as
the Waters cover the Sea. All the Officers, and glorious Gifts appertaining to
them, that are given to the Church, are for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13, 14.
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ.

Inferences.
THis clearly shows what infinite Benefit the Godly receive from Jesus Christ,
and what Dependency they have upon him. What can the Body do without the Head?

2. How happy are all true Believers! how near and dear are they to the Lord
Jesus! what greater Union is there, than that between the Members and the Head!
Ephesians. 5.29.
No Man ever hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as the Lord
the Church.

3. What will become of those evil and wicked Men, that seek to destroy the
Church and Saints of God! Do they not herein strive to break Christ's Bones,
and tear his Flesh in pieces? What will they do in the Day of Vengeance, Isa.
63.4.
when he comes forth to plead the Controversy of Zion.

4. This reproves that Church, that pretends it self to be Christ's Body, and
yet slights and grievously neglects his Members, nay, his most useful Members.
The Church should be as careful and tender of her Ministers, as the natural
Body is of its Eyes. Shall the Eye suffer, or be in danger of being put out or
spoiled, and the Hand refuse to relieve and defend it, when it is in its power?

The Church compared to a Vineyard.
Psalm. 80.15. And the Vineyard which thy Right Hand has planted.

Isa. 5.1. Now will I sing to my well-beloved, a Song of my Beloved, touching
his Vineyard.

Verse 7. For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the
Men of Judah his pleasant Plant.


A Vineyard, the Place where Vines are planted, metaphorically signifies the
Church. The Church is compared to a Vineyard.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Land that is made into a Vineyard, is a Piece of
Ground taken out of a Wilderness, or other common Ground, designed to that
special use. SO the Church is taken out of the Wilderness of this World, 1 Pet
2.9.
being separated from all People, to be a peculiar People to God: Ephesians. 2.1, 2
By Nature Saints were as barren and fruitless as Sinners. II. A Vineyard is
fenced or walled in, to secure it from wild Beasts, and others, who may offend
or hurt it. II. Isa. 5 2. Zech. 2.5.
So the Lord's Vineyard has a Wall or Fence about it: Says the Lord, I will
be a Wall of Fire unto her round about. What use soever a Fence is to a House,
Garden, or Vineyard, the same is God to his People. 1. Every one of his
Attributes (as we have elsewhere showed you) is a Fence or Security to her; his
Power is a Fence, his Wisdom is a Fence, his Mercy is a Fence, his special
Providence is a Fence. 2. The holy Angels are as a Wall or Fence to the Church,
and to every particular Saint; they were as a Wall of Safety to the Prophet, 2
Kings 6.15, 16. 3. Psalm. 34.7.
There is about the Church the Fence or Wall of Ordinances, Church Government,
and Discipline. -- The Reason why God makes a Wall about his People, is opened
under Metaphor, God a Husband man; also the Nature and Strength of it, to which
we refer you.

Quest. Perhaps some may enquire, How much Ground does this Hedge or Wall take
in?

1. It takes in all the Bodies of God's People; no Disease, Sickness, or
Affliction whatsoever can come upon those that truly fear and serve the
Almighty, but what he lets in. This appears in the case of Job; and by what
David says, My Life is in thy hand, etc.

2. This Wall comprehends more especially the Souls of Saints; no Temptation, 1
Cor. 10.13. Mat. 10.30 Luke 21.18
Persecution, or Trial, can come upon them, but what God lets in. His special
Eye, Care, Protection, and Divine Providence is so over them, that not a Hair
of their Heads shall fall to the Ground without his Notice; that is, He has
interested himself in all the Concernments of his Children, yea, even in the
smallest Matters.

3. This Wall takes in their Houses, and all they have: Job 1.10.
Have thou not made a Hedge about him, and about his House, and about all he
has, on every side? The Devil could not touch any of Job's Sheep, Oxen, or
Asses, until God opened the Door for him; much less his Sons, Daughters, Body
and Life. Suffer us (said the unclean Spirits to Christ) to go into the Herd of
Swine. They could not destroy those Swine, before permitted or suffered by the
Almighty.

III. A Vineyard is planted; the choice things that grow there, come not up of
themselves. III. So the Church is planted by the Lord, and every goodly Plant
that grows therein. Hence God the Father is called an Husbandman. Joh. 15 1.
Isa. 5.7.
The Men of Israel are called his pleasant Plants. IV. A Vineyard is dug up,
and well-manured, before it is planted which is not done without much pains.
IV. The Church of God, and every gracious Soul, may be said to be dug, or
the fallow Ground of their Hearts by powerful Conviction broken up, Hos. 10.12
and thereby prepared to receive the good Seed, or to have a Principle of Grace
planted in their Hearts. V. A Vineyard has many Vines planted in it, Luk 13.6.
Cant. 6.11 and 7.12.
and not only so, but also Fig Trees, Pomegranates, and other excellent
Fruit Trees. V. So in the universal Church are many particular Congregations or
Communities of Christians, who are as so many choice Vines in God's Sight; it
also abounds with Plants, some fruitful, and some barren, as is signified by
our Savior, Luke 13.6. He spoke also this Parable: Luke 13.6.
A certain Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came and sought
Fruit thereon, and found none. VI. A Vineyard needs much pruning and watering;
the Stones also must be gathered out of it: hence there are Vine-dressers
appointed to look after it. VI. So the Church of God must have much pains taken
with it, or it will soon decay; there is need of pruning, and cutting off
superfluous Branches, and gathering out other things that offend: Hence God
has appointed his faithful Ministers, 2 Cor. 6.1.
who are Workers together with him, to take care and charge of it. Hence Paul
says, I have planted, 1 Cor. 3.6.
and Apollo watered. VII. Vineyards were wont to be hurt by Foxes, by the wild
Boar, and other evil Beasts; it has many Enemies. VII. So the Church of God is
often vexed, and greatly hurt by the Foxes, little Foxes, namely, false
Teachers, who for their Subtilty and Cruelty are called Foxes. By little Foxes,
Cant. 2.15
some understand such as seem devout, and very humble, and yet preach hurtful
and poisonous Doctrine, yea, bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.2, 3
which greatly tend to the spoiling of God's Vineyard. And then the Church is
greatly annoyed also by the wild Boar, as David shows, The Boar of the Wood
does waste it, and the wild Beasts of the Field devour it. Psalm. 80.13
By which are meant the cruel Enemies the Church met with in those Days; like
as in these latter Times, she has the Pope, who may fitly be compared to a
wild Boar; and the bloody Papists, to ravenous Beasts, Beasts of Prey, such as
continually delight in Blood and Rapine, and to tear the Lambs out of Christ's
Fold, or destroy the precious Bunches of the tender Grapes. VIII. A Vineyard is
continually watched over, lest any thing should annoy or hurt it. VIII. So God
is said to watch over his People. In that day sing unto her: Isa. 27.2, 3
A Vineyard of red Wine; I the Lord do keep it every moment, lest any hurt it.
I will keep it night and day. IX. Many that are idle are called into a Vineyard
to work. IX. So God calls Men into his spiritual Vineyard, to labor therein,
with the Promise of Reward. See Mat. 20. Mat. 20.2, to 8.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Man that is an Householder, which went out
early in the morning to hire Laborers into his Vineyard; and when he had
agreed with the Laborers for a Penny a day, he sent them into the Vineyard.
And he went out, and saw others standing idle in the Marketplace. X. He that
is employed to plant and dress a Vineyard, or is a faithful Labourer therein,
is allowed to eat of the Fruit thereof, besides his Reward at night. X. So
those whom God employs as Planters and Vine-dressers in his spiritual Vineyard,
ought to eat of the Fruit thereof, viz. have a sufficient Maintenance allowed
them. Who planteth a Vineyard, 1 Cor. 9.7, 14.
and eats not of the Fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of
the Milk of the Flock? even so the Lord has ordained, that they who preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. XI. It is expected by the Owner of a
Vineyard, that after much Cost and Pains is bestowed upon it, it should bring
forth much Fruit. XI. So after God has bestowed much Pains and Cost with a
People, (as he did with Israel: Isa. 5.4.
What could have been done more to my Vineyard than I have done in it?) he
expects Fruit: And he looked it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth
wild Grapes. XII. A Vineyard, having had great Labor and Cost bestowed upon
it, and not yielding Fruit answerable to the Charge, greatly grieves and
troubles the Owner, causing him to lay it desolate, and care no more for it.
XII. So when a People have had much Cost and Pains bestowed upon them by the
Lord, and yet they remain barren and unfruitful, walking like Men, and bringing
forth sour Grapes, Grapes of Sodom, rather than good Fruit, He is greatly
offended and grieved thereat, and many times deals by that People, Church, or
Nation, as he threatened to deal by Israel of old. I will take away the Hedge
thereof, Isa. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down: And I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned, nor dug, but
there shall come up Briars and Thorns; I will cause the Rain to rain upon it no
more, etc. Therefore I say unto you, Mat. 21.43
The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the Fruits thereof. Which of all Judgments is the most severe; God
deliver his Church in England from so sore a Stroke.

Inferences.
THis may teach the Church and People of God to take heed they answer the Pains
and Cost God has been at with them. It is not a little, Jam. 3.18. Romans 5.17
but much Fruit that God expects from us; and not only Grapes, but good Grapes,
sweet Grapes, viz. Fruits of Righteousness.

II. And let all the Plants in this spiritual Vineyard see to it, Mat. 15.13
that they are Plants of God's own planting; for if they are not, they shall be
plucked up.

III. And let those that his own Right Hand has planted, see also that they be
well rooted. 1. A Tree not well rooted bears but little Fruit. 2. A Tree not
well rooted is subject to be shaken and blown down. 3. A Tree not well rooted
is in danger of being plucked up.

1. Labor to be rooted in all the Essentials of true Religion.

2. And in all the Principles of Instituted Worship.

3. And in all the Graces of the holy Spirit, in Faith, Love, etc. Ephesians. 3.17.


IV. It may also be of use to encourage and comfort the Church of God, whilst
it remains fruitful to him. How safe and secure is that Vineyard, that God has
so gloriously walled in on every side! In vain are all the Strivings and
Strength of bloody Rome: if God opens not the Door for them, they can never
prevail against us.

5. It also may be for Reproof to loose and slothful Professors; O what Danger
do their Sins expose God's Church to!

The Church compared to a Virgin.
2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ.
A Chaste Virgin. This Simile alludes to the legal Type of the High Priest, who
might marry none but a Virgin, Lev. 21.14.

Note. The Church (or a gracious Soul) is by the Apostle compared to an
espoused Virgin: I have espoused you, i. e. I have been an Instrument or
Spokesman in the hand of my blessed Lord and Master herein.

Simile. Parallel. A Virgin is a Person that is not defiled, one that has been
kept pure from Fornication and Uncleanness. THe Church of God, and every
sincere Christian, is kept pure from Idolatry, viz. the inordinate Love of this
World, and all Antichristian Worship. Rev. 14.4.
Hence the Forty four thousand upon Mount Sion are said to be Virgins; those
are they which were not defiled with Women, that is, with the Mother of
Harlots, mystical Babylon, nor with any of her Daughters; for they are Virgins,
that is, true and chaste to Christ. II. A chaste Virgin, that is espoused to an
Husband, is greatly beloved by him. II. So the Church, and each sincere
Christian, is dearly beloved by the Lord, who is said to rejoice over his
People, Isa. 63.4, 5
as a young Man rejoices over his Bride. III. A Virgin espoused to an Husband,
longs for the Wedding Day. III. So the Church longs for the Return of the
Bridegroom, Cant. 8.14. Rev. 19.7, 8
when Christ will take her to himself. The Marriage of the Lamb is come, etc.
IV. A Virgin espoused, greatly prizeth every kind Token of Love from her
Friend, and delights to hear from him. IV. So all sincere Souls wonderfully
prize every precious Token of Christ's special Favor to them. Let him kiss me
with the Kisses of his Mouth, Cant. 1.1.
for his Love is better than Wine. V. A Virgin espoused is a Man's Wife. V. So
is the Church the Wife of Christ.

The Church compared to a Wife.
Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband.

Rev. 21.9. I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife.


BY the Metaphor, Espousals, which is the most pleasant Metaphor of all, the
spiritual Union between Christ and the Church is expressed, Hos. 2.19, 20. From
the Names of Husband and Wife, Metaphors also are taken, Isa. 54.5. where God
calls himself (...), the Husband of the Church, and hence Zion is said to be
(...), Beulah, that is, married. Isa. 62.4, 5.

Note, The Church of Christ is the Wife of Christ.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Wife is one who has made a solemn Contract with, and is
married to an Husband. SO the Church, and every true Christian, Romans 7.15.
has made a solemn Contract or Covenant with, and is married to the Lord
Jesus. II. A Woman that enters into a Marriage-Relation with an Husband, gives
her self wholly to him. The Husband gives himself to her, and she by way of
Return gives her self unto him; they consent to take each other. II. So a
gracious Soul in this spiritual Marriage gives it self to Christ, and Christ
gives himself to the Soul. I will be thine, says Christ, to love thee, thine
to save thee, thine to crown thee, and make thee happy; I, with all my Riches,
and rich Treasure of Grace and Glory, will be fully thine, and for ever thine.
And on the other hand, the Soul by way of Return gives it self unto Christ: I
will be thine, says every sincere Convert, I will be for thee, and not for
another. Hence it is said, They gave themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5.
Blessed Jesus, says the Soul, such as I am and have, I give to thee; I am a
poor sorry Piece, infinitely unworthy to wash the Feet of the Servants of my
Lord, O how undeserving then of thy Acceptance! my best is too bad, my all is
too little for thee: But since it is thy Pleasure to accept of such a Gift, I
do with my whole Soul give my Self, my Strength, my Time, my Talents, and all I
have, am, or can do, for the Glory of thy holy Name. III. A faithful Wife, in
marrying her self to one Husband, renounceth all other Men, and keeps her self
chaste and faithful to him. III. So all true Christians renounce Sin, Self, and
the Law in point of Justification, and all Lovers whatsoever, and keep
themselves chaste and faithful to Christ. Wherefore, Brethren, Romans 7.15
ye also are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is risen from the Dead, that we should
bring forth Fruit unto God. IV. The Wife obeys and reverenceth her Husband;
as Sarah, who called her Husband Lord. IV. So the Church obeys and reverences
the Lord Jesus Christ, and owns him to be her Lord. V. A faithful Wife strives
to please her Husband. 1 Cor. 7.34
But she that is married, cares how she may please her Husband. V. So the
Church, and each true Christian, strives to please the Lord Jesus. That ye may
walk worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing, Col 1.10.
being fruitful in every good Work, etc. VI. A Wife by marrying an Husband is
interested into his Estate, and has a legal Right to what is his. VI. So the
Soul, by marrying of Christ, is interested into all Christ's Riches; he has a
sure, a new Covenant-Right to whatsoever Christ has; the Riches both of Grace
and Glory are become his hereby. VII. A Wife, by marrying an Husband, is
brought into a near Union and Communion with him: They are no more twain, Mat.
19 6.
but one Flesh. VII. So the Church, and each true Christian, by entering into a
Marriage Relation with the Lord Jesus, is brought into a very near Union and
Conjunction with him. For this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother, 1
Cor. 6.17 Ephesians. 5.31.
and shall join unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This is a great
Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Hence the Apostle says,
He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. This is a most blessed Union, a
full Union, a lasting Union; (1.) a full Union. The whole Person of Christ is
joined to the whole Person of a Believer, and the whole Person of a Believer is
joined to the whole Person of Christ. Not only Christ's Human Nature is joined
to a Believer, but his Divine Nature also; and so not only the Body of a
Believer is joined to Christ, but his Soul is joined also. This may administer
much Consolation to dying Saints: The Body, as well as the Soul, is the Lord's,
and therefore shall not be lost, he will raise it up at the last Day. Joh. 6.39.
From hence Christ sympathizeth with his People, he feels and is sensible of
all their Sorrows, he looks upon their Sufferings as his Sufferings. I was
hungry, and ye gave me no Meat; Mat. 25.35 36. Isa. 63.9.
I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick,
and in Prison, and ye visited me not. In all their Afflictions he was
afflicted. VIII. A Wife, by Marriage-Relation, is taken up with much sweet
Peace, Joy, and Complacency in that Estate: her Husband is better to her than
ten Sons, as Elkanah said to Hannah. It Is a Relation made up of Love and
Delight. VIII. The Church, and every true Believer, by being espoused and
married to Christ, the Lord Jesus has a near, a dear, a strong, and most
intimate Affection toward him. A Saint is filled with most sweet Peace, Joy,
and Delight, and takes most precious Complacency in Christ; He is more than
Father, Mother, Sons, or Daughters. Psalm. 45. Cant. 5.10 Psalm. 73.25
He is fairer than the Sons of Men, the chiefest of ten thousand. Whom have I
in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee. Thou
have ravished my Heart, (says Christ) my Sister, my Spouse. How fair and
pleasant art thou, O Love, for Delights! Zeph. 3.17
turn away thine Eyes, for they have overcome me. He shall rest in his Love.
And on the other hand, what says the Spouse, the Wife of Christ? Cant. 5. ult.
I sat down under his Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit was sweet unto
my Taste. He is altogether lovely. Stay me with Flagons, comfort me with
Apples; for I am sick of Love. The Saints (says one) are called Christ's
Spouse, because of the unparalled Love that is between them; and (says
another) Christ calls himself our Bridegroom, that he might insinuate the
Greatness of his Love, which decays not with Time; and he calls us his Spouse,
not his Wife, noting, that our Love to him should be always new, always lively
and vigorous. IX. A tender and dear Wife is greatly troubled when her Husband
seems to be offended and angry with her, and strives to pacify him again, and
is never at Rest or Peace, until she finds his Love toward her as formerly,
and all things right between them. IX. So a gracious Soul, if Christ be
offended, and withdrawn from him, is greatly cast down and grieved. Cant. 5.6.
Thou hiddest thy Face, and I was troubled; I opened to my Beloved, but my
Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. My Soul failed when he spoke; I
sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no Answer.
Isa. 63.15. and 64.9.
Where is the sounding of thy Bowels, and thy Mercy toward me? are they
restrained? Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember our Iniquity for
ever; behold, we beseech thee, we are thy People. X. The Wife, by her Marriage
with her Husband, is delivered from Arrests for Debts; no sooner is she
married, but her Husband is liable to that Danger, it falls upon him, he must
see to satisfy and pay what she owed. X. So in like manner, no sooner is a Soul
espoused or married to Christ, but all his Debts to Law and Justice fall upon
Christ, and he pays all; He stands between Wrath and us, Justice and us; He
keeps off all Danger of Arrests, and Fear of Imprisonment; He has Riches
enough. All is cleared the day the Soul closes in with him, tho whole Mountains
of Guilt were upon us before. XI. The Wife that is married to a Prince, or
mighty Potentate, is thereby greatly exalted, or raised to Honor, becomes a
Queen the same day the Marriage is consummated, and has the Attendance of his
Servants. XI. So the Church being married to Christ, the Lord Jesus, the Prince
of Heaven and Earth, is raised to the greatest Honor imaginable; she is made
hereby a Princess, and hence called a Queen: On thy right hand did stand the
Queen, Psalm. 45 9.
in Gold of Ophir. The Saints also have the Attendance of Christ's Servants,
the holy Angels: They are sent forth to minister to them that are Heirs of
eternal Life. Heb. 1.14.
XII. The Wife that is married to a rich and godly Husband, is thereby freed
from much Care and Trouble; for he provideth for her, and manageth all her
Concerns. It is true, although every Husband is bound by the Law of that Relation
to provide for his Wife; and free her from Care as much as he can; yet some are
poor, and unable to do it, and hence the Wife is involved in as much Care and
Trouble as he. XII. Christ frees his People from all inordinate and unnecessary
Care: 1 Pet. 5.7.
Cast all your Care upon him, for he cares for you. He manageth all our
Concerns in Heaven, always appearing before God for us: 1 John 2.1.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. And he
manageth all our Affairs on Earth, in a way of Grace, and Divine Providence;
Isa. 27 12.
works all our Works in us, and for us: He gives and loves, saves and feeds us,
and will never leave us, till he has brought us to Heaven. He became poor, 2
Cor. 8.9
but we were no Losers thereby, for by his Poverty we are made rich. XIII. A
Wife brings forth Children, and is many times very fruitful to her Husband; and
when she has brought them forth, takes care of them, feeds and nurseth them.
XIII. So the Church is fruitful to Christ, bringing forth many Sons and
Daughters to him, whom she takes care of, feeds, and nurseth, as the Mother
does her Children. For thus says the Lord, Behold, Isa. 66.12, 13.
I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the Glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing Stream. Then shall ye suck, ye shall be born upon her sides, and
dandled upon her Knees, as one whom his Mother comfort, etc. [See Mother.]
XIV. A Wife has the Privilege to know her Husbands Mind; for many things which
are kept secret from others, are made known to the Wife. XIV. Psalm. 25.14
So the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant. Eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.
nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, the
things which God has prepared for them that love Him: But God has revealed
them to us by his Spirit. Metaphor. Disparity. A Wife may soon lose her
Husband; Death (we see) many times takes him away, and she is thereby made a
Widow, and her Children fatherless. BUt the Church cannot lose her Husband.
Christ dies no more, Rev. 1.18.
he is immortal; and therefore she can never be a Widow, nor her Children
fatherless. I will not leave you comfortless, Joh. 14.18.
(the word is, Orphans.) He is an everlasting Husband.

Inferences.
STand and wonder! Does Christ espouse and take to Wife such a poor and
contemptible Creature as Mankind! What disproportion is there between a King
and a Beggar, between an Ant and an Angel? a far greater disproportion there is
between Jesus Christ and Sinners. He is high and great; but we are base and
vile: He is blessed and glorious; we are wretched and miserable: He is a mighty
King, King of Kings; and we poor Slaves and Vassals, yea, the worst of Slaves,
Vassals and Slaves to Sin and Satan.

2. From hence you may perceive the unspeakable Nearness there is between
Christ and his People; can there be a sweeter and more glorious Union than
this! If we consider the Properties of it, it is a spiritual, a real, an
operative, an enriching, an intimate, an indissoluble Union, to be Bone of his
Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh. What can any Soul desire more? What greater
Happiness, what more glorious, (says one of the Ancients) than this Union!

3. What Doctrine can yield greater Comfort to Believers, who are thus happily
espoused and married to Jesus Christ! We say, such and such are well disposed
of, happily married; O Soul, how well art thou disposed of! What! married to
Christ, to the Son of God, to the King of Heaven and Earth!

4. This may show the Saints their Duty, and put them in mind of their
Covenant. Soul, thou have vowed, and can not go back.

5. And may he of use, especially to all that stand related as Husband and Wife
in the Church, for Husbands to make Christ their Pattern in their Carriage and
Deportment toward their Wives; and likewise Wives to make the Church their
Example in their Behavior toward their Husbands, as the Apostle gives
direction. Ephesians. 5.21. -- ult.


6. Lastly; What Terror does this speak to the Enemies of the Church! If the
Church be the Wife of Christ, what will they do that so much abuse her, and
continually seek her Life? Let them know, He will appear in Wrath and Vengeance
to save and deliver her, and will tear them in pieces in a short time.

The Church compared to a Bush on Fire.
Exodus 3.2. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Flame of Fire out
of the midst of a Bush; and he looked, and behold the Bush burned, and was not
consumed, etc.
ACcording to Ainsworth, and diverse other Expositors, by the Bush is meant the
Church of God in great Affliction, the severe Trials of God's People being
often set forth in the holy Scriptures by Fire, by a Flame of Fire, and
sometimes by a smoking Furnace; as in Abraham's Vision, Genesis 15.17. And behold
a smoking Furnace, and a burning Lamp, that passed between the Pieces. Genesis
15.17
By the smoking Furnace was signified to Abraham, Israel's great Affliction in
Egypt; and by the Lamp, the Law of God that afterward was given; or, as some
understand it, the Lamp of Deliverance, or that Salvation God would work for
them, etc. for that the Salvation of God is like to a Lamp that burns, Isa.
52.1.

Quest. Why is the Church of God compared to a Bush, to a burning Bush? The
Scripture usually sets out the Church by things whose Natures or Qualities are
excellent, things that are of great Worth, etc. And why should she be compared
to a Bush, to a Bramble-Bush, for so Ainsworth and others read it?

Answ. Some of the Reasons of it, according to our weak Judgment, are hinted in
the following Parallels.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Bush is a thing of small worth and value, few esteem or
regard a Bramble-Bush; stately Trees are viewed and prized, and some of them
valued highly, but so is not a Bush. SO likewise the Church of God was then,
and is now, a thing of small value, of little or no esteem in the eyes of
wicked Men; it was no more regarded by proud Pharaoh, and many of the
Egyptians, than a sorry Bramble-Bush. Hence the Apostle speaks of the Church,
as being very contemptible in the sight of Men. We are made as the Filth of the
World, 1 Cor. 4.13
and are the Offscouring of all things unto this day. II. A Bramble-Bush, as
it is a thing of no Worth or Value, so it is a thing that has no Beauty in it,
in comparison of other Trees; it is in no wise taking to the eye. Some things
that are of no great worth, seem very glorious and beautiful; but there is none
of this in a Bramble. II. So the true Church of God is not clothed with
outward Beauty, not arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, decked with Gold, precious
Stones, and Pearls, like the Mother of Harlots; but seems low, Rev. 17.4.
base, and contemptible to a carnal Eye, her Beauty being all hidden: The
King's Daughter is glorious within. Psalm. 45.13
And it is from hence the World values her no more. As Christ made himself of no
Reputation, Phil. 2.7.
so the Church for a while remains among Men in a like State; no carnal Eye
that sees her, does at all desire her. III. A Bush is not only a thing of
little worth in the esteem of Men, but it is in it felf really of small value.
What is a Bramble worth? what is it good for, but to be cut down, and cast into
the Fire? III. So the People of God, considered abstractively, (as they are in
themselves) what are they? what Worth or Excellency is in them? All the Beauty
and Glory of the Church is from Christ. They are naturally vile Sinners, Mich.
7.4.
and are called Thorns, Briars, and pricking Brambles; and tho converted and
changed by the Power of God's Grace, yet there remains something still of the
Old Man and evil Nature in them. And God, in other Places of Scripture, where
he compares them to a Vine, to Lillies, to a Garden, to Golden Candlesticks,
etc. speaks of them with respect to what they are by his special Grace in
Christ Jesus. But here, in comparing them to a Bush, he has respect (as we
conceive) to what they are in themselves, and by Nature, to set forth their own
Unworthiness, that so he might thereby raise Moses his Wonder, to see the
mighty Condescension of the Blessed God, in having regard to such a poor and
undeserving People, to dwell in them, and in keeping and preserving them in the
midst of such fierce and cruel Enemies, when a small Spark might easily consume
and destroy them in an instant, but that he stretches forth his glorious Arms
of Grace and Divine Power for their Succor and Relief. IV. There is one thing
more touching a Bush, which for Illustration sake I shall here mention, not
that the Spirit of God had respect to it in this Vision, viz. A Bush is a
common Receptacle for Birds; it is the Place where they lodge, make their Nests
in, and are secured from many Dangers that do attend them. IV. The Church of
God is the chief Place for the Saints of God to dwell or make their Abode in,
who in the Song of Songs are called Birds: The time of the singing of Birds is
come, etc. Cant. 2 12
Which (says Reverend Mr. Ainsworth) signifies the Saints, who feeling the
Comforts of God's Word and Spirit, do sing the Praises of God, with Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs. Isa. 24.16.
They shall lift up their Voice, they shall sing for the Majesty of the Lord;
and from the uttermost Parts of the Earth we have heard Songs, even Glory to
the Righteous. And indeed in our Judgment the Godly are compared to Birds
principally upon this Consideration, i. e. in respect to their Singing, which
is laid down in several places of Scripture as an undoubted Duty; I wish that
Christians, who are not in the practice thereof, would consider of it. But to
proceed, How safe is the Bird, when she gets into the Bush? so are the
Saints, when they are got into the Church; God being a Wall of Fire round about
her, Ze^h. 2.5.
and her Defense and Glory on every side. V. It is a strange and mavelous
thing, to see a Bramble-Bush on fire, and not consumed; this made Moses to turn
aside: I will turn aside to see this great Sight. V. So it is a strange Sight,
a Prodigy, a Mercy to a Wonder, enough to astonish all true thinking
Christians, to see the Church of God, the unworthy, frail, polluted, weak, (and
declining) Church, as set on fire, yea, all on a Flame, (as it were) many Fires
being kindled on her by wicked Adversaries, and yet she is not consumed! How
many Plots and Hellish Contrivances were there on foot against poor Israel in
Egypt? First, They made a Law, that the Midwives should kill all their
Men-Children, when they did their Office. Secondly; When that would not take,
(because the Midwives feared God, and saved the Men-Children alive: E^od. 1.17.
They feared God, ('it is said) and did not as the King of Egypt commanded, etc.)
then they thought of another way, another Plot was set on foot, a new Fire (as
it were) was kindled, which was to cast all the Men-Children into the River:
And Pharaoh charged all his People, saying, Every Son that is born ye shall
cast into the River, E^od. 1.22
and every Daughter ye shall save alive. Hence poor Moses was cast into the
Flags, who afterward was an Instrument in the hand of God, by working many
Signs and Wonders, and appeared to help and deliver Israel, (one that Pharaoh
little thought of.) Thirdly; But this not taking so effectually neither, they
were most cruelly oppressed by hard Servitude, and forced to make their full
Tale of Bricks, and yet Straw is denied them; which made the Lives of God's
People bitter unto them. Fourthly, and lastly; When they desired liberty to go
and worship God, this was denied them, by no means would Pharaoh consent to it,
but made his hands heavier and heavier upon them. Thus were they in the Fire
and Furnace of Affliction, and yet graciously preserved, notwithstanding their
Enemies were so many, so cruel, and so mighty above them. And this was that
great Sight that God in a Figure showed to Moses; and this great Sight is to be
seen at this Day, in this and other Nations. O what Hellish Plots and
Contrivances have been on foot for many Years last past, especially for the
space of two or three Years! How many Fires have been kindled to consume the
poor Church of God in England, and other adjacent Nations! What Plots and
Sham-Plots have the Popish Enemies set on foot, since the Time that Dr. Oats
first discovered the Grand and Hellish Intrigue! And yet how wonderfully has
God wrought to save us to this Day, notwithstanding we are an unworthy People,
and as little deserving this Divine Favor (in our selves) as ever any were,
who ever lived in any Age of the World! The strange and perfidious Actings of
the Enemy to destroy us, and the strange and wonderful Workings of Divine
Providence to preserve us, have been so admirable, that succeeding Ages, who
shall read the History of these Times, will (doubtless) scarcely believe them,
but rather conclude they are mere Romances. VI. Here I might note also, for
Illustration sake, that a Bramble-Bush is attended with Thorns, and often
offends and wounds such as roughly and unadvisedly meddle with it. VI. So such
as roughly and unadvisedly touch and handle the Lord's People, do but prick and
wound themselves thereby; as most plainly appeared in the Case of Pharaoh, and
the Egyptians. What became of them? Those that afflict God's People, shall be
afflicted, nay, wounded. And I will undo all that afflict thee. Zeph. 3.19.
God knows how to make Jerusalem a burthensom Stone for all People: All that
burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, Zech. 12.3
tho all the Earth should be gathered together against it. Hence Christ gave
persecuting Saul Warning of the Danger: It Is hard for thee to kick against the
Pricks. Acts 9.5.
Those that kick against God's Church, do but kick against the Pricks; they do
but hurt, wound, and undo themselves thereby.

As for Disparities, they are many, and so obvious to all, that I shall pass
them by; for tho the Church of God is here represented by a Bramble-Bush, yet
she is in Christ's sight as a Lilly among Thorns; and her Worth and Glory
through the Lord Jesus is so great, that she very far surpasses all the People
and Families of the Earth. Nothing of all created Things does Christ think good
enough to set forth and illustrate the Beauty and Excellency of his Church and
People by, however unworthy she is in her own sight, or in the eyes of the
sinful World.

Inferences.
ADmire the Grace and Love of God, the Almighty Jehovah, that inhabiteth
Eternity, that he should out of his abundant Favor, good Will, and great
Condescension, dwell in a poor Bramble-Bush! Who is able to conceive of this
rich and undeserved Favor!

2. It also informs us, how it comes to pass that the poor Saints and Church
of God are preserved to this day: It Is because God is among them, God dwells
in the Bush: The Lord dwells in Sion, to comfort, revive, uphold, save, and
deliver her in the Day of Trouble.

3. It may serve to humble us, and lay us low in our own eyes. What are the
best of God's People by Nature, and in themselves, but as a Bush, Bryar, or
Thorny Hedge? It Is God who has made us to differ from others.

4. It may deter the Wicked, and for ever be a Warning to them, to forbear
persecuting God's People; for that it will prove at last to their utter Ruin;
they kick but against the Pricks.

5. Remember the good Will of Him, and seek his Blessing, that dwelt in the
Bush.

The Church compared to a Mother.
Cant. 8.1. O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the Breasts of my
Mother!

Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem, which is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all.


BY Mother in these Scriptures is meant the Church of God, or as some expound
it, the Universal Church. As God is a Believer's Father, so the Church is his
Mother.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Mother is the Wife of an Husband; it imports a
Marriage-State. Every godly Woman that is a Mother, can show who is (or was)
her Husband. THe Church is the Spouse and Wife of Christ. Isa. 54.5.
For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Wherefore, my
Brethren, Romans 7.4.
ye also are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him that is raised from the Dead, that we should
bring forth Fruit unto God. II. A Mother is one that bears and brings forth
Children. II. So the Church bears and brings forth Children to Christ:
Psalm. 87.5.
Of Zion it shall be said, This and that Man was born in her. Hence the Saints
are called Sons, Daughters, and Children of Zion. III. A Mother travails, and
is in great Pain, in bringing forth Children. III. So the Church is said to
travail, and be in pain, in bringing forth of Children to Christ: Isa. 66.8.
As soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her Children. The Church may be
said to travail two manner of ways: (1.) By Preaching, Prayer, and by other
godly Means and Endeavors, to bring forth poor Sinners out of a State of
Nature into a State of Grace. Paul was said to travail in Pain, till Christ was
formed in those to whom he preached. (2.) She travaileth by Preaching, Prayer,
Tears, and Sufferings, and other lawful Ways, to bring forth her Children out
of a State of Bondage, and external Slavery and Captivity, into a State of
perfect Peace, Joy, and Prosperity, free from all outward Violence and
Thraldom, according to the Promise of God; Therefore will I give them up, Mich.
5.3.
until the Time which she that travaileth has brought forth. -- Then the
Remnant of his Brethren shall return unto the Children of Israel. -- She being
with Child, cried, travailing in Birth, and pained to be delivered. Rev. 12.2.
-- For I have heard a Voice as of a Woman in Travail and Anguish, as of her
that brings forth her first Child. The Voice of the Daughter of Zion, that
bewaileth her self, Jer. 4.31.
that spreads forth her hands, saying, Woe is me now, for my Soul is weary
because of Murderers. Be in pain, labor to bring forth, O Daughter of Zion,
Mich. 4.10
like a Woman in Travail. For now shall thou go forth out of the City, and thou
shall dwell in the Field; and thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou
be delivered, the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine Enemies. IV. A
Mother, when she has brought forth her Children, lays them to her Breasts,
to feed and nourish them, and lets them lie in her very Bosom, taking
abundance of Care and Compassion of them. IV. So the Church of God, when she
has in a spiritual manner brought forth Children, she gives them her two
precious Breasts, which are the sound and sacred Doctrine of the Old and New
Testament; those she draws forth, to give her newborn Babes the sincere Milk
of the Word, that they may grow thereby. 1 Pet. 2.1, 1, 2, 3.
Prove. 31.1
V. A godly Mother gives good Counsel and Instruction to her Children. It was a
great Mercy to Timothy, that he had such a good Woman as Eunice to be his
Mother, who took care to give him good Education, and brought him up
religiously; it is said, he knew the holy Scriptures from a Child. V. So the
Church of God gives good Counsel and Instruction to all her Children. Saints
are not only fed by the Church, but well taught also. Solomon exhorts the Sons
of Wisdom to hear the Instruction of their Father, Prove. 1.8.
and not to forsake the Law of their Mother. The true Church teaches nothing
for Doctrine, but what she has received from the Mouth of Christ. She does
not, like the Mother of Harlots, teach for Doctrine cursed Fopperies, idle,
ridiculous, and superstitious Ceremonies, which are a Reproach to the Christian
Religion, and a great Hindrance both of the Jews and Heathens from owning of
it. They are all holy Rites, pious and undeniable Laws, and just Rules of
Discipline, consonant to the holy Word of God, that she teaches all her
Children. VI. A Mother ought to be obeyed and reverenced in all things by her
Children; her just Commands must be submitted to. It Is a great Evil to rebel
against a Mother. VI. So the Church of God ought to be obeyed and reverenced in
all things. It Is an abominable Evil to slight or disobey the Church, our
spiritual Mother. Her Instructions and Admonitions must be received with all
due care and readiness; and those who stubbornly and obstinately refuse to
submit, are guilty of great Sin. VII. A wise and godly Mother greatly loves,
and is tender of all her Children. She takes care to carry it evenly toward
every one of them; not to indulge any one out of a fond and great Passion, and
slight another, because not so beautiful and amiable to look upon. VII. So the
Church of God takes care to carry it tenderly, and with much Wisdom, to all
her Children. She acts not partially toward them, to countenance one more than
another; the weak and poorest Saint is as dear to our spiritual Mother, as the
strongest and richest of them. VIII. A tender Mother has much Compassion and
Bowels toward her weak, sick, and helpless Children; her Heart aches many times
for such. VIII. So God's Church is filled with Bowels of Pity and Compassion
toward her weak and distempered Members. How is she troubled for such as are
under Temptations, or fallen into any spiritual Distemper of the Soul! The
Churches Bowels should exceed the Bowels of a natural Mother to her sick
Children upon this account. IX. A gracious and godly Mother loves those
Children best, that are most dutiful, and who dearly love, and are most like
their Father. IX. So the Church of God loves those Children or Saints best,
that are most diligent, dutiful, and obedient to Christ, and to all the good
and wholesome Laws of the Family; who love, and are most like God, in Mercy,
Mat. 5.45.
Heavenly-mindedness, in good Works, and Acts of Pity and Charity to the Poor;
these she esteems and prizes highly. X. A Mother is allowed by the Father to
chastize or correct those Children, that grow heady and proud, or any ways
misbehave themselves, to the dishonor of the Father, and reproach of the
Family. X. So the Church is allowed, nay, required by Christ, to correct by
gentle Reproof, those Children or Members that do transgress the Law of God;
and if they grow heady, proud, and stubborn, she reproves them sharply; but if
that will not reclaim them, but that they still proceed in a rebellious Mind,
and misbehave themselves, she proceeds further, and takes the Rod of
Church Discipline, and withdraws her self from them, and denies them to come
to the Table with the rest of her Children: Nay, if they fall into any
scandalous Evil, to the Reproach of Christ, his Truth, and the Household of
Faith, she chastizeth them with the Rod of Excommunication, and puts them
quite out of the Family. Deliver such an one unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5.
for the Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of
the Lord Jesus. XI. A Mother is sometimes allowed, in the absence of the
Father, to be chief Governess in the Family; and to choose, according to the
direction of the Father, a Steward over her House, and other inferior Officers;
and as they behave themselves, she ought to encourage them, and continue them,
or otherwise turn them out of their Offices. XI. So the Church of Christ in his
absence is appointed to govern all the Affairs of his House, and according to
those holy Laws and Directions left by him, ought to choose a Steward, viz. a
Bishop, Minister, or Pastor, to take the Charge of the great Affairs of the
Family, and other inferior Officers, as Deacons, etc. to take care of the Poor:
And as the Pastor or Deacons behave themselves, she ought to encourage him or
them, and continue them in their Places; but if they fall into Sin, or neglect
their Work, and are unfaithful in their Places, she has power to correct, and
turn them out: always provided, she acts according to Rule: Against an Elder
receive not an Accusation, 1 Timothy 5.1
under two or three Witnesses. XII. A Mother, tho her Children prove never so
vile and ungodly, has no power to kill them: if she does, tho they are her own
Children, she is deemed by the Law as a Murderer, and as such must die. XII.
So the Church of God, tho some of her Members prove very vile, and will not be
under her Government; or turn Heretics, sucking in damnable Errors: yet the
most she can do, is, to pass the Censure of Excommunication against them: An
Heretic, Tit. 3.9, 10
after the first and second Admonition, reject, etc. And therefore the Mother
of Harlots, for putting to Death such as she calls Heretics, is deemed, by the
Law of God and Nations, a Murderer, and, as such, must and shall in God's due
time die. Her Plagues shall come upon her in one day, Death, Rev. 18.8.
Mourning, and Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire; for strong is
the Lord God that judges her. XIII. It is a great and high Honor to a Mother,
that her Children and Family are well governed, having their Food in due Order;
and that her Children and Servants are all at her Beck, and dearly love one
another; and when none of them are missing at Dinner, or Duty-time. XIII. So
it is the Honor of the Church of Christ, when all her Children humbly and
faithfullly submit themselves to good Order and Discipline, when all of them
carefully attend their respective Duties, and do not absent themselves, when
she calls them together at Times of public Worship, or upon any other
occasion, as to rectify Disorders, or choose Officers, etc. O how lovely and
amiable is it, Psalm. 133.1, 2.
and how does it tend to the Glory of the Church, to see Saints live together
in Love and Unity, always making Conscience of those Laws, that respect the
well ordering, and religious Government of the Family or Household of God! XIV.
Some Mothers have Daughters who have Children. XIV. So the Universal Church
has many Daughters, many particular Churches, which are very fruitful to
Christ.

There are many Disparities, wherein the Church excels other Mothers, which
I leave to the ingenious Reader to find out.

Inferences.
THis should teach Believers to reverence and obey the Church of God, as
dutiful Children do their godly Mother, in all things.

2. And take care they do not grieve her.

3. To have relenting Bowels toward her in all her Troubles. Shall our Mother
be in Distress, and ready to be devoured by hungry Lions? and shall not her
Children be in bitterness of Soul for her? When Sion is afflicted, we should be
afflicted; when her Eyes are wet, shall ours be dry? when she is sad, should
not we be sad too?

4. How does this greatly reprove them, who instead of comforting of her in her
Widowhood State, add to her Sorrow?

The Church compared to a Garden.
Cant. 4.12. A Garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, etc.

Verse 16. Awake, O North Wind; and come thou South Wind, and blow upon my
Garden, etc.

Cant. 5.1. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse.


THe Church of Christ is or may fitly be compared to a Garden.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Garden is a Piece taken out of common or waste Ground,
appropriated to more special Use than the rest. THe Church of God (and every
Believer, or Member thereof) is taken out of the common Mass of Mankind, to be
a chosen and select People to Christ. II. The Ground of a Garden before it is
planted, is as barren, and as unprofitable, as the rest out of which it was
taken. II. The People of God, and Soul of every Believer, naturally were as
barren, blind, sinful, Enemis to God, and every way as vile and rebellious, as
any other Sinners in the World. Ephesians. 2.2, 3
And were by Nature the Children of Wrath, as well as others. Who has made
thee to differ from another? etc. III. In a Garden no choice or rare thing
comes up naturally of it self, until it is sown or planted therein. III. So no
spiritual good Thing can grow or spring up in our Hearts, until the Seed of
Grace is sown in us, or a Divine Principle of Life be implanted. IV. A Garden,
before it be sown or planted, must be dug, purged, and well prepared. IV. So
must our Hearts, like fallow Ground, be dug up with powerful Convictions of
the Word and Spirit, that so Grace may the better take Root in us. Hence it is
said of God's Vineyard, when he was resolved to bring Judgment upon it, It
shall not be pruned, nor dug. Isa. 5.6. Jer. 4.3.
Hence God calls upon them to plow up their fallow Ground, and sow not among
Thorns. V. A choice Garden is walled or well fenced about, for its Security
from Danger and Spoil. V. So the Church of God, or every Christian, is hedged
or walled in. Job i. 10.
Have thou not made a Hedge about him, and about all he has, on every side?
etc. God is said to be a Wall of Fire round about Jerusalem. [ See Vineyard.
Zech. 2.5.
] VI. A choice Garden has in it many Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, of great
Worth and Value, both for Pleasure and Profit. VI. So in the Church are many
choice, pleasant, and profitable Plants, of God's own right hand planting: Jer.
5.8.
It Is sown with holy right Seed, ye Men of Israel are his pleasant Plants. All
choice and saving Graces, and Gifts of the Spirit, are found in God's Garden.
VII. A Garden must have much Cost bestowed upon it, and much Pains taken with
it, or it will soon decay. VII. So must the Church of God have much Pains
bestowed upon it, Prove. 4.23
it must be kept diligently; As God spares for no Cost and Pains, so should his
Servants be industrious, or else the Church will soon decay. VIII. A Garden
has some Weeds in it, which must (as they appear) be plucked up, or they will
spoil and hinder the Growth of the precious Flowers and Herbs that grow
therein. VIII. The Church is not without some corrupt Members in it, which
injure it, like as Thorns and Nettles do a Garden, which as they are
discovered, are plucked up, and cast out. And also in the Hearts of the best
Christians, Weeds are apt to spring up, from that Root of Bitterness that
naturally is within them, whereby many are troubled and defiled, which if not
pulled up, will hinder their Growth in Grace. IX. A choice and fruitful Garden
is valued highly by the Owner thereof; he esteems it above an hundred times so
much fruitless Land. One Acre made into a curious Garden, is prized above many
Acres of common barren Ground. IX. The Church of God (tho it be as it were but
a little Spot, a small Remnant, in comparison of the World) is highly prized by
Jesus Christ; he esteems of his own People above all the People of the Earth. 1
Pet. 2 9.
Hence he calls them his Inheritance, his Jewels, his peculiar Ones: I gave
Egypt for thy Ransom, Isa. 43.3, 4
Aethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou wast precious in my Sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee: Therefore will I give Men for thee, and
People for thy Life. Wicked Men are like barren Mountains; they are the King's
Waste, such whom he sets but little by. X. A rare and fruitful Garden will
afford Fruit to plant others; many Gardens upon this account have (as it were)
sprung out of one. X. So from the Church of God that was first planted in
Judea, many blessed Churches proceeded in a little time. By means of the
Fruitfulness of that one spiritual Garden, seven Gardens more were planted in
Asia, viz. Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Rev. 1.11.
Philadelphia, and Laodicea, besides many others which we read of, etc. XI. A
Garden must be often watered, or else it will soon fade, and the Fruit thereof
wither away, and the choice Flowers will hang down their Heads. XI. God's
Garden must be often watered by the Divine Rain, or Dew of Heaven, viz. the
Word and Spirit of God: My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain. Deuteronomy. 32.1, 2.
And without these Waterings from above, the Fruit of the Church will soon
fail; all our Growth and Greenness is continued by the means of the Word and
Ordinances. XII. A Garden must have the Door carefully kept and looked after,
lest Thieves and other Spoilers should get in, and ruin it. XII. So the Door
of the Church must be carefully kept by such as have the Charge of it, ( viz.
the Ministers or Pastors thereof) or the Danger is great; it behooves them to
take care who they let in. Christ's Garden should be as a Garden enclosed, and
Fountain sealed, to all Unbelievers. But yet let them be never so careful, some
Dec^ivers or Hypocrites will, as in former Times, creep in; 'twas so when the
chief Gardener himself was upon the Earth, there was a Judas among the twelve
Apostles. XIII. The chief Owner of a Garden loves to take his Walks in it, to
see how the Plants and precious Fruits do flourish. XIII. So the Lord Jesus,
who is the Owner and only Proprietor of his Church, loves to take his Walks in
it: Cant. 5.1.
I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse. He is said to walk in the
midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks. Let us get up early to the Vineyards,
Cant. 7.1^
let us see whether the Vine flourish, whether the tender Grapes appear, and
the Pomegranates bud forth; there will I give thee my Loves. XIV. In a Garden
(as it is found by Experience) Worms do much hurt, especially when they get to
the Root of Plants or Flowers. They may seem very green and flourishing, when
there are some devouring Worms gnawing at the Roots, by which means in a little
time they die, are pulled up, and cast away. XIV. So in the Church, Sin, which
may be compared to a Worm, or hurtful Vermin, does exceeding much Detriment. A
Christian seems very green, amiable, and fair to the Eye, like some Plants
full of Leaves; but there is some cursed Worm, some secret Lust, that mars his
Root, and in time he withers, and dies, and is plucked up, and cast away. This
may be a Caution to all to take heed. XV. In a Garden, whatsoever choice Flower
the Owner of it seeeth is fully ripe, if he has a mind to it, he crops it off,
and takes it to himself. XV. So in the Church, those Flowers or precious Saints
Jesus Christ sees are fully ripe for Heaven, he crops off by Death, and takes
them to himself. A godly Man dies when he is ready and ripe for Death. When a
holy Man dies, says Mr. Caryl, Caryl.
it is Harvest-time with him. Tho in a natural Capacity, he may be cut down
whilst he is green, or cropp'd in the Bud or Blossom; yet in his spiritual
Capacity he never dies before he is ripe; God ripens his speedily, when he
intends to take them out of the World speedily. XVI. A Garden flourishes best,
that has the sweet, warm, and splendent Rays of the Sun shining upon it. How
sweet do the Flowers and precious Herbs smell, when the Rain distills, the
South Wind blows, and the Sun sweetly breaks forth upon it! XVI. So the Church
never thrives, nor flourishes, but when the Sun of Righteousness shines in a
gracious manner upon it; when the Rain or spiritual Dew descends, the South
Wind of the Spirit blows, and the Sun of Righteousness sweetly shines, what
a fragrant Scent does the Church of God, and gracious Ones then send forth!
Hence Christ calls for the South Wind to blow upon his Garden, Cant. 4.1^
that the Spices thereof may flow forth. XVII. A Garden is attended with
several Seasons, Winter as well as Summer. And tho in the Winter many Flowers
seem decayed, and their Glory gone; yet a Winter's sharp Frosts, and cold North
Winds, are as necessary as the Summer, for the killing of the Weeds and Worms,
which otherwise would abound. XVII. The Church has its Winter as well as its
Spring and Summer-Season; nay, and the nipping Frosts, and North Winds of
Temptations and Afflictions, are as profitable to the Saints, as the Summer of
Comfort, Peace, and Prosperity; for God sees need of the one, as well as the
other, to destroy those Weeds of Corruption, or indwelling Sin, that is in our
Hearts. If need be, 1 Pet. 1.6.
ye are in Heaviness, through manifold Temptations.

Disparity.
THere are diverse Disparities: Christ's Garden excels all other Gardens.
They are the Plantations of Men; this is planted by Christ: Their Fruit is
temporal and fading; this is spiritual and lasting: They that plant other
Gardens, cannot make them grow; but Christ can. And many others might be
minded, which I here omit.

Inferences.
THis shows what a vast Difference there is between the Church, and the World.
What is a howling and barren Wilderness, to a choice and lovely Garden?

II. Bless God that this precious Garden is not spoiled, and its Hedge of Divine
Providence not removed, nor plucked up.

III. Let us pray, (tho it be surrounded about at this day with cruel Enemies)
that it may never be moved, taken, and trodden down, by Romish Wolves, or other
ravenous Beasts of Prey.

IV. Let the Adversary tremble, whose evil Intent is fully discovered, how they
proceed in their Designs against God's Church, Christ's spiritual Garden, since
it is so prized by him, and his own proper Inheritance, he alone being the
Proprietor thereof. How often does he say, My Garden, my Vineyard? It appears
it is his,

1. In that he bought the Ground with the Price of his precious Blood, to make
a Garden of it.

2. He has at his own Charge planted and sown it.

3. He keeps it, and waters it, and watches over it Night and Day. Isa. 27 2, 3


4. It Is he only that gathers the Fruit of it. Woe therefore to them that
adventure to crop, and pull up, and destroy any of its choice Flowers! They
that touch God's People, Christ's Lillies, touch the Apple of his Eye.

V. Let the Saints of Christ also learn from hence to be fruitful, Christ has
been at great Cost and Pains in order thereunto. And that you may be so,

1. See that you are Plants of his own planting, otherwise you will be plucked
up.

2. See that you are well-rooted; such bring forth most Fruit.

3. Take heed of the Worm at the Root.

4. Take heed whom ye choose for Garden-Dressers, and look to your Hedge or Wall
of Church Discipline. You must know your Bounds, the Garden of Christ must not
be opened into other Men's Fields. Keep your Communion entire; remember, you
are bounded by Christ's Laws and Institutions; take heed you do not, with
Ephraim, mix your selves with other People.

The Church compared to a Lilly.
Cant. 2.2. As the Lilly among the Thorns, so is my Love among the Daughters.
CHrist calls his Church his Love, and compares her to a Lilly among Thorns.
By Daughters are meant (as some conceive) other Churches, who pretend
themselves to be the Spouse of Christ. Daughters (says the Learned Wendelin)
are either Nations, Strangers to the Church of Christ, which nevertheless are
joined to us by the common Ligaments of Humanity, and descend from the same
Creator, and therefore called Daughters; or else such as profess their Names
among the Citizens of Zion, the Church of Christ. But as the Church is compared
to a Lilly; so, with the greatest Elegancy, the Daughters are compared to
Thorns.

Simile. Parallel. A Lilly is a very sweet Flower, so fragrant, that
Naturalists tell us, a Man's Senses will be easily turned with the Strength
thereof. SO there is nothing sweeter to Christ, than the Church, the Spouse:
Ca^t. 4.7, 10, 14.
Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no Spot in thee. The Smell of thy
Ointment is better than all Spices, Spikenard, and Saffron, Calamus, and
Cinnamon, with all Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh and Aloes, with the chief
Spices. The Church, and faithful Children of God, are unto Christ a sweet
Savor. And it is said, Noah built an Altar to the Lord, and took of every clean
Fowl, Genesis 8.40, 41.
and offered Burnt-Offerings on the Altar; and the Lord smelled a sweet Savor.
II. A Lilly is an exceeding white Flower; nothing more pure, nothing whiter,
says the same Author, than a Lilly. II. So nothing is more fair and white, or
purer in Christ's Sight than the Church. My Undefiled is but one, she is the
only one of her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. Thou art
all fair, my Love, and there is no Spot in thee. Hence said to be clothed in
fine Linen, clean and white. Christ, her blessed Bridegroom, gave himself for
her, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
that he might sanctify and cleanse her, with the washing of Water, by the
Word; that he might present her to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot,
or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that she should be holy, and without
Blemish. III. The Lilly is a very fruitful Flower; Plin. lib. 21. cap. 5.
one Root (says Pliny) often yielding fifty Pods. The Dew of Heaven, the Heat
of the Sun, and Fatness of the Soil, make it fruitful. III. The Church is
fruitful; nothing more fruitful, says Wendelin: The which being planted in the
Field of one Jerusalem, in the Days of old, watered by the Apostolic Men, with
the Dew of the Word, and Miracles; the Sun of Righteousness shining upon it,
Mal. 4.2.
and infusing of his Divine Heat into it. In what part of the World, See Vine.
(in the space of a few Years) has it not taken Root? In the former Age, after
the Roman Winters of the Alpine Snow had for some Ages depressed this Flower,
and reduced its Leaves to admirable Paucity, insomuch that they were scarcely
visible to the World, and had circumscribed its Roots into a narrow Space, how
great and swift were the Increasings of it, the Heavens, which before seemed
shut, again bedewing of it! Then that Word (says he) we saw fulfilled, which
was promised in Times past to Israel: Hos. 14 4, 5.
I will be as the Dew unto Israel, and he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast
forth his Roots as Lebanon. His Branches shall spread, and his Beauty shall be
as the Olive Tree, and his Smell as Lebanon. Germany, England, France, Italy,
Spain, Poland, Hungary, Denmark, Sweden, has, (and what Country of Europe has
not?) within a few Years, seen the Roots and Branches thereof spread, and smelt
its Odor. The Popish Waves, Flames and Axes, could neither suffocate, burn, nor
cut up the Flower, Leaves, nor Roots of this Lilly. The Shadow of the Highest
has restrained the Flames; his Spirit bound up or constrained the Waves; his
Right Hand withheld the Axes, that grinning and grinding Dragon, that the
Beast and false Prophet could do nothing, etc. IV. The Lilly is a very tall
Flower; few Flowers (as Pliny observes) are higher than the Lilly. IV. So the
Church and People of God are the tallest or highest People in the World, they
dwell on high. Isa. 33.
Christ's Spouse is secure in that most high and Heaven-threatning Rock, Mat.
16.18. not to be overthrown by any of the Enemies battering Rams, nor to be
reached by any Power of the Dragon. This is that chosen Generation, 2 Pet. 2 9.
royal Priesthood, holy Nation, peculiar People, who are said to dwell on high:
And tho they now seem to creep low upon the Ground, and wander as it were in
Darkness; yet dwelling in God, they rest secure, etc. Mich. 4.1, 2.
and shall in due Time be exalted above the Hills, and the highest Mountains of
the Earth. V. The Lilly is a Flower most gloriously adorned, and lovely to look
upon; so that our Savior says, Solomon in all his Glory was not adorned like
one of these. It is furnished with beauteous Accomplishments; its Form is
excellent, with six Leaves curiously set, and within are seven Grains, and all
within of the Color of Gold, hanging down their Head; much of the Glory of the
Lilly is inward. V. The Church and Spouse of Christ is very glorious; her
Clothes are said to be wrought Gold: Psalm. 45.
She shall be brought to the King in Raiment of Needle Work: Hence said to be
as fair as the Moon, as clear as the Sun. The Church, with every sincere Soul,
is gloriously adorned, furnished with beauteous Accomplishments: (1.) With the
imputed Righteousness of Christ, a transparent and sparkling Ornament. (2.) The
Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which may answer to the Leaves of the Lilly. (3.) The
Graces of the Spirit, which may answer to the Grains within the Lilly, 2 Pet
1.5.6, 7, 8.
which (as St. Peter lays them down) are seven. Yet notwithstanding all this
Glory, with which Christ's Spouse is adorned and beautified, she is not proud;
but, as taught by the seven Grains of the Lilly, or Graces of the Spirit, does
humbly hang down her Head. Psalm. 45.
Her chiefest Beauty is internal: The King's Daughter is all glorious within.
VI. The Lilly is a Plant that (as Naturalists tell us) does shoot up suddenly,
nay, and that it does grow very much in the Night. VI. So God's Church, when
his Blessing is upon it, thrives marvellously in a short time. To make this
appear, consider in the Primitive Time, when the Dew of Grace fell upon the
Christian World, what abundance of Lillies sprung up suddenly? Three thousand
converted by St. Peter at one Sermon. Acts 2.40.
VII. The Lilly is among Thorns; Thorns are things of little Worth, low and
base things, in comparison of Lillies. VII. The Church of God grows in the
Field of this World, amongst base and vile Sinners, Isa 27.4.
who are compared to Thorns and Briars. VIII. The Lilly growing among Thorns,
is hurt thereby. That being a tender Flower, the Thorns coming up with it,
which are of a rough and pricking Nature, the Lilly receives much Injury, not
only in its Growth, but also they tend to spoil its Beauty. VIII. The Church,
like the Lilly, growing amongst the ungodly and persecuting World, are greatly
wronged thereby. The Inhabitants of Canaan, Number. 3.53
that Israel drove not out, were said to be Pricks in their Eyes, and Thorns in
their Sides, by which they were sorely perplexed and vexed. There is a Time
coming, when the Lilly, the Church of God, shall be injured by these cursed
Thorns no more: There shall be no more a pricking Bryar to the House of Israel,
nor any grieving Thorn. Ezekiel. 28.24.
Moreover, the Church should be as Lillies among Thorns for Beauty and Purity;
they ought to outdo and excel the Ungodly, as far as the Lilly does the
Thorn: As beautiful as a Lilly among Thorns, (says Mr. Ainsworth) as innocent
as Doves among ravenous Birds. Simile. Disparity. A Lilly is a natural Plant,
and Flower of the Field. THe Church is a heavenly or supernatural Flower, a
Plant of God's right hand planting. II. There is no care taken of the Lilly
that grows among Thorns; any are suffered to pluck them up. II. God takes
great care of his People, He has made a Fence about them, nay, He himself is as
a Wall of Fire on every side, and does keep his Church, Zech. 2.5.
and water it every moment: Isa. 27.3. Mat. 10 30
He keeps it night and day, lest any should hurt it. Not one Hair of your
Heads shall perish. III. A Lilly is a Flower that soon fades and withers away,
Mat. 6.30.
and is at last cast into the Oven. III. The Churches Beauty and Glory is
increasing: Prove. 4.18.
The Path of the Just is as the shining Light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect Day. Her Glory shall never fade, but she shall be made an eternal
Excellency.

Inferences.
THis may teach all true Christians to admire and exalt the free Grace of God,
in making so great a Difference between them, and the Wicked amongst whom they
live.

2. It shows also what care he takes of them, in preserving them whilst they
grow among Thorns, who do not only prick them by Persecution, but would utterly
root them up.

3. They are hereby called upon, not to rest satisfied with the Name of
Christians only, but to be earnest with the Lord, that whilst the Wicked do
daily manifest themselves to be as Thorns, they may be as Lillies, holy and
heavenly-born Souls, growing up more and more in Grace and Holiness.

The Church compared to a Merchant-Ship.
Prove. 31.14. She is like unto Merchant-Ships.

Isa. 54.11. O thou afflicted, and tossed with Tempests, and not comforted!


THe Church of God in these Scriptures, as Expositors observe, is compared to a
Ship, to a Merchant-Ship.

Simile. Parallel. A Merchant-Ship tradeth from one Place to another; she
fetches her Merchandise from afar. THe Church of God trades to Heaven, she
fetches her spiritual Merchandise from thence: Phil. 3.20.
Our Conversation is in Heaven. II. A Merchant-Ship has a skilful Pilot, to
steer and guide her the right way, that so she may not split upon Rocks or
Sands, or any other way miscarry in her Voyage. II. The Church of God has a
most expert and skilful Pilot, viz. Jesus Christ, to steer her Course through
the Seas of this World, that so she may not be split upon the Rocks of human
Inventions, nor the Sands of false Doctrine, Error, and Heresy. III. A
Merchant-Ship is tossed oftentimes upon a troublesome and tempestuous Sea, and
yet keeps up, and is preserved in a wonderful manner, upon boisterous Waves.
III. So the Church of God is often tossed with Tempests, or subject to, and
vexed with the Incursions of an envious and persecuting World, the Ungodly
being compared to the troubled Sea. Isa. 57.20.
IV. A Ship is steered by the Compass from one Place to another. IV. So the
Church of God is guided in her Passage to Heaven, by the Compass of God's Word,
in respect of Doctrine, Discipline, and Conversation: Thy Word is a Light unto
my Paths. Psalm. 110.105.
V. A Merchant-Ship takes in several Passengers, of diverse Kinds and Nations,
who sail in her to their desired Haven. V. So the Church takes in many
Christians and Professors, and those of several Sorts and Degrees, who all
declare they are bound with the Spiritual Ship, to the Land of Promise. VI.
Some Merchant-Ships have Nets belonging to them, which are cast into the Sea,
to take up Fishes, and bring them into the Ship. VI. So the Church of God has
the Gospel-Net, Mat. 13.47 Mark 1.17
which by the hands of the Mariners, and skilful Fishers of Men, is cast into
the Sea, or Multitude of People, by which means many Men are converted, and
taken into this spiritual Ship. VII. A Ship sails sweetly along, when she has
a prosperous Gale; for unless the Wind blow, she cannot sail. VII. So the
Church, under the powerful and sweet Influences of the Spirit, (which is
compared to the Wind) is carried gloriously along toward her desired Haven;
Joh. 3.6, 7.
but if this spiritual Wind blow not, she is becalmed. VIII. What common
Dangers a Merchant-Ship is exposed to, all the Passengers who sail in her are
liable to also, viz. to the same Tempests, the same Pirates, etc. Let Jonah and
the Mariners be in the same Ship together, and tho the Storm arose for Jonah's
sake, yet all the whole Ship's Company were in danger. So it was in Paul's
Case, with those other Prisoners, Mariners, and Soldiers that were in the Ship
with him. Let there be in the same Sip, (says Mr. Vartue) a Prince going to
receive a Crown, and a Malefactor going to receive Punishment, according to the
Nature of his Offense; whilst they are in the Ship together, they are subject
to the same Storms and Tossings, to be Sea-sick together, to the same Pirates,
and alike ransacked and spoiled by them. VIII. So what common Dangers befall
God's Church, all the Members thereof are more or less exposed and liable to
the same. Let Enemies come, let Persecution arise against it, there are no sort
of Men or Members, whether sincere or not, whilst they remain in the Church, or
hold fast their Profession, let them promise themselves what Safety they will,
who can be secure, or exempted from Violence. Tho as in a Ship, some speed
oft-times better than the rest; Jer. 45.5.
as Baruch and Jeremiah, who had their Lives given them for a Prey, when
Thousands were cut off, yet went into Exile. 2 Timothy 3.12.
Whosoever (says the Apostle) will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
Persecution. Through much Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God.
Hypocrites, in a Day of common Danger and Persecution, are in the like
Circumstances with those who truly fear God; Satan, that Arch-Pirate, and his
Emissaries, will favor them no more than others, until they renounce their
Religion, etc. IX. When a Ship is in a Storm, all the Mariners have their Hands
and Hearts full, they are at their Wit's end; every one takes hold of a Rope,
and endeavors to the utmost to save and secure the Ship (if possible) from
sinking. IX. Isa. 64.17.
So in an Hour of Trouble and Persecution, every Christian should do his best
to secure and save the Church of God from sinking, or from being cast away, or
lost. Every one should have their Hearts up to God, and their Hands to work
wisely, for her and their own Safety. X. Merchant Ships greatly enrich those
Places, Cities, and Kingdoms to whom they belong, bringing to them rare and
excellent Merchandises, which are offered to Sale, or to be exchanged to
Traders. X. So the Church of God, by daily Trading to Heaven, greatly enricheth
poor Sinners. What she receives from Christ, her Merchants or Ministers offer
to Sale, Prove. 23.23.
to the Nation or Nations where she lives: Truth, Peace, Pardon, the the Pearl
of great Price, and other excellent Merchandise, she furnishes the World with.
XI. A Ship's great Safety, consists in her being well built, having a good
Bottom, a skilful Pilot, and sure Anchors, etc. XI. So the Churches Safety
consists in her being truly constituted, Heb. 6.1, 2
according to the Apostolical Prescriptions, or that Pattern left in the Gospel
by Christ, and the Primitive Saints; and in having Christ for her Governor, or
chief Pilot, who (as Jerome observes) sits at the Stern, and guides her Course
as he sees good: And lastly, by having Hope (that precious Grace of the Spirit)
for her Anchor: Which Hope we have as the Anchor of the Soul, Heb. 6.19.
both sure and steadfast, etc. The Nature of which is opened under the Fifth
Head of Metaphors, concerning the Graces of the Spirit, to which we refer you.

Inferences.
THis may inform us, that Trouble and Persecution must be expected. No Ship
sets out to Sea, but meets with Storms and Tempests at one time or another; and
therefore the Mariners look for them, and provide accordingly, to secure the
Ship, and save themselves; and so should spiritual Seafaring Men do.

2. It may also be Matter of Comfort to the Godly. What assurance is here of
Safety! Christ, who guides the Ship, can at his pleasure still the Seas, and
make the greatest Storm in a Moment to be a Calm. Psalm. 65.7.
He stilleth (as the Psalmist says) the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of their
Waves, and the Tumults of the People. Therefore tho Satan, that cruel Pirate,
and other malicious Enemies of the Church, seek daily to sink this spiritual
Ship; and tho he be a Spirit, and therefore of great Power against us, yet he
is nothing to God, who is the Creating Spirit. That which is said of Behemoth,
is no less true of him: He that made him, Job 46.18
can make his Sword approach unto him. Let therefore the Power and Rage of our
Enemies be never so great, and their Opposition at this day never so fierce
against us, yet we have an Assurance from our blessed Savior, that the Gates
of Hell shall never prevail against the Church: She shall never be broken to
pieces, nor suffer Shipwreck. O thou tossed with Tempests, and not comforted!

The Church compared to a Golden Candlestick.
Rev. 1.20. The Golden Candlesticks are the seven Churches.
MR. Brightman, and others, understand this Metaphor of Golden Candlesticks, is
taken from the Candlesticks that were in the Tabernacle erected by Moses; and
the Resemblance between these holds good in two or three Particulars, which
take as follow.

Metaphor. Parallel. IN general, the Use of a Candlestick is to hold out the
Light to others. No Man (says our Savior) lights a Candle, and puts it
under a Bushel, but into a Candlestick; and it gives Light to all that are in
the House. SO the Church holds out the Light of God's Word to all that dwell
therein, in which respect the Apostle calls the Church the Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.17. Exercit. Divin. Exer. 9. Way to the true Church, p. 80. Gurs. Theol.
part 2. Col. 324.
because she holds out the Truth to be seen, (says Weemse) the Expression
being taken from the Custom of many Nations, who are used to write their Laws
in Tables, and so to hang them upon Pillars of Stone, that the People whom it
concerned to know them, might see and read them; as amongst us, Proclamations
are nailed to Posts in Market Towns. Dr. White.

The Church holds out her Light three ways,

1. By her Doctrine; she having diverse approved Ministers belonging to her,
that she calls forth to preach and publish the Word of Truth. Hence the Law
is said to go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

2. By her holy Discipline.

3. By her godly Example and Conversation: Let your Light so shine before Men,
that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Mat. 5.16. Walk as the Children of the Light, Ephesians. 5.8. The Church ought to
meet publicly, to make a public Profession.

II. Candlesticks of Gold are of great Worth, and seldom found but in the
Houses of Princes. II. So the Church is very precious in God's sight: Exodus
19.5, 6. Mal. 3.17.
Ye shall be a peculiar Treasure unto me, above all People. Hence they are
called his Jewels. This Candlestick only belongs to the Prince of Heaven and
Earth; they are Christ's Churches. III. Those Golden Candlesticks had some part
of them for Use, and some part for Ornament; there were Knobs and Flowers
curiously set upon them. III. The Church of God is not only of use to hold out
the Light of God's Word; 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
but it is also richly adorned with several choice and heavenly Graces, that
make it, and every Member thereof, who truly fears God, amiable in Christ's
Sight. IV. The throwing down, or removing of the Candlestick, throws down and
removes the Light or Candle also. IV. So when a Church is removed out of its
place, the Light of God's Word is many times removed from a Nation or People
likewise; which severe Judgment has befallen the People of Asia long ago, by
God's taking away or removing those seven famous Golden Candlesticks, or
Churches, that once were there.

Inference.
LEt the Saints and People of God take heed how they walk before Him: It
behooves them to strive to recover themselves from whence they are fallen, lest
He remove their Candlestick out of its place.

The Church compared to a Flock of Sheep.
Cant. 1.7. Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, and where
thou make thy Flock to rest at Noon, etc.

Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, it is your Father's good Pleasure to give
you the Kingdom.


THe Church, or Saints of God, are compared unto a Flock of Sheep.

Metaphor. Parallel. SHeep are clean Beasts, tame and gentle; not wild, as
Tigers, Lions, Foxes, or Wolves; nor unclean, as Dogs, Swine, etc. SO the
Saints of God are a People tamed, as it were, by God's Spirit, from that
natural Wildness and Perverseness, made gentle, willing to come into Christ's
Fold, cleansed from Impurity of Heart and Life. II. Sheep are simple, a
harmless Sort of Creatures, not crafty, ravenous, and devouring, as those Sort
of Beasts abovementioned. II. So the Saints of God are holy; they are taught
to be simple concerning Evil: Mat. 10.16
Be ye (says Christ) as innocent as Doves. They seek the Hurt of no Man; not
like Romish Wolves, who delight in nothing more than in Blood and Rapine,
shedding the Blood of those who do not wrong or injure them, but desire to live
peaceably in the Land. III. Sheep are meek and patient under Sufferings: Hence
our Savior is said to be led as a Lamb to the Slaughter; Isa. 53.7.
and as a Sheep is dumb before the Shearer, so opened he not his Mouth. See
Lamb. III. So the Saints and People of God are meek and patient under God's
hand, both when they suffer for their Sins, or for the Trial of their Graces;
as appears in Job, David, Stephen, etc. Psalm. 39 9.
I held my Peace, I opened not my Mouth, because Lord, thou did it. IV.
Sheep, as they are patient, so they are profitable, both in their Lives, and by
their Death. There is scarcely any Creature that brings its Owner greater
Incomes than Sheep; they are good both for Food and Clothing. IV. The Saints
are very profitable many ways; the Benefit the World receives by them, or for
their Sakes, is very great; they are called the Light of the World, and the
Salt of the Earth; now the Profit the World receives in both these respects, is
not little. Had there been ten of those Sheep in Sodom, God had not destroyed
it; besides, the Angel told Lot, he could do nothing till he was out of the
City. What a Blessing was Joseph to his Master, whilst he abode in his House,
and Jacob to Laban! They yield the World much Profit, by the Doctrine they
preach, by the fervent Prayers they daily put up to Almighty God, and their
holy and good Examples: Mat. 5.16.
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. V. Sheep are obedient, and ready to
follow their Shepherd whithersoever he goes. It is the Custom in some
Countries, for the Shepherd to go before the Sheep, etc To which our Savior
alludes, John 10.27. V. So Believers, and the Church of Christ, are obedient to
him: Joh. 10.4, 5.
My Sheep (says he) hear my Voice, and they follow me; and the Voice of a
Stranger they will not follow. Psalm. 73.24
Thou shall guide me by thy Counsel, says the Psalmist. Christ's Precepts are
the Saints Directory, and his Practice their Pattern for Imitation. Hence Paul
exhorts the Corinthians to follow him, as he followed Christ. 1 Cor. 11.1.
VI. Sheep are incident to many Diseases, many of them are weak and feeble;
which a good Shepherd takes pity of, and endeavors to heal and strengthen
them. VI. So the Saints of God are subject to manifold Weaknesses, Temptations,
and Afflictions, which moved the Almighty to great Compassion, and sorely to
rebuke the Shepherds of Israel, for their Cruelty and great Remisness toward
his Flock: The Diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick, etc. And therefore says, He would himself take the Work into
his own hands: I will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that
which was sick, etc VII. A Flock of Sheep must not be over-driven, lest they
tire. Jacob, who was a skilful Shepherd, knew this, and therefore told Esau his
Brother, Genesis 33.13
that if the Flock were over-driven, they would die. VII. So the Saints or
Flock of Christ must not be over-driven, they must be led gently along; and God
takes care to lay no more upon them than they can bear. No Temptation has
taken you, 1 Cor. 10.13.
but such as is common to Men; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above what you are able; and will with the Temptation also make way
to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. He will not lay upon us more than is
right. VIII. Sheep are subject to go astray, and to be lost in a Wilderness;
and upon that account need the Shepherd's Care, to seek them, and fetch them
home to the Fold. VIII. So the Saints are subject to go astray from God, and to
wander from his Precepts, viz. decline in their Zeal, Faith, and Affection to
him, and his Ways, and to get wandering Thoughts after the World; and sometimes
they wander, through the Neglect and Carelessness of the Under-Shepherds: My
Sheep, Ezekiel. 34.6 Psalm. 119.176.
says the Lord, wandered through all the Mountains, and none did search or
seek after them. I have gone astray like a lost Sheep, seek thy Servant, etc.
IX. Sheep must be led forth into green Pastures, to be fed: and a good Shepherd
will take heed he puts them not into Fields or Meadows that are not proper for
them; for some Grounds will soon rot and spoil them. IX. So Christ's Flock must
be fed in good Pastures, viz. with sound and wholesome Truth, good Doctrine,
Food that is fit and proper for them; they must not have Chaff of Men's
Traditions, nor the corrupt Glosses of cloudy Doctors, that lived in the dark
Time of the Church. It behooves Christ's Ministers to take heed they suffer not
the Sheep under their Charge to suck in the Poison of Error and Heresy; for
nothing rots and spoils Christians more than that. The Spouse from hence
enquireth of Christ, Cant. 1.7.
Where he feeds his Flock? that is, Where his blessed Gospel was truly and
constantly preached, and his holy Ordinances duly administered, lest she should
turn aside by the Flocks of his Companions, that is, such as call themselves
so. Christ directs her to go forth by the Footsteps of the Flock, and feed
their Kids besides the Shepherds Tents: That is, to follow the Doctrine and
Footsteps of the Primitive Church, for that alone is our Rule in all God's holy
Worship. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: Psalm. 23.1, 2
He makes me to lie down in green Pastures, he leads me besides the still
Waters. X. Sheep have a shadowy Place to rest in, when the Sun shines hot at
Noon, which is a great Refreshment to them, where they chew their Cud; and
being saved from the Vehemence of the scorching Sun, they with the greater
Alacrity return to their Pasture. X. Cant. 1 7
So the Saints and Church of God have a blessed Resting Place in the Time of
the greatest Heat, Temptation, Affliction, and Persecution, or whatsoever may
cause Disquiet, and grieve them; in the midst of which (says Mr. Ainsworth)
Christ gives sweet Repose unto his Sheep; they have Peace in Him, tho
Tribulation in the World. Joh. 16.33 Isa. 47.10. Psalm. 57.1. Isa. 33.2.
They shall not hunger, nor thirst, neither shall the Heat nor Sun smite them,
etc. Under the Shadow of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until these
Calamities be over-past. Hence Christ is said to be as the Shadow of a great
Rock in a weary Land. XI. Sheep have many Enemies, as Lions, Wolves, Bears,
Dogs, Foxes, and the like; and all their Safety stands only in the Care of
their Shepherd: otherwise these cruel Beasts, besides Men, who kill many in a
Night, would soon tear them to pieces. XI. So God's poor Flock have many strong
and cruel Adversaries, who would soon tear them in pieces, and utterly destroy
them, were it not for the precious Love and Care of Jesus Christ. Romans 8.36
We are killed all the day long, and accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter;
Zech. 11.4
hence called the Flock of Slaughter. XII. A Flock of Sheep love to feed and
lie down together; it is a difficult thing to scatter and divide them. If they
are frighted by an Enemy, or pursued by Dogs, Foxes, or Wolves, and should be
separated, they would soon get together again. XII. So the Saints of God do
greatly love to assemble together: Mal. 3.16.
They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, etc. They that fear
thee, says David, Psalm. 119.74.
will be glad when they see me, because I have hoped in thy Word. It is a hard
thing to divide Christ's choice Sheep, their Hearts are knit one to another, as
Jonathan's was to David's. And if wicked Men, like Dogs and Wolves, do
endeavor to scatter them by Persecution, they will soon get together again; as
is signified, Acts 4.23. And being let go, they went to their own Company, etc.
XIII. A Flock of Sheep are subject to take Soil and Filth, and therefore have
need of washing. XIII. So the Godly and Faithful in Christ Jesus are very
subject (as they are in themselves) to contract much Guilt and Pollution, Sin
being of a defiling Nature; and therefore it is they are washed by their
Shepherd: If I wash thee not, Joh. 13.
thou have no part in me. The believing Corinthians are said to be washed, they
were before very unclean and filthy: Such were some of you, but ye are washed,
1 Cor. 6.11
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God, who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in
his own Blood. Rev. 1.5.
XIV. Sheep will live where other Beasts cannot; they will live upon very hard
and barren Commons, where the Grass is exceeding short, and yet seem very well
contented. XIV. So the sincere and truly gracious Soul can live by Faith in a
Time of Want and Scarcity, when the Hopes of other Men die, and pine away. And
tho the World frown upon them, and they cannot see which way by an Eye of Sense
they should subsist, yet they make a good Shift to live upon the Providence of
God, who cares for them, and are very contented and satisfied with such
Pasture that God is pleased to put them into. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, Hab. 3.17, 18.
neither shall Fruit be on the Vine; the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the Fields shall yield no Meat; the Flocks shall be cut off from the Fold, and
there shall be no Herd in the Stall: Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in
the God of my Salvation. XV. There are oftentimes in a Flock of Sheep some
Goats. XV. So in the Church of Christ are some evil and corrupt Members, Mat.
13.47
or such who are none of Christ's Sheep, Hypocrites, such as are unsound at
Heart, who are also called Goats. XVI. Sheep are very fruitful; they multiply
in a little Time exceedingly, tho many are killed by Butchers. XVI. So the
Church of God is fruitful; Acts 12.40, 41.
from a few they have often increased to a great Multitude: Nay, tho they have
been many of them slaughtered by the persecuting Butchers of Babylon, yet they
have rather multiplied the more; from whence that Maxim grew, The Blood of the
Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. VII. In a Flock of Sheep are likely some fat
and strong, and some lean Ones; and the strong are sometimes observed to run
upon, and abuse the weak, being grown very wanton; these sometimes leap over
the Fold, and the Shepherd has much trouble with them. XVII. So amongst the
Flock of Christ are some fat and rich Saints, and some poor and lean Ones, who
do not thrive; you may take it both in a temporal and spiritual Sense: There
are also some whom God rebukes and threatens, who are grown so headstrong,
that they are waxed wanton and haughty, that they oppress and abuse the Poor;
and these God says he will destroy; Ezekiel 34.16.
they being grown fat, like Jeshurun, kick against the Lord, and will not live
in subjection to his Church, nor abide in the Fold. XVIII. Sheep are sometimes
separated from the Goats, for some special occasion known to the Shepherd.
XVIII. So the Sheep of Christ in the last Day shall be separated from the
Goats, Mat. 25.32, 33.
by the Lord Jesus: Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall
separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the
Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his Right Hand, and the Goats on his Left.
Metaphor. Disparity. SHeep may be lost, and torn in pieces, and utterly
destroyed by Lions, Bears, etc. BUt none of Christ's Sheep can be lost nor
perish; Mat. 10.28 Joh. 10.27, 28.
tho the Enemy may kill or destroy their Bodies, yet they cannot destroy their
Souls. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give
them eternal Life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand: My Father that gave them me is greater than all, and none is
able to pluck them out of my Father's hand.

Touching other Properties and Things relating to Christ's Sheep, see the
Metaphor, Christ the good Shepherd.

The Church compared to a House.
1 Timothy 3.15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, etc.

Heb. 3.6. But Christ over his own House, whose House are we, etc.


THe Church of Christ is compared to an House; the great God, whose Throne is
above, has also a Dewlling Place here below.

Metaphor. Parallel. See Vartue's Parallels, p. 400.
A House is a Habitation, a Place built for some Man or Men to dwell in. THe
Church is the Habitation of the Holy Ghost: I will dwell in them, 1 Cor. 6.
Joh. 14.17
and walk in them, etc. For he dwells with you, and shall be in you. 2 Timothy
1.54.
That good thing which was committed to thee, keep, by the Holy Ghost which
dwells in us. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit
of God dwells in you. II. A House is built by a wise Builder, upon a sure and
firm Foundation; some are built upon Rocks. II. 1 Cor. 3.16. and 3.11.
The Church is built upon a sure Foundation, viz. Jesus Christ. Another
Foundation can no man lay, etc. Upon this Rock will I build my Church. III. A
House is builded with, or does consist of diverse Materials, as Timber, Stone,
Brick, etc. which are well hewed and squared before. III. So the Church does
consist of several Members, who are called or compared to Stones: Ye also, as
lively Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.
are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood. And these Stones are also
well hewed and squared, by the Word and Spirit of God. IV. A House has some
main and principal Parts appertaining or belonging to it, as Pillars, Beams,
Rafters, etc. IV. So the Church or House of God has some famous Pillars,
Beams, and Rafters, as the Holy Ghost calls them: The Beams of our House are
Cedars, Cant. 1.17
and our Rafters of Fir. The Righteous are compared to Cedars in Lebanon; those
Trees are tall and durable. Cedar was used in building of Solomon's Temple, a
Type or Figure of the Church; which denotes the Strength, Usefulness, Beauty,
and Excellency of the Saints, (or some among them) who are called Pillars, Gal.
2. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars, etc. And Christ
says, Rev. 3.12.
Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God. V. In a
House, Pillars, Beams, and Rafters are of great (tho of different) use; all are
to support, strengthen, perfect, and complete the Building: the least Material
is needful, and cannot be wanting. V. So in the House of God, Ephesians. 4.7, to 12.
the Prophets, Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, etc. are of great Use, tho
of different Offices; and all for the support of every part of the spiritual
Building; and the least Member cannot be spared. Some are strong, and some are
weak; some have five Talents, and some but two; Mat. 25.
yet one ought not to despise the other. As in a material House, Beams and
Rafters, tho diverse in Strength and Use, yet all have a firm Connection amongst
themselves, to make up one complete Structure; even so in Christ's Church, tho
there be diverse Members, severally gifted and placed, as we see in the Body
natural, yet (as the Apostle there shows, verse 25.) there should be no Schism
in the Body, 1 Cor. 12.24.
but such a Conjunction of one another, as they have of themselves a holy
Sympathy in Supportation, Suffering, and Rejoicing. VI. The House of a Prince,
when built, is furnished, and most richly adorned, that it may become a meet
Habitation, according to the Degree, Glory, and Grandeur of him who is to dwell
therein. VI. So the Church and Temple of God, being built for the glorious
Prince of Heaven and Earth, is most richly and curiously adorned with the
precious Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost: For as the Materials of this House
are Silver, Gold, and precious Stones; so its Ornaments or Furniture does
infinitely excel, it being the King's Palace: The King's Daughter is all
glorious within. Psalm. 45.13
VII. A House is a Place of Security; it defends from many Dangers, which those
are exposed unto, that are harbourless, and forced to lie without Doors;
besides, some Houses have Walls about them. VII. So the Church is a Place of
Security, God having made such a blessed Wall about her: And the Lord will
create upon every Dewlling Place in Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a
Cloud and Smoke by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night; for upon
all her Glory shall be a Defense. I will (says God) encamp about mine House,
because of the Army, because of him that passes by, etc. He has promised to
be a Wall of Fire round about her. Zech. 2.5. VIII. A House is a Place of
Repose, a Resting Place; it is hence greatly desired, by every one that belongs
to the Family that dwells therein. VIII. The Church of God is a sweet Place of
spiritual Repose. Sion is called a peaceable Habitation, Isa. 32.18, 19.
and sure Dwellings, and a quiet Resting Place. IX. A House has a Way that
leads to it, and a Door that opens into it, that so those who are Strangers,
may be readily directed how to find it. IX. So the Church or House of God has
a Way that readily leads to it. In a strict Sense, Christ is both the Way and
the Door. If any enquire more directly, how they may find the Way into the
Church, if they take the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, they cannot miss. Thus
says the Lord, Stand in the Ways, and see, and ask for the old Paths, Jer.
6.16.
where is the good Way, and walk therein, etc. This good old Way is the Way of
Repentance, Faith, and Baptism; the Saints of the Primitive Time walked all in
this Way, and knew no other Door into the Church: And they that gladly received
the Word, were baptized; Acts 2.41.42.
and the same day there was added to them about three thousand Souls. X. A
House is a Place of Devotion; there a Man reads, prays, meditates, and
instructs his Family. X. So the Church of God is the principal Place of Public
Devotion; there Prayers are made, the Word is preached, and the Sacraments are
duly administered. XI. A House is subject to go to decay, and therefore needs
often to be repaired. By the Slothfulness of the Hands the House droppeth
through. XI. So the Church of God will soon decay, if it be not often repaired
by a wise and careful Discipline. Metaphor. Disparity. AN earthly House in
which Men dwell, is the Work of Men's Hands. BUt the Church, or House of God, is
called God's Building; the choice preparing of the Matter, and the framing and
jointing every part, (as to the Manner) is of God. II. A House is built with
such Materials as are without Life. II. But this spiritual House consists of
Believers, who (tho they were once without Life, yet now) are quickened, who are
therefore called living Stones, 1 Pet. 2 3.
built up a spiritual House. III. Some Houses are left desolate, without
Inhabitants, and so go to decay, and at length fall. III. But it is impossible
that ever the House of God should be without Inhabitants: For the Lord has
chosen Zion, Psalm. 13 2. 13, 14.
he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my Rest for ever, here will I
dwell, for I have desired it. And as for sanctified Ones, they are not only
Dwellers in it, but the very Materials of it; so that it can never be without
them. It being also founded upon a Rock, cannot fall: Mat. 16 1^
The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. IV. Other Houses are liable to
be destroyed, either by Fire, or razed by an Enemy, so that one Stone may not
be left upon another. IV. But the House of God has stood ever since it was
erected, notwithstanding the many Plots and Designs of Satan, and his
Instruments, by one means or other, if possible, to have destroyed it, so as
that there might not have appeared so much as the Dust or Stones; no, nor so
much as any Sign left in any Part, or among any People in the World, whether
there had been such a Building or no. But blessed for ever be Jehovah, that it
may yet be said, Walk about Zion, Psalm. 48.12, 13, 14.
and go round about her, tell the Towers thereof, mark well her Bulwarks,
consider her Palaces; that ye may tell it to the Generation following: For this
God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our Guide even unto Death.

Inferences.
THis calls aloud upon all the Members of God's House, to strive more and
more, not only to be a meet Habitation for God, but to beautify and adorn this
House by their holy and heavenly Conversations. Holiness becomes thy House, O
Lord, for ever.

2. Let all take heed how they defile or deface this House, either by plucking
out a Stone or a Pin, or touching a Hair of the Head of any that are of this
Building.

3. Let all God's People examine what their Zeal is for God's House, or whether
they do truly prize the very Dust and Stones thereof.

The Church compared to a Family or Household.
Amos 3.2. You have I known above all the Families of the Earth.

1 Timothy 3.15. The House of God, which is the Church of the Living God.

Gal. 6.16. As we have Opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, but especially
to the Household of Faith.

Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God.


A HOUSE in the holy Scripture is sometimes put for the Family or Houshhold,
and sometimes for the Structure or Building it self: In both these respects the
Holy Ghost runs the Parallel, in respect of the Church.

Metaphor. Parallel. 1 Timothy 2.20.
IN a great House are not Vessels of of Gold, and of Silver only, but of Wood,
and of Earth; some to Honor, and some to Dishonor. SO in the Church of God,
there is a Mixture of Good and Bad, Sheep and Goats, sincere Christians, and
Hypocrites; like as in a Eield there is a Mixture of Wheat and Tares; and in a
Floor of Grain, there is Chaff as well as Corn: tho when any appear unsound,
drossy, and ungodly, she turns them out. When the Family of Christ consisted
but of twelve Men, there was a Judas amongst them. II. In a great Family there
are Persons of different Ages, of different Strength, of different Relations to
the Master of the Family, and of different Employments. II. So in the Church of
God there are little Children, young Men, 2 John 2.12, 14. Heb. 5.11, 12, 13,
14.
and Fathers; there are weak and stronger Christians, some that stand in need
of Milk, some that are fit for strong Meat; some that need to be led, and
carried in Arms; some that are Teachers and Rulers, and others that are taught
and ruled. III. The Master, chief Head, or Governor of a Family, provides and
takes care of all that belong to him; 1 Timothy 3.8.
hence the Apostle says, He that provides not for his Family, is worse than an
Infidel, and has denied the Faith. III. So God, the great and good Master of
this heavenly Family, does and will provide for all and every Soul that belongs
to him. Mat. 6.25, to 30.
Take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. Why take ye thought for Raiment?
Consider the Lillies of the Field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do
they spin. Therefore if God so cloth the Grass of the Field, which is to day,
and to morrow is cast into the Oven; shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little Faith? The young Lions do lack, and suffer Hunger; but they that fear
the Lord, Psalm. 84.11
shall want no good thing. He will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will
he withold from them that walk uprightly. My God shall supply all your Wants,
etc. Phil 4.19.
Casting all your Care upon him, for he cares for you, etc. IV. A Family is
also under the Government of him who is the chief Head and Ruler thereof. IV.
So is the Church under the Government of Christ; and every Member is subject to
that Authority, Order, and Rule, which he has left therein. V. The Master of a
Family defends his Family, to the uttermost of his Power, against all Enemies.
V. So does the blessed God defend and preserve his Church, whose Power is
infinite. So will the Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem; defending, Zech. 9.15
also he will deliver. VI. Every Person in a Family, is privy to all such
things as are publicly done in the House, many of which ought to be concealed,
and not divulged to others. It is a Reproach to a Person of an honorable
Family, to make known any thing that is done in the House, which ought by all
means to be kept secret. VI. So each Member of the Church is privy to all such
things as are done publicly therein; and many things done therein do so
particularly relate to the Family, that it is an evil thing, and justly to be
reproved, for any Member to divulge or make such private Matters known to
others. The Church of God in this respect, as well as in some others, should be
as a Spring shut up, Cant. 4.12
as a Fountain sealed, etc. VII. It is a great Honor to a Family, when it is
well governed. It was this very thing that the Queen of Sheba was so much taken
with, when she came to see Solomon: 2 Kings 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
It is said, When she saw his Wisdom, and the House which he had built, and the
Meat of his Table, and the Sitting of his Servants, and the Order of his
Ministers, and their Apparel, and his drinking Vessels, and his
Burnt-Offerings, that he offered in the House of the Lord, she was astonished,
etc. In a Family, the Governor ought to know his Place, and all the rest to be
in subjection; or else great Confusion and Disorder will break forth. Hence a
Bishop ought to be one that rules well his own House, having his Children in
subjection, with all Gravity. What is more lovely in a Family, than to see
every one behaving himself well, living in sweet Concord, Peace, and Love
together. VII. So it is a great Honor to the Church of God, when it is well
and wisely governed. In this respect Solomon was a Type of Christ, and his
Family a Type of the Family of the Faithful, or Church of God. The Lord Jesus
ought to be acknowledged as the Head, and chief Governor; and next to Him, the
Bishop or Pastor thereof must be obeyed, and submitted to in all things, in the
Lord. Heb. 13.17
Obey them that have the Oversight of you, and subject your selves; for they
watch for your Souls. There is nothing that does more beautify the Church of
God, than good Order. What is any Society of Men, without Rule, and good
Government? Strict Discipline must be kept up in Christ's Family. Every Member
ought to know his Place, and to strive to behave himself well. To this very end
Paul wrote to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.15.
That thou may (says he) know how thou ought to behave thy self in the
House of God, etc. All the Saints should live in perfect Peace, Unity, and
sweet Concord together, as Children of the same Father, and Heirs of the same
Crown and Kingdom. Hence the Apostle exhorts the Saints, Ephesians. 4.3.
to endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace. Nothing is
at this Day more grievous to a sincere Soul, than to see the great Divisions,
and Want of Love, that is amongst us; nor does any thing more encourage our
Popish Adversaries. Jovianus the Emperor, was much troubled at the Divisions
that were amongst Christians in his Time, and showed his Dislike at their
Contentions, in these Words: I tell you truly, I cannot bear with Contention,
but such as are for Concord and Unity I willingly honor and embrace; and
certain I am, that such as strive for Truth and Peace, Christ will embrace,
Discord amongst Brethren being one of those things he chiefly hates. Prove. 6.16
VIII. There is, and ought to be, some special Order and Discipline kept up in
a Family, that every one may know his Place, Work, and Business. VIII. So in
the Church, or spiritual Family, there is a special Order and Discipline to be
learned and kept up, and every one is to know his Place, Work, and Business,
some of which we shall briefly hint in this place.

The first thing that I shall mind is, the Choice of Officers, viz. Elders and
Deacons: They should be chosen according to the Rules and Directions God has
left in his Word, viz. Men fitly qualified: A Bishop must not be soon angry, 1 Timothy 3.2, to 8. Tit 1 5, 6, 7.
not given to Wine, no Striker, not self-willed, not a Brawler, not Covetous,
not a Novice. He must be blameless, one that rules well his own House, apt to
teach, a Lover of good Men, sober, just, temperate, able by sound Doctrine to
convince Gainsayers. There are Directions also given about their Wives.

2. Every Member has his peculiar Vote in choosing of their Officers; after
Election, they are to be ordained, by Prayer, and laying on of Hands. Acts 6.6.
and 13.3.


3. The Pastor or Bishop is to feed the Flock, to be faithful and laborious in
preaching the Word of Life, exhorting, reproving, comforting, 1 Timothy 4.12, 16.
according as he finds occasion.

4. It behooves him, together with the Church, to be careful whom they receive
into the Family, viz. none but such as are converted, true penitent and
believing Persons, as near as they can.

5. They ought to know the State of the Flock, Prove. 27.23. Heb. 13.17
and to watch over every Member thereof.

6. The Members of the Church ought to study their Duty,

(1.) To their Pastor, to provide for him a sufficient Maintenance, 1 Cor. 9.9,
to 14.
that he may not be encumbered with worldly Affairs, and thereby made unfit for
his great Work and Business he is called to. See Planters, Laborers, etc.

(2.) To pray for him, and show him all due Respect, Ephesians. 6.19.
as the Steward and Ambassador of Christ.

(3.) As to their Duties one to another, as Fellow Members of God's Church, it
is needful for them to know how they should carry and behave themselves toward
their offending Brethren. And as touching this, it is necessary to consider, 1.
The Rule touching private Offenses. 2. Touching public and scandalous Offenses
and Offenders.

1. Touching private Offenses, Christ has left us Directions, in Mat. 18.15,
16. If thy Brother offend thee, tell him his Fault between thee and him alone;
but if he will not hear thee, take one or two more, etc. But if he still
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church: But if he will not hear the
Church, then he is fit for Church-dealing, or Excommunication. Let all take
heed they do not make public any Evil or Offense of their Brethren, that is
private; for this is an utter Fault, and a Violation to the Law of Christ, and
Order of his House.

2. Touching public and scandalous Sins and Offenders, such as expose the Name
of God to a Reproach, as Fornication, Covetousness, Idolatry, Drunkenness,
Rioting, etc. these, without through and unfeigned Repentance, ought forthwith
to be delivered up to Satan, or put out of the Church, into the Kingdom of
Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5
from whence they came. And truly it cannot be known quickly who has true
Repentance, that fall into such great Sins, until there be some Time of Trial.
Reformation of Life is the chief part of Repentance; therefore to clear the
Name of God from Reproach, and the better to bring the Offender to the Sense of
his Sin, the Ordinance of Excommunication ought, in my Judgment, immediately
upon Conviction, to pass against him.

3. In the Administration of Justice and Judgment in the Church, special Care
ought to be taken, that with all Wisdom and Impartiality Persons may be dealt
withal. Let the Church and Pastor see to it, that the Rich be no more spared
than the Poor. Levi was not to know his Father in Judgment.

IX. In a religious Family, Devotion is carefully and duly performed, Prayer,
reading the Word, etc. It Is a Reproach to a Family, especially to the Master,
or Governor and Governess, to have this neglected, and a Sin very provoking to
God: Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, Jer. 20.25.
and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name. IX. So the Church of God is
the chief Place of Public Devotion; there the Word of God is and ought to be
read. And hence Paul says to the Colossians, When this Epistle is read amongst
you, Col. 4.16, 17.
cause it to be read also in the Church (mark) of the Laodiceans. There the
Word of God is truly and duly preached, and the Sacraments administered. Out of
Zion, the Perfection of Beauty, Psalm. 50.2. Ephesians. 3.10.
God has shined. To the intent, that now unto Principalities and Powers in
heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. Hence
God is said to love the Gates of Zion, Psalm. 87.2.
( viz. the Place of his visible Worship) more than all the Dwellings of Jacob.
Can there be a greater Reproach to a Church, or any thing more provoking to
God, than to have Prayer, and other Branches of Public Worship and Devotion,
wholly neglected among them? X. All the Family, yea, every particular Person
thereof, ought to be called together, and they diligently to obey that Call,
and come together at the Time of Devotion, or when Prayer is solemnly performed
therein. X. So the whole Church (I mean each Community of Christians) yea,
every particular Member thereof, ought to be called together, and they
diligently to obey that Call, at all Times, when Prayer, or any other part of
Church Service, Devotion, and Worship is to be performed. Heb 10.25
Not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some
is, etc. Acts 2.1.
They were all with one accord in one Place. XI. Some Families are exceeding
great, consisting of many Persons, especially if it be the Family of a Prince,
or noble Person. XI. The whole Family of Christ, the great Prince of Heaven and
Earth, I mean the whole universal Church, both Militant and Triumphant, is
exceeding great, the one part of which is in Heaven, and the other on Earth:
Ephesians. 3.15, 16.
For this Cause I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, etc. Ephesians. 3.15, 16. XII.
It is exceeding commendable and honorable, for all that belong unto a Family,
to be truly and cordially affectionate one to another, to be ready and willing
to do all Offices of Love and Kindness, so far as the Law of such a Relation
does require of each, in their respective Places and Callings. XII. So the Lord
Jesus, the Head and Governor of his Church, has strictly commanded, and does
exceedingly commend the Grace of Love in and among all his Family. The Church
is never more desirable or comely in this World, than when the Love of each
Member does abound one toward another; when Ministers love the People, and the
People heartily love them; and when every one, in the Station wherein God has
set him, is ready and willing to do any Office of Love: How amiable upon this
account is the Church of God!

Inferences.
THis shows, that the Church of God are a choice and peculiar People, such who
have given up themselves in the Order and Fellowship of the Gospel, walking
together in Love, as a holy, religious, and united Family, according to the
Order and Discipline Christ has left in his Word, having sweet Acquaintance
and Intimacy one with another.

And now to conclude with this Head, from the Whole we may infer,

I. That God's Church is most dear and precious in his Sight, or a People that
he has most choice Love and Affections to, and takes great Care of.

II. That the Church of God, under the Gospel Dispensation, is not National,
Parochial, etc.

III. That the Church of God are a People separated from the World, in respect
of the Worship, Traditions, and sinful Customs thereof, etc. Nonconformity to
the World in these respects is an indispensible Duty: Be not conformed to this
World, Romans 12.2. Come out from amongst them, and be ye separated, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, etc. 2 Cor. 6.17.

IV. That the true Church of God is a Number of sincere and godly Christians,
who have solemnly covenanted, and given up themselves, to walk in the true
Order and Fellowship of the Gospel, according to the exact Rule of God's Word,
amongst whom the Word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments are duly
and in a right manner administered.

V. That God's Church has many Enemies, and yet in despite of them all, shall
abide, and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against her: And tho for a
time she may be low, and under great Sufferings, yet she shall arise to a great
Degree of Glory in the latter Day.

THE Eighth HEAD OF Metaphors, Allegories, and Similes, WITH Other Borrowed
TERMS, That respect MEN. I. Of Men in general. II. Of the Godly, or good Men.
III. Of Sinners, or wicked Men.

Men compared to Earth.
Jer. 22.9. Hear, O Earth, Earth, Earth.

Psalm. 33.5. Let all the Earth fear the Lord.

Let all the Earth keep Silence.

Rev. 12. But the Earth helped the Woman.


BY Earth in these Scriptures, we are to understand Men dwelling upon the Earth.

Earth. Parallel. THe Earth is far from Heaven; there is a vast Difference
between them. ALl Men, whilst they remain unconverted, or abide in a State of
Nature, are said to be far from God; tho not in respect of Place, yet in
respect of Condition, Men being by reason of Sin in a State of Enmity: Ephesians.
2.13.
Ye that sometimes were afar off, are now made nigh by the Blood of Christ. II.
The Earth is a heavy, lumpish, and gross Body. II. So Man naturally is
Earth-like, a heavy and lumpish Piece, being taken out of the Earth, and the
Offspring of red Earth: As is the earthy, 1 Cor. 15.48.
such are they that are earthy. III. The Earth has its great Dependency upon
the Heavens; did not the Rain from above water it, and the Sun shine upon it,
how hard and barren would it soon be? II. So Man has all his Dependency upon
God; neither the spiritual Man, nor the natural Man can subsist, unless the
Heavens send down Blessings upon them. All humane, as well as divine Growth and
Fruitfulness, comes from above. IV. Earth turns and cleaves to Earth, as its
proper Center. Tho a Piece of it may by force be lifted up, or thrown upward,
yet by an innate Propensity to descend, it naturally falls down again. IV. So
Man naturally cleaves to, and takes delight in earthly Things: He that is after
the Flesh, Romans 8.5.
minds the Things of the Flesh. He that is not born anew, born of the Spirit,
but is wholly an earthly Man, the Earth is his proper Center; tho sometimes his
Heart may (in an artificial way as it were) be lifted upwards, yet down he
falls again to his own Center. V. What a dark Dungeon would the Earthly Globe
be, did not the Heavens shine upon it! V. So what a dark Dungeon is Man's
Heart, and in what Egyptian Darkness would all Men and Women be involved, were
it not for the Light of the God of Heaven, his Word, and blessed Spirit! VI.
Those Things that are fed and nourished by the Earth, are Earth, and (we see)
go or return to Earth again. VI. So the Body of Man, which is fed from the
Earth, which was taken out of the Earth, (we daily see) goes to the Earth
again; and therefore Man may be called Earth, Earth, Earth; Jer. 22.29.
that was his Original; Earth he was, and Earth he is, and to Earth he shall
return again. VII. The Sun every Spring by its powerful Influences, causes all
earthly Plants and Flowers to come forth, that seemed dead in Winter. VII. So
the Lord Jesus will cause all these earthly Bodies of Men to rise up from the
Dead at the last Day. Joh. 5.28.
All that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, etc.

Inferences.
THis may inform Mankind of their Original, and may tend to keep them humble.
Why should any Mortals have such high towering Thoughts of themselves, and vaunt
in Pride, and Haughtiness of Heart, spotting, trimming, and decking themselves,
when, alas! their Bodies are nothing but Earth, Lumps of Earth: They dwell in
Houses of Clay, Job 4.19.
and it is but a little while ere the Worms will feed upon them. Tho now they
seem like curious Vessels, or refined Earth, yet in a short space they will be
part of the grossest and loathsomest Earth that Eyes can behold, nothing but
Filth, and stinking Putrefaction.

Caryl on Job 7.5. p. 596, 597
O then be not proud of your Bodies, nor of your Beauty: They who are now the
fairest and goodliest to look upon, may quickly have a broken and loathsome
Skin. A Disease, or one Fit of Sickness may spoil all thy Beauty, deface and
blemish thy excellent Feature; and if a Disease does it not, old Age will: Time
will draw Furrows in thy Face, and make Wrinkles in thy Brow. Strength and
Beauty are no Matches for Time. All Things were made in Time, and Time will
mar all Things: So long as Generation continues, Corruption must.

The two Externals which Man is most subject to be proud of, are Beauty and
Apparel. Clothes are a Flag of Vanity, and Pride sits upon the Skirts. But
remember, how fine soever your Clothing is this day, God can put you on
another Suit before tomorrow: He can put you on such Clothing, as you shall
have little cause to be proud of; He can make you wear Worms, and Clods of
Dust.

And if we (says he) consider it, we have little reason to be proud of
Clothes, for if we follow the best of them to their Original, they will be
found to be but a Clothing of Worms, and Clods of Dust.

What are Silks, Sattens, and Velvets, but the Issue of Worms? And what is your
Gold and Silver, what your Pearls and precious Stones? Are they any thing, (if
you will resolve them into their Principle) but Clods of Earth? They are indeed
better concocted by the Heat of the Sun, refined and polished by the Art of
Man; but if you search their Pedigree, they are but Clods of Dust, etc. And if
you be proud of such Clothing, God can cloth you with Worms, not only of
unrefined and unpolished, but of putrified and filthy Dust.

Man compared to a Worm.
Job 25.6. How much less Man that is a Worm, and the Son of Man, a Worm!
A Worm is one of the meanest Creatures, and the Word that is here used ((...)
Vermis parvus, aut Caseo nascens) signifies properly and chiefly those Worms
that breed in Flesh, or Cheese, or any other kind of Food when it is corrupted.
The Word is used, Exodus 16.24. where it is said, The Manna that was reserved
contrary to the Command of God, bred Worms; such a Worm is Man.

God is so excellent and glorious, that nothing can be found out, that can set
forth or illustrate his incomparable Being and Greatness: To whom shall we
liken him! So there is nothing so low and base, but Man in his fallen State is
compared to it; he is compared to Earth, Dust, the Grass of the Field, to a
Lie, to Vanity it self, and here to a Worm.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Worm has its Original from the Earth. SO Man is Earth,
as we showed before; his Original is from thence. II. A Worm lives upon the
Earth, and there it loves to be, and make its Abode. III. So Man in his natural
State lives upon the Earth, and the things thereof; Amos 2.7.
he pants after the Dust of the Earth; his Mind, Love, and whole Desire is
after earthly things. III. A Worm is a Creature of little Worth, and has no
Beauty in it; what is more contemptible than a Worm! III. So Man in his fallen
State is of no Worth, he has made himself as light and empty as Vanity. He was
once of great Worth in God's esteem, whilst he retained his Uprightness; but
now naturally there is no Excellency in him, his Beauty is gone, he is but a
Lump of Sin and Pollution, contemptible as a Worm. IV. A Worm is a Creature
that lies obnoxious to great Danger; every Foot is ready to crush it. IV. So
Man is open to manifold Dangers from Sin, Satan, and the World; many ways he is
exposed to Ruin, and to be undone for ever. V. A small thing may spoil, kill,
and destroy a Worm. V. So a small thing may destroy and ruin Man. First, a
little thing may take away his natural Life; a Bit of Bread has choked some
Men; a Tile from a House may beat out his Brains; a Spider, and other small
Creatures, may presently destroy him. What is Man's Life! how small a thing
will stop his Breath! And then, secondly, a small thing (as it may seem in his
Sight) may destroy his Soul: A lascivious Lust, Mat. 5.28.
a wanton Look upon a Woman, Jesting, and idle Words, nay, the least Sin,
without Repentance, will damn him for ever. But remember this, no Sin is small
or little in it self, tho there be more Venom in some Sins, than in some
others. The least Sin is a Breach of the holy Law of God, and the least Breach
thereof lays a Soul under the Curse of it. Also Christ's Blood was shed to
save us from lesser Sins, as well as from the greater. VI. A Worm is a Creature
that is not able to make resistance, that way to deliver it self from its
Enemy. VI. So what Resistance is a Man able to make (in himself) against Satan?
Is he not as a Worm in the sight of that cruel Enemy, if God let him but once
out against him? Besides, God is an Adversary to him, whilst he remains in an
unconverted State; Psalm. 7.11. Mat. 5.25.
and what Resistance can he make against the Almighty? There is a far greater
Disproportion between God and us, than there is between us and a Worm. VII. A
Worm is a Creature that is a Prey to the Fowls of Heaven; they (you know)
commonly feed upon them, and catch them up at every Turn. VII. So Men are a
Prey to Satan, and evil Spirits, Mat. 13.4, 19.
who are called Fowls of Heaven. How often does the Devil seize upon Sinners,
and carry them captive at his Will? VIII. Worms, when they find the Ground to
shake by Men's treading upon it, many times make haste into their Holes, and
thereby save themselves. VIII. So some poor Sinners, when they find their
earthly Tabernacles begin to shake, by Sickness, or some approaching Judgment,
make haste (their Consciences being thereby awakened by the Lord) to get into
that Place of Security God has provided for them, viz. the Rock Christ, who is
called an Hiding Place. Isa. 32.2.
IX. There are many Sorts of Worms. IX. So there are many Sorts of Men,
[Worms.] 1. Some great, and some small Ones; and yet all are but Worms. 1. So
there are some great Men, mighty Ones of the Earth, as Kings, etc. and some
small or poor Men; but yet all are but Worms, weak and contemptible Creatures
in God's sight. David called himself a Worm: I am a Worm, and no Man, etc.
Psalm. 22 6.
2. There are some Dunghil-Worms, who love to abide or live in Dung and Muck of
the Earth. 2. So there are some Men, (whom we commonly call Muck-worms) who
delight in nothing more than in the Dung or Filth of the Earth or Muck of this
World; their Hearts and Hands are always in the Earth. Take them out of this
Filth, and they are as dead Men; and let them alone, and you shall presently
see them craul to their old Delights. Nothing but the World is in their Mouths;
they wallow in their filthy Lusts, and Earthly-mindedness, as the Swine tumbles
in the Mire. III. There are some Worms very loathsome, such as breed in rotten
putrified Flesh, which are called Carrion-Worms. 3. Such a Worm is a wicked
Man, a Vermin, a Worm, that breeds in Corruption, as it were, a loathsome
Creature in God's Sight. See the Head of the Metaphor. 4. There are some Worms
that deceive the Eye, seeming to be what they are not. Many have thought they
had seen Fire in the Night, when they have cast their Eye upon them in the
place where they have lain. These are called Glowworms. R. W. tells us a Story
of a Parson, that in the Night (being drunk) casting his Eye upon one of these
Worms, having his Pipe of Tobacco filled, went bodily toward it, crying out,
Fire, I hope; Fire, I hope. When the Light comes, these appear to all to be but
Worms. 4. There are some Men who deceive their Neighbors: They take them to be
holy and good Men, precious Saints of God, and yet are greatly mistaken in
them, they being no better than painted Sepulchers, mere Hypocrites; and
notwithstanding their outward Show of Holinesss and Sanctity, are but
Earthworms, having the World, viz. external Advantage, or vain Glory, in their
Eye, as the great Thing they aim at in their Profession; and in the Day of
Christ, they will appear to be what in truth they are. 5. There are some very
hurtful Worms, who spoil Trees, Flowers, and the Fruits of the Earth: See Joel
1.4. Amos 4.9.
Such are the Palmer-Worm, the Caterpillar, and the Canker-Worm: Which Sort of
hurtful Vermin God has often brought upon a People and Nation, as a Punishment
of their Sins. 5. So there are some Men, who, like to these Worms, are of a
very hurtful Nature, and endeavor to spoil Christ's spiritual Trees, Flowers,
and precious Fruit, etc. They are called Locusts or Caterpillars by the
Holy Ghost; Rev. 9.3.
they are said to come out of the Bottomless Pit: And to them was given Power,
as the Scorpions of the Earth have Power, etc. By these Locusts are meant, (as
Franciscus Claudius, a Carmelite Friar, and others expound the Place, as is
noted by Mr. Wilson) 'those great Swarms of Popish Priests, Friars, Monks,
Cardinals, even the whole Popish Hierarchy, and Pontificial Clergy. These are
fitly likened unto Locusts, which are a little vile Vermin, springing (as some
say) out of Smoke, etc. And truly this is made too evident of that Sort of Men
this day in England, and other Nations of Europe. Never were a more destructive
Generation of vile Vermin in the World; none make, or threaten to make greater
Spoil of Christ's Vineyard, and precious Fruit Trees, than they. And in that
they are let in upon us, we may plainly read God's Displeasure against us
thereby; and nothing but unfeigned Repentance and Reformation will doubtless
free this poor Nation from them, for at this very time we are sadly plagued and
pestered with them. See God an Husbandman. 6. There are also some profitable
Worms, who are very laborious; and cloth the World with Silk; and they are
called Silkworms. 6. This Sort of Worms resemble the laborious and faithful
Ministers of Christ, who spend themselves in Preaching, and in divine Prayer
and Meditation, that so they may enrich Men's Souls with Grace and true Virtue.
These, as Instruments in God's Hand, may be said to cloth Men and Women with
Silk, or gloriously adorn their better Part, tho hereby, through Zeal and
faithful Industry for God's Glory, they waste and consume their own Carcases,
spending, and being spent, as the Apostle speaks. X. The House or Place of
diverse Worms is the Earth; they lie hid in the Ground. X. So Man, who is a
Worm, must take up his Place for a short time in the Earth: The Grave is my
House, says Job, Job 17.13
the Place appointed for all Living. This Worm must go to his Fellows, to the
Worms.

Inferences.
BY this we may see what a poor thing Man is: The mighty Ones of the Earth, who
boast of great Matters, are but Worms. And if Man be but a Worm, why does he
swell above the Clouds, as if he would make his Nest among the Stars, when as
he must shortly fall among the Clods, and be eaten of Worms?

2. Take heed of having Men's Persons in Admiration; it is a vain thing to give
flattering Titles to others. As it becomes us not to reproach or vilify any
Man, tho all Men are but as Worms; so it is a God provoking Evil, to flatter
Men thereby, creating high thoughts in them of themselves; as some once served
Herod, crying out, It is the Voice of a God, and not of a Man: But the
Almighty, Acts 12.22.
to show how much he abhorred such as gave not him the Glory, made them know he
was but a Worm; and therefore the Angel of the Lord smote him, and he was eaten
up of Worms.

3. Be not envious at others, tho more rich and honorable than thee. The
greatest of Men are but Worms: and tho some sparkle and shine in outward Glory
and Splendour, and seem to excel every way, yet they may be but like
Glowworms; it is but for a Night they seem like Stars, in the Morning they will
appear like others.

4. Let us learn from hence not to overvalue our selves, nor our Lives: What is
the Life of a Worm!

5. What Fools are the Wicked of the Earth, to muster up their Force against
God's People! Whom do they come out against? It is but against a Worm. Could
they prevail, what Honor would they gain by it? Is it so great a matter to
destroy a Worm? for so Jacob in his low Estate is called: Fear not, thou Worm
Jacob. But let them know, this Worm has a mighty God to take its part: I will
help thee, Isa. 41.14.
etc. Why should Worms seek to destroy one another?

6. Lastly; What cause is there (these things considered) to admire, that the
glorious God of Heaven and Earth should be mindful of a Worm, Job 7.17.
nay, to set his Heart upon him, and give his Son to die for him; and to take
such a poor and contemptible thing as Man into Union and Communion with himself!

Man compared to a Flower.
Job 14. He comes up like a Flower, and is cut down.

Isa. 40.6. All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodness thereof as the Flower of
the Field.


A Man in his best Estate, and in every Estate, is altogether Vanity; Caryl.
so he is in his best Days, and in all his Days, but a Flower, or may be
compared to a Flower.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Flower has a Root, from whence it grows and springs up.
SO all Men have one common Root, from whence they spring up, viz. the first
Adam. II. A Flower springs up out of the Earth suddenly, and at first is but a
tender Bud, fresh and flourishing. II. So Man springs up like a Flower, and at
first is like a tender Bud, fresh and flourishing. III. A Flower has but a
little time of continuance; tho some abide longer than others, yet most Flowers
last not long. III. So Man that is born of a Woman is but of few Days, Job 14.1.
his Time is but short upon the Earth; tho some continue longer than others,
yet generally their Days on the Earth are but few, in a comparative Sense. IV.
There are diverse Sorts of Flowers; some fair to look upon, very lovely to the
Eye, but of an ill Savor. IV. So there are diverse Sorts of Men and Women; some
very fair and amiable to the outward Sight, but of an ill and stinking Savor
in their Lives and Conversations, in the Nostrils of God and all good Men,
having no Grace, and are besides of a perverse and crooked Nature. V. There are
some other Flowers that are not beautiful to the Sight, whose Nature and Virtue
is most excellent. V. So there are some Men and Women, who tho they are not
lovely and beautiful to carnal Eyes, yet are of most sweet and gracious
Dispositions, and whose Worth and Excellency is exceeding great. Psalm. 45.
VI. Great Care is taken of some choice and rare Flowers; they are prized at a
high rate by such as own them, and know their Worth. VI. So the Saints, who are
choice Flowers in God's Esteem, are greatly cared for; He esteems them above
what Men esteem of their choicest Flowers; they are his Jewels, and prized by
him as his chiefest Treasure; of them he has said, the World was not worthy.
Heb. 11.
VII. Some Flowers greatly magnify the Wisdom of their Creator, there being
many great Rarities to be seen in them. VII. So the Wisdom of God appears in
the Creation of Man. He is a curious Piece of God's Workmanship, in his first
Make, in respect of his Body, but more especially touching his Soul. But the
greatest Rarity that appears in this Flower, shines forth in his second
Creation, in his being new made or transplanted into Christ Jesus, whereby he
is adorned with all those most transcendent and incomparable Gifts and Graces
of the Holy Spirit. VIII. The rarest Flowers grow in Gardens; what is a
Field-Flower to some of these? VIII. So the best and most choice spiritual
Flowers grow in God's Garden, (the Church.) What are those sinful Ones, who
grow in the Field of the World, to some of these? IX. A Flower is most
beautiful, when it is fully ripe. IX. So Christ's choice Flowers, his precious
Saints, are most lovely and amiable, when they are fully ripe for Heaven. X.
The Owner of Flowers knows the best Time to crop them; and who shall be
offended at him, when he takes to himself this or that Flower out of his
Garden? He may do what he pleases with his own. X. So God knows the best Time
to crop off, or take away by Death this and that precious Flower. Sometimes he
cuts them down, before others think they are half ripe; but God knows better
than we. He never pulls, nor takes any of his Saints unto himself, till he
sees they are fit to die. And who shall be offended at him in what he does?
tho he take such out of the Garden, that we would fain have grow still there,
because they are such a sweet Ornament to it; but may not God do what he
pleases with his own? XI. Some Flowers are gone on a sudden. Naturalists tell
us of a Flower that lasts but one Day; and I have read of others, that fade
in the very Budding. XI. So some die as soon almost as they are born; they are
taken away, and fade in the very Bud. Also some Christians God crops off, and
receives to himself, as soon as they are born again; they come up, and are
presently cut down, etc. XII. Some Flowers have Seed in them, which if sown
will produce a Flower again the next Spring. XII. So Man, tho he wither away,
and die, yet his Body is laid but like a Seed in the Earth; at Spring, viz. in
the Resurrection-day, he shall arise again. Every Seed shall have his own Body;
it shall not be another, but the same Body shall arise from the Dead: My dead
Body shall arise, etc. 1 Cor. 15.38. Isa. 26.19. Act. 24.5.
There shall be a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust.

Inferences.
WHat a fading thing is Man! Let every one from hence learn to make ready to
die. Happy are they who are fit and prepared for it; for Man in his Beauty and
chief Flourishing is near unto withering.

2. How fading and transient is all our Glory!

3. What Fools are Mortals to value themselves so high!

4. How vain a thing is it also to set our Hearts inordinately upon our dearest
Friends! There is mention made of the coming up of this Flower, and of its
cutting down, but nothing of its growing. Alas! its standing is so small a
time, it is not taken notice of; we are born to die, and we die as soon as we
are born.

Saints compared to Babes.
11 Pet. 2.1, 2. As newborn Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that
ye may grow thereby.
Simile. Parallel. A Babe is begotten. Abraham begat Isaac. Hearken to thy
Father that begat thee. A Babe in Christ is begotten by the Word and Spirit of
God: Jam. 1.18.
Of his own Will begat he us, by the Word of Truth, not of corruptible Seed,
but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, that lives and abides for ever. II.
A Babe has not only a Father, but also a Mother. II. A Saint has not only God
for his Father, but the Church for his Mother. Jerusalem, that is above, Gal.
4.26.
is the Mother of us all. III. A Babe partakes of the same Nature of its
Parents: That which is born of the Flesh, John 3.6.
is Flesh. III. A Babe in Christ partakes of Christ's spiritual Nature: John
3.6.
That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, or spiritual. IV. A Babe is
formed, by the mighty Power of God, in the Womb. IV. A Saint is formed or
created by the mighty Power of Christ, and by the Spirit: We are his
Workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus to good Works. V. A Babe is born, or brought forth
into the World. V. A Saint is born of God: Psalm. 87.5.
And of Zion it shall be said, this and that Man was born in her. Ministers are
said to travail, to bring forth Children to Christ. VI. A Babe has all the
Parts and Lineaments of a Man, if it be a perfect Birth. VI. A Babe in Christ
has all the Essentials of a true Christian; he has all the Parts and
Lineaments of a new Creature. There is a Formation, or a gracious Work in every
Faculty, a partaking of every Grace, tho at first forming not come to full
Growth and Perfection. VII. A Babe, when born, is observed to come into the
World crying. VII. A Babe in Christ, when first born again, or spiritually
brought forth, cries to God, is much in Prayer; God has no Children that are
born dumb. Behold, Acts 9.
he prays; which was a clear Demonstration that he was born again, or a new
Creature. VIII. A Babe newborn desires the Milk of its Mothers Breast. VIII. A
Babe in Christ desires the sincere Milk of the Word, viz. the sweet, saving,
and comfortable Doctrine of the Gospel. IX. Babes are harmless, free from
Malice. IX. Babes in Christ are or should be harmless, concerning Malice, as
Children. X. A Babe, when first born, if not diseased, is observed to grow much
in a little time; its Growth is then more visible than afterward. X. A Babe in
Christ, or a true Christian, when first converted, if not spiritually
distempered, grows much. We read of some of the Saints, who soon after they
received the Word of Truth, grew exceedingly, tho afterward a Saints Growth in
Grace is not so visible. XI. A Babe needs much tending, must be carefully
looked after, or it may suffer much. It is carried in the Arms, dandled upon
the Knees, and laid in the Bosom, and has many a Kiss from the Father and
Mother. XI. Babes in Christ need also much spiritual Tendence, and looking
after. Christ, as well as his Church and Ministers, takes much care of them:
Isa. 40 10, 11.
He carries these in his Arms, and lays them in his Bosom. They have many a
gracious Kiss of Christ's Mouth, or Promise of his Word, whereby he seals up
his Love to them. XII. Babes, after they are grown up, are taught to speak
plain, not to chatter and cry only, but to talk and speak intelligibly, and
also to go. XII. A Babe in Christ is taught by Christ also to pray, and speak
in Prayer more plainly, or to express it self, and make known its Wants more
intelligibly, and also how to go and walk in the Ways of God's Commandments:
Hos. 11.3.
I taught Ephraim to go, taking him by the hand. XIII. Babes are weak in
Knowledge and Understanding: When I was a Child, 1 Cor. 13.
I thought as a Child, I understood as a Child. From hence they many times are
froward, peevish, and soon take distaste; small things will offend them. XIII.
A Babe in Christ is usually weak in spiritual Understanding, or in the
Mysteries of the Gospel, and from hence are very subject also to be offended
with this thing, and that thing, which strong Christians can bear. Many of the
young Disciples in the Primitive Time, were offended at those that did eat
Meat, etc. XIV. A Babe, after it is grown up, does not expect that its Father
or Mother should dandle it upon their Knees, or seem visibly to show that Love
to it as at first, when it was very young. XIV. So Christians, when they are
grown to some degree of Ripeness in Understanding, should not expect to be
always dandled upon the Knee of Promises, or lie in the Arms and Bosom of
Christ; I mean, have such visible Expressions or Manifestations of his Love,
knowing they are his Children, and in his Covenant, in his Family, and under
his Care, Eye, and gracious Provision and Protection. XV. A sweet Babe, one
that is very quiet, and good-conditioned, is greatly delighted in, and
wonderfully beloved by its Parents; when others, tho their Parents cannot but
have Parental Affection to them, yet have not so great a Love, as to him or her
that is so pleasant in their Eye. XV. So a young Christian, that is of a
humble, sweet, and contented Disposition, not cross and froward under the Hand
and Providence of God, but takes all patiently, is mightily prized and beloved
by Jesus Christ. Is not Ephraim my dear Son? Is he not a pleasant Child? etc.
How did Christ delight in John, that sweet and precious Disciple! XVI. Children
need good and careful Education, to be kept under good Discipline, and have
good Instruction: Train up a Child when he is young, in the Way wherein he
should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it. XVI. Young
Christians need also good Instruction, many things they are to learn, that they
may wisely behave themselves in the House and Family of God. They must more
especially be taught the good Discipline of God's Church, that they may know
how they ought to go in and out before one another. See Dear Children. XVII.
Some Babes or young Children, if their Parents do not give them what they would
have, of this or that, presently throw away what they have, and are angry, and
think they do not love them. XVII. So some young Christians, because God does
not give them such l^rge Knowledge and Experience of Himself, and other good
Things of the Spirit, they slight all God has been pleased to bestow upon
them, and conclude God does not love them. XVIII. Babes for these and other
Faults often feel the Rod. XVIII. So Christians are oft-times under the Rod of
God for their Faults.

Saints compared to Children.
Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs, etc.

Gal. 3.16. For ye all are the Children of God, by Faith, in Christ Jesus.

Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye Followers of God, as dear Children.


SAints are God's dear Children, not only Children, but dear Children. Dear
Children has reference to two things: 1. To that high Esteem their Parents
have of them; 2. To that gracious and sweet Disposition such Children are of.

Children. Parallel. CHildren are begotten of their Parents, and brought forth
into this World. THe Saints are begotten of God: Of his own Will begat he them.
Every one that ^^veth him that begat, 1 John 5.1
loves him also that is begotten of him. They are also brought forth by him
into a State of Grace. II. Children partake of the Nature of their Parents,
even of their very Flesh and Bone. II. The Saints, by their being begotten of
God, through Faith, In a mystical sort, are Partakers of the Divine Nature:
That which is born of the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.4.
is Spirit. III. Children are called after the Names of their Parents. III. So
the Saints are called after God's Name, Holy, Heavenly, Godly, etc. Christians,
from Christ; Spiritual, from the Spirit. IV. Children are not in every thing
alike, in Stature, Quality, and Condition. Some are gentle, dutiful, and
humble, and have a clearer Sight, and more perfect Knowledge than others, yet
ought to love one another. IV. So the Saints of God are not in every thing
alike; tho all have Grace, yet not a like measure of it; so tho all see, yet
all have not the same degree of Sight and Knowledge in Divine Things. From hence
it is that there are so many Differences amongst the Godly; but since they are
all God's Children, it behooves them to see that they love one another. V.
Children do not grow alike. Some thrive better upon hard Fare, than others do,
who feed upon more choice and delicate Food every day. V. So some of the Saints
thrive, and grow faster in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, (who sit under the Ministry of such Men, whose Preaching is
accounted by some but as brown Bread) than others, who are daily fed with the
delicate Food of the most acute and elegant Preacher.

Dear Children.
I. A dear Child, one that the Father esteems so, is teachable, ready to learn
what he is taught; he will give his Mind to it, is very flexible. I. So a dear
Child of God is very flexible and yielding to the Teachings of God. If God has
any thing for Abraham to do, he cries, Here am I. They are like holy Job, What
I know not, teach thou me. II. A dear Child is humble and meek, not proud,
stubborn, or self-conceited. II. So a dear Child of God is little in his own
Eyes. How humbly did Abraham express himself to God! Genesis 18.27. Psalm. 22.6. 1
Cor. 3.9.
I who am but Dust and Ashes, etc. and Job, I abhor my self. David cries out, I
am a Worm, and no Man. And the holy Apostles esteemed themselves as nothing:
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo? Unto me who am the least of all Saints,
etc. I am nothing, etc. III. A dear Child greatly loves his Father. Many
Instances may be given of this, both from Scripture and History. III. So a dear
Child of God dearly loves his heavenly Father, he loves him with all his Soul,
with all his Heart, and with all his Strength, loves him sincerely. IV. A dear
Child does not only love his Father, but also his Mother. and is grieved when
she is in distress. IV. So a dear Child of God does not only love God, who is
his Father, but also dearly loves the Church, who is his Mother. Thus did
David, Psalm. 137.5, 6.
that precious Child and Servant of God: If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, Psalm.
137.5, 6.
let my Right Hand forget her Cunning; if I I do not remember thee, let my
Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief
Joy. Jer. 4.19.
How greatly was the Prophet Jeremiah troubled for poor Zion, when he cried
out, My Bowels, my Bowels! The Church lay near his Heart, he laments like a
poor Child, for the Misery of his Mother that bare him. VI. A dear Child is
very obedient to his Parents, will do whatsoever is right, which either Father
or Mother does require. V. So a dear Child of God is in all things obedient to
God's Commands, as is recorded concerning Zacharias and Elizabeth, and many
others: They endeavor to behave themselves as obedient Children in all
respects, will not baulk one of God's holy Precepts: Psalm. 119.
Then shall I not be ashamed, says David, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments. And as they are obedient to God their Father, so likewise to the
Church their Mother. As it is a horrid Evil to rebel against God, so such will
be left inexcusable who slight the Church. Whatever she requires, that is
agreeable to God's Word, must be carefully obeyed; and such as err herein, as
disorderly Persons, ought to be proceeded against. See Mother. VI. A dear Child
in all things strives to please his Father, seeking his Approbation, whether at
home or abroad, present or absent. VI. So a dear Child of God strives in all
things (like our Savior) to please his heavenly Farher: Wherefore we labor, 2
Cor. 5.9.
that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him, Col. 1.10.
-- Walking in all well-pleasing, etc. VII. A dear Child loves Peace, and
cannot endure Quarrelling and Discord in his Father's House. VII. A dear Child
of God greatly delights in, and loves Peace and Union amongst his Brethren; and
he hates Discord and Quarrelling in the Church. Blessed are the Peacemakers
for they shall be called the Children of God. Behold, Mat. 5.9. Psalm. 133.1
Ephesians. 4.3.
says David, how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity! Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace.
VIII. A dear Child is very tender of his Father's Honor, and is much troubled
to hear any speak against him, or any way reproach him. VIII. So a dear Child
of God is sorely troubled, to hear the sacred Name of God reproached and
blasphemed, and his holy Laws contemned. Psalm. 119.136. Josh. 7.9.
Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because Men keep not thy Law. How much
were Moses and Joshua concerned for the Honor of God's holy Name! IX. A dear
Child is greatly grieved, when his Father is offended with him, and will
endeavor to obtain his Favor again. IX. So a dear Child of God is grieved,
when he has displeased his heavenly Father: Thou hiddest thy Face, Psalm 51.4.
and I was troubled. How did David mourn for his Sin, and strive to obtain the
Love and Favor of God again: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done
this Evil in thy Sight, etc. X. A dear Child will not be at undue Times out of
his Father's House, but make up his Place there, especially when he knows his
Father and Mother call for him, and require his Presence. X. So a precious
Saint of God will not be absent from the Church, or heavenly Family, at any
time when his Presence is expected there, if it be possible, especially when
God calls his People to Prayer and Humiliation, or when sacred Ordinances are
administered, or any Work is to be done, which eminently tends to the Glory of
God, and the Churches Good. XI. A dear Child desires rather to dwell in his
Father's House, than in any other place whatsoever. XI. So a dear Child of God
had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness. One thing have I desired of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the
days of my Life, etc. XII. A dear Child will strive to imitate his Father, and
walk in his Steps, in all things that are just and right. Thus Solomon was
exhorted to follow the good Example of his Father David. XII. So a dear Saint
takes care to follow God: Be ye Followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1.
as dear Children. Be ye holy, for I am holy: That is the Precept, and a
sincere Soul labors so to be; it is his great desire to be like God and Christ
as near as he can. Be ye Followers of me, as I am of Christ Jesus.

1. A Saint strives to follow God and Christ in Love: We are taught of God to
love one another.

2. In Humility. What a Pattern has God in Christ laid before us herein! Mat
11.28 Phil. 2.5, 6
Learn of me, says our Savior, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, etc. Let the
same Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.

3. In being merciful and kind to all. Be ye merciful, Mat. 5.45.48.
as your Father that is in Heaven is merciful.

3. In hating and abominating that which is evil. God loathes Sin, and so does
every sincere Christian.

5. In Forgiveness; they strive to be like God in this. He is ready to pardon,
forgive, and forget Injuries done to him, and so ought his Children. Ephesians. 4.34.
And be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. God forgiveth freely, universally, and
for ever; so must they.



Inferences.
Labor to follow God, as dear Children, 1. Sincerely, not in Hypocrisy, not
for Loaves. 2. Speedily; do not defer it: I made haste, says David, etc. 3. In
whatsoever he commands you. 4. Diligently. 5. Follow him through all
Difficulties and Hardships, as Caleb did, etc. and as Ruth followed Naomi. 6.
Follow him humbly. 7. Follow him joyfully. 8. Follow him, when others leave
him. 9. Follow him constantly, even to the end. 10. And lastly, follow none but
him; forsake all those that would lead you astray. Christ's Sheep will not
follow Strangers; they will follow God, and not Baal.

II. From hence every one may perceive, whether they are God's Children, yea or
no.

III. This shows also what great Dignity God has conferred upon Believers.
Behold what manner of Love is this God has bestowed upon us, 1 John 3.1, 2
that we should be called the Sons of God. If David thought it no small thing
to be Son in Law to an earthly King, what an Honor has God conferred on us!

Romans 8.
IV. Saints may from hence read their Privileges: If Children, then Heirs, Heirs
of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ.

Saints compared to Heirs.
Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs, etc.

Rev. 21.7, He that overcomes, shall be Heir of all things.


Note, The Saints of God are Heirs, Heirs of God, Heirs of all things, etc.

Heirs. Parallel. THe Firstborn had a Princely Power and Dominion over their
Brethren, who bowed down before them; they were next their Fathers in Honor.
THe Saints are made Kings to God, are called Kings and Princes: Isa. 32.1.
A King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall decree Judgment. They
shall have Dominion over the Mighty of the Earth, in their Day. They are next
to Christ in Honor, Rev. 3.21.
and shall sit upon the Throne with him. II. The Firstborn were Priests in
their Father's Family, till the Levites came in. II. The Saints are Priests as
well as Kings to God: Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5.
He has made us Kings and Priests, etc. They are called an holy Priesthood, to
offer up a holy and acceptable Sacrifice unto God. III. The Firstborn had the
Inheritance; the rest had but a Piece of Money. And to this day we see, that
Men use to make their Inheritance over to the Firstborn; and besides the
Inheritance, they had a double Portion of Goods. III. The Saints have the
eternal Inheritance made over to them; the World has but a small Allowance,
for all they have amounts to no more than Vanity. God gives himself, and all
he has, to Believers; they have a double Portion, an Hundredfold in this
Life, and in the World to come Life everlasting. IV. An Heir sometimes stays a
great while, before he comes to the full Possession of the Inheritance; and
until then he is under Tutors and Governors, and differs but little from a
Servant. IV. The Saints patiently wait a while, (being under Age) before they
come to the full Possession of the Inheritance purchased for them by Christ;
and until they come to full Age, they are under Tutors and Governors, who deal
hardly with them, and they seem not to differ from Servants. V. The Firstborn
had a peculiar Sort of Apparel, whereby they were distinguished from others;
such was Esau's goodly Raiment which Rachel put upon Jacob. V. The Saints are
clothed with a goodly Raiment, viz. the Righteousness of Christ: Holiness is
the Saints Livery, whereby they are distinguished from the rest of the World.
VI. The Firstborn had the Blessing annexed to them, and (unless they were
supplanted, as Esau was by Jacob) they were blessed of their Father, especially
when their Fathers were at the point of Death. VI. The Saints are the Blessed
of the Lord; none can take either Birthright or Blessing away from them; they
are blessed, and shall be blessed. The Lord Jesus blessed them at his
Departure, and that Blessing shall never depart from them. Heirs. Disparity.
AMong Men, all a Man's Children are not Heirs, nor can they fully possess the
same Estate entirely to themselves, as if but one had it. BUt all the Saints
are Heirs together, they are all Joynt-heirs, and yet every one has all to
himself: They have all one and the same Father, one and the same Christ, one
and the same Spirit, the same Apparel, the same Grace; all one Faith, Hope,
etc. all the same Promises, same Attendance, viz. the holy Angels; the same
Crown, Kingdom, and Eternal Inheritance. II. Heirs among Men have but a small
Inheritance. What is all this World? Luther called all the Turkish Empire, but
a Crust God casts to a Dog. II. But the Saints are Heirs of all Things, Heirs
of Heaven and Earth too, Heirs of God. And what is there more? what can a Man
ask, or desire to have? would he have more than all? III. An Heir among Men is
often deprived, by Force or Craft of his Title, and turned out of all. III. But
the Saints cannot by Force or Fraud be deprived of their Title to Eternal Life.
That it may be sure and firm to them, it is made over to them by the Oath of
God. See Light in the First Volume.

Saints compared to Eagles.
Isa. 40.31. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength, they
shall mount up with Wings as Eagles.

Psalm. 103.5. Who satisfies thy Mouth with good Things, so that thy Youth is
renewed like the Eagles.


Note. In some Things the Saints are likened to Eagles.

Simile. Parallel. AN Eagle is the chief amongst the Fowls of the Air, as a
Lion is the King or chief among all the Beasts of the Earth. SO the Saints are
the chief of Men, the Excellent, as David calls them: Thou art my Lord, Psalm.
16.2, 3.
my Goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth,
and to the Excellent, in whom is all my Delight. The Righteous are said to be
more excellent than their Neighbor. Prove. 12.26. 1 Chronicles. 4.9.
The World is not worthy of them. Hence Jabez, that holy and gracious Man, is
said to be more honorable than his Brethren. A godly Man is of a more noble
Extraction than the Men of the Earth. Saints have an honorable Pedigree and
Descent, they are born of God, are (as it were) of the Blood Royal of Heaven,
and nearly related to the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. They daily
converse, have Communion and Fellowship with the Father, and the Son, the
glorious Sovereign of all the World. They are delicately and most splendidly
fed every day. Others live and feed upon the empty Things of this World, nay,
on the Dust of the Earth, on Ashes, Husks, and Gravel; as the Holy Ghost
declares, They feed upon the Wind, Hos. 12.1.
and snuff in the East Wind: Whilst Believers feed on hidden Manna: He eats
that which is good, and his Soul delights it self in Fatness. He is often had
into the King's Wine-Cellar, he is richly clothed, has more noble and
honorable Titles than any Men on Earth. He has a most glorious Retinue, viz.
the heavenly Angels to attend him every day. Never was King (if ungodly) so
attended, as the poorest Saint in the World is. Saints are the chief of all the
Children of Men, as Eagles are chief of all the Fowls of the Air. II. Eagles
are quick-sighted, they behold afar off. They have not only a quick and clear
Sight, but a very strong Sight, able to look fully upon the Sun shining in his
Strength. Hence the Proverb is, A Man that has a clear and strong Sight, is
Eagle-ey'd. II. The Saints are very clear and quick-sighted, they can see afar
off, even from Earth to Heaven. They through Christ can behold the Glory of God
with open Face. 2 Cor. 3.18.
They can see, and do pry into the secret and hidden Mysteries of the Gospel,
and Covenant of Grace: Psalm. 25.14.
The Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant. They see the Evil that is in the least Sin, and can discern what the
End of the Wicked will be. III. Eagles are very swift Creatures; they have long
Wings, by which means they fly with great Swiftness. Therefore Solomon calling
upon us not to set our Hearts upon Riches, says, They make themselves Wings,
Prove. 27.5
and fly away as an Eagle. The Scriptures often express the more than ordinary
Swiftness of Men, by the Swiftness of an Eagle. David, lamenting the Death of
Saul and Jonathan, gives them this Character, 2 Samuel 1.23.
They were stronger than Lions, and swifter than Eagles. III. The Saints are
very swift and speedy in their Motions, when under the powerful Operation of
the Spirit, or upon the Wings of Faith and Love: Psalm. 119.59, 60.
I made haste, etc. says David. They are said to run, nay, fly like Eagles,
or as Doves to the Windows; they are many times carried swiftly along in the
way of their Duties, as upon Eagles Wings. The Ministers of the Gospel are set
forth by an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, Rev. 14.6.
having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the Earth.
When God's People are assaulted and persecuted, they fly to God for Shelter;
so David, Psalm. 143.9.
I fly unto thee to hide me. IV. The Eagles mount up on high. The Word in the
Hebrew signifies to get high; and therefore (as it is noted by Mr. Caryl) it is
used in the Noun, (...) Sublimis, elatus fuit, eminuit, per Metaphoram,
supervivit.
to set forth the Highness of God, Job 11.8. Psalm. 113.6. Isa. 5.16. and 52.13.
Scripture, as well as Naturalists, tell us, that the Eagle's Motion and
mounting up is wonderful, she flies quite out of Sight. One of the Ancients
says, The Eagle soars above the Doubtless he means the lower Region.
Air, as if she would visit the Starry Heavens. The common Epithetes of an
Eagle are, high flying, swift, etc. IV. The Saints of God mount up on high:
Phil 3.20.
Our Conversation (says Paul) is in Heaven. Men of the World are like Moles
and Worms, always digging and tumbling in the Earth and Muck of this World; but
Believers, those who are truly risen with Christ, Col. 3.1, 2 3.
seek those things that are above, they soar aloft; nothing will satisfy them
but Communion with God. They mount up by Prayer, as also by fresh Acts of
Faith; they mount up by divine Meditation. They are said to dwell on high;
Earth, and earthly Things will not satisfy them; they are of a more heroic and
sublime Spirit. V. Eagles are unweary in their Flight; they faint not, tho they
fly high, and are long before they rest. V. So the Saints should never grow
weary; nay, and the Promise is, Gal. 6. Isa. 40.31.
They shall mount up as with Eagles Wings; they shall run, and not be weary;
they shall walk, and not faint. Tho it be long before they come to Heaven,
their everlasting Resting Place, they are held up, and therefore they hold out
in all their Service and Sufferings. Faith and Love are two such strong and
excellent Graces, that they, like Eagle's Wings, keep them from tiring and
fainting in their Minds, tho their Work be hard, and their Flight toward
Heaven long: Psalm. 27.13.
I had fainted unless I had believed, etc. VI. An Eagle (says one) has a high
Spirit; she flies high, and aims at high things; she will not catch Flies, she
scorns to stoop to such low Game. VI. So a Saint has a noble, high, and
excellent Spirit. Low things are not for high and heavenly-born Souls; they
catch not at the Flies, Toys, and Trifles of the Profits, Honor, and
Pleasures of the World, as others do. VII. Eagles make their Nests on high: She
dwells and abides on the Rocks, Job 39.28.
upon the Crag of the Rock, and strong Place. VII. So the Saints dwell on high:
Their Place of Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks. Isa. 33.16.
They make their Nests in the Rock of Ages; they dwell in God; He is their
strong Dewlling Place. VIII. Eagles renew their Strength by changing their
Feathers; tho old, they seem young and lively again, and are very long-lived.
VIII. The Saints renew their Strength. When any Oldness (as Mr. Caryl words it)
is coming upon the new Creature, they renew their Strength, by looking to Jesus
Christ, who is their Righteousness and Strength: He satisfies their Mouth with
good things, Psalm. 103.5.
so that their Strength is renewed like the Eagle's. As the Lord brings his
People low by bodily Sickness and Weakness, and then renews their natural
Strength; so when there are Decays and Declinings upon their Souls, he renews
their spiritual Strength. And as the Eagle renews her Strength by the Growth
and Succession of new Feathers (of the same kind) in the place of the old; so a
Believer renews his Youth and Strength, by casting off gradually the Old Man,
which is corrupt, and by putting on more of the New Man, Ephesians. 4.24.
(who is quite of another kind) created after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness. IX. Naturalists do observe, that Eagles are fed and best nourished by
Blood; they suck and take in that, both young and old. IX. So (says Mr. Caryl)
do Believers; the feeding of the new Creature is upon Blood; every godly Man
spiritually drinks the Blood of Christ, ( My Blood, says he, is Drink indeed)
as offered to him both in the Promises and Ordinances of the Gospel. A Saint
could not live a Moment, nor have any subsistence in Grace, if he had not (as
the Eagle) Blood to drink. A godly Man is nourished by a believing
Contemplation upon the Sufferings of Christ, and the Effusion of his Blood. X.
Young Eagles are borne and carried upon the Wings of the old Eagle, and thereby
are preserved from the Dangers of Enemies. X. So the Saints are borne,
supported, and carried by the Power and Arms of the Almighty, who is pleased to
compare himself to an Eagle; Deuteronomy. 32, 11, 12.
As an Eagle stirs up her Nest, fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad
her Wings, takes them, and bears them upon her Wings; so the Lord alone did
lead him, and there was no strange God with him. Ye have seen what I did unto
the Egyptians, and how I bore you upon Eagle's Wings, and brought you to my
self. [See Christ compared to an Eagle.]

Disparity.
EAgles have many evil Qualities: They are Birds of Prey, etc. yea, and a very
Vermin Sort of Creature; and upon that account wicked Men are compared to
Eagles, which is opened under that Head of Metaphors concerning ungodly Men and
Persecutors, to which we refer you.

Saints compared to Sheep.
John 10.27. My Sheep hear my Voice, etc.
THe Saints may be compared to Sheep in many respects: Sheep are harmless
Creatures, meek, sociable, contented with hard Commons, very tractable,
patient, fruitful, and very profitable, are made a Prey to evil Beasts, etc.
Upon all which Considerations, and many others, the Saints are likened to
Sheep, which is fully opened under the Metaphor Flock, to which we refer you.

Saints compared to Soldiers.
2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ.
A Soldier is taken in Scripture either properly, (...), or metaphorically.

Properly, it is understood of a Person that is employed in Military Affairs,
one that bears Arms, and is under Military Command, Mat. 8.9.

Metaphorically, it is to be understood of a Christian, that is engaged to
fight the good Fight of Faith, under the Command of Jesus Christ, against the
Enemies of the Soul. This Title is not appropriated only to Ministers, (it is
not a discriminating Title, only to distinguish them from other Saints, as the
Title of Ambassador, Pastor, Watchman, etc.) but a Title that belongs to every
Christian, and Professor of Christ. So that Timothy is not called a Soldier,
merely because he was an Evangelist, but as he was a Disciple, etc.

Saints are compared to Soldiers; every true Christian is a spiritual Soldier
of Jesus Christ.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Soldier is listed under some Captain or Commander; he
gives up his Name to him, and enters himself into his Service. SO every true
Christian lists himself under the Command of Jesus Christ, who is the Captain
of our Salvation; He gives up his Name to him, to serve him in all Uprightness,
as becomes a faithful Soldier to do, making a solemn Covenant with Christ,
and his People, to be on their side; and this is visibly done in Baptism. II. A
Soldier leaves all other worldly Affairs and Encumbrances, to follow that
particular Employ. No Man that warreth, 2 Timothy 2.4
entangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him that
has chosen him to be a Soldier. They ought not, like Reuben, to abide among
the Sheep-folds, Jud. 5.16.
to hear the Bleating of the Sheep. II. So a true Christian forsakes all, and
follows Christ; he becomes dead to this World; he is crucified to it, and that
many times to him. His Heart is not set upon Things below, Col. 3.1, 2.
but upon Things above; he looks upon Religion and Godliness, as his great Work
and Business. They that are after the Flesh, Rom 8.5.
do mind the Things of the Flesh; but they that are after the Spirit, the
Things of the Spirit. III. A Soldier, after he is listed, and entered into his
Company, he is armed, and put into a fit Posture for that Work and Service he
is called to. III. So a true Christian also is no sooner converted, listed, and
entered into Christ's Company, viz. his Church, but he is armed likewise. He
puts on the whole Armor of God, has his Loins girt about with Truth, and has
the Breastplate of Righteousness, his Feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6 10, 11, 12.
the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which is the Word of God. And because most of those Parts or Pieces of a
Christian's Armor are spoken to and opened under that Head of Metaphors
respecting the Graces of the Spirit, we shall speak no more of it here. IV. A
Soldier is known by his Habit, Armor, and Weapons, from other Men; they put
off their own Clothes, and put on the King's, especially if poor and ragged
when they are listed. IV. So a true Christian is known by the Clothes he has
on, from the Wicked and Ungodly of the World. He is clothed with the Garment
of Holiness and Humility; and has on all the precious Graces of the Spirit, as
Armor of Proof, fast girt to him by the Girdle of Sincerity; and this shows him
to be one of Christ's Soldiers. V. Soldiers many times are clothed at the
King's Charge; and it is greatly for the Honor of a Captain, to have all his
Men bravely clothed, and glittering in their Armor. V. So Christ clothes all
his Soldiers, and they are all attired alike, clothed in white. Their Robes
cost dear, viz. the Price of his own most precious Blood; and it greatly tends
to his Honor, to have them kept clean, and without Spot or Stain, all
glittering in their spiritual Armor, viz. adorned with the blessed Graces of
the Spirit. VI. It is a Reproach to Soldiers to be mere mercenary, to fight
for Money, and to mind their own private Advantage, more than the Credit and
Glory of their Sovereign, and Honor of their Captain. VI. So it is a Reproach
to a Christian, to aim at Self in all he does in Religion. Many Men care not to
do any thing for the Honor of God, further then it makes, as they conceive,
directly for their own Interest and Advantage. Tell some Men of this or that
Ordinance and Command of Christ, they presently object, May I not be saved
without it? Is it necessary to Salvation? These Men only make Religion as a
Bridge to carry them to Heaven; mere mercenary Souls! Alas! a true Christian
obeys and serves Christ sincerely, that he may glorify and honor his holy
Name, knowing he deserves more at his hands, than he is ever able to perform,
not doubting his Labor shall ever be in vain in the Lord; the very Work is
Wages to him. Paul was resolved, Christ should be magnified in his Body,
whether it were by Life, or by Death. Phil. 1.20.
VII. A Soldier has his Warfare appointed him, and his Enemies discovered to
him, and Orders to fight. VII. So a Christian has his Warfare appointed him,
his grand Enemies are made known to him, and he has received Commission also
to enter the Combat with them, whosoever they are, whether Foreign or
Domestic, whether external or internal, secret or open.

First; His Foreign or External Enemies are these:

1. The Devil, called the King of the Bottomless Pit, Prince of the Power of
the Air, the great Dragon, the Captain General of the black Regiment, and of
the Hellish Militia, that makes War against the Lamb, and his Followers. Every
Christian is commanded to enter the List, and to fight against these
Principalities and Powers. Ephesians. 6.11, 12.


2. The World; this is another grand, potent, and subtle Adversary; many have
been overcome and subdued by it.

(1.) The Things of the World, viz. the Pleasures, Honors, and Profits of the
World. These (as one well observes) have their Hooks and Snares hid under their
pleasant Baits, they usually prevail by Craft; their Flatteries and Allurements
are very dangerous. By this part of the World Satan set upon our blessed
Savior, Mat. 4.8.

(2.) The Men of the World, who are the Subjects of the Prince of Darkness, and
his Soldiers, the Militia of Hell, and the Auxiliaries of Satan, the Seed of
the Old Serpent, who are filled with Enmity against the Woman's Seed. Romans 8.44
He that is born after the Flesh, persecuteth him that is born after the
Spirit, etc. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye
will do. These continually oppose the Truth, and hate Godliness, and those who
profess it.

(3.) The Worships of the World. Saints have been often exposed to great
Dangers, for opposing the Ways, Inventions, and Superstitions of Men, the
Worship of the Beast, and cursed Fornications of the great Whore; but whilst
they are able to stand, or have Life in them, they must oppose and resist all
false Ways and Worshippers, such as strive to make void the Doctrine of Christ,
and the Commands of God, by their Traditions.

(4.) There are also the Lusts of the World, the Lusts of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life, which Saints are engaged to fight against, and oppose. 1 John
2.16.


Secondly; They have their Domestic Enemies:

1. Sin, which is a wretched and treacherous Inmate, and cursed Adversary.

2. The Flesh. These two made the holy Apostle to cry out, Romans 7. 1 Pet. 2.11.
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me! etc. Hence we are exhorted, as
Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly Lusts, that war against the
Soul.

VIII. A Soldier expects, and therefore ought to prepare to meet with his
Enemies; he knows he is chosen, listed, and placed under the Command of his
Captain, on purpose to fight. VIII. So a Saint expects, and therefore ought to
make ready to meet with spiritual Opposition from the Enemies of the Soul, as
soon as ever he is listed, and entered into Christ's Service. As it fell out
with the Captain himself, who no sooner was baptized, Mat. 4.
but presently he was led into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil: So a
Christian must always be prepared and resolved to engage and fight them: Whom
resist steadfastly in the Faith. IX. A Soldier goes not on a Warfare at his
own Charge; his Prince bears the Expense of the War, and furnishes him with
whatsoever is necessary for that Achievement. IX. A Believer goes not out in
the Spiritual Warfare at his own Charge. Christ furnishes him with Clothes,
Armor, Weapons, and with all Things needful and necessary, all is managed by
his gracious and blessed Spirit. X. A Soldier ought to be expert, and
well-skill'd in Martial Discipline, to know all the Postures of War,
particularly the Word of Command, and to obey presently: He must not dispute
the Matter, nor make the least Pause. Those Soldiers that were under the
Centurion, were very tractable upon this account, as himself confessed: I say
to one, Mat. 8.9.
Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes. X. So a Saint ought to
be well-skill'd in all things necessary for a Christian Soldier; it requires
much Wisdom and Experience; he must understand the Word of Command, and be
ready to obey his Captain, as soon as ever the Word is given. David had learned
this part well: I made haste, Psalm. 119.60. Acts 26.19.
and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. And Paul says, He immediately
obeyed the heavenly Vision. It is a very unbecoming thing in Christians, to
stand, or make a pause about their Obedience to Christ, in those Things they
are convinced to be their indispensible Duty; it argues they have but little
regard to the Honor of their Captain, the Lord Jesus Christ. Shall Soldiers
be so careful and ready to obey their earthly Leaders, who are but Men? and
shall not we be as ready and forward to obey the Lord Jesus Christ, our
heavenly Leader, who is the most w^se and blessed God. XI. Soldiers must know
their Places, how to keep both Rank and File. Military Discipline has
appointed every Officer in the Army his proper Place, and every private
Soldier to abide in the same Rank and File, or Place where he is set by his
Commander: and none may alter their Station, or change their Postures upon
their own private account; they must not break their Order upon their Peril:
for that is a Dishonor to the Captain, and Standers by will laugh and reproach
him; besides, if it be in a Time of Battle, he exposes himself and others to
great Danger. If an Army or Body of Men are once broken, and in Confusion, they
are soon routed by their Enemies. XI. So must a Saint know his Place and
particular Station, where he is set by his Captain, the Lord Jesus. If he be
set as a File-leader, or made an Officer to lead a Party, it is needful for him
to see to his proper Work and Business; he may not acquit his Command when he
pleases. The Commander in chief may prefer or degrade his Soldiers, as
seems good to him; but he may not, he cannot dispose of himself. Pastors must
keep their Places, Deacons keep their Places, Members of each Church keep their
Places, and not when they please withdraw themselves, and get into another
Company, but must abide under particular Command, where Christ has set them.
Shall any one think, that God, who has placed such Order in other Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, is not strict touching that holy Order set and appointed in
his Church? If the Sun, Moon, and Stars keep in their own Sphere, and move in
their own Orbs; if the Sea has its Bounds and Limits set, beyond which it must
not go; can it be imagined, that the Church of Christ should be a more
disorderly Piece, than the inanimate and irrational Creatures? God is the God
of Order, and not of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33.
in all the Churches of the Saints. Therefore if any Christians, that are of
this or that particular Company or Church, do break the holy Order, and regard
not to keep in their Stations, or neglect their proper Work; what a Reproach is
it to them, and to Religion it self! Besides, the Danger they are exposed to,
if Saints neglect Prayer, or hearing the Word, or the Lord's Supper, or are
divided amongst themselves, is very great; unless they rally the sooner, and
unite again, and keep their Ranks, they are in danger of being utterly routed
and undone by Satan. Many hence have been enticed by the Subtilty of the Devil,
to desert their General, and fly from their Colors. XII. Soldiers must
follow their Leader; this is one Word of Command. XII. So must every Christian
follow Jesus Christ, he ought to have his Eye upon him; how often has he
commanded us to follow him! Shall any list themselves under his Command, and
refuse to be subject to his holy Laws and Authority? or follow him for a Time,
and then grow weary? Mat. 16.24
If any Man will be my Disciple, let him take up his Cross daily, and follow
me. We read of a great and famous Army, consisting of Forty Four Thousand, a
certain Number put for an uncertain, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. We must follow Christ in every
Ordinance, follow his Doctrine, and follow his Example, in every one of his
gracious Qualifications, viz. in his Patience, (how contented was he in the
midst of his greatest Poverty!) in his Lowness of Mind, and deepest Humility;
in his Tenderness, Bowels, and Compassion toward those that deserved nothing;
how kind, loving, and merciful was he! Follow him in his Reproaches,
Afflictions, and Indignities; follow him in all Difficulties and Dangers; with
Peter, follow him to Prison, and to Death it self, when he calls us thither. Be
ye Followers of me, as I am of Christ Jesus. Joh. 10.17.
My Sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me. XIII. It behooves a Soldier to be
well-skilled in all Stratagems of War, for that conduces much to his just and
needful Accomplishments, Policy having many times outdone Power, and humane
Strength. XIII. So a Christian ought to be well-skill'd and expert in all
Divine Wisdom and Policy, in the Management of the Spiritual War against the
Enemies of the Soul. Christ's Counsel is, Be ye as wise as Serpents, but as
innocent as Doves. And indeed nothing is more necessary for spiritual Soldiers
than Wisdom and Policy, in the carrying on of the War against their internal
Adversaries, because of their Craft and Subtilty. Their Adversary the Devil is
compared to a Serpent upon this very account; and in other Places we read of
his Devices and Wiles: Ephesians. 6. That ye may stand against the Wiles of the
Devil. (...), properly the Methods of Satan; (...) of (...), Gurnal.
which signifies that Art and Order one observes in handling a Point; we say
such a one is methodical. Now because it shows Ingenuity, and Acuteness of Wit,
so to compose a Discourse; therefore it is transferred to express the Subtilty
of Satan, in laying of his Plots against a Christian. Indeed the expert
Soldier has his Order, as well as the Scholar; there is Method in forming an
Army, as well as in framing an Argument. The Devil is a subtle Enemy, and
Saints are most endangered by his Craft and Policy; he has always got the
greatest Advantage upon Christ's Soldiers by this means. It was the way he
took when he set upon Man at first, and if he overcame him when he was in his
perfect State, no marvel if he prevail upon him in his depraved and maimed
State. And therefore Wisdom is needful, and more especially to discover his
Stratagems: 2 Cor. 2.11.
We are not ignorant (says the Apostle) of his Devices: Some of which I shall
note here, for the spiritual Soldier's Profit and Observation, with respect to
his drawing Men and Women to Sin.

First; He shows his Subtilty, in choosing the most proper and advantageous
Season for Tempting. An hundred Soldiers at one time may turn a Battle, and
save an Army, when Thousands will not do it at another. Satan knows when to
make his Approaches, and the Time when he is most likely to prevail. Gurnal.
The Time he takes to tempt in, is:

1. When newly converted. No sooner is the Child of Grace, the new Creature
born, but this Dragon pours a Flood of Temptations after it.

2. When a Saint is beset with some great Affliction; this is a blind Lane, or
solitary Place, fit for this Thief to call for his Purse.

3. When a Christian is about some notable Enterprise for God's Glory, then
Satan will lie like a Serpent in the Way: An Adder in the Path, that biteth his
Horse Heel, Genesis 49. Zech. 3.1, 2, 3.
so that his Rider shall fall backward. Thus he stood at Joshua's Right Hand,
to resist him. The Right Hand is the working Hand, and his standing there,
implies his Desire to hinder him, and his Enterprise. Indeed the Devil was
never a Friend to Temple-Work, and therefore that Work is so long a doing. What
a handsome Excuse does he help the Jews unto? The Time is not come. Hag. 1 2.
Mat. 4.1, 2.
When our Savior was baptized, and was just entering upon his Ministry, then
Satan set upon him.

4. When he has the Presence of some Object to enforce his Temptation. Thus he
took Eve, when she was near the Tree, and had it in her Eye.

5. After great Manifestation of God's Love, then the Tempter comes. Such is
the Weakness of Grace sometimes in a Believer, that he can neither well bear
Smiles nor Frowns from God. When Paul was exalted with abundance of Revelation,
2 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3 etc.
then was the Time that Satan set upon him with his strong Temptations.

6. At the Hour of Death; Satan knows, that if he cannot prevail then, he never
can. It Is the last Onset, and therefore he resolves to try his Skill. If he
cannot break his Head, so as to keep him out of Heaven; yet he will (if
possible) bruise his Heel, and send him limping thither: I mean, fill a Saint
full of Fears and Doubts about his eternal State.

Secondly; He has many other Stratagems to deceive by Temptations.

1. He hangs out false Colors, and comes to a Saint in the disguise of a
Friend; he transforms himself into an Angel of Light: Master, pity thy self.

2. He strives to get Intelligence of a Saint's Affairs. This (says my Author)
is one great Wheel in this Politician's Clock, to have Spies in all Places, by
whom they are acquainted with the Counsels of their Enemies. He labors to find
out what Sin it is that most easily besets a Person, or that he is most prone
to. Heb. 12.1.


3. In his gradual Approaches to the Soul. When he first comes to tempt, he is
modest, and asks but little, knowing he may get that at many times, which he
should be denied, if he should ask it all at once. A few Men are let into a
City, when an Army, coming in a Body, would be shut out. Remember, he draws to
Sin by little and little: First it may be the Thought of this or that Evil is
darted into the Mind, and after a while lodged quietly there, and then a little
after further Proceed is made in Sin, etc.

4. Satan, like a cunning Warrier, has his Reserves; like a wise Captain, he
has some fresh Troops at hand, if need be: So that if one Temptation will not
prevail, he has a second, nay, a third and fourth, nay Multitudes. What fresh
and new Attempts did he use, when he set upon our Savior?

5. Another Stratagem of his is this: He will in a politic way retreat, as
sometimes you shall have an Enemy fly as overcome, when it is on a design of
overcoming. We read not only of Satan's being cast out, but of the unclean
Spirit's going out voluntarily; yet be sure it was with a purpose to return
more strong than before.

6. He will strive to make use of fit Instruments to carry on his Temptations
to the Ruin of the Soul. I might proceed, but by this all may see, That it is
needful for the Christian Soldier to be well instructed in the Stratagems of
War.

XIV. A Soldier ought to know the distinct Beats of the Drum, and Sound of the
Trumpet; an Alarm, a Call, a March, a Battle, etc. XIV. So a Saint must
understand the distinct and d^fferent Sounds of the Word of God, daily
ministered by his Servants; for a Preacher is a spiritual Trumpeter: Lift up thy
Voice like a Trumpet. Isa. 58.1.
And as it greatly behooves a Trumpeter to be well skilled how to blow his
Trumpet, (for if it give an uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to the
Battle?) so it does a Minister rightly and distinctly to preach the Word of
God, that a Christian (like a Soldier) may have an Alarm sounded in his Ears,
when Danger is near, or an Enemy coming upon him; as also a Call to Duty, to
Prayer, to Fasting, Mourning, and Sackloth, when the Day requires it, etc. Isa.
22.
A good Soldier of Christ will observe the distinct Sound of the spiritual
Trumpet; sometimes it sounds out Reproof, sometimes Counsel, sometimes Comfort;
all is carefully observed by a sincere and wise Christian. XV. A Soldier ought
to be a Man of Courage, bold and resolute, not soon daunted, nor dismayed by
the Threats, Malice, or Strength of an Enemy. He ought (as God bid Joshua) to
be strong, and very courageous. XV. So a Saint ought to be of a courageous
Spirit, not timorous, faint-hearted, or soon dismayed, but a Man of an
undaunted Heart, not fearing the worst that Men can do unto him: Tho I walk
(says David) through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil.
Psalm. 23.4.
The Wicked flee when none pursue, Prove. 28.1
but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion. There are three or four things, which
tend to embolden, and increase Courage in a spiritual Soldier, in the midst of
the greatest Danger, when nothing but Death and Misery seems to stare him in
the Face.

1. The Goodness of his Cause. Nothing administreth more Life and Zeal to a
Saint, than the Consideration of that holy Cause, which in the Strength of
Christ he stands up for, and is s^t to defend.

2. The Consideration of the Power and Strength of that God who has engaged to
stand by him, help and aid him in all his Conflicts with the worst of his
Enemies. Fear not, Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel; I will help thee, says
the Lord. Isa 41.10, 14. 1 John 4.3.
Fear not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee, etc. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them,
because greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World.

3. A good Call. Every Christian, in all his Enterprises, must see to his Call;
let him see that whatsoever he does in Religion, both in matter and manner, it
is what God has enjoined him. He that undertakes any Work or Cause, that is
not warranted by God's Word, has cause to tremble. And also let him see he is
the Man that God approves of, and has employed in and about that Work and
Duty, whatsoever it be; and when he sees that his Call is undeniably good, this
will add Courage to him.

4. A good Conscience. This made Paul so bold in the presence of his incensed
Adversaries: Men and Brethren, Acts 23.1.
I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this day. A Soldier who
has much Guilt upon him, cannot (if his Conscience be at all awakened) engage
an Enemy with that Courage as another Man may, in the high Place of the Field,
(when he knows not but the next moment he may be sent into another World.) It Is
Innocence and Uprightness that puts Life and Magnanimity into a Christian.
Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak Evil of you, 1 Pet. 3.16.
as Evildoers, they may be ashamed, who falsely accuse your good Conversation
in Christ.

5. Lastly; The Assurance he has of Victory. A Saint knows he shall have the
Day, and come off a Conqueror: Before he enters upon the Conflict, his Captain
has told him, He shall overcome at last, and have the Crown of Life. Rev. 2.10.


XVI. A Soldier must expect to endure Hardness, and therefore prepares himself
for it. It is a Life attended with many Hardships and Difficulties; they often
lie in the Field, and fare hard, when others know the want of nothing. XVI. So
the Saints of God must expect to endure Hardness. A Christian's Life is
attended with many Difficulties and Afflictions, which they must endure as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ. He is no good Soldier, that cannot endure Hardness.
But here it may not be amiss to enquire, What is that Hardness that the Saints
do and must endure?

First; They must endure all that Hardness, that either their Sins, or the
Profession of the Gospel, may expose them unto.

1. Saints are exposed to Hardships by means of their Sins; their own
Iniquities bring great Sorrow and Trouble upon them. It made David many times
cry out, and water his Couch with Tears.

2. Sin is not sweet to a Saint in the committing of it. He is overcome
sometimes to do that which he hates, and his own Conscience afterward sorely
lashes and wounds him for it. Sin brings not only Hardships upon the Soul, but
many times sore Distress upon the Body and Family, and a Blast upon a Man's
outward Estate.

Secondly; A Saint meets with the Hardship of Self-denial; he bears the Pain of
having a Right-hand-Lust cut off, and a Right-eye Lust pulled out; he parts
with the best, the nearest, and choicest of his outward Enjoiments. Unless a
Man deny himself of Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Children, House, and
Land, etc. for my sake, he is not worthy of me. This Hardness some cannot
endure; the young Man could not bear it: When he heard this Doctrine, he went
away very sorrowful, etc. Mat. 10.22


Thirdly; They endure the Hardness of Mortification, or of crucifying the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts. Circumcision was painful to the Body, and
let me tell you, the Circumcision of the Spirit is more hard and difficult to a
Saint to undergo; Which is made without hands; cutting off the Foreskin of the
Heart, or putting away the Body of Sin by the Circumcision of Christ. Mortify
your Members which are upon the Earth. The killing of Sin, is as the killing or
destroying the Members of the Body.

Fourthly; Saints endure Hardness from Men.

1. By hard Words. All the cruel Reproaches, Slanders, Revilings, Tauntings,
Scoffings, Backbitings, etc. that the Sons of Belial can invent, they are
forced to endure. They bend their Tongues like their Bow for Lies, and their
Tongue is as an Arrow shot out. The Tongues of some Men are like cruel Weapons:
As with a Sword in my Bones, my Enemies reproach me, etc. The Sword in the
Flesh is painful, Psalm. 42.10. Heb. 11.36.
but the Sword in the Bone is much worse. Mockings are ranked amongst the great
Sufferings of the Godly: Others had Trials of cruel Mockings. The Archers this
way shot hard at Joseph; and what a poisonous Arrow did the Jews let fly upon
Christ! Behold a Drunkard, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners. He
casts out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. As for this Fellow, we
know not from whence he is. Paul was accused for being a pestilent Fellow, a
Mover of Sedition, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, etc. These
things are hard to bear.

2. There is the Hardness of Men's Hands, as well as of their Tongues. Wicked
Men (says a Learned Divine) have Iron Hands, which many times fall heavy upon
the Soldiers of Christ. How heavy was the Stroke of Cain upon his righteous
Brother! and what heavy Hands did Pharaoh lay upon the Israelites in Egypt!
What Hardships did the Primitive Saints endure, under the Heathen Emperors, in
the ten Persecutions! And what sore Sufferings, and cruel Torments, has the
Woman's Seed borne and endured under the Papal Power! What Burnings, Roastings,
and Flayings alive! All along, from the Beginning to this Day, the Saints have
endured great Hardness from wicked Men. See Heb. 11.35. to the end. They were
tortured with Scourges, Bonds, and Imprisonments; they were stoned, they were
sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins,
and Goats-skins, in Deserts, and Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

Fifthly; Saints endure Hardness from Satan. He comes out with open Mouth
against them, like a roaring Lion, seeking to destroy them. Christ's Soldiers
encounter with Devils, they wrestle with Principalities and Powers; Ephesians. 6.
Satan daily lets fly his fiery Darts against them.

Sixthly; They meet with some Hardness and Trouble by the Withdrawings of God
himself. Some Afflictions come more immediately from the Hand of God. Job
complains of the Arrows of the Almighty; David cries out, as if the Lord had
broke his Bones. Yet God in all the Afflictions and Trials he brings upon his
People, designs their Profit: When he has tried me, I shall come forth as
Gold. Job 23.
It is that we may be Partakers of his Holiness. Yet nevertheless the Strokes
and Chastisements of the Almighty are hard to be borne.

Seventhly; Christ's Soldiers meet with Hardness, whilst they attend upon
their proper Work, in their particular Places and Stations unto which they are
called. Some have harder Service than others; as the Forlorn Hope, and the Van
(says one) may meet with harder Service than the main Body of the Army; the
Frontiers, and File-Leaders, may meet with more difficult Service than the
Rear; and the Watchmen that lie Perdue, and stand Sentinel; with harder Duty
than those that abide on the Guard. But tho some endure more Hardness than
others, yet all must take what befalls them in the Place and Station where they
are set. The Ministers of the Gospel (likely) are the Men mostly exposed, and
yet sometimes others suffer as hard things as they; yet every one must see to
discharge his Duty in his respective Place. The Sentinel must not quit his
Watch, because it is cold, or Danger approaches; the File-Leader must not face
about, and fall back in the Rear, because of the Hardness of the Service; the
Leaders must not bid the private Soldiers fall on, and themselves run away;
the Colors are most aimed at, yet the Standard Bearer and Ensign must stand by
them, and display them in the Face of the Enemy. So whatever comes, Ministers
must preach, and People must hear, and the Public Worship of God must be
maintained, the Banner of the Word must be displayed, Saints must keep their
Ground and Station, where they are set by Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 9.
Necessity is laid upon me; and woe is me, if I preach not the Gospel.

XVII. A good Soldier exposes himself to endure Hardness voluntarily,
patiently, courageously, constantly, and sincerely. XVII. So the faithful and
good Soldier of Jesus Christ is not haled, dragged or forced to his Duty, and
to undergo Difficulties for the Gospel-sake; but freely and with a ready Mind
engages in the Work. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem, Acts 21.13
for the Name of the Lord Jesus. Christ cares not for pressed Soldiers, his
are all Volunteers: When the Gospel-Trumpet sounds, Come away, come up hither,
immediately they are upon their Feet.

2. They endure patiently, taking their Captain for their Example: When
reviled, they revile not again. In Patience possess ye your Souls.

3. They endure the Hardness of their Service courageously: Heb. 10 34 Prove.
28.1.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods. The Wicked fly when none
pursue, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion. Shall such a Man as I fly? was
the Saying of a brave Soldier of this Captain's. When Modestus, the Emperor's
Lieutenant, threatened Basil with Confiscation of Goods, Banishment, and Death,
how courageously did he bear it! If you have any thing else, threaten it; for
these things are nothing. This was somewhat like that of Paul; notwithstanding
Bonds, Imprisonment, and Death was threatened against him, yet says he, None of
these things move me, Acts 20.24. Romans 5.3.
neither account I my Life dear unto me, etc. We glory in Tribulation.

4. Saints endure Hardness constantly; the whole Life of a Christian is a Time
of Warfare: till this Life is done, his Warfare is not done. Job 17.9.
The Righteous shall hold on their Way, and he that has clean Hands, shall
grow stronger and stronger. A Saint must never cease being a Soldier;
Godliness must be his Trade as long as he lives. As Satan will never have done
tempting, so he must never cease from resisting his Temptations.

5. And then all this is done sincerely; he has holy Aims and Ends in what he
does.

XVIII. A good Soldier spares none of the Enemy, when he has such a Command
given him: And Saul, for not complying with the Requirement of God in this
respect, lost his Kingdom, viz. in sparing Agag the King, and the Fat of the
Cattle, when the Word of Command was, 1 Samuel 15.
Go, smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not;
but slay both Men and Women, Infant and Suckling, Oxen and Sheep, Camels and
Asses, etc. XVIII. So a Saint, or good Soldier of Jesus Christ, spares not one
Lust: Every Sin, like the cursed Amalekites, must be put to the Sword. He is no
sound Christian, that suffers any Sin to abide quietly in his Heart or Life
unmortified. If there be any one Darling-Lust spared, it is a palpable Sign of
Hypocrisy. Some Men are ready to excuse their evil Lusts, as Saul did: They
will cover their covetous Designs under the Pretense of doing good, and
distributing to the Necessities of the Poor; but alas! this will not do,
Obedience is better than Sacrifice. A Saint must kill all, put all his Sins to
the Sword, or die to them. One Sin spared, as Agag was, will exclude thee the
Kingdom of Heaven: Romans 8.13
If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye mortify the Deeds of the
Body, ye shall live. XIX. A good Soldier will keep with his Colors. It is
punishable by Martial Law, for a Soldier to lie behind his Colors; and Death
without Mercy to depart quite from them. XIX. So a good Soldier of Christ will
keep and abide with the Banner of Truth. The Gospel (says Ainsworth) is the
Saints Ensign: Isa. 5.26.
And he will lift up an Ensign to the People, etc. Christ will lash such as lie
behind. Peter was made to weep bitterly for straying from his Colors. And it
will be Death without Mercy to those that quite depart from the Truth, and
embrace Heresy or Idolatry. And here let me caution all Christians to take
heed, lest they are deceived by their Enemies. Satan, like a cunning Pirate,
sometimes transforms himself into an Angel of Light, he puts out false Colors,
comes with a seeming Banner or Ensign of Truth; he can make use of Scripture,
when it will make for his purpose to deceive. XX. A good Soldier will not turn
his Back upon the Enemy, to the dishonor of his Captain; tho his Life be in
danger, he will not fly, nor cowardly betray his Trust. XX. So a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ will not turn his Back to fly from the Enemy, or utterly
depart from the Truth, whatsoever befalls him; such is his Love to the Lord
Jesus, and Zeal for his Glory. And besides, he knows (if he does) the great
Danger he exposes his own Soul to thereby: for among all the Armor that
Christians should take unto them, we read of no Back-piece; for if they turn
their Back,, they are gone and undone for ever: If any Man draw back, Heb. 10.38
my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him. XXI. A Soldier is greatly animated and
encouraged in all his Encounters and sharp Conflicts with the Enemy, by
considering the Reward and Honor he shall receive, if he manfully holds out,
and gets the Victory. XXI. So a Saint is carried on with much Zeal and Courage,
by the consideration of the eternal Reward he shall receive in the end. This
made Moses despise the Glory of Egypt, and refuse to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter. He saw him who was invisible, and had an Eye to the
Recompense of Reward. Heb. 1^.
Christ himself this way animates his Followers, and faithful Soldiers: I
appoint to you a Kingdom. Be you faithful unto Death, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4.8, 9.
and I will give you a Crown of Life. I have (says Paul) fought the good
Fight, and finished my Course, and kept the Faith: And henceforth there is laid
up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will give me
at that Day, and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. XXII.
Some Soldiers of an Army are now and then singled out as Champions, to engage
an Enemy alone. Tho every Champion be a Soldier, yet every Soldier is not a
Champion. A Captain will not choose any Soldier to this Work, but such only as
he knows are Men of Courage and Experience, etc. XXII. So Christ sometimes
calls forth one of his spiritual Army, to engage the Enemy alone, and as a
Champion of the Truth, to sacrifice his Life in the behalf of it. What greater
Honor can be conferred upon a Christian than this? Such a Champion was St.
Stephen, Antipas, etc. who were brave Men, Acts 7. Rev. 2.13.
Saints of undaunted Courage and Resolution; who loved not their Lives unto
Death. Metaphor. Disparity. NO earthly Soldiers know what the Event or Issue
of their Wars will be; they cannot tell whether they shall overcome, and get
the Victory, or not; tho they be never so valiant and courageous in their
Service, and faithful and true to their Captain and Leader. BUt a true
Christian knows, and is assured, that he shall overcome, and obtain the
Victory. He fights not at an uncertainty, the Issue of the War being made known
unto him by Christ in his Word. And although a Christian may sometimes doubt of
the Truth of his own Sincerity; yet being sincere, he does not doubt of
obtaining the Conquest. II. Earthly Soldiers many times lose their Limbs and
precious Lives in Fight; and it is not in the Power of the wisest Captain in
the World, to repair or make up that Loss again. II. But Christ's Soldiers
never engage their Enemies to the Loss of Limbs or Life it self in his Cause,
but he can restore it with great Advantage. Joh. 12.25
He that loves his Life, shall lose it; but he that hates his Life in this
World, shall keep it unto Life eternal. III. Soldiers are armed with carnal
Weapons, and fight with Men like themselves, and yet many times are overcome,
and lose the Victory. III. But Saints fight with spiritual Weapons, and not
only with Men like themselves, but with the Devil, and his infernal Crew; and
yet through Christ their Captain they get the Victory. For the Weapons of our
Warfare are not carnal, Ephesians. 6.
but mighty through God, etc. For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities and Powers, etc.

Inferences.
THese things being so, let all true Christians take Heart, and be valiant, and
fear not the Face of Enemies.

1. Consider the Worth and Dignity of your Captain. Christians have the best
Captain and Leader in the World.

(1.) He is of a most honorable Extraction, of a most high and noble Descent,
the Heir of all things, the Father's Firstborn, the express Image of his
Person: He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and he is (says one)
Generalissimo of all his Majesty's Forces in Heaven and Earth.

(2.) Consider his Strength and Valor: He has an Omnipotent Arm, and is of a
most valiant, undaunted, courageous, and heroic Spirit. What was Sampson,
Gideon, David, Alexander, Julius Caesar, Scanderbeg, or any other mighty
Warrior, to the Lord Jesus? This is he who cuts in pieces the Gates of Brass,
and breaks asunder the Bars of Iron; that has the Keys of Death and Hell; that
flew Rahab, Isa. 51.9.
and wounded the Dragon; who is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, and will
come upon Princes as upon Mortar. This is He that is the Terror of Devils, the
Dread of Mortals, who will make other Captains tremble, and cry out to the
Rocks and Mountains to hide them in the Day of his Wrath.

(3.) Consider his Wisdom. His Skill and Policy far exceeds the Craft and
Subtilty of all the Machiavellian Politicians in the World. He knows how to
assault and harm his Enemies, and to carry on, and bring off, to preserve and
defend his People, and faithful Soldiers. Let Men and Devils be never so
skilful and politic, Christ knows how to outwit them, and overreach them all.
He knows where all their Mines are dug, where all their Forces, Flankers,
and Ambuscadoes do lie; He knows their Plot, and how laid this day against his
Interest, Gospel, and Vovenant People, in this and other Nations; He knows how
to confound them, and catch them in their own Craftiness, and to bring them to
Shame. He is wonderful in Counsel, and mighty in Working. He has an Omniscient
Eye, as well as an Omnipotent Hand. He makes his Countermines, and blows them
up, or burieth them in the Pit they have dug. He outshoots the Devil and the
Wicked in their own Bow. He will bring down the Beast, and Whore, and all their
Abettors, and make them ashamed of their Hope. Mark the Issue of this present
Dispensation. See Captain in the First Volume, and God a Man of War.

2. Consider the Excellency of your Cause, which is just and righteous.

3. The Goodness of your Call, against which nothing can be objected.

4. For your further Encouragement, consider the Strength of your
Fortifications: They are all impregnable, and impenetrable, of most invincible
Strength. Your Outworks, your Walls, your Bulwarks, your Forts and Towers, all
your Defense is admirable. The Name of the Lord is a Strong-Tower. Prove. 18.10
Isa. 26.1.
Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks. O how formidable and
terrible are the Attributes and Threatenings of God to his Enemies!

5. Consider, Tho your Number be the fewest, yet your Side is the strongest;
God is for us, and on our Side: With them is the Arm of Flesh, but with us the
Lord our God, to fight for us. How many, said Antigonor, will you reckon me
for? Poor Mortal! How many then may we reckon God, Christ, the Holy Ghost for?
The whole Trinity is engaged for us.

6. Consider, Tho your Service be hard, and Conflict sharp, yet it will be
short. It is but a little while, and your Enemy shall trouble you no more. 2
Cor. 4.17.
Our light Afflictions which are but for a moment, etc.

7. Consider, the Devils, and all other Enemies, tho never so potent, cruel,
and malicious, yet they are all conquered and spoiled: Col. 2.15.
Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a Show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it. The Romans were wont in a triumphant manner to
carry those they had conquered about with them, and to brandish their Swords,
and display their Colors, and carry their Arms in open View, as Trophies and
Emblems of Victory: So the Lord Jesus, having conquered Satan, and the Powers
of Hell, rode as it were in Triumph through their Kingdom, (the Air) and made a
Show of them openly, as a glorious Victor. 2. Again, the World is subdued: Be
of good cheer, says Christ, Joh. 16. Rom 8.
I have overcome the World. And we through him are hereby made more than
Conquerors. Come Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, etc. with all their
Blackness, Darkness, Threats, and Terror; what will they do? Who shall separate
us from the Love of Christ? Romans 8.35
or hinder us of eternal Life. 3. Death is subdued, Christ has got the Victory
over that. What Joy and Comfort is this to Believers, to hear that all their
Enemies are conquered; your Captain General has broken them all to pieces.

6. The Enemy cannot hurt you; Romans 8.28
the worst you can meet with will work for your Good.

9. Consider, Tho you meet with hard Things, Christ can and will make them easy
to you. All your Wounds he can heal, and all your broken Bones he can set. The
more you suffer for Christ, the greater your Reward will be.

10. Consider what great and glorious Pay you shall have in the end. Is not a
Kingdom, a Crown of Glory that fades not away, worth fighting and striving for?

11. Look to Christ, remember what he has done and suffered for you; and
consider what many Saints have endured for his sake before you, that were most
precious in God's sight. Is it not better to suffer here, than to suffer in
Hell? What is the Pain and Sorrow of the Godly in this Life, to the everlasting
Pains and Torments of the Damned in the World to come? Get much Faith, and
provide your selves with all your Armor, and the right Use of it, the Nature of
which is opened under the Fifth Head. Get your Hearts loose from the World: No
Man that warreth, 2 Timothy 2.4
entangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life. Labor for much Love to God.
It was a notable Saying of Mr. Bland the Martyr, when he was at the Stake: This
Death (says he) is more dear to me than Thousands of Gold and Silver; such
Love, O Lord, have thou laid up in my Breast, that I hunger for thee. Take heed
you consult not with carnal Reason; rely wholly upon Christ, and never consult
thy present Strength with thy future Sufferings. Take heed you do not overvalue
your Lives. Alas! you cannot live long; what if you die a little sooner than
you might do according to the Course of Nature? Also consider, is it not better
if God calls you to it, to glorify him by dying, than to die otherwise?
Remember, You are not your own; let God therefore make what Improvement of you
he pleases.

Lastly; Pray continually, pray always, for this is the way to overcome. Prayer
has done wonderfully. And this is one great Thing that is enjoined on the
Christian Soldier.

Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication, in the Spirit,
and watching thereunto with all Perseverance, and Supplication for all Saints,
and for me, etc.
HEre are two Things to be noted: 1. A Duty enjoined, Prayer. 2. Blessed
Directions about it, Viz.


1. The Time, Always.

2. The Kinds, All Prayer and Supplication.

3. How, viz. (1.) In the Spirit. (2.) With Diligence. (3.) Constantly.

4. For whom; (1.) For all Saints. (2.) More particularly, for the Preachers of
the Gospel.

Note. Soldiers of Christ ought to pray, to be much in Prayer, to pray always,
to pray in the Spirit, to pray for themselves, and to pray for others also.
First; Tho we are to pray always: Yet there are some special Times for this
Duty. Prayer is twofold, 1. Ordinary, 2. Extraordinary. We must in some Seasons
more especially be at this Duty, to pray hard, to pray mightily, etc.

Quest. What is meant by praying always?

Answ. 1. It is as much as to say, Pray in every thing, according to that Word,
Phil. 4.6. In every thing, by Prayer and Supplication, let your Requests be
made known to the Lord. Some pray in nothing they do. In all thy Ways
acknowledge him.

2. In all Conditions, in a full State, in a naked State, in Poverty, in
Plenty, in Sickness, in Health, in Prosperity, and in Adversity.

3. For every Thing we need, for Spirituals, for Temporals, so far as God sees
them good for us.

4. Daily, frequently, Morning and Evening. David said to Mephihosheth, Thou
shall eat Bread at my Table continually. 2 ^am. 7 7
He cannot mean, thou shall do dothing but eat, (he would not have him to be
such a Cormorant) but commonly every day, etc.

5. To have a Heart always for this Duty, to be always fit and ready for this
sacred Ordinance.

Quest. What are those special Times and Seasons for Prayer? Or when is
extraordinary Prayer to be made?

Ans. 1. When a Saint has any great Work to do for God, or eminent Business
and Service for his Church. See Nehem. 1.5. Acts 4.2, 9. When Abraham's Servant
had special Work to do for his Master, he was much in Prayer.

2. When a Saint is in the dark concerning any one Truth of God, and cannot get
Satisfaction, Dan. 9.1, 2, 3, etc.
then it is a Time for extraordinary Prayer. When Daniel was at a loss about the
Time of Deliverance out of Captivity, how much did he give himself to Prayer!

3. When a gracious Soul is under any sore and grievous Affliction. David in
his Distress and Affliction cried mightily to God. Is any afflicted? let him
pray; that is, let him be more abundantly in that Duty. James 5.13.

4. When Sin abounds, or in a Day of great Rebuke and Blasphemy: When Hell
seems to be let loose, or the Floodgates of Wickedness opened wide in a
Nation, then it is a Time for the Godly to be much in Prayer. Jer. 13.19. Isa.
37.23.

5. In Times of great Distress upon the Church; when the Danger is imminent, as
at this Day; this is a Time for extraordinary Prayer. See Isa. 22. When many
Nations came up against Judah, then Jehoshaphat cried mightily to Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. When Haman plotted to destroy all the Jews, and cut off Israel at
once, and the Writings were sealed, and sent forth, then Esther and the godly
Ones pray mightily. Thus did Jacob, when his Brother was coming to meet him,
fearing he would cut off the Mother with the Child; Genesis 33.
how did he then wrestle with God!

6. In Times of Temptation. When Christ was assaulted, and his Hour was come,
he prayed hard, he spent a whole Night in Prayer, Mat. 26.44. And what says he
to his Disciples? Mat. 26.40, 41. 2 Cor. 12.
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation. When Paul had that Thorn in
the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, he besought the Lord thrice,
that it might depart from him. That three times (as some conclude) might be
threescore times.

7. Lastly; In a Time of great Expectation, when great Things are near, and
much looked for. When Daniel expected great Things, understanding by Books,
Deliverance to the Church was at hand, he set himself to seek God. Dan. 9.2.

Secondly; Consider, Prayer is a great Ordinance. And that does appear,

1. In respect of God; it gives him the Glory of three great Attributes.

(1.) Of his Omnisciency: We hereby acknowledge, that he knows our Wants and
Necessities: Psalm. 39 9.
All my Desires are before thee, and my Groanings are not hid from thee.

(2.) His Omnipotency. We acknowledge, in our crying to God, and relying upon
him in this Duty, that he is able to help us, and supply all our Wants.

(3.) It gives him the Glory of his Goodness: O thou that hear Prayer. A
Saint knows, and confesses hereby (if he pray aright) that God is willing and
ready to help and save him.

2. Prayer is a great Ordinance, if we consider the Power and Prevalency of it
Luther ascribed to Prayer a kind of Omnipotency. It has prevailed over Fire,
Water, and Earth; it has stopped the Sun in its Course. It has prevailed over
evil Angels it has cast the Devil out, and broke his Kingdom down. It has had
Power over the good Angels, as appears in the Case of Elisha; it fetched them
from Heaven to be his Guard and Protection, 2 King. 9.6, 17. Nay, it has
prevailed with Christ himself, the Angel of the Covenant, as appears in Jacob's
Case: As a Prince, thou have wrestled with God, and have prevailed. It has
healed the Sick, raised the Dead, stopped the Lion's Mouth, and has subdued
and put to flight the Armies of Aliens; Heb. 11.
has opened Prison-Doors, and broke in pieces Chains, Gates, and Bars of Iron
and Brass. There is none of the battering Rams, or Artillery of Hell can stand
against it. It Is like an Engine (as one observes) that makes the Persecutors
tremble; and woe to them that are the Buts and Marks that it is levelled at,
when it is fired with the Fire of the Spirit, and discharged in the Strength of
Faith. It Is said, Mary Queen of Scots dreaded more the Prayers of Mr. Knox,
than an Army of Twenty Thousand Men; she had more cause, than an Army of Ten
Hundred Thousand. It Is said of the Witnesses, that They have Power to shut
Heaven, Rev. 11 5.
that it rain not in the Days of their Prophecy; and have Power over Waters, to
turn them into Blood, and to smite the Earth with Plagues, as often as they
will. How do they this, but by Prayer?

3. That Prayer is a great Ordinance, will appear, if we consider the Promises
made to it, 2 Cor. 7.14. Psalm. 50.15. Mat. 21.22. Job 15.7.

4. That it is a great Ordinance, will appear, if we consider how it co-works
with all other Ordinances and Duties, to make them effectual, whether Moral or
Evangelical: Every thing is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer.

5. That Prayer is a great Ordinance, does appear by the Influences it has
over all our Graces. (1.) It Is the Means for getting Grace; hereby a Soldier
of Christ obtains his Armor. (2.) And for the Increase of Grace, in order to
the acting of it. (3.) For the evidencing of Grace. It is that which brings the
Soul into God's Presence, and fills it with Divine Joy and Peace in believing.

6. It is the Divine Breath of the Soul; can a Man live longer than he breaths?
A Saint dies, when he quite cease Praying.

Quest. What hinders or obstructs the Answer of the Saint's Prayer?

Answ. 1. When we pray not according to God's Will; God's Will must be the Rule
of our Prayers. And this is the Confidence that we have in him, 1 John 5.14.
Jam. 4.3.
that if we ask any thing according to his Will, he hears us.

2. When the End or Aim of a Man is not right: Ye ask, and receive not, because
ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it on your Lusts.

3. When we pray not in Faith; Unbelief hinders the Answer of Prayer: Jam. 1.6.
But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering, etc.

4. When Endeavors after the things we want, are not joined with our Prayers.
Psalm. 27.4.
As we have a Mouth to beg, we must have a Hand to work.

5. When any one Sin rests in the Bosom unrepented of: Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me, etc.

6. When we are not fervent. Prayer must be with Affection unto God.

7. When we pray not in Spirit. Our Spirits must pray; and not only so, but if
the Spirit of God does not act and assist our Spirits, our Prayers will not
prevail.

8. When we are not constant in the Duty. We must be importunate and constant,
Luk 18.1.
pray always, and not faint, if we would have our Prayers heard.

9. When we come not to God in the Name of Christ, the Door is shut. We must
ask in Christ's Name, and come to God by him, if we would be heard and accepted
by him.

The Celestial Race: Or, the Saints compared to Runners.
1 Cor. 9.4. Know ye not, that they which run in a Race run all, but one
receives the Prize: So run that ye may obtain.

Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin which does so easily
beset us; and let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us.


CHristianity, or the Life of a Christian, is in these Scriptures compared to a
Race; So run that ye may obtain. A Christian is compared to a Man that runs a
Race.

What sort of Race the Apostle principally alludes to, is not (as we conceive)
so material; besides, many worthy Men do not agree about it, some being subject
to think, the Apostle alludes to the Olympic Games. We shall therefore run the
Parallel, with respect to such Things concerning a Race, which all generally
agree in.

To run, is variously taken in Scripture. 1. To break through, Psalm. 18.29. 2.
To strive with the greatest Speed and Celerity, or to make haste, Prove. 1.26. 2
Kings 4.22. 3. Eagerly in Affection to be carried after. 1 Pet. 4.4. 4. To pass
without Let, Psalm. 147.15. 5. To labor with Earnestness. 6. To go forward,
Gal. 5.7.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Man that runs in a Race, takes great care to begin well.
It behooves him to be exact in his setting out, 1. In respect of Time, 2. In
respect of Place; he observes the Place from whence he must begin to run. A
little Time lost at the beginning of a Race is dangerous. SO a Christian ought
to take great care how he begins or sets out in the Race toward eternal Life.
1. In respect of Time, it behooves him to set out early enough; he must not
defer the great Concernment of his Soul; Delays are dangerous. Isa. 55.6.
Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near. I love
them that love me, Prove. 8.
and they that seek me early, shall find me. Behold, now is the accepted Time;
behold, 2 Cor. 6.1.
now is the Day of Salvation! Some Men begin too late, they mind not the Call
of God. To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Because I
have called, Prove. 1.24, 28.
and ye have refused, etc. -- I also will laugh at your Calamity. Then they
shall call upon me, but I will not answer. 2. They ought to observe the Place
from which they must depart. He that would go to Zion, must leave Babylon; as
he would go to Zoar, so he must depart out of Sodom. He must leave the Way of
Sin, yea, all the evil Courses, Customs, Traditions, and Inventions of Men: Ye
did run well, etc. II. A Man that runs in a Race, ought to know the Way well
which he is to run; if the Path be not plain before him, he is not like to win
the Prize. II. So a Christian ought to know the Way to Salvation, to be
well-instructed in the Path of eternal Life. Christ is the Way: Joh. 14.6.
No Man (says he) comes unto the Father, but by me. There is no other Name
under Heaven given, Acts 4.12.
whereby we must be saved. 1. Christ is the Way, as a Priest, who offered
himself up as as a Sacrifice to God for us, to atone and make Peace between the
Father and us. 2. Christ is the Way, as a King, who has appointed us Laws and
Ordinances, which we must obey and follow, to manifest our Subjection unto him:
Psalm. 119.
I will run the Way of thy Commandments. 3. As a Prophet, who has laid down
all Rules and heavenly Directions necessary for us in Matters of Faith and
Practice, whom we must hear in all things. Acts 3 23. 1 Pet. 2.21.
4. Christ is the Way, in that holy Example he has left, that we should follow
his Steps. A Saint observes the very Footsteps of Christ, and of the Primitive
Church; he sees the good old Way plain before him, as it is recorded in the
holy Scripture, and thereby knows which way to steer his Course. III. A Man
that runs in a Race, must see to put himself in a fit Equipage. He puts off his
upper Clothes, and gets meet and necessary Garments for the purpose; because
the Clothes that a Man usually wears, would much encumber him in his Running.
III. So a Man that would set out in the spiritual Race, or in a speedy Course
toward Salvation, must cast off the Rags of his own Righteousness, and put on
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ by Faith; for that Garment, with the Garment
of Holiness and Humility, is only necessary, Romans 13.14.
and must be put on by all that would run the Race set before them, so as to
obtain the Prize. IV. A Man that would run in a Race, so as to obtain the
Prize, must lay aside all Weights whatsoever: For all know, that if a Man have
a Weight or Burden on him, it will greatly hinder or obstruct him in his
running; nay, if he does not cast it off, it will soon cause him to be weary,
and faint in the Way. IV. So a Christian that would run in this heavenly Race,
must cast off every spiritual Weight. This the Apostle directly counsels the
Saints to do: Let us lay aside every Weight, Heb. 12 1.
and the Sin that does so easily beset us; and let us run with Patience the
Race set before us. Now these Weights are, 1. The inordinate Affections. Our
Hearts must not be set upon Things below, Col 3.2, 3
not inordinately upon Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, House or Land; for he
whose Heart runs out in a covetous manner after the World, as the Prophet
shows, Hab. 2.6.
is like a Man that is laden with thick Clay. It is impossible for a Man to run
this Race with the World upon his Back. What was it that weighed down the young
Man in the Gospel, that came running to Christ, who seemed to be in a full
speed toward eternal Life? Was it not the inordinate Love to the World? 2.
Sin; Sin is a Weight: That Sin that does so easily beset us. Some understand,
the Sin of Unbelief is meant hereby; others, a Man's Constitution-Sin, or the
Sin of his Nature, that which he is most easily overtaken with, whether it be
Pride, Passion, etc. Sin, yea, every Sin must be cast off, take it how you
will, (tho I rather adhere to the latter) if a Man would so run as to obtain;
for nothing like Guilt tends to make a Christian grow weary, and faint in his
Mind. V. A Man that would run so as to obtain the Prize, must not be
overcharged with inordinate Eating and Drinking; for Experience shows, how that
unfits a Man for running a Race, or for any other Enterprise whatever. And a
Man that striveth for Mastery, is temperate in all things. V. So a Christian
must take heed he be not overcharged in a spiritual Sense; there is spiritual
Gluttony and Drunkenness spoken of in Scripture. Hence says our Savior, Take
heed to your selves, Luke 21.24.
lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting, Drunkenness, and
the Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares. What is meant
by Surfeiting, Drunkenness, etc. but all kind of loose Living, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
wanton Riotousness, excessive Delight in, or Desire after the Pleasures of this
World, etc. Or on the other hand, being overwhelmed, and sorely afflicted or
perplexed with inordinate Cares about earthly Matters? All these things must be
avoided by those, who would run the spiritual Race so as to obtain the Prize.
VI. A Man that would run in a Race, so as to obtain the Prize, must see he does
not lessen his Pace; he must run swiftly, and run constantly; if he loyter, or
grow careless, and idle, no wonder if he lose the Prize. VI. So a Christian
must run with speed, he must be very diligent, swift-footed, which is signified
by running; and also he must be even in his Course. He must not be like the
Galatians, Gal. 5.7.
only run well for a Time, but continue always to the end the same Pace, i. e.
keep in a constant Course of godly Zeal and Holiness, according to that of the
Apostle, We desire that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the
full assurance of Hope to the end. Heb. 6 11.
Some Men seem very zealous in a Fit, they are all on a Flame (as it were) none
more forward and lively in God's Ways, and in his holy Worship, than they; but
on a sudden oft-times (as has been observed) they flag, and grow weary. It may
be, as the Proverb is, a zealous Apprentice, a lukewarm Journey-man, and a
quite cold Master. VII. A Man that would run so as to obtain the Prize, ought
to be strong and healthy. A distempered Person, or one that falls sick in the
Way, is not likely to obtain the Prize; a consumptive Man, or one that has
feeble Knees, or a distempered Heart, is not likely to hold out. VII. So a
Christian, that runs the heavenly Race, ought to labor after spiritual
Strength: Be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6 10. 2 Timothy 2.1
and in the Power of his Might. Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace
that is in Christ Jesus. Distempers are as subject to seize upon the Soul, as
upon the Body, viz. the Tympany of Pride, the Fever of Passion, the Trembling
of the Heart through slavish Fear, the Stone of a hard Heart, the spiritual
Consumption, or Decay of Grace; Want of Breath, or Difficulty in breathing out
constant and fervent Prayers and Desires to God, or any other Decay of the
inward Man, or Disease of the Soul. If any of these seize upon a Christian in
his Course to eternal Life, without sp^edy Cure, they will cause him to faint,
and fall short of the blessed Prize. VIII. A Man that runs in a Race, if he
falls lame in the Way, is not likely to obtain the Prize. VIII. So that
Christian that falls lame (in a spiritual Sense) in the Race to Glory, is in
danger of miscarrying. Make strait Paths for your Feet, Heb. 12.13.
lest that which is lame be turned out of the Way, but rather let it be healed.
Some by Lameness understand Want of Sincerity, when there is a Work upon one
Faculty of the Soul, and not upon another; i. e. When the Conscience is
awakened, and the Understanding somewhat enlightened, and yet the Will and
Affection is for Sin and the World. This Man is lame, he is no sound Man, he
goes limping as it were along; he will not run long, as he runs not well.
Others by Lameness understand more directly, a wavering Mind about some main
Truths of the Gospel, or about the public and visible owning and professing of
Christ and the Gospel, in respect of those Truths that are most opposed by Men,
in the Day and Generation in which we live. Some are like those in the Prophet
Elijah's Time, they halt between two Opinions, 1 King. 18.21.
stand wavering between God and Baal, and know not which to cleave to, whether
to the Protestant, or Popish Religion. Now these are lame Professors; they are
corrupt, or not sincere; they will not, unless healed, hold out to the end of
the Race, but be turned out of the Way. IX. A Man that meets with bad Way in
running a Race, is thereby many times hard put to it, and in danger of losing
the Prize: As when he is forced to run up-hill a great while together, or meets
with a rough and untrodden Path, or is fain to run through a deep Mire, or a
very dirty Lane; this tries his Strength, Courage, and Resolution. IX. So when
a Christian meets with hard Things, or passes through great Difficulties in
his Way to Heaven, he is much put to it, viz. when he is forced to mount the
Hill of Opposition, and pass over the Style of carnal Reason, and through the
perilous Lane of Persecution, and Valley of the Shadow of Death; Being
accounted all the Day long as a Sheep for the Slaughter. Psalm. 23.4.
He then is tried to purpose. Many that have set out Heavenwards in a Day of
Peace and Prosperity, have in a Time of Tribulation and Persecution grown
weary, Mat. 13.21.
or being offended, have fallen away. X. Men that run in a Race, have many
Spectators, who steadfastly look upon them, to see how they run, and who will
win; some hoping one will gain the Prize, and others hoping the same Man will
lose it. X. So the Saints of God have many and eminent Spectators, who
steadfastly look upon them, with great Expectation, to see how they behave
themselves, whilst they run the Celestial Race, viz. God the Father, the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the holy Spirit, the one Almighty and Eternal God. Yea, and
all the holy Angels, on the same side, behold them with great Earnestness,
hoping they will hold out to the end, and obtain the Crown of everlasting
Glory, and to that purpose help and encourage them in their Course. On the
other side, there are all the Devils, or wicked Angels, who have their Eyes
upon them for evil, Zech. 3.1, 2.
who do not only hope and long to see them grow weary and faint in their Minds,
but also strive, as much as in them lies, to hinder and resist them in their
Race, so that they may lose the Prize. XI. Some Men run a great while, and
afterward grow weary, and slack their Pace, nay, quite give over running, and
so lose the Prize. XI. So some Professors seem to run well, to be zealous for
God and Religion a great while, it may be for many Years together; but when
Trouble arises, or Temptation seizes upon them, they grow weary, and
indifferent about these Matters, and (with Demas) cleave to this present evil
World, and so turn with the Dog to his Vomit again, and lose Eternal Life. XII.
Some Men that have run in a Race, have run for a great Prize, yea, for a Crown,
(as some have observed) and when they have won it, have been praised
exceedingly, it being esteemed a mighty Honor; it has not only enriched them,
but been to their great Renown and Glory. XII. So the Saints of God, who run
this heavenly Race, run for a great Prize, viz. a Crown of Glory. 1 Cor. 9.25.
And every Man that striveth for the Mastery, is temperate in all things: Now
they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. Be thou
faithful unto Death, Rev. 10.
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. I have (says Paul) fought the good
Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge will give me
at that Day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. This Prize will not only enrich the Soul that obtains it, but raise
his Renown and Glory to Eternity. He shall be honored of all, nay, he is the
Man whom the King delights to honor: Rev. 3.21.
They shall sit down with Christ on his Throne, etc. XIII. The Man that runs,
who resolves to win the Prize, breaks through all Difficulties, will not regard
any vain Allurements, but presses on with his utmost Strength, Celerity and
Speed imaginable; the Thoughts of the rich Prize animating his Mind, and
prompting him on so to do. XIII. So a true Christian, who resolves for Heaven,
he makes haste, he breaks through all Difficulties, and regards not the Golden
Balls Satan throws in his Path, viz. none of the vain Allurements of this
World, but with his uttermost Strength, Celerity, and Eagerness of Affection,
presses forward. I press toward the Mark, etc. Phil. 3.14. Mat. 7.13.
He strives to enter in at the strait Gate. He strives against Satan, against
the World, against Sin, strives in Reading, in Hearing, in Praying, being
greatly animated and encouraged thus to do, Heb. 11.
by seeing him who is invisible (to the natural Eye) and by having a Sight of
the excellent Reward, or that glorious Crown and Kingdom he knows he shall
receive, when he comes to the end of the Race. Metaphor. Disparity. SOme Men in
running a Race do their best; they do whatever in them lies to obtain the
Prize, but nevertheless lose it. BUt now a Christian, whoever he be, that does
his best, does what he can in all Uprightness of Heart, to believe, to close in
with Christ, to love, serve, and obey him, shall never miss of eternal Life.
Joh. 10.2. Romans 8.1.
Never was any Man damned, says a worthy Minister, that did what he could to
be saved. II. Many run in a Race, but one only obtains the Prize. II. But tho
Thousands run in this spiritual Race, yet they may all obtain the Prize.

Inferences.
WE may infer from hence, That the Work and Business of a Christian is hard and
difficult; Heaven is not obtained without running, wrestling, striving,
warring, etc.

2. That many Professors, who set out Heavenward, and run well a little while,
are not like notwithstanding to obtain eternal Life; Mat. 24.
it is only he that endures to the end, that shall be saved.

3. It may also inform us what the Reason is, that so many Persons faint or
grow weary in this spiritual Race. (1.) Their Weights which they have upon him
may occasion it. Or, (2.) The Way being bad, or up-hill. (3.) Their not being
temperate in all things. (4.) Their being diseased or lame. (5.) Satan
beguiling them with his Golden Balls. (6.) They being not thoroughly affected
with the Worth of that glorious Prize they run for. (7.) By means of their
trusting in their own Strength, etc. (8.) Their growing lazy, loving present
Ease, etc. (9.) And lastly, which is the Sum of all, their not being truly
converted, never effectually wrought upon by the Spirit of Grace.

4. It may serve to stir us all up to the greatest Diligence imaginable, to the
end. Whatsoever we meet with in the Way, Heaven will make amends for all.

Saints compared to Salt.
Mat. 5.13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but if the Salt have lost its Savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is henceforth good for nothing, but to be cast
out, and trodden under Foot of Men.
BElievers, as well as Ministers, are called by our Savior the Salt of the
Earth; for Christ preached this Sermon not only to his Apostles, but to all the
Disciples; it is not appropriated to Ministers alone, but to all Believers.

Why the Godly are and may be compared to Salt, is briefly opened in the
following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. SAlt is very profitable, it keeps and preserves Meat from
putrefying, which would soon stink, corrupt, and perish, was it not for it.
Salt (as one says) is the Blossom of Nature, it is mingled with all mixed
Bodies, and preserves them from Corruption. SO the Godly are most profitable in
all the Earth. 1. They keep the World from being totally corrupted by evil and
pestilent Errors and Heresy. (2.) From being spoiled by Profaneness and
Hellish Debauchery. They by their holy Lives, Doctrine, and gracious
Deportment, put a check to the over-spreading Wickedness of those Places where
they live. The World would soon grow much worse than it is, were it not for the
Saints and People of God; it would stink, and be so abominable in God's sight,
that he would not endure it any longer. And besides, God many times spares a
People, Family, and Nation, for the sake of the Righteous who dwell among them.
The Godly are the Interest of People and Nations, (as is elsewhere showed.) Had
there been but a little more of this spiritual Salt in Sodom, viz. but ten
righteous Ones, it might have continued to this day. And he said, O let not the
Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once, Genesis 18.32
Peradventure Ten shall be found there, etc. And He said, I will not destroy it
for Ten's sake. Nay, tho there was scarce ever a godly Soul in it, but
righteous Lot; yet what said the Angel? Haste thee, escape thither, for I
cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Genesis 19.22
As Zoar was saved for Lot's sake, so Sodom could not be set on fire, till he
was out of it. Again, was not Joseph the Interest of Potiphar's House? was not
his Master blessed for his sake? And was not Laban, and what he had, blessed
for Jacob's sake? And was not the whole House of Israel and Judah preserved and
saved from utter Ruin, for the sake of a holy Remnant that was amongst them.
^sa. 1.9.
Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a very small Remnant, we should have been
as Sodom, and been like unto Gomorrah. II. Salt draws putrefying Humors out of
Meat; it is of a purging and cleansing quality. II. So gracious Christians,
Blackwood
by their Doctrine and holy Example, and in particular, Preachers, draw out
Rottenness and Filth from the Hearts and Tongues of Men. III. Salt seasons
Meat, and makes it savoury. III. The godly Christian by his Wisdom seasons, the
Minds of good Men. Hence Sapientia is derived a Sapore, from Savor. The
Latins express wise and witty Speeches, pleasant Discourse, a good Grace in
speaking, and Salt, by the same Word. This agrees with that of the Apostle: Let
your Speech be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, Col. 4.6.
that ye may know how to answer every Man. IV. Salt is of a hot and fiery
Nature; being cast into the Fire, it sparkles, and burns furiously. IV. So
Christ's Disciples are by the Spirit made hot, fervent, and zealous for God,
and his Truth; yet this Heat should be mingled with Discretion, lest they fly
out, Luke 9.33.
as those did who called for Fire from Heaven. V. Salt stirs up Thirst. V. So
the good Example of Christians stir up others to thirst after Christ, and
heavenly Things. Blackwood
We should not so much look for Examples from others, as give Examples our
selves. VI. Salt makes Meat fit for Food, and meet to be received by such as
want it. VI. So by the Salt of a holy Conversation, or a good Life, in them
that preach and profess the Gospel, the Word becomes fit to be received. This
makes it relish, and this way a Preacher or Professor may be said to season his
own Doctrine. And on the other hand, how unsavory does that good Doctrine seem
to be, Romans 2.21, 22, 23, 24.
and what little Relish is there in it, that is preached by an unholy and
unsanctified Person? VII. Salt may lose its Savor, and become good for
nothing, but to be trodden under Feet of Men. It is not fit for the Land, nor
yet for the Dunghill, but Men cast it out. Naturalists tell us, that Salt
having lost its Savor, being laid upon Land, it causes Barrenness. VIII. So
Professors, if they lose their Savor, if they become vain, vicious, and carnal
in their Conversations, what are they good for? A Christian to turn an
Apostate; he that seemed once savoury and serious in his Words and Behavior, to
become filthy, unclean, proud, ambitious, covetous, etc. is one of the worst of
Men; such are fit for nothing but to be cast into Hell. Of these the Apostle
speaks, It is impossible to renew them again by Repentance, etc. Unsavory
Professors, Heb 6 4, 5, 6.
and wicked Apostates, tend to make the Church barren; they hinder the Increase
thereof.

Inferences.
HOw unsavory is the World! Sinners by Nature are loathsome and stinking in
God's Sight: Their Throats are like open Sepulchers. Romans 3.13


2. It shows Saints their Duty, which is to season others. They should season
the Place, Town, Family where they live: (1.) By good Doctrine. (2.) By a good
Conversation. (3.) By good Counsel. Jacob told his Sons, Simeon and Levi, Genesis
34.30
by their slaying the Sichemites, they made him to stink among the Inhabitants
of the Land. The Speech, as well as the Practice of Christians, should be a
seasoning and savoury Pattern, that it may administer Grace to the Hearers, and
Observers thereof.

3. O let it stir up every Christian, as well Preachers as others, to be
savoury! Ezekiel. 36.20. Romans 2.24
How can we season others, if the Salt has lost its Savor? Take heed of
scandalous Sins. (1.) By these the Name of the Lord is blasphemed. (2.)
Religion brought to Contempt and Reproach. (3.) The Hearts of all sincere Ones
greatly grieved. (4.) The Conversion of Sinners hindered. (5.) Men's Damnation
furthered. Hence says Christ, Woe be to the World because of Offenses.

But on the other hand, (1.) A holy and savoury Life makes a Man lift up his
Head with much Boldness, tho reproached: Whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass?
Or of whose hands have I received a Bribe? (2.) It tends to stop the Mouths of
the Wicked, 1 Samuel 12.3.
1 Pet. 3.16. (3.) It is many times not only a Means of Conviction, but
Conversion of others; nay, and of such as will not be won by the Word: 1 Pet.
3.1.

4. If Saints are the Salt of the Earth, and Interest of Nations, it shows the
Folly of those wicked Men, that strive to root them up, and turn them out of
the World.

5. Lastly; It may caution all that profess the Gospel, against Apostasy.
Remember Lot 's Wife. She for not being savoury, or for looking back, Luke 17
32 Genesis 19.26
was turned into a Pillar of Salt, nay, and into a standing Pillar, etc. May
not one Reason of it be this, viz. To show, that that very Example of God's
Severity upon her, might serve, or be sufficient to season all Christians, to
the end of the World, against Apostasy, or looking back?

Saints compared to Merchants.
Mat. 13.45, 46. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-Man,
seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great Price, etc.
Simile. Parallel. A Merchant is a great Dealer in the Things of the World. A
True Christian is a great Dealer in the Things of Heaven; his Affections are
set upon those Things that are above, Col. 3 1.
where Christ fitteth at the Righthand of God. II. The best and greatest
Merchants trade and deal in the richest and choicest Things on Earth, viz.
Jewels, Pearls, etc. II. The true Christian desires, and seeks after the
Riches of Grace, and Riches of Glory, called Pearls, which are of the greatest
Value and Worth, in which he may be most happy. He seeks for Pearls, but he
fixes most upon the Pearl of greatest Price, Jesus Christ. Mat. 13.46
III. Merchants in their first Trading are not so skilful in their Merchandise,
as they are afterward, when by commercing with other Merchants, they have
found out the true Worth of their Merchandise, and the manner of their
Dealings. III. So the true Christian, when he is first concerned in the Matters
of Christianity, is not so skilful as afterward, when he has by Christian
Converse found out the Worth of spiritual Things, and the Deceitfulness of
Satan, the World, and his own Heart, together with the Faithfulness of God. IV.
Merchants are most careful of their Concerns, when they have met with some
Loss; then they begin to fear they shall be undone, if such Losses increase
upon them. IV. Christians are most careful in their spiritual and eternal
Concernments, when they have met with some spiritual Losses, and are attended
with a holy Fear, lest eternal Ruin should follow. V. Merchants that deal in
precious Stones, are very careful lest they should be deceived with counterfeit
Stones, which are very like the true Ones. V. The true Christian is very
careful lest he should he deceived in his Spiritualities, viz. have a false
Faith, a false Repentance, and a false Obedience, and counterfeit Grace, which
may be very like the true. VI. Merchants trade to Foreign Parts or Countries;
their chief Concerns come from thence, whereby they grow rich. VI. True
Christians have their chief Concerns from Heaven, whereby they grow spiritually
rich. Heaven is called a far Country. Luke 19.
VII. Merchants have Correspondents in those Countries to which they trade, who
receive their Merchandise which they send, and make Returns of more gainful
Things. VII. The true Christian has his Correspondent in Heaven, who manageth
all his Concerns, viz. Jesus Christ the Righteous; He is their Advocate and
Intercessor, he appears in Heaven for them, Heb. 9.24. He receives their
Duties, and makes Returns of Mercy; He will receive their Tears of Godly
Sorrow, and return the Oil of Joy. Thou put my Tears into thy Bottle, etc.
VIII. Merchants are strongly engaged by the Profitableness of their Trade, to
follow it very close. O how diligent are Merchants, when they find Riches come
in apace upon them! VIII. So should it be with true Christians; the Gainfulness
of Godliness should engage them to follow the heavenly Trade more closely,
because it has the Promise of the Life that now is, 1 Timothy 4.8
and that which is to come; for Time and Eternity is little enough to make up
the Revenues of a godly Life; what Time cannot do, Eternity shall. IX.
Merchants are diligent in attending the Exchange, where they have an account of
their Foreign Affairs, and also an Opportunity to trade further, either in
selling or buying; and they that are negligent in this Matter, do give just
cause of Suspicion, that they will soon fail, and cease to be Merchants. IX.
True Christians do make Conscience, and exercise a godly Care in attending the
Meetings of the Saints, in their solemn Worshipping of God, whereby they get
Understanding and Knowledge of their Affairs in Heaven, as managed by Jesus
Christ. And there they have the Opportunity to put off spiritual Duties, Heb.
10.25
and receive heavenly Blessings. And such as do neglect this Practice, may
justly be suspected that in a little time they will cease to be Christians. X.
Merchants are very careful in keeping their Accounts; they are often in their
Compting-Houses. They who are wise, will be sure their Books are well kept, and
that their Accounts are in good Order, that so they may see a good End of their
Affairs, and enjoy Comfort in the Management thereof. X. True Christians are,
and ought to be very careful in keeping up their Closet and secret Communion
with God, by private Prayer, and Self-Examination, that so they may give their
Account up to God with Joy, and not with Grief; and may also enjoy divine
Consolation in the faithful Performance of the Duties of Christianity.

Saints compared to Pilgrims.
Heb. 11.13. They confessed, that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth.

1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly
Lusts, that war against the Spirit.


Note. The Saints of God are in these Scriptures compared to Strangers and
Pilgrims.

Simile. Parallel. A Pilgrim is one that travelleth from one Place to another,
and is far from home. THe Saints of God are spiritual Travelers, they are far
from their Father's House, Heaven is their everlasting Home, and thither they
are going. All the holy Patriarchs and Prophets confessed they were Pilgrims on
the Earth. Jacob said, The Days of the Years of my Pilgrimage, (rather than the
Days of my Life, Genesis 47 9.
) because of the Uncertainty of his Abode here, and in respect of his removing
from Place to Place. II. A Pilgrim that sets out in a long Journey, takes care
to free himself of all manner of Weights, and unnecessary Burdens, and
whatsoever else may tend to weary, or unfit him for his Journey. II. So the
spiritual Pilgrim, when he first sets out in the Ways of God, lays aside every
Weight, Heb. 12.1.
and the Sin that does so easily beset him. It greatly behooves him so to do;
for one Sin carried in the Bosom, or the inordinate Love to any Thing or Person
of this World, will prove of dreadful consequence to him. The young Man in the
Gospel had gone a great way, seemed to be a very zealous Pilgrim; but he had
such a cruel Burden upon his Shoulders, that he tired before he came to the
end of his Journey. Covetousness, or an unsatisfied Desire after the Things of
this World, is compared to a Burden, or Load of thick Clay: Who enlarges his
Desires as Hell, and cannot be satisfied, etc. Woe to him that increases that
which is not his; how long? Hab. 2.5, 6
And to him that ladeth himself with thick Clay. Would not a Man that has a
long Journey to go, be laughed at, should he carry with him a heavy Burden of
Dirt and Rubbish? Such Fools are many Professors. See Runner. III. A Pilgrim in
his Travels goes up-hill and down-hill; sometimes he meets with good Way, and
sometimes with bad Way: Sometimes he passes over Styles, and through dirty
Lanes; and then again through green Fields and pleasant Pastures, and
delightful Paths, till he comes to his desired Place. III. So the Pilgrim that
would travel to the New Jerusalem, meets with various Ways and Passages. 1. He
must go out of the horrible Pit of Profaneness; that is Work enough for the
first Day's Journey. 2. Through the Brook of sincere Repentance, or true
Contrition, (for every one that leaves open Profaneness, is not truly
penitent.) 3. Down the Valley of Self-denial, a very difficult Passage. 4. Over
the Mountains of Opposition; for the Devil and all will straitway make head
against him. 5. Over the Style of carnal Reason: Immediately I consulted not
with Flesh and Blood. 6. Into the pleasant Ways of the New Covenant. 7. So upon
the Top of the Rock of Ages, and there he may take a Prospect of his own
Country. IV. A Pilgrim, that has a long and difficult Way to travel, is very
thoughtful how to find the right Way, being a Stranger in that Country through
which he must pass. And besides, being told there are many cross Ways and
Turnings, and hard difficult Passages to find, he takes care therefore to get a
good and skilful Guide, lest he should lose his Way. IV. So the spiritual
Pilgrim spares no Cost, omits no Study, to get the best Information imaginable,
of the ready Way to the Land of Promise. He cease not to enquire of such as
pretend themselves to be Guides, and such as know the Way; but finding them to
be short-fighted, and ignorant of the Way themselves, he seeks further. And as
he goes along, one cries, This is the Way, Mat. 24.23
another, That. Some bid him believe as the Church believes, and he shall never
go astray. Others bid him co^form to the Laws of Men, and do whatever the
Supreme Authority of the Nation does enjoin in Matters of Faith and Religion.
Others call upon him to be led wholly by the Light of his Conscience, and that
will bring him unto the Land of Promise, the Place he longs for. And at last he
meets with another, that seems yet to differ from them all, and greatly to
slight and condemn one grand Fundamental God's Word holds forth, under
plausible Pretenses. He cries up Holiness, and just Living, which all confess
is required; but in the mean time strives to persuade him to cast off the
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and trust to his own Righteousness, or to refined
Morality, rendering Faith in Christ crucified little more than a Fancy; and that
the main Design of Christ in coming into the World was, only to be a Pattern of
Holiness and Humility. But he perceiving the Danger great upon this account,
and that none of these Pretenders could give any convincing Evidence why they
should be believed, and their Counsel followed, above others, he rejected all
their Directions, and resolved to be led by none of them, further than their
Doctrine agreed with a certain Directory, which through the Grace of God he
has obtained, namely, the written Word of God; and that tells him plainly, The
Way is Christ, viz. Christ, as a Priest, dying for him, to appease the Wrath of
God, Joh. 14.6.
and make Atonement for his Sin, fulfilling the Law, and bringing in
everlasting Righteousness. Christ, as a King, to subdue his Sin, and to rule
and reign over him, Dan. 9.24.
according to those blessed and wholesome Laws, Ordinances, and Institutions,
given forth by him, and left in his Word. Christ, as a Prophet, to teach and
instruct him. Christ, as a holy Pattern and Example, to imitate and follow, so
far as by the help of Grace he is able. [See Surety, Sin a Debt, The Word
compared to Light, The Spirit to a Teacher and Guide.] He has learned of
Christ to be holy, and is helped therein by the Holy Ghost to excel his
Neighbor, and denies all his Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts; and yet casts
himself only on Christ, relying upon his Merits, laboring to be like him in
all things, as the Apostle observes: 1 John 3.3.
He that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure. He lets
his Sins go, nay, loathes that which is evil; he lives a mortified Life unto the
World, and yet trusts not to any thing that he has done, or can do, for
eternal Life, Acts 4.12.
knowing there is no Salvation but by Christ alone. He is as godly as any
Socinian in the World, and yet magnifies the Riches of God's Grace, and
Christ's Merits, so as not to expect Justification any other way. V. A Pilgrim
often meets with Trouble, and great Difficulties in his Way, by Winds, Storms,
and Tempests, hard Weather, Cold, Frost and Snow, deep and bad Ways, and many
Dangers, which he narrowly escapes. V. So the spiritual Pilgrim is also exposed
to many Difficulties in his Journey Heaven-wards. Terrible Storms sometimes
arise, Winds of Persecution and Temptation blow so hard, that he is scarce able
to stand upon his Legs. Psalm. 73.2.
My Feet were almost gone, my Steps had well nigh slipped, etc. He is often beset
with Crosses and Afflictions, that he is as a Man in the Mire, and can hardly
get out. VI. A Pilgrim is a Stranger in the Country through which he passes;
and being not known, he is much gazed on, and sometimes abused by the rude
Rabble; all which he takes with patience, and makes no resistance. VI. So the
Godly are Strangers in this World: -- And confessed, Heb. 11.13
that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth. David breaks forth, Hold
not thy peace at my Tears, Psalm. 39.12
for I am a Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner, as all my Fathers were. Hence
they are made oftentimes a Gazing-stock to Men, by Reproaches and Afflictions.
Heb. 10.33.
And how grievously have they been abused by the wicked Rabble of the Earth, as
Jesus Christ himself testifies: If ye were of the World, the World would love
its own; Joh. 15.19, 22.
but because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you. All these things will they do unto you, because
they know not him that sent me. VII. A Pilgrim is a Man that stays not long
in a Place where he comes; he is but a Sojourner for a Night, and is gone; his
Heart is upon his Journey. VII. So the Saints of God have here no continuing
City, but seek one to come. Heb 13 14
This is not their Rest; their Abode is here but as in a strange Land, and
therefore they go forth on their spiritual Progress toward that City, Heb.
11.9, 10.
that has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. VIII. A Pilgrim is not
always in the same good Disposition of Body and Mind, fit and necessary for his
Journey, but sometimes may be distempered, or grow dull and heavy, and out of
Heart, upon the account of the great Difficulties that attend him, which when
he is delivered and eased of, it much rejoiceth his Heart. VIII. So a Saint is
often attended with spiritual Distempers; his Heart is out of Frame, and in a
very unfit Disposition for any Duty; the Troubles and Encumbrances of this Life
dull and deaden his servent Desires after God, and make him go on heavily, nay,
ready to tire him, and cause him to faint in his Mind: yet by the help of the
Spirit, and serious Meditations of the Excellency of the Country to which he is
traveling, he is soon quickened again, and gets fresh Strength and Resolution.
He expostulateth the Case with himself after this manner: Shall wicked Men
pursue after the Vanities of this World with such Pains and Unweariedness! and
shall I be ready to faint, that have Assurance of a Crown of Glory at the end
of my Journey! O how disproportionable are their Labors to their Gains! Blush,
O my Soul, at thy own Neglects! and be astonished, either at their Diligence,
or at thy own Sloth! Do they labor in the Fire for very Vanity? and will thou
show such a sottish, dead, and unbelieving Frame of Heart, as not to pursue
with more Zeal and Diligence after that glorious Country, and endless Felicity
before thee? Is not Heaven worth striving for, and traveling to? IX. A Pilgrim
is glad when he meets with good Company in the Way, especially other Pilgrims,
such as are traveling to the same Place to which he is going himself. What is
more desirable to a Traveller, than a faithful Friend and Companion? This makes
(says one) evil things little, and good things great; by this sweet Society
our Griefs are divided, and all our Joys are doubled. What Calamity is not
intolerable, without a Friend, (a Companion)? And what Society is not
ungrateful, if we have none to share with us in it? We suffer not so much, when
we have some to condole and suffer with us; and we rejoice the more, when our
Felicity gives a pleasure not only to our selves, but to others also. If
Solitude, and Want of Company, be so horrid, so dreadful a thing, it is not to
be understood of the Want of Men, but of the Want of Friends, (meet Company)
for it is a good Solitude, not to dwell with those that do not love us; and a
Man would choose such a Hermitage, where he might not be troubled with them who
bear no benevolous Affection to him. But for my part, I cannot think that Man
to be happy, which has no Friend to participate in his Pleasures. A Man may
more easily bear the hardest Calamity with his Friend, than the greatest
Felicity alone, etc. IX. So a Saint, or spiritual Pilgrim, is glad when he
meets with good and gracious Companions in his Journey to the Land of Promise.
They that fear thee, Psalm. 119.74.
will be glad when they see me, because I have hoped in thy Word. I am a
Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. What
sweet Fellowship have God's Children one with another! How much does their
heavenly Converse and Communion refresh and cheer each others Hearts, under all
their Sufferings and Hardships, which they meet with in their spiritual
Pilgrimage? We took sweet Counsel together, Psalm. 55.4.
and walked unto the House of God in Company. If earthly Society be so
desirable, how pleasant is the Society of Saints, or Communion with those we
shall dwell with for ever! Christian Pilgrims have great Advantage in their
Journey, by traveling together. If the one be poor, and the other rich, the
one relieves his Fellow; or if the one be weak, and the other strong, the one
can take the other by the hand, and afford some help to him, when they meet
with bad Way, or go up-hill. Eccles 4.9, 10.
Two (says Solomon) are better than one; for if they fall, the one will help
up his Fellow. Most Travelers have found by Experience, how comfortable it is
to have good Company in a long Journey. They very much strengthen and encourage
each other, and by this means the Way seems not so long and tedious, as
otherwise it would. They will, if one be sad or cast down, enquire what the
matter is, and often ask how each other do; and thus it is with Believers.
Paul's great care was, to know the State of the Saints to whom he wrote, and
with whom he conversed. X. A Pilgrim sometimes meets with Enemies, such as
strive to persuade him to go back, telling him, the Danger would be great, and
the Difficulty such, that the Advantage he expects at the end of his Journey to
receive, would not make a Recompense for his Pains and Labor. X. So a
spiritual Pilgrim meets with diverse Enemies in his Journey toward Heaven, who
strive to discourage him, and turn him back, Number. 6.14
like as the evil Spies served the Children of Israel. Time would fail me to
tell you all their Names, nevertheless I shall discover some of these Enemies
to you, that so you who are bound for the holy Land, may avoid the pernicious
Counsel they frequently give, and be strengthened against the Discouragements
they lay in the way of true Piety.

1. The first is Fear. This is a very dangerous Enemy; he says, there is a
Lion in the Way, a Lion in the Streets, and many other evil Beasts, who will
devour him, and tear him in pieces, if he proceed on in his intended Journey.
There we saw the Sons of Anak, the Sons of the Giants, etc.

2. The second is Unbelief: I shall now one day perish by the Hands of Saul. 1 Samuel 27.1
This Adversary suggesteth to the Soul, That it is doubtful whether there is
any such glorious Land, or heavenly Country that he talks of, or no: or if
there be, yet (says he) it is not possible for you to find it; and that
certainly you will fall short of it, and faint, before you come to the end of
your Journey; your Sins, says he, are so great, that God will not forgive them.

3. The third is Sloth, a lazy Companion, that would have him sleep and slumber
away his precious Time, and not trouble his Head with Religion, but please his
sensual Appetite, telling him, that Heaven may be had with good Wishes, and
formal Prayer, by crying, Lord, have mercy upon us, and, Christ, have mercy
upon us, etc. And if he have but Time, a little before he breaths out his last,
on a Deathbed, but to cry unto God after this manner, it will be sufficient.
Tho God's Word says, The Soul that sins, it shall die. And, Except a Man be
born again, Ezekiel 18. Joh. 3.3. Heb. 12.
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And, Without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord. It is only a holy Life, that is attended with a happy Death.

4. The fourth is one worldly-wise, a Person much in request in these Days,
whose Counsel many are ready to follow. What! says he, art thou such a Fool,
to expose thy self to such great Sorrow and Suffering for Heaven, when thou
may have it without half the Ado. Pity thy Wife and Children, save thy self
out of a Prison, and hazard not thy Estate: For my part, I came into the World
raw, and I will not go out roasted; I will be of that Religion that is in
fashion, and set up by the Supreme Law of the Nation. Are you wiser than every
Body? You meddle with Things too high for you, etc. Christ says, Whosoever
comes after me, Mat. 16.24, 25.
and does not deny himself, and take up his Cross, cannot be my Disciple; and
that his Saints in the World shall have Tribulation. But this Man would fain
make the Cross of Christ to cease. Come Popery, and what will, by this Argument
he must and will conform to it; he will be of that Religion that is uppermost.
And thus he renders the Apostles and Primitive Christians, and all the holy
Martyrs, Fools and Fanatics, nay, worse, Rebels, because they did not conform
to the Religion of their Superiors.

5. The fifth Enemy is one Moralist, a very honest Man, but that Ignorance and
Blindness of Mind has got such Rule in him. He says, It is sufficient, and no
more is required of us, but to do as we would be done unto, and pay every Man
his own: and that if a Man can but get out of the deep Ditch of Sensuality, and
fleshly Debauchery, and lead a spotless Life toward Man, he need not doubt of
Heaven, nor trouble himself about Faith in Christ, and Regeneration. Tho our
Savior expressly says, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20.
ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. And Paul says, That he
accounted his own Righteousness, and all other external Privileges and
Seize, (that he once thought Gain to him) but Dung, for the Excellency of
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2.
and that he desired nothing more, than to know Chtist, and him crucified. If a
Man could be saved by his own Righteousness, Christ came into the World, and
died in vain; and the Law, which was a perfect Rule of Righteousness, had then
been sufficient to bring Men to Heaven: Besides, how do we come to be delivered
from the Curse, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Book of the Law, to do them?

6. The sixth Adversary is Presumption, a bold confident Fellow, that cries,
Cast your self upon the Mercy of God in Christ, the Lord Jesus died for
Sinners; trouble your Head no more, you shall be saved. Tho I am a Sinner, and
am now and then drunk, and let fly an Oath sometimes before I am aware, yet I
doubt not but it will go well with me; my Heart is good, and Christ died for
such as I am. This Man sins because Grace has abounded, and forgets that
Christ came to save Men from their Sins, and not in their Sins; and that that
Faith that justifies, Acts 15.9. 1 John 3.3.
is attended with good Fruits, and purifieth the Heart and Life of him that
obtains it.

7. The seventh Enemy is Vainglory. If Satan cannot ensnare the Soul by any of
the other Ways, he strives to puff it up with Pride and Self-conceit. Now
Vainglory is a deadly Enemy, therefore take heed of him. It becomes Christians
to be lowly-minded: Learn of me (says Christ) for I am meek and lowly in
Heart; Mat. 11.28, 29.
and ye shall find Rest to your Souls.

XI. A Pilgrim is glad when he comes at last to his desired Place, and forgets
all his former Trouble and Afflictions, which attended him in his Way. XI. So a
Saint, when he comes to Heaven, or has obtained the End of his Hope, 1 Pet.
1.9.
viz. the Salvation of his Soul, greatly rejoices, and forgets all the Sorrow
and Trouble he met with in this World. They shall return, and come to Zion with
Songs, Isa. 35.10. Isa. 51.11.
everlasting Joy shall be upon their Heads. They shall obtain Joy and Gladness,
and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away.

Inferences.
THis may serve to inform God's People, what their State and Condition is, and
will be, whilst they remain in this World. This is not your Rest, etc. Mic.
2.10. Heb. 13.14
Here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

2. Therefore it sharply reprehends those Christians, that settle themselves as
Inhabitants and Dwellers here below, like other People. Alas! Sirs, ye forget
that ye are Strangers and Pilgrims, and but Sojourners as it were for a Night.
Why do ye seek great Things for your selves, and seem to be so much taken with
the Pleasures and Profits of this Life? Ye are not of this World. Let such as
regard no higher things, Joh. 15.19
take their Fill here, and delight themselves in their Portion, for it is all
the Good they are ever like to have; but let them remember those dismal Sayings
of our blessed Savior: Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your
Consolation; Luke 6.24, 25, 26.
woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now,
for ye shall mourn and weep; woe unto you that all Men speak well of, etc.

Saints compared to Palm Trees.
Psalm. 92.12. The Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree, etc.

Cant. 7.7. This thy Stature is like a Palm Tree, etc.

Verse 8. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, etc.


THe Palm Tree and Date-Tree is one and the same Tree, called in Hebrew Thamar,
in Greek Phoenix.

Why the Saints and People of God are compared to the Palm Tree, will appear in
the following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Palm Tree is an excellent Tree, amiable to look upon;
it is very tall, and all its Branches shoot upwards; there are none grow out of
the Side, as in other Trees. THe Righteous, who are compared to a Palm Tree,
are a choice and excellent People; their Affections, like Branches, ascend,
they are set upon Things above; they grow Heavenward. Col. 3 1.2.
They do not shoot out their Branches (as I may say) this way, and that way, to
the World; they grow high in Grace, and in Communion with God. II. The
Palm Tree grows in the purest Soil, it will not grow in filthy Places, it loves
to spread forth its Roots by a River; it loves not dungy Soil, as other Trees
do. II. The Righteous flourish best in a pure Soil, in a Land where the Gospel
is preached in its purity. They are planted in a choice Garden, Christ's
blessed Vineyard, in the Courts of the Lord's House, as it follows in the
Psalm. Psalm. 92.13, 14. 1 John 5.19.
They are transplanted out of, and love not the polluted and idolatrous World,
that lies in Wickedness, which smells like a Dunghill, but in the Garden of
God. III. The Palm is an even and very strait Tree, and grows upright. Hence
it is said of Idols, that they are upright like the Palm Tree. III. The Saints
of God are a People sincere, of an upright Heart, and of an upright
Conversation: for tho naturally they are rough, knotty, and crooked, like
others; yet Grace works out, or cuts off that Crookedness, Uncomeliness, or
Unevenness that naturally was in them. IV. The Palm Tree, when young, is a very
weak Plant; it is so feeble, that it can hardly stand of it self. And therefore
Pliny says, they usually plant three or four of them together, and by that
means they strengthen one another, and stand the faster. IV. The Saints of God,
when first converted, are usually weak and feeble, and hardly able to stand of
themselves, without the help and support of their Brethren; but when planted
together in God's Vineyard, they thrive greatly, confirming and strengthening
one another, which shows the Excellency of Christian Communion and Fellowship.
Isa. 35.3.
Strengthen ye the weak Hands, and confirm the feeble Knees. -- Support the
Weak. V. The Palm Trees (Naturalists tell us) by growing together, do join,
clasp, and grow one to the other, and by that means grow very strong, and
flourish exceedingly. V. The Saints and People of God, by being planted
together in Gospel-Fellowship and Communion, do (or ought so to) join, clasp,
and cleave in Love and Affection one to another, as to become as it were all
but one Tree; and hereby they are made very strong, and flourish exceedingly.
VI. The Palm Tree is one of those Trees that are always green, green in Winter,
as well as in Summer; it does not cast its Leaves, nor fade, as the expression
in Psalm. 1.3. VI. The Godly are compared to Trees that are always green.
Greenness is caused from the abundance of Sap that flows from the Root. Luk
23.31.
Christ is called a green Tree. Greenness, as applied to the Godly, notes their
abounding in inward Grace and Holiness from the Root Christ. Psalm. 52.14.
I am (says David) as a green Olive Tree in the House of the Lord. Saints are
said to be fed in green Pastures, that is, such Pastures as afford precious and
pleasant Food, as also Plenty. Sincere Christians continually abide green and
flourishing; they are like Trees planted by the Riverside, that bring forth
Fruit in their Season; their Leaf shall not wither. They hold up their
Profession, not only in the Summer of Prosperity; but in the very Winter of
Adversity, and maintain their Virtue and Beauty in the hardest Time. Psalm. 92.14
They shall (says David) still bring Fruit in old Age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. VII. The Palm Tree does not only keep up its Greenness, and the
Beauty of its Leaves, but it is a Tree that is full of Fruit, and that good
Fruit, pleasant Fruit, sweet Fruit, Fruit that is excellent Cordial, which you
know Dates are. Surely, says Pliny, new Dates, as they come from the Tree, are
so exceeding pleasant and delicious, that a Man can hardly forbear, and make an
end in good time. VII. The Righteous are a People that have not only the
Greenness of Profession, and the Greenness of Grace, and inward Virtue in their
Hearts, but also the Fruit of a good Life. Their Conversation is full of good
Fruit; the Fruit of Righteousness is pleasant Fruit, choice and precious Fruit;
no Fruit is like the Fruit of the Spirit, which is Love, Joy, Peace, Gal 5.22.
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, etc. Saints are very fruitful
Trees; they may fitly in this respect be compared to the Palm Tree. VIII. The
Palm Tree will thrive under heavy Pressures or Weights that are hanged upon it.
The Palm Tree, says Mr. Caryl, does grow up, when it is most pressed down. When
there are the heaviest Weights hung upon it, then it grows highest; when it is
(as it were) kept down, the Burdens that are upon it cannot make it bow, nor
grow crooked. This Tree, says Ainsworth, tho pressed, yet it endures and
prospers. It is a Tree of an excellent Nature. VIII. Psalm 92.12
Thus the Righteous flourish like the Palm Tree, they grow and increase in
Grace and Holiness, tho under great Burdens and Pressures. The Devil strives
to press them down, Sin endeavors to press them down, wicked Men endeavor to
press them down, and yet they thrive and grow exceedingly: The Righteous shall
hold on his Way, and he that has clean Hands shall grow stronger and stronger.
It Is said of the People of Israel, Exodus 1.11, 12.
when Pharaoh put heavy Weights upon them, when he set Taskmasters to afflict
them with their Burdens, the more he afflicted them, the more they multiplied.
Persecution never does godly Christians any harm; they grow the more, not only
in Number, but in Goodness. It refines and purifies them, it purges and makes
them white; they grow in Faith, in Patience. Tribulation works Patience, Romans
5.4, 5.
and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope. Here is a growing and
flourishing, like the Palm Tree, under heavy Pressures and Afflictions. They
get more Knowledge also of their own Hearts, and more Acquaintance and Communion
with God; the Spirit of Grace and Glory rests upon such. And thus the
Righteous flourish like the Palm Tree, under Weights and heavy Pressures of
Afflictions. IX. The Branches of the Palm Tree were used as Signs of Victory
and Rejoicing, when the People would express their great Joy. When they beheld
Christ riding triumphantly to Jerusalem, Joh. 12.
they cut down Palm-Branches, etc. Also the Hundred Forty Four Thousand, Rev.
7.9.
who were redeemed from the Earth, that were clothed in white, are said to
have Palms in their hands. IX. Saints are as Palm-Branches in Christ's hand, as
a Sign of that glorious Victory he has obtained over Sin, Satan, the World,
Death, Hell, and Wrath, and all other Enemies whatsoever. Also (as one
observes) their being compared to the Palm Tree, may signify that victorious
and triumphant State, and eternal Joy, which they shall obtain, after the heavy
Pressures, Sorrows, and Afflictions, that attend them in this World, are ended.

Inferences.
THis shows forth the Excellency of true Grace; such is its rare Nature, that
it causes the Soul that receives it to grow like a Palm Tree.

2. God hereby outwits the Mighty. There is no Counsel against the Lord. The
Ungodly hang their Weights upon Christ's Palm Trees, and what is their Intent
and Purpose in so doing, you may read in the Scriptures: Come on, says
Pharaoh, let us deal wisely with them, how was that? To lay Weights and
Burdens upon them: To what end? Lest they should multiply. They resolved to
keep them down, they strove to hinder their Growth, they designed to spoil
their Multiplying, and their Growth in Number, as also in Grace and Virtue; but
they were like the Palm Tree, the more they were oppressed, the more they grew
and multiplied. That way Men think to hinder the Truth, to obstruct the Gospel
from flourishing; that way God takes to make it spread and flourish the more.
Those things that happened to the Apostles, to hinder their Ministry, God made
for the furtherance of the Gospel.

3. This should raise up our Hearts to magnify the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
of God, who overrules things thus in the World; who turns that for Good, which
wicked Men design for the great Hurt of his poor People. This also comes from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working. He
makes the Righteous to flourish like the Palm Tree, to grow upwards, by those
Ways and Means which one would think would bring them quite down, and utterly
spoil their growing. Like as when we see the Corn laid at, and thresh'd with a
Flail, Caryl.
one would think there were great Hurt intended to the Corn, but it is only to
separate it from the Straw and Chaff, that it may appear in its own Beauty and
Usefulness: So the Lord has his Flail, to separate the Chaff from the Wheat.
Those Acts of Providence, which seem to be for their Hurt and Undoing, when
they are thresh'd as it were by the World, are only to make them appear what
they are. But thus it fares not with the Wicked, who flourish not like the
Palm Tree, but as the Grass they pass away.

4. This may animate the Righteous, and greatly encourage them against
Persecution. Why should they fear that which God turns to their great
Advantage? O let us labor to improve Burdens, Afflictions, and heavy
Pressures, to the end God designs them, and never more fear the worst that Men
can do unto us. The Righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree.

5. Let us labor for Union, and strengthen one another, combine as one Man in
the Way of Holiness and Christian Affection, that so thereby we may, like the
tender Plants of the Palm Tree, get Strength, and stand when the Wind blows
hardest, and the Storms of the Ungodly rise upon us.

6. This may be also Matter of Trial to us; we hereby may try our selves, and
try our Graces. How is it with you (Sirs) under Sufferings? Do you grow and
flourish the more? If you wither and decay in Grace, in a Day of Trial, or when
you are under Pressures and Afflictions, and cannot bear hard Things for
Christ's sake, it clearly shows you are none of God's Palm Trees.

Saints compared to Wheat.
Mat. 13.27, 28. Let both grow together till Harvest, etc.

Verse 30. But gather the Wheat into my Barn.


THe Saints of God are in this Parable compared to Wheat, or good Seed, but the
Wicked to Tares, and the End of the World to the Harvest. Why Believers are
compared to Wheat, will appear by what follows.

Metaphor. Parallel. Wheat is a precious Sort of Grain, the best of Grain. THe
Saints of God are a choice People, the best of Men. Prove. 12.26.
The Righteous are more excellent than their Neighbors. II. Wheat is a very
profitable Sort of Grain, it tends to the enriching the Husbandman; he
accounts it his Treasure. II. The Saints are a People profitable to the World
many ways. [See Salt.] Nay, Mat. 3.17.
and God accounts them his peculiar Treasure. III. Wheat will abide and live in
the sharpest Winter, which some other Seed will not. III. So sincere Souls will
endure the sharpest Trials. They will live in the Wintertime of the Church,
when others fall off, wither, die away, and come to nothing. IV. Wheat is a
small S^ed, and when it is first sown, it lies hid; in Winter it seems as if it
were quite dead; but when the Spring comes, it sweetly revives again, and
flourishes exceedingly. IV. The Godly are, in comparison of the World, a small
People, Luke 12.32.
called a little Flock; and they lie hid as it were, scarcely seeming to be a
People, whilst the Winter of Persecution and Trouble, under the four Monarchs
of the World, predominate: Cant. 2.11
But when the Winter is past, and the Springtime of the Church shall come,
they shall revive, and cover the Earth, as Wheat does the Land where it is
sown. Light is sown for the Righteous, Prove. 4.18
and Joy for the Upright in Heart. The Growth of Saints in Times of Temptation
does not always so visibly appear. They are like Corn sown, that lies under the
Clods; but when they have taken sweet Root, they soon appear to revive, and
sprout forth like Wheat, by means of the Dew of Grace, and sweet Rays of the
Sun of Righteousness. They shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, Hos.
14.7.
and the Scent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon. V. An Ear of Wheat that
is full of Corn, always hangs downs its Head, when that which is light and
empty stands upright. V. So the Saints of God, or all sincere Souls, that have
much Grace, are humble Ones, they hang down their Heads as it were, are
clothed with Humility, when Hypocrites, or empty Professors, are puffed up.
Abraham calls himself but Dust and Ashes; David, a Worm and no Man; Job abhors
himself, as a nothing Creature; Paul says, he was the least of all Saints: Job
42.6. Ephesians. 8.3.
When the empty Hypocrite cries out, Lord, I thank thee, I am not as other Men.
VI. Wheat needs Weeding. Weeds many times come up with it, and hinder its
Growth. VI. So the Saints and People of God need weeding. Weeds of Corruption
often spring up, and trouble them, which did not God, the good Husbandman,
Heb. 12.15
root out and destroy, would quite spoil his choicest Wheat. VII. Wheat has,
it is observed, sometimes Tares amongst it, which the Husbandman sees good to
let alone till the Harvest, lest in plucking them out some of the Wheat be
pulled up with them. VII. The Field is the World, Mat. 13.38.
where the Saints of God, who are compared to Wheat, grow, ( i. e. live) and
much Tares grow up or live among them, in every Nation, City, and Town. And it
is the pleasure of God, that they should be let alone, or suff^red to grow
together in the World, that common Field, tho not in the Church. And therefore
were the People of God such as the wicked Persecutor calls them, viz. Tares,
Heretics, the Offscouring of the World; yet it is directly contrary to the
Mind of God, that they should be rooted up, and turned out of the Earth. Let
both grow together (says the Husbandman) till Harvest. VIII. Wheat has a
considerable Time to ripen, it must have the former and latter Rain; but when
it is ripe, it is severed from the Tares, and gathered into the Barn. VIII. So
the People of God are not so soon as they spring up in Grace, ripe for God's
Garner, but they need some Time before they are fit for cutting down by Death.
The former and latter Rain of the Spirit must fall upon them; they ripen
gradually. And when the Harvest comes, to wit, the End of the World, Mat.
13.41, 42.
then the Saints shall be severed from the Wicked, the Good come from the Bad,
the Holy from the Vile, like as Wheat is severed from the Tares: and those that
appear pure Grain, shall be gathered into God's Garner, i. e. his blessed
Kingdom; and the Wicked, like Tares, shall be bound in Bundles, and cast into
Hell, to be burned in unquenchable Fire. IX. Wheat, when it is sown, dies, and
rises again; it rises Wheat, and the same Wheat, tho it rises more glorious
than it seemed to be when sown. IX. So the Saints of God die, like good Seed
are sown in the Earth, and shall rise again, 1 Cor. 15.
the same Body shall rise again; as every Seed has his own Body, so shall
every Saint in the Day of the Resurrection have his own Body, tho his Body
shall rise more glorious than it was before. The Apostle says, That which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, because it is sown a natural
Body, 1 Cor. 15.38, 42, 43.
it is raised a spiritual; it is sown in Corruption, but is raised in
Incorruption; it is sown in Dishonor, and raised in Glory; it is sown in
Weakness, it is raised in Power. X. Wheat is threshed by the Husbandman, to
sever the Corn from the Straw and Chaff. X. So God, to sever the Chaff of
corrupt and drossy Professors, from the pure Grain, viz. sincere Saints, leaves
the Wicked as it were to thresh his People; God's People are often under the
Flail of Persecution.

Inferences.
THis may serve to reprove the bloody Persecutors of God's People, who would
fain pluck up the Saints as Tares; but let them take heed. If God would not
have many Tares plucked up, lest some of the Wheat be plucked up with them,
what will become of them, who instead of plucking the wicked Tares (that
perhaps deserve the greatest Severity, as being guilty of innocent Blood)
connive at such, and let them alone, having much Favor for them) and set
themselves wholly against God's faithful and innocent People? What unwearied
Endeavors have been used, to destroy and root out the Godly?

2. It may be a Caution to all to take heed how they persecute Men for
Conscience sake; for who can infallibly know such as fear not God, nor belong
to him, from such as are his People, and do in Truth fear Him? They had better
let many Tares, many Heretics alone, than through Ignorance destroy one godly
and sincere Person.

3. It may also be for Trial: Are you Wheat or Tares? Do you bring Glory to
God, and Profit to your Neighbors? Do you faithfully, like holy Job, adhere to
the Lord, and cleave to him, although he should please to lay you under slaying
Dispensations? Do you endure patiently under the Cross, abide the Trial of cold
winterly Blasts of Persecution? Wheat (you hear) will endure sharp Frosts. The
honest-hearted Professor brings forth Fruit with Patience. Mat. 13.


4. Lastly; It affords Comfort to the Godly; for tho they appear as dead and
withered, or are under many seeming Decays, yet they shall revive again, like
Corn. And although they, like Seed or Grain, are laid in the Earth, and turn to
Corruption; yet they shall have a blessed Resurrection at the last Day, and be
raised in Power and Glory, and in Incorruption. Death does the Body of a godly
Man no Injury. Except a Seed of Corn fall to the Ground, it abides alone; but
if it die, it brings forth much Fruit.

Saints compared to Light.
Mat. 5.14. Ye are the Light of the World; a City that is set on a Hill cannot
be hid.
IN this Metaphor the Lord Jesus commends unto us an holy Duty, viz. to shine
before others in a holy Life and Doctrine. Saints should be like John Baptist,
burning and shining Lights.

1. Light is taken properly. 2. Metaphorically.
1. Properly, for that noble Quality that enlightens the World. Lux, claritas
and splendour in corpore luminoso, vel extra, a corpore luminoso exiens, quae
and Lumen dicitur. God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light, etc.

2. Metaphorically, it is put for several Things. See the First Volume, Book 3.
p. 1, 2. Ye are the Light of the World, etc. Joh. 1.9. Mat. 4.2.
Principally Christ himself is the Light of the World, the great Light that
gives Light to the other Luminaries. The Saints receive Light from Christ, as
the Moon receives her Light from the Sun, and thereby gives Light to the World
in the Night. The Saints are but small Lights, hence called Stars, who give but
little Light in comparison of the Sun; or they are rather as Candles, which God
has lighted and set up.

Metaphor. Parallel. LIght discovers and makes manifest the Nature of Things to
Men; it has a directive Quality in it, Men thereby know which way to go; it
directs Travelers in their Way. SO the Saints of God, by their holy Life and
Doctrine, reveal and make manifest, not only the Works of Darkness, but also
the Excellency of Christ, Grace, and Divine Things to Men; nay, Ephesians. 3.10.
the holy Angels are said to know many Things by the Church. The Saints, by
their holy Lives and Doctrines, teach and dlrect others how to live, how to
behave themselves toward God, and toward Men. II. Light shines forth, and is
visible to all; every one that has Eyes may see the Light. A Candle should not
be lighted, and put under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that it may give
Light to all that are in the House. II. So the Saints should let their good
Works appear to all. Mat. 5.16.
Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Tho the Saints should do nothing
through Vainglory, i. e. to be seen of Men; yet their good Works, and holy
Walkings should be so done, that others should see it. III. It is a great Mercy
and Blessing to see the Light; Light is sweet, etc. Light drives back, or
expells Darkness. III. So it is a great Blessing to enjoy the Company of God's
People, to dwell among such whose Conversations shine; for such godly ones
drive back or scatter Wickedness. As Solomon says, Prove. 20.26.
A wise and godly King scatters the Wicked, and brings the Wheel over them:
So every wise and godly Christian does what in him lies to to the like: What
Darkness did Martin Luther (that Star of the first Magnitude) drive away! That
blessed Light which he afforded the World has shone so gloriously, that the
Devil, the Pope, and all their Adherents, notwithstanding all their Skill, have
not been able to put out to this Day. IV. When the Light of the Candle is put
out, which is to give Light to the whole House, how do Men stumble, and grope
in Darkness? IV. So when the Saints shine not in Grace and Holiness, or fall
into Sin, and wickedly comply with the Evils of the Times in which they live,
how do the ungodly World stumble and fall; the which made our Savior to say,
Mat. 18.7.
Woe to the World because of Offenses, etc. It Is a great Judgment to the Wicked,
to have those who should be as Lights in the World, darkened, or give occasion
of Stumbling.

Inferences.
THis shows, what a great Blessing the World receives by means of the Godly:
They are set up as Lights in a dark Night, to direct Men in the right Way, that
they may not stumble and fall upon the dark Mountains.

II. Let this teach Believers their Duties; let them remember to have their
Conversations honest among the Gentiles. Let your Light shine forth to others,
not that you may be praised, but that the Praise may be given to God, etc. In
all your holy Walking, propose this as your ultimate End, not that you may be
magnified, and lifted up, but that God by you, and through your good Works, may
be magnified, and his glorious Name advanced on high.

III. It may be an Use of Caution to them to take heed of Sin. If they comply
with Satan, and yield to Temptations, and thereby let their Light go out, no
wonder if the World stumble. Sometimes Professors, instead of being Lights,
prove dark Stumbling Blocks. As to instance in two or three things;

1. When Professors fail in their Morals, i. e. are not just in their Dealings
between Man and Man, they give just cause of Offense.

2. When they are like the World, and none can discern any great difference
between them and others, in respect of their Conversation, how can they then be
said to be the Light of the World?

3. When they are overcome with scandalous Sins, viz. are proud, covetous,
Backbiters, Tattlers, Drunkards, etc.

4. When they want Love and Bowels of Compassion to their Brethren, they cease
to be the Lights of the World. They are no more a Blessing to the World, who
thus degenerate from what they should be, but rather the contrary.

Therefore if you want Motives to stir you up to take heed how you walk and
live among Men, that you may not give occasion of Offense or Stumbling to them,
but contrary-wise, be as Lights to them, take these following,

1. Your good Works, and holy Conversation, will greatly tend to glorify God;
but the contrary will greatly dishonor him.

2. Your good Works, and godly Life, will greatly tend to the Profit of the
World, but the contrary will prove to their great Hurt.

3. Your holy Life will make your Profession shine, and also further the
Promulgation of the Gospel; but the contrary will bring a Stink or ill Savor
upon your Profession, and hinder the Promulgation of the Gospel.

4. An evil Life hinders poor Souls from enquiring after the Truth, and
stumbles them in the way of their Obedience to it.

5. It stumbles weak Christians that are in the Ways of God.

6. It weakens the Hands, and grieves the Hearts of strong and sincere Ones.
Phil 3.18.


7. A holy Life will free thee from Blood-guiltiness; I mean, thou will not
have the Blood of other Men's Souls to answer for: but the contrary may make
thee culpable.

Saints compared to Cedars.
Psalm. 92.12. He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon; the Trees of the Lord are
full of Sap.

Psalm. 104.16. The Cedars of Lebanon, which he has planted, etc.

Hos. 14.5. -- And cast forth his Root as Lebanon.


GOd's People, their Growth and Rooting, are in these Scriptures compared to
the Cedar-Tree, the Cedar in Lebanon, in Greek Libanos, which was a Mountain in
the North Part of the Land of Canaan, possessed of old Time by the Hivites,
Judge. 3.3. afterward by the Israelites; on it grew many stately Cedars, etc.

In what respect the Saints may be compared to the Cedars, will appear by the
following Parallels.

Simile. Parallel. THe Cedar is a very noble and stately Tree, it grows very
high; 2 King. 19.23. Ezekiel. 17.22.
hence they are called tall Cedars; also its Branches are called Branches of
the high Cedar. It mounts high toward Heaven. Pliny tells of one Cedar that
grew in Cyprus, Plin. lib. 16. p. 490.
which was one hundred and thirty Foot high, and three Fathom thick. THe Godly
are a renowned People. Tho they seem in the Eyes of the World but mere Shrubs,
yet they are (as it was said of Saul) higher by the Head and Shoulders than all
others who dwell upon the Earth. They grow high in Grace, and spiritual
Experiences. They are said to dwell on high, Isa. 33.10.
they dwell in God, in Communion with Him; they soar aloft, and mount toward
Heaven. Isa. 40. ult. Col. 3.1, 2.
Their Affections are set upon Things above. They may in this Sense be said to
grow like the Cedar; they overtop the Wicked in Renown and Dignity, Prove. 12.26.
The Righteous are more excellent than their Neighbors. II. The Cedar is a
Tree that takes deep Root; its Roots spread this way, and that way, and go far
into the Ground. Naturalists say, that as Trees grow high, so proportionably
they take Root downward, because otherwise they would be top-heavy, and
overturn; a Blast of Wind taking advantage of their Talness, being weak at
Root, would soon blow them down; therefore proportionable to their spreading
above, there must be a rooting in the Ground. II. The Godly are said to take
Root downward; they are well-rooted; they cast forth their Roots as the Cedars
in Lebanon. Saints are well rooted in Christ, rooted in the Covenant, 2 Samuel
23.5.
which is firm, ordered in all things, and sure; well rooted in Grace, in
Faith, Love, and Humility. And indeed those Saints that grow high in Knowledge,
who in Gifts and Parts overtop their Brethren, had need to grow downwards in
Humility, proportionable to their Growth upwards, or else a strong Blast of
Temptation may soon puff them up with Pride and Self-conceitedness, and so
thereby quite blow them down. In Adam we had no sure Rooting, but in Christ, by
partaking of his Fullness, our standing is firm. III. The Cedar is a very strong
Tree. Naturalists also tell us, that it is not subject to Putrefaction, as many
other Trees are. III. Ephesians. 6.10, 11.
The Saints are strong in the Lord. It Is Sin that causes Men to be spiritually
weak, unstable as Water, as Jacob spoke of his Son Reuben; but the Godly are
delivered from the Guilt and Dominion of it, and thereby become strong in the
inward Man, both to do for God, and to suffer for his sake: they go from
Strength to Strength in Zion. David was too strong for Goliath, and overcame
him, he coming against him in the Name of the Lord. Also they are not so easily
corrupted by the Pollution of the Sins of the Times, and evil Example of the
Wicked, as others are; they having a glorious Principle of Life in them, that
preserves them from Soul-Putrefaction. He that is born of God, cannot commit
Sin. 1 John 3. IV. The Cedar is a very profitable Tree, it is excellent to build
an House withal; 1 Kings 6.15, 16.
Solomon therefore made use of it in building the Temple, which we have showed
was a Type of the Gospel Church. IV. The Saints are fit Trees to build God's
spiritual House. The Beams of the Church are said to be of Cedar, Cant. 1.17
which notes the Excellency and Duration of her principal Members. V. The Cedar
is a Tree full of Sap, it also bears a sort of Fruit: And it shall bring forth
Boughs, Ezekiel. 17.23.
and bear Fruit, and become a goodly Cedar, and under it shall dwell all Fowls
of every Wing. The Shadow of this Tree, it appears, is very refreshing. V. The
Trees of the Lord are said to be full of Sap, the Cedars of Lebanon which he
has planted, Christ is their precious Root, who supplies them with abundance
of Grace and inward Virtue: Of his Fullness all we receive, Joh. 1.14, 16.
and Grace for Grace. And by this means also they are made very fruitful,
abounding in Holiness, and good Works. And as they are fruitful to God, so
likewise they are profitable to Men. How happy is that People or Nation, that
sit under the Shadow or Protection of a righteous Government, when
Righteousness and Judgment shall be administered by the Saints! All will seek
for Shelter under them. Which is promised, and shall certainly be accomplished
in the latter Days.

Inferences.
THis may put us upon the Search. If the Saints are like goodly Cedars,
excellent above others, well rooted, strong, durable, and useful to God and
Men, we may hereby try our selves: Do we excel? do we grow up high
Heavenward? do we grow in Humility? Are our Hearts lowest, when our Estates
are highest? When we are most honored in the Eyes of Men, are we most humble
in the Sight of God.

2. It may also afford Comfort to the Godly: What Decays soever they seem now
to be under, yet they shall return again, grow, and send forth their Roots, as
the Cedars in Lebanon. Hos. 14.6.


3. Remember, that that Tree, which takes the deepest Root, spreads its
Branches furthest out, and brings forth most Fruit.

4. Let it also be remembered, that the more the Saints grow like the Cedar, and
put forth their Roots as Lebanon, the more they manifest and clearly show their
being rooted in Christ, whose Countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the
Cedars. Cant. 5.


5. How wonderfully are they mistaken, that think to tear up by the Roots, or
throw down God's tall and strong Cedars! for notwithstanding the many terrible
Blasts, and violent Winds, that has most fiercely blown upon them; yet they
have stood, do and will stand. The Highest himself shall establish her.

Saints compared to Myrtle-Trees.
Isa. 41.19. I will plant in the Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah, and the
Myrtle-Tree, etc.

Isa. 55.13. In the stead of the Thorn, shall come up the Fir Tree; and in
stead of the Bryar shall come up the Myrtle-Tree, etc.

Zech. 1.8, 11. I saw by Night, and behold a Man riding upon a red Horse, and
he stood among the Myrtle-Trees that were in the Bottom.


THe wise God, who best knows the Nature and Properties of all Things that his
Hands has made compares the Ungodly oftentimes in holy Scripture to Trees, and
other Things that are of a hurtful and evil quality, or are of such a Nature
that He sees will sutably set them forth: They are compared to Briars, Thorns,
Nettles, etc. And also the Godly are set forth by, and compared to several
Sorts of Trees, as to the Palm Tree, the Cedar, the Willow, etc. and in these
Places (as many understand) to the Myrtle-Tree; the Nature of which, together
with an useful Parallel, take as follows.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Myrtle-Tree is a rare and most excellent Tree, a Tree
of very great account; hardly any one Tree was more accounted of amongst the
Romans, as Pliny observes; the Jews highly esteemed of it. THe Saints are a
choice People; God esteems highly of them. As the Myrtle-Tree excells the Thorn
and the Bryar, so do the Godly excel the Wicked. Isa. 41.19. Isa. 55.13. Isa.
43.4.
Since thou have been precious in my Sight, thou have been honourahle, etc. II.
There are diverse Sorts of Myrtle-Trees; some white, and some black, Plin. lib.
15. p. 451.
some tame, and others wild, as Historians have noted. II. So there are diverse
Sorts of Christians; some more shining in Grace and Holiness than others; some,
by reason of an evil and crooked Nature, Grace hardly appears in them, etc. We
read of Fathers, young Men, and Children. III. The best Sorts of Myrtle-Trees
were used to be planted in Gardens, and were a great Ornament to them, their
Branches being very green, and amiable to look upon. III. The Godly, those
spiritual Trees, which God plants in his Church, which is his Garden; and the
most holy and mortified Ones of them, such whose Conversation and Profession is
amiable, whose Branches and spiritual Leaves wither not, are a great Ornament
to God's Garden. IV. The Myrtle-Tree yields most choice and excellent Fruit;
nay, more may be said of it, than of any other Tree, for it yields two Sorts of
Fruit, both Oil and Wine. Nature, says Pliny, shows her wonderful Power
touching this Tree, especially in the Juice, considering, that of all Fruits it
alone does yield two Sorts, both Oil and Wine. IV. The Saints of God are a
People that yield two Sorts of Fruit, to the Honor of God, and the Profit of
their Neighbor, answering to the two Tables. In this they excel all other
People. There are some that are morally righteous, they make Conscience of
their Duties to Men, but do not bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, in
answering a good Conscience toward God. Herein do I exercise my self, etc.
Acts 24.16
V. The Myrtle-Trees are said to stand in the Bottom, Zech. 1.8, 11. V. The
Saints of God are a People of a lowly and humble Spirit, and hence they are
compared to the low Valleys; whereas the Wicked are compared to lofty
Mountains. Also the Myrtle-Tree in the Bottom may signify the low and
persecuted State of God's People; and in that the Angels are said to be amongst
them, it holds forth the gracious Presence of God with his Saints, whilst they
are in a low, dark, and persecuted Condition. Yea, Psalm. 23 4.
tho I walk (says David) through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will
fear no Evil; for thou art with me, etc. VI. The Myrtle-Tree never sheds its
Leaves. VI. The Righteous are said to be like a Tree whose Leaves wither not;
Psalm. 1.3.
they hold fast the Profession of their Faith. VII. The Myrtle-Tree is said to
yield a sweet and fragrant Scent. VII. The Saints yield a sweet Savor to God
and Man. Now thanks be to God, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15.
which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the Savor
of his Knowledge by us in every Place: For we are of God a sweet Savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

Saints compared to Willow-Trees.
Isa. 44.4. And they shall spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the
Watercourse.
THey shall spring up, etc. That is, the Offspring of Jacob, the true Seed or
Vovenant People of God. As among the Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse: As
Willows grow and spring up by the Watercourse, so the Saints of God are said
to flourish or spring up

Simile. Parallel. VVIllows are so called, because they mostly grow near to
Brooks, and always prosper best near Rivers and Watercourse, contrary to some
other Trees, as the Cypress and Chesnut-Trees, which love not watery Places.
THe Trees of Righteousness, viz. the Saints, grow best near the River of God,
i. e. where the Springs of living Water flow forth. It is the Influence of the
holy Spirit, which is compared to a River, Joh. 7.37, 38.
that causes Believers to spring up and grow so sweetly. II. Remove a Willow
that grows by the Water side, and plant it upon a Heath, and you will soon see
it decay and wither. II. So if a Christian be removed from Christ, or hindered
of the sweet Influences of the Spirit, and divine Ordinances of the Gospel,
which the Faithful enjoy in God's Church, he will soon decay and wither in
Grace and Holiness, like a Willow upon a dry Heath. Jer. 17.6.
III. The Willow by the Watercourse is green, and flourishes in a Time of
Drought, when many other Trees and Plants fade and wither away. III. So the
Saints and People of God are in this respect like Willows or Trees planted by
the Water side; for so the Prophet plainly affirms: Blessed is the Man that
trusts in the Lord, Jer. 17.8.
whose Hope the Lord is: For he shall be as a Tree planted by the Waters, and
that spreads forth her Roots by the River, and shall not see when Drought
comes, but her Leaf shall be green; and shall not he careful in the Year of
Drought, neither cease from yielding Fruit. Compared with Psalm. 1.3.

Inferences.
HEnce we may learn, that the Holy Spirit in his blessed Springs of Graces,
Promises, and Ordinances, is every way as needful to the Growth of God's
People, as Springs of Water are to the Willow-Tree.

2. Let us bless the Almighty, who has planted us by the side of the River of
God, and let us pray, that he would never transplant us, nor remove us into a
barren and heathy Wilderness.

Saints compared to Vessels.
2 Cor. 4.7. But we have this Treasure in earthly Vessels, etc.

But in a great House are not only Vessels of Gold and Silver, but of Earth and
Wood, etc.


Some understand by this great House, the World; others, the Church.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Vessel is made by a skilful Artizan or Workman; he forms
and fashions it as he sees good. GOD has formed or made all the Children of
Men; they are all the Work of his Hands, formed and fashioned by him alone: And
as he has made and formed us in the first Creation; so also he has made or
fashioned his Saints in the second Creation. This People have I formed for my
self, etc. We are his Workmanship, Isa. 43.21. Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus to good Works. II. There is a great difference between
some Vessels: There are some Vessels of Gold, Silver, etc. and also some of
Earth, Wood, etc. II. So there is a great difference between some Men. The
Saints are Golden Vessels, tho of little esteem in the Eyes of the World: The
precious Sons of Zion, Lam. 4 3.
comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as earthen Pitchers? etc. But
the Wicked are likened to Vessels of Earth and Wood. III. Vessels are made for
some proper and peculiar Use. III. God made all Men, whosoever they are, for
special Use and Service, viz. to honor, worship, and bring Glory to his sacred
Majesty. IV. Vessels are subject to contract Filth and Pollution, and therefore
need often to be washed, etc. IV. So Christ's spiritual Vessels, viz. his
Saints, as well as others, are subject to contract the inward Filth of Sin,
such Uncleanness as nothing but Christ's Blood through Faith can wash away. V.
Vessels of diverse sorts, some very rich, are usually in a great House, in the
House of a Prince, or the like; some of Honor, and some of Dishonor. V. So in
the House of God there are diverse Vessels; 2 Timothy 2.20.
some of Gold and Silver as it were, viz. choice and precious Saints, who are
Vessels of Honor; and some who are like Vessels of Earth and Wood, viz.
hypocritical and unprofitable Ones, who without Repentance are like to be
Vessels of Dishonor. VI. Some Vessels are made use of to hold precious
Treasure. We read of Golden Pipes, that empty the Golden Oil out of themselves.
VI. Some of the Saints of God are made use of for Ministers, to bear the
precious Treasure of the Gospel, Zech. 4.12
also to empty it out of themselves, for the Use and Profit of others. VII.
Sometimes precious Treasure is put into earthen Vessels; but whether it be
Gold, Silver, or precious Stones, that are put therein, yet they are never the
worse because of the Vessel into which they are put, nor will wise Men refuse
or slight such Treasure for the Vessel's sake. VII. Ministers of the Gospel,
tho inwardly very rich and precious, yet they are but Men as others are, poor
earthen Vessels, and some of them very mean and contemptible in the Eye of the
World: You see your Calling, Brethren, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26.
But the Treasure of Wisdom is not the worse, tho it be in such earthen
Vessels; nor will wise Men refuse good Doctrine, and wholesome Counsel, because
communicated by such Servants of Christ. But we have this Treasure in earthen
Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7
that the Excellency of the Power might be of God, and not of us. [See the
Gospel compared to Treasure, in the third Book of the First Volume. VIII. An
earthen Vessel sometimes proves defective, and lets out choice Liquor that is
put therein; nay, and sometimes the Liquor tastes of the Vessel, or loses much
of its precious Relish, by reason an evil Person puts some unsavory Matter
into the Vessel; and by reason of this Mixture, the pure Savor is somewhat
gone. VIII. So some Men, Heb. 2.1, 2 Rev. 2.4.
like leaking Vessels, let out the precious Grace of God; they lose their Zeal,
Faith, Love, Courage, etc. And also many times the Word of God, as it comes
from the Preacher, savours of the earthen Vessel; for the best of Men have
Flesh in them, as well as Spirit. Were there nothing but this precious Treasure
of Grace and Divine Wisdom in them, it would not be so; but Satan like a cursed
Enemy, stirs up the Remainders of the Old Man in the Soul, and through his
subtle Temptations causes the Preacher to mix the Wine with Water, or the pure
Doctrine of Christ, with Man's Wisdom, by which means he vaunts and prides it
oftentimes in himself. IX. When a Vessel proves very defective, the Owner
perceiving he is like to come to loss, empties the choice Liquor from Vessel to
Vessel. IX. So God many times finding his Vessels defective, and that they
contract Filth, or prove leaky, empties his choice Liquor from Vessel to
Vessel, according to that of the Prophet, Jer. 48 11.
Moab has been at ease from his Youth, and has settled upon his Lees, and has
not been removed from Vessel to Vessel; which is meant of Afflictions. God by
bringing a People into Adversity, in the sense of this Text, may be said to
move, pour out, or empty them from Vessel to Vessel. A long Time of Ease and
Prosperity proves hurtful to God's Children; like as the Wine receives
detriment by settling on its Lees. A Day of general Persecution proves various
in its Effects: Some are thereby emptied of chice Gifts and Endowments that
were in them, and others receive thereby a double measure; God takes away the
one Talent for want of Improvement, and gives it to him that had five. Mat.
25.28
X. Earthen Vessels are soon broken; they are very brittle Things; alas! but
with one Knock they are gone. X. So the Saints of God, and Ministers of the
Gospel, are poor frail and brittle Creatures; when God permits the Enemy but a
little to let fly against them, how are they dashed to pieces by their hands!
How many precious Vessels did Queen Mary destroy, and consume to Ashes! But
this must always be considered, viz. God has a gracious Design in suffering
the Enemy thus to break in pieces his choice Vessels; and one Reason thereof
is, That the precious Treasure of the Gospel may be the more diffusive, and
spread it self, that its precious Odor might perfume the more Souls. The Blood
of the Saints has been always accounted the Seed of the Church. XI. Earthly
Vessels are of little value; they are not much accounted of. XI. God's faithful
Saints and Servants, as they are of little esteem in the Eyes of the World, The
precious Sons of Zion, Lam. 4.2.
comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as earthen Pitchers? So they
have but low and mean thoughts of themselves. 2 Cor. 4.7. Rom 9.23
We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power
might be of God, and not of us. Simile. Disparity. OTher Vessels are made by
Men. BUt the Saints and Ministers of the Gospel are Vessels of the Lord's
making: He did not only form them considered as Men, but also as spiritual
Vessels, viz. they are chosen Ministers prepared for his blessed Use: He is a
chosen Vessel to bear my Name amongst the Gentiles, etc. Acts 9.15.
The Saints are called Vessels of Mercy, prepared unto Glory. II. Other
Vessels, when broken into small Pieces, are generally quite spoiled, and can
never be set together again. II. But the Vessels of the Lord, tho they are
broken in pieces by Death, are not thereby spoiled, and utterly lost, but shall
be set together again, and be made far more glorious than they were before.

Inferences.
IT may teach the Saints of God to have low thoughts of themselves. What is an
earthen Vessel? It is true, the Treasure may be excellent that is in the
Vessel; but that does not appertain to the Vessel. Let God have the Glory of
all: 1 Cor. 4, 6, 7.
What have thou which thou have not received?

2. Take heed, you that are Saints, that you do not, like earthen Vessels,
smite one against another, lest by one another you are dashed to pieces.
Remember what frail and brittle Creatures you are, even poor earthen Vessels.

3. It may teach the Saints also to look to themselves, lest they gather Filth;
let every one keep their Vessels clean. Wash your selves daily in the Tears of
true Repentance, and by Faith in that Fountain that is set open for Sin, and
for Uncleanness.

4. It may teach the Saints of God to be careful of their poor Ministers,
remembering always that they are also but poor frail Vessels.

5. Let the Wicked dread the Thoughts of the great Day, such I mean as have, or
strive to break in pieces Christ's chosen Vessels; what will they do in that
Day, when He makes Inquisition for Blood?

Saints compared to Lions.
Prove. 28.1. The Wicked fly when none pursue, but the Righteous are as bold as
a Lion.

Micah 5.8. And the Remnant of Jacob shall be as a Lion, etc.


The Godly are compared to Lions.

Simile. Parallel. A Lion is a very magnanimous and courageous Creature; he
will not fly from his Enemies; he turns not away for fear of any. SO the
Saints of God are full of spiritual Courage; they are not dismayed at the
Threats of Men. Psalm. 27.3.
I will not fear what Man can do unto me: Tho an Host should encamp against me,
my Heart shall not fear; tho I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
I will fear no Evil. Hence they are said to be as bold as a Lion. Shall such a
Man as I fly? Neh.
Quest. But some may say, Wherein does the Courage of the Godly appear? wherein
are they as bold as a Lion?

Answ. In their being valiant and courageous for the Truth. And this they show
forth many ways.

1. By their speaking for it when others speak against it. God's Truth, his
Way, and People are commonly derided, and spoke against; and he that is a
sincere and valiant Christian, will, at all times when he sees there is need
for it, vindicate it, and speak in the behalf thereof.

2. In their endeavoring to clear it from Reproach and Infamy. The Way or
Truth of God is frequently reproached. 1. It Is called Error and Heresy: Acts
24.14. Acts 24.5. Acts 17.19.
After that way you call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, etc. 2.
It Is called Sedition. Hence Paul was accused for being a Mover of Sedition. 3.
It Is commonly called a new Doctrine: We would know what this new Doctrine
whereof thou speak is.

3. They show their Courage in contending earnestly for the Truth; they will
dispute and argue out the Matter in behalf of Truth, and not give up the
Justness and Goodness of their Cause, as long as they are able to stand by it,
or by force of Argument to maintain it. Paul upon this account says, 1 Cor.
15.32.
he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, i. e. Men like Beasts, who acted like Beasts
in opposing the Truth.

4. In their visible professing and public owning of the Truth. They are not
afraid nor ashamed to confess Christ and his Ways before Men. Some for fear of
the Jews did not publicly own Jesus Christ in the Days of his Flesh; but such
who are sincere will go forth, bearing his Reproach. Tho Men forbid them, Heb.
13.13.
nay threaten them, etc. yet they will preach Jesus Christ, and profess his
Name, and maintain his Ordinances, and blessed Institutions. The Apostles cried
out, Acts 4 20. and 5.29.
We cannot but speak the Things which we have seen and heard, etc.

5. They show their Courage in suffering for the Truth, when called so to do.
(1.) They will suffer Reproach for the Truth. (2.) They will suffer Blows for
the Truth. (3.) Imprisonment for the Truth. (4.) Loss of their Goods. (5.)
Banishment. (6.) Yea, Death it self, when called to it, rather than deny
Christ, and the Truth.

6. They will stand by the Truth, when others turn their Backs upon it. Thus
did Paul.

7. They will maintain every Truth, but more especially that Truth which is
most opposed in the Day in which they live. It may be no demonstration of
Courage, to stand up for, or maintain a Truth in one Age, which was a great
Proof of Valor in another, when it was chiefly opposed. Would it be any Sign
of spiritual Courage now, to affirm God is God, and Baal is not? yet that was
in Elijah's Days. 1 Kings 18
Or would it be any Demonstration of Courage now, to affirm Jesus of Nazareth
to be the true Savior? yet it was in the Apostle's Time, because it was the
great Truth then opposed. Christian Courage is now showed, by owning and
maintaining those Truths of Christ now opposed, and which in standing by, do
expose the Professors thereof.

Now that which does animate and embolden the Saints in the Day of Trial, in
standing up for Christ, and his Ways, is:

1. The Satisfaction they have touching the Truth of that which they profess.
It Is God's Truth.

2. The Consideration of the Excellency of God's Truth: Psalm 119.
The Word of God is pure, etc.

3. The Consideration of the Goodness and Justness of their Call to suffer in
behalf of Truth; for that is one thing which must always be considered.

4. The Goodness of their Consciences, or the Evidences of their own Sincerity.
A Hypocrite may suffer some things, but at last his Courage will fail him. I
have heard of a Captain, that principally would make choice of two Sorts of Men
for his Soldiers, viz. either sincere and godly Christians, or downright
Atheists, because neither of them (he concluded) would be afraid to die: The
true Christian would not be afraid of Death, because he knew he should go to
Christ; and the Atheist would not be afraid of Death, because he thought, or
rather hoped he should die as a Beast, and there would be an end of him.

5. The Consideration of his having so good a Second. A courageous and
undaunted Second oftentimes puts much Courage into a Person that is singled out
to fight a Duel. Now a Christian has the Almighty and Terrible God to take his
part, etc. Fear not, Worm Jacob, I will help thee, etc. I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. Isa. 41.14. Heb. 13.5, 6.
So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what Man can
do unto me.

6. The Certainty of getting the Victory, or overcoming at last. As it is said
of Gad, it may be said of a Christian, tho a Troop may overcome him, yet he
shall overcome at last. Hence Saints are said to be more than Conquerors; Romans
8.37
for no Conqueror is certain, whilst he is in the Conflict, that he shall at
last obtain the Conquest.

7. The Consideration of that exceeding great Reward, which they shall receive
when they have overcome, wonderfully adds Courage and Boldness unto them. Be
thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Rev. 2.10.


II. Lions are great Conquerors. Many other Beasts, tho they are much bigger
than they, yet they are not able to stand before them. II. Saints are great
Conquerors; through Christ, they conquer Sin, Satan, the World, Death, and
Hell; they are said to be more than Conquerors. Romans 8.
III. A Lion is a Creature that other Beasts are afraid of. III. So the Saints
are Men that the Wicked often times fear; they dread the Effects of their
Prayers. It Is said, that Mary Queen of Scots was more afraid of the Prayer of
John Knox, than of an Army of Twenty Thousand Men. Herod was afraid of John
Baptist. It has been observed, that some wicked Persons have been afraid to
swear, or carry it unseemly, in the presence of a godly Man. IV. A Lion is a
very strong Creature. IV. The Saints are so strong in the Lord, and the Power
of his Might, that none, either in Earth or Hell, are a Match for them. V. A
Lion treads down, and makes a Prey of his Enemies. V. So the Godly shall in
the latter Days make a Prey of all their Adversaries, be as terrible as an Army
with Banners, when God brings them forth against Babylon. God will raise up the
Sons of Zion against the Sons of Greece, and make them as the Sword of a mighty
Man. Cant. 6.10 Zech. 9.13 Mich. 5.8.
The Remnant of Jacob shall be amongst the Gentiles, in the midst of many
People, as a Lion amongst the Beasts of the Forest, amongst a Flock of Sheep,
who if he go through, both treads down, and teareth in pieces, and none can
deliver.

Disparity.
IN many things the Righteous are not like to a Lion. A Lion has many evil,
devouring, and hurtful Qualities, and it is upon that account wicked Men and
the Devils are compared to Lions.

Inferences.
IN vain are the Saints by Men and Devils assaulted; he that prevails against
them, must also prevail against, and overcome the mighty God; and who is a
Match for Him?

2. This reproves, and may tend to shame the timorous Christian. What! afraid
to own Christ, to stand up for, and stand by the Truth, when thou have God to
stand up for thee, and stand by thee! etc.

3. Let Saints show themselves bold and courageous in the Cause and Interest of
God, and their Souls. A fearful timorous Spirit becomes not a Christian. Have
you a good Cause? have you a good Call? have you a good Conscience? have you a
good Captain? What then do you fear? In the Strength of the Lord, be as bold as
a Lion; and in order thereunto, get the Truth into your Affections, see that
you have received the Truth in the Love of it: And be sure you approve your
selves to be sincere; for it is Sincerity that imboldens a Christian, and makes
him valiant.

Saints compared to Gold.
Job 23.10. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold.

Isa. 13.12. I will make a Man more precious than fine Gold, etc.


Simile. Parallel. GOld is a precious Metal, it is esteemed as one of the
rarest Things on Earth; hence Things of great Value are in the holy Scriptures
set forth by Gold. THe Saints are a choice and precious People, the excellent
Ones in all the Earth. Psalm. 16.2. Prove. 12.26. Isa. 44.4. Lam. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 32.9
Since thou have been precious in my Sight, thou have been honorable, and I
have loved thee. They are called precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine
Gold. God esteems them as his Portion: The Lord's Portion is his People, Jacob
is the Lot of his Inheritance. II. Gold, tho it is a pure Sort of Metal, yet
there is some Dross in it; tho, as Naturalists observe, there is not any Metal,
that is more free from Dross and Rust than Gold is. II. The Saints of God, tho
holy, very precious and gracious Ones, yet are they not without Sin; there is
some Dross of Corruption in the very best. Eccl. 7.20. 1 John 1.8.
There is not a just Man upon the Earth, that does good, and sins not. If we
say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. III.
Gold is refined in the Fire, and thereby is made more pure than it was before.
III. So the Saints are put into the Fire, I mean, into the Furnace of
Affliction, to purge and refine them from all the Dross of their Corruption.
Job 23.10
When he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold. I will make a Man more
precious than fine Gold. I will bring the third Part through the Fire, and will
refine them as Silver is refined, Zech. 13.9
and will try them as Gold is tried. They shall call upon my Name, and I will
hear them: I will say, It is my People, and they shall say, The Lord is my God.
IV. Gold is very pliant, you may bow and work it as you please; and the Fire
makes it more pliable and yielding, etc. IV. So the Saints are of a soft and
pliable Nature; God having infused his precious Grace into their Hearts, they
are of a yielding Temper, they have Hearts of Flesh; and God, by putting them
into the Fire, makes them more pliant and flexible, they presently yield to the
Will of God, when others will not, cannot be brought to it. V. Gold will endure
the Fire; tho it be often put into the Furnace, yet it loses nothing but the
drossy Part. The Fire does it much Good; it cannot destroy the precious Nature
of it. Gold retains its Excellency in despite of the envious Rage of fiery
Flames. V. So the Saints of God, or all sincere Ones, endure the fiery Trial;
they are not burned up not consumed in the Furnace of Affliction, tho heated
sevenfold: tho it burn their Bodies into Ashes, and reduce their Flesh (as one
observes) into the first Atoms; yet the Saint (the Gold) is not hurt, nor does
he receive the least Damage thereby. Sincere Christians are compared to Gold;
and Hypocrites to Wood, Hay, and Stubble, which the Fire will burn up. VI. Gold
is often formed into Vessels, rarely wrought, for the Pleasure, Honor, and Use
of Princes and great Men. VI. See Vessel.
God frames some of his Saints for most excellent Use; he makes of them Vessels
of Honor, to hold the glorious Treasure of the Gospel, and to let it out to
others. These are fitly compared to fine Gold, Lam. 4.2.
although accounted as earthen Pitchers. VII. Gold is carefully kept; Men set
highly by it, and often hide it, lest Thieves should steal it away. VII. So God
sets highly by his Saints; He keeps them carefully Day and Night. They are
called his hidden Ones; He covers them under his Wings from the Pride of Men.
VIII. Men suffer great Pains for Gold, run great Losses and Hazards to obtain
it, and make it sure to themselves. VIII. So Jesus Christ suffered great Pain
and Loss for his poor Saints; he laid down his Life for them. We were not
redeemed with Silver and Gold, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
from our vain Conversations, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without blemish. Simile. Disparity. GOld is earthly, and of a perishing
Nature; it wears away by little and little; the more it is put to use, the
more it wastes. THe Saints, tho their Bodies are earthly, and die, yet they
shall never perish; and their better Part is spiritual, and shall never see
Corruption. The more Service they do, the more glorious they shall be. Saints
are not the worse for wearing. II. Gold has its Glory from Art; were it not
molded, shaped, and furbished by the Wit of Man, it would not be so glorious,
nor of that esteem as now it is. II. But the Saints have all their Glory from
Grace; it is not the Work of Men's Hands, but the Work of God's Hands, that
makes them to shine; they are curiously wrought and fashioned by the Spirit,
from whence they become glorious. III. Gold is Gold naturally, as it is dug out
of the Earth, tho not so pure as it is made afterward by the Art and Industry
of Man. III. But the Saints were mere Lumps of Filth, Earth, and not Gold,
naturally. It Is Grace that makes them excellent as Gold; it is Grace that makes
them differ from others.

Inferences.
THis shows forth the great Worth of God's peculiar Ones: they are esteemed by
him far more excellent, than Gold is by Men.

2. It speaks forth much Comfort to the Godly: God so prizeth them, that he
keeps them as carefully as we do the choicest and rarest Gold.

3. It shows the Excellency of Grace: Grace is of a transforming Nature; it is
like the Philosopher's Stone, it turns every Man and Woman, be they never so
vile and base Metal, into Gold; i. e. it makes them holy, precious; and
gracious Ones in God's Sight.

Saints compared to Doves.
Mat. 10.16. Be ye harmless as Doves.
DOves are, 1. Meek. 2. Harmless. 3. Chaste. 4. They make their Nests in a Rock.
5. They feed upon pure Grain, not on Cartion, as Fowls of Prey do. 6. Have a
lovely Eye, and always fixed upon their Mates. 7. They love to keep Company
together. 8. Mourn when they have lost the Sight of their Mates. 9. They are
often molested by Fowls of Prey. 10. They are very fruitful. 11. They love to
be by sweet Springs and Rivers of Water. 12. They were appointed under the Law
for Sacrifices. 13. They have no Defense but by Flight. Upon all these
Considerations Saints may be compared to Doves; which is largely opened under
the Eighth Head of Metaphors, concerning the Church, to which we refer you.

Saints compared to Lambs in a large Place.
Hosea 4.16. Now the Lord will feed them, as a Lamb in a large Place.
EXpositors differ about the Meaning of these Words. Mercer and Vatablus (as
Mr. Buroughs observes) would carry it thus, Laute ut Agnus, mox mactatur: As a
Lamb, when it has large Food, it is soon slain: so God threatens Ephraim,
that he will soon make an end of them; only he will let them prosper for a
while, and feed them largely, but it shall be for the Slaughter, etc. But
others rather understand, that God would bring Ephraim under such Affliction,
as should humble them, and make them as a Lamb: Feed them as a Lamb, parce ac
tenuiter; not fed as an Heifer, that noted their Prosperity; but fed as a Lamb,
that notes their Adversity: For the Food of a Lamb differs from the Food of
an Heifer. That which will feed a Lamb, will starve an Heifer, or an Ox. They
have, says God, been proud and wanton in the Enjoyment of Peace and Plenty;
but now they shall have short Commons; I will bring them down, and lay them low
at my Feet; they shall be as a Lamb that picks up Grass in the Wilderness, as a
Lamb in a large Place: That is, says Mr. Buroughs, they shall be dispersed
among the Countries. They would not be satisfied in Canaan, which was a narrow
Place, and with the Sheepfold of mine that was therein; and now they shall have
more Room, they shall go into a large Place, but it shall be into Captivity.

But now fully to take in the direct Sense of the Text, I will feed them as a
Lamb in a large Place; that is, as a Lamb that shall be alone, one Lamb. He
speaks of a Lamb singly, because that they should be scattered one from
another. They had Society, and might have abode in the sweet Enjoyment of it,
had they not sinned their Mercies away; but since they did not make good use of
their Peace and Communion together, God threatens to scatter them, one in one
Place, and another in another Place; and they should be as a Lamb alone in the
Wilderness, succourless, helpless, shiftless, bleating up and down. Which
affords us a profitable Parallel.

Simile. Parallel. A Lamb in a large Place, that feeds in a Wilderness alone,
is very solitary, and, as it has been observed, wanders about bleating,
seeming greatly troubled for want of Company. SO when God scatters his People
by Persecution, (because they have not prized nor improved that Peace and
Plenty which he has afforded them in their own Fold, nor regarded the
Sweetness of Christian Society and Communion together) they shall wander about,
bleating as it were, being greatly troubled for want of that Fellowship they
once enjoyed. Thus it was with the poor Jews. II. A Lamb alone in a large
Place, wandering up and down in a Wilderness, among Wolves, Lions, etc. is in
great danger of being devoured every moment; when such as remain in the Fold
with the Flock, are generally safe and very secure. II. So a poor Christian,
that strays abroad, or gets out of God's Fold, and is as a Lamb in a large
Place, is in great danger of being spoiled and devoured every moment; when such
Christians as abide in the Church, and keep close to the Fellowship and
Communion thereof, are safe. Also Christians that are scattered, and forced by
Persecution from the Society of the Saints, are obnoxious to many Deaths and
Dangers. III. A Lamb in a large Place or Wilderness has none to help it; who
watches or takes care of such a Lamb? It has no Shepherd to look after it,
none that regards it. III. So those Christians that stray abroad, or are forced
to wander in a bewildered Estate, have no Fellowship with God's People, nor are
they under the special Care or Charge of any of his particular Ministers; none
regard them: Which is a sore and lamentable State. IV. A Lamb in a large Place
is forced to seek its own Food, and provide for it self, when such as remain in
the Fold, or in the Flock, the Shepherd takes care of them, and daily feeds
them; they have no Want, when the poor Lamb in the Wilderness is in hard
Weather near starving. IV. So Such Christians as stray abroad, and walk alone,
not belonging to any particular Church, have little Food but what they can find
themselves; they have not those sweet and blessed Refreshments at the Lord's
Table, and in the daily Communion with God's People, as such have who are
orderly Members. This made the Spouse cry out, Tell me, Cant. 1.7.
O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, and where thou make thy
Flocks to rest at Noon, etc.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may infer, what a sore Evil it is to be scattered from the Flock
of God. Some slight Christian Society, and think the Yoke of Christ is too hard
and uneasy for their Necks; they account it Bondage, and not Liberty; they do
not like Christ's Fold. And how just is it with God to blind the Eyes of such,
and leave them to wander in the Wilderness, and let them feed as a Lamb in a
large Field, being exposed to the Danger of many Enemies?

2. Some Men love their Liberty, and they may have Liberty enough; but such may
be their Liberty, that it may prove (as one well observes) their Misery. To
keep in the Compass of God's Commands; is the best Liberty of all; as David
professes, Then shall I have Liberty, when I keep all thy Commandments. Other
Liberty will most certainly bring us into Straits, and ruin us, if we do not
take heed, and return unto God. Many want Elbow-Room, and would fain get out of
God's Limits; tho such may at present have Peace, yet mark well their End. It
is a fearful Judgment to be left to wander.

3. Prize Christian Society then, and account it your Mercy, that you are not
as a Lamb in a large Place; and improve the Mercy you now enjoy; lest God bring
that heavy Judgment upon you, to break and scatter you, as many have been in
Days past, and made to seek their Bread in a howling Wilderness.

The Heart of a Saint compared to an Heart of Flesh.
Ezekiel. 36.26. And I will give them a Heart of Flesh, etc.
I. A Heart of Flesh is a tender thing; every small Prick will make it bleed:
So every Sin, nay, the smallest Sin will offend, and make a tenderhearted
Christian cry out, much more a great Sin.

II. A Heart of Flesh is a soft Heart; the Philosophers Description of a soft
thing is, that it easily gives way to a Touch: So a true Christian, a
tenderhearted Christian will yield to God's Word, to his Reproofs, to his
Commands, etc. Lay your Finger upon a Stone, and that yields not; but lay your
Finger upon Flesh, and that will yield: 2 King. 22.19.
So will a Saint. Josiah's Heart melted, when the Law of God was read to him;
his Heart gave way and yielded to God's Word, and trembled at the Judgments
denounced; he had a Heart of Flesh, a tender and soft Heart.

III. A Heart of Flesh cannot bear a great Weight, a heavy Burden will crush
and mar it exceedingly. Lay never so great a Weight upon a Stone, and that will
bear it; you cannot crush that, nor make the least Impression in it, what
Weight soever you lay upon it: but a Heart of Flesh, or that which is of a soft
Substance, is of another Nature; a Weight will bruise, crush, and mar it
immediately. So a tenderhearted Christian cannot bear the Weight of Sin; he
feels the Burden so heavy, that he is sorely crushed down and oppressed under
the Guilt thereof, and grievously bruised. Thus it was with David, Psalm. 38.
I am sore broken, I am bowed down greatly, etc.

IV. A Heart of Flesh, I mean a living Heart, (for it is such a one of which the
Text speaks) is a sensible Heart: So a tenderhearted Christian, or a Man or
Woman that has a Heart of Flesh, is very sensible. Such are sensible of their
own Vileness, and loath themselves before the Lord, cannot bear the Thoughts of
God's Displeasure; it goes to their very Heart, to think that the holy and
infinite God should be displeased and offended with them: they are sensible of
their own Sorrows, and of the Sorrows and Miseries of others. A tenderhearted
Person will grieve for the Afflictions of his Brethren and Sisters; if his
Mother, or any dear Relation, is distressed, and in great Misery, O how
sensible is he of it, and how sorely troubled and disquieted in his Spirit! And
thus it is with a tender hearted Saint, O how is he grieved for the distressed
Saints, and for distressed Sion! etc.

V. A Heart of Flesh, i. e. a tender Heart, will take any Impression you
please: So a tenderhearted Christian will take any Impression from God: He is
like Wax melted, that will take the Impression of the Seal. They are ready to
take the Stamp of the Word, the Image of God, which is Righteousness and true
Holiness. The Spirit and Word of God can mould these Hearts into any Form or
Fashion God pleases, etc.

Saints compared to Stewards.
Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship, etc.

1 Pet. 4.10. As good Stewards, etc.


Note. Every Saint is the Steward of God.

Parallels.
I. A Steward is a Person that has Goods or Moneys committed to his Charge: So
every Christian has many Goods, called Talents, committed to him, Mat. 25.14,
15.
both Spirituals and Temporals.

II. A Steward cannot say, the Riches which are committed to him are his own;
no, he is but the Steward of them, in Trust, they being the proper Right of
another Man, or his Lord's Goods: So a Christian cannot say, any thing he has
is his own; all he is and has is the Lord's.

III. A Steward ought to dispose of every thing committed to his Charge,
according to the special Command of his Master, who possibly orders him to pay
so much to such an one, and so much to such an one, and so much to such Poor
that dwell in the Parish, etc. So every Christian ought to dispose of all his
Lord's Goods, according to his express Command laid down in his Word, or he is
no faithful Steward. So much he is required to dispose of to the Ministers of
the Gospel, that may tend to make their Lives comfortable, and free them from
the perplexing Cares of this Life, which greatly hinder them in their Ministry.
The true Minister's Maintenance is jure divino, of divine Right: So has the
Lord ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14.
that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Also they are
required to give to the Poor, that they may not want, etc. Their Charity ought
to be according to their Ability, and the Poor's Necessity; and not only to
give, but to give cheerfully, with a willing Heart, etc.

IV. Stewards are required to improve their Lord's Money, etc. So Christians
ought to improve all those spiritual Gifts and Graces, Time and Strength,
Wisdom and Knowledge. Whatsoever God has given to them, he expects they should
improve it to his Glory, and to the Profit of their Neighbors.

V. It Is a great and horrible Evil in a Steward, to mind his own Business and
Concerns more than the Concerns of his Lord and Master: So it is an utter Fault,
(and that which may justly call in question the Truth of his Sincerity and
Christianity) for a Christian to mind the World, and his own private Interest,
more than the Interests and Concerns of Jesus Christ. Some care not what
becomes of Christ's Laborers, or of the poor Saints, nor of the Interest of
the Gospel, so that they have all things to their Hearts Content. They eat the
Fat, and drink the Sweet, and lay up great Store of Treasure for their own
Children, etc. they have (perhaps) their Hundreds and Thousands by them; and in
the mean while many faithful Ministers hard put to it to get Bread. Is it not
an abominable Evil in a Steward, to live like a Lord himself upon his Master's
Goods, and let his Master's Children want Bread; and also to keep back the
Right of his faithful and painful Laborers, for whose sake he entrusted him
with so much Substance?

VI. A Steward must expect to be called to an Account: Give an Account of thy
Stewardship, etc. So must every Christian expect to be called to an Account by
Jesus Christ concerning his Stewardship; and what will they have to say, who
have embezelled much of their Lord's Goods, and converted the rest to their own
private Use. Let all take heed, and so demean themselves, that they may have
their Accounts to give up with Joy.

Saints compared to Stones.
1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual House, an holy
Priesthood, etc.
THe Saints of God are compared to Stones, to the Stones of a a Building, etc.

Parallels.
I. SOme Stones that Men build with, are very rough and rocky as they are taken
out of the Quarry, and therefore need much Hewing and Squaring, before they are
fit for the Building: So naturally the Hearts of Sinners are rocky, and like
rough Stones; Hos. 6.5.
and to this the Lord alludes, I have hewed them by the Prophets. Ministers are
God's Tools, by which He does his Work upon Men's Hearts.

II. Stones are fit Materials to build a House withal: So God sees Believers
are the only fit Materials to build his spiritual House.

III. Stones in a Building are well knit and united together: So should the
Saints in Love, etc.

IV. Stones are durable; so are the Saints.

Disparity.
I. NO Builder builds his House with preeious Stones: But Believers are called
precious Stones. This notes the Richness and Excellency of the spiritual
Building: 1 Cor. 3.12
Now if any build upon this Foundation Gold, Silver, precious Stones, etc.

II. No earthly Stones have Life in them; they are not living but dead Stones:
But the Saints are living Stones, Ephesians. 2.1.
being quickened and made alive by Jesus Christ, that so there may be a fit
Resemblance or Similitude between the Stones and the Foundation. See Foundation
in the First Volume, page 242. and Christ the Cornerstone, p. 246, 247.

The Saints God's Jewels.
Mal. 3.17. They shall be mine in that Day when I make up my Jewels.
THe Saints are in this Place called Jewels, they are God's choice Jewels:
There is nothing so excellent in the Eyes of Men, but God's People are as
amiable in his Sight; and why he calls them his Jewels, is opened in the
following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. JEwels are rare and excellent Things, made by the hands of
curious Workmen; they are made of precious Stones, set in Gold and Silver. THe
Saints are to God most choice and excellent Ones: Psalm. 45.
The King's Daughter is all glorious within. These Jewels are made up of a
Complication of all the precious Graces of the Holy Spirit. II. Some Jewels are
long in making; they are not made near so soon as some others are. They carry
on their Work gradually, every Day's Work adds to their Beauty and Richness;
yet having begun, they resolve to go forward, and never cease till they have
finished them, and made them up, quite fit for the Cabinet. II. So some of the
Saints are not so soon made up and fitted for Heaven, as others are; God
carries on the Work of Grace gradually. All Persons, as soon as ever they are
converted, are not made fit for Heaven, but they must go from one degree of
Grace to another. Yet God has promised to perfect the Work he has begun; he
will never cease, until he has made up the Jewels he has begun to make. He
that has begun a good Work in you, Phil. 1.6.
will perform it to the Day of Christ. III. Jewels are a most rare and
excellent Ornament, nothing richer; and are therefore worn only by rich and
noble Persons, in which they take great delight. III. So Believers are the
Glory of Christ: Whether any do enquire of Titus, 2 Cor. 8.23.
he is my Partner and Fellow-helper concerning you; or our Brethren be enquired
of, they are the Messengers of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ. Which
agrees with that in Isa. 62.3. Thou shall also be a Crown of Glory in the hand
of the Lord, Isa. 62.3.
and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God; and hence called Hephzibah, The
Lord delights in thee. No Prince esteems more of his Crown, Jewels, and Royal
Diadem, than God does of his People. The High Priest under the Law was to have
the Names of the Children of Israel engraven on the Breast Plate. See Exodus 28.
And thou shall make the Breastplate of Judgment, the Work of cunning Workmen,
etc. And thou shall emboss in it Embossments of Stones, four Rows: The first, a
Row of Sardius, Exodus 28.6, 7, 8 9.
a Topaz, and a Smaragd; the second Row, a Chalcedony, a Sapphire, and Sardonyx;
and the third Row, an Hyacinth, a Chrysophrase, and an Amethyst; and the fourth
Row, a Chrysolite, a Beryl, and a Jasper. And they shall be set in Gold in
their Imbossements, and the Stones shall be with the Names of the Sons of
Israel, etc. Also in the Ephod there was two Beryl-Stones, and on them was
engraven the Names of the Children of Israel. Now the High Priest was a Type of
Christ, and his having the Names of the Children of Israel engraven with
precious Stones upon the Ephod which was upon his Shoulders, and upon the
Breast Plate, signifies not only Christ's bearing his Saints upon his
Shoulders, (as it were) and upon his Heart, but also what an Ornament Christ
looks upon his Saints to be unto him; for those precious Stones were a
wonderful Ornament to the Priest, both on his Shoulders and Breast. Take Mr.
Ainsworth's Annotations on the 11th Verse. The Engraver, Stone-cutter, or
Jeweller, thus engraving in precious Stone, (and that like a Signet) the Names
of the Children of Israel, signified the firm and perpetual Love, Memorial,
Esteem, and Sustentation of the Church. And to this the Spouse alludes, Cant.
8.6. Set me as a Signet upon thy Heart, as a Signet on thy Arm, etc. IV. A Man
takes great care of, and exceedingly values his rich and choice Jewels; he will
not lose one of them, if he can possibly keep them. IV. So God takes great care
of his Saints, esteems of them as his chiefest Treasure, and will not lose one
of them. All that the Father has given me, have I kept, and none of them are
lost, etc. That God highly prizes, esteems, and takes great care of his People,
does appear many ways. (1.) By the Price he paid for them; He gave up that
precious and invaluable Jewel of his Heart, viz. the Lord Jesus, to be broken
in pieces, that so he might thereby make unto himself many thousand choice and
precious Jewels. (2.) By the great Pains he has used in forming and fashioning
them for himself: We are his Workmanship, etc. (3.) By his making of such a
firm and sure Covenant with Christ in their behalf, that none of them might be
lost. (4.) By the Charge he gives to the Wicked not to hurt them. 2 Chronicles.
16.21, 22.
He suffered no Man to do them Wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their Sakes,
saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. (5.) By his
declaring, that they that touch them, touch the Apple of his Eye. He pities
them as a Father pities his Children. (6.) By his bestowing so many precious
Graces and good Gifts upon them, to make them shine, and gloriously set forth
their Luster. (7.) By executing Wrath and Displeasure upon their Enemies. (8.)
By his defending, saving, and preserving them in the midst of so many great and
imminent Dangers. (9.) In hiding them in a secret and secure Place, out of the
reach of Adversaries. (10.) Lastly, by providing such a glorious Place for them
after Death, that they may be with him for ever. V. Jewels are subject to many
Casualties whilst they are making, and are often marred, or receive much
Detriment, which without much Labor and Cost is not repaired, and made good
again. V. So God's Jewels are subject to sustain great Detriment, and are often
much marred (whilst he is about making of them up) by Sin and Satan, and
through their own Carelessness, which is not soon nor easily repaired. Tho God
graciously by his Word and Spirit renews his Work again upon their Souls, as in
the Case of David, Peter, and diverse others. VI. When a Man has quite made up
his Jewels, he puts them into a rich Cabinet. VI. So when God has quite made
up his spiritual Jewels, he puts them into Heaven; that is the rich and
glorious Cabinet which he has provided for all his choice and goodly Jewels.
VII. A Person that has many rich and choice Jewels, shows them, as he sees
occasion to his Friends, and also to others, declaring his Right to them, and
setting forth the Worth and Fxcellency of them. IV. So God in the Day to come,
when he has made up all the Jewels he intends to make, will reveal, show, or
make known his Saints to Angels and Men. Hence the Day of Christ's coming is
called the Day of the Manifestation of the Sons of God. They shall be mine,
says God. He will say in that Day, These are mine, these that you ungodly Ones
abused, hated, and persecuted, and thought not worthy to live, but accounted
the Offscouring of all things, behold now what rare and lovely Ones they are!
these are the Delight and Joy of my Heart, whom I value as my choicest
Treasure, and I will spare them, whilst you shall bear the Fierceness of my
Wrath and Indignation for ever. Then shall ye return, and discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, Mal. 3. ult.
between him that serves God and him that serves him not.

Disparity.
I. Other Jewels may be lost: But God will lose none of his Jewels.

II. He that makes other Jewels may not be the proper Owner of them, nor wear
them for an Ornament himself: But God, who makes all his spiritual Jewels, is
the proper Owner of them: This People have I formed for my self. They are also
made for his own Glory.

III. Other Jewels may be quite spoiled, broke to pieces, and become good for
nothing; the best and richest Jewels shall at last pass away, and perish for
ever: But God's Jewels shall never be utterly spoiled; for tho they may receive
some Damage by Satan's Temptations, and the Pollution of Sin; yet God will
perfect that which is wanting concerning them, and make them at last so
glorious, that they shall be out of Danger, and shall abide and shine in Beauty
and Glory to Eternity.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may infer, what horrid Iniquity the Enemies of God and his
Church are guilty of, and what a dreadful Account they have to give for
endeavoring, and with the greatest Rage and Malice, and unwearied Attempts,
contriving all ways imaginable to spoil, break in pieces, and utterly destroy
all God's choice and precious Jewels, which he is as tender of as the Apple of
his Eye; what will they do in the Day of Vengeance?

2. It speaks forth much Comfort to the Godly. O how are they esteemed, prized,
and valued by the Almighty! they are his Jewels, his special and peculiar
Treasure.

3. This may inform all Men, what the Reason is God is so much concerned for
the Good and Well-being of his own People, and so often appears to vindicate
their Innocence, and defend them from the Rage and Cruelty of wicked Men.

5. Let us enquire, whether we are God's Jewels, or not. (1.) Are we
regenerated Ones? have we the Pearl of Faith, Love, Humility? etc. (2.) Are we
holy, sincere and faithful in all things to God? (3.) Do we excel others? Is
there a real, or only a seeming Worth and Excellency in us? What do we more
than others? (4.) Do we grow in Grace? does the Work of God go on upon our
Hearts? Are we more sit for Heaven to day, than we were yesterday? A Jewel in
the hand of a Jeweller is every day nearer finishing. The Righteous shall hold
on his Way, and he that has clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger.

Saints compared to Kings.
Rev. 5.10. And have made us unto God Kings and Priests, etc.
THe Saints are in this Place and some others called Kings, which is one of the
highest Titles among Men.

Parallels.
I. KIngs are usually highly descended, or are Sons of Nobles: So the Saints
are all highly descended, they are born from above, born of God, and so may be
said to be the Offspring of Heaven: Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! Behold, 1 John 3.1,
2.
now are we Sons of God, etc.

II. Kings have great Attendants belonging to them: So the Saints have most
great and glorious Attendants belonging to them, viz. the holy Angels. No Kings
or Monarchs on Earth are honored like the Saints and Children of God, in
respect of the Excellency of their Retinue. See Angels under the Sixth Head.

III. Kings have their Crowns, and do reign, or else expect to reign: So the
Saints have a Crown laid up for them: 2 Timothy 4.18.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the
Righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day; and not to me only, but to all
them also that love his Appearance. Be thou faithful unto Death, Rev. 2.10.
Rev. 5.10.
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. And as they shall have a Crown, so they
shall reign upon the Earth as Kings.

IV. Kings are the principal Men on Earth, far exceeding in Honor and
Excellency all common People: So the Saints are the chief and principal Ones,
or the most excellent in all the Earth; it may be said of them, as of Jabesh, 1 Chronicles. 4.9, 10.
they are more honorable than their Brethren. What base and ignoble Persons
are the Wicked, to those noble Souls! The Ungodly, be they never so high and
great in Power and Sovereignty, are compared to Things very base, vile, and
contemptible, as will hereafter be shown. The Righteous is more excellent than
his Neighbor. Prove. 12.26.


V. Kings sometimes meet with great Trouble and Sorrow after they are anointed,
before they come to the quiet Enjoyment of their Crowns; they have been
severely persecuted, and chased from one Place to another, as King David
particularly was: So the Saints of God, tho they are anointed with the Oil of
Gladness, and have an Assurance given them of the Crown of Glory, meet with
very great Trouble in this World, being persecuted, tormented, afflicted, and
sometimes having no certain Dewlling Place, as is said of some of the ancient
Worthies, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.37


VI. Some Kings have possessed and reigned over many Kingdoms, their Dominions
have been very great: The Saints are the Heirs of a Kingdom, nay^ all the
Kingdoms under the whole Heavens shall be given to them. Rev. 11.15 Dan. 9.27.
The Kingdoms of this World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, etc. And the Kingdoms, and Dominions, and the Greatness of the Kingdom,
under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the Most
High, etc.

VII. Kings have great and noble Minds, they busy not themselves about mean
Matters: So the Saints have great and noble Spirits; they converse about Things
above; being risen with Christ, their Affections are not set upon Things below,
Col. 3 1, 2 Phil 3.20.
but seek those Things that are above, where Christ is at the right hand of
God. Our Conversation is in Heaven, etc.

VIII. Kings have many great and glorious Privileges and Prerogatives
appertaining to them; how are they honored and congratulated by the People! So
have the Saints. They shall sit down with Christ on his Throne; they shall judge
the World; they shall be honored by all; the Wicked shall bend their Knees
before them in the Day to come, etc.

There are many great Disparities, which we leave to the Reader's Observation.

Inferences.
LEt not the Saints be discouraged, nor faint under their Afflictions. What tho
David was hunted like a Partridg on the Mountains? He was the Lord's Anointed
for all that, and his Exaltation followed: So it is but a little while, if you
faint not, before God will exalt you.

2. O what manner of Love and Grace is this! What! has God made us his Sons,
Heirs, Joint-Heirs with Christ! Has he made us Kings! and shall we reign! etc.
What shall we render to the Lord! etc.

3. This may quicken and stir up all the Saints to live as becomes their
honorable Calling and Dignity. Has God made us Kings, and shall we live like
Beggars? Far be it from noble-spirited Saints so to do.

Saints compared to Priests.
Rev. 5.10. And has made us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc.

1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a holy Priesthood, etc.


GOD's People are called Priests, and an holy Priesthood, as appears by these
Scriptures. That of Kings shows forth the Dignity of the Saints, and this of
Priests respects their Office and Work.

Parallels.
I. THe Priests under the Law were set apart, or consecrated to God, to attend
him in his Service: So every true Christian God has set apart for himself; he
is separated from the World, and worldly Worships, and sinful ^ustoms, to the
holy Service of God. The Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.
Psalm. 4.3.


II. The Priests under the Law were admitted to approach near unto God; they
had more perfect Knowledge of him, and holy Intimacy with him, than others: So
the Saints are a People near to God: Ye who sometimes were afar of, Ephesians. 2.13.
are now made nigh by the Blood of Christ. They have more perfect and clear
Knowledge of God than others, and more precious Fellowship and ^ommunion with
him.

III. The Priests offered Sacrifices to God: So the Saints offer up spiritual
Sacrifices, a^ceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 1. They offer up their
Bodies and their Spirits, a broken and a contrite Heart. 2. They offer up their
Prayers upon that Golden Altar, which is as sweet Inc^nse in the Nostrils of
Go^. 3. They offer their Substance as God calls for it, which is a Sacrifice
well pleasing in his Sight. 4. They offer up Praises: Whosoever offers Praise,
glorifieth me; Psalm. 50. ult.
and to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of
God.

Inferences.
SAints are Priests, not typical Priests, but a Royal Priesthood, better than
the Priests under the Law; they are spiritual Priests, they offer up spiritual
Sacrifices, etc.

2. Their Persons, as well as their Sacrifices, are accepted of God, through
Jesus Christ; if the Person be not sanctified* the Offering is not accepted:
Joh. 17.19.
For their sakes sanctify I my self, that they also might be sanctified through
the Truth.

3. Let all take heed they offer not the Lame and the Blind, when they have a
Kid in the Flock. My Son, give me thy Heart. Prove. 23.26.


Metaphors, Similes, and other borrowed Terms, etc. CONCERNING WICKED MEN.
Wicked Men compared to Captives.
Isa. 61.1. Proclaim Liberty to the Captives.

Acts 8.23. For I perceive that thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity.

Gal. 4.3. Even so we, when we were Children, were in Bondage under the
Elements of the World.

Gal. 4.25. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers unto
Jerusalem which is, and is now in Bondage with her Children.

2 Timothy 2.26. And that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the
Devil, who are taken captive by him at his Will.

Heb. 2.15. And deliver them, who through Fear of Death were all their Life
time subject to Bondage.

2 Pet. 2.19. While they promise themselves Liberty, they themselves are the
Servants of Corruption; for of whom a Man is overcome, of the same is he
brought into Bondage.


COrporal Bondage or Captivity is as much as to say, Slavery and Thraldom under
some Tyrant, or cruel Enemy, that oppresses: And from these Scriptures it is
evident, that wicked Men (or such as are in the State of Nature, unconverted)
are in a State of Bondage, they are spiritual Slaves or Captives. And in
opening the Bondage-State the Ungodly are in, I shall show, 1. To whom they are
or may be said to be in Bondage. 2. How they were brought into this
Bondage-State. 3. The Nature of this spiritual Bondage.


1. They are in Bondage to Sin: He that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin.
Joh. 8.35.
Sin rules and reigns in wicked Men; they are overcome by their b^se and filthy
Lusts, and of whom a Man is overcome, of the same is he brought into Bondage. 2
Pet. 2.19 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians 2.2. Gal. 4 25.


2. They are in Bondage to Satan, taken captive by him at his Will; He rules in
the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience.

3. They are in Bondage to the Law: For being not able to perform the
Obligation or Requirements thereof, they are brought under the Power and
Bondage of that killing Letter.

4. They are in Bondage to Death; Death tyrannizeth over them, Heb. 2.15.
and through fear of it they are said to be continually in Bondage.

5. They are in Bondage to the Wrath of God, Joh. 3.36.
they are under the Power of God's dreadful Wrath.

Captive. Parallel. SOme that are in a State of Bondage were once Freemen.
ADam (and so all Mankind, How Mankind were brought into Bondage.
considered as being in his Loins) while he flood in that State of Innocence,
before he eat of the forbidden Fruit, was a free Man, he was not in Bondage to
any of these Enemies. II. Some are in a State of Bondage, by being the
Offspring of such Parents as are Slaves; for if the Parents are born Slaves,
their Children that are born in Captivity, are Captives likewise. II. So all
wicked Men are in Bondage, as they are the Offspring of old Adam: Psalm. 51.5.
All Mankind being born in Sin, Satan, Death, and Wrath has Power over them,
until delivered by Jesus Christ. And hence they are said to be by Nature
Children of Wrath. Ephesians. 2.2.
III. Some are brought into Bondage by the Power and Force of an Enemy, they
being surprised, and by reason of Weakness not able to withstand them, are
taken captive; as many of this and other Nations have been by the Turks. III.
Wicked Men are also actually taken captive, and brought into Bondage by Sin and
Satan; as being surprised by the Power of these Enemies, they are overcome, and
so brought into Captivity; Satan being stronger than they, he prevails against
them. 2 Timothy 2^ 26.
And that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are
taken captive by him at his Will. IV. Some by Allurements are enticed by an
Adversary, and that way overcome, and brought into Bondage. Pirates oft-times
put out false Colors, and pretend themselves to be Friends, that so they may
the better trapan and take poor unwary Persons. IV. Prove. 7.21
So wicked Men are by the Allurements and Enticements of Sin and Satan
overcome, and brought into Bondage. These spiritual Enemies by Policy deceive
and trapan the Souls of Men. Satan, like a cursed Pirate, puts out false
Colors, pretends himself a Friend; he presents the Pleasures and Profits of
the World to them, 1 Cor. 11.14.
and thereby overcomes them, and carries them away captive. V. Some Persons,
when they are taken captive by an Enemy, are stripped naked; their own Robes
being taken away, they have instead of them nothing but filthy Rags, to hide
their Nakedness withal. V. Adam, The sad and miserable Condition of Satan's
Captives.
when Satan overcame him by his Treachery and subtle Wiles, was stripped naked:
He lost all his precious Robes, viz. his spotless and perfect Righteousness,
and ever since his natural Offspring, while they remain unconverted, have
nothing but their own Righteousness to cover them, which is by the Holy Ghost
compared to filthy Rags. Some conceive by filthy Rags, Isa. 64 6.
the Spirit of God alludes to those Rags that Surgeons take off of corrupt
and filthy Sores, which we know are very loathsome; this shows that the State of
Sinners is very deplorable. VI. Some Persons who are taken captive, are put
into a Prison, nay, into a Dungeon, and remain under the power of a cruel
Keeper. VI. Sinners, whilst they remain in a State of Nature, Captives of Sin
and Satan, are in a Prison, in a deep Prison or Dungeon of Darkness, Col. 1.13.
called the Power of Darkness. This Prison is strong, there is no Man can break
through, and make an escape. It Is called a Pit, yea, Psalm. 40.2.
an horrible Pit, or Pit of Noise. Some understand, David means the Depth of
Afflictions; others, the horrible State of Unregeneracy, or deep Alienation
from the Life of God, wherein is heard nothing but the fearful and hideous
Noise of an accusing Conscience, and Wrath of an angry God. It Is a Pit wherein
is no Water, Zech. 9.11
viz. no Soul-Comfort nor Refreshment, etc. being under the Power and Tyranny
of Satan. VII. Some Persons, when they are taken captive, and put into Prison,
and also bound with Iron Chains, or Fetters of Brass, their Eyes also have been
put out. Thus the King of Babylon served Zedekiah King of Judah, 2 King. 25.7.
when Jerusalem was taken: And they slew the Sons of Zedekiah before his Eyes,
and put out the Eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with Fetters of Brass, and
carried him to Babylon. VII. Wicked Men are not only Captives, and put into a
bottomless Prison, but they are also bound. I perceive thou art in the Gall of
Bitterness, Acts 8.
and in the Bond of Iniquity. Hence the Prophet speaking of Christ, says, Isa.
61.1.
He has sent me to bind up the Brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound. Every ungodly
Man, whilst he remains in Satan's Kingdom, is bound with strong Bonds: First,
the Bond of a hard Heart; Jer. 5.3. Act. 26.18
secondly, the Bond of Ignorance; thirdly, the Bond of Unbelief: Which they are
no way able to break asunder, or get out of. And by this means they are fit for
any Drudgery the Devil has for them to do, the Eyes of their Understanding
being darkened, or put out. Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye that were sometimes in Darkness, etc. VIII. Some Persons that have been in
Captivity have been almost starved to Death, having had little more than Bread
and Water afforded them, nay, have been forced to eat such things as were not
fit for Food. VIII. Wicked Men, who are the Captives of Sin and Satan, are kept
at hard Commons; they never yet had the least Taste of that which is really
good, but they spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor
for that which satisfies not. And therefore says God, Isa. 55.1, 2
Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your Soul
delight it self in Fatness. Pray observe what the Holy Ghost compares the Food
of ungodly Sinners to: First, They are said to feed on the Wind; secondly, to
feed on Ashes; and thirdly, on Gravel; and fourthly, on Husks. Isa. 44.20. Hos.
12.1. Prove. 20.17.
The Prodigal would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks which the Swine
did eat. Should a poor Captive have nothing allowed him to eat, but Husks,
Gravel, or Ashes, all would conclude his Condition to be very miserable: so
miserable are all ungodly Sinners. Alas! all the Pleasures, Riches and Honors
of this World, or whatsoever it is that they feed upon, or let their Hearts run
out after, are, in comparison of Christ the Bread of Life, and those other good
Things which Believers daily feed and feast upon, but as feeding on Husks and
Gravel. If Men naturally have no Food to eat, they will pine away, and soon
die: So were it not for those earthly Comforts, that the Ungodly have to feed
upon, and support their Spirits with, (tho you see what the Nature of them is)
they would soon pine away. Do but dispossess them of any of these earthly
Enjoyments, Psalm. 34.8.
and their Hearts (like the Heart of Nabal) would presently die in them; for
they never tasted how good the Lord is, how sweet Promises are, what it is to
have the Love and Favor of God; never tasted of the Feast of a good
Conscience, nor of the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. IX. Some Persons that have
been taken captive, have been grievously wounded; they have not only been
stripped, put into Prison, and almost starved to Death, but also have lain there
in a sad, bloody, and mangled Condition, and their Wounds let alone to fester,
stink, and be very loathsome. IX. The Wicked are not only Captives of the Devil,
stripped of all their first Righteousness, in Prison, in Iron Chains, almost
starved to Death spiritually; but also they are wounded from the Sole of the
Foot to the Head, there is no soundness in it, Isa 1.6.
but Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores. Some conclude, that the Prophet
speaks of the Body Politic, or National Church of the Jews, which was under
great Affliction, and so was that way sorely wounded. But doubtless the Wounds
and Sickness spoken of here, were those Sins and abominable Evils that People
were guilty of; which appears from what is said by the Lord in the first Verse,
Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: And as a
Proof of it, he says, The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint. Sin
was the Sickness, and the Wounds; and those Afflictions that God had brought
upon them, was the Cure. But why (says God) should I afflict or chastise you
any more, or use Means for your Help and Healing, when under the Use or
Exercise of that Sovereign Means I have used, you grow worse and worse? It Is
said of the Man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among Thieves,
Luke 10.30
that he was not only stripped of his Raiment, but wounded also. My Wounds stink,
and are corrupt, says David; and in another place he cries out, Lord, Psalm.
88.51
have mercy upon me, and heal my Soul; for I have sinned against thee. From
whence it appears, Psalm 41.4.
that a godly Man may be wounded by his Sin, and that sorely too. Every Sin
makes a Wound in the Soul; what a fearful Case are unconverted Souls then in? O
that Sinners would but consider this. See Sin a Wound and Sickness. X. Some
Persons that have been taken captive, and brought into Prison and Bondage,
besides other sad Circumstances they have been under, they have been brought
under the Sentence of Death, nay, and for their horrid Rebellions, Treasons,
etc. under a fearful and painful Death, as to be torn in pieces, or burned
alive. X. The Ungodly, who remain Captives to Satan, being under the power of
their Lusts, or abiding in the State of Unregeneracy, are not only under all
the sad Circumstances you have heard; but to render them every way miserable,
(as in truth their present State is) they are under the Sentence of Death.
Perhaps some would conclude, that Death to such Persons I have given the
Character of, is better than Life; and, with Job, they had better choose it.
Alas! it would be so indeed, were it to die the common Death of all Men. Death
puts an end to all the external Miseries of Mortals: but the Death of Sin's
Captives is quite another thing: They are condemned to be burned, to be burned
alive too; but this is not all, to lie burning in the Fire of God's eternal
Wrath for ever, where they shall be always dying, but cannot die: Where the
Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. Captive. Disparity. CAptives,
that are so only to Men, are but externally enslaved. BUt wicked Men, that are
Slaves to Sin and Satan, are captivated in their Souls, notwithstanding as to
the Body they may be at Liberty, as to outward Thraldom. II. Some Persons may
be free and at Liberty in their Souls, at the same time when they may be
Captives as to their Bodies, and so their Captivity may seem less grievous to
them. II. But it cannot be so said of a wicked Man; for whatever Misery befalls
his Body, it is abundantly aggravated by and from the Captivity and Slavery of
his Soul; nay, in the enjoyment of his greatest outward Liberty, he is in
dreadful Thraldom by Sin and Satan. III. Captives that are so only to Men, may
and have been redeemed with Money. III. But spiritual Captives, such as are in
Bondage to Sin and Satan, cannot be redeemed with Money. It is not Silver or
Gold, that can purchase the Redemption of one of Satan's Slaves; for the
Redemption of the Soul is so precious, that nothing can make a Compensation for
it, but the precious Blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.
IV. If no other Means can procure the Liberty of Captives, that are so only as
to their Bodies, yet Death sets them free, and those to whom they are in
Bondage have no more to do with them. IV. But wicked Men, living and dying in
Bondage to Satan and their own Lusts, cannot be free by Death, but are thereby
put into an irrecoverable State of eternal Misery, from which there can be no
Redemption, being delivered up to Satan. V. Some that are Captives only in
their Bodies, are so sensible of their Misery and Thraldom, that they seek, and
desire to improve all Means imaginable for their Deliverance. V. But some
wicked Men are not only insensible of their Bondage to the Devil, and their own
Lusts, but are lifeless as to any ways or means of Deliverance. Tho Means be
used daily to convince them of the dreadful Danger of their Bondage-State, and
of the Way and Means of their Redemption; yet through the Blindness and
Hardness of their Hearts, they rest at quiet in the Devil's Prison, where they
are shut up as Captives. And that which declares their greatest Thraldom and
Misery is, they refuse all the Tenders of Grace in order to their Redemption,
nay, set light by Jesus Christ, who came to proclaim Liberty, etc. VI. Captives
to Men only, may may be redeemed, and set at Liberty, and yet so captivated by
them again, as that they may die in Slavery. VI. But wicked Men, tho the
saddest Captives imaginable, in respect of Misery and Thraldom, yet if set free
by Jesus Christ, they shall be no more the Slaves of Satan: Joh. 8.36.
For those whom the Son makes free, are free indeed; free from the Dominion and
Power of Sin and Satan here, and free from the Wages of Sin, which is eternal
Death, hereafter.

Inferences.
Quest. SOme may say, If this be the State of unconverted Men and Women, they
are miserable Objects indeed. But is there no Relief nor Help for these poor
Captives? must they perish inevitably, and be damned for ever?

Answ. God forbid! There is good News for these Slaves and Captives of Sin and
the Devil, a Gospel to be preached to them; God is full of Bowels; were there
no Deliverance to relieve, it would be sad beyond what any are able to
conceive. But to prove that there is Salvation and Relief for the vilest
Sinners, consider these three things following.

1. The Lord Jesus has purchased Deliverance for them, he has laid down a
satisfactory Price or Ransom for those Captives, who through Faith in him shall
obtain Deliverance.

2. Christ is ordained and anointed to preach glad Tidings to them. Luke 4.18.
Isa. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the Poor: He has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted, to preach
Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering Sight to the Blind, and to set at
Liberty them that were bound.

3. Many who have been in the like State of Captivity and Bondage have been set
at Liberty; Thousands that have been Slaves of Sin and Satan, through the
infinite Mercy of God are now in a perfect State of Freedom. Such were some of
you, 1 Cor. 6.11.
says the Apostle, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

Sirs, what blessed News is this for poor Sinners! Suppose a Man who is a Slave
or Captive, and suffers justly for his Sin, were stripped naked, and put into a
Dungeon, bound with cruel and heavy Chains, wounded in a most fearful manner
from Head to Foot, and only fed with Ashes and Gravel-stones, and in this
Condition were condemned to abide for many Years, and then to be put to the
greatest Tortures that Mortals can devise, where he should suffer a long Time
together, always dying, and yet cannot die; and that on a sudden one should
come to him with the joyful News of a full and perfect Deliverance; would not
this be the welcomest News that ever he heard? Sinners, may not the Tidings you
hear, cause your Hearts to leap in you for Joy! Tho you have undone your selves
by your wicked Works, yet God has devised a way to deliver and save you for
ever.

Quest. How, by what means, and by whom (may some poor ignorant Soul say) is
Deliverance brought about?

Answ. Deliverance out of this Bondage-State is by Jesus Christ, only by him,
neither is there Salvation by any other. If the Son therefore make you free,
Acts 4.12 Joh 8.36.
ye shall be free indeed. But further to answer the Question, I say, the
Liberty is, 1. By a great Ransom. 2. By a Conquest.


1. There was no other Way found out to bring Sinners out of this their
miserable Condition, but a great Sum must be laid down: Ye are bought with a
Price. 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18
But know this, We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold, etc. All the Gold and Silver in the World, and all the Riches thereof,
were there Ten Thousand Worlds more, could not redeem one Soul out of this
State of Bondage and Slavery to Sin and Satan. The Redemption of the Soul is
precious, Psalm. 49.8. Mic. 6.7.
and cease for ever. Nay, if a Man should offer up his Son or Daughter, the
Fruit of his Body, for the Sin of his Soul, it would be utterly rejected,
Nothing could redeem us but the Price of Blood, and that too the precious Blood
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19
as a Lamb without spot. [See Surety, Vol. 1.]

2. Deliverance out of this Bondage is by Conquest. Unless the Savior of
Mankind conquer those cruel Enemies of the Soul, not one Sinner can be set at
Liberty: For it is not the ba^e Ransom or Price of Christ's most precious Blood,
I mean the laying down of his Life, that could work a perfect Freedom for us;
for tho that made a full Compensation to the Justice of God, yet Sinners being
under the Power of Sin, Satan, and Death, these Enemies take no notice at all
of that Price; for our Savior did not capitulate with them, neither will they
give up their Prisoner till they are overcome, and (as I may say) are forced to
do it: For as Christ says, When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace, Luk
1^.^1
his Goods are in Peace: But when a stronger than he shall come, and overcome
him, he takes from him all his Armor, etc. Satan is this strong Man armed, and
Jesus Christ the Person that is stronger than he; and it is our Mercy God sent
us such a strong and mighty Savior, one able to subdue Sin, conquer Satan,
overcome Death, that so he might deliver us, who were taken captive by them at
their Will. 1 J h. 3 8.
To this end was the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the Works of
the Devil. He through Death, and rising again from the Dead, has destroyed
Death, and him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil; and delivered
them who through Fear of Death were all their Life time subject to Bondage.
Heb. 2.14, 15. Joh. 16 33
He bids us also, Be of good cheer, for he has overcome the World.

This Conquest by the Lord Jesus is twofold:

1. For us without us: When he ascended on high, he led Captivity captive. He
took him captive, Ephesians. 4.8. Col. 2.15.
that had taken Mankind captive. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he
made a Show of them openly, (the Work is already done) triumphing over them in
it.

2. This Conquest is wrought by Christ also in the Soul; for palpable it is,
that every unconverted Person is under the Power of these cruel Enemies, (as
has been already shown) and have they a sufficient Power of their own to
encounter with them? Is sinful, weak, and depraved Man, a Match for Satan? Is
he able to subdue and overcome him? Or can he by any inherent Power of his own
destroy the Power of Sin, and change his own Heart? Can the Ethiopian change
his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Isa. 13.23.
Is Man able to raise himself from the Power of the Grave? Any of these things
are too hard for Sinners to do; and therefore it follows, Christ must conquer
these Enemies in us, he must break our Bonds, and burst our Chains in pieces,
etc. Pray remember, Christ is a perfect and complete Savior, he alone does the
Work, Isa. 63.5.
he does it for us, and also in us; His own Arm brought Salvation; He has no
Partner nor Competitor.

Secondly; As this may serve to humble Mankind, so also it may lift up their
Hearts who are redeemed, Job 7.17.
in Praises to the Almighty. O what is Man that God should be mindful of him!
What! regard such a deplorable Rebel, Slave, and Captive of Sin and the Devil!
And the rather, considering the Nature of that glorious Freedom procured by
Jesus Christ, which is, 1. A Freedom from the Guilt of Sin. 2. A Freedom from
the Filth of Sin. 3. A Freedom from the Power of Sin: Sin shall not have
Dominion over you. Romans 6.14
4. A Freedom from the eternal Punishment of Sin; a Freedom from Sin, from
Satan, from the Law, from Death, and from Wrath; and by this means made the
Sons and Daughters of God, making them nigh to him, enjoying Union and
Communion both with the Father and the Son, having Peace, and good Assurance of
eternal Life.

Thirdly; It may cause the redeemed Ones of God to pity Sinners, pity their
unconverted Relations; what a deplorable Condition are they in! How exceedingly
are Persons concerned for their Relations who are in Slavery, tho it extend but
to the Body? and what Ways and Means do they with all diligence make use of, to
procure their Liberty and Freedom! And by how much the Bondage of Sin and Satan
exceeds all the Slavery that Man can possibly be exposed unto; by so much the
more ought that Means to be improved, that may effectually accomplish their
Redemption.

Wicked Men Sluggards.
Prove. 6.9. How long will thou sleep, O Sluggard? when will thou arise out of
thy Sleep?
HOw long will thou sleep? Sleep is taken variously in the holy Scripture.

1. For the binding or closing up the Senses, to give the Body Rest: The same
Night Peter was sleeping between two Soldiers, Acts 12.26. This is a natural
Sleep.

2. It Is taken Metaphorically,

(1.) For Death. Hence it is said, David, after he had served his Generation
according to the Will of God, he fell asleep. For now shall I sleep in the
Dust, and thou shall seek me in the Morning, etc. Job 7.21. This is a mortal
Sleep.

(2.) For a dead or senseless State in Sin, i. e. Sin ruling and overruling in
Men's Hearts before Conversion. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
Dead, and Christ shall give thee Life. Ephesians. 5.14. This is a spiritual Sleep.

(3.) For a drouzy and slothful Frame of Heart, which often attends the Godly:
I sleep, but my Heart waketh. Cant. 5.2.

(Thou Sluggard,) or slothful Person. There is a threefold Sluggard:

1. One that is idle, loving Ease and bodily Rest, neglecting his worldly
Concerns. I went by the Field of the Slothful, etc. Prove. 24.30.

2. One that is spiritually idle, wholly careless and negligent of his Soul,
and the great Concernments thereof: The Sluggard says, there is a Lion in the
Way.

3. One that has been formerly awakened in a spiritual Sense, and is fallen
into a cold, drouzy, and negligent State again.

I shall run the Parallel with respect had principally to that Description
Solomon gives of a Sluggard.

Simile. Parallel. A Sluggard is a Person that makes Excuses: The slothful Man
says, Prove. 22.13.
There is a Lion without, I shall be slain in the Street. SO the Sinner, or
spiritual Sluggard, has many Excuses; If I should arise, says he, and follow
Christ, I shall suffer in my Name, be reproached, suffer in my Estate; nay, it
may come to pass, says he, that such as are religious indeed may be put to
Death. There are many Romish Lions without, persecuting and devouring Beasts of
Prey, that I fear will fly upon me in the Street; and hence he resolves to
keep himself in a whole Skin. II. A Sluggard ( Solomon says) is like a Door
that turns upon its Hinges: Prove. 26.14.
As a Door turns upon its Hinges; so does the slothful Man upon his Bed. II.
So a Sinner, or spiritual Sluggard, seems to move this way, and that way: He
reads God's Word, and hears Sermons, and perhaps prays too, but still is where
he was; he is not renewed in his inward Man, no Change has passed upon him; he
is one that loves his Lusts: this and the other Sin, and is not taken off of
his old Hinges; he is still in the State of fallen Man, not taken off of the
old Root, and transplanted into Christ. III. The Sluggard is a Man of Desires,
but not of Endeavors. The Sluggard desires, Prove. 13.4
and has nothing; but the Soul of the Diligent shall be made fat; compared
with Prove. 22.25. The Desire of the Sluggard kills him, because his Hands
refuse to work. III. So the Wicked Man, or spiritual Sluggard, is full of
Desires; he with Balaam desires to die the Death of the Righteous, he desires
to be saved, Numb. 23.10.
and has many faint Desires to be forgiven; he cries out sometimes (when
Conscience flies in his Face, and rebukes him) God forgive me, the Lord help
me, etc. but never strives with all his Might against his Sin, and the
Temptations of the Devll: hence his Desires are said to slay him. Desires
without Endeavors will deceive the Soul, nay, eternally ruin and damn the
Soul. What avails it a Man that is hungry, to wish for Bread, when he never
labors for it? Prove. 10.^ 2 Pet. 1.5, 10.
The Promise runs to the diligent and industrious Person; he shall be fed, but
the Sluggard shall suffer Hunger, and pine away. IV. The Sluggard neglects his
Vineyard, and lets his Field run all over with Nettles and Weeds. I went by the
Field of the Slothful, P^ov. 24.30, 31.
by the Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding, and lo, it was all grown
over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the Face thereof, and the Stone Wall
thereof was broken down. IV. So the Sinner, or spiritual Sluggard, neglects his
Soul, and the Souls of his Family: tho he provides for the Body, and takes care
what he and his shall have to eat, and what to put on; yet his Soul, and the
Souls of such as are about him, are neglected; nothing but Weeds and Corruption
grow there; Sin and filthy Lust predominate, Pride, Passion, Jam. 3.16.
Covetousness, and every evil Work. V. The Way of the Sluggard seems to be
barred or hedged up, that he cannot go on, he cannot find the Path. Prove. 15.19.
The Way of the slothful Man is a Hedge of Thorns; but the Way of the Righteous
is plain. V. So the Sinner's Way, is as it were, hedged up: For like as a Hedge
obstructs or hinders a Man sometimes in his Way, that he cannot pass along; so
the Wicked by one Temptation, Obstruction, or another, are hindered from going
on in the Ways of God. Perhaps the Snares that attend their Trade, are as a
Hedge to them; or the Fear of displeasing a Father, or Uncle, or some other
Relation, lest they should be left out of their Will, or dispossessed of an
Estate; or a Landlord, or some great Man or Neighbor, by whom they may
possibly have their Livelihood, may be as a Hedge or Bar to obstruct them in
their following of Christ; and by this means is the spiritual Sluggard
discouraged. VI. The Sluggard does not enjoy the Good that is in his hand: The
slothful Man roasteth not that which he took in hunting; Prove. 12.27.
that is, when he has got Food, he does not prepare it, nor make it meet to be
received, nor feed upon it. VI. So the spiritual Sluggard does not enjoy the
heavenly good Things that seem to be in his hand: Prove. 17.16
Wherefore is there a Price in the hand of a Fool to get Wisdom, seeing he has
no Heart to it? Some Men hunt (as it were) after Knowledge; go from one Place to
another, will hear this worthy Minister, and that worthy Minister, and at last
when they have found the Venison, (I mean, come to understand the Will of God)
they do not subject to it: they know what the Threatening is, but fear it not;
and know what the Precept is, but obey it not; and know what the Promise is,
and yet believe and apply it not. And thus they roast not that which they have
taken in hunting; they feed not upon the Word; they are forgetful Hearers, and
not Doers of the Word, Jam 1.22.
and thereby deceive their own Souls. VII. The Sluggard is one that loves not
to encounter with Difficulties; he cannot abide to think of enduring a little
Hardship. The Sluggard will not plow by reason of the Cold. Prove. 20 4
VII. The Spiritual Sluggard loves his Ease. If Religion cannot be owned,
professed, and stuck to, unless a Man offer some Force (as it were) unto
himself, and expose the Flesh to some Hardships, he presently grows weary of
it. He cannot in the Morning go to Prayer, because his worldly Business calls
for him, or perhaps it is cold, or he is indisposed, etc. And perhaps he cannot
pray at Night, because it does not agree with the Flesh; the Body is weary, and
would fain go to Bed. And he cannot go to Church to hear the Word of God,
because the Wind blows, or it rains; or he has wearied himself the day before,
and so cannot rise early enough; or it is a great Way, and the Ways are bad,
etc. Yet he knows in his Conscience, that if there were but a good Bargain to
be bought, or some worldly Advantage to be had, tho it were not above the Value
of half Five Pound, all these Obstructions would be nothing. But perhaps some
Sluggards may get over these things; and yet if there lie other Difficulties in
the Way, they cannot hold the Plough of the Gospel; if there is a Blast of
Persecution feared, he knows not how to encounter with that. And thus the
Sluggard discourages himself. VIII. The Sluggard, tho he is so slothful, as to
hide his hand in his Bosom, and is grieved to bring it again to his Mouth, yet
he is wise in his own Eyes. Prove. 26.16.
The Sluggard is wiser in his own Conceit, than seven Men that can render a
Reason. VIII. So the spiritual Sluggard, tho he is monstrous idle, prays as if
he prayed not, and reads as if it were a Burden to him, and hears the Word
with no delight, his Heart is asleep, and perhaps his Eyes too; yet he is very
wise in his own Conceit. Notwithstanding he is such a poor, carnal, worldly
Wretch, he has high Thoughts of himself, and cries out, when reproved, I know
as much as you; mind your own Matters; every Tub shall stand upon its own
Bottom; why do you trouble your self with me? Thus every Man is right in his
own Eyes, but the Lord pondereth the Heart. Prove. 21.2
IX. The Sluggard is a Man that seems to desire but a little time, and then he
will awake: Yet a little Sleep, yet a little Slumber, yet a little folding of
the hands to sleep, etc. As much as if he should say, Let me alone yet a
little, I will sleep but a little longer; let me have a little more Sleep, etc.
IX. So the spiritual Sluggard seems also to desire but a little time to gratify
his Flesh, and please his sensual Appetite, to walk in ways of Vanity, and sin
against God. I will (says an ungodly Person) repent, or it is my purpose to
reform my Ways; but let me alone a little longer, it is time enough yet. It Is a
great while to Day, says the Sluggard, when one comes to awake him early in
the Morning: so says the Sinner, It Is a great while before Christ will come,
or before old Age and Death will come; in his Heart therefore he is resolved to
continue in his evil and ungodly Courses a little longer: Yet a little Sleep,
yet a little Slumber, yet a little folding of the Hands to sleep. Pray observe,
how sweet Sleep seems to be to a Sluggard; so the Ways of Sin and Vanity seem
sweet to an unconverted Man: And as hard Labor is grievous to such a Person;
so is Godliness (I mean strict and real Godliness, Godliness in the Power of
it) to an unsanctified Heart. X. Lastly; A Sluggard cannot abide to be
disturbed: O let me lie, let me sleep; what ado you make! is the Voice of a
slothful Man. X. A Sinner, or spiritual Sluggard, cannot endure to be
disturbed; the Thoughts of Death are to him like the Handwriting on the Wall;
Dan. 5.
he loves not that Conscience should call upon him to awake him, nor Ministers;
nor any Friends he has; nay, such as would, or do strive to rouse a Sinner,
are the unwelcomest People in the World to him. Repent! repent! what ado is
here, says the graceless Soul, can you not let me alone? pray do not trouble
me. You know who sent away Paul, being unwilling to hear any more at that time.

Inferences.
THis shows what a sad and dangerous Condition Sinners are in; they are not
only asleep, but in a dead Sleep, and know not how near eternal Ruin they are.

II. We shall endeavor therefore to awaken the Sinner out of his deep Sleep.

1. Sinner, God calls aloud upon thee: Awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the Dead. How long will thou sleep, O Sluggard?

2. God has called not only loud, but long upon you. Consider what Danger you
expose your Souls unto; you put an Opportunity into the Devil's hands to
destroy you. How easy is it for a weak Enemy to destroy a mighty Champion, when
he is asleep? Jael, a Woman, soon destroyed Sisera when he was asleep.

3. May I not say, Sinner, the Philistines are upon thee, and thy Soul is in
danger of being made a Prey for ever?

4. Many ways has God used to awaken thee: He has employed his Ministers, he
has set Conscience on work, he has brought forth many dreadful Judgments, and
all to awaken thee; and shall all Means fail and be insufficient?

5. Thou losest many choice Blessings by lying thus asleep in thy Sin.

6. There is Grace offered you, Pardon offered you, Peace offered you; and will
not this stir you up? Nay, more than all, Christ is offered you, Heaven offered
you, a Kingdom, and Crown of endless Glory is offered you: Soul, rouse up, and
look about, consider the Opportunity that is now in your hands; will not Life
and Light, Pardon and Peace, God and Christ, Heaven and Happiness, do you much
Good?

Prove. 6 8, 9
7. It Is Harvest-Time. Go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her Ways, and be
wise. She provideth her Meat in the Summer, and gathers her Food in the
Harvest. And shall such a small and contemptible Animal be wiser than you?

8. The Harvest will soon be gone, the Day of Grace be over, and then it will
be too late. Jer. 8.20.
The Harvest is past, the Summer ended, and we are not saved.

9. If you will not sow now because it is cold, you are like to begin Harvest,
and have nothing, viz. at the End of the World; and then you will say, Lord,
Lord, open unto us; and he will say, Verily, verily I know you not, depart from
me, ye Workers of Iniquity.

10. Let me tell thee, thou art just ready to drop into Hell, thou sleep in
a dangerous Place; awake, Sinner, or thou art damned. If thy House were all on
fire, and thy Neighbors should not cry out to thee to save thy self, thou
would conclude they were without all Bowels of Humanity: Sinner, this is thy
Condition, thy Soul is on a flame; see what Sin, that evil Spark, has done; I
can do no less than cry out, Fire, Fire; will thou sleep, and be burnt for
ever? The Lord awaken thee.

III. Let Saints bless God they are awakened out of their sleepy State.

IV. Let not Satan, this World, nor any other Enemy lull you asleep again. Let
us not sleep, as do others. Christians are subject to fall into a spiritual
Drouziness; see Mat. 25.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. O cry therefore with David, Lord,
open thou mine Eyes, lest I sleep the Sleep of Death.

Quest. Some may say, From whence does it arise, that the Saints are so subject
to be overtaken with spiritual Drouziness?

Answ. 1. From the Weakness and Dullness of the Flesh: The Spirit indeed is
willing, but the Flesh is weak.

2. By being slothful, negligent, and out of Employment, when we grow
indifferent and careless, and neglect our Work, neglect Prayer, Reading and
Hearing God's Word, Prove. 19.15.
no marvel if we soon fall asleep: Slothfulness casts into a deep Sleep.

3. By being amongst sleepy Folks: This is apt to make a wakeful Person in a
little time drowsy, and subject to nod too; a sleepy Family, a sleepy Church, a
sleepy Ministry, usually has bad effects upon this account upon a Spiritual
Christian, therefore prize a Soul-awakening Ministry.

4. By means of long watching, Whilst the Bridegroom tarried, they all
slumbered and slept.

5. A black, dark, and gloomy Day is subject to cause one to grow drowsy, as
most men can experience.

6. By an Apprehension it is a long while to day, time enough, says the
Sluggard, to arise. Men think of living long, and that it will be a great while
before the Lord comes, etc.

Wicked Men Fools.
Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God.

Eccles. 10.3. Yea also, when he that is a Fool walks by the way, his Wisdom
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a Fool.

Job 5.2, 3. For Wrath kills the foolish Man, and Envy slays the silly One.

Job 30.8. They were Children of Fools, yea, Children of base Men, they were
viler than the Earth.

Luke 12. Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be required of thee.


SIN is Folly, great Folly, and Sinners are Fools; how often in the Proverbs
are ungodly Men (tho accounted very worldly-wise) called Fools, simple Ones,
Men of no Understanding?

Simile. Parallel. A Fool is one that knows not what is good, what is best for
him; he is a Man of no Understanding. SO wicked Men know not what is good and
right in it self; they know not what is good for themselves, they are Men of no
Understanding; they cry, Who will show us any Good? That is, Psalm. 4.6.
says Mr. Caryl, any good Cheer, Plenty of Corn and Wine. They esteem Gold and
Silver, and other outward good Things, before Pardon, Peace of Conscience, and
the Favor of God, and are therefore Fools. II. A Fool or Idiot will hurt,
wrong, or abuse himself. Perhaps you have heard of the Gentleman's Fool, who
happened to be in Company with a Carpenter, and the Carpenter making himself
merry with him, hid his Hat: But it so fell out (as the Matter is related) the
Carpenter some time after chanced to fall asleep with his Head upon a Block,
which the Fool observing, he took an Ax, and chopp'd off his Head, and hid it
amongst the Chips, and then went laughing away; but being asked, wherefore he
laughed? O (says he) I have cut off the Carpenter's Head, and have hid it
amongst the Chips; and I wonder how he will do to find it when he awakes. But
for this he was committed to Prison, and when he was brought to his Trial, the
Judge was informed that he was a natural Fool; but that he might be convinced it
was true, he ordered a Knife to be given to him, and accordingly it was; then
said the Judge to the poor Idiot, Cut your self with that Knife; and he (poor
Soul!) did so immediately: by which the Judge knew he was indeed a Fool, and so
acquitted him. II. Wicked Men hurt themselves: Nothing wrongs or wounds a Man
more than Sin, hence called a Dart, Sting, etc. Yet so void are all ungodly Men
of Understanding, that they consent to Sin, yield to Sin, run (as it were) this
Spear into their own Bowels, wound themselves to the very Heart, and yet say,
Are not we in Sport? Can there be any greater Folly, or a more palpable Sign of
a Fool, than for a Man to whip, lash, scourge, and do thus unto himself? When
Satan tempts Men to sin, he does (as it were) put a Knife into their hands, and
then bids them cut and slash themselves with it; and yet no sooner does Satan
thus tempt and entice them, but they presently consent to him, until they have
wounded themselves from the Crown of their Heads, to the Soles of their Feet.
What Man but a Fool would run into the Hornets Nests? or after this lamentable
manner wound himself? Sinners are such Fools, that they play with the Asp, and
delight to be at the Mouth of the Cockatrice-Den. Sin in the holy Scriptures is
compared to both these cruel Serpents; and hence the Poison of Asps is said to
be under their Tongues. Who but Fools or mad Men, Psalm. 140.3. Romans 3.13
will sport and play with such venomous Serpents, or drink down deadly Poison,
when told again and again what it is, and what the Effects of it will be, and
yet they will do it. Prove. 23.31, 32.
Look not upon the Wine when it is red, when it gives its Color in the Cup,
when it moves it self aright: That is, whatever Allurements there are to Sin,
take heed of it: At last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder.
III. Is not that Man a Fool, who will harbor a Thief in his House? and tho he
be told of it, and that he is in danger of losing all his Goods, and having his
Throat cut by him, (he being a bloody Murderer) yet laughs at it, and loves
his Enemy, and hugs him in his Bosom, and resolves to eat and drink with him,
and lodge him in his chiefest Room; and yet is informed this Thief never spared
any Man that showed him Favor. III. Wicked Men harbor Sin, and deceitful Lusts
in their Souls, which is the bloodiest Thief and Murderer that ever was; that
spares none, nor ever did, who entertained it, or took delight therein. It has
slain and utterly undone Thousands, and Ten Thousands, yea, many Millions; yet
they hug this cursed Traitor, and let him lodge in their Hearts, and lie in
their Bosoms, and show him all the Favor and Kindness imaginable; and do they
not from hence appear to be the greatest Fools in Nature? IV. Is not that Man a
Fool, that striveth with one that is infinitely stronger than himself? or
thinks a Thorn Hedge can stand before a consuming Fire? or supposes a Potsheard
can prevail against the Potter? IV. Wicked Men strive with the great God, and
do they not in this show themselves to be Fools? Have they an Arm like God? Job
40.9.
can they thunder with a Voice like him? yet they continually resist him, and
fight against him. They that go on in their evil Ways, make War with the
Almighty, and Dread-Sovereign of Heaven and Earth. Woe unto him that striveth
with his Maker: Let the Potsheard strive with the Potshards of the Earth. Isa.
45.9.
Do you not see this day, how Man, sorry Man, sets himself against God! they
are resolved to see what they can do, they will not yet lay down the Cudgels;
they set their Wisdom against God's Wisdom, and try if they can counter-work
him in the Ways of his Providence. Now, what a folly is this! God is as a
consuming Fire, and Man is as Stubble fully dry. See what Jehovah himself says
upon this account: Who would set the Briars and Thorns against me in Battle? I
would go through them, Isa. 27.4.
I would burn them together. Now is not he that takes up Arms against such an
Enemy, that commands Heaven and Earth, a Fool? He whom all the Forces of Earth
and Hell are not able to withstand; who at a Word of his Mouth makes Frogs
invade Pharaoh, and Stars to fight against Sisera; who makes the Hills and
Mountains quake and tremble before him, etc. He is wise in Heart, and mighty in
Strength; Job 9.4.
who ever hardened their Heart against him, and prospered? V. Is not he a Fool,
that has not Wisdom enough to direct himself? But then what will you say of
him that will not follow the Counsel and Direction of the Wise? Tho he is told,
the Way that he is in will bring him into a Lion's Den; or if he step one Step
further, he will fall into a Furnace of Fire: yet resolves to go on,
notwithstanding he confesses he has no ground to question the Truth of that,
which is in Faithfulness told him. V. Wicked Men have not Wisdom enough to
direct themselves; but that which adds to their Folly is this, They will not
take the Counsel of the wise God, nor the Direction of his faithful Ministers.
Tho they are told day by day, that if they proceed and go on in the Ways they
are in, viz. swear, lie, whore, be drunk, etc. they must perish, and be damned
for ever; and that they know not, but the next time they commit any of those
Sins, they may fall into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone: yet
they will go on, and continue in their Sins, contemning all Advice and Counsel,
tho they have not the least ground to question the Truth of what is declared to
them, since the Word of God says positively, Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish: And that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God;
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, etc. nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners. And now
tho they know they are guilty of some of these, or the like Sins, yet they
resolve to live in them, and therefore are Fools. VI. Is not he a Fool, that is
not able to judge of the Nature of Things, or of Times, or Occasions, and from
hence is angry with every thing that suits not with his Nature, or foolish
Humor? He will be angry with the Sun, if it shine hotter than he would have it,
and with the Winds, if they blow harder than he would have them; he likes not
the Winter, nor would have it ever rain. VI. Wicked Men are such Fools that
they know not the Nature of Things, Times, nor Occasions. He is offended with
those Ways of God that cross his sinful Appetite; he would fain have God yield
to him, and order Things that suit his filthy Lusts. If the Word forbid all
Sin, and would, if it might kindle upon his Heart and Conscience, burn up and
destroy all his Lusts; presently he cries out, It Is too hot, and therefore
strives to put it out. In a word, he would be saved in a way of Sin, i. e. have
his Wounds healed, and yet the Sting let alone in the Flesh; he would be well,
but take no Physic; would go to Heaven, but never walk in the way to it; he
would not be naked, and yet will put on no Clothes, etc. and therefore a Fool.
To vex and be angry at the Troubles that fall upon us, or at the Hand of God
which sends them, is a high Point of Folly. VII. A Fool will take Brass
Counters for Gold, and be pleased with Bugles more than with Diamonds. When an
Heir (says Mr. Caryl) is impleaded for an Idiot, Caryl on Job c. 5. p. 182.
the Judge commands an Apple, or a Counter, with a Piece of Gold to be set
before him, to try which he will take: and if he take the Apple, or the
Counter, and leave the Gold, he is then cast for a Fool, and unable to manage
his Estate; for he knows not the Value of Things, or how to make a true
Election. VI. Wicked Men are thus foolish, and more; for when Bugles and
Diamonds, Counters and Gold are set before them, they leave the Diamonds and
the Gold, and please themselves with those Toys and Baubles; when (which is
infinitely more sottish) Heaven and Hell, Life and Death, are set before them,
they choose Hell rather than Heaven, and Death rather than Life; they take the
mean; transitory, trifling Things of this World, before the Favor of God, the
Pardon of Sin, a Part in Jesus Christ, and an Inheritance amongst the Saints in
Light; they prefer a Moment's time of sinful Ease and Pleasure, before an
Eternity of Joy and Glory in Heaven; they prefer the Creature above the
Creator; they labor more for the present Good of their Bodies, than for the
eternal Good of their Souls, which are ten thousand times of greater Worth: And
do not these things demonstrate fully that they are Fools? VIII. Is not he a
Fool, that feeds on Husks, Gravel, and Ashes, and yet thinks he feeds on the
best Food? he lives among Swine, and feeds as they feed, and yet is contented?
VIII. Wicked Men are said in the holy Scriptures to feed on Husks, Gravel, Isa.
45.20.
and Ashes, by which is meant the Pleasures; Profits, and Honors of this
World; for what is it that they feed upon, or take delight in, but these
Things? Take away their outward Enjoyments, or the Comforts of this World, and
their Hearts (like Nabal's) will die within them, or like a Man that pines away
for want of Food; for alas! they have nothing else to support their Spirits.
And whilst they feed upon these things, they conclude they feed upon the best
Food, and enjoy the chiefest Good; yet they never have a real Taste of the Love
of God in Christ, nor do they know how good the Lord is, nor will they make
Trial, tho they are invited to come and buy, and eat that which is good, and
let their Souls delight themselves in Fatness. The Prodigal would fain have
filled his Belly with Husks that the Swine eat, Luke 15.16
(wicked Men being intended by the Swine in that Place) but no Man gave to him.
IX. Is not he a Fool, that thinks it is time enough to sow when he should reap?
When he should gather in his Harvest, he begins to sow his Seed; or when he
sows Tares, thinks to reap Wheat. That Work, that would take up the whole Time
of his Life, he thinks may be done on a Deathbed, or in an Hour or two at the
end of his Days: Or who, having a long Race to run, that requires all his
Strength, resolves to defer it until old, decrepid Age? IX. Wicked Men think
it is time enough to repent, when they have spent all their Days in Sin, and in
serving the Devil. When they should reap the Harvest of a godly Life, they
think it is time enough to begin to sow to the Spirit, and convert to God. They
sow to the Flesh, and yet think to reap Life everlasting; when nothing is more
evident than this, viz. Whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he reap; therefore
says the Apostle, Gal. 6.7, 8.
He that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting. Shall foolish
Men think to serve the Devil all the best of their Days, and yet hope that at
last God will accept of their Repentance? X. A Fool delights to do Mischief;
Prove. 10.23.
or, as Solomon says, It is a Sport to a Fool to do Mischief. We daily see how
mischievous Idiots are; it is dangerous to let some of them at large, or to be
in Company with them, tho others are more harmless. X. Wicked Men are full of
Mischief. Hence says David, Psalm. 26.10
Gather not my Soul with Sinners, nor my Life with bloody Men, in whose Hands
is Mischief, etc. Psalm. 28.3.
Draw me not away with the Wicked, and with the Workers of Iniquity, which
speak Peace to their Neighbor, but Mischief is in their Hearts. Yea, he
devises Mischief upon his Bed, he sets himself in a way that is not good.
Nothing more evident than this. How restless have the ungodly been in every Age
of the Church, to contrive Mischief against their peaceable Neighbors,
especially the wicked Papists! What Plots and Sham-Plots have they devised, to
destroy the Quiet and Peace of this Land, nay, to destroy the upright and godly
People that dwell therein! They care not what Mischief they do, so that they
may undo and spoil those who hate their idolatrous Church. One while they study
Ways how to blow up the King and Parliament; another while burn our Houses, and
lay our famous City in Ashes. And, as if this Mischief were not enough, they
have carried on a secret and devilish Design to take away our Religion and
Lives, and whatsoever is dear to us; and then, to blind the unwary and
credulous Sort of People, invent Sham-Plots, to cast all upon the innocent
Protestants. But let them remember, in this they are but Fools; they have the
Mark and Brand of Fools upon them, and their Mischief shall fall upon their own
Heads. He that seeks Mischief, Prove. 11.27.
it shall come upon him. XI. Is not he a Fool, that labors for the Wind, and
thinks to feed on the Wind, and pursues a Shadow, and sets his Heart upon that
which is not? XI. Wicked Men are said to labor for the Wind; Riches are
compared to the Wind; and he that pursues after them, pursues after the Wind:
and what a Fool is he that does thus! What Profit has he (says Solomon) that
has labored for the Wind? And as Men are said to labor for the Wind, Eccl.
5.16.
so likewise they are said to feed upon the Wind: Ephraim feeds on Wind, Hos.
12.1.
and follows after the East Wind. Which (says Mr. Buroughs) is a Proverbial
Speech, to note the following after vain and unprofitable Things; that is to
feed on the Wind, when Men please themselves in their own Conceits, and in
their own Counsels and Plots, etc. 1. When they promise to themselves great
Matters by Ways of their own, and leave God's Ways and Institutions, they may
be said to feed on the Wind; and the Prophet rebukes the Ten Tribes for this.
2. They feed on the Wind, says he, and so their Hearts are puffed up in Pride
and carnal Confidence. You know, according to the Food a Man or Woman feeds
upon, so will their Bodies be; so those that feed upon the Wind, must needs
have proud Hearts, or be puffed up with Pride and Self-conceitedness. 3. Evil
Men, that live upon Comforts that are carnal, and seek for the Honor and
Applause of Men, they feed upon the Wind, they seek to satisfy themselves with
Vanity, they strive to take hold of a Shadow, and follow after the Wind, Things
that cannot fill the Soul, nor satisfy its Desires; Things that are uncertain,
lost by one Storm at Sea, consumed by one Spark of Fire, or gone by a false
Oath, or wasted by the Badness of Trade, or by the Extravagancy of an evil and
foolish Son, and therefore are Fools. XII. Is not he a Fool, that esteems the
greatest Evil above the greatest Good? XII. Wicked Men set their Hearts upon
their base and cursed Lusts, love their Sins more than God and Christ. We read
of some who are Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God. Now is not Sin the
greatest Evil, and God the greatest Good? 2 Timothy 3.4
There is nothing bitterer than the one, nor nothing b^tter than the other; and
yet they choose Sin, and refuse the Good that is in the eternal God, and account
Christ not worth the Pleasure of one wicked Lust, and therefore Fools. XIII. Is
not he a Fool, who to avoid a Spark, leaps into the Fire; or to save his Hat,
loses his Head? XIII. Wicked Men, to avoid a little Trouble and Affliction in
this World, expose themselves to eternal Torment, before they will deny
themselves of their Lusts, they will burn in Hell for them; rather than go to
Prison for Christ, they will go to Hell for denying of him.

Inferences.
LAment over wicked Men; Fools are to be pitied.

2. Be patient, and thou will see what will become of these Fools.

3. It shows what abundance of Folly and Fools there are in the World.

4. It shows us how strangely ungodly Men, worldly wise Men are deceived in
themselves.

5. It shows what true Wisdom is: The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom, and to depart from Evil is Understanding; and in another place it is
said, Psalm 111.10.
The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, and a good Understanding have
all they that do his Commandments.

6. Let it caution thee to take heed lest thou art a Fool: The Characters of
such an one, as given by wise Solomon, take as follows: (1.) He will be
meddling, Prove. 2.3. (2.) One that is, as you have heard, mischievous. Prove.
10.23. (3.) One that many Afflictions and Stripes will not work upon nor
humble. (4.) One whose Sin cleaves to him. Prove. 27.22. (5.) One that is full
of Words. Eccles. 10.14. (6.) One that will utter all his Mind. Prove. 29.11.
speaks that which he should conceal. (7.) One that Prosperity destroys. Prove.
1.32. (8.) One that is slothful. Eccles. 4.5. (9.) One that trusts in his own
Heart. Prove. 28.26. (10.) One that holds it Folly to depart from Evil. Prove.
13.19.

Wicked Men compared to painted Sepulchers.
Mat. 23.27. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are like
unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful without, but within full
of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness.
THey are principally Hypocrites which our Savior resembles to whited
Sepulchers; and how fitly they may be compared thereunto, is showed in the
following Parallel.

Simile. Parallel. A Painted Sepulcher appears, as the Text says, beautiful
without. SO vile Hypocrites appear glorious and beautiful to Men, as if they
were real Saints; they seem very devout in appearance, and outward Show, to
those that only behold their Outside, it is God only that sees the Heart. II.
Sepulchers, tho they appear beautiful without, yet they are very loathsome
within. II. So Hypocrites, tho they may appear holy and religious to Men, or to
the outward Eye, yet are within vile and ungodly, full of Pride, Vainglory,
Envy, Malice, Covetousness, and every horrid and abominable Lust, which makes
them as loathsome in the sight of God, as a stinking Sepulcher is to us: A
wicked Man, Prove. 13.5
says Solomon, is loathsome. III. Those that make and beautify a Sepulcher, do
it that its inward Filth and Pollution may not easily appear, or offend those
that behold it; much Pains, Cost, and Curiosity is bestowed upon the Outside
of it, whereas Men matter not how filthy they are within. III. So the vile
Hypocrites, in all their outward Shows, Zeal, Religion, and seeming Piety, do
it to hide their cursed Ends, abominable Lusts and Wickedness; for did they
appear outwardly to all Men what they are inwardly, they would be loathsome to
all that fear God. They bestow much Pains and Cost, and show their Skill and
Cunning, to carry it religiously and warily to Men, whereas they take little or
no care how filthy they are inwardly. IV. Tho a Sepulcher appears never so
beautiful without, yet Men know it is loathsome within. IV. So tho Hypocrites
appear never so much like Saints to the Eyes of Men; yet God knows and sees
they are polluted and vile Wretches inwardly.

Inferences.
THis shows what the abominable Nature of Sin is; it is here compared to a dead,
putrified, and stinking Carcass; what is more loathsome?

2. It shows also the filthy, unclean, and abominable State of painted
Hypocrites, etc.

Wicked Men compared to Swine.
Mat. 7.6. Neither cast your Pearls before Swine.

2 Pet. 2.22. The Dog is turned to his Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed
to her wallowing in the Mire.


SOme Sort of wicked Men are more especially in these Scriptures compared to
Hogs or Swine; we shall in the following Parallels show who they are, and how
fitly they may be resembled to them.

Metaphor. Parallel. SWine love to be in the Mud, they will wallow in Filth and
miry Places, which Sheep, and diverse other Creatures strive as much as they can
to avoid. This Beast (says Gesner) is a most impure and unclean Beast, and its
Nature is to delight to wallow in most filthy and noisome Places. SO wicked Men
love their brutish Lusts, and daily wallow in the Mud and Mire of Filth, and
the abominable Pollutions of Sin and Uncleanness, until they become defiled all
over, from the Head to the Foot. Such Men and Women, who live in Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, and other beastly Sins, may fitly be compared to Swine; for it is
as pleasant to them to riot in the Daytime, and tumble as it were in the Mud
of Wickedness, as it is to a Swine to wallow in the Mire. II. The Hog or Swine
is a dull, stupid, and senseless Creature, not like the Heart, and diverse Animals
that might be named. II. So are wicked Men; they are, like this dull and
sottish Brute, slow of Heart, and hard to believe; they are Men of no spiritual
Understanding. III. Swine are craving and very greedy Creatures: They are so
greedy, Dr. Frantzius.
says my Author, that they have no measure in eating; and hence grow so fat,
that sometimes they are hardly able to go; nay, they will eat until they burst
themselves. III. Some wicked Men are just like Swine in this respect: they are
so greedy and covetous, that they are never satisfied. When they have got their
Hundreds, nay, it may be their Thousands by the Year, yet still they pursue the
World, as if they had their Bread to get, and were not worth a Groat, and thus
growing fat, Jeshurun like, they forget God. But Jeshurun waxed fat, and
kicked. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Some there be also, who are such Epicures, that they are naturally like the
Swine, who are not only gluttonous, but will drink until they are quite drunk;
and hence we commonly call a sottish Drunkard, a drunken Swine. IV. Swine, as
they are greedy and unsatisfied Creatures, so they are commonly fed for the
Slaughter. IV. So the Wicked, who flourish in this Life, and feed in their
filthy Sties of sensual Lusts, are let alone in their Sins, being fatted for
the Day of Slaughter. Jer. 12.3.
V. Swine are a mischievous Sort of Creatures: They will not only root up
Gardens and Vineyards, and pleasant Meadows, where they can get in, but will
destroy Chickens, and other harmless Creatures also, and eat them up, and tear
Clothes, and other Things in pieces, if they be not looked after, and kept up
in their Sties; nay, some of them will bite and devour Men, if they look not to
themselves. V. So some wicked Men are very mischievous; if they can but get
loose, or break into God's Garden, they will root it up, and spoil those
precious Flowers and Plants which he has set therein. How often have they eat
up God's Children, tearing them in pieces, like wanton and mischievous Swine,
caring not not what hurt they do: Have all the Workers of Iniquity no knowledge,
Psalm. 14 4.
who eat up my People as they eat Bread, and call not upon the Lord? No Swine
like the Romish Swine upon this account, who, like devouring Locusts, Rev. 9.
strive to eat up every green Thing. It is not to be imagined what hurt these
Wild-Boars have done to God's Vineyard; but blessed be God, who puts a Hook in
their Noses. VI. Swine are of no use or Service (says Dr. Fanzius) to any one
while they live; but when they are killed, they yield the Owner some Profit.
VI. So it is with some covetous Men, who never do any Good with what they have
whilst they live. A wicked Usurer (says Bonaventure) is like a Hog: for whilst
he lives, he is good and profitable for nothing; for he will ever be rooting
up the Earth, running through, and tearing of Hedges, etc. but when the Hog is
dead, then comes Profit by him: So by the Death of the Wicked, some Profit may
come to some of his poor Relations; nay, many times by the Death of some wicked
Rulers, much Good comes to the Church of God in general. VII. The Hog is
continually grunting all the while he is at his Trough, eating in fear, as it
were, lest any should take it away from him. VII. So a covetous Man does not
enjoy what he has without fear; he is afraid of every one, lest they should
rob him, or lest by one means or another his worldly Pelf should be wasted, or
taken away. VIII. The Hog, tho he should be washed, yet in a little time he
will turn again to his wallowing in the Mire, and become as filthy as ever he
was. VIII. So if an unregenerate Man should, by the Light of Nature, or other
Helps that God is pleased to afford, escape many great Pollutions, and reform
in many things, and seem to be a true Convert, and to be clean washed from his
Filthiness; yet for want of a thorough Work of Grace upon his Heart, he will at
last turn again to his former Course, and be as vile and wicked as ever he was;
nay, oftentimes much worse, Mat. 12.43 Luke 11.25
as our Savior intimates by the unclean Spirit's going out of a Man, etc. And
in him is that Word made good, The Sow that was washed, is turned to her
wallowing in the Mire again. IX. A Swine cries out exceedingly, or makes a
great Noise, when he is took hold of, and had away to be killed. IX. So wicked
Men, when God takes hold of them by Sickness, and they come to have
Apprehensions of Death upon them, they cry out, (unless their Consciences are
asleep or seared) being afraid of Death and Hell. X. The Wild-Boar is of a more
stubborn and mischievous Nature, and commonly does more hurt (being very
strong) than any other Swine. Naturalists tell us, that the Wild-Boar is almost
as strong and cruel as a Lion; and that he will often whet and sharpen his
Teeth, and run upon the Huntsman. X. So Antichrist, who may fitly be compared
to a Wild-Boar, I mean his Un-holiness, that Firstborn of Satan, is and has
been more mischievous than any other of the Herd; he having got a great degree
of Power, which he has from time to time exercised against God's People, to
the wasting and spoiling of his spiritual Vine and Vineyard. Psalm. 80.1^
The Boar out of the Wood does waste it, and the wild Beast out of the Field
does devour it. XI. The Swine under the Tree in a greedy manner eat up the
Acorns, but never look up to the Tree or Oak from whence they fall. XI. So
wicked and graceless Men, tho they enjoy all this World's Good, never look up
in a due manner to God, who is the Tree of Life, and is the Author and Giver of
it. XII. Swine will refuse Pearl for Pease; if ye cast Pearls before them, they
will tread them under their Feet. XII. So wicked Men will refuse Grace for
Gold; give them but this World, and let who will take the Pearl of great Price,
the Love and Favor of God. Give them Counsel to leave their Sins, or cast the
Pearl of good Instruction before them, and they will tread it under their Feet;
they will cast that at their Heels, which they should apply to their Hearts,
Mat. 7.6.
and revile you, if they do not tear and rend you into the Bargain. Metaphor.
Disparity. SWine were created such, they were Swine from the beginning. MAn was
created holy and upright at first; this swinish and brutish Nature came in by
the Fall. II. Swine retain their own Nature, and it is impossible for them to
cease being Swine. II. But wicked Men may be changed, and become gracious; it
is possible for them to become Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ, so as to hate
that which they once loved. Grace, when infused into the Soul, makes a real and
wonderful Change.

Inferences.
THis shows the brutish and base Nature of sinful Man; what is more
contemptible in our Eyes than a Swine?

2. It shows what a vast difference there is between a true converted Soul, and
a brutish Sinner; God esteems of the one as of his choicest Treasure, but
ungodly Men are mere Swine and brutish Creatures in his Sight.

Wicked Men Debtors.
Mat. 5.25, 26. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way
with him; lest any time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver the to thee Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Verse. 26. Verily I
say unto thee, Thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost Farthing.

Mat. 18.24. And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which
ought him ten thousand Talents.


IN both these Places Sin is called a Debt, and the Sinner a Debtor. The Reason
of which is showed under the Head of Metaphors concerning Sin, where Sin is
compared to a Debt; unto which we refer you.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Debtor is one that owes Money, Duty, etc. to his
Neighbor; also one that is a Trespasser, an Offender, or guilty Person. A Man
may be a Debtor by Office, Gal. 5.3. by Duty, Romans 8.12. by the Law of Charity,
Romans 15.27. by trespassing or offending, whether God or Man, Mat. 6.12. MAn
owes all that he is, has, or can do, unto God; he having received his very
Being, and all other good Things that he enjoys, from God, as so many Talents
lent him, which he must be accountable to God for in the great Day, etc. Man is
a Trespasser, Mat. 25.19
an Offender, or a guilty Person, having broken the Law, the Penalty of which
is eternal Death; so that as a Traitor, or flagitious Person, by his heinous
Crimes he is become a Debtor to everlasting Punishment. II. An evil Debtor is
unwilling to be called to an Account; nothing is worse to him, than to hear the
News, Give an account of thy Stewardship. Mat. 18.24
Hence it is said, One was brought that owed ten thousand Talents; as if it were
by Force; he was haled before his Master to reckon with him. II. So wicked Men
do not love to think upon the Day of Judgment, care not to hear of those large
Bills and Handwritings that are against them. How grievous will that Voice from
Heaven be to ungodly Men, Luke 16.2.
Give an Account of your Stewardship; Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment! Give
an Account of all the Oaths you have sworn, the Lies you have told, the Times
you have been drunk, the Days of Grace you have neglected; give an Account of
all the hard and reproachful Words you have spoken against your godly
Neighbors, and of all the Wrongs and Injuries you have done them; give an
Account of all those Talents that were lent you; what Improvement have you made
of your Knowledge and Parts, your Seasons and Sabbaths, and of those many Years
you have had in the World? This (I say) is grievous to wicked Men to think
upon. They shall be brought forth in the Day of Wrath; they will not come
willingly, Job 21.30.
but shall therefore be as it were haled before the Judge of Heaven and Earth.
III. Ill Debtors are attended with Shame. Ambrose speaks of some, who for the
Shame and Distress thereof, have made away with themselves, Burges.
fearing more Opproprium Vitae, than Mortis Periculum, the Reproach of Life,
than the Punishment of Death. III. Sinners are such vile Debtors, that they are
attended with great Shame, and therefore, Adam-like, hide their Sins, do not
love, nay, they are ashamed any should know how black and notorious in
Wickedness they are; they have got many Ways to cover their Iniquity. IV. Some
great and ill Debtors have many Shifts and Delays to put off their Creditors;
it is a common custom amongst Men far in Debt, to contrive ways to excuse
themselves, and make vain Apologies, and all to shift and put off further
Trouble. IV. So Sinners have many ways to excuse themselves: have you not heard
some speaking to this purpose, I was drawn in before I was aware; I had not
done such nor such a thing, had it not been for such or such an one; but all
are guilty of human Infirmities, I shall do better; when God gives me more
Grace, I intend to reform: and thus they put off God and Conscience by trifling
Delays and Excuses, and repent not of their evil Deeds, nor go to God through
the mediation of Jesus Christ for Pardon and Forgiveness. V. Some Debtors hate
their Creditors, Leve aes alienum debitore facit grave inimicum, says Burges,
a little Money borrowed makes a Man a Debtor, but a great deal an Enemy; so the
more they owe, the more they hate. Nay, Aristotle says, Debtors wish their
Creditors to have no Being, wish they were dead, so that they might but thereby
be freed from their Debts. V. Wicked Men hate God, they are often set out in
Scripture as Haters of him, because they fear him as an angry Judge, who will
severely demand satisfaction to the last Farthing; they care not whether there
were any God or no, to call them to an account for all their Wickedness which
they daily commit against him; hence the Apostle says, Romans 8.7.
the carnal Mind is Enmity against God: nay, and the Lord positively says of
the Wicked, Zech. 11.8.
that their Soul abhorred him. VI. Some Debtors, are so far in Debt, that they
owe much more than they are worth, or are able to pay, or make a compensation
for. VI. Sinners are so far in Debt to God, that they are not able to make him
satisfaction, they owe ten thousand Talents, and have not one Farthing to pay:
The aggravation of Sin lies in this, (viz.) that it is against God; therefore
that Offense that is against Man is compared to an hundred Pence, but that
which is against God to ten thousand Talents, And when he had begun to reckon,
Mat. 18.28. ver. 24. ver. 25.
one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand Talents. ver. 24. And
because he had nothing to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his Wife,
and Children, and all that he had, and the Debt to be paid. ver. 25. The
Servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, refrain thine
Anger toward me, and I will pay thee all. ver. 26. ver. 26.
Then the Lord of that Servant had Compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him
the Debt. ver. 27. ver. 27.
But the same Servant went out, and found one of his Fellow Servants which
ought him an hundred Pence, and he laid his Hands on him, and took him by the
Throat, saying, Pay me what thou owe. ver. 28. etc. VII. An ill Debtor, that
is very far in Debt, does not love to see nor meet his Creditor, he will go
some by-way, or go much about, rather than come near him, or meet with him.
VII. So Sinners who are notoriously Guilty before God, love not to meet with
him, nor hear of him: if God comes near them by the reproofs of his Word, or by
the checks of Conscience, or by the rebukes of the Rod, how are they startled?
As in the case of Felix, who when he found that God had met with him by Paul's
Preaching, who reasoned of Righteousness, Act. 24.25.
Temperance, and Judgment to come, ('it is said) he trembled: but mark his answer
to the Apostle; Was he pleased with that Doctrine? Alas no, he could not bear
it: therefore cries out, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee. VIII. A Debtor that is far in Debt, is
oftentimes afraid of an Arrest, and much perplexed and troubled in his Mind;
the thoughts of a Prison being grievous to him. VIII. So guilty Sinners are
afraid of the Sergeant, Death; if they perceive Death is approaching, how
troubled are they for fear of the Prison of utter Darkness? (provided their
Consciences be awake.) See Sin a Debt. Metaphor. Disparity. I. A Debtor among
Men, upon the non-payment of his Debts is exposed but to external Punishment,
suppose it should be the highest Punishment that we read of in Scripture or
History; we read under the Law they were bound to sell their Children, Exodus
21.7. and 22.2. 2 King. 4.1.
yea, themselves to become Slaves or Bondmen; it was a sore Punishment to have
Children sold for Parents Debts. I have read that Valentinian the Emperor,
would have such put to Death that were not able to pay their Debts; but
especially, that Law mentioned by Mr. Burges, Burges on Justification. p. 1^0.
was the severest of all, that provided that he who was in Debt and could not
pay it, the Creditors might take him, and cause him to be cut into as many
pieces as they pleased. I. BUt the ungodly and guilty Sinner is exposed to
eternal Punishment; such who obtain no forgiveness or pardon of Sin, through
the atonement of the Cross, or satisfaction made by Jesus Christ, shall be cast
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; it is not Wife nor Children, Father or
Brother can make a compensation, or keep them from the place of Punishment;
Rev. 14.10.
They shall be tormented day and night; they shall drink of the Wrath of God,
which is poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and they
shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence, of the Lamb. ver. 10. And the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever; they have no rest day nor night, etc. Mat.
13.50.
They shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of Teeth. II. A Debtor among Men may escape an Arrest, or fly from the Hand of
Justice; or if he be taken, Death will free him from all Miseries, nay if he
dies in Prison, his Debt is paid. II. But it is impossible for Sinners to
escape the Wrath of God, who live and dye in their Sins; Death will come, there
is no escaping the Hands of this grim Sergeant; and when they are thrown into
Hell, that strong and fearful Prison, they shall by no means come out thence,
till they have paid the utmost Farthing.

Inferences.
HOw may this humble sinful Mortals! What little cause have any of the
Chrildren of Men to boast of their Riches? Alas! they are, whether they know it
or no, exceedingly in Debt, they are worth nothing; and whether they believe it
or not, Death will convince them of it.

2. It may stir up the Hearts of the Godly to pity Sinners, when you see poor
Prisoners that are in Prison for Debt, crying out of the Grates; Bread, Bread,
for the Lord's sake! how ready are you to pity them; but how more doleful is
that Cry of the rich Glutton in Hell, for a drop of Water to cool his Tongue,
and none is given to him?

3. It speaks much Comfort to Believers, who have through that redemption that
is in Christ, obtained the forgiveness of all their Debts; Oh! what a Blessing
(these things being considered) is pardon of Sin! Let thy Soul, with David,
Bless the Lord, and all that is within thee praise his holy Name, who forgiveth
all thine Iniquities, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.
who heals all thy Diseases, who has freed thee from thy Sins, and the
Punishment of them.

Wicked Men the Rod of God.
Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger.
THe Ungodly, and bloody Persecutors of the Lord's People, are called his Hand,
his Rod, and his Sword: Deliver my Soul from the Wicked, which is thy Sword;
from Men of the World, which are thy Hand, O Lord, -- Psalm. 17.13, 14.

Parallels.
I. A Man smites such as have offended him with his Hand, and with a Rod or
Sword: So God makes use of the Wicked, as an Instrument to chastize his
Children, when they transgress his Law, and grievously sin against him.

II. As a Hand or Rod lays on harder or softer Blows, according to the Pleasure
and Purpose of him that strikes: So God lets the Wicked out upon his own
People, to oppress and afflict them as he fees good, either in a milder or more
severe manner.

III. When a Father has chastized his Children sufficiently, and thoroughly
humbled them, he sometimes casts the Rod into the Fire: So when God has by
the Wicked, who are his Rod, thoroughly humbled his People, and taken away their
Sin, he will throw the Wicked, their bloody Persecutors, into the Fire of his
Wrath: For yet a very little while, Isa 10.25.
and the Indignation shall cease, and mine Anger in their Destruction.

Wicked Men compared to Tares.
Mat. 13.38. The Tares are the Children of the Wicked One.
TAres, (...), quasi (...), says Varineus, quia amet triticum, illud ut umbra
corpus sequitur, imitatus, and simul arescit, ac si esset de tritici genere: i.
e. Because it loves the Wheat, and imitates it, as the Shadow imitateth the
Body, and grows up with it, as if it were of the same kind with the Wheat. It
should not (says one) be translated Tares, but evil Seed. It is that which we
call the deaf Ears, that grow up with the good Corn, and cannot be discerned
till the Harvest, Liegh's Crit. Sacr.
and then it proves naught; for Tares and Fitches are soon discerned and
plucked up. The Enemy sowed Tares, v. 15. i. e. corrupted.

Ungodly Men are compared to Tares. Tares (says a noted Writer) is a Sort of
Grain that grows in the Eastern Country; therefore those that are called
Tares amongst us (I suppose) are not the Tares our Savior alludes to.

Metaphor. Parallel TAres are a low and base Sort of Grain, of little worth or
esteem in comparison of Wheat, and some other Grain. SO the Children of the
Wicked One are a base and contemptible Sort of People, in comparison of the
Children of God. II. If Tares are sown amongst Wheat, it is done by the Hand of
an Enemy, out of spite and malice, to the Injury and Loss of the Owner of the
Field. II. So the spiritual or metaphorical Tares, viz. the Children of Belial,
that grow in the Field of this World, were first sowed by the Devil; he is that
Enemy who did it, i. e. He infused by his Spirit, through the Corruptness of
Mortals, that evil Seed into their Hearts, from whence these Tares spring, out
of spite and Malice to God himself, whose is the Field, and also out of spite
and malice to Mankind. III. Tares growing among Wheat, do hurt and prejudice
the Wheat, hindering its growth and flourishing. III. So the Ungodly, or
Children of the Wicked One, dwelling with or among the Saints, hurt and greatly
prejudice them, hindering their Growth in Grace and Godliness. Says David,
Psalm. 120.6
Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar! It is
a hard Matter to keep our Garments clean, and no way to defile them, living in
the midst of a wicked and ungodly Generation. Who can touch Pitch, and not be
defiled therewith? The Israelites dwelling among the wicked Natives of the Land
of Canaan, Psalm. 10 6.35, 36.
it is said, learned their Works, and served their Gods. IV. Tares (as Wilson
observes) are so like Wheat whilst they are in the Blade, as hardly the one can
be discerned from the other. IV. So Hypocrites seem so like true and sincere
Christians, that for a while the one can hardly be known from the other. V. The
Man who had Tares sown amongst the Wheat in his Field whilst Men slept, would
not suffer his Servants to pluck them up, lest some of the Wheat should be
plucked up with them, but let them grow together until Harvest, and then
commands the Reapers to separate the one from the other, and the Wheat to
gather into his Barn, but the Tares to cast into the Fire; from whence it
appears, that those Tares were good for nothing but Fuel for the Fire, etc. V.
So the Almighty (tho there be many Hypocrites, Heretics, and Reprobates in the
World) would not have Magistrates or others to pluck them up (for their Errors
or Heresy only) that is, destroy them, or take them away by corporal Punishment
and Death, lest they pull up and destroy some of his precious Saints with them,
instead of those Children of the Evil One, but would have them live or grow
together in the Field of the World until the Harvest, that is, the End of the
World. The Field is the World; Mat. 13.38, 39, 40, 41.
the good Seed an the Children of the Kingdom; but the Tares, the Children of
the Wicked One. The Enemy that sowed them is the Devil, the Harvest is the End
of the World, and the Reapers are the Angels. As therefore the Tares are
gathered, and burnt in the Fire; so shall it be in the End of the World: The
Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, to gather out of his Kingdom all things
that offend, and them that do Iniquity: And shall cast them into a Furnace of
Fire; there shall be weeping, and gnashing of Teeth.

Inferences.
THis may put every Christian upon the Search and Examination of their Hearts,
lest instead of good Wheat, they should at last prove evil Tares.

2. It also reproves those Magistrates, who in a blind Zeal persecute Men for
Religion, and Conscience sake, pretending they do it to destroy the Tares, viz.
Heretics, etc. whereas they know not but that those they persecute may be good
and faithful Christians. Besides, it is a Work that belongs not to them; God
would have both, tho one Sort may be very vile and impudent Heretics,
Schismatics, etc. to live together to the end of the World.

Wicked Men compared to Chaff.
Psalm. 1.4. The Ungodly are not so, but are like the Chaff which the Wind
drives away.

Mat. 3.12. But he will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire.


Wicked Men are compared to Chaff.

Simile. Parallel. CHaff, before it is separated from the Wheat, cleaves close
to it; and the Wheat must be trod or threshed, before the one can be separated
from the other. SO some wicked Men, I mean Hypocrites, seem to cleave close to
the Saints, and to be in perfect Union or Oneness with them: And the Godly must
be trod upon, or threshed with the Flail of Persecution, before they, as sacred
Wheat, can be separated from the Chaff, viz. counterfeit Christians. II. Chaff
is of little worth or value to the Wheat: Jer. 23.28.
What is the Chaff to the Wheat? It Is a low, mean, and contemptible thing; one
Bushel of Wheat is worth many Bushels of Chaff. II. So wicked Men and
Hypocrites are of little worth and value in the sight of God; he esteems one
true Christian worth thousands, and ten thousands of Hypocrites: I give Egypt
for thy Ransom, Isa. 43.3.
Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou were precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, etc. III. Chaff is light and airy; it is no ponderous Thing,
and therefore the Wind carries it away with a Blast. III. So the Wicked,
whatever show they make of Religion and Piety, they are light as Chaff; they
are not weighty, nor ponderous; their Lightness and Levity is discovered by
their Words and Behavior; and when the Blast and Tempest of Persecution comes,
it drives them away from the seeming Zeal and Religion they pretend to; and at
last, the Wind of God's Wrath will drive them into the lowest Hell, there to be
burned with unquenchable Fire.

Inferences.
THis shows what a great difference there is between the Godly and the Ungodly;
also what the woeful Condition of Hypocrites is, and what will be in the End.

Wicked Men compared to Thorns.
Numb. 33.55. They shall be Pricks in your Eyes, and Thorns in your Sides, etc.

Josh. 23.13. But they shall be as Snares and Traps unto you, and Scourges in
your Sides, and Thorns in your Eyes, etc.

Cant. 2.2. As a Lilly among Thorns.

Nah. 1.10. For whilst they are folden together as Thorns, etc.


THorns (as Glassius and others observe) in these Places of holy Sripture,
signify wicked, mischievous Men. Numb. 33.55.

Simile. Parallel. THorns came in with the Curse, Cursed is the Ground for thy
sake, Genesis 3.18.
Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, etc. Had not Adam
sinned, we should not have been troubled with Thorns. SO wicked Men came in
with the Fall, and as the Fruit of the Curse. Had not Adam sinned, the World
had never been troubled with these Briars and Thorns; but ever since the Curse,
for Adam's Sin, the World has been full of these Thorns. II. A Thorn is no
tender Tree, but contrary-wise sturdy, hard, knotty, and full of Knobs and
Pricks, dangerous to meddle, or have to do with. II. Clopham.
So the Wicked, these Sons of Belial, Belegnol, without Yoke, that is, such as
will not come under the Yoke of Obedience; or Beli Gnalah, not ascending,
because their Males prospered not. These Thorns, wicked Men, 2 Samuel 23.6.
are hard-hearted, knotty-conditioned, full of pricking and stinging Words and
Works. What can he expect that meddles with a Thorn or Briar, but to be
scratched, pricked, and wounded in his so doing? So that Man that has to do
with some wicked Men, shall be scratched or pricked in his good Name and
Estate, one way or other. III. Thorns are Trees of little worth, low and base
Things, hurtful to Fields, Gardens, and Vineyards, etc. III. So wicked Men are
of little worth and value in God's sight; they are of a base Spirit and
Principle, Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God, preferring Earth above
Heaven: Prove. 10.20.
The Heart of the Wicked is little worth. And as they are unprofitable, and
little worth in themselves; so they are offensive and prejudicial to God's
Garden; they hinder the Growth of the Saints as much as in them lies, wounding
the Lilly that grows among them. See Lilly among Thorns. IV. Thorns
nevertheless do serve sometimes to make a Hedge to keep out wild Beasts from
breaking into a Field or Vineyard. IV. So some of these wicked Ones God now and
then makes use of to be a Hedge to his People, to keep out a more bloody and
cruel Adversary: Rev. 12,
The Earth helped the Woman; that is, Wicked Men, Men of the Earth, stood up
for, and sided in with the Church and People of God, and so proved as a Wall of
Defense or Hedge to them. Besides, God makes use of them sometimes as a Hedge to
stop his People in their evil Courses, by suffering these Sons of Belial to
afflict them: I will hedge up her Way with Thorns. Hos. 2.6.
V. Thorns and Briars, when they are grown to any height, are oft-times by the
Owner cut down, and cast into the Fire. V. So the Wicked and Ungodly, when they
are grown to a great height of Wickedness, provoking God against themselves,
are cut down, and cast into Hell. That which bears Briars and Thorns is near
unto Cursing, whose end is to be burnt. He 8.6.8.
VI. Thorns and Briars are not able to stand before a devouring and consuming
Fire. VI. So the Wicked are not able to stand before the dreadful and angry
God. For while they be folden together as Thorns, Nah. 1.10.
and whilst they are drunken as Drunkards, they shall be destroyed as Stubble
fully dry. Isa. 27.4.
Who would (says God) set the Briars and Thorns against me in Battle? I would
go through them, I would burn them together.

Inferences.
IS it not a strange and mavelous thing, that God's People are no more
scratched and pricked with these troublesome Thorns, considering what a
Multitude of them are amongst us?

2. It may caution all true Christians, how they meddle with these pricking
Thorns.

3. It shows the Folly of the Wicked, who strive with the Almighty, and set
themselves in Battle against Him, who is a consuming Fire, and they but Thorns
and Briars, or like Stubble fully dry.

Wicked Men compared to Mountains.
Isa. 41.15. Thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat thm small, etc.

Isa. 2.14. Upon all high Mountains that are lifted up, etc.

Zech. 4.7. Who art thou, O great Mountain? etc.


Parallels.
MOuntains are high and lifted up, and seem to have the Pre-eminence: So the
wicked Princes and Potentates of the Earth are high in Power, and seem to be
lifted up in Pride and Arrogance, and to have Pre-eminence over the Righteous.

II. Mountains are hard to be removed out of their Places: So the Wicked,
having taken such Root in Sin, etc. it is very hard and difficult to remove
them, and make them become plain. Luke 3 4.
This was ('it is true) one great Design of the Ministry of John Baptist; Every
Valley shall be filled, and every Mountain and Hill shall be brought low, etc.
But this Work is not done upon the Spirits of wicked Men; but by the mighty
Power of God.

III. Mountains and Hills are commonly barren and unprofitable Ground: So the
Wicked, who are lifted up in Pride and Arrogance, etc. are spiritually a
barren, useless, and unprofitable Sort of Men.

IV. Mountains were accounted Places of Defense, whither Men used to fly in
time of Danger, tho many times they failed them: So Men oftentimes fly to the
lofty Enemies of God, the oppressing, tyrannical Powers of the Earth, to secure
themselves from approaching Dangers; but in vain (alas!) is Salvation looked
for from these Mountains and Hills, in the Day of God's Anger.

Inferences.
IN this Saints have cause to rejoice; God has promised to throw down all the
Hills and Mountains of the Earth, that are lifted up: Who art thou, O great
Mountain? Zech. 4 7.
Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain.

Wicked Men compared to the Troubled Sea.
Isa. 57.20. But the Wicked are like the troubled Sea, etc.

Jer. 51.4. The Sea is come up upon Babylon, with the Multitude of the Waves
thereof. Caldee, the King, with his numerous Hosts, in Plenty like the Sea, is
come up against Babylon, etc.


Note. The Wicked are compared to the Troubled Sea, and to many Waters, etc.

Parallels.
THe Sea is a great Convention, (as one words it) or a Multitude of Waters; The
gathering together of the Waters called he Seas: Genesis 1.
So the Wicked are a Multitude of People.

II. The Sea sometimes swells, roars, and rises very high, threatening the Earth
as if it would swallow it up immediately: So the mighty Concourse of the wicked
and tyrannical Powers of the Earth, many times swell in Pride and Arrogance,
and make a fearful Noise, as if they would in a moment swallow up the Lord's
People.

III. The Sea has its Bounds set by the Almighty: He has shut up the Sea with
Doors, Job 38.8, 11.
etc. and has said, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further; and here shall
thy proud Waves be stayed: So the Lord sets Bounds to the Wrath and Rage of the
Ungodly; no Creatures can go further than God permits them. As he that made the
Sea, can master it; so he can soon put a Stop and Curb to the proudest
Oppressor and Persecutor in the World. Let Men be as angry as they will, let
them be as stormy as the boisterous Seas; yet the Lord has said, Hitherto
shall ye come, and no further. Psalm. 65.7.
He stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of the Waves, and the Tumult of
the People. Nay, the Devil himself is like a Sea shut up, he cannot do what he
would, he has Bounds set him, etc.

IV. The Sea at God's command is still; The Wind and Seas oby him: So with one
Word speaking (as it were) he can quiet the Wicked, and make them silent in
Darkness; Psalm. 107.29.
He can make this Sea and frightful Storm a Calm, and cause the proud Waves to
be still.

V. The Sea produces or brings forth many strange Monsters: So the Multitude of
the Wicked, this metaphorical Sea, has brought forth many a vile and strange
Monster. See Dan. 7.3. And four great Beasts came up from the Sea, diverse one
from the other; the first was like a Lion, and had Eagles Wings, etc. These
four Beasts signified the four Monarchies of the Earth; what a Monster the
fourth has been, all the World has had full Experience of, that had great
Iron Teeth, etc. What Devils incarnate were many of the Roman Emperors,
particularly Nero, who ripp'd up the Belly of his own Mother! etc. And what a
Monster has the little Horn been, I mean the Papal Power! what a mighty Mass
of innocent Blood has the Beast and Whore devoured! etc.

VI. The Sea is very restless, it ebbs and flows, and seems to be continually
troubled: So the Ungodly are always restless in their Spirtis, like wicked
Haman, they never cease Plotting against the Just. Tho they have very great
Power, Riches, and Honor, yet because God's Mordecai's will not bow down their
Souls for them to go over, all seems as nothing to them; they have Riches, much
Gold and Silver, but not satisfied; they enjoy all the Delights and Pleasures
the World can afford them, but yet are like the troubled Sea: Many times also
their Consciences sorely disquiet them. What Rest soever they may have, yet
certainly they are continually void of the true Peace of God, and in this Sense
there is no Peace to the Wicked, etc. Isa. 57.21.


VII. The Sea continually casts forth Mire and Dirt: So the Ungodly never
cease casting forth their abominable Wickedness.

Inferences.
LEt not the Saints fear the Ungodly: What tho they swell and roar? God has
set Bounds to them: The Wrath of Man shall praise thee, Psalm. 76.10
and the Remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain. No more Wrath of Man shall be
let out, no higher shall these Seas swell, than shall tend to the Glory of God;
the Overplus, that Wrath that would indeed prove hurtful to the Godly, and to
the dishonor of the Almighty, the Lord will restrain.

II. Pray hard, that God would keep the Doors and Bars of these troublesome Seas
fast, and prevent the Danger. I will yet for this be enquired of by the House
of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.37.
to do it for them.

1. Pray, that God will keep the Sea of Man's Wrath within its limited Bounds.

2. Pray, that God would not suffer Satan to break forth too furiously upon us.
If God did not set Bounds to him, no Man could live quiet one hour.

3. Pray, that God would set Bounds to the Sea of Profaneness.

4. And also that he would set Bounds, and drive back the Sea of Error and
false Doctrine, etc.

III. This shows the woeful Condition of ungodly Men: They have no Peace, true
Peace, whilst they live, and be sure shall have none at Death. Peace is the
Portion only of the Lord's People: Great Peace have all they that love thy Law,
etc. My Peace I give unto you.

Wicked Men dead in Sin.
John 5.25. The Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.

Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins, etc.


UNconverted Men are dead, spiritually dead, they are as dead Men. Life is
opposed to Death, which is either the Privation of natural Life, because of the
Separation of the Soul from the Body; or the Privation of spiritual and
heavenly Life, because of the Separation of the Soul from God through Sin. And
this is really true in both respects, in a proper Sense; yet we shall open the
State of Men dead in Sin, by comparing this Death with natural Death, between
which in some things there is a good Parallel, and to which (in the Judgment of
diverse worthy Men) the Spirit of God does allude, etc.

Parallels.
A Dead Man, one that is really dead, is under a total Privation of Life; there
is no Life in him: So Man by Sin is totally under the Privation of the
spiritual Life of God. Now the Life of God consists in a Principle of Grace,
which is called a Seed; The Seed (speaking of a Man quickened) remains in him.
This Seed, 1 John 3.9.
or divine Principle, is unto the Soul, as the Soul is to the Body: but there
is no Soul, or Seed of Grace, no Principle of spiritual Life in an unregenerate
Man; and therefore really and truly dead in a spiritual Sense, as the Body is
dead when the Soul is separated from it. If there be any true and real
spiritual Life in an unconverted Man, how can he be said to be dead? for where
there is not a total Privation of natural Life, a Man cannot be said to be dead
naturally.

II. Dead, the Dead shall hear, etc. This imports, Man was once alive,
spiritually alive, considering the Subject of whom our Savior speaks. Man
before his Fall, or the Entrance of Sin, was alive; Death was threatened upon
Adam's eating of the forbidden Fruit: In the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die: The Deprivation of the spiritual Life of the Soul, as well as the
Life of the Body, was in the Sanction of that Law, Thou shall die the Death.
What Life soever Adam had before he fell, he lost it by his Transgression; and
in that very Day he eat, he suffered a Deprivation of the Light of God's
Countenance, and spiritual Life of God in his Soul. He lost that supernatural
Power of acting toward God spiritually, or Image of God that was in him; so
that it was impossible for him to live any more to God, until quickened by a new
Principle of spiritual Life. And hence unregenerate Men are said to be dead,
etc.

III. A Man that is dead cannot move, act, or speak; all natural Motions
utterly cease; that is the Effect of Death: So unconverted Men have lost all
spiritual vital Acts, that is, all Acts and Duties of holy Obedience,
acceptable unto God. There is in them a total Defect and Want of Power for any
such Acts whatsoever, or else they are not dead, cannot be said to be dead; for
when the Soul departs, it leaves the Body incapable of any kind of Activity.
All the natural Power the Body had, by means of the Soul's Union with it, is
gone, upon the Separation of the one from the other: So Death falling upon the
Soul, or suffering a Privation of the Image of God, or spiritual Life it had,
all its internal Power to act or live to God is gone, the the carnal Mind being
expressly said to be Enmity against God: Romans 8 7.
An evil Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit. In short, there is in all wicked
Men, a Disability or Impotency unto all spiritual Things, to be performed in a
spiritual manner; and that it is impossible for them to act and do in a way
acceptable to God, till quickened by the Holy Ghost.

IV. A dead Man is an unlovely Object to look on; for it is Life that puts a
Beauty and Glory upon the Body: So an unregenerate Man is an unlovely Object.
It Is Grace only, or that supernatural Principle of spiritual Life, that confers
Beauty upon the inward Man, or renders the Soul amiable in God's sight.

V. A dead Man is void of all Sense, he sees not, feels not, hears not: If you
cast Fire in his Face, it is all one to him; or if you run a Sword into his
Heart, he will not complain; lay Mountains of Lead upon him, he feels them not,
etc. So those who are dead in Sin, are senseless Souls. Tho the Anger of God is
kindled against them, and his Wrath burns never so hot, they regard it not; nay
tho you throw as it were Hellfire into their very Faces, yet they fear it not:
Tho there are upon them great Mountains of Sin, and horrid Guilt, yet they feel
them not, etc.

VI. A dead Man cannot be raised to Life again, without the mighty Power of
God: So the Dead in Sin cannot be raised to Life, without the mighty Power of
God's Spirit. Christ, who raised dead Lazarus out of the Grave, must quicken
such who are dead in Sins and Trespasses. The Ephesians are said to believe
according to the Working of God's mighty Power, Ephesians. 1 19, 20.
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead.

VII. A dead Man is loathsome, and fit for nothing but to be put under Ground,
or buried out of sight: So the Wicked are loathsome in God's sight, and unless
the sooner quickened, they will be good for nothing but to be cast into Hell;
some wicked Men are fit to be buried, or thrown into that Grave.

Object. It is by some objected, That there is a wide Difference between Death
natural and spiritual: In Death natural, the Soul it self is utterly removed
and taken away from the Body, but in Death spiritual it continues: a Man is
still, notwithstanding this spiritual Death, endowed with an Understanding,
Will, and Affections, by which these Men are enabled to perform their Duties to
God.

Answ. 1. In Life spiritual, the Soul is unto the Principle of it, as the Body
is unto the Soul in Life natural: Dr. Owen.
For in Life natural, the Soul is the quickening Principle, and the Body is the
Principle quickened; when the Soul departs, it leaves the Body with all its own
natural Properties, but utterly deprived of them which it had by virtue of its
Union with the Soul: So in Life spiritual, the Soul is not, in and by its
essential Properties, the quickening Principle of it, but it is the Principle
that is quickened: and when the quickening Principle of spiritual Life departs,
it leaves the Soul with all its natural Properties entire as to their Essence,
tho mortally corrupted, (which is equivalent with Death natural); but of all
the Power and Abilities, which it had by virtue of its Union with a quickening
Principle of spiritual Life, it is deprived. And to deny there is such a
quickening Principle of Life spiritual, superadded unto us by the Grace of God,
distinct and separate from the natural Faculties of the Soul, is upon the
matter to renounce the whole Gospel; it is all one as to deny, that Adam was
created in the Image of God, which he lost; or that Sinners are spiritually
dead in Sins and Trespasses; and that we are renewed into the Image of God by
Jesus Christ.

2. Whatsoever the Soul acts in spiritual Things by its Understanding, Will,
Affections, etc. as deprived of, or not quickened by this Principle of spiritual
Life; it does it naturally, not spiritually, etc.

Disparity.
A Man naturally dead is altogether incapable to make any opposition against
the supernatural Power of God, put forth in order to quicken him, or raise him
to Life, he can no way, directly or indirectly oppose it. But a Man who is
dead, spiritually dead in Sin, when God in a gracious way comes to use Means to
quicken him, or raise him to a State of Life, he makes opposition, nay; and
does greatly resist and strive against the good Motions of the Spirit, and
Workings of God, in order to his Vivification. So that the Power of God is more
manifestly seen in the quickening of one spiritually dead, than in quickening one
dead naturally.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may perceive the evil and destructive Nature of Sin: It is
spiritually the Death and Ruin of the Soul, and will, without the infinite
Mercy of God, destroy it for ever.

II. It shows also particularly, what the Nature of Adam's Sin was, and what it
did incur upon his Posterity, viz. not only natural Death, but spiritual Death
likewise.

III. It sets forth the Riches of God's Grace in the second Adam, that
quickening Spirit, in raising poor dead Souls to Life again.

IV. Here is much Comfort for all sincere Christians, who are raised from Death
to Life by Christ, in that there is so great a difference between the State of
Adam in Innocence, and our standing in Christ, viz. The Principle of Life in
Adam was wholly and entirely in himself. It was the Effect of God's good Will
and Power, it is true, but it was left to grow on no other Root but what was in
Man himself; it was wholly implanted in his Nature, and therein did its Spring
lie: But in the Life whereinto we are renewed by Christ Jesus, the Fountain and
Principle of it is not in our selves, but in him, as a common Root of Head: He
is our Life. Because I live, ye shall live also. He is the Spring and Fountain
of it. He by Covenant also has undertook to maintain Life in us; he does renew
and increase this Life in us, so that it is impossible that we should
spiritually die for ever.

V. A Man also from hence may easily perceive, whether he be made alive, or
quickened by the Spirit, or no. (1.) A Man that has Life in him, breaths: So he
that is spiritually alive, breaths forth his Soul in fervent Desires to God;
Prayer (as some have observed) being the Breath of the new Creature. Hence God,
when he would convince Ananias that Saul was regenerated, said, Behold, he
prays. (2.) There is in him Heat, spiritual Heat and Zeal Godward. (3.) He
has his spiritual Senses; he can see, feel, hear, etc. (4.) It Is a full
Evidence a Man is alive, when he rises up, and walks: So a spiritual Man rises
up, and walks in neweness of Life. (5.) A Man quickened has his Beauty restored
again: So a Man spiritually quickened, has the Image of God restored; he is
holy, heavenly, etc.

Wicked Men blind.
Luke 6.39. Can the Blind lead the Blind? etc.

Mat. 23.26. Thou blind Pharisee, etc,

Rev. 3.17. Miserable, poor, and blind, etc.


An unconverted Man, or Man in his natural State, is blind.

Parallels.
SOme Men are born blind. All Mankind spiritually may be said to be born blind;
for as they are under a Privation of Life, it follows they are blind, that is,
their Understanding is darkened.

II. Some Men are blind casually, either by Age, or some Accident. Adam before
his Fall, could see; originally Man's Eyesight was good, but Sin has put his
Eyes out.

III. Blind Men have not the comfortable Benefit of the Sun: So wicked Men
receive not the heavenly and sweet Benefit of the Sun of Righteousness.

Tho the Sun shines never so bright, a blind Man is never the better for it,
unless his Eyes were opened: So tho the Gospel be preached never so powerfully,
yet wicked Men see not, nor can they, till the Eyes of their Understanding are
enlightened.

IV. Blind Men stumble, and know not many times at what they stumble; they also
are in great Danger, without a sure Guide: So wicked Men know not what they
stumble at; they stumble at God himself, and at Christ, when they stumble at
his Truth, and his People: They know not whither they go, nor the dreadful
Danger they are in; they think they are in the right Way to Heaven, and yet are
in the broad Way to Hell; they are led oft-times by those who are as blind as
themselves; And if the Blind lead the Blind, they will both fall into the Ditch.

V. Some Men's natural Blindness has been by the just Judgment of God upon them
for their Sin: So God in a way of Judgment blinds the Eyes of some Men, after
common Illuminations. Job 12.40 Isa. 44.18. Romans 11.8.
He is said to blind their Eyes, and harden their Hearts, that is, he denies
them his Grace, and withdraws those common Influences of it from them,
suffering Satan to take full Power of them, leaving them to their own Hearts
Lusts, and so consequently to final Impenitency.

Disparity.
MEn who are naturally blind, would gladly see; they lament nothing more than
the Loss of their Eyesight: But wicked Men are willingly blind, they love
Darkness rather than Light, and refuse the Means God is pleased to afford them,
in order to the opening their Eyes.

II. Men who are naturally blind, do gladly accept of a faithful and sure
Guide: But wicked Men, who are spiritually blind, refuse that Guide God directs
them to, viz. his holy Word; they are neither thankful to God, nor good Men,
for any Help afforded them; nay, they vilify such as would take them by the
hand to save them out of the Pit of eternal Misery. There is no Blindness like
spiritual Blindness. Call upon wicked Men, and entreat them never so often and
earnestly, Pray do not go that Way, take heed, Man, O take heed! there is a Pit
before you; alas! you are going into the Lion's Den, nay, worse, into
everlasting Fire, to Death and Hell: Yet these blind Wretches will go on, live
or die, sink or swim, all is one; no Advice or Warning will be received.

Wicked Men compared to Mad Men.
Eccles. 9.3. Yea also the Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil, and and
Madness is in their Hearts whilst they live, etc.

Luke 15.17. When he came to himself, he said, How many hired Servants of my
Father have Bread enough, and to spare? etc.


WIcked Men are set forth in the Scripture as Men out of their Wits, Men
distracted, mad Men: And truly the Choice they make, their Actions; and
Behavior show, as if they were indeed besides themselves; they are really void
of right Reason, or Men that have lost their spiritual Understanding.

Parallels.
A Mad Man is one that is deprived of his natural Reason, a Beast (as it were)
in the shape of a Man: So all the Ungodly of the Earth have lost their
spiritual Reason, they are Men of no Understanding, and more fitly may be said
to be Beasts in the form or shape of Men, than such as have lost their humane
Reason.

II. Some mad Men are desperate, and very mischievous, care not what hurt they
do: O how desperate are wicked Men! how will they swear, curse, and blaspheme
the holy Name of God, and dare God to damn them; and for Mischief, they delight
in nothing more, spoiling and utterly destroying their innocent Neighbors.

III. Mad Men are usually bound, lest they should proceed too far in their
mischievous Ways: So God chains up, or puts wicked Men into Bonds, limits their
Power, lest they should go too far in their cruel and mischievous Designs
against his People.

IV. Mad Men are usually committed to Prison: So wicked Men are under the
cursed Bondage and Slavery of Satan, who takes them captive at his Will.

V. A mad Man will even spit in the Face of his dearest Friend, who with much
Affection seeks his Good: So wicked Men do as it were spit in the very Faces of
God's faithful Ministers, who in Bowels of tender Love and Compassion seek
their Good; and is this any marvel, when they in a base manner spit in the Face
of Christ himself?

VI. Mad Men refuse Clothes, and will go naked: So wicked Men refuse
spiritually to be clothed with the Robe of Christ's Righteousness; they will
go naked in God's sight, or have nothing to cover them but the Rags of their
own Righteousness.

There are many other Properties in mad People, which may aptly be applied to
ungodly Men; but because diverse of them agree likewise with the Characters of
Fools or Idiots, we shall refer you to that concerning Fools, etc.

Inferences.
NO marvel if God's People meet with so much Trouble in this World, and are
exposed to so many Dangers by the Wicked: alas! they are mad: Let us take the
less Notice of what they do to us; they are out of their right Minds,
distracted, etc. What a mad World is this! how few are there that are come to
themselves! Most Men and Women are mad.

Wicked Men compared to Dogs.
Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy to Dogs.

Mat. 15.26. It is not meet to take the Childrens Bread, and give it to Dogs.

Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs.

Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs.


A Dog is called in Hebrew, Ketab and Lamas, according to Munster; in Caldee,
Kalba; in Arabic, Kalbe; in Persian and Saracen, Kep or Kolph; the Grecians,
Kuon; the Latins, Canis, etc.

In these, and diverse other Places of holy Scripture, wicked Men are compared
to Dogs.

Dogs. Parallel. THere are diverse Sorts of Dogs, who differ very much in their
Nature and Disposition, some b^ing gentle, and others more cursed and snarling;
yet all are but Dogs. SO there are diverse Sorts of wicked Men, and they differ
exceedingly in their Nature and Qualities; some are naturally of a mild and
gentle Disposition, others very fierce, passionate, and peevish; yet all
ungodly, and metaphorically no better than Dogs. II. Dogs are base, ignoble,
sordid, and impudent Creatures, very vile and beastly. II. So wicked Men
generally are vile, ignoble, and impudent Persons, tho some more shameless than
others, God having given them up to vile Affections, to commit all Uncleanness
with greediness. See what Account the holy Apostle gives of some of the
Gentiles: Who changed the Truth of God into a Lie, Romans 1.25, 26, 27.
and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator, etc. For which
cause God left them to themselves, so that their Women did change the natural
Use into that which is against Nature: And likewise the Men, leaving the
natural Use of the Women, burned in their Lusts one toward another, Men with
Men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that Recompense
of their Error which was meet. III. Dogs are not only filthy and unclean
Creatures, but also foolish; for some of them will (as Naturalists observe)
bark at the Moon: and also when a Stone, or other thing is cast at them, they
will follow the Stone, and neglect the Hand that throws it. III. So wicked Men
are not only vile and filthy, but also foolish, as is fully opened under
another Head. They, like Dogs, bark and snarl at the Light of God's Word, from
whence so great Benefit arises to poor Mortals. Like ravenous Currs, they bark
at the heavenly Doctrine, and its faithful Ministers, whom they reproach with
impudent Scandals, and whose utter Extirpation they study. And also when they
are under Affliction, they take notice of secondary Causes, but never regard
the Hand of God in them, according to the Saying of the Poet,

Arripit ut lapidem catulus, morsuque fatigat,
Nec percussori mutua damna facit.
Sic plerique sinunt vexos elabier hosts,
Et quos nulla gravant noxia, dente pecunt.
IV. Some Dogs have a fierce, angry, and churlish Look, enough to frighten
timorous Persons; and not only so, but grin, bark, and snarl at such as come
near them, who design to do them no hurt. IV. So some wicked Men have a very
angry and furious Countenance; they look frowningly upon the Lord's People,
like as did Nebuchadnezzar upon Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who (it is
said) was full of Fury, and the Form of his Countenance was changed against
them, when he saw they refused to worship his God, and to fall down before the
Golden Image he had set up: And not only so, but they grin, and gnash their
Teeth at them, like envious Currs: Psalm. 37.12
The Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon him with his Teeth.
And thus did the ungodly Jews carry it to blessed Stephen; it is said, They were
cut to the Heart, Acts 7.34.
and they gnashed on him with their Teeth. Yet what hurt did any of these
Servants of God do, or design to do to these Sons of Belial? V. Dogs will not
only grin and snarl, but also bite; nay, not only bite, but bite mortally, and
tear in pieces such as offend them, who are not able to deliver themselves from
their Rage and Cruelty. There are some Dogs that are called Bloodhounds, and
some others may fitly be so called. V. So some wicked Men do not only gnash
their Teeth, threaten, and grin at their godly Neighbors, but also will, and
oftentimes do fall upon them with all the revengeful Rage and Malice
imaginable, to the wounding, cutting, or tearing of them to pieces. How many
Thousands of precious Saints and Children of God have the wicked Papists (and
others in many Ages of the Church) destroyed, like hungry and enraged Monsters?
If ever there were any Men in the World, that justly deserved that ignominious
Name of Bloodhounds, devouring and malicious Dogs, sure some of the Romish
Church may be so called; for they have showed themselves rather Monsters than
Men, yea, even Devils in the Shape of Men, as an eminent Writer well observes.
VI. There are some Dogs who will not bark and grin as others do, and yet in a
sly and secret manner will bite and tear such as they come at, which are
looked upon as the most dangerous. VI. So some wicked Men will not threaten,
nor grin at the Godly, like others; and yet in a sly and secret manner
contrive their Ruin; and with all their Might would destroy them, and yet make
no noise of it; wound them, but not let them know who does it. VII. Some Dogs
on the other hand will bark, and make a great Noise, and seldom or never bite
or hurt any Body. VII. So some wicked Men (contrary to the Nature and
Disposition of others) will give out angry and threatening Words, as if they
would do this and that, when they never intend to do what they say, nor will
they cruelly injure any Body. VIII. Dogs must not have that which is holy: Give
not that which is holy to Dogs. VIII. So wicked Men ought not to partake of
holy Things; holy Things belong to holy Persons, they ought not to eat the
Childrens Bread, to be admitted to the Sacrament, etc. IX. Some Dogs are so
fierce, cruel, and unruly, that they are forced to be tied or chained up, for
otherwise they would do very great Mischief: And moreover, to prevent further
Danger feared, their Teeth are sometimes broken out. IX. So some wicked Men are
so cruel and merciless, that God chains them up, i. e. he restrains them from
offering that Wrong and Violence to his People, which is in their Hearts to do.
And finally, to prevent their doing of further Mischief, God does as it were
break their Teeth, that is, destroy their Power, or put them out of a capacity
of doing hurt. Hence David says, Arise, O Lord, and save me, O my God; Psalm.
3.7.
for thou have smitten all mine Enemies upon the Cheek-bone; thou have broken
the Teeth of the Ungodly. X. Some Dogs are made use of by the Huntsman, to
observe and mark his Prey, that he may seize upon it the more readily; and
those are called Setting-Dogs. XI. So some wicked Men, the Devil (that cunning
Hunter) makes use of, to observe and mark the Godly and Upright in the Land;
they are employed to inform against them, and to discover their holy
Assemblies, (in Times of Persecution, that others may the better seize upon
them. XI. Some Dogs will not only fall upon Mankind, but also snarl, bite, and
tear in pieces diverse other Beasts, tho as savage and devouring as themselves.
XI. So some wicked Men will not only wrong, and seek the Ruin of the faithful
and sincere People of God; but when any of their own Tribe (I mean, ungodly and
brutish Ones) do offend them, stand in their Way, or cross them in their
Designs, they will fall upon them, to their utter Ruin also. Babylon has not
only spoiled God's People, and offered violence to Heaven, but has been a
Plague and Curse to the Earth, yea, destroyed the Earth. Rev. 11 18
How have the Egyptians destroyed the Egyptians! viz. One ungodly People
destroyed another, as vile and cruel as themselves. XII. Dogs are a greedy,
craving, and unsatisfied Sort of Creatures; they never know when they have
enough. XII. So many wicked Men, and particularly false Teachers, are such a
craving, covetous, and unsatisfied Generation, (some of them) they cannot be
contented with a Benefice of a Hundred per an. no, nor with two, three, or five
Hundred; nay, a Thousand will not satisfy some of them: And therefore they are
justly called by the holy Prophet, Greedy Dogs, that can never have enough,
Shepherds that cannot understand; they look to their own Way, Isa. 56.11.
every one for his Gain from his Quarter. XIII. Dogs are not only a greedy and
an unsatisfied Sort of Creatures, but oft-times vomiting up what they have
eaten, prove. 26.11
they return to it, and lick it up again. XIII. So some wicked Men are not only
greedy and unsatisfied, but having glutted themselves, and filled their sensual
Appetites, they are constrained sometimes to vomit it up; as is said of such,
He has eaten down Riches, Job 20.25.
and he shall vomit them up again. Nay, so like unto Dogs are many of them,
that if at any time they vomit up, by seeming Repentance, what they have
greedily and sinfully taken, they will return to it, and lick it up again; of
such the Apostle speaks, 2 pet. 2.22.
He is returned to his own Vomit, etc. XIV. Some Dogs run mad, and are so much
the more dangerous and hurtful, of whom all People labor to beware. XIV. So
wicked Men (being left to themselves) do abound so in their Wickedness, that
they run as it were mad in Sin, care not what Mischief they do to themselves or
others; of whom all sober and well-minded People ought to beware: Beware of
Dogs. phil. 3.2.
See Wicked compared to mad Men. XV. Dogs live an idle and lazy sort of Life:
And hence the Proverb is concerning a lazy Person, He has a Dog's Life, viz.
Hunger and Ease. XIV. So wicked Men generally lead an idle and lazy Life, (as
is opened under the Metaphor Sluggard.) They care not to encounter with
Difficulties for the Good of their Souls, how industrious soever they are about
the Things of the World. They labor not for the Meat that endures to eternal
Life, Joh 6.27. Isa. 55.1, 2
will not take Pains for that which is Bread, but are contented with Bones, as
it were, the Crumbs of earthly Comforts. So that they have but Ease and Quiet
here, they content themselves with the Childrens Leavings. And tho their
Consciences many times, like a hungry Stomach, puts them to pain; yet they are
not convinced of the Necessity of a Christ, but go on in their own careless and
wicked Courses, never eating of that which is truly good. XVI. Dogs are
commonly shut out of doors, and not suffered to be amongst the Children. XVI.
So wicked Men are shut out of the Church, and shall not be suffered to abide in
the New Jerusalem, among the Saints: Without are Dogs, etc. Rev. 22.15.
Metaphor. Disparity. SOme Dogs are said to be more faithful than Servants,
watching in the Night, and oft-times giving notice, by their barking, of
Thieves or Strangers, that may approach the House, when the Family are asleep.
BUt some wicked Men are so unfaithful, that instead of giving the least notice
of any approaching Danger (to to their godly Neighbors, that live quietly and
securely by them) they will rather conceal it: and so far are they from
preventing Danger, that they will encourage, and join with any, let them be
never so wickedly inclined or designed to do Mischief; as it is said of them,
When thou saw a Thief, Psalm. 50.
thou consentedst with him, and have been Partaker with Adulterers. II. Some
Dogs are very loving, and show great regard to their Masters, and seem to
delight in their Company, and will not do any Injury to any of the Family. II.
But some wicked Men regard neither Superiors nor Inferiors; nay, so far are
they from natural Love to such as are their Masters, (if godly) that many of
them despise not only Father and Mother, Brother and Sister, but their own
Wives and Children, if there is but the least appearance of God in them; nay,
they love not any that are not as ungodly and wicked as themselves, but do them
all the Injury they can. III. Some Dogs will not only not fly upon Sheep or
Lambs to hurt them, etc. but will sometimes fetch in that which stragleth from
the rest, and assist the Shepherd to bring them to the Fold, and keep them
within the Bounds of their own Pasture. III. But some wicked Men do design the
greatest Hurt imaginable to the Sheep and Lambs of Christ, nay, much worse than
Dogs; for instead of guiding them into Christ's Sheepfold, or keeping them
within the Bounds of his Pastures, they drive them out, and not suffer them (if
possible) to feed in the green Meadows of Gospel Truth, but would utterly
destroy them, were it not for the Care of Jesus Christ, Joh. 10.14. 1 Pet. 2.25.
who is the great Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls.

Inferences.
IT shows to what a dreadful degree Men are degenerated, from what they were in
their first Make.

II. It shows how hateful and loathsome Sin is to God, that the Spirit in the
Word should compare wicked Men (persecuting Men, such as worry and destroy his
People) unto Dogs.

III. It shows the Greatness of God's Power and Love to his People, to preserve
them in the midst of such Beasts of Prey, as Lions, Wolves, Dogs, etc.

IV. It speaks great Comfort to those that are truly godly; for tho the Wicked
do often gnash their Teeth at them, yet God has broken their Teeth, they
cannot bite as they would.

Wicked Men compared to Bulls.
Psalm. 22.12. Many Bulls compassed me about, strong Bulls of Bashan.
THe Hebrews call the Bull Tor, or Taur; which the Caldee call Abir, for a
strong Ox; the Grecians, Tauros; the Latins, Taurus; the Italians, Tauro; the
French, Taureais; the Germans, ein Steir, ein Vnuchersteir, das Vncher, ein
Mummelsteir, ein Hagen, and ein Bollen; the Illyrians, Vul, and Juneez. By all
which several Applications it is evident, that the Name Taurus in Latin is not
derived from Tanouros, the stretching out of the Tail, nor from Gauros,
signifying proud, but from the Hebrew Tor, which signifies great, etc.

The Epithets of this Beast are many, viz. Wild, sharp, Plower, Warrier,
Horn-bearer, blockish, great, glistering, fierce, violent, etc.

Violent, cruel, and proud Persecutors, that abuse and infest the Poor and
Needy, are compared to Bulls, Bulls of Bashan; that is, says Glassius, the
Enemies of Christ, who were strong and fierce, i. e. strong and outrageous
Persons, such as were the Highpriests, Scribes, etc. that set themselves
against Christ; so Ainsworth. Bashan was a fertile Country, famous for
excellent Pasture, the Beasts that fed there being very fat, strong, and great.
Hence the Bulls, Rams, or Heifers of Bashan, are metaphorically put for fat
Ones, Deuteronomy. 32.14. which is transferred to Men, Prove. 22.12. Strong Bulls have
beset me, etc. that is, Enemies strong, fierce, and cruel. The Oaks of Bashan
are used in the like sense, Isa. 2.13. Zech. 11.2.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Bull is a Ringleader of the Herd; for which cause,
says Gesner, Homer compared Agamemnon, Topsell* p. 77.
the great Emperor of the Grecian Army, to a Bull, etc. SO proud and cruel
Persecutors are often Ringleaders of all the Herd of their bloody Crew, like
as were the Highpriests, Scribes, and Pharisees, Mat. 26.41
to the Multitude of the wicked Jews, who conspired against our blessed
Savior. II. The Bull is a very strong Creature; his Strength is very great in
all Parts, but more especially in his Head and Neck. II. So wicked Tyrants are
often great in Power, and have the Advantage every way to strengthen
themselves; as it is said of the little Horn under the Grecian Monarchy, who
waxed exceeding great, Dan. 8.
toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the Holy Land; but more
especially of the fourth Beast, or Roman Power, who has, with human and
diabolical Power, with a high Hand, and stiff Neck, strove against the Saints
of God for many Years. III. A Bull with his Horns does often run at Men, Women,
and Children, so that the Sight of them (when they come toward some Persons)
makes them cry out; for many have been gored, and torn to pieces by Bulls: they
are indeed a cruel Sort of Creatures, especially when enraged, and therefore
all strive to get out of their way. III. So wicked Tyrants, Persecutors, and
bloody Enemies of God's Church, do often furiously run at all that stand in
their way, not only Men and Women, but poor Children, etc. Horn denotes Power,
Deuteronomy. 33.17. Psalm. 22. Dan. 11.40.
(as elsewhere has been showed) and to push with the Horn, metaphorically
signifies an exerting or putting forth of Strength or Power. The Bulls of
Bashan frequently exercise that Authority and Power (which for a time is
suffered to be in their hands) against the Saints; yea, push and gore them with
their Horns in a cruel manner, tearing them in pieces: and by reason of which
many timorous Persons being afraid of them, to avoid the Danger, are ready to
run away, ( viz. leave their native Country) when they hear that furious Bulls
(or cruel Tyrants) are like to be let in upon them. IV. Bulls are suffered to
feed in rich Pasture, till they are very fat; they are like some lawless Sort
of People, being not always restrained to one Meadow or Ground, as Cows are;
they will break into every Body's Field, and feed in Pastures none of their
own. IV. So wicked Men are suffered to feed as it were in fat Pastures, until
they grow fat, and kick against the Lord. They will not know their own
Territories, nor be content with what God has lent them, but make Incursions
into their Neighbors Countries; and, as if they were lawless, make all their
own which they can lay their hands upon, and care not what Spoil they make. V.
Bulls will fight furiously with other Beasts, and with one another. V. So
wicked Men are very quarrelsom; they will not only fall upon the Saints, but
also make War one with another, out of Pride and Ambition, and to accomplish
their own vainglorious and covetous Designs; as we see this day, how one
Popish and Heathenish Bull attacks and wars with another. VI. Bulls sometimes,
to prevent their doing of hurt, are shackled and penned up, who by that means
grow rather the more fierce and mad, and would do the greater mischief could
they get loose. VI. So wicked Men sometimes are by the Almighty restrained many
ways from running at, and spoiling of the Lord's People; Ezekiel. 34.4
he puts Shackles as it were upon their Legs, and Hooks into their Jaws, which
does greatly enrage them; fain would they be revenged, and vent their cruel
Malice upon the Saints, but cannot, their Ways are so blocked up.

Inferences.
I. This further shows the base and cruel Nature of the Ungodly.

II. It serves to inform us, what a Mercy it is they are restrained.

III. It may teach us also to cry to God to shackle and pen them up, and break
their Horns, viz. destroy or take away their Power.

Wicked Men compared to Lions.
Job 4.10. The Roaring of the Lion, and the Voice of the fierce Lion, and the
Teeth of the young Lions are broken.

2 Timothy 4.17. I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion.

Psalm. 57.4. My Soul is among Lions.


THe Lion in Hebrew, as Writers observe, has several Names, as Ari, and Ariel;
they call the Male Lion Labi, and the Female Lebia: Behold, my People shall
arise like Labi, and be lifted up like Ari. There the Caldee Translation
renders Labi, Leta; the Arabian, Jebu; the Persian, Scher; and Munster says,
that Labi is an old Lion. In Job 38. Labaim signifies Lions; in Psalm. 57.
Lebaat signifies Lionesses; in Nah. 2. Laisch is by the Hebrews translated
Lion; and the same Word, Isa. 30. is by the Caldees translated Lions Whelp. The
word (...) is derived (...), which signifies to see.

The common Epithetes of a Lion are these, viz. Wrathful, maned, fierce,
deadly, stout, great, preying, ravening, stubborn, snatching, cruel, bloody,
terrible, swelling, stony-hearted, frowning, violent, etc.

Expositors seem to be of a mind, that Paul, in saying, 2 Timothy 4.17. he was
delivered out of the Lion's Mouth, means Nero, who with open Jaws was ready to
devour and destroy him. However, it is evident, wicked Men, or cruel Tyrants,
are often in holy Scripture called Lions, in respect of some of the Properties
of a Lion; for one Metaphor (as Glassius well observes) is brought to signify
several Things, with respect to their different Qualities and Attributes. Thus
(says he) 1. Christ is called a Lion, Rev. 5.5. because noble, heroic, and
unconquerable. 2. The Devil is called a Lion, because roaring and devouring. 3.
Wicked Men and Tyrants are called Lions, because they are fierce, outrageous,
and cruel to weaker Men, as Lions are to weaker Creatures, etc.

Metaphor. Parallel. THe Lion is a proud and stately Creature. SO some wicked
Men and Tyrants are very proud and stately. II. Lions are courageous and
undaunted in their Acts of Cruelty; they will do what they list, let who will
look on. II. So some wicked Men and Tyrants seem to act in Ways of Oppression
and Cruelty undauntedly, with great Courage and Boldness. Couragiousness (says
Mr. Caryl) in any noble or good Way or Cause, (in which Sense, Prove. 28.1. The
Righteous are as bold as a Lion) is the Courage of Saints: But to be valiant
and courageous in doing Mischief, in wronging and oppressing the Weak and
Innocent, is the Courage of a Beast. That Courage which is out of the Way of
Truth and Justice, is a Lion-like Courage. III. Lions are very strong, the
strongest of all Creatures; what is stronger than a Lion? III. Some Tyrants
have been very strong, Caryl.
Tyranny must have Strength to back it. Hence they who mean to oppress, fortify
themselves with Titles and Privileges, with Honors and Relations: Solomon
considering the Oppressions that were under the Sun, observes Tears on the one
side, and Strength on the other; Eccles. 4.2.
On the side of the Oppressor there was Power. IV. A Lion is a crafty and very
subtle Creature, and hence said to lurk in secret places, and lies in wait
secretly in his Den. IV. So Tyrants, as has been showed, are very subtle,
they have a great stock of Policy as well as Power. Tho as Mr. Caryl notes, we
usually oppose the Lions Skin and the Foxes Skin, yet many times they meet both
in one; some are double Skinned as well as double Clothed. Psalm. 10.9.
Hence we have that Phrase (when David compares a Wicked Man to a Lion) He
lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his Den; Like as a Lion that is greedy of
his Prey, Psalm. 17.12
and as it were a young Lion lurking in secret places: They will (as
Naturalists observe) hide themselves in the Dens, lest Passengers should be
afrighted at them. V. Lions, especially, are cruel Blood-sucking and devouring.
Polybius affirms, that he saw them besiege, and compass about several Cities
of Africa; they will devour both Man and Beast, setting upon Troops of
Horsemen, destroying Flocks and Herds of Cattle, carrying some alive to their
young Ones, killing five or six at a time, etc. V. So Wicked Men are great
Tyrants, and have always been very cruel and Blood-thirsty. What bloody
Wretches were Nero, Caligula? etc. And what Tyrants and devouring Monsters have
the Popes and bloody Papists been? For besides the many thousands of Innocent
Christians they have inhumanly butchered (History shows) they destroyed in
America, See Clark's Examples. Vol. 2.
no less than fifteen Millions of poor Heathens, sparing no Sex, young nor old,
cutting Men, Women and Children in pieces, flaying their Skins off, and
Roasting them alive, and burning them to Ashes, making Children to kill their
own dear Parents, etc. VI. Lions will roar terribly. When the Lion roareth, all
the Beasts of the Forest tremble. The Naturalists observe, Gesner.
that tho many Creatures are swifter of Foot than the Lion, yet when he roars
they all fall down, and he overtakes them with his astonishing Voice; when a
Lion is angry he beats his Tail against the Ground. VI. So Tyranical Men with
their roaring Words, their loud and terrible Threatenings, often afright and
daunt poor timorous Christians; what said the tyranical King of Babylon?
Whosoever falls not down and worshippeth the Golden Image, Dan. 3.11.
shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery Furnace. And now, Act. 4. 1
Pet. 3.
Lord, behold their Threatenings, etc. Be not afraid of their Terror, etc. VII.
Lions are of a fierce, sower and stern Countenance; Gesner. Topsel. p. 370.
and in the sight of Men, it is said, he is seldom found without Rage. VII. It Is
said of the fourth Beast, his Looks was more stout than his Fellows. Dan. 7.
Wicked Persecutors, and Tyrants, look oft-times upon the Godly with an angry
Countenance. Much of Man's Heart is known by his Face; Frowns are as Blows,
hence we call it Brow-beating. The Love of God (says Mr. Caryl) is expressed by
the pleasantness of his Face, and the Light of his Countenance; so also is the
Love of Man. And we may see what the intent of a Person is, by his Looks; many
are in this respect Lion-like: They have (as Aristotle says of the Natural
Lion) Clouds and Storms hanging about their Eyebrows; it was a threatening
against the Jews, in case of Disobedience, that God would send against them, A
Nation of a fierce Countenance, Deuteronomy. 28.50.
which should not regard the Person of the old, nor show favor to the young.
VIII. Lions are hungry and greedy Creatures. VIII. So are Wicked Men and
Tyrants, They have set their Eyes bowing down to the Earth: Psalm. 17.11, 12.
like as a Lion that is greedy of his Prey.

Disparity.
THere are many excellent Qualities in a Lion, which no way agree to Wicked Men
and Tyrants, which we shall leave to the Reader to find out; upon which account
God and Christ are compared in the Scripture to a Lion: See page 40. and 135.
Book 2. of the first Volumn.

Inferences.
THo these Lions are very strong and powerful, yet God is stronger than they,
and he is against them: And he in a special manner desires, says Caryl, Caryl
on Job. chapter 4. p 65, 66, 67, 68.
to be dealing with these, for they in the Pride of their Spirits think
themselves a Match for God; tho indeed their Strength is but Weakness, and
their Wisdom (notwithstanding their Fox-like Craft) but Foolishness, yet in
their own conceit they are stronger and wiser than God himself. Hence (like
Pharaoh) they send Defiance to Heaven, and say, Who is the Lord? When God sees
the Hearts of Men swollen to this height of insolent Madness, he delights to show
himself, Exo. 5.11.
and graple with them that their Pride may come down.

What are all these Lions to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, if the Lord do but
roar, if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah do but come forth against these Lions,
they will run to hide themselves, and call to the Rocks and Mountains to cover
them, etc. God is said in the Holy Scripture, to destroy these Lions by
Degrees, Rev. 6.15, 16.
he proceeds gradually against them.

First, he stops the roaring of the Lions, they shall not be able to make such
a dreadful noise as heretofore; their roaring may be stopped when their Voice is
not, tho they can speak, yet they shall not yell.

Secondly, In the second place, He breaks the Voice of the Lions, they shall
only not roar, but they shall not so much as speak, either against the Lambs,
or against the Sheep, or for themselves, The Voice of the fierce Lion shall be
taken away. God is able to silence Lions and stop their Mouths, not only from
devouring and roaring, but from speaking.

Thirdly, When their Voice is taken away, and their roaring, yet their Teeth
will remain; and they will be biting and tearing still, tho they have done
roaring and yelling; therefore at the third Stroke God breaks out their Teeth,
The Teeth of the young Lions are broken. So the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 58.6.
Break their Teeth in their Mouths, break out the great Teeth of the young
Lions, O Lord; that is, take away the Instrumen^s by which they oppress, the
means by which they tear and rend, as Lions with their cruel Teeth.

Fourthly, Christ deals further with these Lions, he not only breaks their
Teeth by which they used to hurt others, but he takes away their Prey and their
Meat; they shall not have wherewith to live themselves, they were wont to suck
the Blood of the Slain, and to eat the Flesh of the Poor; but now the Lord will
pluck away their Prey, they themselves shall be starved or pinched with Hunger.

Lastly, Not only shall their Meat be taken away, but they themselves shall be
scattered and dispersed; this is the last step of their calamity. Their Dens
shall be broken up, and their lurking places shall be opened, they shall run
from place to place, from Nation to Nation: this is the Judgment of the Lord
upon Lions, and the Portion of the cruel Enemies of our God.

Who has not seen the Truth of all this in our days? We have had Lions,
roaring Lions, rending, tearing Lions amongst us: It was usual among the
Heathen in their Persecutions to cry out, Away with the Christians to the
Lions! this we have often seen, in the Figure, poor Christians sent to the
Lions; put under the Power of Men, as cruel, as bloody, as Lions. Many an one
might say (as David, Psalm. 57.4.) My Soul is among Lions. When the Watchmen (in
the Prophet) was asked, Watchman, what of the Night? he answered, A Lion, my
Lord, (Isa. 21.8.) Our sorrowful Watchmen standing upon their Towers
(considering these sad times, being asked, What of the Day? have answered, We
see a Lion, a company of Lions, tearing and rending in many parts of the
Nation; not Bodies and States only, but Souls and Consciences. God has
wonderfully delivered his Darling from the Lions, his Daniels from the Lions
Den. He has already delivered so far, that the Lions dare not roar, as they
were wont, the Teeth of many of the young Lions are broken, many of the old
Lions are ready to perish for want of Prey, and not a few of their Whelps are
scattered abroad. God has raised up Sampsons to tear these Lions, which roared
upon us, he has stirred up David's to smite these Lions, and rescue the Prey
out of their Teeth; and tho many Lions are amongst us, yet they dare not roar,
much less, tear as they have done; tho the Beasts be alive, yet (for the most
part) the Lions are dead: they are Beasts still, as base, vile, and bloody in
their Natures as ever, but their powerful Lion-like Strength is abated. That
glorious Prophecy is in some sense, and in some part fulfilled at this day, The
Wolf dwells with the Lamb, the Leopard lies down with the Kid, and the Calf and
the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little Child may lead them;
they cannot, they dare not, hurt nor destroy in all our Mountain, Isa. 11.6, 8.
I am sure, we may set our Seal to this Truth of Eliphaz, we have seen Lions,
and fierce Lions, old Lions, and young Lions, even the stout Lions Whelp^, some
scattered abroad, some destroyed, some consumed by the mighty Power of God.

Further, It is here said in the Text, That the old Lion shall perish for want
of Prey. It is a strange Expression; Lions have the greatest Power to get
Provision to satisfy their Hunger, yea their Appetites and Humor; yet these
shall want, these Lions who have all their life time preyed upon the States of
other Men, even these shall want; Note hence the Justice of God, Such as have
made others want, shall at last come to want themselves, they shall perish for
want of Prey; they shall have nothing to eat, When thou ceasest to spoil, thou
shall be spoiled, says the Prophet; And when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. We must not understand
it, as if wicked Men do ever give over sinning; Sin, and their desire of
sinning, is in a kind Infinite: they never say, Now we have done, and will sin
no more; but the meaning is, when thou can sin no more, nor deal
treacherously no more; when thou have done thy utmost, and spent thy Strength
in spoiling others, or taken all their Spoil, so that thou have done spoiling,
because there is no more to spoil; then others shall spoil thee. And thou Lion,
who have preyed upon others along time, shall not have a bit thy self, but
shall perish for want of Prey.

It is the Promise of God unto his own People, Psalm. 34.10. That the Lions
shall lack and suffer Hunger, but they that fear the Lord, shall not want any
good Thing: he expresses it by Lions, to note, that certainly they that fear
him, shall not want; for if any Creatures in the World can preserve themselves
from Hunger, Lions can; if they do but roar, the very Beasts will fall down as
a Prey before them: but yet (says God) these, even these shall rather perish
for Hunger, than any one that fears me shall want. God provides for his
Lambs, for innocent Persons, for those that fear him, tho they have no Strength
to provide for themselves; but the Wicked who have greatest Power, and have
been most active to provide for themselves, shall pine with want; they who have
caused so many to be bitten with Hunger, shall at last be Hunger-bitten, and
for want of Meat gnaw their Tongues.

Lastly, Where it is said, that the Lions Whelps are scattered abroad, observe,
God will not only destroy the Persons of Wicked Men, but their Families and
Posterities, they and their Whelps shall all be scattered, He will not leave
them so much as a Man or a Remembrance, Psalm. 36.6. I sought his place (says
the Prophet) and he could not be found, there was no print of him, no Man could
remember that there was such a Man in the World, unless to curse his Memory.

I shall only give one caution concerning this, and so conclude the Point: That
which is here affirmed in the General by Eliphaz, concerning the destruction of
Wicked Men, Lions, and fierce Lions, is not to be taken as a Truth in the
universal Experience of it; we are not to understand it thus, as if all
Persons, all Lion-like Persons, at all times, perish, are destroyed, and
scattered abroad; but Eliphaz speaks of what is usually done; or he speaks of
what God can easily do at any time, and of what God may justly do at all times.
Lions, fierce Lions, Tyrants, Oppressors, he both may, and can scatter when he
pleases, yet we find, that God has permitted some Lions, to live long, and
die quietly; they spend all their days in roaring and rending, in tearing and
devouring, and yet themselves are not devoured: God suspends his Justice, but
it is for weighty reasons. For in word,

First, If God should destroy all Lion-like Men, the Joints of the World would
be unclosed, and the Bands of human Society broken asunder. God forbad the
Children of Israel to destroy all the Canaanites, lest the Beasts of the Field
should multiply, etc.

Secondly; If God should hunt all these Lions out of the World, his own People
would live by Sense, rather than by Faith, and seem to be terrified by the
visible Actings of Wrath, rather than allured by the Promises of Mercy, or
Tenders of free Grace.

Thirdly; He defers them, until they have sucked Blood enough, rent enough,
done Evil enough, even filled up the measure of their Sin, and fulfilled the
righteous Purpose of God, by their Unrighteousness. As these Lions fill their
own Bellies, so they fulfill God's Counsels; therefore he lets them alone, that
they may do his Work, tho they little think of it, and less intend it.

Lastly; Eliphaz speaks of what God did frequently in those Times of the World
wherein he lived; for then God dealt more by outward Judgments, than in these
Gospel Times. As his Mercies are now more spiritual, so usually are his
Judgments.

Wicked Men compared to Foxes.
Luke 12.32. Go tell that Fox, etc.
THe Lord Jesus calls Herod a Fox, by reason of his treacherous Plots and
Craft, whereby he privately contrived to entrap him. See Erasmus, in his
Paraphrase upon the Place: Go and tell that Fox, who confides in human Craft,
and believes that he can do any thing against the Majesty and Counsel of God,
etc.

A Fox is called in Hebrew Schual, and in Caldee, Thual; and therefore, Psalm.
61. where the Hebrew reads Schuatim, there the Caldee translateth it,
Thealaia: The Arabians call him Thaleb, and Avicen calls a Fox sometimes
Chabel, and also Chalchail; the Greek Septuagint, Alopehon, and vulgarly
Alopex, and Alopon; the Latin, Vulpes; the French, Regnard, etc.

The Epithets expressing the Nature of the Fox, among Writers, are these, viz.
Crafty, wary, deceitful, stinking, strong-smelling, quick-smelling, tailed,
warlike, or contentious, rough; the Grecians, fiery-coloured, subtle for
Slaughter.

A wicked and subtle Persecutor is, and may be fitly compared to a Fox, which
we shall briefly open in the following Parallel.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Fox is a crafty and subtle Creature, which appears in
these respects following: (1.) In that he claps his Tail between his Legs, when
he is pursued. (2.) When he perceives he cannot escape, he urines on his Tail,
and whisks it on the Dogs, which has an exceeding strong Scent, insomuch that
the Dogs not enduring the Scent, are forced for a while to desist. (3.) He will
often, when he is in danger, and no avoiding of it, bite the Dogs on their
hinder Legs, for that is the tenderest part about them. (4.) Because the Beast
called the Urchin is too strong for him, he takes him by Craft: for when he
casts himself down upon the Ground, he leapeth upon his Belly, and destroys
him. (5.) The Fox (Naturalists observe) has a subtle way to take Fish:
Wandering by the Shore, he dippeth his Tail in the Water, and the little Fish
immediately entangle themselves in it, and so are taken. (6.) By Craft, as
Gesner observes, he gets the Badger's Den for his own use; and by laying in the
mouth of the Wolfe's Den, an Herb called Sea-Onion, which is contrary to the
Nature of Wolves, he frights away that Creature, so that he will not come near
it. (7.) He is often troubled with Wasps in the Summertime, but uses this
Wile to destroy them: He hides himself, but lays his Tail out; the Wasps
fly to his Tail, and when there are abundance in it, he runs to the Wall,
or to some Tree, and strikes his Tail against the Tree, and rubbeth it against
the Ground, and so he destroys all of them. Dr Frantzius.
(8.) If he wants Food, and knows not where to get it, Dr Frantzius.
he lies upon the Ground, upon his Back, with his Legs stretched abroad, and
so feigneth himself dead; the Birds seeing him lie in this manner, light on
him, thinking he is dead; and when they are upon him, he takes them, and
destroys them. SO some wicked Persecutors are very crafty and subtle, as
appeared in Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Herod. What Policy did the first use, to
spoil and utterly destroy the Israelites! Come on, says he, let us deal wisely
with them, etc. Many Tyrants, and cursed Persecutors, have pretended much
Kindness to the Saints, when they have in their Hearts utterly designed to
destroy them. What said Herod to the wise Men? Go, Mat. 2, 7, 8
search diligently for the young Child; and when ye have found him, bring me
word again, that I may come and worship him also: Which was nothing else but a
crafty Pretense, for his purpose was to kill him. What Policy did Julian the
Apostate use to destroy the poor Christians! Also what Devices have the
Romanists invented, to spoil and utterly ruin the Protestants from time to
time! contriving Hellish Plots, and then casting them upon such whose Souls
hate such detestable Actions! It has been the common Practice of these crafty
Persecutors, to put the Wolves Skins upon these harmless Sheep and Lambs of
Christ, and then set the Dogs upon them, to hurt and worry them, etc. How have
they charged them with Treason, Sedition, and Rebellion, from time to time, on
purpose to render them odious to the common, and more unwary People. II. The
Fox is not only crafty, but cruel and blood-thirsty, a great Destroyer of
innocent Creatures: He will seize upon Hares, Conies, Hens, Geese, Lambs, etc.
and make a great Spoil of them. II. So wicked Papists, and other Enemies of
God's People, are not only subtle, but very cruel and blood-thirsty. Herod was
called a Fox, partly without doubt upon this account: What barbarous Slaughter
did he make in the Town of Bethlehem, of poor, harmless, and innocent Babes,
that so he might craftily cut off the holy Child Jesus among the rest! And what
cruel, bloody, (as well as crafty) Foxes have the Papists been! How many
Thousands, nay, Millions of Souls, have they destroyed, both of Heathens in
America, and Christian Protestants in most Kingdoms of Europe! See Foxe's Acts
and Monuments. Sir Sam. Moreland 's History, and Mr. Clark's Examples, etc.
III. The Fox never goes straight forward, but tortuosis incedit anfractibus, or
by crooked Windings. III. So the Romish Foxes never walk in the straight Path
of the Gospel, Guild.
nor follow the even and straight Rules thereof, but in crooked Windings, and
Bypath of Error and human Traditions, not leading to God by Christ, but by
Saints and Angels; nor to his Merits only for Satisfaction, but to the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Pardons of their own, and to Purgatory, etc. using all
Deceitfulness and Error to compass their own cursed Ends. IV. The Time,
especially, when the Fox invades and seizes his Prey, is in the Night, when
all are asleep, both Shepherd and Sheep. IV. So in like manner do these Foxes
break in upon a People, when they are secure; like the envious Man, that sowed
Tares among the good Seed, they watch the fittest Opportunities to spoil God's
Heritage. V. Foxes are a stinking Sort of Creatures, and in the Daytime hide
themselves in their Holes, and seldom look out. V. So these Romish Foxes are a
filthy and stinking sort of Vermin in their Lives and Conversations, guilty of
all manner of abominable Lusts, and horrid Pollution; and whilst the Light of
the Gospel clearly and freely shines in a Kingdom or Nation, they hide
themselves; but when it begins to be Even-tide with a People, then they, as at
this Day, begin to look out of their Holes. VI. Foxes are said to do much
Mischief to Vineyards; as Franzius and others observe. VI. So Wicked
Persecutors and Seducers do great hurt and Mischief to Christ's Vineyard, Take
us the Foxes, Cant 2.15.
the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, etc. VII. The Fox, notwithstanding all
his Craft, is often caught and made a Spoil of, being much hated by all, for
the Mischief and Hurt he does. VII. So the Romish Foxes and subtle Enemies of
the Lord's Heritage, notwithstanding all their Craft and Hellish Policy, are
often taken in the Snare, and their Plots discovered, and they hanged for their
Treason and cursed Contrivances, as former and latter times show.

Inferences.
THis may teach us to take heed of two sorts of Men. First, of a flattering and
fawning Persecutor. Secondly, of a cunning and subtle Seducer; for Foxes haunt
not a Vineyard, or Flock of Sheep, more than these do the Church: (1.) By
corrupting the Purity of her Doctrine. (2.) Obscuring the Simplicity of
Worship. (3.) Overturning the Beauty of Order, and bringing in confusion,
spoiling her Bond of Union, by extinguishing the Vigor and Life of
Christianity. (4.) By destroying her Children, and spoiling their Goods, and as
much as in them lies ruining their Souls.

2. Therefore let us pray that these Foxes may be taken, like as the Foxes,
that one way or other their Craft and Subtilty may be discovered, and they
prevented, and hindered from doing more hurt to God's Church.

Wicked Men compared to Goats.
Mat. 25.31. When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, then he shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory.

Ver. 32. And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate
them one from the other, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats.

Ver. 33. And he shall set the Sheep on his Right Hand, but the Goats on the
Left, etc.


THe Male or great Hee-Goat, is called in Hebrew Atud, and the lesser Sier and
Zeir; the Chaldee translate it, Genesis 13. Teias-jaii, and Numb. 15. Lze; Gesner.
the Arabians, Teus, and Maez; the Persians Asteban, and Busan; the Grecians
Tragos, or devouring or ravening.

Tragus ab edendo quod grana fracta pane. The common Epithets given to the
Goat, by the Learned, are these, (viz.) Left-sided, greedy, unarmed, Swift,
long-legged, rough, ragged, unclean, strong-smelling, lecherous, bristler,
wanderer, vile, wanton, etc.

Wicked Men, but more especially Hypocrites in the Church, are compared to them.

Simile. Parallel. THe Goat commonly feeds among Sheep, and lies down with
them, and seems much to love their Company. SO some Hypocrites seem to love the
Company of God's People, they cunningly contrive ways how to get into Churches,
and appear to be of the same Flock, taking much seeming Delight in the company
of the truly Religious. II. Yet there is a vast difference between the natural
Properties of the Sheep and Goats; for whereas Sheep are meek and harmless,
Goats are of a contrary disposition, they are ravenous and very mischievous,
they will eat the Barks of Trees, and spoil tender Plants, great destroyers of
Gardens and Vineyards. II. So there is a great difference between a wicked Man
(notwithstanding his highest pretense to Religion) and a Saint; the one is
humble, meek, and harmless, seeking the good and well being of all, when the
other is proud, stubborn and mischievous; many of them while they seem to have
a great zeal for Religion, secretly care not what hurt they do to God's
Vineyard, contriving means how they may undo and ruin the Godly in the Land.
III. The Goats are a stinking and unclean sort of Creatures; there is no
Creature, says Gesnar, See Topsel. out of Gesner.
that smells so strongly as does a Male Goat, by reason of the immoderate
Lust which this Creature is exceedingly prone and addicted to above others.
III. So Wicked Men are unclean, filthy, and loathsome in the sight of God, by
reason of their abominable and most beastly Lusts and Uncleanness, Romans 1.26,
27.
being given horribly to Fornication, Adultery, Incest, etc. From whence comes
the Proverb of those Men, that have a strong scent about them, that they stink
like a Goat. IV. A Goat is said to be a very greedy and devouring sort of
Creature; Page 198.
for as Dr. Franzius reports, that that Field or Pasture that will feed a
thousand Sheep, will not be enough for a hundred Goats. IV. So some Wicked Men
are of a very covetous and greedy Disposition, not being contented with a small
Portion of worldly good things; for tho they have some hundreds, nay thousands
by the Year, yet are still craving after more, not being satisfied with what
they have of their own, but also strive to possess themselves of that which is
their Neighbors; desiring, like Wicked Ahab, Naboth's Vineyard: So that that
Portion or Estate, which will satisfy and comfortably maintain a thousand
Families of good Christians, is too little for one of them; such is their
covetous and greedy Appetite. V. Goats feed and lie down with Sheep, yet
sometimes the Shepherd separates them one from the other. V. So tho some Wicked
and Hypocritical Persons accompany with the Lord's People, and seem to feed and
lie down with them, yet at last the Lord Jesus will separate the one from the
other, as a Shepherd separates the Sheep from the Goats. Simile. Disparity.
GOats are useful; some poor People are much supplied by them, both for Meat and
Milk. BUt some Wicked Men are not only of no use to either poor or rich; nay
many of them are not only worse than Goats, but worse than Infidels; so far
from relieving others, as that they provide not for those of their own
Household. II. Goats have been made use of in the time of the Law, for
Sacrifice, and were also used, as clearly typifying Jesus Christ. See Ainsworth
on Levit. 16.5, 8, 15. II. But Wicked Men are an abomination to the Lord, their
very Persons, as well as their Sacrifices, are detestable; no use at all made
of them in any part of God's Worship, but are excluded therefrom, till by
hearing the Word they Repent and turn to God, and so become the Sheep of
Christ.

Inferences.
AS this may call aloud to Wicked Men, to consider the sad and loathsome Estate
they are in, so in a special manner it does reprove all such, that, like Goats,
feed and lie down with Christ's Flock, and yet are still but Goats, and as they
so abide, they will be found at the left hand of Christ in the day of his
appearing to Judgment, when they shall be separated, so as never to have the
Company of the Sheep of Christ more; Mat* 25.41
and then shall he say unto them on the left Hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into the everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Wicked Men compared to Thieves.
Jer. 7.11. Mat. 21.13. Isa. 1.23. Rev. 9.21.
A Thief (...), Fur, Mat. 6.19, 20. and 24.43. Joh. 10.8, 10. and 12.6. he that
steals cunningly, (...), so a Thief was named of old, or as if it were (...),
of carrying or taking away, (...), Latro, Mat. 21.13. and 26.65. and 27.38, 44.
a Robber.

In what respect Wicked Men may be fitly compared to Thieves, take as follows.

Parallels.
SOme are Thieves from their Childhood, they begin betimes to steal and rob: So
the Ungodly begin betimes to be Wicked, they are said to go astray from the
Womb, telling Lies, and are by Nature prone to all manner of Sin and
Wickedness; hereby depriving God of that Honor, Fear, and Reverence, that
belongs to him.

II. Thieves love not the day, lest they should be discovered, but are busy and
active in the Night: So Wicked Men hate the Light, They love Darkness rather
than Light, Joh 3.19.
because their Deeds are Evil.

III. Thieves run many Hazards and Dangers, venture their Lives to accomplish
their Designs: So Wicked Men run great Hazards and Dangers, venture not only
the Life of their Bodies, but of their Souls also, to fulfill their Designs and
wicked Purposes.

IV. Thieves are a great Terror to honest Men, they put many in fear: So some
Wicked and Ungodly Men are a great Trouble, Grief and Terror to those who are
Godly; how was the Soul of righteous Lot vexed with the filthy Conversation of
the Sodomites? 1 Pet. 2.7.

V. Thieves greatly abuse, rob and wrong others, not only such as are of their
own Rank and Quality; but sometimes set upon, and rob Persons in Authority; the
Judge, nay and Prince himself, has been sometimes robbed and abused by Thieves:
Did not Tho. Blood but few Years since, steal the King's Crown? So Wicked Men
greatly abuse their Neighbors, they do often take away the good Name of such
who truly fear God, and sometimes attempt their Chastity, etc. This is not all,
they do not only thus endeavor to rob Men, such who are poor Mortals like
themselves; but they rob God: and that many ways. (1.) They rob him of his
Glory. And (2.) Of their own Strength and Flower of their Age, which belongs to
him. (3.) They rob him of their Hearts and Affections, and place it upon the
World and their own base Lusts. (4.) They rob him of their precious Time, and
squander it away in a foolish and idle manner, upon their Lusts; nay, has not
that Man of Blood (I mean the Pope) robbed Jesus Christ of his Crown and Royal
Diadem? does he not assume that Power and Head-ship to himself, that only
belongs to the Prince of the Kings of the Earth?

VI. Thieves oft-times Kill as well as Steal, and Kill in Stealing, so that
they make th^mselves guilty of Murder as well as of Theft: So Wicked and
Ungodly Men, by their Ungodly and Sinful Lives, makes themselves guilty of the
breach of the whole Law of God, by adding Sin to Sin, and multiplying their
Wickedness, and so transgress not only in one, but in every Point, and thereby
wilfully murder their own Souls, and many times kill and destroy their innocent
Neighbors too.

VII. Thieves are sometimes taken in the Fact, or by Pursuit are apprehended,
and laid Hands on, that they may answer the Law in that Case made and provided:
So Wicked Men are sometimes taken in their Wickedness, by the Hand of God; or
if they escape an immediate Stroke in the very Act of Sin, yet they are pursued
by God's just Judgment that follows them, and will overtake them at last.

VIII. Thieves, when taken, would fain make an escape; nay, if they are not
held by strong Hand's, they will get loose and run away: So Wicked Men when
God's Hand is upon them how fain would they make an escape? when Adam fell in
with the Tempter to rob God of his Honor, it is said, he hid himself among the
Trees of the Garden, Guilt made him fly; and what pitiful Shifts do all old
Adam's Children make, to ex^use their Sins? Or if they cannot make excuse, then
they seek out ways to escape if possible: Some say, their Sins are not so great
as others; others say, they were drawn in and enticed; others, that God is
merciful, and they doubt not but he will pardon them; others fly to the
goodness of their Hearts; some to seeming Repentance, saying, God forgive me,
etc. But what ever way they take, till they are truly converted, they are
holden by the Cords of their own Sins, and they shall not escape, nor can get
out of God's Hand, but must answer for all their Wickedness at their utmost
peril.

IX. Some Thieves are so impudent, that they will adventure to rob in the day
time, let who will look on, being too strong for the Standers-by: So some
Wicked Men are so impudent, that they will adventure to rob their innocent
Neighbors of their Goods in a public manner in the daytime; as many of the
Papists have served the poor Protestants in former times, in diverse Nations,
and pretended they had Law for what they did.

X. Some are great Thieves, and therefore called the Captains of the Thieves,
under whose Conduct and Direction the lesser Thieves do rob and steal: So some
Wicked Men are so notorious in Wickedness, that they lead the Van as it were,
and are not only examples to others of inventing new coined Oaths, and sinful
Fashions, and Customs; but do command or lay some kind of force upon such, who
are under their Power, to be as Wicked as themselves, else they turn them off
as not fit to do them Service: Pro. 29.12.
as it is written; If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked,
(that is) he will so discountenance and discourage Truth and honest Dealing,
that none but Liars and Wicked Persons can live with him.

XI. Some Thieves are so merciless, they steal and carry all away that People
have: So some Persecutors have been so void of pity and humanity, that they
have took all away, which some Godly People had, even their very Beds from
under them.

XII. There are some sacrilegious Thieves, such as rob Churches, and steal away
those things that are set apart for Divine Worship: So some Wicked Men are
Robbers of the Church of God, by taking away his holy Institutions, and setting
their Inventions in the room thereof; such are the Romish Crew, etc. Christ
tells us, that such who come not in by the Door, but climb up some other way,
are Thieves and Robbers: nay if it were possible, the Great Thief the Pope, and
his Accomplices, would have robbed us of the Bible, and the true Religion, nay
of the true Church it self; however they (with all that adhere to them) have
robbed many hundreds, nay thousands, of her true and faithful Members, both of
their Goods, Lives and Liberties, for the which they must giv^ an account at
the great Day.

XIII. Thieves are so opposite to honest Men, that they by all means avoid
their Company and Society, if possible, when they know them: So Wicked Men,
known and discovered to be so, are not at all fit Company for the Godly; nay
the Godly are commanded to avoid them, and to have no fellowship with them, so
far as possible they may; however if in Civil Things there be some kind of
Necessity to buy and sell with them, yet their Sin in that, or any other way,
is to be hated and departed from; nay if a Man has been a Professor of
Godliness, and turn to be a Wicked Man, with such a one the Godly are to have
no intimacy, 1 Cor. 5.
that he may be ashamed.

XIV. Thieves know by-ways, and are acquainted with such Places where they may
accomplish their Designs, not only as to Secrecy, but Security: So Wicked Men
do acquaint themselves with by-ways, and therefore called the way of the
Wicked, Let the Wicked forsake his way, Isa. 55.5. Psalm. 1.2.
etc. Blessed is the Man that walks not in the way of the Ungodly, etc.
Joseph's Mistress made use of her Skill in the way of the Wicked, when she
attempted to rob him of his Chastity: for there was, (1.) Privacy, none saw.
(2.) Secrecy, none knew, and (3.) Opportunity, which he might now (without fear
of Shame) make use of; and there is not a Wicked Fornicator in the World, but
would have owned it as his way, and have chosen it too as a fit Opportunity:
But Blessed Joseph walked not in this way, he knew that nothing could be so
private, nor be kept so secret, but the All-seeing Eye of God can see it, and
will bring it to Light.

XV. Thieves are sometimes taken and committed to Prison, there to be kept safe
till the general Assize, or time of Trial, and then are brought forth, tried,
and condemned, many times to die, and soon after executed: So Wicked Men are
taken by Death, and committed to the Grave, and there they are held fast till
the day of the Resurrection, and last Judgment or great Assize, where they
shall be tried, and give an account of all their Wickedness done in the Body,
against whom Jesus Christ will proceed in a way of Justice; and being
arraigned, and indicted for all their Wickedness, Thefts and Robberies, shall
be found Guilty, by good Evidence, by the Law of God, Conscience and Nature,
and being so found Guilty, Mat. 25. ult.
shall receive the just Sentence of Hell Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, with a Go ye Cursed.

Disparity.
THieves can but rob and steal such things as are common to Men: But Wicked Men
rob God, and cheat themselves of their own immortal Souls, as has been showed.

II. Thieves endeavor to hide themselves, and are not willing to be known: But
Wicked Men commit their Wickedness publicly, and matter not who sees them,
they declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it not, they are not ashamed to
commit their Wickedness in the very Face of the Sun.

III. Thieves oft-times spare the Poor, and let them pass, but seize upon such
as are Rich: But Wicked Men regard neither Poor nor Rich, if they are Godly;
nay the Poor of this World (tho Rich in Faith) are mostly in their Eye, to be
made a spoil, robbed and ruined by them.

IV. Some Thieves after they have received the just Sentence of Death, from
which they cannot escape, yet do repent of their Wickedness and receive pardon
of God, tho they die by the Law of Man: But Wicked Men, living and dying in
Sin, after the last Judgment, and Sentence of Eternal Death, cannot repent,
neither have they any time so to do, but must be damned without Remedy.

Inferences.
HEnce we may see, how easily Men may mistake themselves, by condemning others,
when they are in as bad or a worse state themselves; who is it but will readily
cry out against a Thief, and use their utmost endeavor to apprehend him, but
how few are there (of the same kind, viz. Thieves, as has been shown) will lay
Hands upon, or condemn themselves; who are, as you have heard, worse than
Thieves?

2. How does it warn the Godly to look to themselves: for if the good Man of
the House had known at what time the Thief would have come, he would have
watched.

Wicked Men naked.
Ezekiel. 16.8. -- And covered thy Nakedness, etc.

Verse 22. Thou have not remembered the Days of thy Youth, when thou were naked
and bare, etc.

Rev. 3.17. -- Poor, and blind, and naked, etc.


THere is a twofold Nakedness, viz. an external, and an internal Nakedness; the
Nakedness of the Soul, as well as of the Body.

Parallels.
I. NAkedness since the Fall does not only import not having of Clothes, but
the Want of Clothes. As Adam before he fell, had no Clothes, so he needed none;
his Nakedness was an Ornament to him; but no sooner had he sinned, but he saw
the want of a Garment: So all ungodly Men are not only without spiritual
Clothes, but they exceedingly need them; as they have no Righteousness to cover
them, so it is their Misery. It Is a lamentable thing to be naked, and it is a far
more grievous thing to be spiritually naked, to have no real and divine Cover
for the Soul.

II. The Shame, Deformity, and all natural Filthiness of a naked Person does
appear; it is visible, and he is thereby exposed to Reproach: So the Shame,
Deformity, and Vileness of wicked Men, who are spiritually naked, (having not
the Righteousness of Christ to cover them) does appear; and this exposes them
to Shame and Reproach. Sin is the Shame of any People. To see a Man naked,
Prove. 10 ^
that has a rotten and polluted Carcass, full of Sores and stinking Ulcers, is
a loathsome Sight: But such is the State of the Souls of ungodly Men, they are
naked, and their inward Filthin^ss lies fully open to the Eyes of the great
God, nay, and much of it appears to the Sight of Men; spiritually there is no
Soundness in them, from the Crown of their Heads to the Soles of their Feet,
Isa. 1.6.
nothing but Wounds, Bruises, and putrefying Sores.

III. A naked Person is exposed to the Extremity both of Cold and Heat. Clothes
ke^p the Body warm in Winter, and defend from the parching Heat in Summer; and
he that is without them, from hence is in a miserable Condition; every Blast
pinches him, the Sun scorches him, etc. So wicked Men lie open to the dreadful
Wrath of God, which is set forth in Scripture by Things extreme in their
Nature, both in respect of Heat and Cold. O how unable will these naked Souls
be to abide the Day of God's Wrath, or to stand before him who is a consuming
Fire! The Righteousness of Christ will be as a Cover and Screen between the
Saints, and the devouring Flames of God's Anger: but wicked Men have no
Defense, no Screen nor Cover; they are naked, exposed not only to the Shame of
every Eye, but to the direful Effects of God's dreadful Wrath and Vengeance,
etc. whilst they live, and when they die, and for ever.

IV. A naked Man is exposed to great Danger by his Enemies; every small Blow
may wound him, who has nothing on to defend him from it; every small Prick
will make him bleed: But much greater Danger is he in by great Strokes, and
Thrusts of Swords and Spears, and by Arrows and Darts that Enemies may let fly
against him; his Condition is not full of Shame, but also full of Danger: So
wicked Men, who are spiritually naked, are exposed to great Danger from the
Enemies of the Soul. (1.) Sin, nay, every Sin wounds him; the least Sin makes a
Wound in his Soul, what Wounds then do great Sins make! (2.) Conscience wounds
him, and lashes him sorely. (3.) Satan lets fly his fiery Darts and Arrows
against him, and wounds him to the very Heart, and, like an hungry Lion, tears
his Soul (as it were) to pieces. (4.) Death and Wrath wound him, he having
nothing to defend him from any of these, etc.

V. A naked Person is not fit for any Employment; he is not fit to fight, nor
fit to labor: So such who are spiritually naked, are not fit for any spiritual
Service; they can neither work for God, nor suffer for God, nor resist Sin and
Satan; they are not fit for any Society of spiritual Men, but are unspeakably
miserable every way.

Disparity.
NAked Men desire Clothes, they will beg hard for something to cover their
Nakedness: But the Wicked are unsensible of their Nakedness, and therefore seek
not to be clothed; nay, like mad Men, refuse Raiment. We read, Luke 8.27. of a
Man possessed with a Legion of Devils, and the Text says, he wore no Clothes;
his Madness is evidenced by that, he would suffer no Clothes to be put upon
him. It Is a Sign Men are spiritually possessed with a Legion of Devils, that
refuse to put on the Garment of Faith and Holiness to cover their Nakedness.
These Garments are held forth every day to be sold (without Money, and without
Price) in the Ministry of the Word; but so mad are ungodly Men, they had rather
go naked, than lay hold on them, and put them on. And is it not just, that such
Men should be buried in Hell, Isa. 55.1, 2 Rev. 3.
in their own Rags, that will not embrace Christ and Holiness, that they may be
clothed with eternal Salvation?

Wicked Men compared to Vipers.
Mat. 3.7. O Generation of Vipers, etc.
JOhn Baptist calls the Scribes and Pharisees, and other wicked Men of the
Jews, Vipers; not only Vipers, but a Seed and Generation of Vipers. Some think,
he alludes to the Devil, that old Serpent, whose Offspring they were: Ye are
of your Father the Devil, John 8.
etc. But others rather think, he compares them to the Serpent called the
Viper, upon consideration of diverse Properties, wherein there is a fit
resemblance between it and them, etc.

Parallels.
THe Viper is a most poisonous Creature: Act. 28.5.
when the Barbarians saw the Viper stick on Paul's hand, they looked upon him
as a dead Man; their Biting is accounted mortal: So the Wicked are a very
destructive and murderous Generation of Men; their bitter Words, and cruel
Slanders, are like deadly Venom; The Poison of Asps is under their Tongues.
David complains of the Ungodly upon this account, Whose Tongue (says he) is as
a sharp Sword. Sin is compared to Poison: Their Poison is like the Poison of a
Serpent, etc. The Tongue (says James Jam. 3.8.
) is full of deadly Poison. And if this be the Nature of their Words, what are
their Works! Psalm. 57.4.
If Poison be in their Words, what Poison is in their Blows, and cursed
Bitings! Their Teeth are Spears and Arrows.

II. The Viper devours Scorpions, and thereby the Poison becomes stronger: So
the Pharisees and Sadduces, taking in the poisonous Opinions of their corrupt
Rabbis, by adding their own, increased the Poison of their vile Errors.
Blackwood.

III. The Viper has a beautiful Skin, tho inwardly very venomous: So those
Pharisees, like other painted Hypocrites, made a fair Show in the Flesh,
appeared devout, and glorious to Men, but were inwardly full of the Poison of
Lust, and abominable Error.

IV. Young Vipers (as Aristotle, Pliny, Rhodogin, Aristot, Hist. of Anim. lib.
8. chapter 29.
and others affirm) eat their way into the World through their Mothers Belly,
(tho some seem to doubt of the Truth of this generally received Opinion): So
the Scribes, and Pharisees cried out, We are Abraham 's Children, etc. and from
thence concluded, they were meet Subjects for Baptism, and should be saved:
They, like Vipers, as one observes, would needs find a way to Heaven through
the Bowels of their Ancestors, Plin. lib. 10. p. 62. Rhod lib. 3. cap. 37.
or by the Faith of their Parents: Mat. 3.7, 9.
but what said the Baptist? O Generation of Vipers, etc. Think not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father, etc. Or as another worthy
Writer observes upon the place: As the Viper eats (says he) through the Bowels
of his Dam, that they may come to Life; so you Scribes and Pharisees kill your
Mother, the Synagogue, your Fathers, the Prophets, and faithful Teachers, that
you may live in your Pride and Covetousness. --

V. Gesner, and diverse others, affirm, that the Female Viper is the worst,
Hierom.
and her Biting more deadly than the Males; after the biting of the Male there
are but two Holes, but after the biting of the Female there are four. See the
Verses of Nicander.

But of the Vipers Brood, the Female is the worst,
Which, as it were, with greater Wrath does burn;
And therefore when she bites, makes Bodies more accursed,
Inflicting hurtful Wounds, to Vehemence turned;
Rolling her Bulk and Tail more often about,
Whereby a speedier Death does Life let out.
This may aptly be applied to many cursed Women, who, of all the viperous
Generations of cursed Monsters, have, in diverse Ages of the World, appeared in
their venomous Rage and Malice against the Innocent, worse than Men. I might
give you a Catalogue of them, if needful. As some Women who are gracious, seem
to excel Men in Zeal and Love, and other divine Virtues: So some Women, when
very wicked, and left to themselves, exceed most Men in horrid Abomination, etc.

Wicked Men pool.
Rev. 3.17. Poor, and blind, and naked.
A Christless Soul is poor: It is true, a godly Man, one that has much Grace,
is poor in his own Eyes: I know thy Poverty, but thou art rich; But a wicked
Man is really a poor Man, as will appear by the following Parallel.

Parallels.
HE is a poor Man, that has nothing that is really or truly good, that has no
Clothes to cover him, but is naked as ever he was born; that has never a Bit
of Bread, nor any thing that is good, to eat, but lives upon Husks, Chaff, and
Ashes, etc. Now wicked Men are so poor and miserable, that they have nothing
that is truly good: they are naked, as we have showed, their Souls are naked;
they have nothing to eat but Husks and Ashes; for such are those empty and
perishing Things of the World compared to in the Scripture, on which they feed:
He feeds on Ashes, Isa. 45.20. Luke 15.16 Hos. 12.1.
etc. The Prodigal would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks which the
Swine did eat. Ephraim (says God) feeds on the Wind, etc. Therefore wicked
Men are poor and miserable.

II. He is a poor Man, that as he has nothing, so he can do nothing, whereby
to help or relieve himself in his Necessity: Wicked Men, as they have nothing,
so they can do nothing, to relieve their own Souls: They have no Clothes, and
none can they, by any ways of their own, obtain, or help themselves unto; they
have no Food, Isa. 55.1, 2 Psalm. 49.7.
nor can they procure any: They labor for that which is not Bread, and spend
their Strength for that which satisfies not: Therefore poor and miserable.

III. He is a poor Man, that as he has nothing, and can do nothing, so he has
no Body, neither Friend nor Brother, that can do any thing for him: But thus in
a spiritual Sense it is with wicked Men, and therefore poor and miserable.

IV. He is a poor Man, who as he has nothing, can do nothing, nor has any
Body to do for him, and yet is many thousand Pounds in debt: Such is the State
of wicked Men, they have nothing, can do nothing, have no Friend or Brother to
do any thing for them, Mat. 18.24
yet do owe ten thousand Talents to God's Justice, which is a great, a very
great Sum, and therefore poor and miserable.

V. He is a poor Man, that as he has nothing, can do nothing, has none to do
any thing for him, and is many thousand Pounds in debt; and besides, is a sorry
Soul, he has no worth in him, being a vile, base, fordid, and ill-natured
Wretch, worthy of no regard or pity, one that no Body will cast an Eye of
Compassion upon: But such is the Condition of every ungodly Person, Ezekiel. 16.
they have no Worth nor Excellency at all in them, they are not worth regard
nor pity, there is nothing in them that can move God to respect them, nor his
Angels to regard them, therefore very poor and miserable.

VI. He is a poor Man that is in the Condition we have mentioned, and that
which aggravates his Poverty is this, He is not like ever to be in a Condition
to help himself, nor to find a Friend or Brother to help him: a Man may be to
day miserable, helpless, and friendless, but in a little time possibly it may
be better with him, and he may supply his own Necessities, or get some to
relieve him. Now ungodly Men are in the State you have heard, and are never
like to be in a better Condition, by any means of their own, or by any Friend
of theirs, and therefore poor and miserable.

VII. He is a poor Man that is in the Condition abovementioned, and not only
so, but is sick, wounded, and in Prison, etc. Such spiritually is the State of
all wicked Men, Isa. 1.5.
viz. sick, wounded, blind, naked, and in Prison, under the Power of Sin and
Satan, and therefore poor and miserable.

VIII. Some Men's great and miserable Poverty has come upon them, partly by the
Pride, abominable Lust, and Extravagancy of their Parents, and partly by their
own Idleness, Lust, and Prodigality: Even so the spiritual Want and Poverty of
Men was in part brought upon them by the Sins of our first Parents, and partly
by their own actual Sins. This is the State of unregenerate Persons, they are
all even thus poor and miserable: And happy are they who see this to be their
Condition; Mat. 5.3.
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Those who
see their own Wants, Poverty, and Misery, shall out of the Fullness of Jesus
Christ be supplied with whatsoever they need: for tho Man naturally be so poor,
that he has nothing, can do nothing, and has no earthly Friend or Brother
that can do any thing for him; and besides, he owes ten thousand Talents, and
is worth no regard nor pity; yet the eternal God has found out a Way, for the
manifestation of his own glorious Grace and Bounty, to enrich him, and make him
happy for ever. 2 Cor. 8.9.
He that was rich became poor, that we through his Poverty might be made rich.

Disparity.
POor Men are full of Complaints, they commonly bewail their Poverty, and would
gladly have all their Wants supplied, and be made rich, if they knew but which
way it might be done: But wicked Men, tho they are poor, so poor and miserable
as has been shown, yet they are contented, being woefully blinded by the Devil,
etc. So that tho they are daily told how they may be made rich, yet they slight
all Advice and Counsel, and stubbornly refuse the Riches of Grace and Glory.

The Heart of a wicked Man compared to a Rock.
Jer. 23.29. -- And like a Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces.

Ezekiel. 11.19. And I will take away the stony Heart, etc.

Luke 8.6. And some fell upon a Rock, etc.

Zech. 7.12. -- They made their Hearts as an Adamant-Stone.


NOte, The Hearts of Sinners are like Rocks; or, wicked Men have stony and
rocky Hearts.

Parallels.
A Rock is a barren and fruitless Place; what will grow upon a Rock? So the
Hearts of wicked Men are barren and unfruitful to God; they bring forth no
spiritual Fruit to him.

II. Rain cannot enter nor soak into a Rock, but as it falls, so it glides off,
and runs away: So the spiritual Rain of Heaven, viz. God's Word, tho it falls
never so powerfully upon ungodly Men, it will not enter into their Hearts: My
Word has no place in you, says Christ, etc. Good Doctrine, and heavenly
Counsel glides off of these spiritual Rocks, like Rain from a Rock, or high
Mountain.

III. Rocks and Stones are naturally rough, and unfit for use, until they are
hewed and squared, etc. So the Hearts of wicked Men are naturally rough, and
unfit for any spiritual use, until they are hewed by the Ax and Hammer of the
Word: Hos. 6.5.
I have hewed them by the Prophets.

IV. A little thing will not break a hard Stone, or a flinty Rock, etc. So a
little Matter will not break a stony or rocky-hearted Sinner; God strikes
often, and strikes hard, gives many a Blow upon their Hearts, by his Word, and
by his Spirit, and sometimes by Afflictions, before their Hearts will yield, or
break in pieces.

V. He that will break a Rock in pieces, or hew Stones to make them fit for
use, must have a meet and convenient Instrument: So God makes use of a right
and fit Instrument to break in pieces the hard and rocky Hearts of ungodly Men,
viz. his blessed Word, in the hand of the Spirit: Is not my Word like a Hammer,
Jer. 23.29.
that breaks the Rock in pieces?

VI. A Man many times employs Workmen to break a Rock, and hew Stones: So God
employs his Ministers, as Workmen in his hand, to break these spiritual Rocks,
and hew these rough and ragged Stones, to make them fit to lay in his spiritual
Building: I have hewed them by the Prophets. Hos. 6.5.


VII. Seed that falls upon a Rock, or stony Place, tho it does spring up, it
soon withers away, (if the Fowls of Heaven do not pick it up): So the Word of
God, if it be sown upon stony and rocky-hearted Sinners, tho it may seem to
spring up, yet it soon withers for want of Root. They believe for a while, Luke
8.13.
but in time of Temptation fall away.

Inferences.
NO marvel Ministers Work is so hard and laborious, they are God's
Stone-cutters, or Rock-hewers; nay, and it fares worse with them than with
other Workmen, that work in Stone-Pits, or hew Stones, they labor all Day,
and go home at Night, and come again in the Morning, and find their Work as
they left it: But God's Workmen hew, and take pains, and leave their People,
and come again, and find them worse than before, their Hearts many times
growing more hard and obdurate, etc.

II. Let not Ministers notwithstanding all this be discouraged, for they know
not but at last God may set a Word home that may do the Business, and make the
hard-hearted Sinner tremble, and cry out, as they did, Acts 2.36. Men and
Brethren, what shall we do?

Quest. But some may say, From whence does it arise, or what is the Cause of
this spiritual Hardness that is in the Hearts of Men.

Answ. 1. Naturally the Sinner's Heart is hard, and like a Rock; we all brought
a flinty and churlish Nature into the World with us; such is the Effect of
original Sin.

2. There is also an acquired Hardness. Pharaoh hardened his own Heart; and the
Prophet says, Zech. 7.12
They have made their Hearts as an Adamant-Stone.

3. There is a judiciary Hardness of Heart, which is inflicted by God as a
Judge. Men harden their own Hearts against God, and God at length resolves they
shall be hard indeed; and therefore he withdraws the common Influences of his
Grace from them, and deprives them of all gracious means of softning. And when
all these three meet together in a Man, Isa. 48.4.
he is irrecov^rably hard and sinful, His Neck is an Iron Sinew, and his Brow
brass.

4. A Man is hardened in his Sin gradually; and as he grows harder and harder,
so nearer and nearer to eternal Ruin. (1.) He takes leave to meditate on Sin,
he rolls it up and down in his Thoughts as it were; a hard Heart lets vain
Thoughts dwell in it. (2.) He takes some Tastes of the Pleasure and Delight of
Sin, it seems to him as a sweet Morsel under his Tongue; and this is a Sign of
a further degree of Hardness. (3.) The third Step is, Custom in sinning; it
argues great Boldness to venture often. (4.) And then in the next place, he
defends and maintains his Sin, he has got some Plea or Argument for it, he is
an Advocate for Sin. (5.) He is angry with them, and secretly hates them in his
Heart, that reprove him for his Sin, or advise him against such and such wicked
Ways. (6.) He grows soon after this Conscience-proof, and Sermon-proof, nay,
and Judgment-proof too; he neither fears Rod nor Sword; a Stone will yield as
soon as he. (7.) He after this sits down in the Seat of the Scorner, derides
and reproaches the Law, and mocks at approaching Judgments, like the Sodomites.
(8.) And at last becomes a Persecutor of them that are godly, like cursed
Pharaoh, etc.

Quest. What are the Signs of a hard Heart?

Answ. 1. When many Blows will not break it, nor make the Heart yield.
Notwithstanding God lays on hard and heavy Strokes by his Word, by Conscience,
and by Judgments, yet nothing works remorse.

2. When that Word or Sermon which wrought powerfully upon another Person,
works not at all upon thee.

3. When the divine Rain of the Word glides off of thy Heart, and will not
remain or abide with thee, it is a Sign thy Heart is hard.

4. When thou art neither troubled for thy own Sins, nor troubled for the Sins
of others.

5. When thine own Miseries, the Miseries of the Saints, and the Distresses of
Sion, do not melt thee, nor work Compassion in thy Soul: Tho God is
dishonored, his Right and Sovereignty invaded, and Ruin seems to be at the
Door, yet thou art not troubled at any of these things.

Wicked Men compared to Eagles.
Hos. 8.1. He shall come as an Eagle against the House of the Lord. (Some
understand this Eagle signified Nebuchadnezzar; others, the Assyrian, etc.)

Lam. 4.19. Our Persecutors are swifter than the Eagles of Heaven, etc.


Tyrants and cruel Persecutors are compared to Eagles.

Parallels.
EAgles are very swift in their Flight, and that especially when they pursue
their Prey: So cruel Persecutors are swift to shed Blood: Isa, 5.26.
They haste like Eagles to the Prey.

II. Eagles are quarrelsom Creatures, preying, devouring, envious, proud,
lofty, the Plague and Tormenters of all other Birds or Fowls of Heaven, (as
Naturalists observe.) Gesner reports, that in a certain Eagle's Nest were found
three hundred Ducks, one hundred and sixty Geese, forty Hares, and many Fishes,
etc. In these respects wicked Men, or bloody Persecutors, may fitly be compared
to them: They are very quarrelsom, always seeking occasion against the
Innocent; envious, proud, and lofty, as appeared in Pharaoh, and others. They
are the very Plague and Torment of all their Neighbors. How many has the
Roman Eagle destroyed! how many Thousands, nay, Hundred Thousands of the Sheep
and Lambs of Jesus Christ have been found in her Nest! (as I may so say.) In
her was found the Blood of Prophets, Rev. 18.24
and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth.

III. The Eagle is a subtle and crafty Creature: She will fill her Wings with
Dust, and get upon a Stag's Horns, and by beating the Dust and Sand into his
Eyes she blinds him, and then soon conquers him. She also carries Shell-Fishes
on high, letting them fall upon a Rock to break them; which sets forth her
great Subtilty, etc. How crafty have many Persecutors been to destroy the
Godly! Come, says Pharaoh, let us deal wisely with them. Their common Practice
is, to put the Saints into Wolves Skins, and then set the Dogs upon them, to
worry them. Christ was accused for being an Enemy to Caesar, and the Apostles,
as Movers of Sedition. Acts 24.5.
Thus the cruel Papists dealt with the good Lord Cobham, and many other
Christians, viz. accused them with Treason and Rebellion, that so they might
with the better color take away their Lives.

IV. An Eagle is an unclean Creature, and therefore God would not have it to be
offered up in Sacrifice; tho she be accounted the King of Birds, yet God rather
chose the Dove upon this account, and refused the Eagle: So wicked Men are
unclean, and their Prayers and Sacrifices, yea, their best Performances, Prove.
15.8, 9.
are an Abomination in the sight of the Lord.

V. An Eagle is no comely Bird, she has no sweet Voice, nor is she good for
Food: So wicked Men are not comely, but contrary-wise, very fulsom and
ill-favored in God's sight, neither is their Voice sweet in his Ears. Christ
takes great delight to see his People, and in hearing their Voice. Let me see
thy Countenance, Cant. 2.14
let me hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely.
But thus he speaks not of the Ungodly: their Persons and Prayers are no ways
delightful to the Almighty. God had respect to Abel, and his Offering; but unto
Cain, and his Offering, Gen 4.4, 5
he had not respect.

Disparity.
AN Eagle has many and excellent Properties, wherein there is a great
Disparity between her and ungodly Men; and upon this account the Lord Jesus is
compared to an Eagle, and his Saints to Eagles. [See Christ an Eagle in the
First Volume.]

Wicked Men compared to the Devil.
John 6.10. Have not I chosen you twelve? and one of you is a Devil.

Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, etc.


VIle and ungodly Men may in many respects be compared unto the Devil himself.

Parallels.
THe Devil at first was formed or created by the Almighty; I do not say, he was
created a Devil, Sin made him a Devil, but God at first made him; he was
created an Angel of Light: So God created wicked Men; they are God's Creatures:
Eccles. 7.29.
Tho God at first made no Man wicked: The Lord created Man upright, but he has
sought out many Inventions. It Is Sin that has made Man so vile.

II. The Devil then is grievously degenerated from what he once was; so are
wicked Men from what they were in Adam.

III. The Devil is an Enemy to God; he was God's first Enemy: So are wicked Men
cursed Enemies of God, and early Enemies too: It Is thought Man became God's
Enemy not many days after Satan fell; he is almost as old an Enemy as the Devil
is.

IV. The Devil conspired like a vile Traitor against his lawful Sovereign: So
have all the ungodly ever done, and still daily do: They would not have God
reign, nor his Laws be obeyed, etc. but would magnify themselves, and their
cursed Edicts; above the righteous Laws and Statutes of Heaven.

V. The Devil sins freely, naturally, with full purpose, and cannot but sin: So
wicked Men sin freely, it is sweet and pleasant to them, it is like sweet Wine,
etc. They delight in Sin; Eccles 8.11. Job 15.16. Jer. 13.3. 2 Pet. 2.24
their Hearts (as Solomon says) are fully set in them to do wickedly: They
drink in Iniquity, as the Fish drinks Water. Can the Ethiopian change his
Skin? then may they who are accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well. Hence
says the Apostle, Having their Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease
from Sin.

VI. The Devil hates those that are truly godly, and seeks to beguile and
deceive them: So wicked and ungodly Men hate the Saints, and strive to entice
and draw away their Hearts from God and his Ways. Hence, as Satan is called a
Deceiver, and a Serpent, so are some of his Children.

VII. The Devil's great design is to encourage Vice and all Profaneness, and
by one means or another to suppress real Godliness: So this is the great Design
and Endeavor of some wicked Men.

VIII. The Devil is so vile, that God sees it necessary to lay a restraint
upon him, and put him into Chains, or else the World would not have a Moment's
time of Peace and Quiet: So ungodly Men are so much like the Devil in this,
that God also sees the like need to restrain them: for as the Devil is
boundless in his Wrath, Rage, and Malice against Mankind; so are his cursed
Emissaries against their Fellow Creatures: Hence God puts a Hook into their
Jaws, and sets Bars to these swelling Seas.

IX. The Devil trembles at the thoughts of God's Wrath, and dreads the Day that
is coming: So do wicked Men fear him, not because they love him, but because
they are his Enemies, and as such, they fear he will one day reckon with them.

X. The Devil tempts to Sin; he is not contented to be vile himself, but he
would fain have others be vile and ungodly as well as he: So wicked Men tempt,
entice, and draw others to Sin; they are not content to be ungodly themselves,
but strive to defile and corrupt others also.

XI. The Devil is a Murderer, a great Murderer, and takes delight in shedding
of Blood, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and making Desolation in the Earth, hence called a Lion, and a Dragon: So
wicked Persecutors are in this the very Picture of the Devil, viz. great
Murderers; their Feet run swift to shed Blood. How many thousands of innocent
Souls have the bloody Roman Devils destroyed within these twelve hundred Years!
They delight in spoiling, and making desolate the Inhabitants of the Earth, who
oppose their Pride, Psalm. 37.4. Psalm. 44.19
or stand in the way of their Exaltation; and thence they are called Lions and
Dragons likewise.

XII. The Devil would fain make those who fear God miserable in this World, he
envies their Happiness, and if he was but let loose upon them, he would utterly
deprive them of their Goods, of their Children, of their Health, etc. and bring
them into a forlorn and miserable Condition, as he dealt with holy Job: So some
wicked Men in this are like the Devil, they envy the Peace and Prosperity of
God's People, and if God did not restrain them, (were it in their Power) they
would rob them of all their Goods, (as some have attempted of late,) nay, and
destroy their Offspring. How many innocent Babes did the Papists destroy in
the Massacre in Ireland, crying out, Spare them not, Nits will become Lice!
They grutch them their Liberty; and therefore (says God) The Devil shall cast
some of you into Prison, etc. Rev. 2 10.
Is the Devil come to be a Pursevant, or an Officer, or to give Warrants to
cast into Prison? No, but it is spoken of wicked Persecutors, that the Devil
sets on work.

XIII. The Devil is an Accuser, one that vilifies and reproaches all sincere
Christians; he is called the Accuser of the Brethren: Wicked Men are in this
also like the Devil, they love to accuse and vilify the Godly in the Land; as
Tertullus served Paul, Acts 24.3, 5.
We have found this Man a pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition, etc. They
continually labor to render them odious, that so they might be hated, and
exposed to the Severity of the Law, and merciless Rage of the rude Rabble.

XIV. The Devil is utterly cast off and forsaken of God, and shall have his
Portion in the Lake; there is no hope left him for an Escape; he knows it will
for ever be his Portion: So some wicked Men are utterly rejected of God, and
given up to a reprobate Mind, and there is no Hope left for them of escaping
the Damnation of Hell; they shall as surely be damned and tormented for ever
and ever, as it is certain the Devils shall. So that in these, and many other
things that I shall pass by, it appears, wicked Men bear a resemblance of the
Devil, they are like unto him, they have the Image of the Devil upon them; Sin
turns a Man into a Devil. Joh. 6.70.
Have not I chosen you twelve? and one of you is a Devil.

Disparity.
THe Devil is a Spirit, a created Spirit; wicked Men are Flesh as well as
Spirit. Now the Nature of a Spirit in very many things differs from an humane
Body, so that in diverse respects, there is a great Difference between the Devil
and the Ungodly.

Inferences.
NO marvel wicked Men and the Saints agree no better.

II. O what a fearful thing is it to be left and forsaken of God!

III. No marvel wicked Men strive so much to set up and establish the Devil's
Kingdom, seeing they are acted by like Principles, and are alike Enemies of God.

IV. The Godly may wonder they are not long ago destroyed, considering the
cursed and devilish Disposition of wicked Men, amongst whom they live; it is
God only that has restrained them.

THE Ninth HEAD OF Metaphors, Allegories, and Similes, WITH Other Borrowed
TERMS, That respect I. The true Ministers of the Gospel. II. False Ministers.
III. False Churches.

Ministers compared to Angels.
Rev. 1.2. The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, etc.

Rev. 2.1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, etc.


MInisters are called Angels.

Angels. Parallel. ANgels are endued with most eminent Power and Dignity, they
excel in Strength. SO has God endued his Ministers with great Power and
Dignity, they are his Substitutes on Earth, they represent Christ himself; and
Paul says, Phil. 4.13.
He could do all things through Christ that strengthened him. II. Angels are
God's Messengers, and are often sent to bring good News to Men; the Angels
brought the first tidings of Christ's Nativity. II. So the Ministers of the
Gospel are Christ's Messengers, they are called the Messengers of the Churches,
and the Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23.
they bring the glad Tidings of Peace and Salvation, by Christ. III. Angels are
very wise; David was said to be wise, according to the Wisdom of an Angel of
God. 2 Samuel 14.22.
III. Ministers of Christ are, or ought to be, wise Men, they understand the
Mysteries of Christ, and open them to others. The Secrets of the Lord are with
them, Ephesians. 3 10.
the Angels themselves understand the manifold Wisdom of God by his Saints, and
Ministers of the Gospel. IV. Angels desire to pry into the Mysteries of Grace
and Mercy, by Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.12
IV. Christ's true Ministers, make it their great Business to study Christ, to
dig and dive into the hidden Mysteries; 1 Cor. 2.1, 2.
I determined to know nothing among you but Christ, and him crucified. V.
Angels are lively, beautiful, and shining. When Angels appeared to diverse
Persons, of whom we read, their Brightness and Glory was very great. V.
Christ's true Ministers are lively, and very beautiful; when the Spirit of the
Lord is eminently upon them, they shine gloriously in Grace, and Holiness: Act.
6.15.
Stephen (who was a glorious Preacher) was said to shine like the Face of an
Angel. VI. Angels are very obedient to God, they do his Commands, and wait for
his Word. VI. The faithful Preachers of the Gospel are very ready to obey God's
Commands, tho they are thereby exposed to great Danger, if God bid them go,
Romans 1.15.
they go. VII. Angels are swift in executing their Business; hence said to have
Wings. VII. The Ministers of the Gospel are swift in their Spiritual Motion,
they are said to fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach, etc. Rev. 14.6.
VIII. Angels have made known much of the Mind of God to the Sons of Men. VIII.
Christ's true Ministers daily make known the Mind and Will of God, it is one
great part of their Work and Business. IX. Angels admire, reverence, and adore
the glorious Majesty of God, and therefore vail their Faces before him, and
give Glory to him; Yea, as Mr. Venning observes, it is their very Business to
sing Hallelujahs to God; Angels Worship is, singing and praising of God, they
seek not themselves in serving God. IX. The Ministers of Christ, and all true
Christians admire and adore God, and his glorious Majesty, and with self
abhorrency vail their Faces, as it were, ascribing all Glory and Honor unto
God: Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, Psalm. 115.1
but to thy Name do we give Glory; the Servants of God desire only to rejoice
in God, they know no other Name to Glory in, but in the Name of the Lord; and
hence they sing his praise, tho in Prison, Act. 16.
in all which they seek not themselves, in any Service they do for God, but the
Honor and Glory of his Name only. X. Angels do their Service to the Lord with
joyfulness; the Morning Stars, it is said, sang together, and all the Sons of
God shouted for Joy. X. So Christ's true and faithful Ministers and People,
take much delight in their Service, their Minds run exceedingly upon their
Work, to do for God; to spend, and be spent for God and his People, is the
desire and delight of their Souls. XI. Angels are without wearisomness in their
Work and Service, they are as strong and as lively at the end, as they are at
the beginning. XI. So Christ's faithful Ministers and People, by the help of
God's Spirit, labor and faint not, 2 Cor. 4.16.
For which cause we faint not, etc. They shall run and not be weary; Josh.
14.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Caleb was as strong and as able to do Service for God at fourscore, as he was
at forty Years old. XII. Angels serve the Saints, and watch over them, and
daily administer to them; and, tho glorious Creatures, do not think it below
them so to do. XII. So the true and faithful Preachers of God's Word serve the
Churches, Members, and Saints of God, and daily watch over them, and minister
unto them; and tho possibly some of them may far excel in Parts and Wisdom,
yet they think not his Service below them. XIII. Angels are often sent to
comfort the Saints when cast down, as they ministered to Christ in his Bloody
Agony. XIII. So are Gospel-Preachers sent, and commanded to comfort the
Feeble-minded, and support the Weak; they know how to comfort others with the
same Comfort whereby they themselves are comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4


Inferences.
THis may inform us, what Glory and Dignity God has conferred upon his
Servants, who labor in the Ministry; they have a glorious Name, and are
greatly honored by the Lord, and therefore should be received with all due
respect, and esteemed very highly for their Works sake.

II. It shows us who are true Ministers of the Gospel.

III. It shows Christ's faithful Ministers, how they should do their Work, and
behave themselves before the Lord.

Ministers compared to Stars.
Rev. 1.20. The Mystery of the seven Stars, which thou saw in my Right Hand,
and the seven Golden Candlesticks: The seven Stars are the seven Angels of the
seven Churches; and the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches.
BY Stars in this place, it appears the Ministers of God's Word are meant.

Metaphor. Parallel. NAturalists say, the Sun communicates his Light to the
Stars. SO Christ imparts of his Spirit, and saving Light and Knowledge, to his
faithful Ministers. II. The Stars are placed by the Lord in the Heavens. II. So
the Ministers of the Gospel are placed by the Lord in the Church. III. The
Stars are a great Ornament, and shine gloriously in the Heavens. III. So
faithful Ministers are a great Ornament to the Church, in which they shine
forth gloriously in Doctrine and Conversation. IV. Stars differ one from
another in Glory. IV. So there are Diversities of Gifts of the Spirit in the
Ministers of the Gospel; some shine more than others in Parts and Piety. V.
Stars sometimes are obscured by Clouds, and shine not. V. So Ministers
sometimes, through Temptations, are beclouded, and shine not as at other times.
VI. Stars are a Guide unto Mariners. VI. So the Ministers of the Gospel are
Guides to spiritual Mariners. VII. A Star led the wise Men to Christ. VII. A
true Minister's design in Preaching, is to lead Men to Christ. VIII. Stars give
light to Men, only in the Night. VIII. So Christ's Ministers shine forth, and
give light to Sinners, and others, whilst the Night of this World does last.
IX. The Stars send down sweet Influences on the Earth: Job 38.31.
Can thou bind the sweet Influences of Pleiades, (or, the seven Stars?) IX.
So the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, in a blessed manner influence, by
their heavenly Doctrine and Life, the Souls of Men to whom they preach, and
daily converse with.

Inferences.
O What a Blessing are faithful Teachers to a People or Nation where they live!
Is it not a lovely thing to see the Gospel-Stars? Pray that the Heavens may be
clear, and that these Stars may not disappear, nor withdraw their shining.

Ministers compared to Laborers.
Luke 10.7. The Labourer is worthy of his Meat.
THe Lord Christ compares his faithful Servants, that preach his Word, to
Laborers, to such as externally work and labor with their hands.

Laborers. Parallel. Laborers usually are hired, and then set to work. We
read of one that went to hire Laborers, Mat. 20.
etc. SO Christ spiritually is said to hire Laborers, and send them into his
Vineyard; he assures them of a glorious Reward, when they have done their Work.
II. Some Men labor in the Field, they are Harvest-Men. II. Such Laborers are
the Preachers of the Gospel: The Harvest is great, Mat. 9.37.
and the Laborers are few, etc. They labor to make ready, and gather in
Christ's Wheat. III. Some labor so hard, that they wear out their frail
Bodies, and bring themselves quickly to the Grave. III. So some of Christ's
faithful and laborious Servants labor so hard in their Studies, in Watching,
Praying, and Preaching, that they spend themselves, or bring utter Weakness
upon their frail Tabernacles: I am willing (says Paul) to spend, and be spent,
etc. 2 Cor. 12.15.
IV. Laborers are often hindered and obstructed in their Work, like as the Jews
were in building the Temple. IV. So Christ's spiritual Laborers are often
hindered in their Work: Satan strives to hinder them, and false Teachers strive
to hinder them, and wicked Persecutors endeavor to hinder them, and many times
forbid them to preach any more in the Name of Christ. V. Laborers observe the
fittest Time to do Business in; they work hard by Day, and whilst they have
good Weather. V. So Christ's Laborers observe the fittest Time to do their
Work; like as Christ says, John 9.4.
I must do the Work of him that sent me whilst it is Day; the Night comes, when
no Man can work. VI. A Labourer is worthy of his Meat, and ought not to be
denied it. VI. So the Ministers of Christ ought to have all things necessary
provided for them, and their Families: 1 Cor. 9 9
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn. So God has ordained,
that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And (since this
Duty is much neglected among some Christian Churches,) I shall here transcribe
a Page or two, being part of a Sermon preached by Mr. N. C. at the Ordination
of an Elder in the City of London, 1681.

These Words call not only for a Maintenance of Ministers, but for such a
plentiful Contribution, as may make them Partakers with you in all good things.
If God bless the Congregation with a plentiful Portion of this World's Goods,
it is their Duty to make their Minister a Party with them in their flourishing
Condition. And, considering the Place and Employment he is in, and the Service
he attends, it would be extremely unworthy to think you have done enough, if
his pressing Necessities be answered, while you abound in Superfluities. If the
Congregation be poor, their Minister must be content to be poor with them, yea,
rejoice to approve himself a Minister of Christ, by Hunger and Nakedness, if
the Providence of God call him thereto: But whilst it is in the power of your
Hand to provide better for him, God expects it from you; and, be not deceived,
God is not mocked, neither will he suffer his Commands to be slighted and
evaded, without rendering a just Rebuke to the Offender: For whatsoever a Man
sows, that shall he also reap.

Now that you may the better understand how far you are concerned in this Duty,
before I proceed to the further pressing of it, let me put you in remembrance:

1. That a Minister is bound to attend wholly and only upon his Calling in the
Ministry, and not to entangle himself in the Affairs of this Life, that he may
please him by whom he is called to this spiritual Warfare; and nothing but real
Necessity may dispense with the contrary. His whole Time and Strength is little
enough to be employed in the Work and Service he is called to. He must give
himself to the Ministry of the Word, and Prayer; and continue in Reading,
Meditation, etc. as a Man wholly devoted unto Gospel-Service; and is therefore,
by his Call to the Ministry, secluded from those ways and means of providing
for his own Subsistence, as the Trades and secular Employments of others
furnish them with, that his Mind, by the Cares of worldly Business, may not be
diverted from that Study of God's Word, and Care of Souls, which the Duty of
his Station engages him to. And if he may not expose himself to the careful
Thoughts that accompany worldly Business, tho tending to his Profit; certainly
it is no way meet, that he should be left to conflict with the thorny Cares of
a necessitous Condition, whilst those he ministers to, have means to prevent
it.

2. It is no less the Duty of a Minister, than of other Men, to provide for his
Family, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and (what lies in him) to take care of his Wife and Children, that they may
not be exposed to a thousand Miseries and Temptations, when he is gone. I
confess, of all Men in the World, a covetous, raking Temper worst becomes a
Minister: But we greatly mistake, if we think he must divest himself of the due
Affection of an Husband toward his Wife, or of a Father toward his Children;
or, that those Fruits thereof, which are justly esteemed commendable in others,
should be a Fault in him.

3. An Elder or Bishop is under a special Charge to use Hospitality, and to set
in himself a Pattern of Charity, and compassionate Bounty to poor Souls; and if
it be his Duty to be hospitable and charitable in an eminent degree, then
without controversy the People are concerned to endeavor that he may be
capable of giving proof of this Grace in him, by the Exercise of it as there is
occasion.

These things being premised, I shall show you, that you lie under the
strongest Obligation imaginable to this Duty: '1. By the Law of Nature. '2. By
the express Command and Appointment of Christ. 3. On the account of the great
and manifest Evil and Inconvenience, that follows the Neglect thereof.


First; The Law and Light of Nature obliges you to it, as to the matter of
Equity and Justice. And from hence our Apostle takes his first Plea, in 1 Cor.
9.7, etc. Who goes a Warfare any time at his own Charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk of the Flock? The Ministry is a Warfare, undertaken at
the Command of Christ, for the Service of your Souls; and it is as reasonable
that the Minister should receive a Supply of outward Things from you, as that a
faithful Soldier should receive his Pay from his Captain, at the Charge of the
Commonwealth, for whose Good he militates. Shall a Man feed a Flock, (as a
Pastor does) and be denied to eat of the Milk of that Flock, which it is his
Work to keep and feed? Or, is it consistent with common Justice, to deprive a
Man of the Fruit of that Vineyard, which is planted and manured by his own
Labor? Such is the Case, in respect of Maintenance, between a Minister and the
People. It is not your Charity that I ask for him, but Justice and Debt that I
plead for: He is employed in your Service, and of Right should live upon your
Charge; Nay, you have called him off from other Business, and therefore his
Maintenance is due from you, as is the Wages of your Servant; tho I fear some
give more to the meanest Servant in their House, than they are willing to do to
their Minister. Certainly, if you choose as you ought, your Ministers are not of
the lowest of the People, but may be allowed to have a Share of Parts, common
Prudence, and Ability for Business, with other Men; and could manage Trades, or
fall into other Employments, and get Estates as well as you, if they were not
devoted to a better Service: And must they needs be devoted to Necessities and
Misery, in the same hour that they enter upon the Ministry? My Brethren, this
ought not to be. Let your Ministers have as good a Treatment at least, as the
Law provided for the Ox that treads out the Corn, who might not be muzled.
Neither was this written for the sake of Oxen; for, does God take care of Oxen?
or were there no higher End of this Law, than that the brute Creature should
not be abused? Certainly there was; And for our sakes no doubt was this
written, 1 Cor. 9.8, 9, 10, 11.
that he that ploweth, should plow in Hope; and that he that thresheth in Hope,
should be Partaker of his Hope: For if we have sown unto you spiritual Things,
is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal Things?

Secondly; The Lord has not left us to argue this only from general Principles
of Reason, and common Equity; but, to put the Matter beyond dispute, has
superadded his express Command. Thus he provided for his Ministers in the Time
of the Law, which the Apostle urges in the next place, 1 Cor. 9.13. Do ye not
know, that they which minister about holy Things, live of the Things of the
Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar? God did
no sooner separate the Levites to the Service of the Sanctuary, but he by Law
provided for their Subsistence; and tho they were but one Tribe in twelve, yet
the Tenth of the Increase of the whole Land was given to them, besides the
First Fruits and Offerings, and diverse other Advantages; so that their Lot
might equal, yea, exceed that of their Brethren. This Law indeed is now
abrogated, and we pretend to no Right of tithing your Estates; but the moral
Equity of it can never cease: Neither has Christ left Gospel Ministers to the
wide World, but has made Provision for them also, so far as the Interest of
his Command will go with them that profess his Name; for so it follows, v. 14.
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. The Labourer is still worthy of his Hire, and not the less
worthy, because he labors in the Gospel. Tho indeed (if Men did fully come up
to their D^ty, yet still) the Charge of Gospel Worship will appear very
inconsiderable, when compared with that of the Law; for, were that my Business,
I think I could demonstrate, that the fifth part of their Estates was yearly to
be spent in things relating to the Temple-Service. And if we are sensible of
the great Privilege and Blessing of the Gospel, on higher accounts than merely
the Ease of those Burdens, we shall never think much to defray the moderate
Charge of a Gospel Ministry, in such a manner as may give Reputation to our
Profession.

Thirdly; That you may prevent the Evil and Inconvenience that follows the
Neglect of this Duty, it concerns you cheerfully to practice it: I might have
said, Evils and Inconveniences, as of many, for many there are, and those of
easy observation to an u^prejudiced Eye; but it is the Discouragement of Study,
which at present I chiefly aim at. That Study must needs be discouraged, (I
intend the Study of Theology) by the Peoples Neglect to make a comfortable
Provision for their Ministers, is too evident to require a Proof. Who will
apply himself to gather and lay up those Stores of solid Learning, which are
needful to a Minister, when he can expect to purchase nothing to himself but
Poverty and Distress thereby? Or, how shall a Minister be capabl^ to furnish
himself with universal Knowledge of Things relating to his Work, that has no
means for providing for his own Information, or no Time free from Cares and
worldly Business? And the Disadvantage of this will at last fall to the Share
of the People that he ministers unto. He that considers, that the holy
Scriptures were originally written in Hebrew and Greek, must have an hard
Forehead, if he deny the Usefulness of Learning to a Minister; besides, many
other things there are that call for it, in reference to the opening of the
Scriptures, which I cannot now insist upon. And it is not without diligent and
continued Study, that the deep Things of God can be searched out, and so
proposed to you, as to enrich your Minds with the clear and solid Knowledge of
them. I confess, a little Learning, and less Study, may furnish a Man with such
a Discourse, as may please some weak Persons, that judge of a Sermon by the
Loudness of the Voice, and affectionate Sentences, or can fancy themselves to
be fed with the Ashes of jingling Words, and Cadency of Terms in a Discourse.
But alas! the seeming Warmth of Affection that is stirred by such Means, is as
short-lived, as a Land-flood that has no Spring to feed it. He that will do
the Souls of his People good, and approve himself a Pastor after God's own
Heart, must feed them with Knowledge and Understanding, and endeavor to
maintain a constant Zeal and Affection in them, by well informing their
Judgments, and such an opening of the Mind of God from the Scriptures, as may
command their Consciences: And this is not to be expected, but from him that
labors in his Study, as well as in the Pulpit. Mistake me not; I know the
Success and Fruit of all the Studies and Labors of Men that preach in the
Gospel, is from the Grace and Power of the Holy Ghost; but the Assistance of
the Spirit is to be expected by us in the way of our Duty. These things might
be yet applied more home to my present purpose; but perhaps some will think
there is too much said already, (tho I heartily wish more were not needful) and
my Time calls me to put a Period to this Exercise; and therefore I will only
add a Word for the enforcement of this and the other Duties which I have laid
before you, by accommodating the same Things to you, which were before touched,
for the encouragement and quickening of your Pastor in his Duty.

First; Remember, your Pastor is the Minister of Christ, one that dispenses
the Mysteries of God to you in his Name; and therefore (he acting in his Place,
according to his Duty) the Lord Jesus will account that done to himself, that
is done to his Minister: Mat 10.40, with Luke 10.16.
He that receives you, (says he) receives me; and he that despises you,
despises me, etc. If the Name and Authority of Christ will beget an Awe in
you, or his matchless and unspeakable Love influence you, there is no want of
Motives to those Duties that have been pressed upon you. If you acknowledge a
religious Respect and Reverence due to the Son of God, exercise it in humble
Obedience to his Word; and if you love him, and value his Gospel, treat not his
Ministers in an unworthy manner; and forget not, that He, who gave his Life a
Ransom for you, well deserves a Return of the greatest Love from you, and to be
honored by you, not only with good Words, but with your Substance, and the
First Fruits of all your Increase. Prove. 3.9.


Secondly, It Is the Business of your Salvation, and the Concern of your
precious and immortal Souls, that a Minister is employed in; and therefore it
is much more your own Interest than his, that you should make Conscience of
your Duty. With this Argument the Apostle enforces his Exhortation, Heb. 13.17.
For they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an Account, that they do
it with Joy, and not with Grief, for that is unprofitable for you. The Ministry
can never be effectual to the saving of your Souls, if you be not sincere in
Obedience under it. And will you be less careful for your Souls, and their
eternal Welfare, than you are for your Bodies, and the Comforts of a temporal
Life? Can you be content to lay out your Strength and Substance to provide for
these, and neglect the other? It is sad to consider, how many there are among
Professors, that live in the World, as if there were no Truth in the Report of
that which is to come, and have the meanest esteem of the most necessary Means
of Salvation, viz. the Word, and Ordinances of Christ, and a Gospel Ministry!
Can expend perhaps an hundred Pound per annum, more or less, for the
Convenience, Ornament, or Delight of a frail Carcass, but will grudg half so
much for the Poor, or the support of Gospel Worship.

Ministers compared to Watchmen.
Isa. 62.6. I have set Watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem.

Ezekiel. 3.17. I have made thee a Watchman, etc.

Heb. 13.17. They watch for your Souls.


Ministers are called Watchmen.

Watchmen. Parallel. Watchmen have a Charge committed to them, and they ought
to take heed they do not betray their Trust. MInisters have a great Charge
committed to them, which they ought to see to, and so to behave themselves,
that they may have their Accounts to give up with Joy: For,

1. They are entrusted with the Word, the faithful Word and Doctrine of God is
committed to them; they must see they preach nothing for Doctrine, but what is
the direct and undeniable Truth and Mind of God; they must not corrupt the
Word, nor intermix it with the Traditions of Men. I give thee charge in the
sight of God, 1 Timothy 6.13.
who quickneth all things, and before Christ, who before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good Confession, that thou keep this Commandment without spot,
unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. They have received the Charge of preaching God's Word; they must preach,
whoever forbid them. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
who shall judge the Quick and the Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom;
preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, exhort, with
all Long-suffering and Doctrine.

3. They have the Charge of God's Ordinances, or the holy Sacraments of
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. Go therefore, teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20.
( i. e. make Disciples) baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. For I received from the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you, (I had it in charge, as if he should say, from Christ
himself) that the same Night in which he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24.
he took Bread, and blessed it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is
broken for you; this do in remembrance of me: After the same manner he took the
Cup, etc. They must not corrupt the Ordinances, nor administer them otherwise
than the plain Rule, left in the Word of God, directs.

4. They have the Charge of the Church and Flock of God: Acts 20.27
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and unto the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood, etc.

5. They must know the State of the Flock, be Examples to the Flock: 1 Pet.
5.2, 3
Feed the Flock of God which is amongst you, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind; neither being Lords over God's
Heritage, but being Examples to the Flock.

6. Lastly; They have the Charge of Men's Souls: Watch for your Souls, Heb. 13.17
as such that must give an account. These things are part of these Watchmen's
Charge.

II. Watchmen are not to sleep, nor give way to slumber; they must be awake
when others sleep, to see what Dangers are near, etc. II. So the Ministers of
the Gospel must not be sleepy and slothful; they are to be upon the
Watchtower, to see what Danger approaches, or is coming upon the Church and
People of God. III. Watchmen are to give warning, if they see Evil coming;
hence they ought to have a good Eyesight; a blind Man is not fit to be a
Watchman. III. So Ministers, or Christ's spiritual Watchmen, must give warning,
when they see Danger approaching, and therefore had need be Men of Knowledge:
They are called Seers; if they have no Eyes, they cannot be called Seers.
Ministers had need be like Argus, (whom Poets say had an hundred Eyes); they
should be full of Eyes, like the living Creatures about the Throne, to see
before them, and behind them, that so they may perceive clearly every thing
that is evil or hurtful to the Souls of Men, or Church of God, and give warning
of it; and not like those foolish Watchmen the Prophet speaks of, His Watchmen
are blind, sleeping, lying down, Isa. 56 10. Ezekiel. 33.6, 7.
loving to slumber. If the Watchman sees the Sword coming, and blow not the
Trumpet, and the People be not warned; if the Sword come and take away any
Person from among them, he is taken away in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I
require at the Watchman's hand.

They are to give warning to Sinners, that they repent, and be converted, for
Wrath is gone out against them from the Lord; if they live in one Sin, they
must perish: They are to warn them of the Danger of Unbelief, to warn them of
the Danger of the Hardness of their Hearts, to warn them of the Danger of
Pride, Covetousness, and all other Sins; to give warning of the Danger of
Idolatry, and all false Worship and Heresy; of the Danger of Apostasy, the
Danger of the inordinate Love of the World, or of any thing short of Jesus
Christ, etc.

IV. Watchmen are made and constituted such by others, and called forth to
stand upon the Watch. IV. So Ministers are made or constituted Watchmen by the
Lord: Son of Man, Ezekiel. 33.7
see, I have made thee a Watchman to the House of Israel. It Is Christ's
Prerogative to appoint Watchmen, etc. V. Watchmen are not for themselves, but
for the Flock, for the whole Flock, Town, Parish, or Army, where they are set
as Watchmen. V. So a Minister is appointed to watch not only himself, but God's
Flock, the whole Flock that is committed to his Charge; yea, every Member of
the Church: he is to look after the poorest, as well as the richest; and not
seek theirs, 2 Cor. 11.28. and 12.14.
but them. VI. Watchmen are to give an account of the time of the Night. Men go
to the Watchman to enquire; he says, it is such or such an Hour: Watchman, what
of the Night? Isa. 21.12.
etc. The Morning comes, and also the Night. VI. So Christ's faithful
Ministers are to give an account of the Night; they ought to be well-skill'd in
the Times, to show what Israel ought to do. O that our Watchmen had more
Knowledge upon this account! that they could but tell how long! Paul told the
Romans, Romans 13.10, 11.
the Night was far spent, and the Day was at hand. Our Watchmen begin to speak
after the same manner: The Morning comes, the Morning of that longed-for Day
of Christ's Kingdom; and the Night, that eternal Night of Babylon's Ruin. VII.
Watchmen are exposed to Danger, and much Hardship; they are oftentimes set
upon, and basely abused in the Night, whilst they are upon their Duties, by
evil, quarrelsom, and mischievous Persons, and endure many cold Blasts. VII. So
the Ministers of the Gospel are often set upon whilst they are upon the Watch.
See how it befell Peter and John, Acts 4. and Stephen, chap. 7. and the great
Minister of the Gentiles, St. Paul himself, Acts 16. whilst he was preaching
Christ: The Magistrates rent off their Clothes, and commanded them to be
beaten; and when they had laid many Stripes upon them, they cast them into
Prison, etc. VIII. Watchmen many times, through their Care and Diligence, by
discovering approaching Evils, prevent much Danger and Misery from falling upon
Men. Some by this means have been delivered from being burnt in their Beds,
when a violent Fire has broken out suddenly in the Night; they cry out, Fire,
Fire, to awaken People when they are asleep. VIII. So Christ's Ministers, by
opening the State and miserable Condition of poor Sinners to them, and of the
Necessity of speedy Repentance, in turning to the Lord, and closing with Jesus
Christ, have prevented great Danger that was near them, (I mean, as Instruments
in the hand of God.) By this means many poor Souls have been delivered from
eternal Burnings in Hell. Ministers cry out, Fire, Fire, Hell is exceeding hot,
to rouse secure Sinners.

Inferences.
WE may infer from hence, That God takes great Care, and shows much Pity to the
Sons of Men, in that he has provided his faithful Ministers to watch over them.

II. It also shows, that all true Ministers are Ministers of God's making:
Ezekiel. 33.7
Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman, etc. There are many that God never
made Ministers, nor does he approve of them.

III. It shows what the Work and Office of a Minister is; also that their Work
is hard: A Watchman's Work is an hard and difficult Work. Many endeavor to
avoid coming upon the Watch, shifting it off to others, and rather choose to pay
their Money, than serve in their own Persons; Watchmen are upon Duty, when
others are asleep in their Beds. Thou shall give them warning from me. Ezekiel.
3.17
Ministers must not come in their own Names, but in Christ's Name. As they come
with God's Word, they come in his Name, in his Authority, to reprove, admonish,
comfort, etc. Ministers must learn as well as teach: What I received from
Christ, I delivered to you, etc. Greenhill on Ezekiel. 3.17.
Thou shall hear the Word at my Mouth. They must not come with Man's Word, or
warn People to be subject to the Traditions, Inventions, and Doctrines of Men:
I will stand upon my Watch, and set me upon the Tower, Hab. 2.1.
and will watch to see what he will say unto me.

Ministers compared to Trumpeters.
Isa. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet.

Joel 2.1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion.

1 Cor. 4.8. If the Trumpet give an uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself
for the Battle?


MInisters may fitly be compared to Trumpeters, as diverse worthy Men have
observed, from these and some other Texts of Scripture: They were the Priests
of the Lord in the time of the Law, that blew the Trumpets, etc.

Simile. Parallel. A Trumpeter ought to have Skill, and be well instructed to
blow a Trumpet, before he take upon him that Employ. SO a Man ought to have
much Wisdom, and be well-instructed in the Mysteries of the Gospel, and also
with the Work, Care, and Office of a Minister, before he take upon him that
great Employ. Ministers ought to be experienced Men. II. A Trumpeter ought to
be one that is strong to blow, for that weak and defective Men cannot sound a
Trumpet. II. So Ministers ought to be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of
his Might, endued with much of the Spirit, that they may lift up their Voices
like a Trumpet. III. A Trumpeter is called to that Place and Office by the
Captain, or chief Commander of the Troop. A Man is not to force himself upon a
Troop, and say, I will be your Trumpeter; but must be tried, listed, and
orderly entered into that Troop. III. So every true Minister must have a Call to
that Place and Function by Jesus Christ; that is to say, ought to be a Person
well-gifted and qualified for the Work, and that in the Judgment of the Church,
and there to be chosen and called forth by them: How shall they preach, except
they be sent? A Man, Romans 10.
or Member of a Congregation, must not force himself upon a Church or People,
and say, I will be your Preacher, I have a Gift, and can serve you; but must be
tried by the Church, who is the competent Judge of his Fitness for that Work,
and so be orderly admitted. IV. One or two Trumpeters usually belong to every
Troop of Soldiers. IV. Every particular Church has one or more Ministers, or
Gospel-Preachers, belonging to it. V. A Trumpeter is to sound to prepare Men to
Battle. V. So the Gospel is to be preached, to prepare and fit Souls to fight
the spiritual Battle, against Sin, Satan, the Flesh, and the World. VI. A
Trumpeter ought to know all the distinct Notes or Sounds he is to sound;
sometimes to sound a Call, sometimes an Alarm, sometimes a March, sometimes a
Battle, etc. There are many certain and distinct Sounds, and every Soldier (as
we have elsewhere showed) ought to be well acquainted with it, and to know them
all. If the Trumpet give an uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to the
Battle? VI. So a Minister is sometimes commanded to sound an Alarm: Joel 2 1.
Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain. They are to
pronounce Wrath and Judgment, to thunder as it were from Mount Sinai, to rouse
up the slothful and secure Sinner, or drouzy Professor; and sometimes a Call to
Duty, to assemble the People to fast, and cry mightily unto the Lord: Blow the
Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a Fast, call the solemn Assembly, Joel 2.15, 16.
gather the People, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders, gather the
Children, and those that suck the Breast, etc. VII. A Trumpeter, by blowing his
Trumpet in the Day of Battle, is of great use to an Army; the sounding of the
Trumpet greatly encourages and animates the Hearts of Soldiers. VII. So a true
Minister, by preaching the Gospel, is exceeding useful to God's Church, in the
Day of Trial, etc. How does a lively and an awakening Sermon put Spirit and
Courage into the Hearts of Christians, and make them fearless, and valiant for
the Truth! VIII. A Trumpeter usually goes before the Troop of Army, sounding
his Trumpet; he is often exposed to Danger. VIII. So the Ministers of the
Gospel should be as He-Goats before the Flock, they are the Leaders of the
People: Ministers are often greatly exposed. IX. A Trumpeter is to keep
sounding all the while an Army is engaged; nay, not only to sound his Trumpet,
but to sound it loud also. IX. So a Minister must preach always, in season, and
out of season, whilst the Saints and Church of God are militant. Necessity is
laid upon me, and woe is me, 1 Cor. 9.16.
if I preach not the Gospel. Yea, and it must be preached publicly. X. Some
Trumpeters have Silver Trumpets; nay, God commanded Moses to make two Silver
Trumpets, to call the Assembly; and these were for Eleazar and Ithamar, the two
Sons of Aaron. X. Prove. 10.20.
So the Tongue of the Righteous is as choice Silver. Ainsworth, speaking of two
Silver Trumpets, that were to be made of beaten Work, Numb. 10. says, it
signifies the Labor of the Ministers, of giving themselves to Prayer, and to
the Ministry of the Word; Psalm. 12.7.
The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as Silver, etc. XI. A Trumpeter makes
sometimes sweet Music with his Trumpet. Many love no Music, like the rare
sounding of a Trumpet. XI. So a Minister makes sweet Music sometimes, in
preaching of the Gospel in the Ears of Men. And lo, Ezekiel. 33.32.
thou art unto them as a very lovely Song, of one that has a lovely Voice, and
can play well on an Instrument.

Inferences.
MInisters must cry aloud, and spare not, they must lift up their Voice like a
Trumpet: They must be endued with Courage, not fearing the Face of Men, sparing
none, but reprove and warn great and rich Men, as well as the Poor.

II. They must be Men of Wisdom, that know how to sound distinctly, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth, lest by their uncertain Sound great Detriment
befall Christ's spiritual Soldiers.

III. Hence let all the Saints magnify God, for that they have, and do yet hear
the joyful Sound, by which they have been called to engage in the spiritual
Warfare, and thereby animated to a Perseverance in the same to the end.

IV. Also hence may be inferred, That as the Saints are spiritual Soldiers, so
it is their great Concern to observe the sounding of these spiritual Trumpeters
with the Silver Trumpets, that they may be always ready to make good their
Ground in an evil Day: And having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, etc.
Ephesians. 6.


Ministers compared to Spokesmen.
2 Cor. 11.2. For I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as
a chaste Virgin to Christ.
I Have (as if the Apostle should say) acted the part of a Spokesman, I have
endeavored to engage your Affections to Christ. Every Minister strives to
espouse Souls to the Lord Jesus; as Abraham's Servant was employed to obtain
Rebeka for Isaac. It Is the main Work of a Minister to win Souls, and bring them
over to Christ.

Note. Ministers may fitly be compared to Spokesmen.

Simile Parallel. A Spokesman is a Friend to the Lover, one that knows his
Secrets, and is judged faithful, a Person that he confides in, and is therefore
trusted with his great and most weighty Concernments. Abraham had great
confidence in his Servant, and therefore chose him for that Work, viz. to go
and take a Wife for Isaac. MInisters are the Friends of Christ: I have called
you Friends. They know the Mind of Christ: The Secrets of the Lord are with
them. Joh. 15.14, 15.
All things (says Christ) that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Christ chooses none to
this Work, but such as are faithful: 1 Timothy 1.12.
And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has accounted me faithful, putting me
into the Ministry. II. A faithful Spokesman is very intent and diligent in his
Business. Abraham's Servant would not eat nor drink, until he had delivered his
Message, or told his Errand. II. So a faithful Minister is very diligent about
his Master's Work. Peter and John forsook all, and followed Christ. He gives
himself wholly up to the Work of the Gospel. Job. 23 12
They esteem (with holy Job) the Words of his Mouth more than their necessary
Food. III. A Spokesman uses many Arguments to engage the Affections of the
Person to whom he is sent; he does set forth the Merits, Riches, and Worthiness
of the Person who is the principal Suitor. III. So Ministers use many weighty
Arguments to persuade Sinners to fall in love with, and espouse themselves to
the Lord Jesus, to accept of the Offers of his Grace and Divine Favor, being
not willing to take any Denial, if possible. They pray, woo, and beseech in
Christ's Name; and some of the Arguments they use are these, viz. 1. They set
forth the Greatness of their Lord and Master: He is the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, says Paul; the Lord of Life and Glory, says Peter. 2. They set
forth his great Riches: Unto me, Ephesians. 3.8.
who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I should
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ. See how Abraham's
Servant pleaded, when he came to court the Damsel: The Lord has blessed my
Master greatly, and he is become great; Genesis 24.35, 36.
and He has given him Flocks and Herds, etc. Silver and Gold, and
Man-Servants, and Maidservants, and Camels, and Asses. Verse 35. And Sarah my
Master's Wife bare a Son to my Master, when she was old, and unto him he has
given all that he has. O how rich and great (says a Minister) is God! The
Cattle of a thousand Hills are his: The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness
thereof. And Christ (says he) is appointed Heir of all Things. Joh. 16.15 Joh.
13.3.
All Things that the Father has, are mine. He knew, that the Father had given
all Things into his Hands. 3. They set forth not only the Greatness and Riches
of Christ, but also his admirable Beauty: He is fairer than the Children of
Men. Psalm. 45.
4. They set forth the Greatness of his Love, so far as they can conceive of
it, or make it known; for the Breadth, Length, Depth, and Height of it is
wonderful, Ephesians. 3 18, 19. Mat. 28.
(as Paul shows) and passes Knowledge. 5. They set forth his Power and
Sovereignty: He has all Power in Heaven and Farth; He is the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth; nothing is too hard for him to do; Men and Devils, Wind and
Seas are at his Command. 6. They set forth his great Wisdom: He is the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, says the Apostle. In him are hid all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge. 1 Cor. 1.24 Col. 2.3.
7. They set forth his great and glorious End in coming into the World, which
was, that we might have Life, and to betroth us to himself for ever. 8. They
set forth the Greatness of his Sufferings, his wonderful Abasement, the Nature
of his bloody Agony and Anguish he suffered upon the Tree. What! does not this
Jesus (says the Servant of God) that comes to you through a Sea of Blood,
deserve your Affection? etc. 9. They use Arguments of another nature, such as
are taken from the Consideration of the Sinners dead, cursed, and miserable
State without him; the Blessedness of such as do embrace him, and espouse
themselves to him; and diverse others, too many here for me to reckon up. IV. A
faithful Spokesman is not satisfied, to see the Person to whom he is in the
behalf of his Master a Suitor, to be only ready to hear, and seem to approve of
the Motion he makes, unless she at last be brought to a ready and willing
Compliance, and say with Rebekah; Genesis 24.58.
I will go along with this Man; that is, I am resolved to become Isaac's Wife.
IV. So Christ's faithful Ministers are not satisfied to see Sinners hearken to
the Word, and seem pleased with the Doctrine of the Gospel, which they daily
preach, unless they leave their Sins, and become new Creatures, and close in in
good earnest with Christ, giving themselves to him. It Is said of the Saints,
They gave themselves to the Lord. If a Man be a Suitor to a Damsel, and she
seem to like him, and be pleased with the Motion he makes, and yet never
consent to become his Wife; will this please him? surely no: Neither does it
please Christ, nor his Ministers, to see Sinners go from place to place to hear
Sermons, and write Sermons, and commend this and that Preacher, if they do not
make a real Contract, and become espoused to the Lord Jesus. It Is nothing less
than a through Work of Grace, Regeneration, or a true Conversion, that will
satisfy one of Christ's faithful Spokesmen. V. It grieves a faithful Spokesman,
when he finds his Master is slighted, and his dear and noble Lord that sent
him, rejected, and a base and poor Fellow entertained, and delighted in,
instead of him who is so worthy. V. So it grieves a faithful Minister, when
Sinners slight the Message and Tenders of Grace in the Gospel; when Christ is
not embraced, nor closed in with; when they only take him into their Lips, but
keep him out of their Hearts. O this wounds their Souls! Shall Sin, says the
Servant of God, that base and filthy Enemy of my Master, be entertained and
delighted in? Shall the Devil have the Rule and Pre-eminence in you? and the
Love of the World be so sweet, which is Enmity to God? And shall Christ, who
died for you on the Cross, he who is so excellent, who is able to make you
happy for ever, be slighted and rejected by you? What! will you prefer your
base Lusts above all that unconceivable Good there is in God the Father, in
Christ his only begotten Son, in the holy Spirit, and in the Way of Holiness?
VI. A Spokesman, when he sees he cannot prevail, returns, and gives his Master
or Friend that sent him, an account how Matters go. VI. So Christ's faithful
Ministers in the Day of Judgment, shall doubtless be brought in as Witnesses
against stubborn and impenitent Sinners, to whom they preached the Gospel. Genesis
24.49.
And now (said Abraham's Servant) if you will deal kindly and truly with my
Master, tell me; if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the
left: That is, that I may give my Master an account of my Errand; what shall I
say to him that sent me? So says Christ's Servant, If you will deal kindly and
truly with my Master, tell me; if not, tell me, that I may turn, etc. I must
declare to the Lord Jesus, in the great and dreadful Day, how you have slighted
or not regarded the Message I am sent about; how you are resolved to keep to
your other Lovers, and remain in your Sins, being carnal, loose, ungodly; and
that Christ is not precious in your Eye, nor will you be persuaded to forsake
all, and follow him, nor be made sensible of that Glory and Beauty that is in
Holiness. And what a sad thing will this be, when a Minister must appear
against this Man, and that Man, and say, Lord, I spoke to them again and again,
I preached an hundred Sermons to them, to engage their Hearts to thee, but none
of them would take place, as thou see, upon their Hearts, etc.

Ministers compared to Clouds.
Deuteronomy. 32.2. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, etc.

Isa. 5.6. I also will command the Clouds, that they rain no more Rain upon it.


CLouds have diverse Metaphorical Notations in the holy Scriptures:

1. For Calamities, or great Afflictions: How has God covered the Daughters of
Zion with a Cloud! Lam. 2.1.

2. Because of the Number and Multitude of Clouds, (for in tempestuous Weather
a great Plenty of thick Clouds appear) so an innumerous Company of Witnesses
are compared to Clouds, Heb. 12.1.

3. They are also used in Comparison: Behold, he shall come as Clouds: that is,
his Army will I make a vast Appearance, the Targum says, as a Cloud which comes
up and covers the Earth. Ezekiel. 38.9.

4. For Vanity and Inconstancy, or Emptiness; hence false Teachers are compared
to Clouds without Rain.

5. And upon diverse accounts true Ministers of the Gospel may be compared to
Clouds; for as false Teachers are like Clouds without Rain; so true Ministers
are as Clouds full, or filled with Rain, etc.

How fitly Christ's Ministers may be compared to Clouds, will appear by what
follows.

Ministers. Parallel. CLouds are fit Receptacles for the Water, they receive
their Water, as it is drawn up out of the Fountain of the great Deep: For God
has made the Clouds as useful as so many Buckets, to draw up Water out of the
Sea; and the Wind is made use of as an Hand, to carry these Buckets or Clouds
whithersoever the great Creator pleases, to distill it down upon the Earth,
that the Earth might be replenished, and made fruitful by it. SO Ministers
receive all their spiritual Rain out of the great Fountain of all Fullness: Of
his Fullness have we all received, etc. and that by the Spirit; that so their
Doctrine might drop as the Rain upon the tender Herbs, Deu^. 32.^
and as Showers upon the Grass. It Is according to the Gifts and Operations of
the Spirit, be it more or less, that these spiritual Clouds are filled; and as
God is pleased to distill and bless the Word, it becomes profitable, and makes
this or that Man fruitful in Grace and Holiness. What abundance of Fruit have
the Saints brought forth under the dropping of these Clouds! II. Clouds are
prepared by the wise God, as fit Mediums to let Rain down, that so it might
fall gradually, as the Earth is able to take it in, to the benefit of all
things that grow thereon, and not to its detriment, as possibly it would, were
it not that God made use of the Clouds. II. Ministers are appointed by the Lord
as Instruments, to communicate of his Grace and Divine Goodness to the Children
of Men. If he should make use of other Mediums, it might be to our hurt; should
he speak to us himself, we could not ('it is possible) be able to bear the
hearing of his Words. The poor Israelites desired Moses to speak to them, would
not that God should speak to them any more, lest they died. III. Clouds let
down their Water more freely at one Time than at another; now and then it falls
down wonderfully. III. So the spiritual Clouds sometimes pour down, or rather
out, the Divine Rain in a plentiful manner; at other times they seem much
straightened in their own Spirits. IV. Clouds let down their Water at God's
Command, and they obey his Voice. IV. So Ministers preach at God's Command;
it is He that opens their Mouths; it is as the Spirit gives them utterance. V.
It Is a great Judgment upon a People, when God commands or restrains the Clouds
from raining upon the Earth, or upon this or that particular Nation, Field, or
Vineyard. V. So it is a severe and sore Judgment upon a People or Congregation,
when God suffers his Ministers to preach no more unto them, or makes their
Ministry of no advantage or profit to them. I will command the Clouds, Isa. 5.6.
that they rain no Rain upon it, etc. VI. Clouds are of great profit to those
who have weak Eyesight, in that they are as a Vail between the bright shining
of the Sun, and them; for the Light must be proportionable to the Sight, or
else the Eyes are confounded. VI. So the Ministers of the Word of God are of
infinite use and advantage to poor Mortals: For we have all but weak spiritual
Sight, and cannot behold the Glory of God, nor take in Divine Mysteries,
without these blessed Mediums God is pleased to make use of, in his gracious
Condescension to us; and therefore God speaks to us by Men like our selves, and
opens heavenly Things by earthly Similitudes, etc.

Inferences.
LEt us pray, that these spiritual Clouds may be full of Divine Rain.

2. It shows us the great Wisdom and Condescension of God to Mankind, and what
great Profit we receive by the Preachers of the Gospel.

3. It shows the great Folly of all those that go about to stop these Clouds
from raining, when God has given them a Command. Will they attempt to hinder
the Light from shining, or the Clouds from raining, at their pleasure? Even
thus they attempt spiritually, when they strive to hinder Christ's Ministers
from preaching the Word, or obstruct the Showers of Gospel Grace from falling
upon the Souls of Men.

Ministers compared to Fathers.
1 Cor. 4.15. For tho you have ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet have ye
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.
MInisters are Fathers, spiritual Fathers to Believers.

Metaphor. Parallel. FAther is a Name of Dignity, Headship, and Authority;
hence the Rulers of Israel were called Fathers. MInisters are Men of Name,
Power, and Dignity; they are Christ's Substitutes; hence called Rulers. II.
Some are called Fathers, because they beget Children; this is the common
Appellation and Notion of the Word. II. Ministers, by the preaching of the
Gospel, in a spiritual way, beget Christians to Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 4.15.
I have begotten you through the Gospel. III. Fathers train up and nourish
their Children, showing much Tenderness and Compassion toward them; they are
said to pity their Children. III. Faithful Ministers also train up those
Christians they have begotten to Christ, in the further Knowledge of the Truth,
being very tender of them. As you know how we exhorted, and comforted, 1 Thessalonians.
2.11.
and charged every one of you, as a Father does his Children. IV. Fathers have
Power to command their Children: I know him, (that is, Abraham) that he will
command his Children, etc. IV. So Ministers of Christ have Power in his Name,
to command those Christians, who are under their special Care and Charge, to do
their respective Duties: These things teach and command. 1 Timothy 4.11. 2 Thessalonians.
4.6.
Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, etc. V. Fathers ought to
be reverenced and honored by their Children, ( Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, etc.) and their just Commands to be observed and obeyed. V. So faithful
and worthy Ministers ought to be highly esteemed and honored by the Saints.
Mal. 1.16. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. VI. A Father ought not to
be rebuked by his Children, (it becomes them not so to do, tho he may be in a
Fault, and blameworthy) but entreated. VI. So the Minister of Christ ought not
to be rebuked by any particular Members of the Church to whom he belongs, tho
in some things he may be blameworthy: Rebuke not an Elder, 1 Timothy 5.
but entreat him as a Father. Tho I doubt not, but that the Church, after a due
and orderly Proceeding with an Elder, if he be under Evil, and obstinate, may
be rebuked, nay, not only so, but further proceeded against also. VII. It Is the
Honor of a Father to rule and govern his Children, and whole Family, with
Wisdom and Discretion. VII. So it is a great Honor to a Minister, or Pastor of
a Church, to rule and govern the Congregation where he is placed, wisely
behaving himself in all things; not to be soon angry, peevish, nor
self-conceited, but to study the Rule, and impartially to carry it with an
equal Severity and Mildness to all, studying the Nature and Disposition of
every Member. VIII. Fathers ought to walk wisely before their Children, in all
Holiness and Sobriety, setting themselves as Patterns (to all that are in the
Family) of Grace and Virtue. VIII. So it is the Duty of Pastors and Ministers of
Churches, to lead an holy and godly Life, and be as Examples of true Virtue and
Piety to all they converse with. Be thou an Example of the Believers, 1 Timothy
4.12.
in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. IX. It
is a great Sorrow and Grief to a good and godly Father, to see his Children
froward, and fall out one with another, violating the Bonds of Nature. IX. So
it is an Heartbreaking Sorrow to a godly and faithful Minister, to see the
Saints and Members of the Church walk loosely, and live in Strife and
Vainglory, wronging and abusing each other, and thereby violate the sacred
Bonds of brotherly Love, Tenderness, and Forbearance: For many walk, of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are Enemies of
the Cross of Christ. Phil. 3.18.
X. It is the Property of a godly Father to pray for his Children, and also for
the whole Family committed to his Charge. X. So Christ's faithful Ministers do
not cease to pray for those whom they have been instrumental to beget (by the
Word of Truth) unto Christ; nay, not only for them, but for all committed to
their Charge; nay, for all the Children of God, Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ might dwell in their Hearts by Faith, and that they may be rooted
and grounded in Love, etc.

Inferences.
WE may infer from hence, that the Office of a Minister is an honorable
Employment.

2. It may in many things teach Pastors their Duties to their Members, and
Members their respective Duties toward their Pastors.

3. It also serves to inform us, who are faithful, wise, and discreet Ministers
of Christ.

4. We may further learn, what a great Concern it is for a Church to choose wise
and sober Persons to be their Pastors.

Ministers compared to Stewards.
Luke 12.42. Who is a faithful Steward, etc.

1 Cor. 4.1. Let Men so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the Mysteries of God.

Verse 2. Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a Man be found faithful.


Liegh's Crit. Sacr.
STeward, Stewardship, the Original, (...), rendered in 1 Cor. 9.17.
Dispensation, properly signifies the Administration of Houshold-Business,
whereof one takes such and such Care, and does so dispose thereof, as that he
appoints every one what they are to do.

Note. True Gospel Ministers are Stewards, spiritual Stewards, Stewards of God.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Steward is an Officer that principally belongs to great
Men; few, besides rich and noble Persons, have Stewards of their Houses. SO
true Gospel Ministers or Pastors, are Officers that belong to Christ's House,
who is a great Prince, nay, King of Heaven and Earth. II. A Steward is a Person
that has a great Trust and Charge reposed in him; many rich and excellent
Things are committed to his Care and Oversight, sometimes all the Goods of the
House, and Charge of the Family. II. So faithful Ministers have a mighty Trust
reposed in them; the Lord Jesus has committed to their Care and Charge Things
of very great worth and value, even all the Goods of his House. 1. They are
entrusted with the Truth, and every Branch and Part of it, called the Mysteries
of God, which is of inestimable Value. 2. The whole Church; they have the Care
and Charge of the whole Family or Household of God. 3. They have the Care and
Charge of Men's Souls committed to them. See Watchmen. III. It behooves a
Steward to be faithful in all things, seeking the Honor of his Lord: They
ought to be much in their Business, not leaving it to others, that are not
experienced in it, nor careful to look after it; nor leave their Master's
Business, to mind and look after their own. III. So ought every Minister of
Christ to be faithful in all things, wholly studying the Profit, Honor, and
Interest of the Lord Jesus. They ought continually to be about his Affairs, not
leave the Management of the Church, and Concerns of the Ministry, (like some
self-seeking Priests of our Days) to others, who are unexperienced, negligent,
and worse; to follow their own Concerns, and living in Ease and Pleasure,
pursuing after the Riches and Vanities of the World, mattering not whether
Christ be honored or no, or whether his Interest sink or swim, so that things
go well with them, and they thrive in the World. There are too many such in
this Day, so that we may well say with the Apostle, All seek their own, and
none the Things that are Jesus Christ's. IV. Stewards give direction to all
inferior Officers. and others in the Family, about their respective Work and
Business. IV. So Ministers give directions to the Deacons, and other Members of
Christ's Church, how to discharge their Duties in their respective places, etc.
V. Stewards must expect to be called to an account, and if unfaithful, are
frequently put out of their Stewardship: Luke 16.2.
Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. V.
So all the Ministers of Christ must expect to be called to an Account: The Time
is coming, when Christ will reckon with them; and happy will they be, that have
their Accounts to give up with Joy, to whom the Lord Jesus will say, Well done,
good and faithful Servant, etc.

Ministers compared to Planters.
1 Cor. 3.6. I have planted, and Apollo watered, etc.

Verse 8. Now he that planteth, and he that waters, are one.


GOD is the chief spiritual Planter, Isa. 5.7. and 60.21. and 61.3. Mat. 15.13.
None but he can implant a Principle of Grace in the Sinner's Heart; it is his
proper Work to take us out of the old Stock and Root, and plant us into the
new. But forasmuch as these Things are asserted by the Preaching of the Word,
Ministers are called Planters: I have planted, etc. 1 Cor. 3.6
They are but under or subordinate Planters and Waterers, to (...), him that
gives the Increase, viz. Jehovah.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Skilful Planter is a curious Artist, one that knows the
Nature of Trees, Plants, and Seeds. He is skilled in Setting, Ingrafting,
Innoculation, or Grafting with the Scucheon, as they call it, etc. SO an
experienced and able Minister of the Gospel is a very skilful Person, one that
has knowledge of great Mysteries, both of Nature and Grace: He knows the State
of Man in the first Adam, that old Stock; and also the Nature of Planting, or
Grafting into Jesus Christ, how and which way it is, and must be done. II. A
Planter has fit Tools or Instruments to do his Work withal, viz. a Spade, a
Knife, etc. without which he can do nothing. II. So Ministers of Christ have
fit Instruments to work with, viz. the Gospel, which is called the engrafted
Word, i. e an Instrument or Means by which Souls are planted, or grafted into
Christ, by the help of the Holy Ghost, without which they can do nothing. III.
A Planter knows, that until the Ground he is to plant, be dug up, and well
prepared, it is not meet to be sowed or planted. III. So Ministers know, unless
the Hearts of Sinners are dug by the powerful Convictions of the Word and
Spirit of God, they are not fit to receive the Seed of Grace, nor to be planted
in God's Vineyard. IV. Planters, as Naturalists observe, find by experience,
that a wild ungrafted Tree never bears good Fruit, nor can, till it be removed
out of its natural Soil, into a good Soil, and grafted with a better Kind. The
Root that bears this wild Fruit is a degenerate Root, and that is the Cause the
Fruit is so unpleasant, sour, and naught. IV. So Ministers also know, that
unregenerate Men, who grow upon the natural Root of old Adam, unless they are
removed, and planted into Jesus Christ, cannot bring forth acceptable Fruit to
God; until removed by the Power of the Word and Spirit, and transplanted into
Jesus Christ by a lively Faith. Mankind naturally are the Offspring of a
corrupt and degenerate Root, viz. the first Adam; for as is the Root and Tree,
such are the Branches, and the Fruit thereof: A corrupt Tree cannot bring good
Fruit. Mat. 7.18.
V. A Planter, who has Skill in Grafting, knows the Stock must be cut off,
before the Sienes (as some call them, or after Pliny, Sions) be grafted in. V.
So a Minister knows, that until the new Stock, viz. Jesus Christ, was cut off,
that is to say, crucified, no Men, as spiritual Syenes, can be grafted into him
by a lively Faith: Tho there is in this a great Disparity (as applied to
Ministers) for Planters cut off or cleave the Stock themselves, before they
graft the Siene; but Christ was cut off by another hand. VI. A Planter knows, a
Twig that is to be grafted, or a Bud inoculated, must first be cut off with a
Knife that is keen or sharp, or an Instrument, from the Tree on which it
naturally grew: And when the Grafts are cut off, in order to this Work, it is a
critical Season with them (says worthy Mr. Flavel) if they lie too long before
they are engrafted, or take not with the Stock, they die, and are never more
recovered; they may stand in the Stock a while, but are no part of the Tree.
VI. So a Minister knows, before a Soul can be grafted into Christ, he must be
cut off of the old Stock, viz. old Adam, and taken off of his own
Righteousness. The first Work upon a Christian is cutting Work: They were cut
or pricked in their Hearts, Acts 2.37. Heb. 4.
while Peter preached to them. The Word of God is sharper than a two-edged
Sword. As no Siene is engrafted without cutting; so no Soul is united to
Christ, Joh. 16.8, 9.
without a true and cutting Sense of Sin, and of its own Misery. And when Souls
are under a Work of Conversion, it is a critical Time with them; many have
miscarried then, and never recovered again: They have indeed for a time
remained like dead Grafts in the Stock, by an external, lifeless Profession,
but never come to any thing; for such dead Grafts in a little time fall off
from the Stock, Christ, and perish. But this I must needs say, it is
principally for want of being quite cut off, or because they were never
thoroughly cut or wounded at Heart; Convictions upon their Hearts were never
deep enough, or not kind Convictions, rather Legal than Evangelical; they were
not cut by a fit Instrument, etc. VII. A Planter, when Grafts are cut off, and
prepared to be engrafted, makes all convenient speed he can to close them with
the new Stock; the sooner (says one) that is done, the better. The Graft is
intimately united, and closely conjoined with the Stock; the Conjunction is so
close, that they become one Tree. VII. So a Minister, when he sees poor Sinners
are fitted, and every way prepared by powerful Convictions, ought to make what
speed he can to apply the Plaster, and direct them to a Closure with Christ,
that is to say, Act. 16.30, 31.
to believe on the Lord Jesus. And when this is done, there is an intimate
Union betwixt Christ and the Souls that believe in him: He that is joined to
the Lord, is one Spirit. It Is the nearest, closest, and strictest Union; they
are so glewed one to the other, so that look as the Graft is really in the
Stock, and the Sap of the Stock is really in the Graft: So a Believer is
really, tho mystically, in Christ, and the Spirit of Christ is communicated to
a Believer: He that dwells in Love, dwells in God. 1 John 4 16
And as the Graft is bound to the Stock so steadily, that the Wind cannot lose
it; so the believing Soul is fastened to Christ by such Bonds, Flavel.
as will secure it from all danger of being loosed from him any more.

This does the Soul's Union with Jesus show,
And where and how these heavenly Plants do grow.
VIII. A Planter sometimes plants a whole Vineyard, with the help and
assistance he has from others. VIII. So a painful Minister may, nay, and has
planted a whole Church by the help and assistance of the Spirit of God, yea,
several Churches, as St. Paul, and others we read of, etc. IX. A Planter's Work
(like other Laborers) is very hard; they ofttimes sweat at it, spend and waste
themselves; they find some Ground very rocky, and difficult to dig up, and to
manure. IX. So is the Minister's Work a very hard and laborious Work; no Digger
nor Planter works harder, or takes more pains, than some faithful Planters, or
Preachers of the Gospel; they frequently sweat at their Work (as we have
elsewhere showed) and by their Study and great Labor, waste their frail
Bodies. Some Sinners have rocky Hearts. X. A Planter does not only plant, but
also water his Plants, that they may grow and thrive the better. X. So godly
Ministers do not only preach, whereby Souls are planted by the heavenly
Doctrine; but also pray for Increase, whereby their Plants are watered: I have
planted, and Apollo watered. What Paul plants, Apollo comes after and waters
with his Doctrine, that dropped like Dew. Neither is he that planteth, any
thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the Increase. XI. He that
plants a Vineyard with his own Labor, ought to be allowed to eat of the Fruit
thereof; and it would be accounted a strange thing, should he be denied it. XI.
So a faithful Minister, or spiritual Planter, ought to eat of the Fruit of that
Church or Vineyard he has planted, or does keep, prune, and manure; that is to
say, to be fed and comfortably maintained by them. Who goes a Warfare at his
own Charge at any time? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit
thereof? 1 Cor. 9.7
Or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? Say I these
things as a Man, or says the Law the same also? etc. If we have sowed unto you
spiritual Things, is it a great thing we should reap your carnal Things? [Read
Labourer.] XII. Planters greatly rejoice to see their Plants thrive and grow,
and their Labor prosper. XII. So Ministers rejoice to see Saints or spiritual
Plants grow and thrive in Grace, and true Holiness: I have no greater Joy, than
to see my Father's Children walk in the Truth. XIII. Planters do not only take
delight in planting, in the Spring, and other fit Seasons; but do also take
care of the Plants at such times when it is Winter, lest the Frost and Cold
should spoil their Growth. XIII. So spiritual Planters, Christ's faithful
Ministers, do not only take delight to labor in Christ's Vineyard, to plant
and graft when the Sun or Spring-Season of Providence shines upon them, but
endure the sharpest Storms of Persecution, in the taking care of those tender
Plants, who by reason of the sharpest Winter, may be in greatest Danger. XIV.
Planters have been, and are greatly instrumental for the Benefit and Advantage
of the Place or Country where they dwell, by the Vineyards, Orchards, and
Gardens they have planted. XIV. So Ministers have been, and are great
Instruments of much Good and Benefit to the Place or Country where God has
blessed their Labors, by planting Churches, who have sent forth such Fruit, that
many thereby have been made fruitful in Grace and Holiness. What spiritual
Profit have these after-Ages reaped by the Labors of those that were at first,
and those that followed after, as Planters in God's Vineyard! of which the holy
Scripture, and other Histories give a full Account. So that Word is fulfilled,
Others have labored, and you are entered into their Labors; i. e. We reap the
Benefit of those that were Planters before us, as others may reap the Benefit
of the Labors of such as are now entered into the same Work, that the
Generation that is to come may praise the Lord.

Inferences.
WHat Grace and Glory is this, O Saint, that God has conferred on thee, in
taking thee out of that wild, dead, and barren Stock, and planting thee into
that precious, living, and fruitful One, Christ Jesus! Can thou enough admire
and prize this Grace and Favor!

II. It shows what wonderful Union, and blessed Nearness there is between
Christ and every sincere Christian!

III. It shows us, that all our good Fruit is from Jesus Christ, and by means
of that blessed, mysterious, and glorious Union with him.

IV. Ministers ought to be Men of Wisdom, such as are faithful, able, and
willing to labor, Men that are not idle.

V. It reproves not only such Saints, that take up with the Name of Plants in
God's Vineyard, and bring not forth Fruit; but also Churches, that see not, or
will not see, nor learn their Duty to their painful and faithful Ministers.

VI. It shows the Folly and Madness of all those that go about to hinder or
spoil the Work of those spiritual Planters, God's Ministers: For what would Men
think of such, that should suffer none to plant, nor any Plant or Tree to grow,
nay, destroy (in as much as in them lies) all the Vineyards, Orchards, and
Gardens in the Place or Country where they dwell? Such like Work do all those
that persecute God's faithful Ministers and People.

Ministers compared to Builders.
1 Cor. 3.10. According to the Grace of God which is given me, as a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the Foundation, etc.
A Builder is a Metaphor taken from Carpenters and Masons, etc. that build
Houses; the Hebrew Word by which Building is expressed, is derived from the
Root, (...) to build or rear an House or City. God in Christ is the chief
Master Builder: He that built all Things, is God; 1 King. 10.4.
and he is the great Builder of his Temple: Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, etc. And yet Ministers under him are likewise Master Builders, etc.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Wise Master Builder gives direction to others, how the
House, etc. must be built; and to this purpose shows the Figure or true Form of
it, that so other Under-Builders may know how to go on with their Work. SO St.
Paul, and other great and wise Master Builders, (the Apostles) have given plain
Directions to us, and all inferior Builders, how the House of God must be
built, and with what Materials; and they have left in the holy Gospel a plain
Scheme or Figure of it, that so all spiritual Builders may know how to proceed
in their Work. II. A Master Builder takes special care rightly to lay the
Foundation, upon which the whole Fabric or Structure is to be built, etc. II.
So the Apostles have, as Instruments in God's hand, laid the Foundation of the
true Religion, the Foundation of Faith and Salvation, the Foundation of the
true Church, etc. 1 Cor. 3.11
Another Foundation can no Man lay, than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. III. A Builder has sometimes much Rubbish to remove, before he can go
on with his Work; as the poor Jews had, who built the Temple, etc. III. So have
Ministers much Rubbish to remove out of their own and Sinners Way, before they
can proceed in their blessed Work. There is the Rubbish of False-Doctrine about
Justification; this was in the Apostle's way, as well as it is in ours: The Jews
were hardly taken off from their own Righteousness, and legal Ceremonies; they
would needs build upon a Legal Foundation: They stumbled at the Stumbling
Stone, etc. We have much Popish Rubbish to remove, the Rubbish of Men's
Inventions, and superstitious Ceremonies, etc. besides the Rubbish of other
Heretics and Deceivers. IV. A Builder oftentimes meets with hard Work, in
hewing and squaring his Timber and Stones, some being very rugged and knotty,
etc. IV. So Ministers find some Sinners are very stubborn and obstinate, like
knotty Timber, scragged and rugged Stones, which, without much Labor and
Pains, are not hewed and fitted for the Building. V. A wise Builder takes care
to prepare and make all his Materials ready, before he raises the Structure, or
builds his House. V. So should a Minister of the Gospel see that all the
spiritual Stones and Timber be well squared, fitted, and prepared by a through
Work of Repentance and Faith, before they are placed or laid into the Building
or Church of God. Prepare thy Work without, and make it fit for thy self in the
Field, and then build thy House. Prove 24.27.
They must not lay Stones into the Building, as they come out of the Quarry
from whence they are dug, such Persons as were never converted, nor capable
Subjects of it; and then afterward, when they are put into God's House, go
about to hew them by the Word, i. e. endeavor to convert them. Ministers are
Hewers, and the Ax is the Word of God: I have hewed them by the Prophets; But
they must proceed orderly, i. e. not baptize, Mat. 28.19, ^0.
and then teach; but first teach, or make Disciples, and then baptize them. VI.
A Builder can tell how many principal Pillars or Posts belong unto the House or
Building, and sees to fit all the Materials thereof in their proper place, and
will be sure to see that he wants never a principal Pillar. VI. So Ministers
can tell how many fundamental Principles there are of the Christian Religion, I
mean, Principles necessary to Salvation; and also the Number of the Foundations
of Church-Constitution and Fellowship; and will see that every thing they do be
done orderly, every thing fitted according to the Directions of God's Word; and
that they want not any one of the Foundation-Principles of the Christian
Religion. It Is dangerous, you know, if a House be to be built upon six main
Pillars, if it want one. Read Heb. 6.1, 2. VII. A Builder has his Rule, by
which he does all his Work: He does not work by Guess, nor by the Sight of his
own Eye only, but by a certain and unerring Rule. VII. So a wise Minister has
his Rule, viz. the Word of God; he does not do what he thinks is right in his
own Eyes, until he has tried it by the Rule; nor will he follow the Humor and
Fancy of others, who may say, this is right, and that is right: but according
as he finds Things to agree or disagree with the holy Scriptures, and Spirit of
God, that unerring Rule, by which he receives, or rejects, takes, or leaves:
He, with Moses, will do all things according to the Pattern showed in the
Mount: As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy,
Gal. 6.
and upon the whole Israel of God. The Word of God should be our Guide in all
Things. VIII. A wise Builder takes care that all the Building be fitly framed
together, and well fastened to the Foundation. VIII. So a wise Minister, or
spiritual Builder, endeavors to see that all the Saints be united, fitly
framed, or joined together in Love, and well fastened by Faith, and Love to
Jesus Christ. See what the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22.
And are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone; in whom all the Building being fitly
framed together, grows to an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye are builded
together for an Habitation of God, through the Spirit. IX. A Builder takes
great care to give directions about the Door, or Way into the House he is
building, and makes it plain, that all People who have a mind, or ought to
enter in, may readily find the way, and not stumble at the Threshold. IX. So a
wise and faithful Minister takes special care to give directions about the Door
into God's House, that all whom Christ would have enter in, may not be at a
loss about it, nor stumble as it were at the Threshold. It Is absolutely
necessary, that they are acquainted with, and able to show to others, what are
those initiating Ordinances into the House or Church of God. And sad it is to
see so many worthy Ministers among us at so great a Loss in this respect; as is
demonstrated in a small Treatise, written by Mr. W. R. entitled, A sober
Discourse of Right to Church Communion. It has always been asserted by
Christians of all Persuasions, (till of late) that Baptism in Water, that holy
Sacrament Christ ordained and left in his Church, is absolutely necessary to
Church Fellowship and Communion; though touching the Subject and Manner of the
Administration of that Ordinance, there has been much Controversy: but sure I
am, the Word of God is very full and plain in this Case.

1. The Lord Jesus has positively enjoined Repentance, Faith, and Baptism, to
be taught as the first Principles of his sacred Doctrine, and as Fundamentals
of Church Communion and Fellowship. See Mat. 28.19, 20. Heb. 6.1, 2.

2. This also was the Door the holy Apostles (those wise Master Builders)
directed Persons to, and opened for entrance in the Primitive Time: Repent, and
be baptized, every one of you, etc. Then they that gladly received the Word,
were baptized; and the same Day there was added unto them about three thousand
Souls. Acts 2.40, 41. Compare this with Acts 8.48. and 16.33. Gal. 3.27. And
hence it is said; By one Spirit are we all baptized into one Body, or to be of
one Body. Moreover, as it is in the above cited Treatise proved, upon an
Examination of the Records of the next Age after the Apostles, it is evident,
the same Order was retained and kept up, as appears by Justin Martyr, in his
Apology to Antoninus Pius, the Roman Emperor. This Food (said he) we call the
Eucharist, to which no Man is admitted, but only he that believes in the Truth
of the Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of Regeneration, (so he called
Baptism) for the Remission of Sins, and that so lives as Christ has taught.
Tertullian and Cyprian positively affirm the same, and diverse others of the
ancient Fathers; as Basil, Nazianzen, Optatus, Athanatus, Epiphanius, Hilarious,
Ambrose, Jerome, Sozomen, Athanasius, Augustine, etc. as is largely showed by
the Divines of Magdeburg, in their History of the Church, printed at Basil,
1624. Also all our modern Divines fully agree with the Ancients in this great
Point, viz. That Baptism is absolutely an initiating Ordinance, and that no
unbaptized Person ought to be admitted into the Church, nor to the Lord's
Supper; tho it is confessed, that some do not say, that Baptism alone is the
Door into the Church, but Baptism, and Imposition of Hands. There are two Doors
to be passed through, (as says a learned Writer) 'before we can come, aditus,
and intima Ecclesiae penetralia, viz. Baptism, and Laying on of Hands; whereof
the latter properly and immediately gives admittance. Mr. Hanmors cites some
ancient Christians speaking thus, Confirmatio (sive manuum impositio) protinus
dat jus communicandi in Sacramento corporis ac sanguinis Christi: That is,
Confirmation (or Imposition of Hands) forthwith gives full Authority and Right
of Communion in the Body and Blood of Christ. And in another place says the
same Person, He that was not confirmed, was not admitted to the Eucharist.

X. A Master Builder goes on with his Work, when the Foundation is laid; the
Scaffolds are not taken down, till the Building be finished, but rather raised
higher and higher, as the Fabric goes up; he resolves every Day's Work shall
add some further Beauty to it, in order to the final perfecting of it. X. So a
true faithful Minister, when he sees the Work of God's House going on, every
one laboring diligently every day to be more and more holy, and pressing on
toward Perfection: Not laying again the Foundation, etc. Heb. 6.1, 2
let us go on to Perfection, and so grow up unto him in all things, who is the
Head. Gospel-Builders are for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4 5.
till we all come into the Unity of the Faith, and Knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect Man, etc. Metaphor. Disparity. EArthly Builders build with
ordinary Wood, Stones, Brick, etc. lifeless and dead Materials: Also they build
Houses for Men, or mortal Creatures only, which may be soon destroyed by an
Enemy. BUt the spiritual Builders build the House of God with precious Stones,
not earthly but heavenly, not dead but living: Ye also, as lively Stones, are
built up a spiritual House, and not for Man, but an House or Habitation for
God, through the Spirit; a House that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against.

Diverse Disparities are also here omitted, and left to be enlarged by the
studious Reader.

Inferences.
THis may inform all that look upon themselves to be spiritual Builders, to
take heed they do not refuse the chief Cornerstone, as the Jewish Builders
did: Remember the Foundation is laid, which is the Lord Jesus Christ.

II. It may caution them to take heed they build with fit Materials, not with
Wood, Hay, and Stubble, but Gold, Silver, and precious Stones.

III. It may caution them to take heed they build according to the Rule. Let
them not mistake the Rule, the Pope or Church of Rome is not the Rule, as we
have shown in the First Volume, Book 3. page 1, 2, 3. General Councils are not
the Rule; the Light within is not the Rule; the Word of God is the only Rule,
by which these Builders of God's House must do all their Work.

IV. It may caution them to take heed they do not make any other Doors into the
Church, than what Jesus Christ has made. The Door that let into the natural
Church of the Jews, is shut up by him that has the Keys of David;
Birth-Privileges will not give a Right to Church Membership under the Gospel.
Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father, etc.

V. It may caution them to take heed they do not leave out of the Building any
principal Pillar, lest their Building prove defective, and stand not long. It Is
a fearful thing to alter, add to, or diminish from the Word of God. Rev. 2.2.

Ministers compared to Pillars.
Gal. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed Pillars, etc.
MInisters are like Pillars in the House of God.

Simile. Parallel. A Pillar helps to support and bear up the Building. SO
Ministers help to support and bear up the Church and House of God. II. Pillars
are a great Ornament to a Building; they serve not only for Use, but for
Beauty. The two Brazen Pillars in Solomon's Temple were curiously adorned with
Nets of Chequer-Work, Lilly-Work, and Rows of Pomegranats, etc. II. So godly
Ministers are a great Ornament to the Church, being gloriously adorned (many of
them) with the Gifts and Graces of the blessed Spirit, which some think was
figured forth by the Pillars of the Temple, in respect of the Chequer and
Lilly-Work; and by the Pomegranats, the Fruitfulness of their Conversation,
etc. III. These Pillars stood in the Porch of the Temple. III. So the Apostles,
those chief Pillars of the Gospel Church, lived in the beginning of the Church,
says Mr. Lee, Mr. Sam. Lee, fol. 228.
or entrance of the Gospel-Ministration.

Ministers compared to Shepherds.
Ezekiel. 34.9. O ye Shepherds, hear the Word of the Lord.
MInisters, in diverse places of the holy Scriptures of the New Testament, are
compared to Shepherds.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Shepherd is chosen and appointed to take care of the
Flock, being a Man skilful in that Work. SO a Minister is chosen and appointed
to take care of the Flock and Church of God, and of the Souls of Men committed
to his Charge. II. A Shepherd feeds his Flock, leading them into good green
Pastures. III. So Ministers feed the Flock of Christ: Simon, Son of Jonas,
love thou me? Feed my Sheep, Feed my Lambs, etc. Feed them with good
Doctrine, feed them with a good Example. III. A Shepherd endeavors to keep the
Flock together, lest any should stray from the Fold. III. So a faithful
Minister strives to keep all the Members of the Church, under his Care,
together, and will not (if he can help it) suffer any of them to go astray. IV.
A Shepherd watches over his Flock in the Night, lest any Danger (by Dogs,
Wolves, or Foxes) should befall them. Luke 2.8.
And there were in the same Country Shepherds abiding in the Field, keeping
Watch over their Flocks by Night, etc. IV. So Ministers must abide with their
Flock; they must not be at a distance from them, lest Evil should befall them
from the Enemy, there being many Dogs, Wolves, and cunning Foxes abroad,
seeking to destroy and spoil the Sheep and Lambs of Jesus Christ, I mean,
subtle Deceivers and Persecutors. V. Shepherds are very tender of their Flocks,
and drive them as they can go, showing much Compassion to the Weak and Feeble,
and endeavoring to heal and strengthen the Diseased. V. So Ministers should be
very tender of the Saints, or spiritual Flock, and not impose upon them such
things as they are not convinced of to be their Duty; they must not drive them
out of their Pace, and the Weak and Feeble among them they ought to take
compassion upon, and strive to heal the Diseased. The Shepherds of Israel
failing herein, greatly provoked the Owner of the Sheep against them: The
Diseased (says he) ye have not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which
was sick, etc. Strengthen ye the weak Hands, Ezekiel. 34.4
and confirm the feeble Knees. VI. Shepherds sometimes keep Sheep that are none
of their own. VI. So Ministers keep Christ's Sheep: Feed My Sheep. They are
Christ's by Choice, by Gift, by Purchase, by Conquest, etc. VII. Shepherds
ought to feed of the Milk of that Flock they feed. VII. So Ministers ought to
be fed by the Flock or Church they feed: 1 Cor. 9.7
Who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the Flock? etc. VIII. It Is
a Shame to a Shepherd to regard the Fleece more than the Flock; it may be said
of some Shepherds, if they are fed, and have the Fleece, let what will befall
the Sheep, they matter not. VIII. It Is a Shame and great Reproach to a
Minister, and a Sign he is none of Christ's Servant, who chiefly regards his
own, base, and carnal Ends; if he has but the Fleece, and be well fed, let what
will become of the Church, or Souls of those under his Charge; he seeks not
them, but theirs.

Inferences.
HEnce Ministers may be greatly encouraged to a faithful and careful Dis^harge
of their Trust; for that they serve the Lord Jesus, whose the Sheep are they
feed, who will reward them in due Time.

II. It may also caution them to be very careful, that they feed Christ's Flock
with no other Food than what is of Christ's providing.

III. It may inform all the Flocks and Sheep of Christ, over whom the
Holy Ghost has appointed Shepherds or Overseers, (1.) To prize their faithful
Ministers, observe their Doctrine, and eye their holy and heavenly
Conversation. (2.) To walk as Sheep. (3.) To keep close to their Fold.

Ministers compared to Ambassadors.
2 Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, etc.

Ephesians. 6.20. For which I am an Ambassador in Bonds, etc.


THe Words, Ambassador, Legate, or Messenger, are synonimous Terms, properly
such as are commissionated or deputed betwixt distant Parties, to transact
Affairs of Moment. The Term is applied to the Ministers of the Gospel; and it
sets forth, 1. The Dignity, 2. The Duty of Ministers.

Note. Faithful Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, etc.

Ambassador. Parallel. AMbassadors are authorized and sent abroad by Princes,
about the great Affairs of their Kingdoms. MInisters are authorized, empowered,
and sent by the Lord Jesus, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, on the great
Affairs of his Glory, and Man's Good. II. Ambassadors usually are Persons of
Eminency; it is an Office that a Prince will not confer upon any of his
Subjects, but on such as are of great Esteem in his Court, such as are fitly
qualified for that great Trust confided in them; in a word, great Honor and
Dignity is conferred upon them. II. Faithful Ministers of Christ, such as are
Ministers indeed, are eminent Persons, such as are great Favorites to the
Court of Heaven. What higher Dignity does Christ confer upon any of his Saints
here below! They also are Men fitly qualified for this great Employment; and
what their Qualifications are, and must be, you may see in 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
viz. Blameless as the Stewards of God, 1 Timothy 3. 1 to 7. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9.
not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given to
filthy Lucre, a Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of good Men, sober, just, holy,
temperate, holding forth the faithful Word, able by sound Doctrine to stop the
Mouths of Gainsayers, etc. not a Brawler, not Covetous, one that rules well his
own House. III. The Dignity of Ambassadors appears in the Greatness of their
Prince from whom they come; they have usually respect according to the Rank and
Quality of their Master. III. Now true faithful Ministers are sent as
Ambassadors from the great God, who is King of Heaven and Earth: By whom Kings
reign, and Princes decree Judgment. With him is terrible Majesty, he rules and
reigns over all, and who can say unto them, What do thou? IV. An Ambassador
appears according to the Dignity of the Person whom he represents, and whose
place he supplies. IV. True and faithful Ministers represent the Person of
Jesus Christ; O! and what Honor is this! They are employed in his stead, they
are his Deputies: He is the chief Ambassador, called therefore the Messenger of
the Covenant; Mal. 3.1.
from him they receive their Authority. V. The Excellency of the Message
Ambassadors are sent about, shows further the Dignity of the Officers. Now
there are three sorts of Ambassies in the World: Gurnal,
1. Ambassies of Peace. 2. Ambassies of Marriage. 3. State-Ambassies, which
respect Trade and Commerce, etc.


V. Ministers come with a threefold Ambassy; 1. Of Peace. 2. Of Marriage. 3. Of
heavenly Commerce and Trade, etc.
1. An Ambassador is welcome, when he comes from a Prince about Peace; and that
especially, 1. Christ's Ministers are welcome when they come with an Ambassy of
Peace; and needs they must be so, if we consider these Things following. (1.)
When he comes from one that is formidable, mighty in Power, and whose Armies
are irresistible; now to a poor, weak, and naked People, how welcome is his
Approach! (1.) These Ambassadors come from that great God that is dreadful in
Power, that if he speak but in his Wrath, the Earth trembles, whose Armies are
also ready; who offers not Peace, because he cannot make War, or stands in need
of our Friendship, but merely from his great Love wherewith he has loved us,
etc. What can Sinners do to withstand his Power? Does he fear their Hostility?
Can they shoot their Arrows as high as Heaven? If they strike at him, he makes
their Swords turn into their own Bowels. O how gladly should these Ambassadors
be received! Who would not tremble to think of this God! (2.) An Ambassador is
welcome, when he is sent to a People that have felt already the Impression of
his Power, and are pining under the bleeding Miseries of his Anger. (2.) So a
Minister of Christ is welcome to poor Sinners, who find the Arrows of divine
Vengeance sticking in their very Hearts, and the Curse of God cleaves to every
Faculty of their Souls, who lie bleeding under his heavy Anger. (3.) An
Ambassador is welcome, when the Terms he offers are honorable and easy; not
like the Peace that Nahash offered to the Men of Jabesh-Gilead, viz. That they
should have every one his right Eye thrust out, and lay it as a Reproach to
Israel. (3.) Now the Ministers of the Gospel offer honorable and easy Terms:
God might require the perfect keeping of the whole Law, he might demand
Satisfaction for all the Wrongs and Injuries we have done to his Justice; but
they offer Terms of Peace and Pardon, upon the Acknowledgment of Sin, and
laying down our Arms, and to hold no League or secret Friendship with Sin or
Satan any longer, to take hold of Christ, and plead the Atonement of his Blood:
Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. (4.) An Ambassador is
welcome, when he offers Peace from a Prince that is real to his Word, and gives
good security for the performance of what he promises. (4.) Now God does by his
faithful Ministers give the greatest assurance imaginable of the performance of
whatsoever he offers to poor Sinners; He has past his Word, nay, more, it is
upon Oa^h, Heb. 6. 2. Ambassadors sometimes offer an Alliance, by Marriage,
between one State and another. 2. And this is one great part of a Minister's
Ambassy, he is sent to let Sinners know what good Will the God of Heaven and
Earth bears to them, and that he is desirous to bestow his own dear Son, the
Heir of all Things, in Marriage upon them; what Favor and Grace is this! Can
Sinners be so sottish, foolish, and ungrateful, as not readily to receive and
embrace this Offer? 3. Sometimes (as we minded before) Ambassadors come with an
Ambassy for Trade, that there may be an open Trade and Commerce between such
and such Princes and States, etc. 3. The Ministers of the Gospel come with
Ambassies for Commerce; God is willing, in Christ's Name, to trade with Man
again: For no sooner had Adam sinned, but a War was commenced, and all Trade
forbidden: but now through Christ there is a free Trade opened again to Heaven;
Convinced and repenting Sinners may be stored with all Things they need, as
Pardon, Peace, Union* and Communion with God, and eternal Life, even all the
Riches of Grace and Glory: Ho every one that will, -- Come, buy; -- and you
that have no Money, come, buy, Isa. 55.1.
and ^at; yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without Price. VI.
Those that honor an Ambassador, honor the Prince that sent him; but those
that abase, slight or despise him, do also despise the Prince or State that
sent him. We cannot despise this Messenger, and yet honor his Master, (says
Mr. Gurnal.) VI. So those who receive and show all due respects to Christ's
faithful Ministers, honor Christ, whose Deputies they are, and whose Person
they represent. Few are so bold, as to say with that proud King, Who is the
Lord, Exodus 5.2.
that I should obey him? Yet many dare say, Who is the Minister, that I should
obey his Message, or repent at his Summons, or tremble at the Words he speaks?
What Is he? Do I not know him? What Is he better than us? Shall I mind what he
says? A Rush for his Doctrine. etc. But let such read that Word, He that
hears you, hears me; Luke 10.16
and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me. VII. An Ambassador should take heed he cast no Indignity upon
his Office, by any base or unworthy Practice; he should behave himself with all
Wisdom and Gravity, and avoid all dirty and unseemly Actions; for in so doing,
he would bring much Honor and Renown not only to himself, but to his Master
also that sent him. VII. So Ministers must be holy Men, that they bring not
themselves, and the Dignity of their Function, into Contempt. A wise, grave,
and gracious Behavior exceedingly becomes a Minister. Paul says, he magnified
his Office: O then let others take heed they do not vilify and debase it. That
which another Man may do without much Reproach, you cannot do, but it will be
to your great Blemish and Dishonor, nay, and to the Dishonor of Christ, and
of his Truth also. VIII. An Ambassador is to do his uttermost endeavor to
negotiate and accomplish such Matters he is sent about; he must see to his
Charge: For if the Treaty of Peace, or Marriage, or Ambassy for Commerce and
Trade, succeed not, the Ambassador is sure to be called to an account, how he
has discharged his Place, etc. VIII. So Ministers must see the Work of their
Place and Function. They are (says Gurnal) 'called Ambassadors, in regard of
their Duty, as well as Dignity; where there is Honor, there is Onus, Places of
Honor are Places of Trust. Many like well enough to hear the Ministers
Dignity; with Diotrephes, they love Pre-eminence, yet would willingly be
excused the Work that attends it. None have a greater Trust reposed in their
Hands, than Ministers; it is tremendum Onus, a Weight that made the Apostle
tremble under it: I was among you, says Paul, with much fear and trembling.
They have the Charge of Souls committed to them, one of which is more worth
than all the World, no less than the Price of Blood, the precious Blood of
Jesus Christ. To them is committed the Word of Reconciliation: Hence they pray
and beseech, and use all Means imaginable to bring the Souls of Men to Terms of
Peace and Reconciliation with God, through Christ; they knowing the sad and
dreadful Effects, if they speed not in their Ambassy: Knowing the Terror of the
Lord, we persuade Men. And in another place, says Paul, We pray you in
Christ's stead, be you reconciled to God. For if the Treaty of Peace between
God and Sinners does not succeed, the Minister is sure to be called to an
account, how he discharged his Trust in the Business, etc. IX. An Ambassador is
to keep close to his Instructions; he is in nothing to act contrary to, or
derogate from his Commission. IX. So Ministers must see they keep close to the
Word of God; they had need to take their Errand well before they come into the
Pulpit, or Assembly of God's People: I have received of the Lord, what I
delivered unto you. They must speak nothing, require nothing, preach nothing,
but what is according to the Authority of God's Word, which is above the
Church, Senates, General Councils, or any Authority whatsoever. These
Ambassadors must act and do exactly according to their Commission, etc. X. An
Ambassador must not only act according to his Commission, as to Matter, but
must deliver his Message also with much Zeal, and with all due respect had to
his Master or Prince that sent him: He must not prosecute his Business coldly;
or after he has had Audience, give himself to the Pleasures of the Court where
he is resident, and mind his Affairs no more, or not regard how his Master's
Business succeeds. What Answer will he be able to return? Surely, if he should
do thus, he could not say, he had done the Work of a faithful Ambassador, etc.
X. So Ministers must be fitted with Zeal, and act diligently in their Places,
or prosecute their Business vigorously; their Hearts must be deeply engaged in
their spiritual Ambassy. They are to preach with all fervency, as having the
Sense of Christ's Honor, and the Worth of immortal Souls upon their Hearts;
and not only say, Thus and thus says the Lord, and be satisfied to see People
willing to give them the hearing: Tho they may thank them for that Civility,
yet they must not quit them, unless they see they accept of the Terms of Peace
and Reconciliation, offered to them in Christ's Name, through the Gospel. They
must show them the Profit that will accrue to them, if they do comply; and the
Danger, on the other hand, if they do refuse; and that it will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for them. XI. It
behooves an Ambassador to be faithful in all things to his Master's Interest,
and not to become a Pensioner to a Foreign Prince; for such an on^ is utterly
unworthy of such an honorable Employment. XI. So Ministers must not comply
with Christ's Enemies, or seek for Reward from them, such as would betray his
Interest, whatever is proffered them. But as we are allowed of God to be put in
Trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4, 5.
not as pleasing Men, but God, which tries our Hearts: For neither at any time
used we flattering Words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness, God is
Witness. XII. An Ambassador ought to seek the Interest of his Fellow Subjects,
and show much Love, Care, and Tenderness to them, so far as the Interest of his
Prince will bear; and not to do any thing to the spoiling of their Trade, etc.
XII. So Ministers ought to seek the Good and Welfare of all the Saints and
Church of God, and help them by their Counsel and Prayers at all times; and not
to weaken, but strengthen their Hands, and protect them from the Scorn,
Reproach, and Oppression of the Enemy, as much as lies in them, etc. XIII.
When a Prince finds his Ambassadors cannot succeed in their Business, but that
all Terms of Peace are rejected, he calls them home, and then bloody Wars
commonly follow. XIII. So when God sees, that the Messenger, and Message he
sends by his faithful Ministers, is slighted, and that Sinners remain
obstinate, after long patience, he calls home his Ministers, perhaps takes them
away by Death, and resolves to treat with that People or State no more, but
contrary-wise, to let out his Wrath upon them. And thus it fared with Israel of
old: The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising
early, and sending them, etc. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Word, and misused his
Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till there was
no Remedy.

Inferences.
THis shows what great Dignity God has conferred upon his faithful Ministers;
and this Title should procure an honorable Esteem of them in the Hearts of all
Persons to whom they are sent. And this is more necessary to the good Success
of their Message, than is generally thought; tho it is evident, what Ministers
speak upon this Subject is misconstrued, as if they herein rather sought
themselves, than to befriend the Gospel, or advance the Honor of their Master.
Men are ready to interpret it as a Fruit of their Pride, and an Affectation
they have of some outward Grandeur, and worldly Pomp, which they design to gain
by such a magnificent Title. The Apostle himself was sensible of this, and yet
would not desist to magnify his Office; 1 Cor. 4.5
and therefore says he, Let Men so account of us, as Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and that they should judge nothing before the
Time.

Object. But some may say, If God will use Ambassadors to treat with Sinners,
why does be not use Angels? etc.

2 Cor. 4.7.
Answ. 1. The Apostle answers this: We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels,
that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.

2. Ministers being Men, have the Advantage many ways above Angels for this
Work. (1.) They are more concerned themselves in the Message they bring, than
Angels are: What greater Argument for a Man's Care, than his own Interest! (2.)
They have a more deep Sense arising in their Hearts, upon the account of the
Temptations they are subject to, etc. (3.) The Sufferings which Ministers meet
with for the Gospel's sake, are of great advantage to their Brethren; had
Angels been the Ambassadors, they could not have sealed to the Truth of their
Doctrine with their Blood, they cannot die, etc. (4.) Besides, the Presence of
Angels might terrify and afrighten us, their Glory is so great, etc.

II. This shows, that Ministers have a special Commission: How shall they
preach, except they are sent? Romans 10.
They must have a lawful Call to this Office, as Ambassadors have.

III. Let poor Sinners from hence be persuaded to hearken to them, and
carefully receive the Message Ministers bring from the great God, and accept of
Terms of Peace, and close in with Jesus Christ.

IV. It shows the wonderful Love of God, and the great Care he has of Men's
Souls.

V. It shows what an intolerable Affront is offered to the Majesty of Heaven,
by those that abuse or deride the Ministers of the Gospel; and much greater, by
them that persecute and imprison them for delivering their Message. Paul was an
Ambassador in Bonds, etc.

VI. It shows the Weight and Importance of the Preachers Message; it is not a
slight or sleeveless Errand they come about: Deuteronomy. 30.15. Joh. 3.36. Mark
16.15, 16.
I set before you this day Life and Death. -- Hear, and your Souls shall live.
He that believes not, the Wrath of God abides on him. Go into all the World,
and preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that believes; and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned.

Ministers compared to Rulers.
Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the Word of God, etc.
MInisters of the Gospel are Rulers or Governors, etc.

Rulers. Parallel. RUlers are Men in high Place, endued with Power and
Authority over others; it is a Name of Dignity. SO Ministers are the chief of
God's People, such as have great Power committed to them, as the Deputies and
Ambassadors of Christ. II. Rulers or Governors have a Law, by which they ought
to rule and govern in all things. II. So Ministers are to rule the House and
Church of God by the Rule of God's Word. III. It Is an evil thing, and justly
reprovable in Rulers, to exceed the Limits and Bounds of the Law by which they
are to rule and govern, or to carry things according to their own Wills and
Lusts, not regarding the fundamental Laws of the Land where they live. III. So
it is an abominable Evil in Ministers, to rule according to their own Wills,
violating the Law of God. Ministers may exceed their due Bounds, and be
arbitrary, and tyrannize over the People in things spiritual, as well as Civil
Rulers or Magistrates in things temporal. IV. Rulers (in some places) are
chosen by the People whom they govern; it is the People's Privilege to choose
their Magistrates. IV. So Ministers ought to be chosen by the Church; it is the
Privilege of the People to choose their own Pastors, and other Officers,
according to the Qualifications laid down by the Spirit of God. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3. Acts 6.3.
Wherefore, Brethren, look ye out among your selves, etc. V. Rulers ought to be
wise Men, Men fearing God. See Jethro's Counsel to Moses, Exodus 18.21.
Thou shall provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of
Truth, hating Covetousness, 2 Samuel 23.4.
etc. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke unto me, He that rules
over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of God. What a sore Rebuke does God
give covetous Rulers by the Prophet! Ezekiel. 22.27.
Her Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves ravening the Prey, to shed
Blood, and to destroy, to get dishonest Gain. V. So Ministers ought to be Men
wise, holy, and of a blameless Conversation, such as are given to Hospitality,
1 Timothy 3.2, 3.
and not greedy of filthy Lucre. It Is an odious thing to see a Minister
covetous, who is required to open the Nature of, and preach against that Sin,
as well as all others, and ought to live accordingly. How can he preach against
that Sin he is guilty of himself? or, if he does, what good effect can he think
it will have upon other Men's Hearts, when the Word reflects back upon himself,
(as it were) Physician, heal thy self. Paul could say in the truth of his Heart
to the Saints, It is not yours, but you, I seek. This was the beastly Sin which
God so loathed in the Prophets and Rulers of Israel: You are greedy Dogs, which
can never have enough, that cannot understand; they all look to their own Way,
every one for his Gain from his Quarter: Compared with that of Micah 3.11. The
Heads thereof (speaking of Zion) judge for Reward, and the Priests teach for
Hire, and the Prophets divine for Money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and
say, Is not the Lord amongst us? VI. Faithful Rulers are a great Blessing to a
People, and ought to be cheerfully obeyed, reverenced, and submitted to. It Is a
great Sin to speak evil of Dignities, or despise Dominions: R^m. 13 1.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, etc. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, 1 Pet 2.13, 14.
whether it be to the King ((...) of (...), a Foundation, and (...), the
People, the Foundation of a People) as Supreme, or unto Governors, etc. VI. So
Ministers, faithful and able Ministers, are no small Blessing, and Sign of
God's Favor to a People; yea, great Benefit we receive by them in many
respects, as might be shown: They feed, guide, counsel, and pray for us, as
well as rule and govern us; and therefore they ought to be with all readiness
obeyed: Obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb. 13.17
and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
an Account, etc. And to speak evil of Ministers, is to despise their high and
holy Function; it is a God-provoking Evil. There were some in the Apostle's
Times, who were crept into the Church, who (like Corah) spoke against the
Dignity and Power of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, (who in a sense are
said to be the Foundation of God's People) whom the Apostle characterized, and
shows what their End is like to be: Who were presumptuous, self-willed, and
were not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. Their Hearts rose against the
Servants of God, for exercising Authority in Christ's Name, which is given to
them. What said Korah? All the Lord's People are holy, etc. as if he should
have said, Is this Moses more than others? But we see what became of him, Numb.
16. VII. Some Rulers, or chief Magistrates, do not, cannot pass any Act or Law,
(such is the Nature and Constitution of the Government where they live) without
the People: No Law can be made, but with the Assent and Consent of the People,
in their Representatives in Parliament, as it is here in the English Nation.
VII. So Christ's Ministers, or Pastors of Churches, cannot, by virtue of any
Authority given by the Lord Jesus, pass any Act, either for the receiving in,
or casting out of Members, etc. without their Brethren, etc. They must have the
Assent and Consent of the Church. Many Reasons might be given for it, which I
shall omit. If he neglect to hear the Church, Mat. 18.17
let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, or Publican. VIII. Rulers should rule
their People in Love, showing all Tenderness and Bowels to the Disobedient,
like tenderhearted Fathers, unless it be toward those that are notorious
Criminals. VIII. So should Ministers labor to act in their places toward the
Saints in Love, and to show all Tenderness and Meekness, with Compassion, to
such who through weakness transgress; [See Fathers] and not to be severe to
any, unless obstinate and capital Offenders; on such Justice ought to be
executed. IX. Rulers, that rule well, are worthy of double Honor. IX. So
faithful and laborious Ministers, that rule God's House well, ought to be
greatly respected: 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor. X. Rulers
are very needful; there is a great Necessity in all Societies and Communities
of Men, of Government, and Rulers. What is a Nation, City, or Family, without
Rule, Rulers, or Government, but Disorder and Confusion? X. The Need there is
of Rulers in God's Church is very great, God being a God of Order, and not of
Confusion, in all the Churches of the Saints. The Necessity of them appears, by
considering the Nature of diverse of the Metaphors we have opened concerning
them. What would become of a Flock of Sheep, if they had no Shepherd? etc.
Rulers. Disparity. RUlers, or earthly Governors, are commonly Noblemen, Men of
great Name, clothed with outward Glory and Grandeur. CHrist's true Ministers
are of little or no esteem in the eyes of the Men of the World; they are
commonly accounted base, low, and contemptible, etc. Ye see your Calling,
Brethren, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.
how that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many noble
are called: But God has chosen the foolish Things of the World, to confound
the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of the World, to confound the
Things that are mighty; and base Things of the World, and Things which are
despised, has God chosen, yea, and Things that are not, to bring to naught
Things that are; that no Flesh should glory in his Presence. II. Many earthly
Rulers are Lords, and lord it over their Brethren. II. But Christ's Ministers
are contented to be Servants. Even as their Lord and Master came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and was on Earth as him that served: So his
Ministers must not assume the Title of Lords, nor must they lord it over God's
People: Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the
Flock. 1 Tit. 5 3.


Inferences.
ANd now to conclude with this Head, from the Whole we may infer these
Particulars following:

1. That a true Minister of Christ, is one that is truly converted, a gracious,
holy, and sincere Person, one that has the experience of the real Work of God
upon his own Heart.

2. A Member of a true constituted Church, i. e. a Community of godly
Christians, that have given up themselves in a solemn Covenant, in the Fear of
God, to walk in Fellowship and Communion together, according to the Rule of the
Gospel; amongst whom the Word of God is truly preached, and the Ordinances duly
and in a right manner administered.

3. That he ought to be chosen by the Church, according to the Direction left
by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.1, to 6. Tit. 1.5, to 9.

4. That he ought to be a discreet Person, endued with considerable Gifts and
Abilities by the Holy Ghost.

5. If called to be a Pastor or Elder, he ought to be ordained by the laying on
of hands of the Presbytery, or Eldership. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 4.14.


6. That he ought to be very laborious, and give himself wholly to the Work of
the Ministry; making the Word of God in all things his Rule.

7. That he ought to have a comfortable Maintenance allowed him by the Church,
to which he belongs, if they are able to do it: That this is their Due by
Divine Right, tho not a forced Maintenance, otherwise than Love to God, his
Truth, and People, whose Duty forces them to allow their Ministers a
Competency.

Secondly; We may infer, That the Work of a Minister of Christ is no easy, but
contrariwise a very hard and difficult Work: Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2.16 Exodus 4.13 Jer. 20.9.
So hard, that many of Christ's Servants of old undertook it with much
trembling, which made them cry out, Send by whom thou will send, etc. So hard,
that a Saint with all his natural Parts is not sufficient for it; nay, a Saint
with all his acquired Parts is not sufficient for it; nay, I may say, a Saint
with all his spiritual Gifts, Graces, and Endowments, without fresh Supplies of
new Strength, is not sufficient for it.

Thirdly; It informs us wherein the Difficulty of the Ministers Work does lie;
and that,

1. In respect of themselves, who are employed in it. (1.) They are but Men:
Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman; 1 Cor. 1.27.
and they commonly none of the wisest and most learned in the esteem of the
World neither. (2.) Man at the best is a darksighted Creature: We know but in
part. 1 Cor. 13.9 Romans 7.
(3,) Man at best is attended with Weaknesses, and carries a Body of Sin and
Death about with him. (4.) Man at best has but small Skill, and short
Experience. (5.) Man at best is subject to great Discouragements, and liable to
Temptations.

2. In respect to the Work it self, a Minister's Employment is very hard and
difficult. (1.) It Is a mysterious Work; what Mysteries are greater than those a
Minister is to study and dive into? 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, etc. (2.) It Is
difficult, in that it calls for the greatest Care and Exactness imaginable: Add
not to his Word, etc. (3.) In that it calls for the Strength of his whole Soul.
(4.) In that it is a Work that consists in diverse Parts; there are many
Things in which a Minister ought to be well instructed, as appears by what has
been said. (5.) In that it is a Work which calls for much Diligence; a slothful
or idle Person is not fit to be a Minister. It Is a Work that must be followed
continually: Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine.

3. It Is a difficult Work, in respect of the Opposition that is made against
them, or from those grand Obstructions they meet with, 1. From their own
Hearts; 2. From Sin; 3. From Satan; 4. From the World, (1.) By Reproaches and
Contradictions of the Ungodly; (2.) By Heretics, and False-Teachers; (3.) From
Persecutors, etc.

Fourthly; We may infer from what has been said in opening these Metaphors,
That Gospel-Ministration is of absolute Necessity.

1. Because God has ordained Preaching as the ordinary Means for the
Conversion of Sinners: Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God.

2. God has gifted, and graciously endowed some Men, on purpose for this Work.

3. He has given plain Directions to his People, how and whom to choose and
ordain, etc.

4. The Necessity further appears, by considering the Nature of the Similes and
Metaphors we have opened: Sinners are in Arms against God; and these are his
Ambassadors, by whom he treats, and offers Terms of Peace to them. Christ
designs to espouse Sinners to himself, and these are his Spokes-men, by whom he
effects this glorious Enterprise.

Fifthly; It shows also, That the Ministers Function is a most noble and
honorable Employment; and that all due Respect, Esteem, and Obedience ought to
be given to them.

Sixthly; We may infer, That many who pretend themselves to be Christ's true
Ministers, are none of his Ministers, but rather a Shame and Reproach to that
venerable Name, Work, and Office.

Seventhly; Let us learn from hence to bless God, that we have so many able and
worthy Ministers of Christ in our Land. O let us pray for them, and desire God
to send more of these Laborers into his Harvest. Pray ye the Lord of the
Harvest, etc.

Eighthly; It sharply reproves many Churches and Professors, for the great
Neglect of their Duties toward their Ministers: What a Day do we live in! How
is Christ's Interest, Ministers, and poor Saints, forgot, slighted, and
neglected! O that God would raise up some to cry aloud, and spare not, but lift
up their Voice like a Trumpet, to show God's People their Transgressions, and
the House of Jacob their Sins!

Metaphors, Similes, AND Other borrowed Terms, etc. CONCERNING FALSE TEACHERS.
False Teachers compared to Wolves.
Acts 20.29. I know, that after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the Flock, etc.
A Wolf is in Hebrew Zeeb, Genesis 49. in Chaldee, Deeba, and Deba; the Arabians
call him Zebab; the Greeks, Lycos, and Lagos, and Lycania; and Lycos, among
some of the Arabian Writers, is borrowed from them, as Munster has noted in
his Lexicon of three Languages: The Italians call it Lupo; in French, Loup; in
Spain, Lobo; in Germany, Valff; in English, Wolf.

The common Epithets of this Beast, amongst several Authors, are these, Sour,
Elianus. Gesner. Topsell.
wild, fierce, bold, greedy, wary, swift, bloody, hard, degenerate, gluttonous,
hungry, flesh-eater, famishing, harmful, cruel, furious, insatiable,
treacherous, martial, ravenous, nightly, etc.

There are five sorts of Wolves: The first is called Toxenter, a swift Wolf;
the second Kind are called Harpages; and these, says my Author, are the
greatest Raveners, to which (says Topsall) our Savior alludes, Mat. 7.15. The
third Sort are called Lupus Aureus, a Golden Wolf, by reason of his Color; the
fourth, Acmone; the fifth, Ictinus. I know, that after my departure shall
grievous Wolves, etc. Not Wolves only, but grievous Wolves, such as are called
by some (...), Snatchers, or ravening Wolves.

Note. Some False-Teachers may fitly be compared to Wolves, to ravening Wolves.

Metaphor. Parallel. A Wolf is a cruel and devouring Beast; Topsell, p. 571,
578.
he is not contented to kill to fill his Belly, but will spoil and destroy a
whole Flock, etc. SO some False-Teachers are very cruel and bloody, destroying
Multitudes of Souls; it is not one or two, but the whole Church of God they
strive to devour; hence said not to spare the Flock. Acts 20.29
II. Wolves are not only cruel, but subtle and very crafty also, watching the
fittest Time to seize upon their Prey. They will silently approach the
Sheepfold, to see whether the Dogs be asleep, or the Shepherd wanting; when he
is careless or negligent of his Flock, then comes the Wolf to destroy, and suck
the Blood of the poor Sheep. Those Beasts that have Horns, he comes upon at
their Tails, lest by their Horns they prove too hard for him. They will, after
they have made great Slaughter, to hide their Villainy, wash their bloody
Mouths, etc. II. So some False-Teachers are very crafty, and subtle to deceive,
and prey upon the Souls of Men. They privily bring in damnable Heresies, 2 pet.
2.1.
in a sly manner they seek to insinuate themselves into the good Opinion of
Men, and with wretched Hypocrisy and Sophistry counterfeit much Purity,
Humility, and Angelical Sanctity, boasting of peculiar Illuminations, and
Communion with God, etc. And therefore they are said to come in Sheeps
Clothing, Mat. 7.15.
but inwardly are ravening Wolves. By good Words, and fair Speeches, Romans 16.18.
they are said to deceive the Hearts of the Simple. None have pretended to more
seeming Zeal, and outward Holiness, than some vile and notorious Heretics; to
put off their counterfeit Coin, they are content to mix it with some good
Silver. Were it not for their outward Show of Piety and Holiness, they could
never do that Hurt to the Church of God, and Men's Souls. Hence the Apostle
cautions the Saints, to be no more Children tossed about with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the Slight of Men, Ephesians. 4.14.
and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. III. Wolves,
Naturalists tell us, keep close in their Dens or Lurking-places in the
Daytime, and about Even-tide secretly come out, seeking their Prey. Moreover,
it is said, Dr. Frantzius.
they will learn those Tones that the Shepherds use; nay, and that some
Shepherds have themselves been so deceived by them, that they have taken their
Tone for a Man's Voice, and as if some Man had called them; by which means they
have gone forth, and have been devoured by Wolves. III. So Romish Wolves, and
other False-Teachers, and vile Heretics, whilst the Light of God's Word shines
freely and gloriously forth in a Nation, keep close, and do as it were hide
themselves: but if once it seems to look like Even-tide with a People, (as at
this very time it does with poor England) then out come these cruel, ravening
Wolves, and adventure publicly to read Mass, and contend for their most
notorious and execrable Heresies, and cursed Fopperies. Many Deceivers also
there are in the World, who labor to get the very Words and Tones (as I may
say) of Christ's true Ministers, insomuch that some good Men, nay, Teachers
themselves, have been beguiled by them; and it is no marvel, for Satan himself
is transformed into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Therefore it is no great
thing, if his Ministers also be transformed, and appear as the Ministers of
Righteousness, etc.

Inference.
LEt us learn from hence to take heed of False-Teachers, and enquire into their
inward Parts; labor to search thoroughly into their Doctrine, and not be
deceived with the outward Show of Holiness in their Lives: for they come
(remember) in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves.

False-Teachers compared to Foxes.
Cant. 2.15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, etc.
MOst Expositors understand, by these Foxes, these little Foxes, the Holy Ghost
means False-Teachers, who may be compared to Foxes in these respects following.

Parallels.
I. THe Fox is subtle and crafty; so (you have heard) are False-Teachers.

II. The Fox is not only crafty, but cruel to harmless Creatures: So are
False-Teachers to the Souls of Men.

III. Foxes invade in the Nightime, like Wolves, etc. So do Deceivers, whilst
Ministers sleep, or are secure, or neglect their Watch.

IV. Foxes are great Spoilers of Vineyards: So False-Teachers do great hurt to
the Church of God.

V. Foxes never go strait forward, but by crooked Windings, etc. So
False-Teachers never keep to the plain Letter, and express Meaning of the Word
of God, but have their Shifts and Evasions, and unnatural Inferences, whereby
they seek to defend their evil Doctrine, etc.

VI. Foxes are often taken by Traps that are laid for them, etc. So are
False-Teachers often found out and discovered by the true Ministers of Christ:
But these, as natural brute Beasts, were made to be taken and destroyed. 2 Pet.
2.12.

[ See more of Foxes under the Head of Metaphors concerning Wicked Men, and
Persecutors.]

False-Teachers compared to Wells without Water.
2 Pet. 2.17. These are Wells without Water, etc.
FAlse Teachers are in this place compared to Wells without Water.

Parallels.
A Well is a fit Receptacle for Water, and it is expected Water should be
therein; but if it be empty, it greatly deceives and disappoints them that come
to draw Water out of it: So Ministers should be stored with much Grace and
heavenly Doctrine, etc. But those who come to a False-Teacher, to receive
Instruction and Comfort for their Souls, are grievously deceived.

II. A Well that has no good Water in it, may notwithstanding have much Dirt
and Filth, and some foul and stinking Water: So False-Teachers, tho they are
empty and barren of goood Doctrine, yet it may be they have much corrupt,
detestable, and abominable Filth of false Doctrine, Error, and Heresy in them,
which foolish Ones are greedy of, draw out, and take down, to the poisoning and
utter ruin of their Souls.

False-Teachers compared to Clouds without Rain.
2 Pet. 2.17. These are Wells without Water, Clouds that are carried with a
Tempest, to whom the Mist of Darkness is reserved for ever.

Jude 12. Clouds they are without Rain, carried about of Winds, etc.


AS False-Teachers are compared to Wells without Water, so likewise they are to
Clouds without Rain, carried with a Tempest, etc.

Parallels.
SOme Clouds seem as if they had much Water or Rain in them, tho empty: So some
false Teachers do seem very like the true and faithful Servants and Ministers
of Christ; they in outward Show appear devout, and talk like Saints, pretending
to much Humility and Godliness, as if they were the very Men that God had
appointed to dispense his Word, and heavenly Truth: But alas! they are but mere
empty Clouds, being only filled with airy and unprofitable Notions. Some Clouds
(as Pliny observes) are nothing else but mere empty Vapors, and these are
often carried very swiftly with the Wind: So False-Teachers are carried away as
empty Vapors, with the Wind of Delusion, or false Doctrine.

II. Clouds prevent or hinder Mortals from beholding the glorious shining of
the Sun, and tend greatly to darken the Heavens: So False-Teachers obstruct (in
a great measure) the glorious Gospel in its Light and Splendour, from shining
upon the Souls of Men, and tend to darken the blessed Light of Divine Truths,
in a Nation where they abound, and are countenanced.

False-Teachers compared to Deceivers.
2 John 1.7. For many Deceivers are entered into the World, who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh; this is a Deceiver, and an Antichrist.
DEceiver, or one that causes to err, is by the Greeks called, a Despiser; by
the Chaldee, a Mocker, Mat. 27.63. (...), a notable Cozener, Impostor.
Ainsworth. See Liegh's Crit. Sacr. seduced, and seducing others: Such our
Savior and his Apostles were reputed, but falsely; others are truly so called,
who deal fraudulently and false-heartedly with God, Men, and their own Hearts.

Deceiver. Parallel. A Deceiver, or cunning Impostor, has many Ways whereby he
secretly, and with much craftiness seeks to trapan and beguile his Neighbor:
As, (1.) He will pretend himself to be a special Friend, and so insinuate into
a Man's Affection. (2.) He strives to find out the Disposition of the Person he
intends to cheat. (3.) He will (the better to accomplish his Design) change his
Name, and pretend himself some worthy and noble Person, and of some eminent
Family. (4.) He will watch the fittest Opportunity to effect his Enterprise.
(5.) He will sometimes put a Vizard on his Face, and often change his Habit,
that he may deceive the more securely. (6.) And if he is in danger to be taken,
he will exclaim against the Deceiver, and cry out, Stop Thief, etc.
FAlse-Teachers, who are cunning to deceive, have many ways to delude poor
Creatures: As, (1.) They commonly pretend much Pity and Compassion to the Souls
of Men, and hereby they endeavor to wind themselves into their Affections; and
when once a Person harbors a good Opinion of them, their Work is half done.
(2.) They seek to find out what Parts they have, and what Principles they hold,
with whom they converse: for if they perceive they are Men and Women well
rooted and grounded in the Orthodox Faith, and able to defend the Truth, they
have little hopes of prevailing; but if they find that they are Persons of a
weak Judgment, and mind more abundantly the Conversation of Men, than what
Doctrine they hold, or do more mind and regard the Circumstantials of Religion,
than the grand Fundamentals thereof; they will pursue such close. (3.) They do
always change their Names; for if their Names were known, they could not
beguile so many: Were Error, False-Doctrine, Blasphemy, Heresy, Wolves in
Sheeps Clothing, Foxes, cunning Serpents, Deceivers, etc. but writ upon their
Foreheads, most People would be afraid of them; but they, contrary-wise, call
themselves Christ's Ministers, Witnesses of Jesus, Friends of Truth, the Lamb's
Followers, etc. Also it is common with them to pretend themselves to be the
Orthodox Men, Sons of the Church, of the Holy Church, of the Catholic Church,
Masters in Israel, Guides of the Blind, etc. (4.) They study to find out the
fittest Season and Opportunity to accomplish their Design, and Hellish Purpose,
viz. They watch for such a Time, when the Professors of the Gospel and Truths
of Jesus begin to decline in their Zeal, and to lose much of the Power of
Godliness, and seem to make a mighty Stir about the Form thereof, and are much
divided amongst themselves; when Iniquity does abound, and the Love of many
waxes cold; in a word, when Men begin to grow secure, or the true Shepherd is
off of his Watch, then these Wolves and Deceivers get abroad, and, like that
wicked Enemy, sow their Tares of Error and Delusion. (5.) The Jesuits, those
crafty Deceivers, have often appeared in a Disguise externally, and do usually
change their Garbs, etc. Sometimes they are Holders-forth in a Quakers Meeting;
at other times they will counterfeit themselves to be Lawyers: Sometimes they
will take on them the Habit of Priests, sometimes Merchants, sometimes
Shoo-makers, etc. And all this, that they may the more securely carry on their
wicked Designs and Purposes to pervert poor Souls, etc. (6.) And lastly, When
these False-Teachers and Deceivers begin to fear they shall be discovered, and
perceive there is a Cry raised against them, and that they are closely pursued,
and in danger to be taken, then (to save themselves) they cry out against
others. None are more ready to exclaim against False-Teachers and Deceivers
than they, endeavoring to cast all the Infamy and black Aspersions imaginable
upon the true and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, loading them with all the
foulest Calumnies they can devise, that they themselves may in the mean while
pass the better for true Men, and be the less suspected. Thus those blind
Guides in Israel served our Savior himself: Some said, He is a good Man; Joh
7.12. and 8.48. Mat. 27.63.
others said, Nay, but he deceives the People. -- Say we not well, that thou
art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Sir, we remember that the Deceiver said,
whilst he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again. And thus they
exclaimed against the Apostles: Paul was called a Mover of Sedition; and by
False-Teachers he with others were called Deceivers: As Deceivers, and yet
true, etc. Acts 24.14.
-- After that way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
etc. II. Some Deceivers have been notorious in the horrid Practice of beguiling
others: They have been such Crafts-Masters at it, that they have deceived
Multitudes; and not only the common Sort of People, but diverse great Men and
Princes have been cheated by them. II. So the Pope, and his Hierarchy, those
cursed Deceivers in the Romish Church, have been notorious in the Hellish Trade
of beguiling the Souls of Men. How many Millions have they deceived! O the
Multitudes they have led blindfold to Hell! The Kings of the Earth have been
beguiled by her, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been made drunk, and
bewitched with the Wine of her Fornication. III. Some Deceivers have so far
prevailed, that they have utterly ruined whole Families, cheating People of
their best and chiefest Treasure. III. So False-Teachers have sometimes so
wonderfully prevailed, that they have utterly corrupted, ruined, and undone, by
their false Doctrine, many Nations, Cities, Towns, and Families, cheating them
of the Truth of Christ, and his blessed Ordinances; and not only so, but
thereby also of their Souls, Mat. 16.26
which are of more worth than all the World. IV. Grand Impostors, old Cheats
and Deceivers, it is observed, rarely reform their Hellish Lives, and become
true Men, but grow worse and worse, till Justice seizes them. IV. So
False-Teachers, Heretics, and Seducers, seldom or never are recovered, and
brought back by unfeigned Repentance, to the true Church of God: And therefore
the Apostle Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.13.
Evil Men, and Seducers, shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived, etc. V. The End of Cheaters and Impostors (we see) oft-times is sad.
If he be a notorious Offender, and be taken, he dies without Mercy. V. So the
last End of False-Teachers and Heretics will be sad and miserable: They are
said to bring upon themselves swift Destruction. The Beast, 2 Pet. 2.2, 3. Rev.
19.20
and False-Prophet shall be cast alive into the Lake of Fire, burning with
Brimstone, etc.

THE Church of ROME, Mystery Babylon. The GREAT CITY, and GREAT WHORE, Revel.
17. Proved to be the ROMISH CHURCH: WITH THE Grand Objections of the Papists
Answered.
REV. 14.8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen, that Great City, because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of her Fornication.

REV. 16.19. And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her
the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness of his Wrath.

REV. 17.5. And upon her Forehead was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE
GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS (or Fornications) AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.

REV. 18.1, 2. And after these things, I saw another Angel come down from
Heaven, -- And he cried mightily with a strong Voice, saying, Babylon the Great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the Hold of
every unclean Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, etc.


IN the handling of this great Subject, it seems needful to give an Account of
the various Opinions, that have (more or less) pr^sented themselves to the
World about it, which may be reduced to these four following Heads.

I. That it is Jerusalem; and that for two Reasons:

1. Because the Man of Sin, or last Beast, that is to head this Babylon, is set
forth by St. Paul, to sit in the Temple of God, showing himself to be a God. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Rev. 11.8.


2. Because this City where the Beast reigns, and shall slay the Witnesses, is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified.

II. That it is the Turkish Empire, or Power of the Saracens; which Mr. Mede
somewhat touches, and in a brief way most learnedly argues against, in his
third Book, page 644, 645.

III. That it is indeed Rome, the Seat of the fourth or last Empire, but Rome
in its Heathen State, under the idolatrous and persecuting Emperors: So the
Rhemists would have it, if there be a Necessity to fix upon Rome to be this
Apocalyptical, or Mystery Babylon. For this Opinion the present Romanists have
no better Advocate than Dr. Hammond, who has done very worthily at other
Turns. See his Annotations upon the 17th Chapter of the Apocalypse.

IV. That it is the present Power and Church of Rome, who under pretense of the
most high and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, does influence and govern the
Secular Power and State of Kingdoms. Of this last Opinion were the ancient
Waldenses, who felt the bloody Power of Rome, venting it self in most horrid
and barbarous Cruelties against them, and that for a long Series of Time, as
appears by our most Authentic, Ancient, and Modern Writers, who give a very
ample Account of the great Persecution of Christians, for many hundred Years
last past, in all Parts of the Christian World, where they have had Power. To
which Opinion of the Waldenses most of our modern Protestant Divines agree, of
which we shall mention only Cartwright, Fulk, the worthily admired, and Learned
Mede, not forgetting famous Du Moulin of France; as may be seen in their Works
at large.

But because we will not take Things upon Trust, nor refer the Reader to many
Quotations, which he may want Books and Time to satisfy himself about; it
appears needful, that we remove the Objections with as much Brevity as
possible, before we state the Metaphor, and run the Parallel.

Now that Babylon in all these New Testament Texts cannot be fairly applied to
Jerusalem, the Turks and Saracens, nor terminate in the Heathenish State of
Rome, we offer these following Considerations or Arguments:

I. It cannot be meant the City Jerusalem:

1. Because Jerusalem did not reign over the Kings of the Earth in St. John's
time, when he saw this Vision, and wrote the Revelation, which this City
Babylon is expressly said to do: Rev. 17.18.
And the Woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the
Kings of the Earth. Jerusalem having been not only under Captivity diverse times
before, but were then entirely under the Power of the Roman Yoke, as the whole
History of the Gospel does confirm, and themselves did most plainly confess: We
have no King but Caesar. John 19.15.


2. Jerusalem was never in so high esteem with the Beast, as to be capable to
ride as Queen-Regent upon him, (as this Woman, Whore, or City is said to do):
And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee the
Mystery of the Woman, and the Beast that carries her, which has the seven
Heads, and ten Horns. Rev. 17.7. Rev. 17.7.
compared with Verse. 3. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the
Wilderness, and I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of Names
of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, -- For by the Woman sitting,
and Beast carrying, is undoubtedly signified, Influence, Power, and Dominion,
which Jerusalem was far remote from, not only under the Roman Monarchy, but
also under the three Kingdoms that went before it, viz. the Babylonian,
Grecian, and Persian; as might be largely illustrated both out of Sacred and
Humane History.

3. Jerusalem did not sit upon many Waters, which is interpreted to be People,
Nations, and Tongues; that is, had not Command or Dominion over them, as this
Woman, Rev. 17.15.
Whore, or City is said to have: And he says, The Waters which thou saw,
where the Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues:
The whole Land of Judea being under Tribute to the Roman Government at that
time: And it came to pass in those Days, Luke 2.1.
that there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should
be taxed; Verse 4.
and particularly, Galilee, Nazareth, Judea, and the City of David, called
Bethlehem.

4. Jerusalem was not capable to enchant and bewitch all the Nations round
about her, either by her Religion and Doctrine, or by great Gifts and Rewards.

(1.) Because the Roman Power kept her under, and much in awe, on the one hand,
not owning nor subscribing to her Religion.

(2.) The Christian Doctrine and Religion blocked up her Way, on the other
hand, that she could not extend her Influence to either neighboring, or remote
Nations, as this Woman, Whore, or City is said to do: For thy Merchants were
the great Men of the Earth; for by thy Sorceries were all Nations deceived.
Rev. 18.23


5. Jerusalem, tho she were guilty of much Blood, from the beginning of her
Excellency and Glory, in Solomon's Time, killing Prophets, even all that were
sent unto her, murdered John Baptist, and our Lord and Savior, as also the
blessed Martyr, St. Stephen; yet in her could not be found that great Mass of
Blood that was shed, and Myriads of Christian Saints that have been barbarously
murdered, by Massacre, and public Martyrdom, since they were ruined and
destroyed by Titus Vespasian, which we find positively charged upon this City
Babylon: Rev. 17.6.
And I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of Saints, and with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, and I wondered with great Admiration; as indeed well he
might, (as shall be shown. Rev. 19 24.
) And in her was found the Blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that
were slain upon the Earth; that is, since the Destruction of Jerusalem.

6. And lastly; Not to multiply more upon this Head, tho Jerusalem was
fearfully destroyed, as the History of Josephus shows; yet shall she rise
again, be built upon her own Heap, be replenished with her own Children, which
this City Babylon under Consideration shall never be, after this Catastrophe
which John saw visionally coming upon it: And a mighty Angel took up a Stone,
like a great Millstone, Rev. 18.21.
and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City
Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

II. It cannot be the Turks and Saracens, for two Reasons offered by the
Learned Mead, lib. 3. p. 643.

1. Because tho they did arise to great Power in the World, yet they had not
their Seat in that great City, which in St. John's Time reigned over the Kings
of the Earth, which this Babylon is expressly said to have. Rev. 17.18.


2. That they did not rise by Apostasy from the Christian Religion, which this
Babylon (with her Head, the Man of Sin) did; for, as this worthy Author says,
the Turk (whatever he be) could be no Apostate, because he was of a Nation that
never was Christian.

To which we shall add something for the clearing of this Head, that we may
discharge that Debt we owe to God, to the Church, and the World.

3. It cannot be the Turks, because they are not strangely and wonderfully
mysterious, which this Babylon is said to be: And upon her Forehead was a Name
written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, Rev. 17.5.
AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did
thou marvel? I will tell thee the Mystery of the Woman, Verse 7.
and the Beast which carries her, which has the seven Heads, and ten Horns.

What special Mystery has showed it self to the World from the Turks and
Saracens, more than from other common Empires or Kingdoms, that is matter of
Admiration to the wisest of Men? Is it matter of Wonder, that the Turks do own
but one true, and most high God? Is it matter of Wonder, that they do own Jesus
Christ to be a Prophet, and a good Man? Is it matter of highest Wonder, that
they prefer Mahomet above Jesus? Is it matter of Wonder, that they appear true
to their Contracts, in Matters of Civil Commerce? Is it matter of highest
Wonder, for them to endeavor to keep what Dominion they have, and to enlarge
it, to make Slaves and Prizes of those professed Enemies they take Prisoners? We
say, in none of these things is there any high Mystery, or matter of greatest
Wonder, being Things common to all Places and Kingdoms invested with Power: For,

(1.) Did not the great King of Literal Babylon own the only true God, yet
still held the Church in Captivity?

(2.) Did not Israel own the same, and yet kept their Idols, after their Revolt
from Judah?

(3.) Did not Judah prefer Moses above and before Christ, and at that time when
Christ was personally amongst them, working most stupendous Miracles, which did
evince his Divine Mission? Nay, did they not prefer a common and notorious
Villain before the blessed Lord of Glory, when they desired a Murderer to be
freed, and pressed hard to have the good and blessed Jesus, the Savior of the
World, killed? And did not this wise Apostle know this to be true in Fact, and
to equal, nay, outdo any thing that the Turks or Saracens ever did, or can be
accused of? And if St. John was transported with astonishing Wonder, at Matters
much less than he had seen before, does it not give good reason to suspect him
of Weakness and Defect, that he should suffer himself to be surprised with the
greatest Wonder, at far less Things than he had seen and known before?
Certainly therefore we must conclude, there was something more of Mystery in
John's Vision, than what has been showed to the World by the Great Turk, or
any other Power; and indeed, undoubtedly, the greatest Mystery that ever the
World was acquainted with: For the Characters of Babylon must either be
singular, that is, such as none have besides; or else they must be
transcendent, to go far beyond what others had in a lesser degree. Otherwise
John might have kept the Description of Babylon to himself, there being no
clear Distinctions, to render the wisest and most discerning Men able to make a
Judgment upon her. The Mystery then that is written upon this Woman Babylon,
seems clearly to lie in these Particulars following.

First; That she does transact the most horrid Wickednesses that ever the World
was, or is like to be, acquainted with.

Secondly; That under this monstrous Guilt, she is prodigiously confident, and
without all regret, or show of Shame, and most impudently boasts of the highest
Sanctity and Holiness in the World, viz. That she is totally pure, infallibly
certain, and cannot err, etc. That this indeed is a Mystery to be wondered at,
let it be considered,

(1.) That a Shepherd should be a Wolf, and devour that Flock which he pretends
to be an Overseer or Pastor of.

(2.) That a professed Servant of Jesus Christ, and the meanest of Saints,
should exalt himself above his Master, and not above his Master only, but above
the God of his Master, and all other deputed Gods, that are Vicegerents to the
King of Heaven, by slighting and trampling upon the Holy Scriptures, and Laws
both of God and Princes, dispensing with the Breach of them, indulging the
highest Violation thereof, and setting up his own Inventions, Traditions, and
Decrees above them; insomuch that there is a thousand times less danger (in
their esteem) in respect of Excommunications, and Corporal Punishments in this
World, or of Damnation in the World to come, in breaking and violating the Laws
of God and Princes, than there is in the Violation or Breach of the Inventions,
Traditions, and Decrees of Mystery Babylon, and her Head.

(3.) That one sitting in the Temple of God, pretending himself as a poor
Apostle, Vicar, and Successor of Christ, nay, as the Successor of a poor
Fisherman, should wear the highest Ensigns of Imperial Dignity!

(4.) That he should be so lordly, and prodigiously insolent, (who was
commanded to the greatest Humility and Abasement) as to tread upon the Necks of
Emperors, kick off the Crowns of great Princes, and make Kings his Foot-Pages.

(5.) That he should pretend highly, yea, most highly, to God, Christ,
Religion, and Holiness, and yet espouse to himself, as the Darlings of his
Bosom, not only the chiefest Sons of Belial, but all that will decline Sanctity
and Religion, and embody themselves with those Firstborn Sons of Wickedness,
that are of the highest Magnitude, and engage themselves in such monstrous and
butcherly Practices, that humane Nature, as such, could never act in the
butchering of brute Beasts.

(6.) That the Spouse of this prodigious Monster should in Profession own God,
Jesus Christ, and the Things of Religion, of which Justice and Charity,
Holiness and Compassion are not the least Part; and yet under this Vizard, and
in the very time of these Pretensions, perpetrate the greatest and most
unparalled Villainies in the World: 1. In being the Top of Pride. 2. In
committing palpable Idolatry. 3. Fill themselves with Excess and Drunkenness.
4. To curse, swear, and blaspheme the very Name they profess to be sacred. 5.
To cast down the Truth, burn the Bible, deface the holy Books and Laws of God.
6. To assume not only a Power to dispense with Violations of the highest
Nature, but to pardon and forgive them at pleasure. 7. To commit Adultery, and
account it a venial Crime. 8. To break Covenants, drive a Trade in Perjury,
forswear every thing they are justly charged with, and is fully proved against
them. 9. To foment Wars and Broils in every Kingdom and Country where they have
Power; contrive the Ruin of Towns and Places, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms,
by Fire, Sword, and most cruel Devastations. 10. To slaughter, kill, and
barbarously murder, both Men, Women, and Children, even all that dare make a
show of Conscience and Religion, so far as to abhor and dissent from these
Villainies.

This is such a Scheme of Religion, and Systeme of Divinity, to come from an
Apostle, a Shepherd, a Vicar and Successor of Christ, from a Church, Sheep,
Saints, and the pretended Followers of the meek, peaceable, and innocent Jesus,
who taught altogether otherwise by his Doctrine and Example, that it might well
be wondered at, and is the strangest Mystery that ever appeared, of which we
challenge the whole World to show the like in the Turks and Saracens. For Men
to swear, lie, and forswear themselves, and yet be true Men: to contrive
Rebellion, Murder, and Treason; and yet be as innocent as the Child unborn: to
be elevated to the highest Pinnacle of Pride, even above Emperors and Kings,
above Jesus Christ, and God his Father; and yet be humble and lowly: To commit
gross Idolatry; and yet be the Servants of the Living God: To be filled with,
and make a Trade of Excess and Drunkenness; and yet be the Paterns and
Standards of Sobriety and Temperance: To cast down the Truth to the Ground,
deface the Laws of God, and burn the Scriptures; and yet be the true Witnesses
to it: To forgive Sins, and yet be the greatest of Sinners themselves: To
commit Fornication and Adultery; and yet be spotless and pure in Heart; To
foment Wars and Broils in every Kingdom and Country where they have Power; to
contrive the Ruin of Towns and Places, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, by
Fire, Sword, and cruel Devastations; and yet be as harmless as Doves to all
Mankind, the only Sons of Peace and Quietness: To slaughter, kill, and
barbarously murder Men, Women, and Children, that dare not be so wicked as
themselves; and yet to be full of Mercy, tender Pity, and Compassion; an
Apostle, Shepherd, Vicar, and Successor of the meek and Lamb-like Savior. And
for the dear Consort of this impious Head, or Man of Sin, to be not only
confederate with him, but a Principal in all these unparalled Villainies, and
most butcherly and rapacious Murders; and yet be the Holy Catholic Church of
God, the pure and spotless Spouse of Jesus Christ, the true Sheep, the harmless
Lambs, the best of Saints, and close Followers of the Lord Jesus, who always
taught the contrary by his holy Doctrine, and meek Example. We say, these
Things not being found by secret Search, but are written in Capital Letters
upon her Forehead, appear in open view, to be read by every one that is not
wilfully blind: Let any one show us a greater Mystery in the World than this,
and we will subscribe to it.

4. It cannot be the Turks, because they are not the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth, which this Babylon is said to be, Rev. 17.5. And
upon her Forehead was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF
HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And here we demand, in excuse to the
Turks, this one Thing:

From whence did proceed the Murders, Massacres, and Martyrdoms of all the
Religious Professors of Christianity, that have died by violence in the
Christian World, for the space of twelve hundred Years last past? And from what
People did proceed those horrid Oaths, Blasphemies, and Execrations, that the
World has woefully been acquainted with, most horrid and strangely astonishing
to repeat?

Came these unparalled Degrees of Impiety from the Turks? from the
Waldensians, Lutherans, Calvinists, or any Nonconforming Protestants? No, no.
Why, whose Language then is it? Whose! Why, it is the Language of the Beast of
the bottomless Pit, and bloody Whore, who bare these blasphemous Sons of her
own Body, daily nourishes them at her Breast, and strengthens them in their
sinful Courses, by accounting them the Sons, the precious Sons of Sion, the
true Sons of the Catholic Church, the Darlings of Heaven, the beloved Ones of
the Virgin Mary, and giving them Pardons for these bold and Heaven-daring Sins,
as often as they do commit them, and come to ask Pardon for them; so that Sin
and Pardon is as constant and common with them, as Breathing and Eating. And
these Things are done to seal and confirm Lies, which is the more heavy,
heinous, and prodigious: For if Men may lie by allowance; may kill, and shed
innocent Blood, without Control of Conscience, and Church Censures; may swear
and blaspheme, and challenge God himself to damn them; may burn Men for
Religion, consume Cities to Ashes, conspire the Death of Kings, the Ruin and
Overthrow of Kingdoms, whore, and murder Infants; and yet be accounted a
Church, the Members and Parts of it, called Saints, holy Children, and Sons of
the Most High God: Then may we claim a Patent, and take a License to change the
Name of all Things, and alter all the Idea's of the Minds of Men; call and
account Beelzebub a good God, and all his black Tribe, the pure Saints of the
Most High; call the lower Regions of Blackness and Darkness, to which he is
confined, the Heaven of Glory and eternal Light. Of which Things we ought in
Justice to clear the Turks, until Witnesses of undoubted Credit shall come
forth, and evidence, that the Turkish State is the Mother of as great
Abominations as these are.

5. And lastly; The Turks cannot be Mystery Babylon, because they never were
made drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, which this Woman, Mystery Babylon, is expressly said to be, Rev. 17.6.
And I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus; and I wondered with great admiration. Now let any Man show
such Bloodshed, Saints Bloodshed, by Massacres and Martyrdom, for the
professing of Christianity, (which must be, if the Text be answered in that
Clause, Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus,) by the Turks, either within their
Dominions, or without, as has been shed by a Generation nearer home, and we
shall become like the Man without a Wedding Garment, wholly speechless, and say
not a Word more about Babylon.

III. Now that Babylon in the Apocalypse, is Great Rome, that in former Times
reigned, and in future Times shall be destroyed, is owned by some of the
Papists themselves, and is asserted by all Protestants; the Difference betwixt
them is brought to this narrow Point. The one wholly confines Babylon to Rome
Heathen, and there totally to terminate; the other brings Babylon down lower,
to Rome Antichristian, or Papal Rome. Now that this Work may be to Edification,
and more full Satisfaction in this great Case, we shall advance to the last and
chief Secret that is to be opened and considered, namely, Whether all Things in
John's Vision or Prophecy, that are applied to Mystery Babylon, did completely
terminate in Rome Heathen, and come no further?

In Answer to this great Enquiry, we do, with the Body of Protestants, in
opposition to the Papists, conclude the Negative, viz. That all Things in the
Apocalypse applied to Mystery Babylon, did not terminate in Rome Heathen. The
Reasons of which Negative are as follows.

1. Because the Beast that Mystery Babylon rides on, is the eighth Head, or
last Ruling-Power of that City that is seated upon seven Hills, which must be
Rome Papal, because the whole Race of Rome Heathen was gone off, before the
eighth Head came up. -- The sixth Head was in John's Time; the seventh was to
come, and continue but a short Space, The Beast that carrier the Woman, viz.
Babylon, is of the seventh, but is the eighth, and shall be the last; for he
goes into Perdition. This being so evident from the Letter of the Text, needs
nothing more to confirm it. Now that Rome Heathen was not the last Part of the
Romish Power, is not only the full and joint Consent of all Writers upon this
Subject, but is so evident to all the Christian World, that it would be Vanity
it self to make a Show of Proof. The Conclusion then is this: If the very last
Part of the Roman Power carries the Woman Babylon, and that the Heathen State
of Rome went off before, and was not the last; then Babylon could not terminate
in Rome Heathen, but must come down to Rome Papal. See Rev. 17.3, 7, 9, 11.

2. If Babylon be totally terminated in Rome Heathen, then the Book of the
Apocalypse is of little use to the latter Ages of the Christian World: For if
the whole Transactions relating to the Persecution of the Church, and the
Slaughter and Destruction of God's Enemies, did end in Rome Heathen, then it
served only to give a characteristical Account of a Beast and Whore that was
grown old, and ready to go off the Stage; but has wholly left us in the dark,
and given us no notice at all of that horrible Confusion, and bloody
Persecutions, which have reigned in the Christian World for more than a
thousand Years last past; which for Length of Time, Numbers of Murders, and
Manner of Cruelties, has outdone all the Wickedness of Rome in its Heathen
State. Which is not at all likely, that a Vision should be given, and a
Revelation made, and called so, about a State that was almost expired, and the
most great and principal Part wholly left out, and said nothing to. Who can
imagine, that a careful Savior should be so full in his Discoveries to the
Jewish Church, concerning their Sufferings, and the Time under Egypt, and
Babylon Literal; and be so short and lean to his Gospel Church, to leave them
altogether without any written Profpect, or extraordinary Prophet, to inform
them what should come to pass in the World, from the going off of the Power of
Rome Heathen, to the end of all the Churches Troubles, which have already
lasted above a thousand Years? The Conceit of which is fit but for two Ranks of
Men to receive, viz. the Roman Catholics, and such Protestants as look for
Antichrist to come at the end of the World, after the Restoration of the Jews
to their own Land, and building a material Temple at Jerusalem, where
Antichrist shall sit three Days and an half, or Years, to kill two Men called
the two Witnesses.

3. If this last Babylon was wholly to terminate in Rome Heathen, then there
was no Cause of Wonderment and great Admiration for a wise Man, to see in a
Vision an Heathenish State, under a Diabolical Influence, to perform Actions
suitable to their State, and not contrary to their Professions: For what matter
of Wonderment can it be to feel the Wind blow, to see the Sea foam, and hear
the Waves rage and roar, when the Winds oppose its Effluxion? And what Cause of
great Wonderment and Admiration for a wise Man, to see wicked Heathens oppose
and persecute Christianity, when it is so suitable to their Spirit, and
agreeable to their Profession so to do, we cannot yet understand, and we will
diligently listen to them who will undertake to inform us: For the thing is
true, that a wise Man did wonder at the Sight he saw with great Admiration,
Rev. 17.6. I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and I
wondered with great admiration. Wondered! O strange! At what? To see that which
was common to all Ages, the Seed of the Serpent, that professed Heathenism, the
Wicked, even the worst of the Wicked, by Principle and Profession, to plot
against the Righteous, and to gnash upon him with their Teeth; Idolaters,
professed Idolaters, to persecute the Servants and Worshippers of the true God;
those that were born after the Flesh, and lived after the Flesh, to persecute
them that were born of the Spirit, and lived after the Spirit. Surely, if our
Adversaries Opinion was true in this Case, that Babylon is only Rome Heathen,
St. John had forgot that Cain killed Abel, and Ishmael persecuted Isaac; and
took not so much notice of the Course of the World, common to every Age, as
Paul did, who said, But as he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit; as it was then, so it is now: And what strange
Wonder is in all this?

4. Rome Heathen never was espoused, married, or united to the Lord Jesus, in a
spiritual way, visibly owning his Laws, and submitting to his Government, as a
Wife submits to, and obeys her Husband, and afterward casts him off, and
chooses another Head and Husband; and therefore cannot be Mystical Babylon, or
the great Whore: For tho these Heathens were great Idolaters, yet were they
never charged with spiritual Adultery, nor could they, unless they had once, by
visible Profession, made a Covenant with, or espoused themselves to the Lord
Jesus, which Rome Papal before its Apostasy did: Therefore Rome Heathen could
not be the great Whore, or Mystical Babylon.

5. Rome Heathen cannot be the Babylon set forth by St. John, unless she be
guilty of all the Christian Blood shed upon the Earth since the Destruction o^
Jerusalem: For as the Guilt of all the Blood shed from righteous Abel, to the
Death of Zacharias, is by our Savior fixed upon Jerusalem, and cannot be
removed to another People; so the Blood of all the Martyrs and Followers of
Jesus, is by this Revelation ^^x'd upon the last Babylon, R^v. 17.6. And I saw
the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus.
Chap. 18. v. 24. And in her was found the Blood of the Prophets, and of Saints,
and of ALL that were slain upon the Earth. But Rome Heathen was not guilty of
all the Christian Blood that was shed upon Earth, by Murders, Massacres, and
Martyrdom, since the Destruction of Jerusalem: For to look back but for six
hundred Years last past, in which Time we shall find Hundreds of Thousands of
professed Christians most butcherly and barbarously put to Death, for their Zeal
and Love to the Christian Religion, in the respective Nations of Europe, before
which the Heathenish State of Rome was gone off about the space of six hundred
Years. So that if we will regard the full satisfying of this Prediction about
My^^ery Babylon, we must of necessity bring her down lower than the Heathenish
State of Rome.

6. Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylon under Consideration, because the
Discoveries of other Prophecies, relating to the same State, no way agrees to
the Power of Rome Heathen.

(1.) This State of Babylon is called the Mystery of Iniquity. This no way
agrees to Rome Heathen, but fully agrees to Rome Papal. Compare 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
with Rev. 17.7. viz. For the Mystery of Iniquity does already work. -- The
Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee the Mystery
of the Woman, and of the Beast that carries her.

2. The Head of this State of Mystery Babylon is called the Man of Sin, by way
of Eminency, (...), not only beyond the common Rank of Men, but beyond the
highest Sons of Wickedness that went before him. And there is a great Truth in
this; for if we consider the Pope in respect of Pride, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, and
Blood, he is the most unparalled Man of Sin.

(3.) This State, or Mystery of Iniquity began to work in the Apostle's Days,
which is no ways applicable to the Power of Rome Heathen; for that did not then
begin, it being at that time in the very Meridian of its Greatness, and
universal Sovereignty: Luke 2.1. And it came to pass in those Days, that there
came out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should be taxed.

(4.) This Man of Sin, Mystery of Iniquity, or Head of this Babylonish State,
is say to be let or hindered in his Designs: He that now lets, will let,
until he be taken out of the Way. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. But now Rome Heathen had no
Let or Hindrance, either from the Word of God, for that declared it (as it was
a Civil Magistracy) to be God's Ordinance; nor from any opposite Power, either
Civil or Military, they giving Laws to the greatest Part of the World, and
enjoying the Supreme Government of the best Kingdoms in the Universe, none
being able to cope with them at that Time.

(5.) This Head of the Babylonish State is said to sit in the Temple of God,
which the Power of Rome Heathen did not do, neither in the Temple of Jerusalem,
nor in the Church, which is more properly the Temple of God: For the Jews kept
the Possession of the Literal Temple, till it was destroyed; and for the Church
of God, the Heathen Emperors never loved it so well, at to make their Residence
in it. But the Bishop of Rome, before he showed himself to be that wicked One,
viz. the Man of Sin, d^d evidently sit in the Church or Temple of God, and so
fulfilled this Prophecy in the very Letter of it.

(6.) He (that is, the Man of Sin, or Head of this Babylonish State) was to
rise by Apostasy, or falling away from the Christian Religion: 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
There shall come a falling away first; exactly agreeing with another Prophecy
to the same purpose, 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter Times some shall depart from the Faith, etc. But Rome Heathen did not
rise by Apostasy from the Christian Religion, or a departing from the Faith,
which they never professed, as is evident to the whole World: Ergo Rome Heathen
cannot be this Babylonish State.

(7.) This Man of Sin, or Head of Mystery Babylon, lay hid in the Apostle's
Time, and was not revealed: 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Rev. 17.9.
but the Power of Rome Heathen did not then lie hid, or wanted to be revealed;
for it stood visible and high, upon a Hill, even upon seven Hills, according to
the Roman Poet, Ovid, (who lived about the very Time of Christ's being on
Earth) in Lib. de Tristibus.

Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit Orbem
Montibus, Imperii Roma, Deumque Locus.
That is, But Rome, which from her seven Hills the whole
Earth views around, the Place of Gods, and Rule, etc.


Ergo, Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylonish State.

(8.) This Mystery of Iniquity is said to oppose and exalt himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But this the Power of
Rome in its Heathen State did not do; for they worshipped, offered Sacrifices,
and bore a Reverence to their Gods, which by Nature indeed were no Gods; and
it is only the Head of Rome P^pal, that runs down all Gods but those of his own
making; Ergo, Rome Papal, and not Rome Heathen, must of necessity be this
Mystery of Iniquity.

(9.) The Rise or Coming of this Mystery of Iniquity, is after the working of
Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. But the Rise of the Romish Greatness and Power, when
Heathen, was not after the working of Satan, Dan 7.2, 3
but was said by Daniel, to be produced by the Providence of God, or the four
Winds of Heaven; and by the Apostle, to be Powers ordained of God. Romans 13.1.
Therefore Rome Heathen cannot be the Mystery of Iniquity, etc. here meant.

(10.) This Mystery of Iniquity is not only said to come after the working of
Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. but also with All Power, etc. But the Rise of Rome Heathen
was not after that manner: Ergo, etc. To illustrate the first Proposition,
note, That the Term [All Power] marks out the Romish Pope so notoriously, that
whosoever runs may read it; for if we do but impartially consider his impudent
Usurpations upon Crowned Heads, and his Pretenses of Supremacy over the whole
Christian World; his proud imperious Decrees, Bulls, etc. his Disposal of the
Kingdoms of Princes, and the Inheritances, yea, the very Lives of private
Persons, of any Rank, that dare disobey him; his Pretenses to shut and open
Heaven, Hell, and his feigned Purgatory; his carrying a Symbol of that vast and
God-like Power, viz. a Brace of Keys hanging at his Girdle: All these will
appear as clear Demonstrations, that the Head of Rome Papal is the Head of
Babylon, and the Grand Impostor, or the Capital Manager of this Mystery of
Iniquity, he having (most sacrilegiously) assumed to himself all Heavenly Power
of damning or saving, and all Earthly Power, both Temporal or Civil, and
Ecclesiastical or Sacred.

(11.) This wicked Babylonish State comes forth with a great Pretense of
Miracles, which are but false Signs, and lying Wonders, to deceive and cheat
the People; and by this means they conquer Nations, and carry away their Kings
to their wicked Interest. This Rome Heathen did not do. For tho the Heathenish
Power of Rome did conquer Nations and Countries, with their Kings, yet it was
by State Policy, and Force of Arms, not by pretended Miracles, false Signs, and
lying Wonders: Therefore Rome Heathen cannot be this Mystery of Iniquity, or
Babylonish State.

(12.) This wicked State, under consideration, is declared not only to depart
from the Faith by a palpable Apostasy, but to forbid Marriage, and command a
long Lent, and many other Fast-Days, whereon some Sorts of Meats are prohibited
to be eaten; which does so fully agree to the Papal State of Rome, that nothing
can be more plain, unless the Spirit had expressly told us, This will be
fulfilled by Rome Papal. For these two things we have their Canons upon Record,
the which if none can show the like of the Heathen State of Rome, then Rome
Papal shall carry the Title of this Mystery of Iniquity, and Babylonish State.

7. If the Babylon, under consideration, be only confined to the Power of
Heathen Rome, then there is a more evident and apparent Mystery upon the State
or Power of Rome Heathen, than upon any Power or State that went before it, or
should come after it; for so the Text imports, Rev. 17.5. And upon her Forehead
was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, etc. But there did no such
Mystery appear upon the Power or State of Rome Heathen, therefore this Babylon
cannot terminate there. What great Mystery appeared upon the Power and State of
Rome Heathen, more than appeared upon the Power and State of the three
foregoing Monarchies?

8. This Babylon cannot be confined to the Power of Rome only in its Heathen
State, because Babylon is to continue till the good People shall (with the
Horns that did support her, which is the last Part of the wicked and
persecuting Power, answerable to the ten Toes in Daniel's great Image) reward
and destroy her, for the Injury that she did unto them, according to these
three Texts of Scripture, Rev. 18.4. Dan. 7.22, 26, 27. Rev. 17.16. And I heard
another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her, my People, that ye be not
Partak^rs of her Sins, etc. Verse 6. Reward her even as she has rewarded you,
and deal unto her double according to her Works: In the Cup that she has
filled, fill to her double: How much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much Torment and Sorrow give her. And the ten Horns which thou
saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire: Which the Power of
Rome in its Heathen State felt not, but ended its Course, without being
destroyed by good People, and the ten Horns, which is the last Part of the
Image-Government. And in the Days of these Kings, Dan. 2.44.
(viz. ten Toes, ten Horns, ten Kings) shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom
which shall never be destroyed: And the Kingdom shall not be left to another
People, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. Which could not be fulfilled in what Constantine did in
the Time of Maxentius, as Dr. Hammond would have us believe, for these three
Reasons.

(1.) Because the ten Horns, that afterward the Roman Power fell into, were
not come up, and so could not destroy the Power of Rome in its Heathen State.

(2.) Because Babylon's Persecution, Misery, and Confusion, did not utterly
cease, which it must have done, so as to rise no more for ever, if the Power of
Rome Heathen destroyed by Constantine, had been this Mystery Babylon.

(3.) Because tho there might be a Body of good People with Constantine, when
he overthrew Maxentius, yet the Power of the Kingdom was not so established in
the hand of good People, as not afterward to be left to others, as the Text
affirms; And the Kingdom shall not be left to another People: For (as we shall
anon show) the Kingdom or Power that ceased to be in the hands of Heathens, and
by a mighty and divine Providence came to be in the hands of a worthy and
renowned Christian Emperor, came afterward into the hands of very Devils
incarnate, who acted all the Violence of the Heathen Power over again, and
indeed out-did them.

9. Those that are for confining this Babylon to the Power of Rome in its
Heathen State, are not well aware what they do; for if they do demand it, their
Opposites, who hold it to be Rome Papal, may grant it for Argument's sake: But
then the Remedy is worse than the Disease; for they slip into such a Precipice,
as neither Baronius, Bellarmine, Dr. Hammond, or the Rhemists, can save or
deliver them from. The true State of the Case is this:

Rome Heathen is Mystery Babylon; this say the Papists: And the more willing
they are to say so, because it is a good Argument to prove that Peter was at
Rome, he subscribing his first Epistle from Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. The Church
that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you, etc. But this
being allowed, the worst is to come. This Babylon is destroyed, when the Power
of Rome Heathen is taken away, so as to be no more for ever; but then what
Condition does the State of Babylon fall into? Does it become the Throne of the
Lamb, the City of the Living God, the Habitation of Holiness, and
Dewlling Place of Zion, the true Church, the Place of the holy Ones, and Saints
of the Most High? O no! What then? Hearken, and an Angel from Heaven shall tell
you, Rev. 18.1, 2. And after these Things (of the Horns hating the Whore,
making of her naked, and burning her Flesh with Fire) I saw another Angel come
down from Heaven, having great Power, and the Earth was lightened with his
Glory; and he cried mightily, with a strong Voice, saying, Babylon the Great is
fallen, is fallen; and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the Hold of
every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. Now, you
Papists, if you will needs have Babylon to be Rome Heathen, take it, and much
Good do you with it; but then make Rome Papal better than an Habitation of
Devils, if you can.

If it be not Rome Heathen, then adieu to Dr. Hammond, and the Rhemists, we
have what we desire: If it be, then Rome Papal is a far worse Place than Rome
Heathen or Babylon ever was; -- And then what a fine Church do the People make
themselves?

10. If the Place, Seat, and City of Rome was not utterly ruined, (so as to be
no more for ever as a Place of Commerce, Trade, and Human Society,) when the
Heathen Power ceased, -- then Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylon, because at
the Ending and Downfall of this Babylon, the Place, Seat, and City is utterly
ruined, so as to be no more a Place of Trade, Rev. 17.16.
Commerce, or human Society: And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the
Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and shall eat
her Flesh, and burn her with Fire. Verse 18. And the Woman which thou saw is
that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth -- for her Sins
which God has remembered, Rev. 18.8.
which have reached unto Heaven, therefore shall her Plagues come in one Day,
Death, and Mourning, and Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire: For
strong is the Lord God who judges her. Ver. 11, 12, 13. All Sorts of
Merchandise, Traffic, Trade, and Commerce with humane Society, shall cease, so
as to be no more in her at all; and the good Things which she in Fullness
enjoyed before, even all Things that were dainty and goodly, are now departed
from her, and she shall find them no more at all, verse. 14. for in one Hour is
she made desolate. And a mighty Angel took up a Stone, like a great Millstone,
and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with Violence shall that great City
Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Verse 21. And the
Voice of Harpers, and Musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpeters, shall be heard
no more at all in thee; and no Craftsman, of whatsoever Craft he be, shall be
found any more in thee; and the Sound of a Millstone shall be heard no more at
all in thee. Verse 22. And the Light of the Candle shall shine no more at all
in thee; and the Voice of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride, shall be heard no
more at all in thee. Verse 23.

But the Place, Seat, and City of Rome was not so utterly ruined as to be no
more for ever a Place of Trade, Traffic, Merchandise, and humane Society, when
the Heathen Power of Rome ended.

Ergo, Rome Heathen cannot be the Whore of Babylon, under present
Consideration, whose Seat or City has since had a powerful Government,
reigning in Pride and Pomp, for some hundreds of Years.

11. If Rome Papal be Mystery Babylon, the City of Pride and Confusion, that is
set forth by St. Jobn in the Apocalypse; then neither the City of Jerusalem,
the Seat of the Turks and Saracens, nor Rome Heathen, is or can be the same:
But Rome Papal is the Mystery Babylon set forth by St. John in the Apocalypse
-- Ergo neither the City of Jerusalem, the Seat of the Turks and Saracens, nor
Rome Heathen, can be the same.

The last Proposition is thus proved:

If all the Marks and Characters left us upon Divine Record, to prove Mystery
Babylon by, do more aptly and fitly agree to Rome Papal, than to the City of
Jerusalem, the Seat of the Turks, or Rome Heathen: Then Rome Papal; and not any
one of them, is Mystery Babylon.

But the Marks and Characters left upon Divine Record, to distinguish and know
Mystery Babylon by, do more aptly and fitly agree to Rome Papal:

Ergo, Rome Papal, and not the other, is Mystery Babylon.

For the clearing up of this Argument, we shall distinctly state the Character
of Mystery Babylon, and run the Parallel betwixt her and Rome Papal, in this
Method following.

1. Babylon is a Woman, which imports either a single Person, ranked in the
Feminine Gender; or a Body of People related to some Head, Husband, or public
Person, to whom she is joined in Wedlock, by Covenant, or Matrimonial Contract,
as Eve was related to Adam, and therefore called Woman; or as Judah and Israel,
who were joined in Covenant with God, and therefore called a Woman; or as the
true Church now is married or joined to Christ, and therefore called a Woman. A
single Person, as Eve was, she cannot be, because the Character given of her in
respect of her State and Actions, does no way comport with it: She must
therefore be a Body of People, related to some Head, Husband, or public
Person, as Judah and Israel of old was, who are often called by the Title of
Woman; and in like manner Babylon, before her Degeneracy, were a People joined
in Matrimonial Contract, by a Gospel Covenant and Profession, to the Son of God.

Metaphor. Parallel. BAbylon imports a Body of People that was once united to
the Son of God; and hence, Metaphorically called a Woman; And I saw a Woman
sit, etc. And the Woman was arrayed, etc. And I saw the Woman Drunk, etc. Rev.
17.3, 4, 6. ROme Papal, or the Church of Rome, is a Body, a great Body, a
famous Body of People, and which were, before their Apostasy, a true Church, by
Gospel Covenant and Profession united to the Son of God* as her publi^k Head
and Husband; Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. To all that be
in Rome, Romans 1.6, 7.
beloved of God, called to be Saints; Grace be to you, and Peace from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. II. Babylon is a City, a very great City, so
called in a threefold respect: Rev. 17.18. and 18.10, 16, 18, 19, 21.
(1.) In respect of Power; (2.) In respect of People; (3) In respect of Place
and Residence, where this Power and People is seated; Psalm. 121. Isa. 14.31.
Acts 19.28.
City being indefinitely taken for either of these, or comprehending all, as in
these Instances. II. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is a City, a very great
City, so called in a threefold respect, 1. In respect of Power, which is
twofold, (1.) Civil, (2.) Ecclesiastical, Re^. 13.1.
signified by two Horns like a Lamb. 2. In respect of People, which are great
in Number. 3. In respect of Place and Residence, where this Power and great
People is seated; and indeed it is as worthily called, by way of Eminency, a
City, as any Power, People, or Place in the Christian World, because there is
nothing so much spoken of, or gives sadder occasion to be so much spoken of, as
Rome, in respect of Power, People, and Place, which shall be further cleared by
Argument, etc. The Fame of this People as a Church, was great, before the Power
and chief Dominion of the Place was joined with it; as appears, Romans 1.8.
First, I thank my God, through Jesus Christ, for you all, that your Faith is
spoken of throughout the whole World. III. Babylon is not only a Woman, and a
City, but a bad Woman, and a City of Confusion; for so the Word Babel, Genesis
11.1, to 10.
or Babylon, signifies, viz. Evil, or Confusion. III. Rome Papal, or Church of
Rome, is not only a Woman, and a City, but a very evil Woman, and a City of
Confusion: There is the Name of the Lamb much spoken of, but his Doctrine
undervalued and slighted, his Laws trampled upon and violated, his Example not
regarded for Imitation, either by the Bishop himself, his Cardinals, or
inferior Orders, having his Humility and Self-denial only in Words, like those
the Apostle speaks of, that in Words profess God, but in Works deny him. For
under this verbal Humility, here is the greatest Pride in the World; under this
verbal Meekness and Self-denial, the greatest Oppression and Cruelty,
Covetousness, and Love of the World; as appears by their pompous Garbs, their
cruel Punishments, and the vast Sums of Money brought in from all parts of
their Dominion, by Sleights, and cunning and deceitful Cheats: Besides, a mere
Hodg-podg of Principles, one Order or Fraternity professing that which another
writes against, and cries down; which is the more strange to come from a Church
infallible: Besides the strange Mixtures in their visible Worship, of
Traditions, and human Inventions, of lying and diabolical Tricks, of blessing
by a Cross, consecrating holy Water, and cleansing by it, which are too
numerous and tedious to relate, and the less needful, because every Man that
has seen their Ways, has an imperfect Book of it in his own Mind, and can
read the Truth of what we say within himself. And let any People in the
Christian World, pretending to Religion, be compared to them, for
supernumerary, trifling and insignificant Ceremonies, crowded into their
pretended Worship; nay, let all the People in the Christian World be laid in
the Balance against the Church of Rome in this respect, and they will be found
inconceivably wanting; for which we have this Reason to judge her to be Babylon,
and the City of Confusion.

If there is more Confusion (in Contrariety of Principles, Practices,
contradicting Pretensions, crouding in Supernumeraries, and Mysteries of
Unscriptural Inventions, into visible Worship) in Rome Papal, or the Church of
Rome, than is to be found amongst any or all People pretending Religion, in the
Christian World besides: Then is Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome, the great
Babylon, or City of Confusion.

But there is more Confusion, in the forementioned Respects, to be found in
Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome, than in any or all People pretending
Religion in the Christian World besides: Ergo, etc.

IV. Babylon is not only a Woman, and a City, a City of Confusion, but she is a
Whore, which is a strange Word to be applied to a great and famous People; a
Word that carries in it one of the highest Impeachments, but no other than was
given to Israel, Isa. 57.3. and 16.17. Hos 4. and 5.3.
Judah, and Jerusalem, in the Days of old, upon a very good Reason; for they
being joined in Covenant with God, to serve him in Obedience and Subjection,
did, like to an adulterous Woman, break Wedlock, and set up other Lovers or
Idols in his stead, Ezekiel. 16.38. Hos. 1.9. and 2.2, 5.
and continued so a long time, till a Bill of Divorce was given, and God
proclaimed them not married to him as his Wife, but a Whore, and divorced; yet
it is observable, that they used his Name, tho they worshipped Idols, and
cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we. IV. Rome Papal,
or Church of Rome, is not only a Woman, and a City, a City of Confusion, but
according to Scripture-History, and notorious Matter of Fact, she is a Whore
also, and may be justly so called; for in the Apostles Time she joined her self
to the Lord, by firm Ties of a Gospel-Govenant and Profession, and was the
renowned Spouse of the Son of God, owned and professed him in the Time of
Heathenism, received the Apostles and Servants of God amongst them, withstood
the Fury of the Emperors, suffered Persecution, had their Faith spoken of
throughout the whole World; and yet after all this, like Israel of old, she
left God, and his holy Laws, made Idols to her self of Saints, Angels,
Relics, and Images, upon which she doted, and forsook the Son of God, upon
the working and appearance of the Man of Sin, who exalted himself into the
place of Christ, and became her Head, by which means she is so far degenerated
from what she once was, that she retains nothing, holds fast nothing of what
really appertains to true Godliness, but the bare Names of God and Jesus
Christ, having corrupted the true Worship of the Son of God, her first Husband,
and notoriously abandoned Obedience to him, taking this vile Person to be her
Head, and chief Guide, and setting him in the Place of, and Dignity above her
first Head, and true Guide of her Youth; and yet (like Israel of old) still
cries, The true Church, the Catholic Church, the Mother Church are we; having
on her Forehead a strange Mystery written, i. e. God, Christ, Truth, Verity,
Infallibility; and next to this there lies nearest her Heart, Devil, Pope,
Lying, Deceit, Perjury, Idolatry, and horrible Cruelty toward the best of Men,
professing Christ and Religion in Uprightness and Truth: For which Change of
her first Head, Husband, and Guide of her Youth, for this vile Person, with
which she commits most abominable Lewdness, together with the Kings of the
Earth, she is ranked by the Angel amongst the worst of Women, and styled, as
her Type and Predecessor of ol^, a well-favoured Harlot, or of the Angel, a
Woman, a City, and notorious Whore, which ill and black Characters we conclude
with this Argument:

If there be no Body of professing People in the Christian World, that has so
apparently de^lined or adulterated from what they once were, deserted the holy
Doctrine, Example, and right Government of Jesus Christ, and set up another
visible and public Head of the Church in room and stead of him, whose Power
and Laws are preferred above and before the Authority and Laws of the Lord
Jesus, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome has done: Then Rome Papal, or Church
of Rome is this Whore spoken of:

But there is no Body of professing People in the Christian World, that has so
apparently declined, or adulterated, or deserted the holy Doctrine, Example, or
right Government of Christ, ut supra:

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is this Whore spoken of.

To reinforce this Argument, let it be showed by any Man, that any People
different from the Church of Rome has made such a Change, in point of Religion
and Headship, and Matters thereto pertaining, so as that this black Character
of Whore can more fitly and fully be made to meet upon them, and we must
confess our Argument not weighty; but till then, we conclude it carries
Conviction in the Bowels of it.

V. Babylon, this Woman, this City of Confusion, this Whore, is a very great
Woman, City, and Whore: And the great City was divided. Rev. 16.19. Chap.
17.18. chap. 18.10 Verse 16.
And the Woman which thou saw, is that great City, etc. The Merchants stood
afar off, saying, Alas! alas! that great City, Babylon, that mighty City. Again
they wept, saying, Alas! Verse 18.
alas! that great City, which was clothed, etc. What City is like unto this
great City! And cried, weeping and wailing, Verse 17.
saying, Alas! alas! that great City, wherein were made rich! etc. And a mighty
Angel took up a Stone, Verse 21.
like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence
shall that great City Babylon be thrown down. I will show thee the Judgment of
the great Whore, Chap. 17.1
etc. He has judged the great Whore, Chap. 19.2
etc. Great in four Respects: (1.) Great in Name. (2.) Great in Power. (3.)
Great in Multitude. (4.) Great in Action, vile Actions. V. Rome Papal, or
Church of Rome, is not only a Woman, a City, a Whore, but a very great Woman,
City, and Whore, great in many respects, but chiefly in these four:

1. She has a great Name, no Name so great in the Christian World, as the Name
of Rome. She is called a Queen, because joined by Contract to a great Man, the
Man of Sin, a Man greater than Emperors, and Temporal Princes, who pretends a
Power to give them their Crowns, to set them upon their Heads, and kick them
off at pleasure.

2. Great in Power. She gives Rules to Kingdoms, advances her Ecclesiastical
Laws above Temporal; sets her Head, and the chiefest of her Sons, above Secular
Jurisdiction; makes them unaccountable, and pretends a Power to absolve and
bless them; and without Controversy, the lesser is blessed of the greater.

3. Great in Multitude. There are no People besides, that are in a spiritual
united Body, and visible Community, professing Christianity, comparable to her
for Multitude, and the vast Numbers of her Sons and Daughters.

4. Great in Action, vile Actions, such as deposing and poisoning Princes,
fomenting Jealousies, raising Wars, setting Nations together by the Ears,
invading Rights, making Uproars, burning Cities, and carrying on dreadful
Devastations, where she is gainsay'd. And that which adds to her Greatness, is
the invincible Confidence she has, that all Persons and Things are made for
her, and given to her, so that all Things she does are allowed as legal and
just in Heaven: From whence we frame this Argument.

Arg. If there be no United Body of People, or visible Community in the
Christi^n World, that is so great in Name, Power, Multitude and Action, vile
Actions, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome has been, and still is -- Then Rome
Papal or Church of Rome is this great, very great Woman, City, and Whore spoken
of.

But there is no united Body of People, or visible Community in the Christian
World, that is so great in Name, Power, Multitude and Action, vile Actions, as
Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome is --

Ergo, Rome Papal, etc. is this great, very great Woman, City, and Whore spoken
of.

To reinforce this Argument, let it be considered that the Christian World is
distinguished or divided into two Parts, viz. Papists and Protestants; the
Protestants cannot be this Whore.

1. Because they own Jesus Christ to be Head of the Church, and only him.

2. They have never revolted or changed him, so as to set up another in his
room under any Title whatsoever, but profess him to be their Lord, and are in
Obedience and Subjection to his Laws in all matters purely Religious.

3. Neither is their Name, Power, Multitude, or Actions, so great by far as the
Papists are) they being but small, inconsiderable, and low, in all Papist
Countries: And when the Protestant Religion has gotten up to be the professed
Religion of any Nation, Kingdom or City, what is that Nation, Kingdom, or City,
in comparison of those Nations, Kingdoms and Cities, where the Papists reign,
and Popery is professed? This every intelligent Man has so full a Prospect of,
that it appears needless to give proof by Instances.

VI. Babylon, This Woman, City of Confusion, and Whore, which is very great,
sits upon many Waters; Rev. 17.1.
which is expounded to be Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues;
And he (the Angel) said unto me, Verse 15.
the Waters which thou saw where the Whore sits, are Peoples, and
Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, etc. Which according to the learned Mede,
and a famous French Author, is more than a third part of the ten considerable
parts, which the Roman Monarchy fell into, not long before the Pope, Man of
Sin, or Head of Mystery Babylon, assumed the Imperial Seat and Crowns, which
afterward became ten Kingdoms with crowned Heads, assisting the Beast against
the Lamb, and persecuting of the Saints, distinguished into ten Kingdoms or
Empires. 1. Of Germany. 2. France. 3. England. 4. Scotland. 5. Denmark. 6.
Polonia. 7. The Kingdom of Spain. 8. The Kingdom of Navarre. 9. The Kingdom of
Hungary. 10. The Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. All which Rome Papal had in
Possession, as our French Author says, in the days of Pope Leo the tenth,
which was less than 200 Years. VI. Rome Papal or Church of Rome, is not only a
great Woman, City of Confusion, and Whore, that has set up the Man of Sin,
great Belial, or highest Son of Wickedness, but she likewise sits upon many
Waters (viz.) People, and Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, which may be
illustrated by undeniable Instances.

1. She sat upon, or ruled over more than one third part of ten, which was
formerly under the Roman Empire in its Civil State, which (more than one third
part) has since fallen into ten States or Kingdoms, under the Government of
ten crowned Heads, and have all agreed to give their Power to this last Beast,
according to what was foretold by Daniel, Dan. 7.
concerning the little Horn, which had a Mouth speaking great things, whose
Looks were more stout than his Fellows; by whom three of the first Horns of the
Roman Power in its Civil State was plucked up by the Roots, and in their place
succeeded ten Kings or Crowned Heads, who have their Crowns given them by this
last Beast; and as they have their Crowns given by, and hold their Kingship
under the Pope, little Horn, last Beast, or Man of Sin, in requital of his
Fatherly Care, to give his Sons so great a Patrimony, they gave their Power
unto him, and engage against the Lamb, making War with and persecuting the
Saints, till the Word of God, or Prophecy of Daniel, is fulfilled, which ten
Crowned Heads answer to the ten Toes in Nebuchadnezzar's Image, to the ten
Horns in this 17th of the Apocalypse, that are so concerned in the Beasts
Kingdom, as to be overcome by the Lamb; and turn to hate the Whore, that before
they supported, and for whose Pleasure they did persecute the Saints, which ten
States or Kingdoms are by our French Author, in his Book, called the
accomplishment of the Prophecy, p. 345. distinguished to be as in the other
Column set forth. All which Kingdoms, as King James in his learned Works makes
out, took their rise with Rome Papal, upon the division or ruin of the Roman
Empire in its Civil State, the body of which Kingdoms may well be called many
Waters, (viz.) Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, or People of
several Languages, which were as well known to have been under the Usurpation
and Jurisdiction of Rome Papal, as their being so; which does fully answer to
the very Letter of the Text, The Waters which thou saw, whereon the Whore
sits, are Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, Tongues.

2. Her making all the European Merchants Rich, that traffic by Sea, Rev.
18.11.
by the great expense of all Commodities which are swallowed up within her
Territories and Dominions. Which could never be effected unless she had Nations
and Multitudes to contribute to her great Pride and Luxury.

3. A third Instance is, the numberless number of good Christians which she
has drawn in and murdered, for no other cause than their fearing God, and
obeying his Laws by loving Jesus Christ, and following his Example, of which we
have a large account in Fox's Acts and Monuments, and other Histories; Upon
which we form this Argument.

Arg. If there be no Body of People, professed Church or State in the Christian
World (under any single Denomination) that sits upon, commands or bears rule
over Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, as Rome Papal, or Church of
Rome, does. Then Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome, is this Babylon treated of.

But there is no Body of People, professed Church or State (under any single
Denomination) that sits upon, commands or bears rule over Peoples, Multitudes,
Nations, and Tongues, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome does.

Ergo, etc.

To the establishing this Argument, let it be considered, that the whole State
of the Christian World consists of but these two parts, as we showed before,
viz. the Church of Rome (considered as Head and Body) and those that dissent
from her, and those are so inconsiderable, whether the Waldenses, Albigenses,
Hugonots or other parties of Protestants, that no one party of them, nay if we
put them all together, can be said to fit upon, command, or bear rule over,
Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues; to answer the Text, the Waldenses
and Hugonots, have been and still are a persecuted People, the Lutherans never
got up so high as to command many States, or Kingdoms, or places of many
Languages; Great Britain (tho a Protestant State, or Kingdom) comes not near to
fulfill the Text, much less the seven Provinces that of late revolted from
Spain. So that if Rome Papal has done so, and no other People that dissent
from her could ever yet do the like, then this proves Rome Papal the Whore that
sits upon many Waters, etc.

VII. Mystery Babylon, or the great Whore, is such a Woman, such a City, such a
Whore that the Kings and great Men of the Earth have committed Fornication
with. See the Text, Rev. 17.2.
With whom the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication, i. e. Spiritual
Fornication, or Fornication in a Mystery, after a mysterious manner, 2 Chronicles.
21.11. Isa. 16.26, 29. Rev. 18.9. and 19.2.
such as Jerusalem of old was charged with, which was a following the same
Idolatry that this Woman Babylon had set up, and was devoted unto; and so great
was her Fornication, Isa. 19.2.
that it is said, she did corrupt the Earth with it. VII. Rome Papal, or Church
of Rome, is such a Woman, such a City of Confusion, such a Whore that the Kings
of the Earth have committed Fornication with, and that has corrupted the Earth
with her Fornications, Fornications after a mysterious manner, by following
abominable Superstition and Idolatry.

1. Has she adored the Pope as her Lord God, Universal Head, and Bishop
infallible, acknowledged above all Laws? so have the Kings, and their misled
People, done.

2. Has she worshipped the Virgin Mary, diverse Angels, and many departed
Saints? so have the Kings, and their misguided People, done.

3. Has she adored Images, the Crucifix, and Pictures of pretended Saints? so
have the Kings, and their misguided People.

4. Has she foolishly debased her self with the Adoration of the Relicts of
known and unknown Saints? so have the Kings, and their misguided People.

5. Has she grossly and superstitiously worshipped the true God in a false
manner, by crowding in an innumerous Train of Fopperies into his Worship and
Service, which he never ordained, as Candlesticks, Altars, Vestments, Spits,
Oil, Holy Water, Beads and a World of such like Trumpery? so have the Kings and
their misguided People, not only the Emperor of Germany, Kings of France,
Spain, Poland, Portugal, that are still under her Influence; but the Kings of
England and Scotland too, (before the Reformation got Ground): Upon which we
form this Argument.

Arg. If there be no Body of People in the Christian World, pretending a
Church State, that has set up Idolatry to that Degree, and with whom the Kings
of the Earth have complied, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome has done. Then
Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is the Mysterious Whore of Babylon treated of.

But there is no Body of People in the Christian World, pretending to a
Church State, that has set up Idolatry to that Degree, and with whom the Kings
of the Earth have complied, as Rome Papal, etc. has done.

Ergo, etc.

To reinforce this Argument, let any Man that will become an Advocate for the
Church of Rome, show, that any People called the Reformed (who dissent from the
Church of Rome) are guilty of like Idolatry, and that the Kings of the Earth
have complied with them in it, as aforementioned, and we will acquit this
Argument, but if this Character does more fitly ageee to Rome, than to the
Reformed, etc. our Argument is good.

VIII. Babylon is such a Woman, City, and Whore, that has not only had Kings
committing Fornication with her, but has intoxicated the Minds of Multitudes,
and corrupted a great part of the World, or common sort of People, by wicked
and false Doctrine, And the Inhabitants of the Earth have been made drunk with
the Wine of her Fornication. Rev. 17.2.
VIII. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is such a Woman, City, and Whore, that
has not only had the Kings of the Earth to commit Fornication with her, in
dancing after her Pipes in all her mysterious Allurements; but has intoxicated
the Minds of the Multitude, and corrupted a great part of the World, or common
sort of People, by wicked and false Doctrine; As first, that a wicked Man
should be appointed of God to be the Vicar of Christ; as if God had no more
regard to his own Name, and the Good of his Church, and Honor of his Son, than
to institute a Child of the Devil (as every wicked Man is) to be Vicegerent to
the most holy Jesus, in the highest Transactions that relate to Heaven, and the
Souls of Men. Surely if God shut Judas out from his Bishopric, because of his
Wickedness, tho an Apostle; he is not so far changed since to be fond of a
wicked Pope, as to make him immediate Deputy to Christ, and to impose a Wolf,
as Shepherd, upon the Universal Church.

2. Who says, That he is an infallible Judge to determine Articles of Faith,
and impose them upon great Penalties; so that as a Lord he has Dominion over
Men's Faith, and Souls too, which the Apostles disclaimed.

3. Who says, The Church cannot err, (tho God and the World knows, there are
not such great Errors in Principles, nor such villainous Enormities, cursed
Actions, cruel and immoral Practices in the World besides,) which the poor
Multitude believes, and kill others that oppose it, and venture Body and Soul
upon it.

4. That says, that a Priest (tho he be a treacherous Villain, a Contriver of
Murder, an abominable Adulterer) has Power to absolve his equal and
Fellow-Sinner from all his Offenses, if he come to Confession, tho the
pretended Penitent keep his old Habit of Wickedness still; contrary to what God
and Jesus Christ say, That the Dauber with untempered Mortar, and the Daubed;
the Layer of the Pillow under sinful Elbows, and the Leaner thereon; the blind
Leader, as well as the blind Follower, shall all fall together.

5. That says, There is a Purgatory, that is no part of Heaven or Hell; and
that Men may be redeemed thence for Money: Tho God says, The Redemption of
Men's Souls is precious, and cease for ever, after the Offering of the Body of
Jesus once for all; that Redemption is not with corruptible Things, as Silver
and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as a Lamb slain without spot.

6. That says, That the Hands and Mouth of a filthy unclean Priest, can make
not only the Bread and Wine sacred, but turn both into the real Body and Blood
of the Son of God, make whole Christ of a pitiful Wafer-Cake, that after it is
eaten, turns to Corruption; and before it is earen, is a fit Feast for Rats and
Mice; not only contrary to Reason, but the full Verdict of all our Senses.

7. That says, That no Person, how good and pious soever he be, can be saved,
out of the Pale of their polluted, ungodly, and devilish Church; tho the
Scripture plainly affirms, That in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him.

8. That says, It Is no Sin to lie, swear, and forswear, to kill, slay, and
murder such as they call Heretics, (tho never so good) if it be for the Cause
of the Church, with a thousand Things of the like Import, which the People do
verily believe: And as they dare not gainsay upon their Salvation, so will they
embrace and use all Opportunities to fight and make Wars, overcome Cities, and
lay waste Countries and Kingdoms, to kill and slay, by Massacre, and all manner
of murdering ways, all Ranks and Degrees of Men, that oppose the horrid
Principles and Practices of those cursed Children. Nay, they will go boldly to
their own Death, when convict, and condemned for Villainies, and deny that to
day, that they were convicted of but yesterday, and tho never so notoriously
guilty, yet will take it upon their Death and Salvation, that they are as
innocent as the Child unborn. What can this be, tho they drink it down for most
sweet and pleasant Wine, but an Infusion of the rankest and most deadly Poison
that the lowest Celler of the Bottomless Pit can afford, the very Wine of
Fornications, and the most dangerous Drunkenness and Intoxication in the World?
Which is attended with this Aggravation, that the best prepared Medicines of
the wisest Physician will not recover them; for Babylon having made the
Multitude drunk with this sort of poisoned Wine, how rare is it to have any
come to themselves, to their right Mind again! And to shut up this Head, take
this Argument:

Argument. If no People in the Christian World has made the Multitude, or
common Sort of People drunk, corrupted and intoxicated their Minds by wicked
Lies and false Doctrine, such as beforementioned, as Rome Papal, or Church of
Rome, has done: Then Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is this Babylon treated of.

But no People in the Christian World has made the Multitude, or common Sort
of People drunk, corrupted and intoxicated their Minds by wicked Lies, and
false Doctrine, such as beforementioned, as Rome has done.

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is this Babylon treated of.

IX. Mystery Babylon is such ill Company, as to let Kings be dishonestly
familiar with her, and make the lower and ruder Sort of her Associates drunk.
She is said to sit drunk upon a Scarlet-colour'd Beast, and this Beast is full
of the Names of Blasphemy: Rev. 17.3.
And I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of the Names of
Blasphemy, etc. So that the Woman and the Beast are distinct; the Woman, the
Church; the Beast, the Secular Power, or Civil State. This appears evident from
diverse Considerations, arising,

1. From other Prophecies relating to the same Thing.

2. From the Letter of the Text.

3. From Arguments in Reason.

4. From the Confession of the Woman Babylon, or the Whore her self.

Dan. 2.
1. From many Prophecies; the latter part of the Image is partly Iron, and
partly Clay; two States really distinct, that could never so incorporate as to
become one.

2. From the Letter of the Text: I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored
Beast, Rev. 17.3.
full of the Names of Blasphemy. The Colors of the Royal and Imperial
Vestments the Angel in the next Words declares distinct, and the Apostle in the
Vision beheld them distinct.

3. They appear to be distinct from Arguments in Reason: For (1.) The Beast is
in the Masculine, the Whore in the Feminine Gender. Ver. 11, 2, 4, 6, 16.
compared.
(2.) The Whore else did sit and ride upon her self; an high Absurdity. (3.)
The Horns, being of the Beast, shall hate the Whore: if not distinct, the Whore
must hate her self, even to Ruin and Desolation, which is nonsensical. (4.)
The Beast shall abide, tho in Captivity, after the Whore is thrown down or
destroyed.

4. From the plain Confession of the Woman or Whore her self, who says, I sit
a Queen, I am no Widow. Ergo, she has a Head or Husband, which is the Beast,
little Horn, or Man of Sin, that Paul declared should rise after the removal of
the then present Power which did let, which the Primitive Fathers, as
Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, and others, understood to be the Imperial Power,
in its pure, civil, iron, or unmixed State.

IX. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, has not only been ill Company to the Kings
and great Men of the Earth, in drawing them into her Idol^try, Abuse of God,
his blessed Son, the Christian Religion, and blessed Books of the Old and New
Testament; but she has made the lower and ruder Sort of People drunk too. And
it is no Wonder, she thinks she may do any thing, having a Dispensation from
Heaven, which the Pope keeps the Keys of, and fearing no Power on Earth; for
she has the Beast, the Secular Power under her; she sits upon him, and rides
him, and is not only distinct from the Secular Power, but above it; so as what
of the Secular Power is still left at Rome, is under the Conduct and Management
of the Church: there being no Civil Administration of Justice, or Exercise of
Laws, but what is authorized and allowed by his Unholiness, the Head; and the
Cardinals, the Shoulders, Breasts, and Arms of the Church, or State
Ecclesiastical. To make this fully evident, the Pope does not only exercise a
Power of appointing Seculars in Rome, and near to it; but he claims the like
Supremacy abroad, in the Islands far off. If the Secular Princes fall off from
him, or if they will not be reconciled to him, as Head of Holy Church, he will
excommunicate and depose them, and dispose of their Crowns, Thrones, and
Scepters from them. That the Pope is a Temporal Prince, as well as an
Ecclesiastical Bishop, i. e. makes Laws, exacts Tribute, raises Soldiers, and
acts as a Monarch, (which fairly affords him the Title of Beast); that his
Royal Robes, Chair he sits in, to his very Hose and Shoes, with the Vestments
of Cardinals, is Scarlet, no Man can reasonably doubt: That what the Civil
Power claims, and the Ecclesiastical Power exercises, are not incorporated, or
entirely mixed; that the Princely Pope is in the Masculine, and his Spouse, the
Church, in the Feminine, is owned by all Parties.

That the Church State does sit upon, ride, and govern the Secular at Rome,
Italy, and all its Territories; that the Church of Rome owns that she is no
Widow, but has a Head, called his Holiness, or Supreme Ruler of the Church, is
so evident, that we cannot find them upon any File or Record of Controversy.
There remains therefore no more to be done at this time, but to frame our
Argument upon the Premises, and leave the Reader to prove the Weight thereof in
the Balance.

Argument. If there be no visible State in the Christian World, that does so
apparently sit upon, command, and govern the Beast, or a great Secular Power,
clothed with Scarlet Vestments, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, does: Then
is Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon here treated of.

But there is no visible State in the Christian World, that does so apparently
sit upon, command, and govern the Beast, or Secular Power, clothed with
Scarlet Vestments, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome does.

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is the Whore of Babylon here treated of.

To reinforce this Argument, we challenge any professed Papists, Atheist, or any
else, to show where any other People or Parties are, to whom these Characters
agree; and then we shall be content to let fall our Argument.

X. This Beast that Babylon sits upon, commands, and governs, is not only
clothed with Scarlet, but is full of the Names of Blasphemy, etc. Which may be
taken in a threefold Sense: (1.) For reproaching the Name of God. (2.) For
telling Lies in Divine Things. (3.) For ascribing that to Creatures which
belongs to God. And tho we will not excuse the Beast from the two former, yet
for brevity's sake we shall take the latter, viz. the ascribing that to
Creatures, which belongs to Him, that says, I am God, and my Glory will I not
give to another. X. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, sits upon, commands, and
governs that Beast, or Scarlet Power, that is not only clothed with Scarlet
Vestments, but is full of the Names of Blasphemy, which appears by his
receiving, allowing, and encouraging the ascribing that to Creatures, which
belongs to God, and to his Son, of which we give you but these Instances: (1.)
When this human, sinful, and wicked Head, is called our Lord God the Pope,
whether this is not Blasphemy against God? (2.) When he is called, Universal
Head of the Catholic Church, which none is but Christ. (3.) When he is called
the Lamb of God, the Light of the World, the Root of David, the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, whether this is not Blasphemy against the Son of God? (4.)
Whether when the Orders of the Church, Oral Tradition, the Decrees of Councils,
are said to be of greater Authority than the Scriptures, which they call a Nose
of Wax, the Heretics Ink-Rule, are perniciously mischievous to the People;
whether this be not Blasphemy against God that spoke, and the Word of God
spoken? (5.) When Angels, the Virgin Mary, and other unknown Saints, shall be
invocated with Addresses only becoming the Divine Majesty; as if these
Creatures were infinite, and could hear us at so great a distance as is Earth
from Heaven, which they could not do, if perpendicularly over us* much less
from all parts of the World, over which they cannot be; whether this ascribing
Infiniteness and Adoration to the Creature, that is only due to the Creator,
who is over all, God blessed for ever, be not Blasphemy? (6.) To conclude,
Whether making a God of a piece of Bread, and calling the profane Priest the
Maker of the Creature, be not ascribing that to the Creature, which only
belongs to God? Is not this the vilest Blasphemy in the World, worse (if
possible) than Atheism it self? For as Philosophers observe, it is better having
no Opinion of God, than such an one as is unworthy of Him; which we shall close
with this Argument.

Arg. If no People in the Christian World are born up and supported by a Beast
full of Names, full of such Names or Inscriptions of Blasphemy, as Rome Papal,
or Church of Rome is: Then Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, must be this Babylon
treated of.

But there is no People in the Christian World born up and supported by such a
blasphemous Beast, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome is.

Ergo, etc.

To reinforce this Argument, let it be considered, that none can pretend to fix
this Character or Mark upon any Protestant Dissenters from the Church of Rome,
called Heretics, who have no such Beast to support them, nor ascribe such
blasphemous Titles, or Adoration to any Creature in Heaven or Earth: For they
acknowledge the one God, the Object of Divine Worship; one Mediator between God
and Man, the Lord Jesus; and God's sacred Truth to be the only Rule; disowning
all Principles and Practices contradictory thereunto: Ergo, It Is not the
Protestant Dissenters from the Church of Rome that are here meant.

XI. Babylon, that sits upon a Scarlet-colored and blasphemous Beast, is
adorned with great Pomp, and outward Glory, very well fitting that Spirit that
delights in Grandeur: Rev. 17.4.
And the Woman was arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and
precious Stones, and Pearl, having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of
Abomination, and Filthiness of her Fornication. Which must be such as none of
her Neighbors can match her in, else no Note of Distinction. XI. Rome Papal,
or Church of Rome, does not only sit upon a Scarlet-colored and blasphemous
Beast, but she is beautified and adorned with great Pomp and outward Glory, by
which she commends her self to that part of the World that delights in her
Gaudery, being a Woman whose Worship is filled with detestable Doctrine, which
she holds forth to them with Pictures and Gallantry of all sorts. (1.) Look
into the holy Patrimony of consecrated Saints, there you find Riches and
Honor, tho not durable Riches, and Righteousness. (2.) Look unto their Garbs
and Vestments, there you shall find Cardinals like splendid Princes, Heads of
Parties and Provinces in such Habiliments, that for Riches might have become
the highest Order of the Jewish Priesthood. (3.) Look into the Instruments, and
Mode of their Worship, and there you shall find the Altar and Candlesticks, the
Vessels for Oil, and Pots of Purification, as if their Predecessors had been at
Solomon's Temple, and had brought a Pattern from thence; and yet in this G^lden
Cup, or framed Piece of Gallantry, there is nothing to be found, but foul and
adulterated Wine, most fitly to be called by the Angel, Abomination, and
Filthiness, and the Wine of Fornication: Which we conclude with this Argument:

Arg. If no People in the Christian World has such Riches and Splendour, such
Pomp and Gallantry in the Maintenance and Management of their Worship, as Rome
Papal, or Church of Rome has: Then Rome Papal must be this gaudy Harlot, or
Whore of Babylon.

But there is no People in the Christian World that has such Riches and
Splendour, such Pomp and Gallantry in the Maintenance and Management of
Religious Worship, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome has.

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome must be this Whore, or well-favoured
Harlot treated of.

The Argument is full and clear, and so well fortified, that we think it needs
no Rere-guard to enforce it; and therefore, tho it be short, and low of
Stature, we shall leave it amongst our Infantry, and draw up our right and left
Wings, yet further to assault Babylon.

XII. This Woman or City, that is thus adorned with outward Pomp and Glory,
has upon her Forehead a Name written, MYSTERY, Rev. 17.5.
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Which
may be true both in a Literal and Mystical Sense, the Breeder of Misses,
Concubines, and Whores, to gratify the Sensual Appetites of her Letcherous
Sons; but chiefly in a Mystical Sense, she Breeds, and brings forth Spiritual
Harlots, viz. Unclean Communities. XII. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, if she
be not concerned here, we will acquit her of being Mystery Babylon.

1. Here is a Name written in Capital Letters, and written so as to be read
publicly too. It Is not written upon any part of the Woman, that may be hid or
covered with a Garment, but on that part which is kept bare, and is easiest to
be seen, her Forehead, her public, visible, and known Parts.

(2.) Here is Babylon, or Confusion, a mixed Body, that is far from that good
and pure Order, which in Words she pretends.

(3.) Here is Mystery in the case, and a great Mystery to a Wonderment, even to
the surprising of every wise and thinking Man, ver. 6.

(4.) Here is a Mother, a Mother of a very spurious Illegitimate and unclean
Offspring, Harlots, and Abominations, many Abominations, and great and
reigning too, Abominations of the Earth, i. e. that large Part of the Earth,
where she is situate, and does reside. A little unto each or these, as the Time
and Space we are limited to will allow.

A Name upon the Forehead] if this were no^ to be read and seen by most
Christians and Professors, it would not much concern the Christian World for
whom it must be calculated; for others that own not the Christian Religion, are
not in a Capacity to make a Judgment upon the Case: for if this Book of the
Revelations were not written for the Christian World, it leaves us not any
Certainty where the case is to be considered, and the Matter to be judged. Now
if it be calculated for the Christian World, then it must be upon such a
People, that is most public and visible, and apparent, which agrees to none so
fitly as to the Church of Rome: which, by their own Confession, is the most
potent and visible in the Christian World, for where have the inconsiderable
Heretics (so called) whose Beings are in Corners, such a Name, as may be read
or known by all, or the principal part of the Christian World? Now to clear
these poor innocent (so called Heretics, from being concerned in this
Character, we imagine at least it cannot refer to them:

1. Because they have no Forehead so broad to bear the Inscription, which we
will engage to make good against any Romanist in the World.

2. Because they are so plain and honest a People, and their Principles so
easily and well known, that it is wild and ridiculous to call them Mystery
Babylon, there neither being any hellish depth nor confusion in what they
profess, as might be fully evinced by unquestionable Instances; for what
confusion or hidden thing can be in this, that there is one God the Object of
Worship, one Holy Book called the Bible, the Rule of Worship, one blessed
Kingdom, Heaven, or World to come, the Reward of Worship; and all that act
Faith, Hope and Charity, upon these three great Fundamental Principles, shall
inherit that blessed Kingdom, or World to come?

3. Because they are so retired and private, that had they a Forehead broad
enough for the Inscription aforesaid, yet they sit so low that Nations cannot
easily read it; and if we acquit the poor innocent Protestants, who must we fix
these Characters upon? If all Dissenters from the Church of Rome be clear, then
it must unavoidably be fixed upon Rome her self: if any demand for what Reason,
the Answer is,

First, Because when the Protestants are exempted, then there is none left to
bear the Inscription, but the Church of Rome.

2. She has a Forehead broad enough to bear Mystery and Confusion, for there
is not a greater hellish depth and Confusion to be found upon any People, than
upon the Church of Rome, as will appear in its place.

3. Because the Dissenters, with respect to Appearance, and the exercise of
Power, are very small and inconsiderable, in comparison of that overgrown
monstrous Body of the Church of Rome; for to call the Dissenters great, and the
Church of Rome small, is as congruous, as to call the Ocean a little Spring,
and the smallest Brook the Ocean.

Secondly, Babylon, Confusion, or a mixed Body, is far from that pure Order,
which in Words Rome pretends unto, and can by no means agree to the
Protestants; for they are so strict in their Discipline, that they admit of no
such mixture that deserves the Name of Confusion, they will receive none into
their Communion without much Caution and Satisfaction; and when received, keep
them no longer than they appear to walk strictly and holily, according to the
Principles upon which they first received them; and as for their Officers they
are soon summed up, being no more than Bishops, or Elders, and Deacons. But the
Roman Church may be called Babylon, or the City of Confusion very reasonably,
because she so fitly answers literal Babylon of old, that was her Type, and
from whence she derives her Name.

1. In setting up another way for Men to go to Heaven by, than what God has
ordained and appointed, (viz.) a Tower of their own making.

2. In having so many Languages amongst them, which is like the Confusion of
Babel.

3. In bearing the Glory and Sway over the Kingdoms and Countries of the
chiefest part of the World, therefore called the Lady of Kingdoms, which is no
way applicable to the poor Dissenters.

4. In plucking up, or razing out the true Worship of God, which was settled at
Jerusalem, and setting up Idolatry in the room of it.

5. In Captivating God's People, who were carried away into literal Babylon.

6. In their Doctrines, Principles, and Modes of Worship, which is such a
jumble, mixture, and heap of Things, that may go for Confusion it self.

7. In their Orders, Diversity, and long Muster-Roll of Officers, that are so
numerous, as well as unscriptural, that if Mixture and Confusion may be thought
to be any where, it is to be found in this Church, where you have, Popes,
Cardinals, Archbishops, Abbots, Provincials, Heads of Fraternities, Priests,
Monks, Friars, Followers of Dominick, St. Francis, Jansenius, Augustine,
Caphucins, etc. and what not? All which is many times more like to be Babylon,
Mixture, or Confusion, than the Dissenters from the Romish Church.

Thirdly, For [Mystery] which is in the Description, it no where agrees to
them, whom they call Heretics, but agrees very well to the Church of Rome, in
four Things.

1. In calling themselves the Church of God, and yet are the Synagogue of
Satan, that is a Mystery.

2. In calling themselves the pure Spouse of Christ, and yet an abominable
Whore; that is a Mystery.

3. In pretending to be the Mother of Peace, Purity, and Charity, and yet the
Breeder, Bringer forth, and Cherisher of Division, Falsehood, most bloody
Butcheries, and barbarous Cruelties, this is a Mystery.

4. In being Queen Regent, riding upon the Beast in State, and yet being that
good Woman that fled into the Wilderness, and abides there in a suffering
Condition all the time of the Beast's Reign, this is a Mystery. See our fourth
Argument: One Proof of their Church is visibility; yet it is evident the true
Church for the space of 260 Years was to be in the Wilderness, or in an obscure
Condition, etc.

Fourthly, [Mother of Harlots, and Abominations] better agrees to the Church of
Rome, than to Protestants.

It Is against the Principles of Protestants, to allow Fornication or Adultery,
in Persons of any Rank whatsoever, maintaining constantly, that Marriage is
honorable, but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; whereas Rome gives
public toleration to notorious Whoredoms, and the most shameless and unnatural
Beastialities, as the whole World knows.

Fifthly, [For Mother of Harlots] in a Spiritual Sense, she is owned by all her
Children to be the Mother Church. And

1. Therefore Protestants are exhorted to return into the Bosom of their Mother.

2. All polluted and National Churches in the European Kingdoms, sprang from
her, as the Churches of France, Spain, Portugal, etc.

3. All Corruption in Doctrine and Discipline may call her Mother, that is to
say, the false Titles and Errors following, viz. Universal, Supreme,
Infallible Head, Holy Father the Pope, His Holiness in the Abstract -- Our Lord
God the Pope, unerring Church, Priestly Absolution, Selling of Pardons,
Indulgences, Dispensations, adoring the Crucifix, worshipping of Images,
foolish Crossings, Anointings, and Sprinkling with Holy Water, the adoration of
the Mass, and many such things, which from the beginning was not so.

4. For Personal Vices: from whence come horrid Oaths and Blasphemies, most
astonishing Perjury, and subtle Equivocations, and Hypocrisies, all manner of
Uncleanness, Lying, and Adulteries, Covenant Breaking, and Bloody-mindedness:
is this allowed and practiced by the Protestants? No, No, they are the Brats
and Offspring of this lewd and filthy Mother, who indulgeth those abominable
pernicious Practices, for which she is rightly called Mystery Babylon the
Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. Which we conclude
with this Argument.

Arg. If this Name Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth; does not so fully and fitly agree to the
Protestants, nor any other People, as it does to Rome Papal, or Church of Rome.
Then Rome Papal, or Church of Rome (and not the Protestants, etc.) is Mystery
Babylon, the Mother of Harlots.

But this Name Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth, does not so fully and fitly agree to the
Protestants, etc. as it does to Rome Papal, or Church of Rome.

Ergo, Rome Papal (and not the Protestants) is Mystery Babylon, the Mother of
Harlots.

XIII. This Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth,
is very drunken Company; for she not only makes others drunk with the Wine of
her Fornication, and commits Adultery her self; but she is a Beastly drunken
Whore, that makes her self drunk after the worst manner of Drunkenness, which
is, to be drunk with Blood, the best Blood, the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs
of Jesus Christ; Rev. 17.6.
And I saw a Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, and I wondered with great Admiration. XIII. Rome Papal, or
Church of Rome, if she be guilty here, it is enough to make not only good Men,
but even Angels wonder, to see a Woman pretending to be nobly descended, the
Daughter to the great King of Heaven, the Spouse of the Lamb, the Mother of all
Peace, Purity, Holiness, Innocence, Charity and Chastity; I say, to see a Woman
by Profession, such a drunken beastly Strumpet in Works and Actions: and if
Rome Papal, or Church of Rome be guilty in this point, she is the unhappiest
Church in the World; for she then gives cause to every good Man in the World to
abhor her, and indeed she has very good luck if she escape this Charge; for if
she be Mystery Babylon, the Mother of false Churches, and Abominations of the
Earth, there is no avoiding, but she must be this drunken Strumpet. But because
it is never safe judging a Cause before Trial and Examination of Witnesses, we
will,

1. Consider what it is to be drunk.

2. What things do necessarily contribute to it.

3. The true and proper Signs of it.

4. Whether such things can be fixed upon Rome Papal, or Church of Rome? And
then conclude this Head.

1. To be Drunk, is an excessive taking in of such Things, as disorder Nature
in its Course and Operations. This we take to be a general Definition of it,
including the Proper and Metaphorical Notations thereof.

2. Such things as necessarily contribute to it; are, (1.) Great and vehement
Thirst: (2.) Plenty of the thing thirsted after. (3.) The greedy taking their
fill of it.

3. The Signs of Drunkenness are. (1.) When the Faculties are so disordered,
that they will not submit to the best Reason that can be given them. (2.) When
they will abuse those whom they are most obliged to love and respect. (3.) When
they have cast off all consideration of their own and others Good, and forbear
no Mischief but what they are restrained from by force.

4. That these things are evident in the Church of Rome, and cannot be so
fairly fixed upon her Opposites, or supposed Heretics, appears:

1. Because she has shed a Mass, a very great Mass of Blood upon the account
of Religion, (all which was unlawfully shed) of this the whole Christian World
is a Witness.

2. To clear her supposed Heretics from this red and bloody Crime.

(1.) It is against their Principle to kill Men for Religion, and this they do
avowedly profess, pleading for Liberty of Conscience, in Matters purely
Religious in all places.

(2.) They have wanted Power to do it, in case they had been for it in
Principle, all Power being in the Hands of Papists before the Reformation.

(3.) Where there has since been a Protestant Seat or Kingdom, governed by
Laws different from that of the Popish Countries, yet they have not made use of
their Power and Laws, to take away the Lives of Papists merely for Religion;
and if it has happened at any time, that some Ecclesiastical Persons have been
put to Death by Protestants; it has been but very rare and seldom, and the
Cause not for their Religion, but for Sedition, Rebellion and Treason:
otherwise they have lived peaceably under Protestant Governors, enjoying their
Civil Right in Common with other Men. And for the confirming of this, we make a
Challenge to all Christendom to come forth and make it appear, Where England,
Scotland, and Ireland, the United Provinces, etc. since the Reformation, have,
by Massacres, Murders, or Martyrdom, put one thousand, nay one hundred to Death
of Men, Women and Children, only because they professed the Romish Religion, or
any Religion different from theirs: so far have they been from making
themselves Drunk with the Blood of Saints, and Religious Men. And if this
cannot be done, then having brought our Character within the Confines of the
Christian World, we must necessarily charge this Drunkenness, by Blood, upon
the Church of Rome.

This Head we will conclude with the following Argument.

If no Sect of People in the Christian World be guilty of so much Blood, drunk
with Blood, innocent Blood, Blood of Saints, as the Church of Rome is. Then the
Church of Rome is this Woman, that St. John saw, to his great astonishment,
Drunk, with the Blood of the Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus.

But there is no Sect of People, etc. guilty of so much Blood, or Drunk with
the Blood of Saints, etc.

Ergo, The Church of Rome is this Woman, etc.

XIV. Babylon is a Church, or Body of People, that sits upon a Beast that had
seven Heads, or seven sorts of Sovereign Governments 1. Kings. of whom Romulus
was the first. Rev. 17.9, 10, 11.
2. Consuls. See Mede, Peter du Moulin, etc.
3. Military Tribunes. 4. Decemvirs. 5. Dictators. 6. Heathen Emperors. 7.
Christian Emperors.) Rev. 17.9, 10, 11. And here is the Mind that has Wisdom,
the seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman sits. And there are
s^ven Kings, five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come: but when
he comes he must continue a short space. And the Beast that was, and is not,
even he is the eighth, and of the seven, and goes into Perdition. XIV. Besides
all that has been said, we hope to very good Purpose, if we find not Rome
here, we will let her go for ever: For (1.) This is the place which has had
seven Sovereign Governments, five of which were gone off the Stage, and the
sixth, ( viz. the Heathen Empire) was in Being in St. John's time. (2.) The
seventh was to appear and to continue but a short space ( viz. the Christian
Empire): for it cannot be the Papal Power, because that was not up in St.
John's time, so not the sixth Head; and as the Papal Power, for that Reason,
could not be the sixth Head, so for a very good Reason it could not be the
seventh Head, because that whenever that did appear, it was to continue but a
short space; which respects not the Papal Power, but answers the Christian
Empire; for the Papal Power has continued longer than any of the other
Soveraignties that went before: and if the Papal Power be neither the Sixth,
nor seventh Head, then it must needs be the eighth, which is of the seventh,
and goes into Perdition, or else it must be no Head or Power at all. But a Head
and a Power it is, a great Head and Power it has been, therefore it is the
eighth Head which carries the Whore, according to the express Le^ter of the
Text, and shall go into Perdition. And that by the Woman, City, or Whore, that
sits upon the seven Mountains, is meant Rome, we have no cause to doubt,
because the great Sons of Rome themselves, as Baronius, Bellarmine, and many
others do confess it; but would defend their Mother from being a Whore, by
putting it off to the Power of Rome in its Heathen State; to which we have
fully answered already: And do say, that Rome Papal is neither the sixth Head,
nor the seventh, but the very last Beast, or eighth Head, in which there is a
Secular and an Ecclesiastical Power joined together; which makes up a Beast, a
most Blasphemous Beast, and a Whore, a most Devilish, Drunken, and Bloody
Whore, which has her Seat upon seven Mountains, on which this City of Rome was
built, as before. This Paragraph we shall shut up with this Argument.

Arg. If Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, be born up by a Secular Power, which
had seven sovereign Governments, seated upon seven Hills. Then Rome Papal, or
Church of Rome, is the very Mystery Babylon, that the Apostle John saw in his
Apocalyptical Vision.

But Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is born up by a Secular Power, which had
seven Sovereign Governments, and seated upon seven Hills.

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome is the very Mystical Babylon, etc.

This Argument shines so clear, that unless our Adversaries can assign any
Protestant State, by them called Heretical, that these Characters do better and
more fully agree to, it must pass for current Coin; and which we shall be ready
to receive from them: So we proceed.

XV. Mystery Babylon, is not only a Beastly Woman, that has made her self Drunk
with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, that sits upon a Beast that
had seven Heads, or seven sorts of Sovereign Governments, and was seated upon
seven Mountains; that professes her self the Mother of all Spiritual Power and
Jurisdiction: but such a Woman, and such a City, that in the Eye of the Vision,
had, did, or was, to Reign over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. And the
Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns over the Kings of
the Earth. XV. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is not only a Beastly Woman, that
has made her self Drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, that
sits upon a Beast, or the Remains of that Power, which had seven sorts of
Sovereign Governments, and is seated upon seven Mountains; that professes her
self the Mother of all Spiritual Power and Jurisdiction: but is such a Woman,
and such a City, that since the Vision and Prophecy of St. John, has for
several hundreds of Years reigned over the Kings of the Earth; she has
governed a great part of Italy, if we will believe her self, ever since
Constantine, who gave it as a Patrimony to St. Peter, she has had her Kingdom
over Germany, so long upon France, Spain, Portugal, Poland, England, Scotland,
and Ireland; so that their Kings have been governed by her; whom she would,
they killed; whom she willed, they worsh^pped, and so became guilty of drinking
the Wine of her Fornication; whom she willed, they set up; whom she willed,
they plucked down. What she required, they paid themselves, and made their
People pay also. When she willed, they raised Arms; and when she willed, they
laid them down again. What shall we say, the Church of Rome has had such a
Power over the Kingdoms of Europe, that the Power and Wills of Princes have
been controuled and overruled, when in any considerable Case they have gone
contrary to the Sense and Interest of the Church, and that to such a Degree, as
they have sometimes made them do Penance, resign up their Crowns, and then
receive them again as an Act of Kindness, from the Chair of St. Peter. Which
affords us ground for such an Argument as this.

Arg. If there be no great and considerable Body of People in the Christian
World, that has so evidently and apparently reigned over the Kings of the
Earth, as Rome Papal, or Church of Rome has done: Then Rome Papal, or Church
of Rome, is this Babylon, City, or People, that St. John sets forth.

But there is no such great and considerable Body, etc.

Ergo, Rome Papal, etc. must be this Babylon, etc.

The Major is undeniable: The Minor is so notoriously known to the whole World,
that the Papists can never avoid the Force of it, unless they can produce some
Protestant Kingdom, or State, that domineered over the Kings of the Earth in a
more eminent way and manner, than Rome is here charged with: But that is
impossible. The Conclusion is therefore true.

And now having thus in fifteen Particulars run the Metaphor by way of
Parallel, betwixt Mystery Babylon, and Rome Papal, as the same is set forth in
the Apocalypse, other Histories, and known Experiences, we shall, before we
quit this Task, briefly consider, how the Acts and Progress of the Church of
Rome do most fully comport with other Types and Prophecies of Holy Scripture,
namely, with Literal Babylon, that was her Type, and from whence she derives
her Name; from the Prophecy of Daniel, concerning the little Horn, vile Person,
or Man of Sin, which is her Head; the Prophecy of the Apostle Paul, in two
remarkable Epistles, the First to Timothy, and the Second to the Thessalonians;
and conclude. The Sum we shall cast into one general Argument, and so proceed
to the various Branches of it. The concluding Argument is this:

Argument. That People whose Acts and Progress do most fitly and fully comport
with Literal Babylon, which was a Type, with the Prophecy of Daniel about the
little Horn, and Revelations of the New Testament about the last Scene of
Things, is undoubtedly the wicked and bloody Whore of Babylon.

But Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is that People, whose Acts and Progress do
most fitly and fully comport with Literal Babylon, the Prophecy of Daniel, and
Revelation of the New Testament, about the last Scene of Things.

Ergo, Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is undoubtedly the wicked and bloody
Whore of Babylon.

The Truth of this Argument we will endeavor to illustrate by this Induction
of Particulars following.

Metaphor. Parallel. AS Literal Babylon was the Head-City of the First or
Caldean Kingdom, called the Glory of the Caldean Kingdom, Isa. 13.19.
and great Babylon, etc. SO Rome Papal is the Head-City of the last Kingdom,
called, Great Babylon, or the great and Mother-City, Rev. 17.18. II. Literal
Babylon had a great Head or King over her, called Lucifer, or Son of the
Morning. II. So Rome Papal has a great Head or King over her, called the Angel
of the Bottomless-Pit, Son of the Evening, Darkness, or Perdition. III. Literal
Babylon had Dominion over many Countries or Provinces. III. Rome, or Mystery
Babylon, has Dominion over many Countries or Kingdoms, no less than the
Territories or Jurisdictions of ten considerable Kings, called ten Horns. IV.
Caldea, or Literal Babylon, fell under a fourfold Circumstance, in respect of
her Supreme Lord, or chief Head: As, (1.) That He was, when in great Pride he
did insultingly say, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built, by the Might
of my Power, for the Honor of my Majesty? (2.) He was not, when by the
Watchers, and the holy Ones, he was tossed from his Throne, and made to eat
Grass with Oxen, till seven Times (or Years) past over him. (3.) Yet was, when
his Reason, and the Hearts of his Nobles returned to him, and gave him a
Re-advancement. (4.) Went off finally, when God brought the Medes and Persians
against his Successor, into whose Hands the Kingdom was translated. IV. Rome,
or Mystery Babylon, is foretold by the Angel to fall under a fourfold
Circumstance, in respect to her Supreme Lord, or chief Head, the last Beast, by
her called, Our Lord God the Pope. (1.) When he carries the Whore in State,
makes War with the Saints, and overcomes them; when his Adherents say, Who is
like unto the Beast? who is able to make War with him? Then He was. (2.) He is
not, when the Horns shall hate the Whore, make her desolate, eat her Flesh, and
burn her with Fire; And good Men join issue with them, to take away the little
Horn's Dominion, and lead him into Captivity, whose Life shall be prolonged for
a Season and Time, even unto the time of the End. (3.) He yet is, when by
virtue of a false Prophet, and all the Helps Satan the Dragon can afford him,
he shall make a Rally of the careless Nations, to bring up against the Jews,
after the Restoration, to complete the Battle of Armageddon, foretold by
diverse Prophecies. (4.) He shall go off the Stage for ever, as the Man of Sin,
great Opposer of Christ, and Son of Perdition, when God shall send his Son from
Heaven to fight against, and slaughter his deceived Nations; of whom it is
said, The Lord shall go forth, and fight against those Nations, Zech. 14.
as when he fought in the Day of Battle: Which will be so dreadful a Fight or
Battle, as never yet was fought, for Slaughter and Blood; and so destroy this
vile Person with the Brightness of his Appearance, to fulfill 2 Thessalonians. 2. and
cast him, as the Son of Perdition, into the burning Flames, to fulfill Rev.
19.20. And the Fowls of Heaven shall be filled with their Flesh. And here is
the Mind that has Wisdom, The Beast that was, and is not, and yet is, is of
the seventh Head, and is the eighth, and goes into Perdition. V. The first
Beast, or Head of the Caldean Kingdom, or Literal Babylon, did invade Judea,
besiege Jerusalem, take the City, and trample it under foot, till raised again
by an Edict from the next great King of Persia. V. The last Beast, or Head of
the Roman Kingdom, called Mystery Babylon, does invade Sion, the Gospel Church,
has closely besieged her, and blocked up her Privileges, and trampled under
f^ot the holy City, for a long space of Time, Rev. 11.2. VI. The first Beast,
or Power of the Caldean Kingdom, called Literal Babylon, did take away the two
Olive Trees, that stood before the God of the whole Earth. VI. The last Beast,
or Power of the Roman Kingdom, has taken away, or endeavored to slay the two
Witnesses, that bore up the Light and Testimony of God to the World. VII.
Caldea, or Literal Babylon, did set up Image Worship, commanding, upon pain of
Burning, the Worshippers of the true God to fall down. Jer. 5.38. Dan. 3.6. It
is the Place of graven Images, and they are mad upon their Idols. And whosoever
falls not down, and worshippeth, shall the same Hour be cast into the midst
of the burning fiery Furnace. VII. Rome, or Mystery Babylon, requires Worship
to be given to the Crucifix, the Image of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints,
but especially to the Idol of the Mass; so that whosoever will not own that
most ridiculous Idolatry, of a piece of consecrated Bread, coming out of the
Priest's unhallowed Hands, to be their God and Savior, shall be burned at a
Stake; as many blessed Men and Women, young and old, were in the Marian Days.
See Fox 's Acts and Monuments. VIII. Caldea, or Literal Babylon, was the Place
of Captivity and Spoil; for she carried the Servants of God away captive, and
made a Spoil of their Treasures, and rejoiced in so doing. Jer. 52.28, 29, 30.
Ezekiel. 1. Dan. 1.
Here we shall find Ezekiel, and Daniel, and Thousands more in Captivity; here
we shall find the Spoils of Jerusalem, and the Enemy rejoicing in the Spoil.
Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced at the Destruction, ye are grown fat
as the Heifers at Grass, and bellow as Bulls, etc. VIII. Rome, or Mystery
Babylon, is become the place of Captivity and Spoil; for it is by her Orders,
Dictates, and Influence, that the Servants of God have been carried away
captive, and their Goods and Possessions made a Spoil of in all parts of the
Christian World. In her Dominions it was, where we find John Hus, Jerome of
Prague, the Noble Lord Cobham, and thousands more, captivated and destroyed.
It Is in their Jails we find good Men imprisoned; in Popish Countries we find
the Inquisition, and other cruel Usages: For who is it in all the Christian
World besides, that imprisons, spoils, and destroys Men for their Religion,
that persecutes the People of God, but the Vassals of this sinful City of Rome?
Her wicked Sons did not only kill and spoil in Bohemia, Piedmont, and other
Countries, but they rejoiced in their horrid Wickedness, as appears in the
Histories of the Saints Sufferings, written by Mr. Fox, Mr. Clark, Sir Sam.
Moreland, and others, etc. IX. Caldea, or literal Babylon, notwithstanding her
great Wickedness, yet was the most lofty and proud of all Countries besides,
called the Lady of Kingdoms, and the Glory and Beauty of Excellency, for which
God does severely threaten her. Isa. 13.19.
Behold, I am against thee, O thou most Proud, says the Lord God of Hosts:
Jer. 50.31.
For thy Day is come, the time that I will visit thee. IX. Rome, or Mystery
Babylon, notwithstanding her great Crimes, and most horrid Wickedness, yet has
been the most Proud of any City or People in the Christian World, who says in
her Heart, I sit a Queen, am no Widow, shall see no Sorrow; for which
Haughtiness and Pride of hers, the Lord will remember her with Judgment, and
Severity, when he comes to make Inquisition for Blood, and avenge upon her the
Injury done to Sion: Rev. 18.7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much Torment and Sorrow give her, etc. X. Chaldea, or literal
Babylon, was not only a People of great Pomp, Pride, and Covetousness, but of
great Riches and Treasures. Thou that dwell upon many Waters, Jer. 50.37.
and 51.13.
abundant in Treasures, thine end is come, the end of thy Covetousness. X.
Rome, or Mystery Babylon, is not only a People of great Pomp, and Pride,
arrayed with Purple, Scarlet, Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, but she sits
upon many Waters, is Covetous, as well as Proud, and full of Treasures: and
indeed it must needs be so; for besides the Gifts that were first given in the
time of Constantine, (as is pretended) she has made a Prey upon Nations, a
Spoil upon Saints, had the Gifts of Kings, had vast Revenues settled upon her
Orders and Clergy; she has peeled the People by selling Pardons, and
Indulgences, raising Peter Pence, and the like; so horribly covetous is she,
that she is not willing any should go to Heaven without the Gift of Money to
holy Church, by which slight she is grown so exceeding Rich, and full of
Treasure, that she can afford a golden Cup to present her intoxicating Wine in,
to be clothed with Scarlet, decked with Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones; she
makes the Merchants of the Earth rich that do trade with her; she has indeed,
as a full answer to her Type, Lam. 1.10. stretched forth her hand upon all the
pleasant things of those Countries and Kingdoms where she has sat as a Queen.
XI. Caldea, or literal Babylon, did spoil the meetings of God's People, made
the Ways of Sion to mourn, because Men could not come to the solemn Assemblies,
Lam. 1.4. The Ways of Sion do mourn, because none can come to her solemn Feasts
(or Assemblies) All her Gates are desolate, her Priests (or Ministers) do sigh,
her Virgins are afflicted, and she is in Bitterness, etc. XI. Rome, or Mystery
Babylon, has spoiled the Meetings of God's People, (the true Professors of the
Religion of the Holy Jesus) by driving the Gospel, Sion, (or Church) into the
Wilderness; and oftentimes burning and plucking down their Meeting-Places, and
persecuting her Ministers, driving them into Corners, frighting and dispersing
their Auditors; by Fines, Imprisonments, Banishments, and cruel Usages; so that
her Ministers have been made to sigh, her Gates become desolate, none being
suffered to enter without Danger; and their Virgins (the best sort of
Professors) have been afflicted: the faithful Pastors grieving, because they
might not preach to their Flocks; and the People mourning, because they could
not hear the pleasant Voice of their Pastors, by reason of Violence, etc. XII.
Caldea, or Literal Babylon, made the worst of Men, Chief among the Nations, and
Provinces, over which she ruled, suffering none to come to Preferment, but such
as were Enemies to Sion, and the ways of Worship by her observed, Lam. 1.5. Her
Adversaries prosper, and are the Chief, etc. XII. Rome, or Mystery Babylon,
has made the worst of Men Rulers, or Chief among the Nations; not suffering
Men to bear Office in Kingdoms, Cities, or Corporations, nor indeed comfortably
to buy and sell, unless they would relinquish Goodness and Religion, and
receive the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead, or right Hands, viz. publicly
profess, or privately subscribe to such Injunctions as were against their
Consciences, and inconsistent with their Religion; Who can be Cardinals, unless
they do own the Pope? Who can be Kings, without being deposed or poisoned, that
subscribe not to the Sea of Rome? Who can sit safe as Governors over any
Cities, where she sits as Queen, without truckling under that Yoke of
Servitude, that she puts upon the Necks of all her Vassals? Rev. 13.16, 17.
XIII. Caldea, or literal Babylon, was guilty of starving, or famishing the
Children of Sion, in the days of her Power and Reign, which made the Prophet
cry out, Lam. 1.19. and 4.7, 8, 9, 10. and 5.10. My Priests and mine Elders
perished in the City, while they sought their Meat to refresh their Soul; those
that were purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, more ruddy than precious Stones
curiously polished, became as black as a Coal, withered and wrinkled, their
Skin cleaves to their Bones for want of Food. XIII. Rome, or Mystery Babylon,
has been guilty of this most horrid Cruelty, by forcing tender and
heavenly-born Souls, both Ministers and People, from their Dwellings, and that
in a most bitter season, driving them up into Corners, where they have been
kept, till starved to Death, by much hunger; of which we have a lamentable and
Heartbreaking Relation, in the History of the Irish Massacre, etc. XIV.
Caldea, or literal Babylon, delighted so in burning-work, as that they set on
Fire and burnt down the very Houses and Dwellings of the People of Sion, as
well as the places of public Worship, Jer. 52.12, 13. In the nineteenth year
of the King of Babylon, came his chief Steward, and burnt the House of the
Lord, and the King's House, and all the Houses of Jerusalem, and all the great
Houses burnt he with Fire, etc. XIV. Rome, or Mystery Babylon, has so much
delighted in the cursed Trade of Burning, that she has not been contented with
burning the Bodies of Men and Women to Ashes; but she has burnt down their
Meeting-Places, wherein they worshipped God: and not only so, but the very
Habitations and dwelling-Places of the faithful Servants of Christ, leaving
them and their Wives and Children Harbourless; as she did not only to the
blessed Witnesses of Christ, in the Valleys of Piedmont, but to famous and
renowned London it self, etc. remember 1666. XV. Caldea, or literal Babylon,
was so villainous as to ravish the Women in Sion, and the Maids in the Cities of
Judea, declaring their Sin like Sodom, Lam. 5.11. They defiled the Women, and
ravished the Maids in their Cities, etc. XV. Rome, or Mystery Babylon, has
been so beastly villainous, that it is almost beyond Belief, taking Women before
their Husbands Faces, and Maidens before their Parents Faces; first ravishing
them openly, in the sight of the Sun, and then imbruing their barbarous Hands
in their Blood, as diverse Histories do declare. XVI. Caldea, or literal
Babylon, delighted in Hanging as well as Burning, serving God's People, as Men
serve Dogs that they do not think fit to live; as well as used them like dry
Bones and rotten Wood, by burning them to Ashes and Powder, they hanged them up
as well as burnt them, and hanged them up in a miserable manner too, even the
best among the People, Lam. 5.12. Princes are hanged up by their Hands, the
Face of Elders were not honored, which is the worst way of hanging for
continuance of Shame and Pain. XVI. Rome, or Mystery Babylon, has not less
answered her Type in this than in many other things; for she has served the
best of Men like Dogs, that have been counted not fit to live, for besides
making them like rotten Wood, and burning their Bones into Lime, Dust or
Powder, she has driven a very cursed Trade in hanging; and because she would
see which was the wor^t way of hanging, she has hanged some by the Neck till
dead, and others by the middle, and burnt them by degrees, to lengthen out
their Pain and Misery; others by their tenderest Parts; O monstrous Barbarity!
A Shame to have it told in Gath, or published in the Streets of Askelon! What
was done to the noble Lord Cobham, and many others in these parts of the World,
is so plain and notorious, as if she had been under a constraint to accomplish
the Iniquity of her Type.

Here we shall (for the further clearing up of this Mystery) run a brief
Parallel between the little Horn and the Popes, or Bishops of Rome, and so
conclude.

I. The little Horn rose at the latter end of the Fourth Kingdom, or when the
Roman Empire stood upon its last Legs, or fell into a Division of ten Parts.
Dan. 7.7, 8. And the Roman, or fourth Beast had ten Horns; and behold, there
came up amongst them another little Horn. I. The Popes of Rome were kept under
by the Emperors, who kept a strict Eye over them, curbed their Insolences and
Exorbitances, and at the first appearance nipping their aspiring Projects in
the very Bud; sometimes deposing and banishing some proud Prelates, when they
showed at what they levelled their Designs. But after the Power of Rome, which
before was entire in one Emperor, fell into ten Parts and Divisions, which
happened in the Year of our Lord 456, as Accomplishment of Prophecies.
Du-Moulin, and the Learned Lib. 3. p. 779.
Mede show at large, out of the Roman Histories. Upon this Division, and
weakening of the Empire, the Bishop of Rome took his advantage, to make his
Advance, and rose up to Regal Power, enacting Laws, raising Taxes, and levying
Soldiers; by which means he struck in with Parties, and encroached upon Italy,
and the Parts adjacent. II. This Power arising upon the Weakening and Division
of the old State of the Fourth Monarchy or Kingdom, is called a little Horn,
because truly so at its first beginning. Dan. 7.8. And behold, there came up
amongst them another little Horn, etc. II. The Papal Power, or Bishop of Rome,
before this Division, was but low and small, being confined to his Episcopal
Power over the Church, till by his Arts he had got up gradually to the Regal
Seat, and Power of the Temporal Sword, which he managed with so much Craft and
Policy, that afterward he enlarged his Dominions; but is very rightfully in
his Infancy styled a little Prince, Power, or Horn, arising up amongst, or
after the rest, which began presently after the Death of Julian, about the Year
365, in which Time was a most fearful Earthquake, the like never known before,
betokening the Decay of the Fourth Kingdom, in its Civil State or Power, by a
Division or falling of Nations, who set themselves against the Power of Rome,
and harrassed, wasted, and destroyed the Provinces thereof, for near forty five
Years together. See Mede, lib. 3. p. 659. III. This little Horn, after his Rise
to Temporal Power, plucks up three of the ten Horns by the Roots. Dan. 7.8.
Before whom there were three of the first Horns plucked up by the Roots. III.
The Papal Power having gained the Temporal Sword, tho but a little Horn at his
beginning, did practice and prosper so, that betwixt the Year 365, and the Year
456, or soon after, when Rome was sacked by Gensericus, he gained such
Enlargements, that he came to possess about three parts of ten of the former or
old Roman Dominions, according to the Rules or Measure of the Compass; as we
find in Mr. Mede, lib. 3. p. 658. and famous Du-Moulin, ubi supra. Upon which
three Characters of the little Horn, we frame this short Argument.

If the Pope of Rome did arise to Temporal Power, upon the weakening of the
Caesarean Dominion, (which before did hinder him in his aspiring Usurpation)
was but little in his first Rise and Appearance, did enlarge, and grow to a
Possession of about a third part of the old Roman Dominion: Then the Pope of
Rome is the little Horn, the Wicked Power, and vile Person, set forth by the
Prophet Daniel.

But the Antecedent is true: -- Ergo, so is the Consequent.

IV. This little Horn has Eyes like the Eyes of a Man, etc. IV. The Pope of
Rome has Eyes like the Eyes of a Man, the Resemblance of a humane Look, but a
Heart like the Dragon, out of which foul Mouth he utters presumptuous Things.
His Predecessors had Eyes like a Leopard, a Bear, a Lion, a Dragon; but this
has Eyes like a Man. In which there are three things to be noted: (1.) He
looks higher, (2.) Sees further; and, (3.) Is more enticing, than those that
went before him. (1.) He looks higher, that is, makes a pretense of Piety, and
Design for Heaven. (2.) Sees further, that Deceit, Flattery, and Policy, will
do more than Strength. (3.) Is more enticing to Kings and People, than the Eyes
of a Leopard, Lion, or Dragon, or the former Powers in their Heathen State. V.
This little Horn has a Mouth speaking great or presumptuous Things, above the
rate of ordinary Men. Dan. 7.8. V. The Pope of Rome has a Mouth speaking great
or presumptuous Things, above the ordinary rate of Men. This is evident in many
respects, of which we shall give you but a few Instances out of many. (1.) That
he is the highest Deputy of God, above all the Kings of the Earth. (2.) That he
is infallible, and cannot err, which is an incommunicable Attribute of the Most
High. (3.) That he is universal Head and Bishop of the Catholic Church. (4) He
assumes the Attributes of his Holiness, and holy Father; such an Oracle, that
has Right or Power to give Laws to the World, to which all ought to subscribe,
and yield obedience, and none ought to dispute. Greater and more loftily can no
Man speak, unless he will say, I am the Supreme Being, and there is no God in
Heaven or Earth above my self; which would be so highly ridiculous, that every
Idiot would be able to detect it. VI. The little Horn had his Looks more stout
than his Fellows: Dan. 7.20. Whose Looks were more stout, etc. VI. The Pope of
Rome has Looks more stout than the Horns that have been contemporary with him;
which appears in three things: (1.) In his terrible Bulls, that he makes to
roar and stare most dreadfully. (2.) In his Power and Acts of deposing Princes.
(3.) In asserting himself to be God's Vicegerent, against whom no Person, upon
any Cause or Pretense whatsoever, ought to lift up Hand or Tongue, upon the
Penalty of a total Ruin in this World, and an eternal Ruin in the World to
come. VII. The little Horn makes War with the Saints. Dan. 7.21. I beheld, and
the same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them, and that
for a long Time, even to the wearing out of the poor Saints of the Most High.
Verse 25. VII. The Pope of Rome has made War with the Saints, and prevailed
against them, and that to their Ruin, as to Liberty, Estate, and even Life it
self; as the true Witnesses of Christ have most sadly experienced in many
Countries, in diverse bypast Ages, even for such a Series of Time, that may be
properly called a wearing out of the Saints of the Most High; for his Cruelty
ended not in a Month, or a Year, but has lasted for many hundred Years: So
that for Length of Time, Numbers of Countries, and Multitude of Persons, there
is no Power that ever reigned, has outdone, or equalized this vile and bloody
Monster; upon which we frame this Argument.

If the Pope of Rome may be more fitly said to have Eyes like the Eyes of a
Man, a Mouth speaking presumptuous Things, and Looks more stout than his
Fellows; to have made War with the Saints, to have prevailed against them, and
wore them out, more than any other Power that ever yet reigned: Then he is the
little Horn, or vile Person, under Consideration.

But the former is true: -- Ergo, so is the latter.

VIII. The little Horn is diverse from the rest of the Horns. Dan. 7.24. And he
shall be diverse from the first, and shall subdue three Kings. VIII. The Pope
of Rome is diverse from the rest of the Potentates in these four respects: 1.
The Manner of his Rise. 2. His Pretensions to Power. 3. In his progress to his
Height of Dignity. 4. In his Management of the Power he has usurped. 1. He was
small or little in his Rise, but an ordinary Bishop, before he came to be a
Temporal Prince. 2. He pretends not to hold his Kingdom by Inheritance, or Gift
of the People, as other Kings do, but by a special and Divine Patent. 3. In his
progress to the Height of his Dignity, by leaving his fixed Station, as Pastor
of a Church, and by Deceit, Treason, and Violation of all Laws, mounts the
Throne of Imperial Grandeur. 4. He rules by a supreme Ecclesiastical Power, as
well as Temporal; pretends to the Keys of Heaven, as well as the Sword of
Justice on Earth, showing himself to be the Beast that has two Horns like a
Lamb, spoken of, Rev. 13.11. IX. This little Horn has so many Marks upon him,
that they are too numerous to handle distinctly after our usual Method; and
therefore we shall put the remaining part into a general Rank, and conclude
this Subject. IX. The Pope of Rome has so many Marks or Characters upon him,
that are too numerous to be handled distinctly in a little room; and therefore
we shall but touch upon them, so far as they show the Texts made good, and form
an Idea of Truth in the Minds of Men. 1. He must change Times and Laws. 1. The
Pope has changed Times and Laws, in two respects: (1.) He has set up, and
plucked down Kings, which is called a changing of Times and Seasons, Dan. 2.21.
(2.) He has made strange Alterations of the Laws, Orders, and Institutions used
in the Church, in respect of Officers, Administration of Sacraments, and
Celebration of Days. 2. Continue a long space of Time. 2. Has continued above
twelve hundred Years. 3. He is a vile Person. 3. He is as vile a Person as any
in the World, tolerates all kind of Wickedness, by his Dispensations, Pardons,
etc. 4. Had not the Honor he has, fairly given to him, either by God or Man,
but gained it by Flattery. 4. Had his Exaltation neither by Inheritance, lawful
Conquest, nor rightful Gift from rightful Donators. 5. Removed the preceding
Power by the Arms of a Flood. 5. He had the help of Phocas, to kill the Emperor
Mauritius; and by the help of Goths and Vandals enlarged his Power. 6. He
became strong by a small People. 6. Became strong by a small People, having
only a declining Church, and Apostate Christians to assist him. 7. He shall
have power over the fattest Places of the Province, and there scatter his
Riches. 7. He has power over Italy, which is reputed the Garden of Europe,
etc. 8. Such as do wickedly against Religion, he shall accept. 8. He has
accepted, entertained, and encouraged the People of any Nation, that would turn
wicked, and sacrifice all Piety and Religion, to serve his Interest. 9. Under
him the Saints fall by Captivity and Spoil, by Sword and Flame, many days. 9.
Under him the Saints have fallen, by Flames, Captivity, and Spoil, many days.
10. Shall do according to his own Will, not accounting himself tied to any
Laws. 10. He has done according to his own Will, and does not look upon any
Laws to be obligatory to him, either from God or Men. 11. He shall exalt
himself above every God, and speak mavelous things against the God of Gods.
11. He (the Pope) has exalted himself above every God, (that is, such as are
so accounted amongst Men, or Gods on Earth,) by excommunicating, deposing,
treading upon their Necks, and kicking off their Crowns; by his blasphemous
Edicts and Injunctions he exalts himself above God himself, and his written
Laws, etc. 12. Shall not regard the God of his Ancestors. 12. He does not
regard the God of his Ancestors, either the Idols of the Emperors, or the God
of the good Bishops that went before him. 13. Nor the desire of Wedlock. 13. He
has been remote from the desire of Women in a lawful way, nay, and frights his
Clergy from it too, who are made incapable of spiritual Promotion, and censured
as heinous Transgressors, if married. 14. Nor any God in a pious way. 14. He
has not regarded any God in a pious way; for tho he does name the true God
often, and in Words profess him, yet in Works he does defy him, and profane
his holy Name. 15. Shall give Honor to them that have armed Forces. 15. He
gives honor to them who have armed Forces, and lends them Assi^tance to carry
on his black and diabolical Designs. 16. Shall own a strange God, with splendid
Ceremonies, Dan. 11.38. 16. He has owned a strange God; a Mark completely made
up in the Mass, which is adored with splendid Ceremonies. Upon all which, we
fairly frame this Argument.

If all these sixteen Characters meet nowhere so clear and evident as upon the
Pope of Rome; then the Pope of Rome is the little Horn, and vile Person, set
forth in the Book of Daniel:

But all the aforesaid Characters meet no where so clear and evident, as upon
the Pope of Rome, etc.

Ergo, etc.

To these Characters we shall add a few more out of the Evangelist Matthew, the
20th of the Acts, the first Epistle to Timothy, and the second to the
Thessalonians, and so draw to a Conclusion.

Christ foretold that Enemies should come in his Name, and own him to be the
true Christ, with an Intent to deceive; that they should appear in Sheeps
clothing, and under this Vizard hide their devouring Teeth. And, Mat. 27.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves; that is, have a design to destroy you. The Popes of Rome,
in their Succession, have been clothed with Sheeps clothing, covered their
D^sign with the Name of Christ, the true Christ, but with an intent to deceive;
for all their Pretenses of Jesus being the true Christ, have been but as a
Vizard to hide their devouring Teeth; whilst they hid themselves under the
Notion of Christianity, they have carried on most pernicious and destructive
Designs, showing their wolfish and devouring Nature in these three respects.
(1.) If there have appeared any Kings in the Christian World, that have been
piously disposed, they have forthwith endeavored to pervert them by their
Diabolical Doctrines, or destroy them by their Holy Poison. (2.) If any
Ministers, or Men of Parts, have risen up, to set forth God's holy Truth, and
bless the World with Gospel Light, and saving Doctrine, they have either
choked them with Preferments, affrighted them by dreadful Fears, or by a
ravenous thirsting after their Blood, have most wickedly and treacherously
destroyed their Lives. (3.) If collective Bodies of pious Congregations of
Saints have sprung forth in the World, they have followed them like
Bloodhounds, and devouring Wolves, with Fire and Sword, fearful Massacres,
Devastations, Murders and Slaughters, till they have spoiled them, torn in
pieces, and devoured them: Completely fulfilling that Prediction of the
Apostle, Acts 20.29, 30. For I know this, that after my departure shall
grievous Wolves enter in amongst you, not sparing the Flock: Also of your own
selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse Things, to draw away the Disciples
after them. Who can this Prophecy so exactl^ agree to, as the bloody Popes, who
at first arose out of the Church, and acted the ^art of Wolves to purpose, (1.)
By affrighting the Flock: (2.) By dispersing and scattering them ab^oad: (3.)
By drinking or sucking the Blood of any of them they could fasten upon, in a
most astonishing and prodigious manner?

As for those two eminent Gospel-Prophecies, viz. the beginning of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and of 1 Timothy 4. we will give a brief Abstract by way of Parallel, showing how
these relate only to the Pope of Rome, and no other.

The Apostle expressly tells us, that a Man of Sin shall arise, who shall be a
lawless One, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, etc. 1 Timothy 4.
that will lift up himself against God, to sit in the Temple of God; that was
hindered in his wicked Design by the Imperial Power; who gets up by a falling
away: That he was to be so considerable, as to be easily discerned and
discovered by the Christian World; that he was to manage a great Mystery of
Iniquity: His coming up was to be by the Assistance and Working of the Devil:
He was to have a twofold Power, Civil and Ecclesiastical, comprehending all
earthly Power: He was to suggest Signs and lying Wonders to the People: He was
to make use of all Treachery or Deceivableness, and Lies; his Followers were to
be given up to strong Delusions; his Party was to speak desperate Lies in
Hypocrisy, to have scared Consciences: That he should be against Matrimony;
that he should command a long Lent, and to abstain from Meats. If the Pope of
Rome be not a Man of Sin, then Beelzebub is not a Devil, as is largely
demonstrated in the foregoing Sheets; for no Divine or Humane Law can set any
Bounds to his Ambition, and spiritual Tyranny. That he exalts himself against
God, in polluting his pure Worship, and against Kings, by his usurped
Supremacy, is before evidenced: That he was hindered by the Roman Imperial
Power, is the Opinion and Judgment of the Learned; and also that he was the
monstrous Spawn of the Great Apostasy. That he manages a great Mystery of
Iniquity, in which his grand Counselor, the Devil, lends him Politics, to a
double Usurpation, and Encroachment upon Soul and Body; pretends to Miracles,
and false Wonders; acts like the Metropolitan Cheat and Impostor of
Christendom: That his Followers are strongly deluded, mere Liars and
Hypocrites, with seared Consciences, forbidding honest Marriage, but allowing
Canonical Whoredom: That he forbids Meats, but can dispense with the grossest
Debaucheries: All these, I say, with those other Marks the Holy Spirit gives of
him, are so legible upon the Pope, as if the very Sunbeams had writ them in
Capitals upon his Brazen Forehead. Therefore we dismiss him with this
full-prov'd Conclusion, That He, and only He, is (...) the Antichrist, and the
very Man of Sin.

Thus you have had a brief Description of Mystery Babylon, and the
Antichristian Beast, who has been so long a time so great a Plague to the
World, but more especially to God's Church; and we did intend to have added
some probable Conjectures concer^ing the Time of her Fall, which, according to
most Authors, will be in this present Age, etc. according to Peter du Moulin,
Brightman, and others, before the Year 1690. It Is said, The ten Horns shall
hate her, etc. And I have met with a very ancient Prophecy, that says, There
shall arise a Prince of the Illustrious Lilly, that should make War with
^landers, etc. And that he should fall out with Rome, and make War against
Italy, and in the fortieth Year of his Reign should burn Rome with Fire. And
according to the Description there given of the Person, it should seem to be
the present French King; the Difference there seems now to be between him and
the Pope, causes many to speak of it, etc. But this we must leave to what Time
shall produce.

THE Tenth HEAD OF Metaphors, Allegories, Similes, AND Other Borrowed TERMS,
CONCERNING Sin and the Devil.
Sin a Thief.
Luke 10.30. And Jesus answered and said, A certain Man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among Thieves, which stripped him of his
Raiment, and wounded him, leaving him half dead, etc.
THis is generally taken for a Parable, tho it is not so called, and before I
run the Parallel concerning Sin and a Thief; I shall very briefly open the
whole Parable, according to my present Understanding, and commit it to better
Judgments.

1. By this certain Man, I understand the First Adam.

2. By Jerusalem, that happy State, and Place of Peace, and Rest, which he
enjoyed before his Fall.

3. By his going from Jerusalem to Jericho, his departing from God, in obeying
the Serpent.

4. By Thieves, Sin and Satan, etc. These stripped him of his Raiment, viz. His
first Righteousness, etc. and spiritually wounded him, leaving him half dead,
i. e. tho he was alive in his Body, he was dead in his Soul: In the Day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

5. By the Priest and Levite who had no compassion on him, may be meant the Law
and Levitical Priesthood.

6. By the Samaritan, Jesus Christ.

7. By pouring in Wine, the Blood of Jesus, that precious Fruit of the true
Vine; by Oil, the Holy Spirit, which those receive who partake of the Virtue of
Christ's Blood, called, the Oil of Gladness.

8. By setting him on his own Beast, may be intended the Doctrine of the
Gospel; for that, a Doctrine, metaphorically, is said to carry the Soul, as a
Beast does the Body; Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines,
etc. Heb. 13.

9. By the Inn, may be meant the Church of God, for thither the true Doctrine
of Christ carries Believers.

10. By the Host, the Minister or Pastor of the Church.

11. By the Twopence given to the Host to take care of the poor wounded
Person, may be meant the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit; or, as others,
the Old and New Testament: but I rather conclude the former.

12. The Samaritan going away, may signify Christ's Ascension into Heaven, who
besides all the Divine Gifts, Graces and Comforts of the Spirit, he bestows
upon his faithful Ministers here, and to capacitate and fit them to do their
Work and Office, he will when he comes again give them Eternal Life.

Observe. Sin and the Devil are, and may fitly be compared to Thieves and
Robbers. If this may not safely be inferred from hence; yet from diverse other
Texts of Scripture it may naturally be reduced, etc. See Romans 7.11. 2 Cor.
11.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.22. Heb. 3.13. In the opening of this, we shall first show what
Sin and the Devil robs Men of. 2. Show what kind of Thieves and Robers Sin and
the Devil are.

Thieves. Parallel. A Thief, is one, or more, that in a secret and felonious
manner takes away that which is another Man's, whether it be Goods, Money, etc.
and thereby oft-times undo, and utterly ruin their Neighbors, depriving them
of all those good things they had in Possession, or the Promise of enjoying,
etc. SIn and Satan strive unjustly to take away, or deprive the Sons of Men, of
their undoubted Right to Divine Things. Adam was invested with a very great
Estate, he had great abundance of all good things in his Possession, before the
Fall, viz. Union, and Communion with God, perfect Righteousness, etc. he was
the Heir of the World, Eden in an especial manner, with all the Riches, Glory,
and Delights thereof, were his, etc. nothing was denied him, save the eating of
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; but by Sin and the Devil he was robbed
and deceived of all, and brought to utter Beggary: and since, God has been
pleased in a gracious manner through the Lord Jesus Christ, to invest Believers
with much Spiritual Riches, and Righteousness; again these Enemies strive to
rob and deceive them of all the second time: but to speak more particularly,
the things which they endeavor to deprive the Sons and Daughters off, are
these.

First, Of their precious Time, by telling them that it is too soon, too early
to mind the Concernments of their Souls; like as those in Haggai, strove to
deceive the People, The time is not come, etc. 1. Sin and Satan persuade Men,
that time is not so swift nor uncertain, but that they shall have Time and Days
enough hereafter, whereas on a sudden, Times Hourglass is out, and they are
cut down in a moment. 2. By stifling the Senses of poor Sinners, insomuch that
they cannot judge of their Time; they are so taken with other Things, Sensual
Things, that they know not what time of the Day it is, they think it is a long
while to Night, when alas their Sun is almost set. 3. By hiding from Men the
great Perils and Dangers of the Times they live in, they are so blinded by
these Thieves, that they see not into what a Pit they are a falling. 4. By
persuading them, that a great deal of work may be done in a very short time,
that the work of Repentance may be done upon a Sickbed, or when old Age comes.
5. And then at another while, when they have spent much of their Days in
Pleasure and Vanity, this Enemy persuades them it is now too late, and the time
of their Visitation is past, etc.

Secondly, These Thieves strive to rob Men of the Opportunity of time, I mean
those precious Sermons, Seasons of Grace, and Holy Sabbaths, God is pleased to
afford them; by secret Craft, these Enemies blind the Eyes of Men after such a
manner, that they prefer their Worldly Advantages and Profit, in their Shops
and Callings, above the Riches and glorious Blessings of the Word and
Ordinances of God, they prefer Earth before Heaven, Gold above Grace, the good
of the Body above the good of the Soul; if the Enemy cannot keep Men from
attending upon the Word, then he endeavors to fill their Minds with other
Things, causing them to be so negligent in hearing of the Word preached, that
it profits them nothing; or if they should hear with Attention, yet this
Adversary causes them to rest satisfied with a bear hearing, and thereby
deceive their Souls.

Thirdly, Sin and Satan rob, or deprive Men of Union, and Communion with God,
and of the true Grace of God, by which this Union and Communion with God, and
Christ is attained; persuading them common Grace is saving Grace, and legal
Conversion is Evangelical Conversion, and outward Reformation true
Regeneration, etc.

Fourthly, Sin and Satan rob Men of Peace, not only of Peace with God, but also
of the true Peace of Conscience.

Fifthly, They strive to rob Men of their precious and Immortal Souls.

Sixthly, They rob, and endeavor to rob and deceive Men of the Crown of Life.

Lastly, In a Word, these Enemies strive to rob and cheat Men and Women of all
the saving benefit of Christ crucified, endeavoring to make his blessed Death
wholly ineffectual to their Souls.

II. Thieves many times take and lead poor Travelers out of the King's
Highway, into some by-Place, and then bind them Hand and Foot, as well as take
away their Treasure. II. So Sin and Satan, lead Sinners out of the true way of
God, into by and untroden Paths of Sin and Idolatry, Isa. 61.1.
and in a barbarous manner bind them with cruel Bonds: hence Christ is said to
deliver them that were bound. Acts 8.23.
The Apostle Paul speaking to Simon the Sorcerer, said, I perceive thou art in
the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity. There are three Bonds that
these Spiritual Thieves bind Sinners with; (1.) The Bond of Ignorance. (2.) The
Bond of Unbelief. (3.) The Bond of a hard Heart. III. Thieves do not only bind
such that they rob, but many times murder them; they do not only steal, but
kill also, and that in a barbarous manner.

There are, and have been, some great and notorious Thieves; Would you not look
upon him to be a grand Thief, that robs and craftily deceives a whole City, a
whole County, nay a whole Kingdom?

III. So Sin and Satan, do not only rob Men of all their Heavenly Treasure, but
also kill and murder their Souls; Sin kills Spiritually, and Sin kills
Eternally; Sin, Romans 7.11*
taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.

Sin has deceived and robbed the whole World at once. What a Deceiver Sin is.
When our first Parents were beguiled, all Mankind were beguiled, and what Man
that ever lived has not actually been robbed by this Thief? The best of Men,
have more or less, been deceived by him.

1. Sin is a great Thief, if we consider the eminency of those it has robbed.

(1.) Sin deceived the Angels that fell, who were most glorious Creatures in
their first Estate.

(2.) Sin robbed and deceived Adam, who was so higly honored and dignified by
the Almighty, etc.

2. Sin is a bold Thief; which appears, in that it will adventure to steal and
deceive at that very time when it is arraigned, and its abominable Cheats laid
open by the Ministers of the Gospel.

3. Sin is an old Thief; no sooner was the World created, but presently we read
of this Robber, and how he cheated our first Parents; O how many Ages, how long
a Time has this Thief reigned in his Wickedness?

4. Sin is a subtle Thief, he robs and steals in the Daytime, as well as in
the Night, and yet it is hard to find him out; he has many secret Corners to
hide and lurk in, nay he has got the Art to change his Name when he is taken,
and charged with this or that Abomination. (1.) If you search for him by the
Name of Pride, he calls himself by the Name of Comeliness and Decency. (2.) If
you search for him under the Name of Covetousness, he calls his Name Industry,
Thriftiness, and Good-husbandry; nay he is grown so crafty, that some think
it is impossible to find him out: under the last Appellation, he does not only
change his Name, but also prevails cunningly upon Men, according as he finds
their natural Inclination and Disposition; some he deceives by the Pleasures of
the World, some by the Profits and Riches of the World, and some he puffs up
with Vainglory, and the Honors of the World. (3.) Sin deceives by pretending
Kindness and Friendship to the Children of Men; Sin and Satan promise a future
time, and Days to repent; they promise Heaven to the vilest Sinner, promise
Life, whilst they thrust the Knife into the very Throat.

Sin is composed of naught but subtle Wiles,
It fawns and flatters, and betrays by Smiles;
It Is like the Panther, or the Crocodil,
It seems to love, and Promises no Ill.
It hides it Sting, seems harmless as the Dove;
It hugs the Soul, it hates when it vows tru'st love.
It plays the Tyrant most by gilded Pills,
It secretly ensnares the Soul it kills.
Sins Promises they all deceitful be,
Does promise Wealth, but pay us Poverty:
Does promise Honor, but does pay us Shame;
And quite bereaves a Man of his Good-Name:
Does promise Pleasure, but does pay us Sorrow;
Does promise Life to day, pays Death to Morrow.
No Thief so vile* nor treacherous as Sin;
Whom Fools do hug, and take much Pleasure in.
5. That Sin is a crafty Thief and Robber, does appear further, if we consider
what Fools, and mere Babes it makes of worldly-wise-Men.

(1.) It deceives them of Treasure of an e^imable Value, for mere Toys and
Trifles, it cheats them of most blessed Pearls, for sorry Pebbles; they like
Idiots, take Brass Counters, before Guinies and yellow Gold.

(2.) It makes them believe strange things, contrary to reason; As first, that
tho they sow Tares, yet they shall reap Wheat; nay, tho they sow not at all,
yet they shall have a great Crop at Harvest; furthermore, that that work may be
done when they are Old, and ready to drop into the Grave, which is so hard and
difficult, that all the Days of their Life, and the greatest of their Strength
is too little to accomplish; and that it is time enough to sow their Seed, when
they should, with others, be a gathering in their Harvest. Lastly, it makes
such Fools of Men, as to consent to set the Knife to their own Breast, and be
willing to let out their own Hearts Blood.

IV. Bloody Thieves, and Murderers, are a great Terror to honest Men; and they
will avoid them, if possible, and provide themselves with suitable Weapons, to
withstand and vanquish them. IV. Sin is such a bloody Thief and Murderer, that
all Godly Men dread it, and endeavor to avoid it, as much as possibly they
can; and not only so, but also take unto themselves the whole Armor of God,
Ephesians. 6*
that so they may be able to subdue and overcome it.

Inferences.
IF Sin be a Thief, a bloody and treacherous Thief and Robber; what Folly are
these Men and Women guilty of, who are so ready and willing, at every turn, to
entertain it as a Guest in their Houses? nay, and shall lie in the chiefest
Room of their Hearts?

2. It shows the Folly of these Men also, who hide their Sin, and desire
nothing more than to have their beloved Lusts spared; Who would hide, and plead
for a cursed Murderer, or suffer a bloody and venomous Serpent to lie in their
Bosoms?

3. It shows the Folly of such that play and make a sport at Sin, Fools make a
mock at Sin.

4. Take heed you are not beguiled and robbed by it.

5. When you are hard put to it, call for help, Cry out, Thieves, Thieves! Pray
for the help of the Spirit.

6. Be sure watch against it; you are ready to have a watchful Eye over a
Thief, nay over one who is bu^ suspected so to be.

7. Keep the Door shut against Sin. And

Lastly, Be not so foolish as to believe Sin and Satan's Promises.

Sin a Debt.
Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our Debts.
SIn is called a Debt, (...), Debita, in these Words, Sins and Debts are used
promiscuously, as Luke 11.4. compared with this in Mat. 6.10. Luke 13.4. Luke
was learned in the Greek, and wrote (...), Sins; whereas Matthew has (...),
Debts. Canin in loc. N. T. Page 86, 87.

Now when Sins are called Debts, or said to be forgiven, it is a Metaphor from
pecuniary Debts, as the Debtor was said luere when he paid his Money; and it is
generally used of any that are obnoxious to Punishment; so the Grecians say
(...), and the Latins poenas debere; so the Hebrew Word (...), is used both
for Debts and Guilt, Dan. 1.10. Ezekiel. 18.7. as also for Sin, Exodus 32. and
(...), which is applied to a Sinner, James 2.20. is also frequently used of
Punishment, as Mat. 5.21, 22. In Sin there is the obliquity and dissonancy from
the Law of God, and this is not called a Debt, for we do not owe this to God,
but the contrary, Obedience, and Holiness; in Sin there is Guilt and Obligation
unto Eternal Punishment, and this is called a Debt, etc.

Metaphor. Parallel. DEbts are variously taken, and may be contracted diverse
manner of ways. (1.) A Man may rob his Neighbor of his Good-Name, defame and
wickedly wrong him that way, and thereby make himself guilty, and become a
Sinner against him, and is as much bound to make him satisfaction, as if he had
been his Debtor, by getting away much of his Goods, etc. SO Man by Sin, has
taken away or robbed God Almighty of his Glory; Adam gave more credit and
rather hearkened to the Devil, than to God, and what a reproach was this (as I
may so say) to his Maker! Satan shall be believed when God shall not: when a
Man will not believe, trust, nor give credit to what his Neighbor faith, tho
never so just and upright; what a Reproach, and Contempt, does he cast upon
him? So what greater wrong could Man do to God, (the most just and holy One of
Heaven and Earth) as not to regard his Word, believe, nor give credit to him;
but rather side with, and yield to his cruel Enemy, that studied Revenge, and
to bring him into Reproach. And thus Man became a Sinner, and made himself
guilty, being a Debtor to God, and bound to make satisfaction, or suffer for
Sin, if this wrong cannot be made up, or the Debt paid. II. Man brake a Holy
and Righteous Law, and thereby made himself notoriously guilty, and obnoxious
to the Penalty annexed; and Guilt that lies upon him, is commonly called a
Debt, he is a Debtor to the Law, as well as a Criminal. II. Sinners have broke
the holy and righteous Law of God, and by this means are become miserably
guilty, and palpable Debtors, both to the Law, and Justice; the Law is broke,
and Justice requires Satisfaction; the Penalty is Death. A heavy Debt, such a
Debt is Sin; he has violated a just Law, and how will he make a Compensation?
III. Some Debts, in a common acceptance, are a great Sum, many Pounds,
thousands of Pounds. III. Sin is a very great Debt, every ungodly Man may be
said to owe many thousands, tho never so Rich and Mighty in the account of Men.
So Mat. 18.24. where our Sins are not only compared to a Debt, but to a Debt of
a vast Sum, ten thousand Talents, which according to computation amounts to
1500000 l. and according to others, 1875000 l. IV. Some Debts are so great in
value, and the Debtors so poor, that they are not able to pay them. IV. Sin is
so great a Debt, that a Man of himself is not able to make satisfaction to the
Law, and Justice of God for it; he owes ten thousand Talents, Mat. 18.24.
and has nothing to pay; so our Savior himself plainly intimates. V. A Debt
exposes a Man ofttimes to an Arrest, and fills his Mind full of Trouble;
especially, if it be an Action upon Execution, that admits of no Bail. V. Sin
exposes a Man to an Arrest, by Death, a Sergeant (that will) when he has
received his Warrant, take no Bail, and this fills wicked Men (especially) full
of Fears; Heb. 2.
Who through fear of Death, are said, to be all their Life time subject to
Bondage. VI. A Debt does not only expose a Man to the danger of an Arrest, but
(in case he cannot pay the Debt, or procure Bail) to a Prison also. VI. So Sin
exposes a Man, not only to an Arrest, by Death, but also to the Prison of
Eternal Darkness, out of which there is no Redemption; Verily, Verily, Mat.
5.26.
I say unto you, he shall not come out from thence, until he has paid the
utmost Farthing. VII. Some Men's Debts have been paid by the Hands of others,
who out of mere Compassion, have undertaken to satisfy for all they have owed,
and thereby have kept the poor Debtors from perishing. VII. So this great Debt,
(viz.) Jesus Christ, (the Sinners Friend) out of Infinite Bowels, by one single
Payment on the Cross, or by his Active and Passive Obedience, has satisfied
for, or made a full Compensation to the Law, and Justice of God, in the behalf
of Sinners; that so he might thereby deliver them from Eternal Ruin. See
Surety. Metaphor. Disparity. A Debt among Men, only exposes the Body, or
Bodies of Men to External Danger, Sufferings, or Sorrow. BUT Sin, this
Spiritual Debt, exposes not the Body only, but the Soul: it brings not the
Soul, by Guilt, to Sorrow and Misery here; but both the Soul and Body to
Sufferings Eternally hereafter. II. Debts among Men, are oftentimes forgiven,
without Payment, or Satisfaction made for them, either by the Debtor, or his
Surety. II. God does not forgive Sin (this spiritual Debt) without a fu^l
Payment, or plenary Satisfaction made for it by our Surety: it consists not
with his Justice, Honor, nor with the Nature and Purity of his Law
(considering the Nature of Sin it self) so to do: And therefore, what Man is
not able to do upon this account, Jesus Christ his blessed Surety has done for
him.

First, To make this appear, or further to manifest the Truth of it, it will
not be amiss, to consider the Nature of God's Threatenings, I mean, Legal
Threatenings, which several Divines have well distinguished from Evangelical.
Gospel, or Evangelical Threatenings, are those Fatherly Chastisements, which God
denounces, to keep us within the Bounds of Child-like Obedience; and
therefore, God has not only signified, (but the Nature of the Affair
requires,) that they should be executed only in case of Need, 1 Pet. 1.6.

But Legal Threatenings, denounce unmixed and unallayed Curse and Wrath. These
two widely differ, not only in their Nature, but End. In the first, suppose,
that the Business of the Threatenings be done to God's Hand, without the
Execution of them, it clearly follows, that the Obligation of the Believer to
them, as they have respect to such an End, dissolves and cease; that which is
God's Intent by them, being obtained without them, the execution of the
Threatenings, without the least derogation from the Truth of God, or Impeachment
of his other Properties, may be suspended.

But Legal Threatenings being of another Nature, and having another End, namely,
the Vindication of God's Holiness and Justice upon Prisoners and Rebels, they
are no wise dissolvible, but must of necessity be inflicted, that the
Perfections and Government of God may be vindicated, and Sin may be revenged.
All Sin is a Contempt of God's Authority and Government, and casts Dirt upon
his Glory, and Punishment is the vindicating of God's Honor, in revenge of
Evil committed.

Let this be noted, that in case of such a proportionable Satisfaction, by
which the Honor and Equity of his Law is vindicated, his Justice, Holiness,
and Hatred of Sin demonstrated, the ends of Government attained; he may relax
and dispense with the Threatening, as to the Party offending, which is the case
here: for by executing the Threatenings upon Christ, and receiving a valuable
consideration of Satisfaction from him, he has given as eminent demonstration
of his Righteousness, Purity, and Hatred of Sin, and as fully vindicated his
Law from Contempt, as if the Offenders themselves had suffered; and therefore,
by an admirable mixture of Grace with Justice, has released us. These things
being premised, I reassume (says he) the Argument, Ferguss^n.
namely, That the Truth of God's Threatenings, would not allow him to pardon
Sin, and save Sinners, but upon the consideration of a Satisfaction.

First, God having denounced Death, and the Curse against Sin, Genesis 2.17. Deuteronomy.
27.26. The Veracity and Faithfulness of his Nature obliged him to see it
inflicted: Never any entertained a Notion of God, but they included in it that
he spoke Truth. Could ever any Threatening of God, be of awe upon the Conscience
of a Sinner, should the first and great Threatening be made so easily void?
Should it be granted, that notwithstanding God's solemn Denunciation of Wrath,
in case of Sin, that yet he has taken the Offender into Favor, and pardoned
the Offense without any Satisfaction, or Consideration at all? what would
Creatures imagine, but that God either intended his Threatenings for mere
Scare-Crows, or that he were subject to Mutabili^y; which Apprehension being
once received, what boldness would Men assume in Sin? believing that the
Comminations of the Gospel, would be no more executed than those of the Law:
but let God be true, and every Man a Liar.

Secondly; To suppose that God has abrogated his Threatening, is at once to
overthrow the whole Scripture; for that expressly tells us, that not one jot of
the Law was to perish. Mat. 5.18. That every Disobedience received a just
Recompense of Reward, Heb. 2.2. See Heb. 8.28. and 9.22, 23. That without Blood
there was to be no Remission.

Thirdly; If the Threatening annexed to the Law be released, it is either by
virtue of the Law it self, or by virtue of the Gospel. It is not by virtue of
the Law; for that was wholly inexorable, requiring either perfect and constant
Obedience, or denouncing unmixed and unallayed Wrath. Gal. 3.10. Nor is it
released by the Gospel; this the Holy Ghost clearly informs us, Romans 3.31. Do
we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law.
Beza's Paraphrase here is very good: Christi satisfactio quid aliud quam Legis
minas ostendit minime irritas esse, quam illas luere Christum oportuerit? O
Christi Justitia, quid aliud est quam Legis praestatio? See also Mat. 5.17, 18.
Think not, says Christ, that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I
am not come to destroy, but to fulfill: For verily I say unto you, till Heaven
and Earth pass away, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law,
till all be fulfilled. As all the Predictions of the Prophets were fulfilled by
him, and in him, so was the whole Law in his keeping the Precepts of it, and
teaching others to do the like, and in his bearing the Penalty of it, and
fulfilling the Types of it. The Gospel is so far from repealing the Penalty of
the Law, that the very Gospel it self is founded on Christ's undertaking to
bear the Penalty of it. Heb. 9.15, 16. There could have been no Testament, but
in and through the Death of the Testator. There could have been no such thing
as a Gospel, or a Tender of glad Tidings and Mercy to us, but through Christ's
undertaking, as our Surety, to bear the Curse of the Law. Gal. 3.13. And so
much for the Argument from the Truth of God's Threatening.

The Sum of what we say and believe about this great Truth, is this:

1. That by the Sin of our first Parents, all Men are brought into a State of
Sin, and Apostasy from God, and of an Enmity to him. Genesis 6.5. Psalm. 51.5. Romans
3.23. and 8.7. Ephesians. 4.18. Col. 2.13.

2. That in this State all Men naturally continue, sinning against God, nor of
themselves can do otherwise. Romans 3.10, 11, 12.

3. That the Justice and Holiness of God, as he is the Supreme Governor and
Judge of all the World, requires that Sin be punished. Exodus 34.7. Josh. 24.19.
Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6, etc.

4. That God has also engaged his Veracity and Faithfulness in the Sanction of
the Law, not to leave Sin unpunished. Genesis 2.17. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the Words of this Law, to do them. In this State and
Condition all Mankind, had they been left without Divine Help and Aid, must
have perished for ever.

5. That God, out of his infinite Grace and Goodness, sent his Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ, to deliver them.

6. That this Love was the same in Father and Son: The Father could not be more
gracious and kind than the Son, nor the Son in Bowels exceed the Father; but
both alike loving, gracious, and compassionate.

7. That the Way in general whereby the Son of God, being incarnate, was to
save lo^t Sinners, was, by a Substitution of himself, according to the Decree
and Appointment of God, in the Sinner's room; according to 2 Cor. 5.21. He has
made him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. Compared with Gal. 3.17. Romans 5.7, 8. and 8.3. 1
Pet. 2.24. and 3.18.

8. That Christ, in his saving Sinners, has, (1.) Offered himself a Sacrifice
to God, to make Atonement for Sins. Isa. 53.10. Ephesians. 3.2. Heb. 2.17. and 9.11,
12, 13, 14. (2.) That he redeemed us, by paying a Price, a Ransom for our
Redemption. Mark 10.45. 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Pet. 1.18. (3.) That he bore
our Sins, that is, the Punishment due for them. Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet. 2.24. (4.)
That he answered the Law, and the Penalty thereof. Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.13. and
4.4, 5. (5) That he died for Sin and Sinners, to expiate the one, and in the
stead of the other. Romans 4.25. and 5.10. (6.) And that God, upon Christ's
voluntary Susception of his Office, as Mediator, and Condescension to the Work,
did so lay our Sins, in and by the Sentence of the Law, upon him, that he made
full Satisfaction for whatsoever legally could be charged upon them for whom he
thus suffered. (7.) And all this, that the Justice of God being satisfied, and
the Law fulfilled, Mankind might be freed from the Wrath to come. Romans 3.25.

III. Among Men, that Debt that is paid, or full Compensation made for it,
(either by the Debtor, or his Surety) cannot be said to be forgiven. III. But
that Remission of Sins is wholly through the free Love and Grace of God, is
evident, yet not without respect had to the Atonement or Propitiation, through
Faith in Christ's Blood. For without shedding of Blood, there is no Remission.
Ephesians. 1.7. We have Redemption through his Blood, even the Remission of Sins.
chap 4. v. 32. As God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. God has set him
forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness, for the Remission of Sins. Romans 3. It is absolutely free, in
respect of all immediate Transactions between God and Sinners, free on the part
of God.

1. In the eternal Purpose of it, when he might justly have suffered all Men to
have perished under the Guilt of their Sins.

2. Free in the Means that he used to effect it. (1.) In the sending of his own
Son. (2.) In laying the Punishment of our Sins upon him. (3.) In his Covenant
with him, that it should be accepted on our behalf. (4.) In his free Tender and
Proposal of it by the Gospel, without Money, and without Price. (5.) In the
actual Condonation and Pardon of them.

Secondly; It is free on the part of the Persons that are forgiven, in that,
(1.) It is given and granted to them, without any Satisfaction made by them, or
a Surety of their procurement, they being not able to find any. (2.) Without
any Merit to purchase or procure it. (3.) Without any penal satisfactory
Suffering here or hereafter. (4.) Without any expectation of a future
Recompense, or being once pardoned, they should make or give any Satisfaction
for what they had done before. And as none none of those Things would, so
nothing else can impeach the Freedom of Pardon and Forgiveness. Whether then we
respect the Pardoner, or the Pardoned, Pardon is every way free, namely on the
part of God who forgives, and on the part of Sinners that are forgiven.

If God has now, besides all this, provided himself a Lamb for a Sacrifice; if
he has, in infinite Wisdom and Grace, found out a way thus freely to forgive
us our Debts, to the Praise and Glory of his own Holiness, Righteousness, and
Severity against Sin, as well as to the magnifying of his Grace, Goodness, and
rich Bounty, which he immediately exercises in the Pardon of Sin: Are any Man's
Eyes evil, because he is good? Will they not be contented to be pardoned,
unless they may have it at the rate of spoiling or robbing God of his Holiness,
Truth, Righteousness, and Faithfulness. Dr. Owen.

Object. But does not this Doctrine set forth God to be severe to his own Son,
to substitute him in the Sinners room, to bear his Wrath, and suffer for their
Sins?

Answ. God laid nothing upon his blessed Son, but what Christ offered himself
freely to undergo for Man's sake; and had it not every way consisted with his
own Glory, thus to deliver up the Lord Jesus, to satisfy both Law and Justice,
doubtless he would never have sent him into the World. And if it had been only
to make Christ a Pattern of Humility, and of Patience under Suffering, that God
laid these things upon him which he endured, it might have left some room for
Men so to speak, in that others might, as indeed many of the Godly have been
made Examples upon that account.

Object. If God cannot pardon Sin without Satisfaction, he is more weak and
imperfect than Man.

Answ. 1. God cannot do many Things that Man can do; not that he is more
imperfect than they, but he cannot do them upon the account of his Perfection:
He cannot lie, he cannot change, cannot deny himself, which Men can, and do
daily.

2. To pardon Sin without Satisfaction, in him who is absolutely holy,
righteous, true and faithful, the absolute, necessary, Supreme Governor of all
Sinners, the Author of the Law, and Sanction of it, wherein Punishment is
threatened and declared, is to deny himself, and to do what one infinitely
perfect cannot do.

3. Why does not God pardon Sins freely, without requiring Faith, Repentance,
and Obedience in them that are pardoned? yea, as the Conditions on which they
may be pardoned: For seeing he is so infinitely good and gracious, cannot he
pardon Men, without prescribing such Terms and Conditions unto them, as he
knows that Men, and that incomparably the greatest Number of them, will never
come up unto, and so must of necessity perish for ever? Yea, but our
Adversaries say, this cannot be, neither does this impeach the Freedom of
Pardon: For it is certain, that God does prescribe these things, and yet he
pardons freely; and it would altogether unbecome the holy God, to pardon
Sinners that continue impenitent, and so live and die. But does not the
Socinian see, that he has hereby given away his Cause which he contendeth for?
For if a Prescription of sundry things to the Sinner himself, without which he
shall not be pardoned, does not at all impeach (as they say) the Freedom of
Pardon, but God may be said freely to pardon Sin notwithstanding it; how shall
the receiving of Satisfaction by another, (nothing at all being required of the
Sinner) have the least appearance of any such thing? If the Freedom of
Forgiveness consists in such a boundless Notion as these Men imagine, it is
certain that the prescribing Faith and Repentance unto Sinners antecedently to
their participation of it, is much more evidently contrary unto it, than the
receiving Satisfaction from another, who is not to be pardoned, can to any
appear to be. Secondly, If it be contrary to the Holiness of God, to pardon
any, without requiring Faith, Repentance and Obedience in them, as it is
indeed; let not these Persons be offended, if we believe him, when he so
frequently declares it, that it was so, to remit Sin, without the fulfilling
his Law, and satisfying of his Justice. Dr. Owen.

IV. Oft-times, nay, most commonly, Men, as soon as some Debts are paid, or
Satisfaction made by the Debtor, or his Surety, the Debtor may demand a
Discharge or Acquittance immediately from the said Debts, etc. IV. But it is not
so here in reference to this Debt; for tho Christ, as our Surety, has made a
full Compensation to the Law and Justice of God, yet Sinners are not
immediately acquitted; neither does it follow, (says the Doctor) that on the
supposition of Satisfaction, pleaded for the Freedom, Pardon, and Acquitment of
Persons originally guilty, and liable to Punishment, must immediately, and ipso
facto ensue, it is not of the Nature of every Solution or Satisfaction, that
Deliverance must ipso facto follow. And the reason of it is, because this
Satisfaction by succedaneous Substitution of one to undergo Punishment for
another, must be founded in a voluntary Compact and Agreement; for there is
required unto it a Relaxation of the Law, tho not as unto Punishment to be
inflicted, yet as unto the Person to be punished. And it is otherwise in
personal Guilt, than in pecuniary Debts: In these, the Debt it self is fully
intended, and the Person obliged with reference thereunto in the other, the
Person is firstly and principally under the Obligation. And therefore when the
pecuniary Debt is paid, by whomsoever it be paid, the Obligation of the Person
himself unto Payment cease ipso facto: But in Things criminal the guilty
Person himself being firstly, immediately, and intentionally under the
Obligation unto Punishment, when there is introduced by Compact a vicarious
Solution, in substitution of another to suffer, tho he suffer the same
absolutely, which the Person should have done for whom he suffers; yet because
of the ac^eptation of his Person to suffer* which might have been refused, and
could not be admitted without some Relaxation of the Law, Deliverance of the
guilty Person cannot answer ipso facto, but by the Intervention of the Terms
fixed in the Covenant or Agreement, for an admittance of the Substitution.

It appears from what has been said, that in this matter of Sin being called a
Debt, and of Satisfaction, Sin is not to be considered as such a Debt, and God
a Creditor, and the Law as an Obligation to the Payment of that Debt, as some
Men seem to run it: But Sin is a Transgression of the Law, and thereby
obnoxious and liable to the Punishment constituted in it, and by it answerable
unto the Justice and Holiness of another; and God, as the infinitely holy and
righteous Author of that Law, and Supreme Governor of all Mankind, according to
the Sanction and Tenor of it. The Substitution of Christ was merely voluntary
on the part of God, and of himself, undertaking to be Sponsor, to answer for
the Sins of Men, by undergoing the Punishment due unto them. That to this end
there was a Relaxation of the Law, as to the Persons that were to suffer, tho
not as to what was to be suffered: Without the former, the Substitution
mentioned could not have been admitted; and on supposition of the latter, the
Sufferings of Christ could not have had the Nature of Punishment, properly so
called; for Punishment relates to the Justice and Righteousness in Government
of him that inflicts it; and this the Justice of God does not but by Law. Nor
could the Law be any way satisfied or fulfilled by the Suffering of Christ, if
antecedently thereunto, its Obligation, or Power of obliging unto the Penalty
constituted in its Sanction unto Sin, was relaxed, dissolved, or dispensed
withal. Nor was it agreeable to Ju^tice, nor would the Nature of the Things
themselves admit of it, See Surety ^^t first Volume.
that another Punishment should be inflicted on Christ, than what we had
deserved; nor could our Sin be the impulsive Cause of his Death, nor could we
have had any Benefit thereby. Dr. Owen.



Inferences.
THis shows what the Nature of Sin is, together with the woeful and miserable
Condition of Man thereby. How few know, or are sensible, how far they are in
Debt, and what fearful Danger they are in hereby every moment!

II. It may raise our Hearts to admire the Grace and Goodness of God, in
sending Christ to satisfy for our Sins.

III. Let us also from hence be stirred up to cry for Pardon and Forgiveness of
our Sins: Forgive us our Debts.

Quest. What is it we desire of God in this Petition?

Answ. 1. We pray, that God would not require or exact Payment and Satisfaction
for our Sins of us; for if he should pass by Millions of Sins, and set down but
one hundred, nay, come so low as to charge but ten, nay, forgive us all save
only one, that one would sink us down to the lowest Hell. Should God require us
to make satisfaction but for one evil Thought, we should be utterly undone.

2. We pray, (says Mr. Burges) that God would lay our Sins upon Christ, or
accept of Satisfaction in and through him; for seeing (says he) God has
declared his Will, that Man shall die for Sin; if we should pray, that he would
absolutely forgive our Sins, it would be to pray that he might be unjust.
Therefore in this Prayer thus we may argue, O Lord, we call not upon thee to
repeal any Threatening, to nullify thy Word, to become unjust; but thy Wisdom
has so found out a way, that we may be pardoned, and thou satisfied, etc.

3. We pray, that through Christ's Atonement, or the Propitiation of his Blood,
our daily Sins and Infirmities may be forgiven us, and we kept in a State of
Justification; for if our former Sins should be forgiven, and not our present
and future, our Case would be desperate; for Sin, like Sampson's Hair, tho cut,
it will grow again. And as we sin daily, so we ought to pray for Pardon,
through Christ's Mediation; for Sin is not actually forgiven, before committed,
nor before we have the true Sense and Sorrow of it upon our Hearts. Where God
gives Remission, he gives a broken Heart, Acts 5.31.

4. We pray, that God would account or impute Christ's Righteousness unto us
for Pardon.

5. We pray for the sense and feeling of the Grace and Blessing of Pardon in
our own Sou^s; for it is one thing to be pardoned, and another thing to know,
or have the feeling sense of it our selves. We are in this Case (says an
eminent Person) like some Heir or Prince, that has many temporal Dignities,
but by reason of his infancy does not understand it. We pray principally, 1.
For the real Exhibition of Pardon; and, 2. For the Declaration and
Manifestation of it in our Consciences. Some say, That God, from all Eternity,
has pardoned Sins past, present, and to come; and that when we believe or
repent, our Sins are pardoned declaratively only to our Consciences; but now, I
say, We pray not only for Assurance and Manifestation of Pardon, but for Pardon
it self. The Reasons are:

(1.) We might by the same Rule interpret all the other Petitions, in regard of
Declaration only, and not of Exhibition. When we pray for Sanctification and
Glorification, in that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, it might be as well said,
that we are sanctified and glorified from all Eternity; and therefore when we
are saved and glorified in Heaven, this is but to our sense and feeling. And
thus Men make the Decrees of God to be from Eternity, with the Execution of
them in Time. How ridiculous would it be to expound that Petition, Give us this
day our daily Bread, thus! viz. Not that God should give us our daily Bread,
but make us to see and feel that he has given it to us.

(2.) A second is from the Nature of Forgiveness it self: When Sin is pardoned,
it is said to be blotted out; now can any think, that blotting out is only in a
Man's own Conscience and Feeling? It is more immediately out of God's Book, (it
being a Metaphor taken from blotting or crossing Debts out of a Book of
Accounts, etc.) and not only the Guilt that lies upon our Hearts; therefore
these are very separable the one from the other. A Man may feel no Weight or
Burden of Sin upon him, and yet it stand in red Characters in God's Book: and
on the contrary, a Sin may be blotted out there, yet be very heavy and terrible
in a Man's feeling and apprehension. So Sin pardoned is said to be covered or
hid, not in respect of us, as if it were taken from our Sight, but from God's
Sight; and he is said to cast our Sins behind his Back.

(3.) This Explication, as the whole Sense of the Petition, would overthrow all
other Scriptures, which make no Pardon of Sin to be, but where the Subject has
such Qualifications as this in the Text, viz. forgiving others, etc.

(4.) This which these Men say, would make no difference between Sins repented
of, and Sins not repented. Where do we read, that God does (like the Pope)
antedate his Pardon, before the Sin be committed, or repented of? Burges.

6. We pray, That as God does forgive Sin, so also he would release the
Punishment, and take away all the Wrath that does belong to it. It is but a
Mockery which Papists make about Pardon, as if indeed God did pardon the Sin,
but not the Punishment; that that abides still, and we must work out a Release
from that by our own selves. It is true, God, tho he does pardon Sin, yet he
may grievously afflict; but these are only fatherly Chastisements, and not
judicial Punishments. But in this Prayer we desire, as the Sin is removed, so
also whatsoever Troubles, Afflictions, or Chastisements do remain, that they
likewise may be taken away; that as the Gulf of Hell is removed, so every Cloud
also may be dispelled.

7. We pray not only for Pardon, but also for the gracious Concomitants and
Effects of it, which are Peace with God, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. Romans
1.5.

From the Whole we may infer,

I. That Man is a guilty Sinner, (nay, that Believers are not without Sin, as
they are in themselves) Man, as considered in his fallen State, is accused and
charged by the Law, and must plead, and he cannot plead, Not guilty, being
under the Impeachment of his own Conscience, Ille noscens se damnat quo peccat
die. This might have been the Plea of Adam before his Fall, but none else. 1
Kings 8.46. There is no Man that sins not. Eccles. 7.20. 1 John 1.8. Our
Plea then must be, Guilty; and in this Case we must plead Mercy for the sake of
Mercy, or Mercy for the sake of Christ, or upon the account of the Satisfaction
he has made.

II. There is to pleading Mercy for the sake of Mercy, for (as one well
observes) that were not to plead, but to beg; nor were it at all to be
justified, but merely pardoned; it were to be dealt with alone upon the Score
of Grace, and not at all upon the Score of Righteousness, whereas Justification
is an Act of Justice rather than Mercy: tho it is true, in the Salvation of
Sinners both Grace and Justice (as has been showed) meet together; we are both
pardoned and justified. God is (says one) as merciful as we can desire, and
yet as righteous as himself can desire; there is the freest Grace, and the
fullest Justice. As God pardons Sin, he displays his Mercy; as he justifies us
from Sin, he manifests his Righteousness.

Pardon is free to us, but it cost Christ dear; there is a Mystery in the
Remission of Sin; it is not forgiven without Atonement, Satisfaction, and
Reconciliation made for it by Jesus Christ. Which appears,

1. In that those who are pardoned, are said to be justified through him. Acts
13.39.

2. Because Christ is said to bear our Sins, or the Punishment of them. 1 Pet.
2.24. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. He died in our stead, for that is the meaning of his
bearing our Sin, as might be largely showed from the Old Testament, where we
read of Persons that God said should bear their own Sins.

3. Because the Scr^pture says, Without shedding of Blood there is no
Remission. Heb. 9.22. And that it is through that one Offering of Jesus Christ,
that we are both pardoned and accepted. Redemption, and Forgiveness of Sin, is
through his Blood. Romans 3.25.

4. Because Christ is said to reconcile us, and pacify the Wrath of God for our
Sins. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Romans 5.

5. Because we are said to be bought with a Price: Christ gave himself a Ransom
for many. 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18. Mat. 20.28.

6. Because he is said to be made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, etc.
called, The Lord, our Righteousness. Our Justification consists in the
Non-imputation of Sin, and the Imputation of his Righteousness, that so
Salvation might be wholly of Grace, and all Boasting excluded.

Sin a heavy Burden.
Psalm. 38.4. For my Iniquities are gone over my Head, as a heavy Burden, they
are too heavy for me.

Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every Weight, and the Sin that does so easily
beset us, etc.


WEight (...),] signifies several Things; (1.) The Greatness of Heavenly Glory,
2. Cor. 4.17. (2.) Trouble, or the Wrath of Wicked Men, Prove. 27.3. which often
presses down the Godly. (3.) That which is ponderous, Things, Words, or
Matters of Moment, in opposition to such Things, or Words, that are Light,
Airy, etc. (4.) Sin, because it presses down and is grievous to be born, etc.

Note, Sin is a great Weight or heavy Burden.

Simile. Parallel. A Weight or Burden that bears hard, or lies heavy upon the
Breast of a Person, ready to crush him to pieces, is very grievous, worse to be
born, than a Weight upon the Legs or Arms, etc. SIn is a Weight or Burden, that
lies heavy upon the Soul of an enlightened Christian, and this is the cause it
is so grievous, it presses down the Powers of the Noble and Superior Part of
the Creature. Lay a Weight upon a Stone, and that will bear it, and not break
or yield under it; but if a great and mighty Weight be laid upon such things,
that are tender, or of a soft substance, how sorely will it mar and crush that?
So a stony-hearted Sinner, tho he has great Mountains of Sin and Guilt lying
upon him, he complains not, he is, alas! unsensible (and to use the Apostle's
Words) past feeling, his Heart being like a Rock, Ephesians. 5.19. Ezekiel. 36.26. Psalm.
38.4.
or the nether Millstone; but a poor Saint whose Heart is tender, God having
taken away the Heart of Stone, and given him a Heart of Flesh, he is sensible
of this Burden, his Soul and Conscience cannot bear it, he cries out in great
Anguish and Horror of Spirit. II. Some Weights and Burdens laid upon some Men,
are so heavy that they cannot be born, the strongest Man cannot stand under
them, etc. II. Sin is such a Burden or Weight that no Man is able to bear, it
will make the stoutest Heart to ache, and the strongest Back to stoop; it made
David (that mighty Man of God) to cry out, Psalm. 38 6.
I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, etc. All my Bones are broken. Nay,
when this Weight was laid upon the Lord Jesus, whom God made strong for
himself, how did it crush him, and cause him (if I may so say) to stagger and
sweat under it, as if it had been great Drops of Blood falling down to the
Ground: It Is said his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death, Luke
22.44. Mark 14.^2, 33. Psalm 89.19
and that he went forward and fell on the Ground. He bore our Sins upon his own
Body on the Tree. O what a Mercy was it, that God laid help upon one who was
Mighty; tho he was able to bear this Weight, yet how did it make him to cry
out, under the Burden of it, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from
me, etc. There is a twofold Weight in Sin. 1. As it hinders our Justification.
2. As it hinders our Sanctification. The first respects the Punishment that is
due to it; and that Weight Jesus Christ bore for us, which none was able to do
besides himself. III. A heavy Weight or Burden, laid upon a Man that is to run
a Race, is very troublesome, and a great Impediment to him, and therefore ought
to be cast off, etc. He is a very foolish Man that having a long Race to run,
will carry a great Weight or Burden about him: can such expect to win the
Prize? III. So Sin greatly hinders the Saints of God in their spiritual Race,
it is unto them like a heavy Burden, and therefore ought to be cast off by them.
Let us lay aside every Weight, Heb. 12.1.
and the Sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run with Patience the
Race that is set before us. Sin will soon cause a Christian to faint, if he
throw it not off by true Repentance. See Runner. Simile. Disparity. SOme heavy
Weights or Burdens, tho they cannot be born when they are bound up or tied
together, yet if severed, some part of them may be born and easily carried. BUT
Sin is such a kind of Burden, that it cannot be born, either whole or apart;
that is to say, one Sin severed from a Multitude, that a Person may be guilty
of, and charged upon the Soul; (tho it should be judged the least) no Man is
able to stand under the Guilt, or Burden of it.

1. For the least Sin being against an Infinite God, deserves an Infinite
Punishment.

2. The least Sin being a breach of the Law, brings a Soul under Wrath, and the
Curse thereof.

3. The least is not done away without Christ's Blood, nothing but that only
can wash it away, or cleanse from it. Now that which makes Sin to be so great a
Burden to a Child of God is, (1.) Because it sets God against the Soul, it
makes him to become a Man's Enemy, and to fight against him, etc. (2.) Because
it is a Burden unto God himself, hence he cries out, I am pressed under you, as a
Cart is pressed with Sheaves. Amos 2.13.
Nothing is more opposite to God than Sin, or is more loathsome to him. (3.)
Because it wounds, bruises, and lays the Soul it self a bleeding. (4.) Because
it brings the Soul under the dreadful Wrath of an angry God, yea binds down
under everlasting Wrath, causing a final Separation from God and Christ for
ever.



Inferences.
WHat insensible Creatures are unconverted Sinners!

2. Moreover, what a sore and grievous thing it is to have this Burden laid
upon the Soul!

3. It may stir up such who feel this Weight, to cast it off, by Repentance and
Faith: remember Christ has born it for thee, that thou might go free. Isa.
53.
The Lord has laid on him the Iniquities of us all.

4. It shows us what a wonderful Mercy it is to be freed from this Burden.
Saints are delivered from the Power and Dominion, Guilt and Condemnation of it,
Romans 6.14
through the Lord Jesus Christ.

Sin a Sting.
1 Cor. 15.56. The Sting of Death is Sin.
Parallels.
DEath is like a venomous Serpent, that has a cruel and tormenting Sting, and
this Sting is Sin.

II. The Sting of some Serpents, in the Flesh, is very painful, it makes such
to cry out exceedingly: So such who feel themselves stung with Sin, cry out,
like as those did in Acts 2.36. The pain and torment of a wounded Conscience is
intolerable, as many can experience, and the History of Francis Spira
abundantly shows.

III. The Venom or Sting of some Serpents is mortal, it kills the Body: so
Sin, that Venom of Death and the Devil, kills both Body and Soul.

IV. If a Serpent biteth or stingeth any one part, the Venom and Contagion
spreads over all the Body, and destroys the whole Man: so the Sting and
Poison of Sin, which entered by one Man's Offense, Romans 5 15, 18.
has infected and killed all the Lump of Mankind: moreover, he that harbors
but one Sin in his Bosom, it will destroy his whole Soul, if this Sting be but
in his Tongue, it is like the Poison of Asps, his Life must go for it, without
speedy help.

V. No Salve or Medicine could heal the Bodies of those who were stung with
those fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, till they looked up to the Brazen
Serpent, no Physician on Earth could cure them: Dioscor. l 6. c. 30.
so no work of Man can cure the biting of Death and the Devil, or Sting of Sin,
but the Venom thereof rages and reigns tormenting the Conscience, until the
Soul looks up by a true and lively Faith to Jesus Christ.

VI. As the Sting of a Serpent must be pulled out, before the Person stung can
be cured; so Sin must be lifted, pulled, or worked out of the Heart and Life of
a Sinner, by the Spirit, before he can be either healed or saved.

VII. As some Serpents cannot hurt when they have lost their Sting; so Death
cannot hurt a Soul, whose Sin is taken away by Jesus Christ.

Sin a Wound.
Psalm. 38.5. My Wounds stinck and are corrupt, etc.

Prove. 18.14. -- But a wounded Spirit who can bear?

Luke 10.34. And bound up his Wounds, etc.


SIN wounds the Soul of a Sinner, a Church or Nation. When Ephraim saw his
Sickness, and Judah saw his Wounds, etc. Hos. 5.13. The Word translated Wound
in this place, is from a Word that signifies colligavit, he has bound up,
either because of the corruption of the Body that is gathered together, or
because of the binding of it up with Clothes.

Parallels.
WOunds are either new, which we commonly call green Wounds, or else old
Wounds: Now Sinners have an old Wound upon them, which is like a stinking
Ulcer, which they received above five thousand years ago: in the Garden of
Eden, when Adam was wounded by his Sin, in eating of the forbidden Fruit, all
his Posterity were wounded in him; also every Sinner has many fresh Wounds
upon him. Romans 5.12.


II. Some Wounds are venomous, as the biting or cruel sting of some poisonous
Serpent, etc. Sin is a venomous Wound, it is the sting of a Serpent, the old
Serpent. [See Sting.]

III. Some Persons have been full of Wounds, wounded from the Crown of the Head
to the Soles of the Feet, they are (as it were) nothing but Wounds: so Sinners
are full of Wounds, every Sin is like a Wound, or makes a Wound in the Soul; so
many Sins a Man is guilty of, so many Wounds he has in his inward Man. Every
Faculty of their Soul is wounded: (1.) Their Judgment is corrupt. (2.) Their
Understanding darkened, full of Vanity, Blindness, Incredulity, Enmity and
Unteachableness. (3.) The Will, that noble Faculty, is wounded, and fearfully
depraved; the Mind of a Man being corrupt, the Will must needs be corrupt: As
to a Man that has his Palate possessed with a vicious Humor, every thing seems
bitter according to the Humor; so the Understanding reckoning the ways of God
both Enmity and Folly, the Will acts accordingly. The Will of wicked Men acts
cross and contrary to God and his Holy Will in all things, they resist and
fight against him, and are not subject to his Law, neither indeed can be; there
is much Pride, Inconstancy, Romans 8 7.
Stubbornness and Disobedience in the Will, Our Tongues are our own, and who is
Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4.
(4.) Their Affections are wounded, and very filthy, Men naturally love the
Creature, more than God, nay they love their Lusts, horrid Sins and
Uncleanness, above the Majesty of Heaven. The Apostle, giving a Character of
some Men, says, they are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God. (5.) The
Memory is wounded, 1 Timothy 3.4.
being forgetful of that which is good, and like a leaking Vessel: Men are
ready to remember, what God bids them forget, but forget that which he commands
them to remember, they are too apt to think upon Injuries; nay, may be one
Injury will be thought on more than many Kindnesses and Years of good Service:
they are subject enough to remember Trifles and vain Stories, whenas a
profitable Sermon, or wholesome Counsel, is forgot, etc. (6.) The Conscience of
a Sinner is wounded with Sin, tho not for it, or in a deep and real Sense of
the evil of it. Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure,
Tit. 1.15
but their Minds and Consciences are corrupt; the Conscience, which should like
Job's last Messenger, bring us Word that all the rest of the Faculties are
dead, i. e. wounded, Preston.
and corrupted; alas! is maimed, dumb, or misguided, or grievously distempered;
that when it should accuse, it excuses; it should act the part of a faithful
Register, to set all our Sins down exactly, but it falsifies in this, and, as
says Dr. Preston, when it should set down Hundreds, it sets down Fifties, when
it should restrain from Evil, it is almost asleep, and lets the Sinner alone:
whom it should condemn, for want of Light it acquits: And as a Man is wounded
in every Faculty of his Soul or rational part, so likewise he is in his
sensitive part; his Eyes are full of Adultery, his Lips are unclean, R^m. 3.^3
his Throat is like an open Sepulcher, the Poison of Asps is under his Tongue,
his Ears are deaf and dull of hearing that which is good.

IV. As some Wounds a Man receives are very deep and reach to the Heart: so Sin
makes a deep Wound; Man is not only wounded in every part, but very deeply
wounded: Je^. 4.18 Genesis 6 5.
This is thy Wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches to thine
Heart. Their Heart devises Wickedness, etc. Every Imagination of the Thoughts
of his Heart is only evil continually: Jer. 4.14.
Hence says God, Wash thine Heart from Wickedness, etc.

V. Some Wounds are corrupt, filthy, and very loathsome; the Wounds Sin makes
in the Soul, Isa. 1.6.
are very filthy and abominable, From the sole of the Foot, even to the Head,
there is no soundness in it, but Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores: they
have not been bound up, neither molified with Ointment; My Wounds stink and are
corrupt.

VI. Some Wounds smart and are very painful, causing the Patient to cry out in
great anguish: Sin makes such a Wound in the Soul, that it causes such who
have their Spiritual Feeling to cry out; the pain is so great, that a Christian
cannot, without Divine Help, Psalm. 38.8, 9.
bear up under the smart and torture of it; I have roared (says the Psalmist)
by reason of the disquietness of my Heart; Lord, all my desire is before thee,
and my groaning is not hid from thee.

Lev. 13.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
VII. Some Sores or Wounds are infectious, like Plague-Sores, or the Leprosy,
they infect the Clothes and Garments of the wounded and diseased Person, and
not only so, but the very House where he dwells, and the People also that come
near him, or converse with him: Sin is of an infectious Nature, no Plague more
catching and infectious, than the Sore or Plague of Sin, it defiles all a Man's
best Actions, and makes all our Righteousness like filthy Rags. If ye daily
converse with, or are frequently in the Company of some wicked Men, it is a
thousand to one if you are not the worse for it; Who can touch Pitch, and not
be defiled therewith? We are commanded to keep our selves unspotted from the
World; it is a hard matter to keep clear of these Spots and Pollutions wicked
Men are defiled with. Sin is of such an infectious Nature that it has
corrup^^d the Earth, Isa. 24.5.
The Earth is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, etc. Nay some conceive,
the Sin of Man has darkened, in some respect, the glorious Heavens, Job 25.5.
with the Sun, Moon and Stars, that they shine not so splendidly as they did at
the first.

VIII. Some Wounds are of a festering and spreading Nature, whilst the Patient
is under Cure, they grow worse and worse: The Wounds or Sins of some Men (tho
they are under Cure, i. e. sit under a powerful and Soul-searching Ministry)
fester, as it were; 2 Timothy 3.13.
they, instead of growing better, grow worse and worse, like as the Apostle
speaks of Deceivers.

IX. Some Sores, Wounds and Scabs, bring Shame upon such who have them: Sin is
such a Sore, and so hateful a Scab, that it causes Shame, and Confusion of
Face. Sin is the shame of any People, Phil. 3 19.
and yet how do some glory in it? They glory in their Shame! Sin is the soul
Disease; the Hurt, nay all the Hurt, Sorrow, and Shame Sinners meet with, came
in originally by Sin, by yielding to the Devil, and by adulterating from God:
no running Sore, no Scab, no breaking out in the Flesh, like Sin in the Heart
and Life of a Sinner.

Ezekiel 18. Joh. 8.22. Romans 8.13.
X. Some Wounds are Mortal: Sin makes a mortal Wound; The Soul that Sins shall
die; and, unless ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in your Sins. If ye live
after the Flesh, ye shall die, etc. I do not say there is no Help, nor Cure for
these Spiritual Sores and Wounds; yet I must say they are incurable, as to Man,
no Man can find by all his Skill and Art any healing Medicine. And upon this
account the Lord said of Judah and Israel, their Wound was incurable, they had
brought themselves into such a Condition, that none could help them, nor bring
them out; O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self, but in me is thy help.
Indeed some Men are so desperately and dangerously wounded, that there is
little hope of them, they have all the signs of Ruin and Eternal Death upon
them imaginable.

Quest. It may be you will say, When may the state of a Person be said to be
desperate, and almost (if not altogether) past hope, or wounded even unto Death?

Answ. 1. If a Man sins, and is sorely wounded, and yet continues in his Sinful
Course, the Sting is not pulled, as it were, out of his Flesh, I mean out of
his Heart, nor is he willing it should; there is little hopes at present of
this Man. Can a Wound be healed and yet the venomous Sting stick fast in him? A
continual course or custom in Sin, tho they be small Sins comparatively, may
prove deadly.

2. When ^in is in the Affection it is dangerous You know when the Heart is
wounded and corrupt, there is no hopes of Life: if in times of Infection you
can keep it from the Heart, you are well enough. Physicians, tho they have
Medicines to keep Infection from the Heart, yet they have no Medicine to cure
the Heart, if once the Distemper gets into it. When a Man closes in with his
Sin, likes it, loves it, and makes Provision to fulfill the Lusts of it, it is a
dangerous sign.

3. When the Wound spreads and increases, or a Person grows more vain, carnal,
and filthy, it is a sad sign. Some Men have been for a time cautions, and
somewhat tender, their Consciences have restrained them from yielding unto Sin,
but afterward they came to grow more hard and bold, and have adventured on
this and the other Evil, and so by degrees from little Sins make no Conscience
of greater, till they are notorious in Wickedness, and this after common
Illuminations; this is a sign they are near Hell.

4. When a Person is sorely and grievously wounded, and yet is unsensible, does
not cry out, nor feel any pain, it is a sad sign. Come to some wounded Persons,
and ask them how they do; they will answer you, Very well, I ail nothing, then
Relations begin to weep: so some Sinners, through a custom of Sin, grow
insensible, they are past feeling, they are not only without pain themselves,
but laugh at such who complain of their Sores upon the Head, and mourn for
their Sin; of this Man you may write in Red Letters, Lord have Mercy upon him.

5. When a Man is dangerously wounded, and nothing that is given him will go
down, neither Food nor Physic; or if he does take it, yet it will not stay
with him, it is a very bad sign: so when a Sinner refuses all good Counsel that
is given him, and instead of vomiting up, by true Repentance, his Sin, he
vomiteth up the Physic and Food of his Soul that should do him good, and
despises all Reproof, Prove. 28.1.
hardening himself against it, he is near to Destruction.

6. And Lastly, When a Man is wounded, and that Balsam, Means or Medicine, that
seldom fails to work a Cure in others, yet will do him no good, but
contrary-wise, whilst in Cure, and under the best Means, he grows worse and
worse, there is little hopes of him: so when a Sinner under a powerful and
Soul-saving Ministry, and diverse sore Afflictions, is not at all reformed, but
grows worse and worse, his Condition is bad; it may be that Sermon that works
no change at all in him, has tended, through the Mercy of God, to the
Conversion of several Souls who were as sorely wounded as he. If a Physician
gives the best Medicine he has, and lays on a most Sovereign Plaster, and yet
the Patient says, Sir, that which you prescribed has done me no good; I
wonder, says he, it seldom fails me, I fear your Condition, I must give up, I
have done what I can for you, the Lord pity your Soul, you are no Man for this
World; it is an Argument that Wound or Sickness will be unto Death, when the
best Preaching, the best Means that can be made use of, will not work upon a
Man's Heart; he is under Losses and Affliction, and diverse melting Providence,
but nothing will do.

Inferences.
IS Sin a Wound? or does it wound the Soul, wound the State, Nation, and Church
of God? We may then infer from hence the Folly of Men and Women who love and
hug their Sin. Will thou, O Sinner, hug a Serpent in thy Bosom, that strives to
sting thee to Death? what Fools are wicked Men?

2. Let us learn from hence to bewail the Condition of our sinful Relations,
let the Husband mourn over his unbelieving Wife, and the Wife mourn over the
unbelieving Husband; Fathers grieve for their unconverted and wounded Children,
and Children grieve for their wounded and unconverted Parents, etc. What are
they that thou love so dearly, and who lie in thy Bosom mortally wounded, and
will thou not be troubled for them? what not one Sigh nor Tear come from thee
for them? be astonished, O Heavens! what a hard Heart have thou?

3. Seek out for help, you that are unconverted, delay not; and let such who
are healed, do what they can to get help and Cure for their Friends: if a
Husband, a Wife, a Father, a Child or Brother be dangerously sick, or wounded
externally, how ready are you to enquire for some skilful Physician, or
Chyrurgion! and what speed will you make! and will you not be as tender and as
careful of their Souls?

4. Take heed you do not draw others into Sin. What not only wound thy own
Soul, but be cruel also to the Souls of others! will thou murder thy self, and
murder thy Friend too?

5. What blind Wretches are they that make a mock at Sin? [See Fools.]

6. Let it be also matter of caution to all, to take heed they rest not
satisfied with slight healing, Jer. 8.11.
They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly, etc. This may
be done many ways.

(1.) Some rest satisfied, and lick themselves whole with the thoughts of
federal Holiness, think they are in Covenant with God, through the Faith of
their Parents; thus the Jews, Mat. 3.9.
We are Abraham 's Seed, we have Abraham to our Father; my Parents were Godly;
and so they might, and yet thou a Child of the Devil, and be damned for all
that.

(2.) Some fly to their Godly Education: but that will never heal their Wounds;
it is not what a Godly Family thou wast brought up in, and what good Instruction
thou had, but what thou art, and what a change there is in thee, what Faith
and Fear of God is there wrought in thy Soul?

(3.) Others apply the Mercy of God, when they begin to feel Conscience to
terrify them, Exodus 34.6
and their Wounds appear, but never consider his Justice: remember God is
graci^us and merciful, etc. but will in no wise clear the Guilty.

(4.) Others trust to a partial Reformation of Life, they are other Men to what
they were once. Soul, it is not Reformation, or leaving all manner of gross
scandalous Sins, but a change of Heart and Regeneration thou must seek after.

(5.) Some apply the Promises of God to Sinners, before their Wounds were ever
lanced, or their Sores laid open, and the Corruption let out: this is but
skinning over the Sore, and to leave it to fester and rancle inwardly; the
proud Flesh must with some corroding Plaster be taken down, thou want
through Humiliation for Sin.

(6.) Many satisfy themselves, because they are not such great Sinners as some
are. Remember, Luke 13 3, 5.
I tell ye, nay, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

(7.) Some fly to their Duties, they sin and are wounded, and they think Prayer
will make them whole.

(8.) Some boast of their Knowledge and Experiences, etc. they can discourse and
talk well, nay, and will tell you, they are Members of the Church too: and this
may be, and yet they die of their Wounds, and go to Hell. O take heed you are
not slightly healed.

Quest. Well, but it may be you will say, What should we do to be thoroughly
healed?

Answ. There is but one Physician can heal these Wounds; none but the Lord
Christ only has the healing Medicine; his Blood is the Balsam, which thou must
apply by Faith. And if thou would have a perfect Cure, thou must be put to
pain; He that would be healed, must suffer his Wounds to be lanced, and
searched to the bottom.

2. Take the Physician's Counsel, and carefully follow his Directions; come to
him presently, whilst it is to day, or thou art a dead Man.

3. If it be so, that he says, thy right Hand must be cut off, bear the Pain;
or thy right Eye must be pulled out, submit to him. Whatsoever is dear to thee,
that hinders the Cure, thou must deny thy self of.

4. A Purge thou must take, or thy Wounds cannot be healed; the evil Humors, or
the Filth and Corruption that is in thy Heart, must by the Spirit of Grace be
purged out.

John 3.3.
5. Thou must become a new Creature: Except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God.

Sin a Plague.
1 Kings 8.38. What Prayer and Supplication soever be made by any Man, or by
all thy People Israel, which shall know every Man the Plague of his own Heart,
etc.

Levit. 13.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. -- And it be in the Skin of the Flesh like the Plague
of Leprosy, etc.


BY the Plague of the Leprosy, all Expositors agree, was represented the
hateful Nature of Sin.

Note. Sin may fitly be compared to the Plague, to the Plague of the Leprosy,
etc.

Parallels.
THe Leprosy proceeds from poisoned and corrupted Humors in the Body: So Sin
is nothing else but the poisonous and corrupt Humors of the Soul.

II. The Plague of the Leprosy spreads over every part of the Body: So Sin has
spread it self over the whole Lump of Mankind, and over every Faculty of the
Soul.

III. No Disease is more stinking and hateful to Men than the Leprosy: So
nothing is more abominable and detestable in the sight of God, and sincere
Christians, than Sin.

IV. No Disease is more contagious and infectious than the Leprosy; the Plague
of the Pestilence (says a Divine) is not so infectious as the Plague of the
Leprosy; Dr. Tailor
it infecteth Houses, Walls, Vessels, Garments, etc. So nothing is so
infectious as Sin. [See Sin a Wound.]

V. The Plague of the Leprosy separated the infected Person from the Fellowship
of all Men, whatever they were, if incurable, although Kings; they were utterly
and for ever excl^ded the Host, as Vzziah, neither were they admitted to come
into the Temple, to join in holy Things: So Sin unrepented of, 2 Kings 15.5.
separateth from God and Christ, and from the Fellowship of the Saints; it
shuts Souls out of the Church, nay, out of Heaven it self.

VI. No Disease is more painful and mortal, or more incurable; therefore they
were enjoined to put on mournful Apparel and Garments; it was so rarely and
seldom cured, that most carried it to their Graves: So Sin is very painful and
tormenting, as we before have showed.

VII. The Symptoms of the Leprosy agree with the Symptoms and Effects of Sin.

1. There is a D^bility and Weakness of all Parts in them that have this
Disease, because the Spirits are exhausted: So Sin makes feeble, weakens, and
debilitates the Powers of the Soul Hence Jacob, when he blessed Reuben, cries
out, As weak and unstable as Water, because of his Sin. Saints have weak Hands,
and feeble Knees often times hereby.

2. There is in a Leper a Tumor and Swelling in the Flesh: So Sin swells a Man
up in Pride, Vainglory, and Self-conceitedness.

3. There is in them, says my Author, a burning Thirst, through the adust and
burnt Blood by Melancholy, whereof it arises: So Sin causes an Inflammation
and Burning of Anger, of Lust, and vehement Thirst after the World, Preferment,
Pleasures, Riches, etc. [See Poison.]

4. There is in them filthy, putrid Matter, breaking forth in a most loathsome
manner: So such as are greatly infected with the Plague of Sin, cast forth
nothing but horrid Pollution. Hence wicked Men are likened to the troubled Sea,
that casts forth mi^y Dirt.

5. They have a hoarse and weak Voice: So Sinners cannot pray, or if they do,
John 9.
they cannot be heard. God hears not Sinners.

6. They have a stinking Breath and Mouth, and therefore they must cover their
Lips, lest by their Breath they should infect others: So Sinners have a filthy
Breath: Their Mouths are full of unclean and adulterous Speeches, belching
forth nothing but vile and abominable Oaths, Cursings, and slanderous
Accusations against the Godly, and sometimes also against one another; but
these seldom cover their Lips.

Inferences.
WHat an horrid Disease, and Plague of Plagues, is Sin! Every Man has a
running Plague Sore upon him. Who is it that is not a Leper from the Womb? We
were all born with this Plague; we brought it into the World with us. Every
Man, as he is in himself, may cry out, Unclean, unclean. Sin has spread it
self over us like a Leprosy.

II. Wicked Men are miserable, whoever they are, if not cured of this Plague.
Sin renders a Man more hateful to God, than an ugly Toad is to us.

III. It may caution Saints to shun the Company of a vile Sinner, and dread
Sin, and fly from it, as from the Plague. Nothing that Sinners touch, but they
defile, infect, and taint it, (till they are cleansed) whether earthly or
heavenly Things; all Creature Comforts and Actions are unclean to them hereby:
The very Plowing of the Wicked is Sin, Prove. 20.4. Tit. 1.13.
yea, the Sacraments, Prayers, or Alms, all is polluted, so long as they are
unconverted. Unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure, etc.

IV. A wicked Man can converse with no Man, but, as a Leper, he infects him by
his ill Example; he endangers the Lives and Souls of Men.

V. It may teach the Saints to bless God, and admire his Grace, who has
delivered them from the Contagion of Sin. Joh. 5.14.
But art thou made whole? sin no more.

VI. None but the High Priest pronounced a Person clean from the Leprosy: so
none but Christ can discern our Uncleanness, and pronounce us clean, and wholly
free from the Plague of Sin.

O What is Sin? it is a Leprosy,
When Scripture so compares it, may not I
Call it a Plague, a Wound, a loathsome Sore,
That does corrupt and spread the Soul all 'ore?
Like to an Ulcer, or infectious Biles,
Which the whole Man most woefully defiles.
O how do Men fly from the Pestilence,
And shall not we learn Wisdom now from thence?
Sin is a Plague that kills eternally,
All sorts of Men, unless they swiftly fly
To Jesus Christ; no Medicine will do good,
Nor heal the Soul, but this Physicians Blood.
Sin compared to Poison.
Romans 3.13. The Poison of Asps is under their Tongues.
Poison of Asps denotes, 1. Sometimes great Punishments. Job 6.4. and 20.16. He
shall suck the Poison of Asps, etc. 2. Sometimes corrupt Doctrine, and
Heresies, wherewith Men poison themselves and Followers. Deuteronomy. 32.33. Their
Wine is the Poison of Dragons, i. e. their Doctrine; So Ainsworth, Rev. 17.2.
With the Wine of her Fornication: Which intends Venom and Poison of the Devil,
the old Dragon; or the detestable Superstition and Idolatry of Antichrist, and
Church of Rome. 3. It signifies the cruel Malice and Rage of Men.

Note. Sin is the Venom or Poison of the Serpent, or the old Dragon.

Parallels.
Poison inflames, heats, and (as it were) sets the Body on fire: So Sin
inflames, heats, and sets (as it were) a Man's Spirit on fire. What a Heat does
the Devil put some Men in, by stirring up their Wrath, Rage, and Malice against
their Neighbors!

II. Poison causes a great and extreme Thirst. Gross or dreggish Liquor will
not quench the fiery Thirst of Poison; Caryl.
it drinks (says one) nothing but pure Spirits: So Sin stirs up an insatiable
Desire or Thirst after Revenge, as also after the Pleasures, Profits, and
Honors of this World, which nothing can allay, but the Water of Life, which
Jesus Christ gives; John 4.14.

III. Poison gets quickly (says one) to the Spirit, it is subtle and spiritful,
Plutarch.
and in a very little time will corrupt the whole Mass of Blood, etc. So Sin in
a little time corrupted the whole Lump of Mankind. Adam had no sooner sinned
against God, but the spiritual Poison and Venom thereof struck to his Heart,
corrupting every Faculty of his Soul, and not only so, but also the Souls of
all his Posterity. [See Wounds.]

IV. It Is noted by Plutarch, that when an Asp stings a Man, it does first
tickle him, and makes him laugh, till the Poison by little and little gets to
the Heart, and then it pains and torments him, more than ever it delighted him
before: So does Sin, it may please a little at first: Though Wickedness be
sweet in his Mouth, Job. 20 12
tho he hide it under his Tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not, but
keeps it still within his Mouth: Yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, it is
the Gall of Asps within him. Forbidden Profits and Pleasures are very
delightful to carnal Men, and many love to be meddling with these poisoning
Morsels of Sin. Many eat that on Earth, which they digest in Hell. Men must not
think to dine and dance with the Devil, and then to sup with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in God's Kingdom.

V. Poison in a Toad or Serpent, suits and agrees well with their Nature; but
Poison in a Man's Stomach makes fearful Work, it being of a contrary Nature: So
Sin in a wicked Man, one that has no spark of true Grace in him* seems to be
suitable, and agree well with him, his whole Nature being so grievously
corrupted, and changed into the evil Nature thereof, he having used himself so
long in sinful Ways, that Sin, ( viz. open Profaneness, Superstition, and
Error) is habitual, and become natural to him, as Poison to a Toad. Naturalists
say, That if a Man take a little quantity of Poison at a time, and so accustom
himself to it,
it will at length become so natural to him, that he may take it as Food: Even
so wicked Men, by a continual Course and evil Custom in Sin, drink it down as
pleasant Liquor, (like as the Fish drinks Water.) But now Sin to a true
Christian, is like much Poison in a Man's Stomach: it is contrary to that new
Nature, and divine Principle, which is wrought in him by the Spirit of God; he
cannot bear nor endure it, he hates every false Way: Romans 7.
That which I hate, that do I.

VI. Poison is deadly in its own Nature, and of a killing and destroying
Quality, if not timely vomited up, by taking some fit and proper Antidote, etc.
So Sin, (whether fleshly or spiritual, viz. sensual Debauchery, or Heresy) will
kill and destroy all wherever it is, both Body and Soul, eternally, except by
true Repentance it be vomited up. Tho Men take it down as sweet Wine, Prove.
23.31.
and are not presently sensible of any harm; yet at last it will bite like a
Serpent, and sting like an Adder.

VII. Oil will expel Poison, and it is often given to Persons who have taken
it, to cause them to vomit it up: So the Oil of Gladness, viz. the Spirit of
God, is the best Antidote in the World, to expel and work out the Poison of Sin
in the Soul. [ See Oil of Gladness, in the First Volume, Book 2.]

Inferences.
WHat do Sinners mean? will they poison themselves? are they void of
Understanding, to take down the Poison of Dragons? Will they wilfully murder
themselves? What Blindness and Folly is in their Hearts!

II. O how should this stir up the Godly to pity wicked Men, and to strive, as
much as lies in their Power, to prevent their sinning, and endeavor to turn
away their Wrath!

III. It may also caution Believers to take heed of Sin, and of the Venom of an
evil Tongue, as also of the Poison of Heresy and Error.

IV. Let Sinners also learn from hence timely to look out for Help. O get a fit
Antidote to save you from this Poison!

Ah! what is Sin? it is Poison in a Cup,
That Is gilt without, and Men do drink it up,
Most earnestly, with joy and much delight,
Being pleasant to the carnal Appetite.
Sin's sweet to him whose Soul is out of taste,
But long (alas!) its Sweetness will not last.
Sin's sweet to the Flesh, that does it dearly love;
But to the Soul it does rank Poison prove.
Have thou sucked this most deadly Venom in?
And do not see thy vital Parts begin
To swell? Art poisoned, Soul? Look, look about,
To get an Antidote to work it out,
Before it be too late, the Poyson's strong,
Don't stay a Week, twelve Hours is too long.
One dram of Grace, mixed with repenting Tears,
The Grace of perfect Love, that casts out Fears,
Mixed with that Faith which kills all Unbelief,
Took down with speed, will ease thee of thy Grief;
'Twill purge the Soul, and work by Vomit well,
And all vile Dregs of Venom 'twill expel.
Unless thou vomit up each Dreg, be sure
No hope of Life; one Sin will Death procure,
Eternal Death: Repentance is not right,
'Till Sin, nay, every Sin's forsaken quite.
Not only left, but as a poisonous Cup,
Thou must it loath, it is hateful, spue it up.
Sin a Sickness.
Isa. 1.5. The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint, etc.

Mat. 9.12. -- The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.


SPiritual Sickness is twofold; (1.) To be sick with Sin. (2.) To be sick of
Sin: as Sin wounds the Soul, so it makes sick, and this is Man's Misery; but to
be sick of Sin, (viz.) to be sensible of the Evil and cursed Nature thereof,
this is a Mercy.

Parallels.
THE Causes of Natural Sickness are diverse, sometimes it arises from some
inward, and sometimes from some outward Cause; to know from whence the
Distemper grew or did arise is very necessary, whether it be Chronical or
Acute, i. e. that which has seized on the Patient on a sudden, by Heats, Cold,
or from the Corruption of the Blood, by an infectious Air, etc. which an able
Physician is diligent to pry and search into. Now as touching the Sickness of
the Soul, it is evident the Original Cause thereof, was by eating of the
forbidden Fruit, which surfeited the whole Lump of Mankind; or (if you please)
it was occasioned by Poison, by the Poison of the old Serpent. Deadly Poison
makes a Man very sick, and corrupts the whole Mass of Blood: And as it is
needful to find out (if possible) the Cause of Sickness, so it is as necessary
to find out the Cause of Spiritual Sickness; the Cause being discovered, the
Cure is easy. If a Man does not see what his state is, as considered in the
first Adam, nor the evil and damning Nature of Sin in general, nor the
particular Plague of his own Heart, he is in no hopeful way of help and healing.

II. Some Sicknesses or Diseases are Epidemical: Sin is a Sickness or Disease
so universal, and a Contagion so catching, that none have escaped, nor are
totally free from it.

III. Some are so sick that they have no place free: Sin is a Disease that
afflicts every part, Isa. 5.
the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint.

IV. The Distemper which we call the Sickness, or Pestilence, is very mortal,
and sweeps away thousands: Sin is such a Sickness, no Pestilence like it; Sin
is the Plague of Plagues. That which is most opposite to God, is the greatest
Evil; but Sin is most opposite and contrary to God, and therefore the greatest
Evil. That which separates Man from, and deprives him of the greatest Good,
must needs be the greatest Evil, or the Plague of Plagues; but Sin does this,
therefore the greatest Evil. That which is the greatest Judgment to be left
unto, is the worst of Evils; but it is the greatest Judgment in the World, to be
left or given up to the Lusts of our own Hearts: Ergo, etc. When God designs to
bring his severest Wrath upon a People, or a particular Soul, when he resolves
to afflict them to the uttermost, he does not say, I will bring Plague, or
Sickness, or Famine upon them, but, I will deliver them up to their Sins.
Israel would have none of me, etc. and what then? Psalm. 81.11. Romans 1.26, ^8.
So I gave them up to their own Hearts Lusts, etc. Thus he gave up the Gentiles
to vile Affections. That Sickness, Plague, or Pestilence, that destroys most,
that kills Millions, which is so infectious, that none amongst Thousands, nay,
Millions of Thousands, can escape, is the Plague of Plagues; but such a
Sickness is Sin. More shall be damned, than shall be saved; nay, but few
comparatively enter in at the strait Gate, and so find Life. Now all that are
damned, are damned or destroyed by Sin, and therefore it is the worst of Evils.
That which kills or destroys Body and Soul too, is the Plague of Plagues; but
Sin destroys Body and Soul too: Ergo, Sin is the Plague of Plagues.

V. Many of those who have the Disease we call the Sickness, have Spots upon
them, which are of two sorts, one of which are called the Tokens; and when they
appear, they look upon themselves as dead Men: So Sin, this spiritual Plague
and Sickness of the Soul, Deuteronomy. 31.4.
marks some Men out for eternal Death: Their Spot (says the Lord) is not the
Spot of my Children; that is, their Sin is not a Sin of Infirmity, such as
appear upon the Children of God. Any Spot is bad, but some are worse, very bad,
they are deadly Spots, they have the Tokens of Death and Wrath upon them.

1. The Sin or Spot of a godly Man is rather a Scar or Wound that is healed, or
almost healed: But Sin in some of the Ungodly, is like a rotten, putrefying
Sore in the Flesh.

2. The Spots of the Godly are not so contagious or infectious as the Sins or
Spots of the Wicked. The Sins of the Ungodly make their very Persons and
Prayers loathed and hateful in God's sight; now God, tho he hates the Sins of
his own Children, Psalm 109.7.
yet he loves their Persons.

3. Sin in a Saint is his Sorrow, it is that which he hates, it wounds and
grieves his Soul, Romans 7.3.
he is sick of his Sin; but the Wicked love their Sin. Sin is in a godly Man's
Conversation, and that is his Trouble; but Sin is in a wicked Man's Affection,
which renders it to be a deadly Spot.

4. Sin reigns and predominates in the Hearts of the Wicked: But Sin, tho it
may sometimes tyrannize in a Saint, yet he obeys it not, he is not the Subject
or Servant of Sin: The one yields and subjects to Sin; the other opposes and
resists it, every Faculty of his Soul is set against it; and not only so, but
against every Sin.

VI. Sickness brings oft-times utter Weakness upon the Body: So Sin brings
Weakness upon the Soul: I am feeble, etc. It makes a Christian very faint. [
See Leprosy.]

VII. Some Sickness is very grievous to be born: So Sin is grievous to a true
Christian, who is made sensible of it.

VIII. A Man that finds himself very sick, and like to die, will soon look out
for Help, or send to a Physician: So the Soul that is sin-sick, will seek for
Help, viz. hasten to Jesus Christ, for none else can cure the Sickness of the
Soul.

Inferences.
ARt thou sick, and ready to die, and insensible of any Illness? does nothing
ail thee? This is sad.

II. Art thou sick, and greatly afflicted? is thy Soul weary of its Groanings?
Haste to the Physician, go to Christ.

1. The more sick, the more need of Physic; the greater Sinner thou art, the
more need of a Savior thou have.

2. The longer thou delayest, the more hard and difficult will thy Cure be,
besides the Danger thou runnest, Death may be at thy Door.

3. Consider, you must have a Cure, and be freed from this Sickness, this Stone
in the Heart, this Unbelief, or whatever else the Disease be, or else be
damned.

4. Christ came from Heaven on purpose to be thy Physician: He came not to call
the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

5. Soul, let me tell thee, as it was once said to blind Bartimeus, Be of good
cheer, Mat. 11.28, 29.
Christ calls thee. Come to me all ye that are weary, etc.

Luke 10.30.
6. Thou may have Physic and Cure very cheap: Tho thou have no Money, Christ
will do all freely, if thou will cast thy self upon him.

7. Christ is able to cure all Diseases. Tho thou art never so sick, he is able
to make thee whole: Heb. 7.25.
He is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him.

8. Christ is willing as well as able. See Mat. 8.2. Mark 1.41.

9. Christ can do the Work, when all other Means fail, ( Mark 5.26.) when
Purposes fail, good Desires fail, Prayers fail, and good Works, and Moral
Righteousness fails, etc.

10. Christ is such a Physician, that rather than thou should go without
Cure, he has shed his own Blood, to make thee whole, and free thee from thy
Sickness.

11. If Christ undertakes the Cure, he will never leave thee, till he has
perfectly restored thee to Health again. But remember, there is no Cure, but by
his precious Blood: He died, that we might live.

Can thou be sick, and such a Doctor by?
Thou can not live, unless thy Doctor die.
Strange kind of Grief! that finds no Medicine good
T'asswage the Pain, but the Physician's Blood.
Fr. Quarles.
Sin compared to Vomit.
Jer. 48.26. Moab also shall wallow in his own Vomit, etc.

2 Pet. 2.22. -- The Dog is turned to his Vomit again, etc.


A Wicked Man, or one who turns to his old evil and wicked Courses, is compared
to a Dog, and Sin to Vomit which a Dog licketh up.

Parallels.
A Vomit is a very loathsome Thing, but a Dog's Vomit is most detestable: So Sin
is a very loathsome Thing, but Apostasy is the worst of Sins; no Sin is more
abominable in God's sight than that.

II. A Vomit is cast up sometimes by reason of the Sickness of the Stomach: So
a Christian being very sick of his Sin, casts it up, or vomits it out by
Repentance.

III. Some Men finding themselves oppressed by means of some Obstructions, or
by reason of the Foulness of their Stomachs, take something to make them vomit,
to free themselves of that which otherwise may endanger their Health, if not
their Lives: So a Christian, being sensible of internal Obstructions, and
Pollutions of his inward Man, takes a fit Antidote of Christ's preparing, by
which means he vomits up the Filth and Pollution of his Heart and Life, and
thereby attains a healthy Soul, and flourishes in Godliness.

IV. Some Men on a sudden are made to vomit, by eating something that offends,
or agrees not with their Stomachs: So many Sinners, by hearing of a
Soul-searching Sermon, and by the Rebukes and continual Gnawings of their own
Consciences, vomit up some of the Sins of their Lives; but in a little time
they grow more sick of Religion than ever they were of their Sins, and so, with
the Dog, they lick up their old Vomit again, i. e. turn to their former Ways of
Sin and Error.

V. What is more hateful, or causes greater Shame, than to see a Man wallow in
his own filthy Vomit? So it is hateful to see a wicked and an ungodly Apostate,
who has turned his Back upon Christ and his Ways, wallowing in all his former
Sins, and brutish Lusts.

Inference. Let this teach us to hate Sin and Apostasy.

Sin an Uncleanness.
Ezekiel. 36.29. From all your Uncleannesses, etc.

Zech. 13.1. In that day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and for Uncleanness.

Ephesians. 4.19. To work all Uncleanness, etc.


SIN is compared to an unclean thing, and Man by reason of Sin is said to be
defiled; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? the Hebrew Tama, as Mr.
Caryl observes, comes near the Word Contaminatum, which is used by the Latins
for Uncleanness, and it speaks the greatest Uncleanness, Pollution, Sordidness,
and Filthiness imaginable, as of Habit, Goar of Blood, the Muddiness of Water,
or whatsoever is loathsome or unlovely, noisome or unseemly; such an Uncleanness
is Sin.

Note, Sin is an unclean thing: They who see the Face of Sin in the Glass of
the Law, see it the most ugly and deformed Object in the World: If Virtue could
be seen, she would attract all Eyes to her, and ravish all Hearts to behold
her, Virtue is an invisible Beauty; so if Sin could be seen, all Eyes would
turn away from it, and all Hearts loath it. Sin is an invisible Deformity. The
Spirit of God does as it were strive for Comparisons, to set out the ugliness
of Sin, it is compared to the Blood and Pollution of wretched newborn Infants,
Ezekiel. 16. Romans 3.13. Isa. 1.5, 6. Jam. 1.27.
to the Corruption and Putrefaction of a rotten Sepulcher, to the Scum of a
Seething-Por, to loathsome, stinking and putrefying Sores, to the superfluity
of Naughtiness, to the Leprosy, etc. all these Comparisons show forth the
ugliness of Sin, but alas! it is filthy beyond compare.

Parallels.
SOme things are so unclean and filthy, that they defile every thing they
touch: Sin is such an Uncleanness who can touch it, meddle with it, and not be
defiled by it? it is an infectious Uncleanness: as Good is so much the better,
by how much the more it is diffusive, so Sin is so much the worse, by how much
it is the more infectious and diffusive. Sin is diffusive two ways. 1. By
Propagation from Adam to all his Posterity. 2. By way of Imitation.

II. Some things are full of Uncleanness, they abound in Filth and Pollution;
such a Defilement and Uncleanness is Sin, it is not in one Part only, but in
and upon the whole Man, it goes quite through; there is not the least part free
from Head to Heel, Caryl.
They are all gone out of the way and become vile, vile all over. There is a
double universality of this Uncleanness. 1. It defiles all Men. 2. All of Man,
not one Man in the World but is unclean by Sin, and not one part in Man but is
unclean; view him in his Understanding, Will, Judgment, Memory, Affection,
Conscience, Eyes, Hands, Tongue, Feet, all parts of the Body, and Powers of the
Soul are unclean.

III. Some Uncleanness is active, prevailing and powerful, it increases and
grows worse and worse, and defiles, and pollutes more and more; such an
Uncleanness is Sin. Man is unclean as he comes into the World, but this
Uncleanness grows and prevails more and more upon him, by actual Sin he becomes
worse and worse, and is more defiled every day; it strives to captivate and
bring the Souls of all Men under the defiling Power and Pollution of it. Romans
7.23.


IV. Some Uncleanness is so loathsome, that it causes such things to stink as
come near it; Sin makes the Sinner stink, his Person stink, his Life stink, and
his Services and Prayers, and all his best Actions to stink in the Nostrils of
God. Prove. 15.8.
The Sacrifices of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord.

V. Some Uncleanness are inward, hidden, obscure, appear not to the external
Eyes. Sin is not a Spot in the Garment, or visible Pollution in the Face, or
rottenness in the Flesh, tho that is bad, and sometimes the effects of this
Uncleanness, but it is rottenness in the Heart; all a Man's Intrals are as it
were corrupted. Man, as you heard, and every part of Man is defi^ed, and yet
externally this uncleanness does not appear, the Sinner seems as beautiful and
comely to the outward Eyes as other Men, this Uncleanness is internal: As
Saints internally are glorious and beautiful, so Sinners internally are foul,
filthy, and deformed, their Heart, Tit. 1.15.
Liver, and Conscience, is defiled.

Disparity.
WHat Pollution and Filth is so fixed and abiding, that all the Nitre and
Fuller's Soap in the World cannot wash it off, nor the hottest Fire purify,
purge it out, or consume it? But such an Uncleanness and Pollution is Sin, that
all the Water in the mighty Ocean cannot wash it out; nay, could a Man bathe
himself in b^inish Tears of godly Contrition, Jer. 2.22.
it will not cleanse, or take away the Filth of his Transgression. Tho thou
wash thee with Nitre, and take unto thee much Soap; yet thy Iniquity is mark^d
before me, says the Lord. All the Fire of Hell cannot burn it out; Hellfire
shall never (as says Mr. Caryl) consume this Filth; those who are not purged
in this Life, shall never be purged in the next. The Wicked shall ever be in
punitive Flames, but shall not find (as Papists dream) any purgative Flames;
the Fire and Brimstone of Hell shall never fetch this Uncleanness out of the
Damned.

II. What Uncleanness, and abominable Filth and Pollution is ensnaring? Men and
Women are shie of, and ready at all turns to fly from, and avoid any external,
horrible Uncleanness: But Sin is a bewitching and ensnaring Uncleanness. All
the bodily Beauty in the World did never entice so many, as the Deformity and
foul Face of Sin has. Beauty and Comeliness are the Attractives, the Loadstone
of Love; Christ was not loved by many, because he did not appear beautiful, he
veiled his glorious Beauty: Lust is loved, tho it be altogether unbeautiful.
Christ is the Mirror of Beauty; tho some see no Comeliness in him, he is fairer
than the Children of Men: But there is no Form or Comeliness in Sin, nothing
indeed why it should be desired; yet how is it admired and esteemed by all
Sorts of Men! They dote upon it, and run mad with love to it, ('it is so
bewitching) as the choicest Beauty in the World.

III. Wh^t Filth, Uncleanness, or Pollution, is of such a murdering, killing,
and destroying Nature, as Sin? It is true, some horrid Pollution is of a
corrupting, poisonous, and destroying Quality, but not like Sin: This Venom,
this Uncleanness, is worse than any, more mortal than any; it kills both Body
and Soul too; it destroys eternally. O there is no finding out the cursed
Nature of it; there is nothing can save from the killing Power of it, nor
cleanse from its Pollution, but Christ's Blood.

Inferences.
O What a woeful Condition is Man in by Nature, how unclean in God's sight! Well
might Eliphaz say, Job 15.16.
How abominable and filthy is Man, who drinks in Iniquity like Water! The
Word (...) notes that which is most abhorring to the Nature of Man; that which
is not only so nauseous that the Stomach cannot digest it, but so base, that
the Mind is burdened to think upon it; yea, the Word imports that which is
rejected by all the Senses, that which the Eye cannot endure to look upon, that
which the Ear cannot endure to hear of, that which is a Stink in the Nostrils,
and which the Hand will not touch, such a a thing is Man in God's Sight, by
reason of Sin. Filthy, (...), the Word is derived from a Root that signifies,
Caryl on Job 15.16.
corrupt, rotten, putrified, the Scum of a Pot, the Rust of Metals, the Dung or
Excrement of Man and Beasts. There are no Words (says Caryl) filthy enough to
express the Filthiness of Man. The Word is found, says he, but three times in
Scripture, in this Construction, and in all of them it is applied to show the
abominable Wickedness of Man: The first is this, Job 15.16. Psalm. 14 3. Psalm.
53.3. as if this were a Word picked out on purpose, as a Glass, to show Man his
Face and natural Complexion in, etc.

Job 7.17.
II. O what is Man, that God should be mindful of him! What Beauty is there in
him, that the Almighty should set his Heart upon him!

III. What little reason have wicked Men to be proud? And how sadly are they
mistaken, who think to adorn themselves with Sin? How do Sinners pride
themselves in their filthy Garments, and Cloak of Unrighteousness? He is no
Gallant now a days, unless he can swear and curse, and cry, Damn-him, and,
Sink-him. Lord, what an Age is this! They show their Sin, as Sodom, and hide it
not; they glory in their Shame.

IV. Let us learn from hence to be fully sensible of our Birth-Pollution, I
mean, Original Sin, Job 25.5. Job 14.4.
that which we brought into the World with us: Can he be clean that is born of
a Woman? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Can the Stream
be clean, when the Fountain is so unclean? All that are born by natural
Generation, are unclean. Adam's particular Act or Breach of the Law of God was
ours, we being in him; he stood as the common Root of all his Posterity; it is
also by the Almighty imputed to us: The natural Pravity or Corruption which
issues from thence, passes from Generation to Generation.

V. We may infer from hence, that every Man and Woman has need of washing; say
not therefore with Peter, Thou shall never wash my Feet, when every part is
defiled, etc.

VI. Go, polluted Soul, go to the Fountain, It Is the Blood of Jesus Christ,
that cleanses us from all Sin.

VII. Bless God, there is a Fountain to wash in, a Fountain opened for Sin and
Uncleanness. [See Fountain in the First Volume.]

VIII. You that are clean, praise the Almighty: Ye were as filthy as others:
Such were some of you, etc. Saints may be said to be clean four manner of Ways:
(1.) Clean meritoriously, by the Blood of the Lord Jesus. (2.) Efficaciously,
by the Spirit uniting them to Christ, and sanctifying their Hearts. (3.) Clean
instrumentally, by the Word: Now are you clean, through the Word which I have
spoken unto you. (4.) Clean impulsively, and attractively by Faith: --
Purifying their Hearts by Faith.

Sin compared to Gray-Hairs.
Hos. 7.9. -- Yea, gray Hairs are here and there upon him, and he knows it
not.
HE knows it not, that is, Israel, or Ephraim, viz. the ten Tribes. Hos. 1.4.
Amos 9.8.
Ephraim may be considered as a Kingdom, I am against the sinful Kingdom; or as
a Church: They were a People in Covenant with God, or in a National
Church State, and once youthful and beautiful, but now they are become old and
grayheaded, i. e. they had Symptoms of Decay and Ruin upon them.

Gray Hairs: Some by gray Hairs understand heavy Judgments; others, some
prevailing Evils or Sins, which were Signs of Destruction, etc. There may be
Truth in both.

Note. Symptoms of Ruin oft-times appear upon a People, before their Ruin
comes.

Parallels.
GRay Hairs are a Sign that a Man's best Days, his youthful Days, are gone: So
some Sins and Judgments upon a People, are a Sign that their best Days are past
away, that their Youth and Glory is departing.

II. Gray Hairs are a Sign of old Age: So some Sins and Judgments upon a
People, show forth that they are old in Wickedness.

III. Gray Hairs come oft-times by great Grief. Scaliger tells us of a young
Man, Buroughs.
who through the extreme Trouble of his Spirit, was turned gray in one Night:
So the Judgments and Miseries of a People, because of their Sins, make them
gray headed, and thereby look old and withered, etc.

IV. When gray Hairs come upon a Man, they bring oftentimes with them feeble
Knees, and Stiffness of the Limbs: So Sin makes feeble; the Heat of Zeal, and
Vigor of Spirit is thereby abated.

V. Gray Hairs are Symptoms and Forerunners of Death and Mortality: So some
Sins and Miseries upon a People, are the clear Symptoms of spiritual Death, or
Night of Darkness.

VI. Some Men have gray Hairs here and there, and they know not of them: So a
Soul, Nation, or Church, may have sad Symptoms of Ruin upon them, and they be
ignorant of them: He knows it not.

Quest. What were those gray Hairs that were upon Ephraim?

Answ. 1. One was, Strangers had devoured his Strength: Their Support and chief
Stay, that which should uphold, comfort, and succor them, was gone. -- Wicked
Men were let in upon them, and such who sought to spoil them of their Rights,
Liberties, and Estates; or spiritually, Sin prevail^d, strange Lusts had
devoured their Strength. Hos. 2.5.
Ephraim was fallen in love with other Lovers, his Affection was set upon
Strangers. Saints should keep their Hearts close to Christ, or else the Love of
the World will soon steal away their Strength* and make them decay in
Godliness. The Whoredom of Ephraim was doubtless one of those gray Hairs he had
upon him.

2. The Pride of Ephraim was another gray Hair: The Pride of Israel does
testify to his Face; and therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their
Iniquity. Hos. 5.5.


3. Their Goodness was as the M^rning-Cloud, and as the early Dew, it passed
away: Hos. 6.4.
Which might be another of his gray Hairs. By their Goodness, doubtless is
meant their Goodness and Kindness to God, and one toward another. They were
false-hearted, unconstant, and fickle, like a Morning-Cloud; their Words were
empty Sounds, like Clouds without Water; they dealt treacherously with God, and
deceitfully with their Brethren.

4. They were like a silly Dove without a Heart; they let their dearest
Enjoiments go, like as a silly Dove parts with her Young, and did not, like the
Hen, strive to preserve them: This might be another of his gray Hairs. A Dove
is easily caught with a Net; so was Ephraim easily ensnared by his Enemies. A
Dove will keep her Nest, tho you take it away, and thereby take her captive: O
how unwilling are some Men to part with their Lusts! They will not leave their
Sins, or Company, tho it prove their Ruin: They are like the silly Dove.

5. The great Things of God's Law were accounted strange Things to Ephraim; tho
God himself wrote them, yet he liked them not, but rather derided at them that
owned, and subjected to them. This was another gray Hair.

Hos. 7.8.
6. Ephraim was as a Cake not turned, he was not through for God; he stood
halting between two Opinions, did not know what Religion to be of: Or he was so
perverse, that tho he lay under heavy Judgments, and was ready to be burned on
the Coals; yet he sought not to prevent the Danger, H^s. 7.14.
and escape the Fire; he cried not to God in his Affliction. And this was
another of his gray Hairs.

7. Ephraim was as an empty Vine; he brought forth Fruit to himself: God
received but little from Ephraim; all his Labor and Doing was for himself, to
enrich himself, and lay up for himself; he cared not for the Interest of God.
An empty Vine: He had Juice and Sap enough to bring forth Fruit to himself, but
was barren toward God. They cannot spare Time, nor have they leisure to wait
upon his Service: They cannot spare Money to further the Interest of Godliness,
tho they can give two, three, four, or five hundred, nay, a thousand Pounds, to
such a Son, or such a Daughter, and maintain them bravely, when some of
Christ's Ministers want Bread: They love (alas!) their Sons and Daughters more
than Christ: They are empty Vines, they bring forth Fruit to themselves. O what
a base Spirit and Principle are some Professors of! They are like Ephraim. And
this was another of his gray Hairs.

Hos. 12.1.
8. He was broken in Judgment, he fed on the Wind, and followed after the East
Wind: He pursued after Vanity, and the empty Things of this World. And that was
another of his gray Hairs. Many more I might mention, they were indeed thick
upon him, he was become very gray in Wickedness.

Inference.
LEt us take heed we have not gray Hairs upon us, and know it not. Is not
England, and the Church of God in England, grown here of late gray headed? O
what Signs and Symptoms of Ruin are there upon us! I will leave you to find
them out. Where is that Love and Zeal that was once? Is not the World got into
the very Hearts of Professors? Do they not follow after the Wind, and pursue
the East Wind? Are they not like an empty Vine? Does not every one mind his own
carnal Interest? Have not Strangers devoured our Strength? Are we not become
like a silly Dove without an Heart? Is not Whoredom and Superstition amongst
us? Does not our Pride testify against us? And is not our Goodness like the
Morning-Cloud? Where is that Love and Bowels which should be in us toward one
another? Are not some of the Things, yea, the great Things of God's Law,
accounted by us as strange Things? Search further, and more gray Hairs will
appear. Are we not divided and broken in Judgment? Can a Nation divided against
it self, long stand? -- Are there not many faithful Ministers snatched away in
a short time? Is not this the Forerunner of some dismal Calamity? Have not we
had many fearful Signs in the Heavens? And are not the Evening-Wolves come out
of their Holes? Besides all this, let every Soul search and see what gray Hairs
he has upon himself.

Metaphors, Similes, AND Other Borrowed TERMS, CONCERNING The Devil, or Evil
Angels.
The Devil called the God of this World.
2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which
believe not.
THE Devil here is called a God; not that he is a God, either by Nature, or
has this name conferred upon him by the Almighty, in respect of his Office,
but rather he is called so in respect of wicked Men, who serve and obey him as
their God, and in whom he rules and works effectually, as in his own People and
Subjects.

Properly there is but one God: tho there are many who are called Gods, yet
they are not Gods by Nature; I am God and none else. Unto us there is but one
God: one eternal, immense, Isa. 45.22.
infinite, and incomprehensible Majesty. And this God is either considered
Essentially, God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. or else Personally, viz. the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit; There are three that bear Witness in Heaven, etc.
and these three are one.

Improperly, (1.) Idols are called Gods; (2.) The Ark, 1 Samuel 4.7. (3.)
Magistrates, I have made the a God to Pharaoh. Thou shall not revile the Gods;
Exodus 7.1. Exodus 22.28.
the Chaldee says [Rab] that is, a Master; the Hebrew Elohim (God) as Mr.
Ainsworth observes upon the place, is attributed to Judges and Magistrates, I
said ye are Gods, these are Gods by Office. (4.) Satan, Psalm. 82.6.
as in this Text, who would be looked upon and worshipped as a God, he is
properly an Angel, once an Angel of Light; God created him; and before he fell,
he was a good Angel, as other Angels are who kept their first Estate; he is
called a God; but there is one Word that confines his Power and Sovereignty,
and greatly degrades him, limits him, and spoils his Divinity, makes him but a
poor petty God, he is but the God of this World, both for extension and
duration; he bears no rule above, nor shall he bear any sway in the World to
come: If the God of this World, it is by Usurpation; he is like an audacious
Traitor who rebels and strives against his Lawful Sovereign, For the Earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Christ is Heir of both Worlds; tho he
admits Satan to God it here for a while, he is a false God, an Enemy to God,
and no God.

Disparity.
GOD is without Beginning; the Devil had a beginning: God is an uncreated
Spirit, the Devil an Angel and a created Spirit (I do not say he was created a
Devil) Sin made him a Devil. God can do what he pleases, he has an unlimited
Power; the Devil's Power is limited, he can go no further than God permits him.
God has a just and rightful Power, Satan has only an usurped Power, etc. God
is infinite, immense, etc. But some may say, in what Sense is Satan said to be
God of this World? What World? etc. The word World is a convertible Phrase, and
here I understand it is to be taken for the Inhabitants of the World; I mean
the Wicked, distinct from the Godly. He is the wicked Man's God three ways.

1. By Devolution, they have fallen off from God to Satan, they have departed
from the true God, and his Service, and have closed in with the Devil; and so
Satan owns them to be his Subjects. The whole World is divided into two parts,
two Bodies, and are under two Heads, either Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, or of
the Kingdom and Power of Satan; they are either of the Army of Light, or
Regiment of Darkness.

Romans 6.16.
2. The Devil is the wicked Man's God by voluntary submission, His Servants ye
are to whom you obey. Wicked Men are Satan's Volunteers.

3. By God's just Desertion, as they have cast off God and his Service, and
desire not the knowledge of his ways; so God has cast them off, and suffered
Satan to possess them, etc.

The Devil a Prince.
Joh. 14.30. -- The Prince of the World comes, etc.

Ephesians. 2.2. According to the Prince of the Power of the Air.

Rev. 9.11. And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless
P^t.


THE Devil is in these Scriptures called a Prince, Prince of Darkness, Prince
of the Power of the Air, King of the bottomless Pit, etc.

Parallels.
PRince is a Term that denotes Power and Sovereignty; Satan has great Power
over wicked Men, etc. There is also, no doubt, some kind of Supremacy or
Superiority amongst the evil Angels; we read of the Prince of Devils, He casts
out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Also some of these wicked Angels
are called Principalities and Powers, which signifies Eminency of Place, above
others. What degrees or order there is amongst Devils is hard to find out, what
ever Order there is amongst them, yet we know he is the Master of mis-rule
amongst Men, etc.

II. A King or Prince ruling and reigning, imports a Kingdom: for what is a
King without a Kingdom and Dominions over which he reigns? The Devil has a
Kingdom. There is a twofold Spiritual Kingdom spoken of, viz. the Kingdom of
Light, and the Kingdom of Darkness, called sometimes the Kingdom and Power of
Darkness. ^1. His Kingdom is in the Hearts of ungodly Men, he rules and reigns
there. 2. His Kingdom takes in all the Confines and Territories of Antichrist,
and all other false and corrupt, erroneous and tyrannical States whatsoever,
throughout the whole Earth, where his Power is owned, and his Authority
subjected to. 3. He is said to be King of the bottomless Pit.

III. The Name of some Kings puts an awful fear upon Men: So the Name and Power
of Satan is such, that it makes many Souls to dread and quake at the Thoughts
of him.

IV. Some Kings have been great Tyrants. There is no Tyrant in the World, nor
ever was, so vile as the Devil. True, some have acted like Devils, they seemed
more like Devils than Men, as Nero, who caused the Bowels of his own Mother to
be ripped up to see where he lay, etc. [See Lion and Dragon.]

V. Some Kings are mighty in Power, and their Dominions very large: Satan is a
mighty King, he has a Power that no mere human force can stand against, hence
called the strong Man armed; none ever seemed a match for him but the Prince of
Peace. Besides, he rules over all the Nations of the ungodly, and by force or
fraud enslaves to his hellish Scepter Millions of Souls, there is no Kingdom,
or Nation, in the whole Universe, but he pretends to some Right, Supremacy, and
Authority in it; the World is full of his Creatures; nay there are more Souls
who are his Vassals, than the Son of God has faithful Subjects.

The Devil a Hunter.
Psalm. 91.3. He will deliver thee from the Snare of the Hunter.

Prove. 6.5. Deliver thy self as a Roe from the Hand of the Hunter.


By the Hunter in these places, I see no ground to doubt, but that the Holy
Ghost principally intends the Devil, who is the great Hunter and Destroyer of
Men's Souls, out of whose Hand, i. e. Power, Wisdom advises her Son to deliver
himself.

Parallels.
A Hunter is one that pursues, or eagerly follows after his Prey, what sort of
Beasts soever he hunts, he seems unwearied in his Pursuit, his Heart is
affected with his Game, and hence takes great delight in it: So the Devil
pursues Sinners, nay and the Godly too, for they are part of his Game, and how
eagerly does he pursue them, it is the only thing he seems to delight in, he is
never weary of this work, nor in the work.

II. A Hunter in pursuing after the poor sensitive Beast, designs to kill and
destroy them, it is to take their Lives away, etc. So the Devil in hunting after
the Souls of Men, his grand design is to destroy them, He seek^th whom he may
devour; it is the Soul, the Life of the Soul, he strives to destroy. As David
speaks of his Enemy, Thou huntest after my Soul to take it, 1 Samuel 24.12.
so may every Man and Woman say of Satan.

III. A Hunter has many Devices and cunning Stratagems to ensnare the Game he
pursues: So the Devil has many Snares and cunning Wiles to catch and destroy
the Souls of Men, Hence he is compared to a Serpent: We are not ignorant says
Paul, of his Devices, 2 Cor. 9.11.
and in another place, he exhorts the Saints to put on the whole Armor of God,
that they may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. The Greek Word
signifies such Snares as are set to catch a Man, He will deliver thee, says
the Psalmist, from the Snare of the Hunter, Psalm. 91.3.
meaning (says Ainsworth) the Devil; Satan has many Devices and Snares to
draw Men into Sin. 1. By persuading the Soul it is no great matter, it is, says
he, but a little one. 2. By presenting the Pleasure and Profit of sinful
Practices, and hiding the Shame thereof, and the Wrath and Misery they will
certainly bring on the Soul at last. 3. He lays before a Man the Sins of good
Men, O says he do you not find that such and such Godly Men have done as bad
as this, was not David overcome with Adultery, Ezekiah with Pride, and Noah
with Drunkenness, etc. but all the while he strives to hide from them their
Virtue and unfeigned Repentance, and utter abhorrence of these Sins afterward.
4. He presents God to the Soul, as one made up all of Mercy, and that
Repentance will make all whole again; but afterward, it may be, when the Soul
is defiled by yielding to his Temptation, persuades Souls the Sin is so great,
and God so just, that he will not pardon Sin, it is little before committed, but
great when it is committed, and this way he seeks to ensnare the Sinner. 5.
Another way he has to catch his Prey with, is by leading the Soul into the way
of Sin, it may be, to the Harlots, Door, he allures into the Company of
Sinners, and entices the Soul to contemplate upon Sin to toy a little with
Dalilah (as it were) and a Multitude of other Snares he has.

IV. A Hunter, that he may the better catch his Prey, has not only his Snares,
but also his Dogs, and them of every sort fit for his Sport and Enterprise, he
has his setting-Dogs, his scenting Dogs, his race-Dogs, some to start his
Game, and others to pursue his Game, etc. So the Devil, the great Hunter of
Souls, has, besides his subtle Wiles and Snares, fit Instruments to effect
and accomplish his Design; he has his Dogs (for so as we have showed you else
where) wicked Men are called, and them also of every sort, some great ones, and
some small ones, some that are like setting-Dogs, who watch how they may
trapan, and prey upon the Godly to draw them into Sin, or into Sufferings; and
others, who are like cruel Bloodhounds, who, as being void of Mercy, endeavor
to tear the Saints in pieces.

V. Some Hunters mind little else, save Hunting; it is said of Nimrod, Genesis 10 9.
he was a mighty Hunter* etc. So the Devil he is a mighty Hunter, he minds
nothing more than the hunting of the Souls of Men, O the Millions, that he has
catched and destroyed, he is a most cruel Hunter.

VI. Some Hunters are very swift and diligent in the pursuit of their Prey,
they will ride over many Fields in a day, they will search and beat about with
abundance of dilig^nce, to find out their Game, they are it may be here now,
and a few hours hence many Miles off, and hardly allow themselves time to eat
their Meat, etc. So the Devil is a swift Hunter, he is like Lightning (as it
were) swift in Motion, he is a Spirit, and so has the advantage to leap
suddenly upon his Spiritual Prey, he has his Eyes upon all the ways of Men, he
is here to tempt this Man, and presently in another place to catch unwary and
secure Souls.

VII. A Hunter is diligent to observe the Disposition of the Creature he hunts,
and also the places where it haunts: So the Devil, he observes the Dispositions
and natural Inclinations of Men and Women, and also all their haunts, that so
he may the better prey upon them, he knows what Men are prone to Lying, and
what Men are addicted to Covetousness, and who are naturally inclined to the
Lusts of Uncleanness, and who are subject to Passion, etc. and according to the
various Tempers and Inclinations of Persons, he suits his Temptations.

VIII. A Hunter seeks to come sometimes, if possible, on his Prey unawares,
when they are secure, to steal as it were upon them: So the Devil comes upon
Christians many times when they are asleep and in a secure state; an Enemy has
done this whilst Men slept. And hence Solomon's advice is to the Sons of
Wisdom, not to Give sleep to their Eyes, nor slumber to their Eyelids, P^ov.
6.4, 5.
and to deliver themselves from the Hand of the Hunter, etc.

Disparity.
OTher Hunters generally hunt for their Recreation, it is not out of Envy and
Hatred they bear to the Creatures they hunt: But the Devil hunts the Souls of
Men out of that implacable Hatred he bears to them, it is not his Pleasure, but
his Malice, which stirs him up to kill and destroy poor Sinners, he knows he is
miserable himself, and he would make, if he could, all the Children of Men as
miserable as himself.

Inferences.
THis may serve to awaken all Men, to take heed and deliver themselves from
this mighty Hunter; Soul fly to Christ, he is able to save thee, who has
promised to deliver thee from the Snare of the Hunter, etc. labor to be like
the Roe, swift-footed, O labor with David for Hinds Feet.

The Devil a Fowler.
Prove. 6.5. Deliver thy self as a Roe from the Hand of the Hunter, and as a
Bird from the Hand of the Fowler.
AS Satan is likened to a Hunter, so he is likewise unto a Fowler, they are
both Metaphors of a like Import.

Parallels.
A Fowler has his Nets, Gins, and many Allurements to catch the poor silly
Bird: So has Satan to catch the Souls of Men, some of which we mentioned
before.

II. A Fowler having taken diverse Birds, he makes use of them, in a crafty
manner, to bring others to his Net: So does Satan, he this very way seeks, to
allure Sinners, he sets before the Eyes of the unwary Soul, how many Birds he
has got in his Snares, and yet they sing most sweetly, and leap about as if
they had all Joy and Enlargements in the World; he would persuade Gods Children
none have so sweet and pleasant a Life as the Ungodly, who flourish in
Prosperity, and are not plagued like other Men, and by this means, this cunning
Fowler oft-times ensnares the Souls of Men.

III. A Fowler is very cautious how he spreads his Net in the sight of any
Bird: So Satan craftily strives to hide his Net and Snare, by which he seeks to
catch the Souls of Men, he presents the Golden Cup, but hides the Poison. Thus
he deceived Eve, he strove to affect her Heart with the choicest and excellent
Nature of the Fruit of the Tree, Ye shall be as Gods, etc. This was the Bait,
but the Net or curled Hook is hidden, he seems to court her as a cordial
Friend, as one that wished her the greatest Happiness imaginable; but alas! his
design was to catch her in the Net of Rebellion against God's Law, to destroy
and undo her for ever; In vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird.
Eccl.


IV. A Fowler strives to counterfeit the real call of Birds, thereby to entice
them into the Snares and Nets he has spread for them: So Satan endeavors to
transform himself into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15.
and also teaches his Ministers to counterfeit the Garb, Behavior, and Call of
Christ's true Ministers, thereby to deceive and draw Souls into Perdition and
Destruction. who more ready to press Holiness, and Self-denial, etc. than some
of the grand Deceivers of this Age, They come to you in Sheeps clothing, Mat.
7.15.
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

V. A Fowler some times in the Night dazles the Eyes of the poor Birds with a
great Light, and thereby most easily spreads his Net over them: So Satan by
false Lights preys upon the Souls of Men, who cries out, Light, Life and Power,
etc. and this has so dazzled the Eyes of People, that many have been taken, and
little think where they are, nor the danger they are in, alas! the cunning
Fowler has got his Net over them.

The Devil a Lion.
2 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour.
CHrist is compared to a Lion, says the learned Glassius, because Noble,
Heroic, and Unconquerable. 2. Wicked Men and Tyrants are so called, because
Fierce, Outrageous and Cruel. And 3. The Devil is called a Lion, because
Roaring, Rapacious and devouring, etc.

Some of the common Epithets of a Lion, as we have under another Head noted,
are these, viz. Bold, Stony-hearted, Preying, Ravening, Stubborn, Cruel,
Bloody, Terrible, Swelling, etc. Which sets forth his Natural Evil, and worst
Properties, upon which account the Devil, as all the Learned observe, is
compared to him.

Parallels.
THE Voice of the Lion is called Rugitus, that is, Roaring, or Bellowing, which
is very terrible to other Beasts, who when they hear him roar, tremble; he
roars when he is hungry and wants Prey: So the Devil is said to walk about like
a roaring hungry Lion, who is not satisfied with the Prey he has already got,
but seeks to devour more Souls: for as the Lion is a very greedy and
unsatisfied Beast; so is the Devil, he would, did not God restrain him, destroy
the whole World, not a Soul should escape.

II. A Lion is a very strong Beast, What is stronger than a Lion? So the Devil
is a strong Enemy; and one reason, doubtless, why he is compared to a Lion, is
to signify his Strength, as his being compared to a Serpent, does his Subtilty.
Hence God has laid help for us upon one Mighty to save, viz. the Lord Jesus,
who was able to encounter with this strong and furious Adversary, For to this
end was the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil,
and destroy him who had the Power of Death, 1 John 2.14. Heb. 2.8.
which is the Devil.

III. A Lion is a very bloody and tyrannical Beast, To^s l^, p. 361.
he will set upon and destroy whole Flocks and Herds of Cattle, he is a great
Enemy to Sheep and Lambs and other innocent Creatures: So the Devil is very
bloody and cruel, as appears in Job's Case, he took away his Cattle, and then
all his Children, and after that smote his Body with Biles; he seeks to destroy
the Bodies and Souls of Men too, the Godly stand in fear of him; for Christ's
Sheep and Lambs, have not a more cruel and bloody Foe in the World.

The Devil a Dragon.
Rev. 12.7. And the great Dragon was cast down, that old Serpent called the
Devil and Satan, etc.
AS the Devil is compared to a Lion, so likewise to a Dragon. Some are ready to
question whether there be any such Creature, or no; but it is without any just
ground, since the holy Scripture speaks of them in so many places: Besides, we
have approved Histories and Historians, which treat of them, as Aelianus,
Aristotle, Pliny, Mantuan, Gesner, Ovid, etc.

Parallels.
THe Dragon is a flying Serpent, he is described with Wings very voluble, and
spreading themselves wide according to the quantity or largeness of the
Dragon's Body; which caused Lucan the Poet to write in this manner, Vos quoque
qui cunctis innoxia numina terris
Serpitis, aurato nitidi fulgore Dracones,
Pestiferos ardens facit Africa; ducit is altum
Era cum Pennis, etc. --
You shining Dragons, creeping on the Earth,
Which fiery Africa holds, with Skins like Gold,
Yet pestilent by hot infecting Breath,
Mounted with Wings in the Air we do behold.


The Devil is said to have Wings, to denote his Swiftness in pursuing his Prey.
He is like to a furious flying Dragon. No Man can get out of the reach of
Satan; let them climb up never so high in Grace and Virtue, Satan has Wings,
and can pursue them with his poisonous Breath of Temptations.

Elianus, Megasthenes.
II. Naturalists observe, that Dragons seldom hurt in the Daytime, but in the
dark Night they come out of their Holes, and deep Caves: So the Devil does the
greatest hurt in the Night of Ignorance; he hates the Light, like his cursed
Children; his Kingdom is the Darkness of this World.

Topsell, p. 706.
III. Naturalists say, Dragons have cruel Teeth, and that they have a treble Row
of them in their Mouths, and that their Bite is very dangerous. Teeth, says
Glassius, denote Virulence, and an hostile Power, because Beasts, when they
fight, use them as offensive Weapons. The Wounds the Devil gives to poor
Sinners by his prevailing Power, are venomous and mortal.

IV. Dragons are mortal Enemies to Mankind, and Multitudes have been destroyed
by them; in this they fitly resemble the Devil.

V. Dragons have a cruel infectious Breath: Those in Phrygia, when they are
hungry, turn themselves toward the West, and gaping wide, with the force of
their Breath (says my Author) they draw the Birds that fly over their Heads
into their Mouths; which some attribute to the infectious Nature of their
Breath: Also they kill with their Tails; nay, some say, the Strokes of their
Tails are more deadly than the biting of their Teeth. The Devil, like the
Dragon, has many ways to wound and destroy Mankind. Sin is like the biting of
Dragons, Deuteronomy. 22.
and false Doctrine in Scripture is called Dragon's Poison, it is the Poison of
this old Dragon: Their Wine is as the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom
of Asps.

VI. They will fight terribly, and are (as Naturalists note) always in War with
the Elephant, and with diverse other Beasts, both wild and tame, for he is the
cruel Enemy of them all: Rev. 12.7, 8.
So the Devil makes War with the Lamb, and with all his Followers: There was
War in Heaven; Michael, and his Angels, fought against the Dragon; and the
Dragon fought, and his Angels, and prevailed not. The Lord Jesus is too hard
for this old Dragon.

VII. There are in Ethiopia, and other hot Countries, Multitudes of Dragons,
some greater, and some lesser, also some of a red color. We read of some that
have been found to be nine Cubits long, and of a great Thickness. Neither is it
to be thought, (says Mr. Topsell, out of Gesner) incredible, Topsell, p. 704.
that the Soldiers of Attilius Regulus killed a Dragon, which was an hundred
and twenty Foot long. Dragons (says he) are certainly great Beasts, and there
are few or none bigger on Earth: So there are many Devils, and by some places
of holy Scripture, we may conclude there is a chief or grand Devil, one whose
Hellish Power is above the rest, etc. The Earth and Air are full of these
cursed Dragons, but being Spirits, we cannot see them: Besides, we may suppose,
that they may abound more in some Countries than in others.

The Devil a Serpent.
2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through
his Subtilty, etc.

Rev. 12.9. The old Serpent, the Devil, etc.


SErpents are venomous Beasts, that creep upon the Ground, or go as it were
upon their Bellies, which, as it appears from Genesis 3.14. was laid upon them at
first as a just Judgment of God: Upon thy Belly shall thou go; meaning, says
Ainsworth, in great Pain, etc. This Creature the Devil made use of to deceive
Eve; the Devil spoke in, or by the Serpent, i. e. opened the Serpent's Mouth;
for we are not to conclude that Serpent was the Devil, because the Text says
positively, it was a Beast of the Field, who (as some conceive) is said to be
more subtle than any other Beast, by means of Satan's Influences; yet all
agree, that naturally the Serpent, or some Serpents are very crafty and subtle.
Aristotle and Galen define a Serpent to be, Animal sanguineum, pedibus orbatum,
and oviparum; that is, A bloody Beast, without feet, laying Eggs.

There are diverse sorts of Serpents; we read of the Adder, Asp, Dart, Dragon,
Dipsus.
Cockatrice, etc. Some affirm that the Cockatrice or Basilisk has Wings, from
Isa. 14.29. Out of the Serpent's Root shall come a Cockatrice, and his Fruit
shall be a flying Serpent. The Basilisk is esteemed the King of Serpents,
partly for the great Strength of his Poison, and partly for his stately Pace,
and magnanimous Mind; for he goes upright with his Head, near half a Yard in
length.

Parallels.
SErpents are a venomous sort of Creatures, especially the Cockatrice: For his
Poison (Naturalists affirm) infecteth the Air, and the Air so infected kills
all living Creatures, and all green Things, Fruits and Plants of the Earth; it
burns up the Grass whereupon it goes, or creeps; and the very Fowls of the
Air fall down dead, when they come near his Den or Lodging: So the Venom or
Poison of the old Serpent, viz. Sin, is very deadly, and of an infectious
Nature, as has been largely showed. What Creature has not been hurt and
corrupted, more or less, by this Poison? It has disordered the whole Creation;
the very Ground is cursed, Genesis 3.
and brings forth Thorns and Thistles hereby.

II. Amongst all living Creatures, there is none that perishes sooner than
does a Man, by the Poison of a Cockatrice, for with his Sight he kills him,
the Beams of his Eyes do corrupt the Spirit of a Man; nay, says my Author, he
kills other Serpents by his Sight, such is the Venom of his Poison: So no
Creature has suffered, or received such hurt, as Mankind has by the Poison of
the old Dragon. Tho the Sin of Man, which is the Venom of this Serpent, has
been a Plague to all Creatures, yet Man receives the greatest Ruin by it, it
destroys him eternally. Wicked Men, who are compared to Serpents, are destroyed
by this old Serpent.

III. A Serpent is a very subtle Beast; Be ye wise as Serpents, etc. The Devil
being compared to a Serpent, it principally denotes his Subtilty, who has a
thousand Ways to destroy and undo the Children of Men.

IV. Serpents are most envious, implacable, and furious Beasts; they are
immitissimum animalium genus, Topsell. Elianus. Pliny.
a most ungentle and barbarous kind of Creatures, says my Author; as appears
by the Rage of a little Snake, one of the least of the Serpents kind: for when
he perceives he is hurt or wounded, he never cease casting out his Poison,
until he has done harm, or died of Madness. In this he is the very Image of
the Devil, who is so outrageous, and filled with Envy, to Mankind, that he
cares not what Mischief he does, though it greatly heightens his own Punishment
in the end. There is an irreconcilable Enmity between the Serpent and the
Woman, and between his Seed and her Seed. Gesner. Topsell.
A Man naturally; by a kind of secret Instinct, abhors the sight of a
Serpent; and so does the Serpent the sight of a Man.

Pliny Seneca.
V. There is a certain sort of Serpents, that if a Man look steadfastly upon them
with one Eye, with a single Eye, they will run away from him: Such a Serpent is
Satan; for if a Christian face him with a single Eye, that is, look upon him
with an Eye of Faith, it will resist him, and make him fly.

Inferences.
FRom the Whole we may perceive, what the Nature of Sin is: These evil Angels
were glorious Creatures at first, before they fell: but behold, what vile,
cursed Creatures and Monsters their departing from God, and Rebellion against
him, has made them!

II. It may teach all Men to beware of the Devil, to watch against him, to
avoid Sin, and the Venom of Sin, as they would a Serpent.

III. It may be of use to stir up the Godly to Diligence and Watchfulness, etc.
Be sober, be vigilant, etc.

IV. It may teach us to bless and praise God for Christ, in whom, through
Faith, we get the Victory over this terrible and crafty Enemy.

THE Eleventh HEAD OF METAPHORS, SIMILES, AND Other Borrowed TERMS, CONCERNING
The Means of Grace, Providence and Affliction.
The Day of Grace.
Mat. 20.6. Why stand ye here all the Day idle? etc.

Heb. 3.7. To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, etc.


THe Time that God allows Men to repent, and provide themselves for another
World, is called a Day: Behold, now is the accepted Time, behold, now is the
Day of Salvation. I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day;
that is, whilst the allotted Season lasts. John 9.4. To day if you will hear
his Voice, etc. that is, before the Time allotted you, or the Space given you
to repent, be expired.

Parallels.
A Day is a certain Time; so many Hours, etc. A natural Day is twenty four
Hours, an artificial Day contains twelve Hours: So God allows a Man a certain
and prefixed Time to repent. Jerusalem had a Day: O that thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy Day, the Things that belong unto thy Peace.

II. The Day is set in opposition to the Night, and it signifies the Time of
Light: So the Time of God's Patience, whilst the Gospel is preached to Men, and
God waits upon them, and strives with them, to bring them over to the Knowledge
of the Truth, is the Time of Light; and when God takes away the Means of Grace,
and the Gospel, from a Kingdom, Nation, or particular Soul, that is a Time of
Darkness, and then it may be said, the Day is gone, and Night is come upon them.

III. It Is Day when the Sun rises, and Night when the Sun sets: So it is the
Sinner's Day, whilst the Gospel-Sun shines, and the Means of Grace are
continued to them; but Night then, when the Ministration of the Gospel is taken
away, and no more Means of Grace afforded to them.

IV. The Day is Man's working Time; Laborers in the Field, when the Day is
ended, go home, they can work no longer: So whilst God affords the Gospel, and
Means of Grace, Sinners should, like faithful Laborers, work hard, work out
their own Salvation, labor for the Meat that perishes not: for when that is
gone, no Man can work; then the Things of their Peace will be hid from their
Eyes, like as it fell out with Jerusalem.

V. The Day brings great Light with it, which makes great Discoveries of
Persons and Things; whilst the Night lasts, Men cannot see what is near them,
neither the Good they may receive, nor the Evil they should refuse, and escape
from; but the Day discovers all, and makes every thing manifest: So the
Gospel-Day brings Light, and the Light thereof discovers the Evil that is in
the Hearts, Works, and Lives of Men; by this Light they see their Sins, and the
Danger they are in thereby, and also the Way to be delivered from them. Christ
is the Way which the Daylight makes manifest. In the Night of Popery, Men lost
the blessed Path to Peace, and Way of Life, and ran to the Merits of their own
Ways, and to Popish Pardons, and what not? but the Day of the Gospel in England
has discovered their Mistake, and showed them the plain Way to Heaven, etc.

Eccl^s 11.7.
VI. The Day is comfortable, it is a pleasant thing for the Eyes to see the Sun:
So are the Means of Grace, and the Day of Gospel Light. O how sweet and
pleasant a thing it is to see this Day, wherein the Word of God is powerfully
and plainly preached amongst us!

VII. The Day sometimes is over-cast, and the Light darkened: So the Gospel-Day
is sometimes, as a Judgment upon a People or particular Soul, darkened, and
Clouds seem to cover the glorious Heavens, even as at this Time. O what thick
and black Clouds seem to arise!

VIII. Some Days prove stormy, and high Winds arise: So sometimes the Day of
Gospel Grace proves stormy, and high Winds of Persecution arise upon a People;
nay, not only Winds of Persecution, but also strange Whirl-winds of Delusions
abound in it, which make it very perilous.

IX. A Day has its Morning, its Noon, and its Evening: So has the Day of
Gospel Grace in a Nation, and to a particular Soul, who improves it not. God
threatened his People of old, Mich. 3.6.
That the Sun should go down over the Prophets, and the Day should he dark over
them.

X. The Day suits not with some Men, they are for the Night; they are said to
rebel against the Light, they hate the Light, the Night is for them; such are
the Thief and Adulterer: Pov. 7.9.
The Whorish Woman waits for the Twilight, even for the black and dark Night.
So many Sinners love not the Day of Gospel Light, they are for the Night of
Ignorance and Error. They had rather have Popery come, or any Thing come, than
to have the Gospel, or the powerful Preaching thereof; it suits best with their
carnal Hearts, they love that Religion that indulges them in their brutish
Lusts.

XI. There are many ways to know when the Day draws toward an end, and Night
approaches: As, (1.) When the Heat of the Sun abates. (2.) When the Shadows
grow long, or are stretched forth. (3.) When the Harvest-Men begin to go home
apace. (4.) When the Evening-Wolves begin to lurk out of their Holes. Now when
these Signs are upon a People in a spiritual sense, their State is bad, they
may fear Night approaches upon them. (1.) When the Gospel in its powerful
Preaching, abates in its Heat, and blessed Influences upon Men's Hearts, so that
but a few are warmed, and effectually wrought upon by it. (2.) When Religion is
more in Show than in Substance; when the Shadow is long, and the Substance
little; Men being more zealous for the Form, than concerned for the Power of
it. (3.) When many powerful or painful Ministers and Laborers are called home.
(4.) When the Romish Wolves, who have lain long in their Holes, and dark
Caverns, or lurking Places, begin to come boldly abroad, and impudently show
themselves, it is a Sign of Evening-Tide, and that the Day is near expiring. Is
not this thy State, O England?

The Means of Grace compared to the Summer.
Jer. 8.20. -- The Summer is ended, etc.
By Summer is doubtless meant that Time that God allows Men to gather in, and
lay up spiritual Good for their precious Souls. The Time of Gospel Light, or
Means of Grace, is compared to the Summer.

Parallels.
THe Summer is the chief Time of the Year, that Season which generally all Men
prize, long for, and rejoice in: So the Time of Gospel Grace, and Gospel Light,
is the chiefest and choicest Season in the World. The Time of the Gospel, the
Dispensation of the Gospel, was the Time which the Prophets, and many good and
righteous Men of old longed for, and which all sincere godly Persons do prize,
and rejoice in.

II. Summer is the Season that ripens the Fruits of the Earth; were it not for
the Heat and Influence of Summer, what would become of the Husband-man's
Labor? So the Means of Grace, or Ministration of the Gospel, ripens the good
Seed which is sown in the godly Man's Heart, nay, it makes all fit and ready
for the Harvest, and for cutting down. It ripens the godly Man for Heaven, and
the ungodly Man for Hell: The Word is either a Savor of Life unto Life, or
else the Savor of Death unto Death; it either softens or hardens. It has the
same Effects upon Men's Hearts, that the Sun has in the hottest Time of Summer,
upon that which it sends forth its Influence upon.

III. The Summer is the poor Man's working Time, it is the Season in which he is
to provide himself for Winter with such things he wants. The Day of
Gospel Grace is the Saints Summer, it is the Time in which he works hard,
gathers in, and lays up for his immortal Soul: He learns of the Ant, who
provides her Meat in Summer, etc. Prove. 6.


IV. In Summer every thing looks green; the Herbs, Grass, Plants, Trees, and
all the Fruits of the Earth, are in their Beauty, and greatest Glory: So in the
Day of Gospel Grace, whilst God affords Means of much Light and Knowledge, when
Seasons, Sabbaths, Sermons, and Ordinances, in a plentiful manner do abound
amongst us, how do the Saints flourish, their Graces flourish! O what Beauty
and Greenness is there upon all sincere Christians!

V. He that is slothful and idle in Summer, as he brings Shame upon himself,
('it is a Sign of Folly, etc.) so he suffers, wants Bread, and is exposed to
great Straits in Winter. He that gathers in Summer, is a wise Son; but he
that sleeps in Harvest, Prove. 10.5.
is a Son that causes Shame. So he that is idle and negligent in the Time of
Gospel Grace, or improves not the Means God affords, for the Good of his Soul,
as it is a Reproach and Shame to him, so he exposes himself to Ruin thereby.
What will he do when Death and Judgment comes? Then he will want, and suffer
Hunger, etc.

The Means of Grace compared to Harvest.
Mat. 9.37. The Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few, etc.
NOte. The Time of Gospel Grace, wherein Work is to be done, and many Souls are
prepared, and made willing to hear the Word of God, is compared to Harvest.

Parallels.
HArvest is the Time to work and do business in, and it behooves Men to labor
hard then: So whilst there is an open Door for the Gospel, or God is pleased to
continue the Means of Grace, Christ's Ministers ought to labor hard.

II. Harvest greatly tends to the relief of the Poor; they in Harvest-time
gather in, and lay up against a Time of Want and Scarcity: So do the Saints,
whilst the Day of Grace lasts, provide and lay up for their Souls.

III. Sometimes there is bad Weather in Harvest, which does hinder and
discourage the painful and laborious Husbandman: So Storms arise, and very bad
Weather (as it were) often attends Christ's faithful Laborers, which greatly
hinders them in their Ministry.

IV. The Harvest is sometimes great, and the Laborers but few, so that the
Work lies very heavy upon some Men: So in a spiritual sense, the Harvest is
great, i. e. many People are willing to hear God's Word, but there are but few
painful Preachers, and by this means the Work lies heavy upon them; and when it
is thus, we are enjoined to pray to the Lord of the Harvest, Mat. 9 37.
to send more Laborers into his Harvest.

V. The Harvest sometimes proves thin, and comes into a little Room; or it may
seem much in Bulk, and yet but a little Grain: So it is sometimes in the
spiritual Harvest, there are many Multitudes hear the Word, attend upon the
Means, they flock into the Assemblies; but alas! but few are converted; the
Corn is little: A small Room will hold them, were they severed from the Straw
and Chaff of the fruitless and unprofitable Multitude.

VI. When the Harvest is like to be catching, or the Husbandman sees Clouds
begin to gather, and grow black, or they hear it thunder mightily, they work
very hard, and hurry in the Corn, not knowing when they may have fair Weather
again: So Christ's Servants, when they perceive a dismal Day approaching upon
them, labor hard, and bring in what Souls they can into his Barn.

VII. The Harvest sometimes is very long, and sometimes but short: So God
lengthens or shortens the Day of Grace, as he pleases. The old World had an
hundred and twenty Years; others but a short Season. O that thou had known in
this thy Day the Things that belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from
thine Eyes. Christ seems to be quick with them. And so it fared with those,
Acts 13.46.

VIII. In Harvest the Husbandman will not neglect a fit Opportunity of
gathering in his Hay and Corn, upon presumption of much fair Weather to come:
So a wise Christian will not lose the present Season for his Soul, upon hopes
of much Time to come, but rather says, Now is the Time, etc.

Observe in Summer's soultry Heat,
How in the hottest Day,
The Husbandman does toil and sweat
About his Corn and Hay.
If then he should not reap and mow,
And gather in his Store,
How should he live, when for the Snow
He cannot move out of Door?
The little Ants, and painful Bees,
by Nature's Instinct led,
These have their Summer-Granaries,
For Winter furnished.
But thou, my Soul, whose Summer's Day
Is almost past and gone,
What Soul-Provision do thou lay
In Stock, to feed upon?
If Nature teaches to prepare
For temporal Life; much rather
Grace should provoke to greater Care,
Soul-Food in time to gather.
Days of Affliction and Distress,
Are hasting on apace;
If now I live in Carelessness,
How sad will be my Case?
Unworthy of the Name of Man,
Who for that Soul of thine,
Wilt not do that which others can
Do for their very Kine!
Think, frugal Farmers, when you see
Your Mows of Corn and Hay,
What a Conviction this will be
To you another day?
Who never were up before the Sun,
Nor broke an Hour's Rest,
For your poor Souls, as you have done,
So often for a Beast.
Learn once to see the Difference
Betwixt eternal Things,
And these poor transient Things of Sense,
That fly with Eagles Wings.
J. F.

Godliness compared to a Trade.
Heb. 3.1. Wherefore, holy Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling,
consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus.
THe Profession of Godliness is in this, and diverse other Scriptures, compared
to a Trade or Calling; and it is a very fruitful and profitable Metaphor.

Parallels.
A Trade or Calling properly is that Art, Craft, or Occupation, whereunto one
has been trained, or wherein he exercises and employeth himself, whatever it
be, whether Handicraft, or Merchandising, etc. Now Godliness is the Occupation
of every true Christian, it is that which he has been trained up in, it is that
which he exercises and daily employeth himself about. Herein do I exercise my
self, etc. Actt 24.16.
Rather exercise thy self unto Godliness, etc.

II. A Man, when he first sets up a Trade, has, or ought to have, a Stock
suitable to what it does require, in order to the well-managing of it, or
otherwise he is not like to do good of it; for the Want of a convenient Stock
has ruined and utterly undone many new Beginners: So every Christian ought to
see, when he first begins to profess Godliness, what Stock he has, I mean,
what Grace, what Faith, what Love to God, and to his Neighbor, what
Experiences of a through Change; for without a Stock of the Truth of Grace, and
Work of Regeneration, no Man can follow the Trade of Godliness, to make any
saving Earnings of it.

III. A Man that sets up a Trade, ought to know the Nature, Worth, and Value of
those Goods and Commodities his Calling leads him to trade or deal in, or else
he may be quickly cheated, and run out of all, by buying counterfeit Goods, or
bad Ware: So every Christian must know what Goods he is to trade spiritually
in, as also the Nature and Excellency of them. Now the heavenly Commodities are
these, Faith, Love, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness,
Temperance, Pardon of Sin, Communion with God, Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. Now
he ought to know all these Things, the true from the counterfeit. And next unto
the Graces of the Spirit, and the other excellent and rare Things he deals in,
there are the Ordinances of the Gospel, the Nature and Usefulness of which he
ought also to understand, and not to be deceived about them, lest he take the
Traditions of Men for Christ's Institutions.

IV. A Man who sets up a Trade, ought also to know who he is to deal or trade
with: So ought every Christian; and that is God, through the Mediator Jesus
Christ; for without him there is no trading to Heaven. It Is by him we believe
in God, by him we come to the Father. Christ is a Saint's only Correspondent;
he receives all our Prayers and Duties, and makes Returns of Mercies.

V. A Man who begins a Trade, ought to be well instructed, and to know every
particular Art and Mystery in it: Some Trades or Professions are hard to learn,
they are full of Mystery, and very intricate; and if they understand them not,
or are not Crafts-masters therein they will never live comfortably of them, as
Experience commonly shows: So every Christian ought to learn the Mystery of
Godliness; this heavenly Calling is not easily learned; there is no Trade that
is more mysterious than the Trade or Art of Godliness, as we shall fully
evince, and make appear, 1. By plain Texts of Scripture. 2. By Arguments and
Demonstrations drawn therefrom.


As to the First, see these Scriptures: 1 Cor. 2.7. But we speak the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, etc. Compared with Romans 16.25. Ephesians.
1.9. and 3.3, 4. Col. 1.26. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without Controversy great is the
Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, etc. Godliness is twofold, 1.
The Doctrinal Part. 2. The Practical Part.

A Mystery is a Thing hidden, hard to find out, that which few understand,
Godliness a Mystery.
which lies not open to the Sight and Apprehension of Men. Many Arts used
amongst Men are full of Mystery. If a Man go into a Chymist's Shop, possibly he
may see there several Extractions of Minerals, but he may not know how he
extracted those Spirits, nor does he understand the Nature and Operation of
them, that is a Mystery. There are diverse other curious Arts and Devices very
hard to learn, they are so mysterious; but all come short of these heavenly
Mysteries. The Mysteries of Godliness are exceeding great.

1. These Things are hidden Things from the Eyes of Men. See Mat. 11.25. The
Gospel is read daily, every Man has the History of it in his House; but alas!
very few understand it; it is a Mystery; it is not known, but by such only who
feel its Power, and blessed Effects and Operations of it upon their Hearts.

2. The Gospel, and great Things of Christianity and Godliness, are the rare
Contrivance of God's eternal Wisdom, 1 Cor. 8.1.
and therefore full of Mystery. If any Man thinks he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as he ought to know. These things are not easily found out.

3. The History of the Gospel, and Principles of Christianity and Godliness,
could not be known without Revelation; had not God afforded us the written
Word, what should we, John 20.31. Romans 16.25, 26.
or could we have known of these Mysteries? What do the Heathen know of them,
that have not the Holy Scripture? Does the Light within discover the
Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of
Jesus Christ? Does that teach the Mystery of Faith and Regeneration? It Is true,
some have affirmed, that they should have known all Things the Gospel reveals,
if they had never had the written Word: But how false that is, appears to all;
and they themselves have been silenced, by putting one Question to them, John
20 30.
which is this: It Is said in John 20. Many other Signs did Jesus, in the
presence of his Disciples, which are not written, etc. Now let them show us
what those other Signs were: But alas! they can tell us nothing but what the
Scripture relates; neither had we or they known them, but by the Record thereof.

That which we have the History of, and yet cannot understand, or make our own,
unless the Spirit of God opens and explains it to us, is a great Mystery: But
we cannot understand the Mystery of Religion and Godliness, without the
Spirit's Teaching and Explanation: Ergo, etc. As the History must be revealed
by the written Word, so the Mystery must be revealed by the Spirit: For what
Man knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man, 1 Cor. 2.11.
which is in him; even so the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of
God.

4. That which needs or requires several Gradations and Mediums, to open and
explain it from time to time, is a great Mystery: But the Gospel, or Mystery of
Godliness, requires such several Gradations and Mediums, to open it unto the
Children of Men. (1.) God under the Law revealed these Things by diverse
Sacrifices, Washings, and other Rites, whilst Persons remained in their
Nonage. (2.) It requires the Use of diverse earthly Similitudes, to open and
explain it to the Understanding of Men. God is compared to a Father, to an
Husbandman, to a Judge, to a Creditor, to a Portion, to an Householder, etc.
Christ, to a Lamb, to Light, to an Husband, to a Vine, to a Shepherd, etc. The
Spirit is compared to the Wind, to Oil, to Water: and Grace, to Seed, to Gold
tried in the Fire, etc. The Mysteries of Religion and Godliness are so hard to
understand in their own Nature, that God condescends to open them to us by
earthly Things: In this God shows what Children we are, and how difficult it is
for us to understand these Things. And tho they are thus explained, yet how
little is it that we are able to understand of them! Now that which the
Children of Men are not able fully to take in, or comprehend, tho God makes use
of the best Mediums he in his Wisdom sees good to make use of, is a great
Mystery: But the Children of Men are able to take in but little of the
Mysteries of the Gospel, notwithstanding these gracious Mediums God is pleased
to make use of: Ergo, etc.

5. That which the Children of Men are not able to take in or receive the
knowledge of at once, but when God fees necessary to discover by degrees, by
little and little, notwithstanding all those proper and fit Mediums he
condescends to make use of, is a great Mystery: But the Mysteries of the
Gospel, and Godliness, God sees the Children of Men, notwithstanding all those
Mediums he is pleased to make use of, cannot take in or receive at once, but
that there is need for him to open and discover them by degrees, by little and
little: Ergo, it is very mysterious, so vast a Depth, so great a Light, so
strange a Mystery is this Mystery, that God reveals it now a little, and then a
little. Adam had the first Discovery of it: The Seed of the Woman shall break
the Serpent's Head. Abraham had more of it made known to him; Moses had a
greater Revelation of it than the Prophets: And then, John Baptist, who saw
more than all that went before him, and upon that account was called the
greatest Prophet that ever arose amongst them that were born of Women; and yet
he saw but a little of this great Mystery, Luke 7.28.
comparatively to what those saw who were in the Kingdom of Heaven, viz. the
Gospel Church, after the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

6. That which all the wise Men of the World, merely by all their natural
Wisdom, Arts, and Sciences, could never find out, nor arrive at the true
knowledge of, is a great Mystery: But all the wise Men of the World, merely by
all their Arts and Sciences, and human Learning, could never arrive to the true
knowledge of Christ, and real Godliness: Ergo, the Principles of true Godliness,
and the Mysteries thereof, are out of the reach of mere humane Reason; tho not
against or contrary to Reason, yet they lie above Reason: Reason must stoop to
Faith in these things. The Gospel is called Wisdom, as opposite to the Wisdom
of Men; and the Apostle says positively, That it was Wisdom in such a Mystery,
that none of the Princes of this World knew. Nay, the Spirit, says one,
Sydenham.
jeers all the Learned of the World in this very thing, because of their gross
Ignorance. Where is the Scribe? where is the Wise? where is the Disputer of
this World? 1 Cor. 1.20.
Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? Verse 18.
Hence the Preaching of the Gospel was accounted by the learned Greeks but
Foolishness. Natural Men may understand natural Religion; but true Godliness
consists in the Light of Divine Truth, and in the Life of Grace, God
manifesting himself in the Light of Truth, and working the Life of supernatural
Grace by his Spirit in the Heart. True Godliness does not consist in the
Knowledge of the Letter of the Gospel. A natural Man may have the historical or
notional Knowledge of the Gospel and Christianity, he may arrive to the most
exact understanding of things, as far as Letters and Words can express them;
that is, he may know the true sense and meaning of things in the Gospel,
according to what either the History, or Tenor of such Words will import, and
know the Grammatical Sense of Words, better than many true Christians: But this
is not the spiritual and true Knowledge of Religion and Godliness; for that
consists in the saving and experimental Knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ. The
Mystery of the Gospel, and Power of Godliness, is the Discovery of God's Glory
in it self, and the working of it gloriously in the Soul; it lies not in the
bare Expression, or Knowledge of Words, nor in the external Form of Profession
of these Words; but it lies in the Divine Glory of God, which is wrapped up in
these Words, and the gracious Conformity, Disposition, and Affections of the
Soul to these things. It Is an easy matter to confess Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God, and to read the Scriptures, to pray, etc. but to see the Mystery of
that Glory which is in this, that Christ is God's Son, and to have the powerful
Influences of it upon the Heart, whereby the Soul is brought into the Image or
Likeness of Christ's Death and Resurrection; this is a Mystery.

7. That which the most wise and knowing in the same Art or Mystery, can reach
or understand but part of, must needs be a great Mystery: As suppose a
Schoolmaster, nay, the ablest in the World, who professes to know and teach
such or such an Art or Mystery, is forced to confess, he sees and knows but
little of it, or sees but in part, it is so hard and difficult to find out; all
would conclude, that Art or Science was a Mystery indeed: But so it is here;
for the holy Apostles, who had as great a knowledge of these Mysteries as any
ever had in the World, nay, we may modestly conclude, a greater, yet they
declare, they knew but in part, and saw but in part, they saw comparatively but
a little way into these Mysteries, For we know but in part. -- Now we see
through a Glass darkly. 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
-- Now I know in part. -- Ergo, These are great Mysteries.

8. That which the holy Angels desire to pry into, nay, look into with the
greatest Earnestness and Desire imaginable, and are contented, the better to
understand, to learn of the Church; and yet, when all is done, do admire, and
stand as it were astonished at, is a great Mystery: But the Angels do pry into
these Mysteries with the greatest earnestness, and are contented to learn of
the Church, that they may the better or more fully understand them, and after
all, stand and wonder, to behold the Depth of this Grace, of this Love, and the
Strangeness of this Mystery. Ergo, the Gospel, or Doctrine of Godliness, is a
great Mystery. Now to make this Argument good, pray consider these Texts of
Scripture: 1 Pet. 1.12. Which things the Angels desire to look into. The word
[desire] signifies the utmost coveting or longing after a thing which a Man
cannot be without: Desire to look into: (...), this Word signifies bowing down
to pry heedfully and narrowly into a Thing. 1. The Angels are greatly taken
with this Mystery, with this Grace and Love in Jesus Christ, manifested to
fallen Man; they look and pry into it, Exodus 25.20.
according as it was typified of them, by the placing of the Cherubims looking
down toward the Mercy-Seat. 2. That they are content to learn of the Church,
see Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent, that now unto the Principalities, and Powers in
heavenly Places, might be known, by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God. 3.
That they after all stand as it were amazed, and wonder at these Depths, see 1 Timothy 3.16. -- Seen of Angels, (...), it is not meant of a bare Sight, but a
Sight which astonishes the Understanding, and takes up the Heart: He was seen
with admiration and wonderment: Thus Dr. Sibbs.

9, That which the glorified Saints shall admire, when they arrive to a perfect
Knowledge, must needs be a great Mystery: But the glorified Saints shall admire
at the Mystery of this Grace and Love, in the Day of Christ, nay, it will be
the matter of their wonder to all Eternity. See 2 Cor. 1.10. Therefore the
Doctrine of Godliness is a great Mystery.

10. This will be further manifest, by considering wherein the greatness of
this Mystery does consist.

First; Now the Mystery of Godliness principally consists in the Person of
Christ, God manifest in the Flesh. 1 Cor. 2.2.
Paul determined to know nothing so much as Christ, and him crucified. When we
know Christ better, we shall understand this Mystery better: Christ is the
Mystery wrapped up in all the Gospel, he is the Scope of all the Scripture, the
Pearl hid in the Field; every Line is drawn to him, as the proper Center; all
the Types and Shadows pointed to him, and all the Promises run in him. Jesus
Christ is really and truly God, and yet very Man, God and Man in one Person,
and is not this a Mystery? (1.) Is it not a Wonder, that a Woman should compass
a Man? (2.) That he that made the World, should be born of a Woman! (3.) That
the Ancient of Days should become a Child of a Day old! (4.) That Blessedness
it self should be brought under a Curse for Sinners! Christ was made a Curse
for us, Gal. 3.13.
as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree. (5.) That he
that was the Heir of all things, Heir of both Worlds, should be laid in a
Manger! (6.) That he who was God over all, should have no where to lay his
Head! (7.) That he should become poor, who was so rich, and by his Poverty make
others rich! is not this a Mystery? (8.) He by dying destroyed Death; and
unless he had died, we could not live; and by Death he brought us to Life! (9.)
And is it not a Mystery, that a Person should be capable to die, and yet by his
own Power raise himself up again from the Dead? (10.) Is not this a Mystery,
that the Physician should die to cure his Patient, nay, and unless he die, the
Sin-sick Soul could not live; and that his Blood should be the Balsam? Is it
not a great Mystery, that the offended Savior should suffer, to free the
offending Sinner?

11. Is it not a Mystery, that the Nature of Man should be so joined to the
Divine Nature of God, that both should make but one Christ? and that our Nature
should be exalted above the Nature of the Angels, that Man should sit at God's
right hand, that Man should be very God, and God very Man, in one Person? O how
great is ^he Mystery of Godliness!

Acts 2.23. chap. 4.28.
12. Is it not a Mystery, that Christ suffered according to the Decree and
determined Counsel of God, and yet the Jews did wickedly in putting him to
Death?

Secondly; The Mystery of Christianity appears to be great, 1. in God's casting
off the Jews, who followed after Righteousness, and in calling the Gentiles,
who followed not after Righteousness! That God should not be found of them that
sought him, and be found of them that sought him not! (2.) That God should
choose poor and contemptible Ones into his Service, and reject the Wise, the
Noble, and the Learned! and that by weak Things he overcame the Mighty, and by
Folly confounded the Wisdom of this World!

Thirdly; There is a great Mystery in Election, in Justification, in
Sanctification, in Renovation, etc. Nay, what Branch or Part of the Doctrine of
Godliness is not full of Mystery?

Fourthly; There is a Mystery in every Grace:

1. In Faith: As, (1.) That a Sinner should believe, i. e. go out of himself,
and be carried above himself, to believe Things impossible to Man's Sense, and
above his Reason, that he should seek for Justification by the Righteousness
and Obedience of another! for a Man (as one would think) to have a great deal
of Holiness, and good Works, and yet to throw it, as it were, all away, and be
dead to it in point of Trust and Dependence! is not this a Mystery? (2.) To
believe, when every thing is opposite to it: To work for Life, and to oppose
some Sin, a natural Man is ready to do; but to believe in Christ for Life and
Holiness, to rely upon his Doings, his Works and Merits, this the Heart of Map
is averse to; nay, and Satan opposes it, the World mocks at it, and accounts
it Foolishness. (3.) That a Man should believe, and not see, nay, believe, as
Abraham did, in hope against hope.

2. There is a Mystery in Love, that a Man should love him with an endeared
Affection, with a superlative Love, whom the World can see no beauty in; nay,
thus to love him, whom their natural Eyes never beheld, nay, love him, who is
able to make great, and save from all Misery, and yet suffers his People, and
best beloved Ones, to lie amongst the Pots, and to be hated and persecuted in
the World, and, to appearance, to be of all Men the most miserable! A Saint
knows the Reason of these Things, but it is a Mystery to others. The Love of
Christ turns the Affections another way, it drives, as it were, Jordan back, it
makes the Waters ascend, and run up hill. Is it not a Mystery, to see a Saint,
who has a Hundred, nay, it may be, Five Hundred a Year, a gracious Wife, many
sweet and lovely Children, enjoying much Health, and living in all Prosperity;
yet if he has lost the Light of God's Countenance, or Christ be withdrawn from
him, he is cast down, and greatly distressed and afflicted in his Spirit, and
crying out, Ah! what is all that I possess, since I want the Love of Christ, the
Presence of Christ? what is an Estate, and no Christ? Wife and Children, and no
sight of Christ? Christ (says he) is all to me, and all is nothing without
him. This is a Mystery to carnal Hearts, they wonder at it: Nay, to see a Man,
that has all the Comforts of the World, expose himself to cruel Mockings, Loss
of Goods, to Imprisonment, and Death it self for Christ's sake, is a strange
thing to worldly Men, they think the Man is mad, it is a Mystery to them, etc.

Fourthly; The Effects and Operations of Grace and Godliness are a Mystery.

(1.) That God should make Men wise, by teaching them to become Fools. 1 Cor.
3.18.


(2.) That the way to become rich, very rich, eternally rich, is to become
poor: This is a Mystery, yet this Mystery is taught us in the Person of Christ.
David was a King, and very rich, yet cries out, I am poor; he was poor in
Spirit. This poor Man cried, There is that makes himself rich, yet has
nothing; there is that makes himself poor, Prove. 13.7.
and yet has great Riches.

(3.) That the way to have all, is to lose all; and that a Man gains most, when
he loses most: Is not this a Mystery?

(4.) That Men must die to live, or that the way to live is to die; nay, that
God kills by making Souls alive, and yet by that killing and death, brings them
to life: And is not this a Mystery? Sin must die, and we must die to Sin: Sin
revived, and I died; Romans 7.11.
yet by that Death he revived, and lived. A Man must die to Self, or he can
never live himself.

(5.) God makes Men blind by giving Sight, and turns that Darkness into Light;
and is not this a Mystery?

(6.) The way to Honor and Exaltation, is to be abased, and suffer our selves
to be trod upon; this is opened also in the Person and Life of Christ. To enjoy
God's Favor, is first to bear his seeming Frowns. And many such like Mysteries
there are in Godliness.

Fifthly; There is a Mystery in Ordinances, which those who follow this Trade
should understand, a Mystery in Baptism, a Mystery in the Lord's Supper. But
these things I cannot enlarge upon for want of Room.

Use 1. Let all take heed they do not slight or reproach these Mysteries.

2. Let them not think to understand them in their own fleshly Wisdom.

3. Let them labor to get the Power and Operation of them upon their Hearts,
and then they will esteem them, and say, there is a Truth in what we affirm and
teach.

VI. He that would drive a Trade to gain by it, or thrive upon it, must follow
it closely, he must make it his chief Business, nothing will be done in it to
purpose without diligence. So every Christian, who would gain by the Trade of
Godliness, must keep close to it, he must follow it day and night, and manage
it wisely, throughout all his other Affairs. Godliness must be followed without
intermission, it must be every day's Work; the Head, Heart, Hands, Feet, Time,
Strength, Discourse Contrivance, must be taken up about it. No Man can thrive
in Godliness, if his Heart be not in it. When thy Hand is in the World, thy
Heart should be in Heaven.

VII. He that drives a Trade with discretion, must take heed he runs not too
far in debt, and that ^e keeps his Books carefully, or else he may soon run out
of all: So must a Christian take heed he run not far in debt. Debts will be
contracted: In many things we offend all: But be sure to see these Debts paid,
left the Creditor come on a sudden upon thee. If any Man sin, we have an
Advocate, etc. Renew Repentance every day, 1 John 2.3.
and labor after fresh Acts of Faith; keep thy Accounts even with God, observe
the Mercies thou receivest from him, and be sensible of thy Faults and
Miscarriages.

VIII. There is no Man that follows a great Trade, but ought to see he has a
Stock sufficient to trust; he that cannot trust, in some Callings, shall have
but a poor Trade: So every Christian must be careful to get a good Stock of
Faith and Experience; for if a Saint cannot trust God, he will never make any
Earnings of Godliness. It is true, it behooves a Trader to take heed whom he
trusts; so it behooves a Christian; he must not trust his own Heart, nor in
his own Righteousness, nor put too much confidence in Princes. We can never
trust Men too little, nor God too much.

IX. A Man that would follow a Trade to Advantage, must be much at home, and
keep his Shop, and, as the Proverb is, his Shop will keep him; but he that is
more abroad than at home, will soon come to Beggary: So a Saint must be much at
home, and keep his own Heart well. Some Professors are more abroad, spying
Faults in other Men, than they are in taking notice of their own.

X. A Man that drives a Trade, ought to take heed he go not behind-hand, and
instead of getting, lose by his Trading: So ought a Saint to take heed he go
not backwards instead of going forwards, and lose instead of gaining. Thou have
lost thy first Love. -- Remember from whence thou art fallen, Rev. 2.
and repent.

XI. Some Men trade upon other Men's Stocks, as Factors, Stewards, etc. And such
Traders are Christians, they trade upon Christ's Stock, they regulate their
Affairs by Christ's Advice, they drive on Christ's Interest. All that Saints
have is their Master's Money, and it behooves them so to lay it out, that it
may bring in the most Increase. Remember, all your Graces, Gifts, and Temporal
Goods too, are the Lord's.

XII. Some Trades require great Layings out; and if a Man is sparing in his
Layings out, he must expect his Comings in will be accordingly: S^ the Trade of
Godliness requires great Layings out. A Christian, who will not lay out his
Strength, Time, and Parts, and what he has, for God, will never grow rich in
Faith and Godliness.

XIII. Quick Returns are the Life of a Trade, and animate a Man in his Calling
and Business exceedingly: So quick Returns do enliven and greatly encourage a
Christian, when he finds God answers his Prayers, Isa. 65.24.
as the Promise runs, Whilst they speak, I will answer, and^.

XIV. Some Men grow very rich by a Trade: So some Christians grow very rich in
Faith and Experience, by Godliness. [ See City of God, page 82, 83.]

Inferences.
THis may inform the Saints what they undertake, when they enter upon the Work
and Business of Godliness, they must look upon it as their chief and principal
Calling.

II. How are many Men deceived! They pursue the World as their chief Business,
and mind Religion and Godliness, when they have nothing else to do.

III. Be exhorted, O Christian, to follow thy Calling; do thou want Motives?

1. Consider, it is an honorable and ancient Trade; Christ Jesus himself was of
this Profession, Godliness was his chiefest Business; all the Saints and
Worthies of old followed this Calling.

Prove. 3.14.
2. It Is the best Trade and Calling in the World: For the Merchandise thereof is
better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold.
Heavenly Things are rare Things, Things of great worth: (1.) They cost dea^,
viz. the Price of Christ's most precious Blood. (2.) They are durable Riches.
(3.) O what precious Things are Pardon of Sin, Peace with God, Union and
Communion with God! What a rare Thing is Heaven! Is not a Crown worth Trading
for?

3. Consider who you trade with, and that is the great God, through Jesus
Christ.

4. You have a faithful Correspondent, one that ever lives to make Intercession
for you.

5. You have your Goods upon easy Terms: Ask, and you shall receive. Come, buy
Wine and Milk without Money, Isa. 55.1.
and without Price.

1 Timothy 6.6. and 4.8.
6. It Is the most profitable Trade: Godliness with Contentment is great Gain.
It Is profitable to all things, having the Promise of the Life that now is, and
of that which is to come.

Metaphors, Similes, etc. CONERNING Providence and Affliction.
Afflictions compared to Clouds.
Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and Darkness are round about him, etc.

Joel 2.2. A Day of Clouds, etc.

Lam. 2.1. How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Sion, with a Cloud, in his
Anger?


CLouds are a moist Vapor, exhaled from the Earth and Sea, by the Sun, and
condensated by the Cold in the middle Region, and carried by the Winds up and
down, called the Bottles of Heaven; which God, says one, does fill with Wine
and Vinegar, with Mercy or Wrath.

By Clouds and Darkness are meant Afflictions and dark Providence, under which
God often times exercises his own People.

Parallels.
CLouds are many, Who can number the Clouds in Wisdom? Job 38.37.
So the Calamities of God's People are many, innumerable Evils compass me
about, many are the Afflictions of the Righteous.

II. Clouds are said to be round about the Almighty, Job 22.14.
nay thick Clouds are said to be a covering to him, and yet he dwells in the
Light, which no Man can approach unto: Now when God is said to dwell in
Darkness, or to have Clouds and Darkness round about him, it shows that God's
Works and Ways are hid from us: so that we are not able to see him, nor look up
to behold what he does, God's Providence are like Clouds, they obscure or hide
God's Counsel and way of his working from us; he is in the Clouds tho we see
him not, those Clouds and Darkness which are about him do not hinder his sight
of us, tho they hinder our sight of him.

III. Clouds are of different kinds, some are said to be thick and very black,
when others have a kind of thinness in them, and are, as Mr. Caryl notes (as it
were) transparent; some are more gross and opacous, quite hindering and
intercepting our sight of things beyond them: So some of God's Dispensations
are dark, very dark, and others more bright; some are so dark and gloomy, such
black and thick Clouds are over us, that we can see no Light, we cannot see
through them, no seeing things beyond them; when others are not so dark, they
are like light Clouds, the Mind of God may be seen and plainly understood in
them. Job was covered with thick darkness, he understood not the reason why God
contended with him, he had quite lost sight of the Almighty; I go forward, but
he is not there, Job 23.9, 10.
and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand, where he does work,
I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see
him: but it was his Mercy, God was hid on the right hand; for sometimes he
hides himself on the left hand from a People.

IV. Clouds make the day dark, dull, and People very Melancholy: So some of
God's dismal Providence make the Dispensation in which we live very dark and
uncomfortable, and fill us with Trouble and Sorrow.

V. Clouds are at the Commandment of God, he covers the Heavens with them, and
again dissipates and scatters them at his Pleasure: So all the Troubles and
Calamities that attend a People or Nation, are brought upon them by the
ordering and overruling hand of God's Providence: Is there any evil in a City
and I have not done it? Who gave Jacob to the Spoil, Isa. 42.24.
and Israel to the Robbers? did not the Lord? etc. and then he again, sometimes
in an unexpected manner, scatters all the thick Clouds in a moment, making the
day clear, serene, and comfortable.

VI. Clouds sometimes grow thicker and thicker, threatening a dismal Storm of
Thunder and Hail, causing all that are in the Field to hasten home: So the
Dispensations of God's Judgments sometimes are such, that all God's People fear
a dreadful Storm will come upon them; and then those who have strayed abroad,
and estranged themselves from God, begin to look about them, and hasten home
apace, to take Sanctuary in God.

VII. Clouds cover the Face of Heaven; many Vapors gathering together rise up
and darken the Sun, and keep from us the comfortable Aspect thereof: I will
cover the Sun with a Cloud. The same Word that is used for a Cloud, does
signify a Multitude: So Clouds (as Mr. Greenhil observes) sometimes signify a
Multitude of Men, a Multitude of Enemies, as it was prophesied concerning
Nebuchadnezzar's Army, and of the great Gog, Thou shall ascend, and come like a
Storm, and shall be like a Cloud to cover the Land.

VIII. Clouds are so swift, that they are irresistible; they pour out the Rain,
and none can let them: So the Enemies, and other Troubles, come sometimes in
upon God's People, that there is no stopping them.

IX. Clouds are such plain Emblems of Misery and Affliction, that the Hebrew
Word (...) for a Cloud, signifies also Calamity: So the Day of the Lord's Wrath
in Scripture is set out by Clouds frequently: That Day is a Day of Trouble and
Distress, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds and thick Darkness.

Now the Reasons why God brings Clouds and Darkness upon his People, are many,
which I must pass by.

Affliction compared to Fire.
Isa. 24.13. Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the Fire.

Zech. 13.9. I will bring the third part through the Fire, etc.

1 Cor. 3.13. -- And the Fire shall try every Man's Work, of what sort it is.


FIre is taken in the holy Scripture two ways, either literally, or
figuratively and metaphorically; and so it signifies several Things, and
amongst the rest these; 1. The Wrath of God. Mal. 4.1. 2. The Effects of his
Wrath. Isa. 52.4. 3. Any sore and dismal Affliction, Trial, or Persecution.
Isa. 24.15.


Note. Judgments, or sore Calamities, are compared to Fire.

Parallels.
THere is a great Judgment and Terror in Fire let loose upon a People: So when
God brings in Enemies, or lets them loose upon a People, it is a great Judgment,
very terrible and amazing.

II. There are different Fires: Some are a Judgment, as before; but others are
profitable, as the Refiner's Fire: So there are different metaphorical Fires.
God's Wrath on the Wicked is like a devouring and consuming Fire, that burns up
all; but the Fire in which he puts his own Children, is like the Refiner's
Fire. Afflictions and Judgments upon the Godly, are but to burn up their
Corruption, and make them more pure; they shall not consume them.

III. Some Fires break forth suddenly and unexpectedly: So some Judgments break
forth upon a People and Nation suddenly, when no Man looks for it, whether it
be Plague, Sword, or Famine.

IV. Fire burns terribly; when it has gotten to a Head, it is hard to stop it:
So when the Wrath of God breaks forth in good Earnest upon the Wicked, it is
hard to stop it. Tho Wrath has been quenched by Prayer, yet sometimes Prayer
cannot quench Wrath: Pray not for this People. Jer. 7.16.


V. The Fire will refine Gold, and make it more fit for use; but Wood, Hay, and
Stubble it consumes to Ashes: So sincere Christians endure the Fire of
Affliction, and are made better by it; but all drossy Professors and Hypocrites
the Fire of Persecution consumes.

Affliction compared to a Rod.
Job 9.34. Let him take his Rod away from me.

Psalm. 89.32. I will visit their Transgression with a Rod.

Mic. 6.9. -- Hear ye the Rod, etc.


THE Rod has diverse Acceptations:

1. The Word (...) Shabat, is taken sometimes strictly, for a Bough or Sprig
growing from the Stock of a Tree, because a Rod or Staff is made of a Bough of
a Tree.

2. It signifies a Scepter, the Scepter of a King, an Emblem of Power, etc. And
because in ancient Times, (as the Learned observe) they were wont to make
Scepters of such Rods, and all Scepters have the Form or Shape of a Rod;
therefore the Original expresses the Rod and the Scepter by the same Word. Genesis
49.10. The Scepter, (Shebet, the Rod) shall not depart from Judah, etc. This
Scepter (says Mr. Caryl) denotes two things: (1.) Authority to judge or
command, (2.) Power to correct or punish.

3. The Word sometimes refers to Ecclesiastical or spiritual Discipline, or
Censure of the Church: Shall I come with a Rod? etc.

4. The Word is often used in Scripture to signify Punishment or Correction,
because Correction is often given with a Rod; and therefore to be under the
Rod, is to be under Punishment or Affliction, etc. The Rod and Reproof give
Wisdom. Prove. 29.15. There is a Divine Rod of Chastisement for the Godly, and
an Iron Rod of Wrath and Vengeance for the Wicked. And in this Sense the Words
are to be taken in the above cited Texts.

Parallels.
A Rod puts to pain, if it be sharply laid on; it makes the Person to smart,
and cry out, etc. So Afflictions are grievous and painful to Flesh and Blood;
they wound and pain the outward Man, whilst the inward Man takes pleasure in
them: 2 Cor. 12.10.
I take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Persecutions, in
Necessities, in Distresses for Christ's sake. Yet in another place the same
Apostle says, No Affliction for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous. Heb. 12.11.
As the Spirit would not do those Evils, which the Flesh would and does; so the
Flesh would not endure those Evils of Sorrows and Afflictions, which the Spirit
gladly yields to. As a Believer delights in the Law of God after the inward
Man, when the Flesh is vexed and troubled at it: So he delights in the Rod
after the inward Man, when his corrupt Part is most impatient and unquiet under
it: Rejoice when ye fall into diverse Temptations; that is, Jam. 1.
into diverse Afflictions. The Flesh has its Sense, and feels Smart; but the
Spirit is armed with Faith, which overcomes the Smart. Afflictions were not so
much as a Rod, Caryl.
if they did not pain, and make smart; and we are not so much as Christians, if
we cannot bear the Smart with Patience, etc.

II. A Rod is used to correct, not to kill: Affliction is called a Rod, in
regard of the Hand that uses it; a Sword is in the hand of a Judge, and a Rod
in the hand of a Father. God deals with his People, as a Father with his
Children, in chastizing them. When we offend him, he does not take a Sword into
his hand to slay us, but a Rod to scourge us.

III. A Rod is used by a Father, when no other Means will reclaim the Child: So
God never afflicts his People, but when he sees there is need of it, he seeing
no other Means will do. He does not willingly afflict nor grieve the Children
of Men. Lam. 3.33.


IV. A Father has diverse Rods; if one will not do, and make the Child bow,
submit, and humble himself, another shall: So God has diverse Rods; He
sometimes corrects with the Rod of Sickness, Losses, Crosses, etc. Sometimes
with the Rod of Poverty, sometimes with the Rod of Desertion; and sometimes he
uses the Wicked in his hand, as a Rod to afflict and chasten his own People,
which is one of the worst of God's Rods; and therefore David chose rather to
fall into the immediate Hand of God, than to be scourged with the Rod of the
Enemy. The Assyrian is called the Rod of God's Anger. Isa. 10.5.


V. In using the Rod, the tender Father always designs the Good of the Child:
So God in afflicting and chastening his People, designs their great Good: It Is
not for his Pleasure, Heb. 12.8.
but our Profit, that we might be Partakers of his Holiness.

Inferences.
LEt those Christians who are under the Rod, confess they have deserved it; He
has not punished us according as our Sins have merited at his hands.

II. Let us from hence also learn to submit to the Rod, and not strive and
struggle with God. O how uneasy are some Men and Women under Affliction. O I
could bear, says the Soul, any thing but this. Alas! is it necessary that thou
should choose thy own Rod? God will correct us with what Rod he pleases,
according to his good pleasure it must be, for the degree and kind of it too;
and are you troubled at the Rod, at this Rod? It may be you had rather God
should afflict you some other way; but God sees this is the best, and no other
will do the work upon your Hearts. It may be, if we had committed some other
Sins, and not such and such a Sin, we should have been corrected but with such
and such Rods, and not with this which seems most cross and grievous to us.

Lam. 3 40.
III. Let us labor to find out what God speaks to us by the Rod: Let us search
and try our Ways. Many times we may find out our Sin in the Punishment of it.

Jer 8.6. Psalm. 51.4.
IV. Let us confess our Faults when we are under the Rod; God hearkens to hear
what we say: Against thee only have I done this thing, and in thy sight.

V. Let us labor to be thoroughly humbled when under the Rod.

Quest. Some may say, Why does God use the Rod?

Answ. 1. Because Believers are his Children; Fathers will look after the Good
of their Children. Prove. 22.15.
To spare the Rod, may be the Ruin of the Child.

Amos 3.2.
2. Because the Sins of God's own People are grievous in his Sight. You have I
known above all the Families of the Earth, and therefore will I punish you for
your Iniquities.

VI. Hear the Rod: The Lord's Voice cries to the City, and the Man of Wisdom
shall see thy Name: Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

1. The Man of Wisdom is one that fears God, Prove. 9.10. A holy Man is a wise
Man, and a Sinner is a Fool; Holiness is the best Wisdom, and Wickedness is the
greatest Folly.

2. He that escapes the greatest Evil, and chooses the greatest Good, is a Man
of Wisdom.

3. He that prefers the Good of his Soul, before the Good of his Body, is a Man
of Wisdom.

2. The Man of Wisdom will hear the Rod. (1.) He will commune with his own
Heart, to find out the Cause of God's Anger, the Cause of Affliction. (2.) He
will tremble at God's Judgments. (3.) He will justify God under the Rod. (4.)
He is one that finds out God's Name in the Rod: He finds out Anger in the Rod,
Mercy in the Rod, Wisdom in the Rod, Power in the Rod, Faithfulness in the Rod,
etc.

3. A wise Man under the Rod will endeavor to turn away and pacify the Anger
of God.

There is (it appears) a Voice in the Rod, which a wise Man strives to
understand. (1.) There is a chiding Voice in the Rod. (2.) And not only so, but
in some Rods an amazing Voice. (3.) A threatening Voice. (4.) An awakening
Voice. (5.) A convincing Voice. (6.) There is an humbling Voice in the Rod.

Quest. Why do so few Men and Women hear and understand the Voice that is in
the Rod?

Answ. 1. Because the Affliction or Judgment perhaps is general, it is hard for
Men to make special and particular Application of common Calamities.

2. Because Men are more subject to look to secondary Causes in the Rod, than
to the immediate Hand of God.

3. Because Men are so heedless and unsensible, they will not trouble
themselves to find out the Voice that is in the Rod.

4. It Is because Men are so full of other Business, that they have not Time to
hearken to God's Voice in the Rod.

5. It Is because they do not see any present Effects of God's Hand; he is loath
to strike: How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? etc.

Affliction compared to a Furnace.
Deuteronomy. 4.20. But the Lord has taken you, and brought you forth out of the Iron
Furnace. Jer. 11.4.

Ezekiel. 22.18. -- And Lead in the midst of the Furnace.


A Furnace is either taken properly, or figuratively.

1. Properly. (1.) For a Place which Refiners refine their Gold in. Prove. 17.3.
(2.) A Place of Torment, such as was that which the three Worthies were put
into, who refused to worship Nebuchadnezzar's Golden Image, Dan. 3.6, 22.

2. Metaphorically, for heavy and cruel Bondage, Deuteronomy. 4.20. Jer. 11.4. For
Hell Torments, Mat. 13.42. And shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire.

Note. Afflictions, or sore and cruel Trials, are compared to a Furnace.

Parallels.
A Furnace is prepared for Gold: The Refining-Pot for Silver, and the Furnace
for Gold: So Afflictions are appointed for the Saints, who are compared to Gold.

II. A Furnace refines Gold, and makes it much more pure than before: So does
Affliction refine, and make more holy, the Hearts and Lives of godly
Christians: Job 23.10.
When he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold.

III. A Furnace is made sometimes very hot: So Afflictions are sometimes very
sore and grievous to the Godly. A weak Fire will not refine some Gold; no more
will small Trials refine some Christians.

IV. A Furnace melts the Gold, and makes it soft, before it is refined: So
Afflictions melt or make the Hearts of Believers soft: -- And I will leave you
there, (speaking of the Furnace) and melt you. Ezekiel. 22.20.


V. A Furnace consumes Tin, Lead, etc. and also the drossy part of Gold: So
those Afflictions and Trials God brings upon his People, burn up or consume all
loose and hypocritical Professors, who are compared to base Metal, as Tin,
Lead, etc. And not only so, but also all the Filth and Corruption of such who
are sincere. Psalm. 37.20.
Into Smoke shall they consume, (speaking of ungodly Ones.) [ See Gold, and
Refiner in the First Volume, page 262, 264.]

VI. Some Furnaces denote great Torment; it is an amazing thing, to be thrown
into a hot fiery Furnace: So some Afflictions and Judgments brought upon an
ungodly People, are very terrible, when they are in Wrath. The Wrath of God is
to wicked Men like a burning and consuming Furnace: Who can stand before his
Indignation? Nah. 1.6.
or who can abide in the fierceness of his Anger? His Fury is poured out like
Fire. [See Furnace, as it respects Hell Torments.]

Affliction compared to the Winter.
Cant. 2.11. For lo, the Winter is past, etc.
SOme understand by Winter, the State of the Elect before Conversion; but
others, Guild. Durham. Ainsworth.
(in my Judgment) upon better grounds, those cruel Persecutions the Church of
God shall be under, during the Reign of the Tyrannical and Antichristian Powers
of the Earth: The Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, etc. These things
(says Mr. Ainsworth) may be applied to the outward Troubles and Grievances of
this Life, by the Malice of the World, as when Israel was brought into the
Bondage of Egypt, and of Babylon, and after was released: likewise to the
spiritual Winter, Reign, and Rage of Antichrist; after which the Graces and
Fruits of the Gospel began again to flourish: It may also signify the
Afflictions of the Soul.

Parallels.
WInter is a Time of Cold, attended with Snow, Frost, Storms, and sharp
Weather: So whilst the spiritual Winter of the Church continues, sharp and
bitter Storms of Persecution frequently arise upon the Godly.

II. Winter, tho it be sharp, yet it is a profitable and wholesome Season of the
Year, in respect of the Body of Man, and Fruits of the Earth: So is the
spiritual Winter of the Church, or Soul; the Godly can no better be without
Adversity, than we can be without Winter.

III. Winter-Frosts, etc. kill the Worms, Weeds, and Vermin: So do
Afflictions, and the Frosts of Persecution, destroy the Weeds of our
Corruption, and free the Church from carnal Professors, who are like Worms, and
base Vermin, that hinder the Growth of God's choice Grain.

IV. In Winter it is a difficult and hard thing to travel some Roads: So it is a
difficult thing to travel in the Way to Heaven, i. e. to keep on in the Path of
Gospel Holiness and Obedience, in a Day of Persecution.

V. In Winter many things look as if they were dead; Trees, Flowers, and
Plants, have no Beauty in them, they are not pleasant to the Eye: So whilst the
Wintertime of the Church continues, the blessed Trees and Plants of
Righteousness seem as if they were withered, and their Beauty and Glory gone,
by means of the Tyranny and Oppression of the Ungodly; but when the Winter is
past, and the longed for Spring begins to appear, they will sprout up, and
flourish again gloriously.

VI. In Winter we have now and then some good and comfortable Weather: So now
and then in the Wintertime of the Church, there is a sweet, serene, and calm
Time of Peace and Tranquillity: Acts 9.31.
Then had the Churches Rest throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, and
were edified, and walking in the Fear of the Lord, and in the Comfort of the
Holy Ghost, were multiplied.

VII. The Winter makes the Spring and Summer much more acceptable and sweet: So
the Storms, Tempests, cold Frosts, and nipping Time of Trouble, Oppression, and
Persecution, will cause the Golden Age of the World, viz. the Reign and Kingdom
of Christ, like the Spring and Summer, to seem much more sweet and acceptable
to the Saints, and all that fear God. This is signified by the Singing of
Birds, etc. They shall sing in the Heights of Zion, Jer. 31.12. Isa. 35.1, 2.
etc. The Wilderness and the solitary Place shall be glad, and the Desert shall
rejoice, and blossom as the Rose; it shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even
with joy and singing, etc.

VIII. In Winter, Frosts, and cold pinching Weather usually last not long; they
are but for a season; a Thaw will come: So the afflicted State of a godly Man,
tho it be unpleasant, yet it is not lasting, to be sure not everlasting. Tho
some Frosts hold longer than others, yet none hold always; Summer will come:
And usually where Winter is fiercest, Summer for a Recompense is pleasantest.
Our Modern Geographer, having described the Sharpness of Winter in Muscovia,
Heylin 's Geography.
concludes thus: Such is their Winter, etc. Neither is their Summer less
miraculous; for the huge Seas of Ice, which in a manner covered the whole
Surface of the Country, are at first approach of the Sun suddenly dissolved,
the Waters dried up, and the Earth dressed in her Holy Day Apparel; such a
mature Growth of Fruits, such flourishing of Herbs, such chirping of Birds, as
if it were a perpetual Spring. Even thus, after a cold Winter of Affliction,
shall the Church, or a particular Soul be relieved by a sweet and comfortable
Summer of Prosperity.

Inferences.
THis may help the Godly to bear up under Afflictions and Sufferings in this
World: What tho they be pinching and troublesome whilst they last? yet they have
a very good Effect. Like as Frost mellows the Earth, and after it the Clods
crumble easily; whereas if there was no Winter, no Frost, they would be more
stiff, and not fit for the Husbandman: So thy Heart is hereby made mellow, and
more meet and fit to receive the good Seed. Frost dries up the ill Humors of
the Earth; so do Afflictions those of the Soul, etc. The Winter-Frosts kill the
Weeds and Worms which eat the Roots, and hinder the Growth of Herbs and Corn:
So Afflictions tend to kill our Lusts, those Weeds and Worms that breed and
grow in our Hearts always, hindering our Fruitfulness in Grace, and true
Godliness.

II. You know Fire does well in Winter, to warm the Blood, etc. So the Fire of
the Spirit will warm and heat thy Soul in and under Afflictions and
Temptations; get therefore near it, and labor to experience its powerful
Operations. [ See, The Word and Spirit compared to Fire, in the First Volume.]

III. It may reprove such who are discontented under Afflictions; they would
not be in such and such a troubled Condition, etc. Alas! Soul, will a wise Man
be angry and offended with the Winter? Would thou have all Summer, and no
Winter? all Peace and Prosperity, and no Adversity? Consider how necessary
Winter is.

Affliction compared to Darkness.
Isa. 8.22. Behold Trouble and Darkness, etc.

Lam. 3.2. -- And brought me into Darkness, etc.

Joel 2.2. A Day of Darkness, etc.


DArkness is taken properly, or metaphorically.

1. Properly; Darkness is nothing else but a Privation of Light; Caryl.
it is no positive Creature, it has no Cause in Nature, but is the Consequent
of the Sun's Absence.

2. Metaphorically, or improperly; it signifies diverse Things: (1.) The State
of Nature, or Unregeneracy, or deep Alienation from the Life of God: Ye that
were sometimes Darkness, etc. (2.) Several Sins wherein wicked Men live. (3.)
Desertion. (4.) The Grave. Ephesians. 5.8. Ephesians. 5.11.
(5.) Hell. (6.) Afflictions.

Note. Afflictions, Calamities, and spiritual Desertions, may be compared to
Darkness.

Parallels.
DArkness is a Judgment; thick Darkness was one of the Plagues of Egypt: So
some Calamities and severe Afflictions are brought upon a People or Nation, as
a just and dreadful Judgment of God.

II. Natural Darkness is occasioned by the Absence of the Sun, and Obscurity of
the other Luminaries of Heaven: So some Afflictions and Calamities are
occasioned by the absence of the Light of God's Word, and hiding of his Face.
When the Gospel is taken away from a People, that People are presently involved
in thick Darkness, which is a most sore and fearful Judgment.

III. Darkness is very uncomfortable, it is a dolesom thing to have no Light: So
to be under some Afflictions, especially Desertion, is the most uncomfortable
State in the World.

IV. Darkness causes a Man to lose his Way, and wander about, and exposes him
to many Dangers: So spiritual Darkness causes a Man to stumble. Walk whilst you
have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you; for he that walks in Darkness,
John 12.35.
knows not whither he goes. Give Glory to the Lord your God, Jer. 13.16.
before he cause your Feet to stumble upon the dark Mountains; and whilst you
look for Light, he turn it into the Shadow of Death.

V. There are Degrees of Darkness; Darkness, and thick Darkness, and the
Blackness of Darkness, etc. One degree of Darkness may attend the Day; a Day
may be dark, but not like the Darkness of the Night; and some Nights are darker
than others, as Experience shows. And hence we read of Darkness, and of the
Shadow of Death: Psalm. 23.4.
Tho I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil,
etc. That is, the greatest Darkness and Evil that can befall a godly Man. The
Shadow of a Thing in Scripture (says Mr. Caryl) denotes the Power of a Thing;
and to be under the Shadow of a Thing, is to be under the Power of it: To be
under the Shadow of the Almighty, is to be under the Power of the Almighty,
etc. To be under the shadow of Death, is to be under the power and reach of it:
Tho I may be so near Death, that it may seem to others to be really Death, and
that it is impossible to escape Death, yet I will fear no Evil. Some
Afflictions threaten Death upon God's People, and upon his Concerns and
Interest in the World, and Christians may seem to be under the Influence of
Death. The Influences of Death are those Fears and Doubtings, Divisions,
Distractions, and Vexations of Heart and Mind, Cries and Confusions, which
usually accompany or prepare the Way for Death, Job 3.5.
Let Darkness, and the Shadow of Death stain it, etc. That is, such Darkness as
dwells with Death, such Darkness as fills the House of Death, the Grave. Such
Darkness as this, Heman complained of: I am accounted with them that go down
into the Pit, etc, free among the Dead, Psalm. 88.4, 5, 6, 7.
like the slain in the Grave, wh^m thou remembrest no more, and they are cut
off by thy Hand. Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the
Deep: Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy
Waves. Selah. He seemed to be under the greatest Darkness, so sorely deserted,
that he saw no Light, he sat in the very Shadow of Death, Caryl.
viz deadly Darkness, thick Darkness, stifling Darkness, such as is in deep
Pits and Mines under the Earth, where Vapors and noisome Damps do many times
strike Men with Death, in the most deplorable State and Condition imaginable.
It Is one thing to have some Afflictions, and some Doubtings of Mind and Spirit;
and another thing, to be in these great Deeps of Affliction and Desertion.

VI. No natural Darkness is so thick and dismal, but God can make it worse; he
has Power over the Darkness, Isa. 45 7.
as well as over the Light: I form the Light, and create Darkness; I make
Peace, and create Evil: I the Lord do all this. So no Affliction or Sorrow is
so grievous, but God can mak^ it much greater. Tho we may be in Darkness, nay,
in Night-Darkness, yet this Darkness may increase more and more, to a perfect
Night of Darkness. I will punish you yet seven times more for your Sins.

VII. Darkness is more grievous to such as have enjoyed much Light, than to a
Man that was born blind; for one that has had his perfect Eyesight, and has
known how sweet a thing Light is, how sad and lamentable is it for him to lose
his Sight, or to dwell in Darkness! So it is more grievous to a Christian, who
has lived in a Land of Light, and has long enjoyed the sweet Favor and Light
of God's Countenance, to be deprived of all spiritual Light and Comfort, than
it is to a Person, who never knew how sweet Divine Light, Communion with God,
and the Blessings of the Gospel are.

VIII. Let Darkness be never so great, yet God can soon expel it, and bring
forth Light in the room of it: So it is easy with God to turn our Night of
Sorrow and Affliction, into Light, Joy, and a good Day.

IX. Darkness is many times mixed with Light, so that it is hard to say which is
most, the Light or the Darkness: So sometimes it is with a People, or particular
Soul. But it shall be one Day, Zech. 14.7.
which shall be known to the Lord, not Day, nor Night, but it shall come to
pass at Evening-time it shall be Light. It shall be dark; but at Even Tide,
that is, when thicker Darkness is looked for, and suddenly expected, instead of
that there shall be Light. God grant it may be thus with his poor Church in
England.

Inferences.
BLess God for Light: O what a sad thing is it to be in Darkness, either to be
deprived of the happy Fruition of the Light of God's Countenance, or of the
Light of God's Word and Ordinances!

II. Work whilst you have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you. Is not
England threatened at this time with a Night of Popish Darkness?

III. But however, there is Comfort to the Godly: Tho their Day may be clouded,
and Darkness may invade them, yet it will be Light again. Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart. Psalm. 97.1^.
Light is like Seed hid under the Clods, but it shall sprout, and spring up
gloriously in a little time.

1. It Is sown in the Purposes and Decrees of God: He has purposed and decreed
to give Light to the Righteous, and Joy and Gladness to the Upright in Heart.

2. It Is sown in the glorious Attributes of God.

3. It Is sown in the faithful Promises of God.

4. It Is sown in the Faith and Prayers of the People of God. There is a
plentiful Stock of Seed sown in this respect, and it shall in due time spring
up; the Prayers of the Saints fallen asleep, are not lost.

5. Light, and a good Day, is sown in all the Sufferings of the Saints; if we
suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.

6. Light and Gladness is sown as it were in the horrid Wickedness of the
Ungodly. Was not Light and Gladness sown for the Israelites, in the Sins of the
Amorites? (1.) In the Sin of Self confidence the Seed may be said to be already
sown: Behold, I sit a Queen, and shall see no Sorrow. Rev. 18.
(2.) In the Sin of Blasphemy. (3.) In their Treachery and Deceit. (4.) In
their bloody Cruelty.

Affliction compared to a Storm or Tempest.
Psalm. 83.14, 15. As Fire burns the Wood, and as Flame sets the Mountains
on Fire; so persecute them with thy Tempest, and make them afraid with thy
Storm.

Job 27.21. The East Wind carries him away, and he departs; and a Storm
hurleth him out of his Place.

Isa. 4.6. A Covert from the Storm.

Isa. 25.4. -- When the Blast of the terrible Ones is as a Storm against the
Wall.

Mat. 7.27. -- And the Winds blew, and beat upon that House, and it f^ll, and
great was the Fall of it.


BY Storms and Tempests are meant two things: 1. The terrible Wrath and
Vengeance of God against the Wicked. 2. The fierce Wrath of the Ungodly against
the Righteous.

Note. Wrath, whether it respects the Wrath of God or Man, is compared to a
Storm, or terrible Tempest.

We shall speak to this Metaphor, Storm and Tempest, principally in reference
to the Wrath and Judgment of God.

Parallels.
A Storm or Tempest sometimes is looked for and expected, (by certain Signs
which some observe) a considerable while before it comes; by the gathering of
the Clouds, they see a Storm threatened: So the Wrath and Displeasure of God
against a People, or Nation, is by some observing Men expected and looked for
before it comes. There are certain Signs, which are like the gathering of the
Clouds: (1.) When Sin grievously abounds. (2.) When the Hand of God has been
lifted up, and yet Sinners are not humbled. (3.) When many faithful and eminent
Servants of God are taken away by Death. (4.) When there are strange and
wonderful Signs or Prodigies seen in the Heavens, or upon the Earth or Waters,
etc. (5.) When the People of God generally, as one Man, do look for it; (for
God usually goes first upon the Hearts of his own People in this respect.) (6.)
When former Afflictions do not humble, nor work Reformation in Professors, and
others.

II. A Storm comes now and then very suddenly, before Men are aware: So does
the Storm of God's Wrath come oftentimes very suddenly upon a sinful Nation and
People. It may be the Plague this night breaks forth, or a Fire, or a War,
which Men dreamed not of: When they cry Peace and Safety, sudden Destruction,
etc. I only allude to that Text.

III. A Storm is sometimes very tempestuous, mixed with Thunder, Lightning, and
great Hail, so that it is very terrible, causing Horror and Amazement in most
Men and Women: So the Wrath of God sometimes breaks forth upon a People in a
most sore and dismal sort, so that the Mountains, the great Ones of the Earth,
quake at him, and all are afraid of his Judgments, and cry out to the Rocks and
Hills to cover them: 1 Samuel 7.10.
The Lord thundered with a great Thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and
discomfited them, etc. The Lord also thundered in the Heavens, and the Highest
gave his Voice, Hail stones, Psalm. 18.12, 13, 14.
and Coals of Fire: Yea, he sent out his Arrows, and scattered them; and he
shot out Lightning, and discomfited them.

IV. A Storm and cruel Tempest is irresistible; Man cannot withstand it when it
comes: So the Wrath and Judgments of God, when they come in fury upon a People,
there is no resisting of them: Who can stand before his Indignation?

V. A dreadful Storm many times makes sad Desolation, blowing down Houses, and
tearing up Trees by the Roots: So the Wrath of God many times makes great
Desolation; it sweeps away Thousands, and Ten Thousands, leaving Towns and
Cities almost without Inhabitants: Come, see what Desolation the Lord has made
in the Earth.

VI. God sometimes suffers the Devil to raise the Wind, who thereby does great
Mischief, as in Job's Case: So the Devil, and his Instruments, Job 1.19.
are many times suffered to raise a great Storm of Persecution upon the Lord's
People.

Affliction compared to a Flood.
Psalm. 29.10. The Lord sits upon the Flood, etc.

Psalm. 42.7. All thy Floods and Waves are gone over me, etc.

Isa. 59.19. For the Enemy shall come in like a Flood, etc.

Psalm. 93.3. The Floods have lifted up their Heads, O Lord, etc.

Mat. 7.27. And the Floods came, etc.


BY Floods some understand ungodly Men; others, Afflictions, and those
principally which wicked Men bring upon the Saints. Thus Ainsworth, and diverse
others expound it. Caryl on Job 27.20.
Afflictions and Troubles, says Caryl, are often compared to Waters in the
Scriptures, etc.

Parallels.
A Flood is the gathering together of many Waters: So the Ungodly oft-times
gather themselves together against the Righteous: For lo, thine Enemies make a
Tumult; and they that hate thee, Psalm. 83.2.
have lifted up the Head. -- The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, of
Moab, and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with the
Inhabitants of Tire, etc. And as many Enemies combine together against the
Saints; so oftentimes many Afflictions of diverse kinds do beset them: Many are
the Afflictions of the Righteous.

II. A Flood, or many Waters meeting together, roar, and make a great Noise: So
the Wicked, combining together against the Interest of Christ, roar (as it
were) in belching out cruel Threatenings against the Saints. Thus Pharaoh and
the Egyptians made a great Noise, as if they would in a moment have swallowed
up poor Israel. The Enemy said, I will pursue, Exodus 15.9.
I will overtake, I will divide the Spoil: My Lust shall be satisfied upon
them; I will draw my Sword, my Hand shall destroy them.

III. A Flood comes many times suddenly: So do Afflictions and Troubles come
upon God's People.

IV. A Flood many times rises very high, overflowing all Banks and Bounds: So
the Ungodly rise high in Rage and Malice against the Saints, breaking down all
Bounds of Law and Justice, and Banks of Humanity, making fearful Incursions
upon the just Rights and Privileges of God's People, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

V. Floods come violently, there is no stopping them: So Afflictions come in
like manner oftentimes upon the Saints; there is no escaping or stopping the
dismal Providence of God.

VI. Floods of Water come successively, one Wave following another: So do
Troubles and Afflictions frequently upon a Believer; like Job's Messengers, one
at the heels of another.

VII. Floods many times drive down Trees and Houses, etc. So Afflictions and
grievous Calamities drive down, Mat. 7.
and carry away the House and Hope of a foolish Builder, or unsound Professor.

Inferences.
WHat a Mercy is if God's People have not been drowned in these Floods, long
before this time! It Is the Lord only that has set up a Standard against them.
As the Waters have rose higher and higher, so he has graciously raised the
Banks of his Divine Providence, and thereby prevented the Danger.

II. Let not God's People be afraid, for the Lord sits upon the Floods, etc.

1. He sits upon the Floods as an Observer, his Eye is upon the Wicked, he sees
what they are doing in secret, their Counsels are not hid from him.

2. The Lord sits upon the Floods, to direct and order their Course;
Afflictions are ordered by him, both in respect of kind and duration.

3. The Lord sits upon the Floods as a Restrainer; He can assuage these mighty
Waters at his pleasure: Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the
Remainder of Wrath shall thou restrain.

4. The Lord sits upon the Floods, as a Preserver; He it is that keeps his
Saints from drowning: Isa. 43.2.
When thou passest through the Waters, I will be with thee, etc.

5. The Lord sits upon the Floods as a glorious Deliverer: Many are the
Afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

Affliction compared to Heat.
Cant. 1.7. Where thou make thy Flock to rest at Noon.

Isa. 25.4. -- A Shadow from the Heat, etc.

Mat. 13.6. And when the Sun was up, they were scorched.


THe Afflictions and Sorrows of the Godly are set forth by Extremes, by extreme
Cold, Frosts, etc. and then again by extreme Heat: Both are grievous to be born
and endured. Their Effects are such, that they aptly illustrate the Miseries of
the Lord's People in this World. By the Heat, or hot and scorching Beams of the
Sun, in Mat. 13.6. our Savior himself shows, is meant Persecution, v. 21.

Parallels.
NAtural Heat is from Heaven, it is occasioned by the scorching Beams of the
Sun, the Earth naturally being cold: So Afflictions come not out of the Dust,
Job 5.6, 7.
neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground. Tho the meritorious Cause of
all our Sufferings is our Sin, and so materially they are from our selves; yet
the Lord is the efficient Cause of them: Is there any Evil in the City, and I
have not done it?

II. Great Heat, or the continual scorching Beams of the Sun, are grievous to
be born: So sore Afflictions, and fiery Trials, are grievous to God's People, I
mean their fleshy Part: No Affliction for the present seems joyous, but
grievous, etc. Heb. 12.


III. In a Time of great Heat, or in the hottest Time of the Day, in very hot
Countries, great Labor is unpleasant, and very hard to be undergone: So it is
hard to labor, and bear heavy Burdens in God's Vineyard, viz. to stand up
for, and maintain the Truth, in a Time of hot Persecution, as many faithful
Servants of God found by experience in the Marian Days, etc.

IV. Great Heat, or the continual scorching Beams of the Sun, quickly fade,
consume, and spoil the Beauty of the Body: So cruel Sufferings and Persecutions
spoil the outward Beauty of the Church, making her look very black and deformed
in the Eyes of the World, which made the Spouse to cry out, I am black, etc.
Cant. 1.5, 6.
Which she attributed to the vehement and scorching Sunbeams of Persecution:
The Sun has looked upon me. And as Persecution seems to mar the external
Beauty of the Church and People of God, rendering them the most miserable People
in the World to a carnal Eye: So likewise other Afflictions have the like
effect upon the Body: My Skin (says Job) is black upon me, Job 30.30.
and my Bones are burnt with Heat. The Skin, and external Beauty cannot hold
its own against the ill Effects of a Disease, especially if lasting: When thou
with Rebukes do correct a Man for his Iniquity, Psalm. 39.11.
thou make his Beauty to consume away like a Moth, etc.

V. The scorching Heat of the Sun is but for a short time, in the heat of the
Day: So the Persecution lasts but for a short time: Our Afflictions which are
but for a moment, etc. Sorrow may continue for a Night, but Joy shall be in the
Morning, etc.

VI. In the Time of Heat, and hot scorchings of the Sun, Men use to betake
themselves to some shadowy Places for Refreshment: So in the Day of Affliction,
and hot Persecution the Church of God, and each sincere Christian, has a
shadowy Place to retire unto; God affords sweet Refreshment to his suffering
Saints.

VII. In a Time of great Heat, the Fruits of the Earth, and many green Things
are dried up, and wither away, and a Famine many times follows: So by the means
of a hot and cruel Persecution, many Christians, who seemed zealous for God,
and to have much Greenness upon them, in a Day of Liberty and Prosperity, are
dried up, like the fruitless Fig Tree, and wither away; and also sometimes a
Famine of the Word follows.

VIII. In a Time of great Heat and Drought, those Trees that are planted by the
Watercourse flourish sweetly notwithstanding: So all faithful and sincere
Christians, in the hottest Time of Persecution, shall flourish, and not cease
from yielding Fruit: Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord. -- For he
shall be as a Tree planted by the Waterside, Jer. 17.8.
and that spreads out her Roots by the River, and shall not see when Heat
comes; but her Leaf shall be green, and she shall not be careful in the Year
of Drought, neither cease from yielding Fruit.

Affliction compared to Wormwood.
Lam. 3.19. Remembering mine Afflictions, and my Misery, the Wormwood, and the
Gall.
WOrmwood properly is an Herb well known amongst us, upon the account of its
exceeding Bitterness; hence a common Proverb rises, It Is as bitter as Gall or
Wormwood, etc.

Parallels.
WOrmwood and Gall, and other bitter Things, are physical, very good in diverse
Distempers: So Afflictions are good spiritual Physic; the diseased Soul
receives much Profit by them many ways. 1. They purge out the corrupt and
noxious Humors of the Soul. 2. They tend to abate and pull down the Tympany of
Pride. 3. They are good against spiritual Deadness. 4. They are good against
spiritual Barrenness; nothing (when sanctified) makes a Soul more fruitful. 5.
They kill Worms, (as Wormwood naturally does) principally the Worm of an
accusing Conscience, that breeds out of the Corruption of the Heart and Life,
etc.

II. Wormwood, Gall, or Aloes, are not commonly given alone, but are mixed with
other Ingredients, otherwise it is hard to take them down: So God mixeth Mercy
with Affliction; in the midst of Judgment, he remembers Mercy toward his own
People. Babylon shall have nothing but Gall and Wormwood, it shall be without
any Composition of Mercy or Pity; hence said to be a Cup without mixture, etc.

III. Wormwood and Gall are exceeding bitter, and make such things bitter as
are given with them, tho sweet in their own Nature: So Afflictions, especially
some sorts of Afflictions are very bitter and irksom to the Flesh; they also
make bitter all our earthly Sweets.

Quest. Perhaps some may say, When are Afflictions so exceeding bitter? etc.

Answ. 1. When God strikes us in our best and dearest earthly Enjoyments; when
he takes away an only Son, a Husband, a Wife; or by a Fire, or otherwise, takes
away all our earthly Substance, stripping us quite naked of every thing: Then
Afflictions may be said to be bitter, like Gall and Wormwood.

2. When God brings upon us one Affliction after another: To day thy Cattle are
taken away, and then presently upon it thy Children, by a severe Judgment; and
after all, thou art struck with a sore and dismal Affliction in thine own Body.
Thus it was with Job. When God deals thus with a Man or Woman, Afflictions may
be said to be bitter. But then again,

3. When God strips a People, or particular Person, not only of all their
outward Mercies, or earthly good Things, but also of all their spiritual good
Things too, such Things as are dearer to them than their Lives; then
Afflictions may be said to be bitter. Should God at once bring so severe a
Stroke upon us, as to deprive us of all our Civil Rights and Privileges,
suffering an Enemy to break in upon us, who would not regard our good and
wholesome Laws, by which every Man's Propriety is secured to him; and not only
so, but deprive us of the Gospel, and blessed Ordinances thereof, and drive our
Ministers into Corners, or burn them to Ashes in Smithfield, and set up Popery,
and tyrannize it over our Consciences: This Affliction would be bitter, like
Wormwood and Gall, -- Which God in Mercy prevent. --

4. When Afflictions are very heavy and sore upon us, and we cannot find out
the Cause and Ground why God contends with us, then they may be said to be very
bitter. It was this which made holy Job Job 10.2.
so much distressed in his Spirit, -- Show me wherefore thou contendest with
me. He did not doubt of the Justice and Righteousness of God in them, but as
suspecting some Evil in himself, as yet unseen, or not discovered to him.

5. When God afflicts his People, or a gracious Soul, very sorely for Sin, for
this or that Sin, which they know they are, or have been guilty of. O this goes
to their Hearts, to think they should provoke their heavenly and dear Father
against them, to chastize them so severely.

6. When we are under great Afflictions, and God hides his Face, or withdraws
himself from us, then Afflictions are bitter: This is to be outwardly
afflicted, and inwardly too.

7. When Afflictions are lasting, or of long continuance, then they are very
bitter. A small Burden or Weight, born long, will weary a strong Man; but if
it be very heavy and abiding, it is much more grievous.

8. When God afflicts a Man in Indignation, when he lets fly his tormenting
Arrows against him, from the fierceness of his incensed Wrath, forcing him to
drink off his Cup without mixture, it being all bitter, and no sweet. Thus God
deals sometimes in a way of Judgment with wicked Men, tho never so with his own
People, and to such, Afflictions are bitter indeed.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may perceive what an Evil Sin is, that God will not spare his
own Children, when they offend him. Sin is a bitter thing, as appears by the
Effects of it; Afflictions are many times the Fruits and Effects of Sin.

II. It shows us also, that there is a great difference betwixt the Afflictions
and Miseries of the Godly and the Wicked.

Quest. But some may say, How may a Christian comfort himself, or get support
under sore and bitter Afflictions?

Answ. 1. Consider, that all your Afflictions, tho never so bitter, are less
than your Sins deserve: He has not dealt with us after our Sins, nor rewarded
us according to our Iniquities.

2. Consider, that tho God chastize a godly Man very sorely, yet it is not in a
way of Wrath, to destroy him, but contrariwise, for his great Good and
Advantage.

3. Consider, there is not one Dram of Gall in the bitterest Cup thou do
partake of, but what God, the most wise Physician, put into it; and if less
Gall would do, thy Potion should not be so bitter. All our Afflictions are
proportioned to us by the Almighty, both for kind and quantity.

4. Consider, thy Afflictions are not so bitter as the Afflictions of many of
God's Children were, of whom we read, who were far more worthy and deserving
than thee or I are: What are thy Afflictions compared with holy Job's?

5. Consider the bitter Potion Jesus Christ drunk up for thy sake: He never
offended, and yet suffered, and his Sufferings were intolerable; no Mortal is
able to express the Nature of his Grief and Sorrow. Shall Christ suffer
willingly for us, who sinned not? and shall we be troubled at the bitterness of
our Sufferings, who are so grievously defiled with Iniquity, and many times
suffer for our Sins?

6. Consider, that all the Bitter a godly Man meets with, or ever shall, will
be in this World. As wicked Men have all their Sweet here, and shall have
nothing but bitter hereafter: So godly Men have all their Bitter here, and
shall have nothing but Sweet hereafter.

7. Consider, how gracious God is to his own Children, in intermixing all their
Bitter with Sweet. It Is not like the Bitter some wicked Men have in this World:
Isa. 27.7.
Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? Or is he slain,
according to the Slaughter of them that are slain by him?

8. Consider, all the Bitter thou meetest with in this Life, will be turned
into Sweet. John 16.20.
Ye shall be sorrowful, but your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy.

Afflictious God's Arrows.
Job 6.4. For the Arrows of the Almighty are within me, etc.

Lam. 3.13. He has caused the Arrows of his Quiver to enter into my Reins.


AN Arrow is a deadly Engine, so called in the Hebrew, from its Effect,
Cutting, or Wounding: Taken properly, it is an Instrument out of a Bow of Wood
or Iron, either for Sport or Fight; but figuratively, it signifies diverse
Things in the holy Scripture.

1. The Word of God: Thine Arrows are sharp in the Heart of the King's Enemies,
Psalm. 45.5.
whereby the People fall under thee; that is, thy Words are sharp and piercing.

2. Bitter and reproachful Words: They bend their Bows to shoot their Arrows,
Psalm. 64.32. Psalm. 120.4.
even bitter Words.

3. Any evil or mischievous Purpose which a Man intends or aims to hurt his
Brother: When he bends his Bow to shoot his Arrows, let them be as cut in
pieces. Psalm. 58.7. Zech. 9.15.


4. Any kind of Affliction or Punishment: And the Lord shall be seen over them,
and his Arrows shall go forth as Lightning, etc.

Parallels.
ARrows are shot out of a Bow by some Man; some Arm must bend the Bow, and
shoot the Arrow, or the Arrow moves not: So all Afflictions come from God, who
is the efficient Cause of them; hence called the Arrows of the Almighty.

II. Arrows fly swift, and wound suddenly: So Afflictions come very speedily
oftentimes with a glance, as an Arrow, quick as a Thought.

III. Arrows come unexpectedly oftentimes, and wound a Man: So Afflictions come
many times upon a Person or People unexpectedly: When they cry Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them.

IV. An Archer has commonly many Arrows; his Quiver is full of them: So God
has many Judgments; we read of his Quiver too; He can send one Arrow after
another.

Psalm. 91.5.
1. He has the Pestilence; this is one of his Arrows: Thou shall not be afraid
for the Terror by Night, nor for the Arrow that flies by Day, nor for the
Pestilence that walks in Darkness, etc.

Ezekiel. 5.16.
2. He has Famine; this is another of his Arrows When I shall send upon them
the Arrow of Famine, etc.

3. He has the Sword: This is another Arrow of the Almighty, and this Arrow
God shot at Job; Job 1.15.
He brought upon him the Sabeans, who slew his Servants with the Edg of the
Sword.

4. He has Thunderbolts and Hailstones, which are also some of the Arrows of
his Quiver; and these are in readiness against the Day of Battle.

5. The withdrawings of God from a Soul or People, are also part of the Arrows
of his Quiver, psalm. 38.1, 2.
and these go deepest of all, they go to the very Heart: For thine Arrows stick
fast in me, says David.

V. Arrows fly secretly, and make no Noise, they are felt before they are
seen: So many Afflictions fly silently upon a Man, stealing upon him, and
wounding him unobserved and unseen.

VI. Arrows are sharp Things, and made sometimes more sharp than ordinary, as
the Archer sees cause: So Afflictions are very sharp and bitter Things, and
sometimes God makes them sharper than at another time: I will make mine Arrows
drunk with Blood. Arrrows are Instruments drawing Blood, Deuteronomy. 32.42.
and some Rebukes and Judgments of God are like unto them. The Arrows of the
Almighty are within me, Job 6.4.
the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit. Job seems to allude to the Custom of
those cruel Men, Caryl.
who, when they pursued the Enemies with deadly Hatred, and would wound them
incurably, used to dip the Heads of their Arrows, the Top of their Spears, and
the Point of their Swords, etc. in Poison, that so every Wound might be Death:
The Poison of such Arrows, etc. drinks up the Spirit, and corrupts the Blood.
Job compares the Arrows God shot at him, not to ordinary Arrows, which kill
only by piercing, but to poisoned Arrows, which kill by infecting. Afflictions,
like Arrows, put a Man to great Pain. When a Man has Terror without, and
Terror within, Terror coming from the Wrath of Man, and Terror coming from the
Wrath of God; his Potion is bitter: Such Arrows are sharp and tormenting.

THE Twelfth HEAD OF METAPHORS, SIMILES, AND Other Borrowed TERMS, CONCERNING
The World, the Life of Man, AND THE Four Last Things,
The World compared to a Wilderness.
Cant. 3.6. and 8.5. Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, leaning
upon her Beloved? etc.
WIlderness, (...), Tohu; A Wilderness is properly a wild Place, a Place
without shape or order. Moses has this Word, Genesis 1.1. to express the Chaos,
The Earth was without form, and void.

1. Metaphorically, it is taken sometimes for Affliction, Hos. 2.14. Rev. 12.

2. For this World, and so understood generally by Expositors in this and other
places, i. e. for the present State, Ways, Worships, and Pollutions of the
World, etc.

Parallels.
A Wilderness is commonly a waste, wild, and barren Place, some of which are of
a vast Bigness: This World is of a vast bigness, and very barren of Grace and
Holiness.

II. A Wilderness abounds with Briars and Thorns: So does the World with wicked
and ungodly Men, who are compared to Thorns and Briars.

III. In a Wilderness are many wild and devouring Beasts, so that it is
dangerous to dwell in it, or pass through it: So this World abounds with cruel
and unmerciful Men, who are called Wolves, Lions, Bears, Dogs, Dragons, etc. by
which means God's People are always exposed to great Trouble and Danger, whilst
they remain therein.

IV. In a Wilderness a Man may soon lose his Way, and wander up and down: So
whilst Men abide in this World, they are subject to go astray, and wander from
the Path of of Peace and Righteousness, and therefore have great need of a
Guide.

V. In a Wilderness commonly grow Trees of diverse sorts, some good, and some
evil: So in the World are Men both good and bad, righteous and wicked.

VI. In a howling Wilderness a Wall of Fire is exceeding necessary to preserve
from wild and ravenous Beasts: God upon this account is said to be a Wall of
Fire to his People, whilst they remain in this World, amongst the Sons of
Belial. [See Wall of Fire, Vol. 1. p. 76, 77.]

Zech. 2.5.
VII. In a Wilderness there is no tilling, sowing, nor planting: So in the
common Field of this World there grows little or nothing, but what the carnal
and natural Hearts of Sinners bring forth.

VIII. A Wilderness is a solitary and dolesom Place: so is this World to a
godly Man.

The World compared to a Field.
Mat. 13.38. The Field is the World.
Parallels.
THe Field is a broad Place: So is the World.

II. In a Field grows Wheat and Tares, good and evil Seed: So in this World
there are good and evil Men, Saints and Sinners, which God would have grow
together, like the Wheat and Tares, until the Harvest.

III. What is set or sowed, or comes up naturally in a Field, ripens for
Harvest: So the Godly, and the Ungodly, whilst they remain in the common Field
of this World, ripen for the spiritual Harvest.

IV. In a Field, Flowers, and other precious Things, oft-times receive much
detriment from Enemies, evil Beasts, and many other ways: So the Godly, whilst
they remain in this World, receive great Hurt from Satan, wicked Men, and from
the Corruptions and Evils of their own Hearts.

V. Part of a Field an Husbandman separates sometimes from the rest, to make a
Garden, Orchard, or Vineyard of: So God, the good Husbandman, has taken a
little Part or Parcel of the Sons of Men from the rest, to be a peculiar People
to himself.

The End of the World compared to Harvest.
Mat. 13.39. -- The Harvest is the End of the World.
WHen the Harvest is ripe, it is cut down; the Husbandman sends Reapers into
the Field: So when all the Elect are ripe for Heaven, and Wickedness is grown
to full Maturity; so that ungodiy Ones are all ripe for Hell, the End of the
World will come, and then God will send Reapers into the Field, which are the
holy Angels; and they will cut down, and gather out of the Field, all Things
that offend, and them that do Iniquity.

II. At the Harvest, the Reapers divide between the good and evil Grain; they
bind up the Wheat by it self, and the Tares by themselves, etc. So shall these
spiritual Reapers do, they shall gather all the Elect, like Wheat, into God's
Garner, and bind up the Tares into Bundles, to be burned.

III. The Husbandman waits with much patience for the Harvest: So God Almighty
patiently waits, bearing and forbearing with wicked Men, until the End of the
World.

Disparity.
When Harvest is all housed, the Husbandman presently tills and prepares his
Ground again, designing to sow more Seed: But when this Harvest is all come
home, and housed, God, the good Husbandman, will not till, plow, or sow the
Field of the World any more; no more Gospel to be preached, nor Graces or Gifts
to be distributed, when this Harvest is ended.

Of the Life of Man.
The Life of a Man compared to a swift Post.
Job 9.25. Now my Days are swifter than a Post, etc.
Parallels.
A Post rides swiftly, he makes haste: So the Life of Man, or Time of a Man's
Life, swiftly passes away.

II. A Post ought to make no stay: So the Days of Man's Life stay not; the
Hourglass of Time runs continually, and never stands still.

A Post (says my Author) is an excellent Emblem of Time. Caryl.
There are many Considerations in Post-riding, which shows how exceeding speedy
Time must be, to which it is here compared. 1. A Post rides upon fleet or
speedy Horses. 2. He rides his Horses upon their speed. A Man may have speedy
Horses, and go softly; but a Post spurs on. 3. A Post has Change of Horses at
every Stage, that so he may keep upon the speed. 4. He has Horses standing
ready for change; they are not to fetch out of the Field, or to be made ready,
when he comes to his Stage; it is but leaping into the Saddle, and away. 5. He
that rides Post makes no long Meals, much less Feasts; he takes a Bit, and is
gone. 6. He lies not long in Bed, he scarce goes to Bed till he comes to his
Way's end. 7. A Post has extraordinary Pay for his Service, and that to cause
him to make the more speed. 8. Sometimes he rides upon pain of Death, with a
Halter about his Neck; no Man will loiter when his Life lies on it. 9. All give
way to him that rides Post; he must not be hindered. 10. He stays not to salute,
much less, like other Travelers, to gaze, and view the Country, Towns,
Buildings, Gardens, by or through which he passes.

All these Things laid together, evince, that a Post makes great speed; yet
says Job, My Days are swifter than a Post. A Post may by one means or another
be stayed; but the Days of Man's Life stay not. The Post may stay whilst he
changes Horses, etc. But the Chariot of Time, viz. the Sun, stays not to
change Horses. The Sun is the Measure of Time, and that makes no Stop, has no
Stage, or Baiting-place.

The Life of Man compared to a swift Ship.
Job 9.26. They are passed away as the swift Ships, ( or, as the Ships of
Ebeth.)
SOme understand by Ebeth, the Name of a River in the Eastern Part of the
World, about Arabia, near the Place where Job lived, that runs very swiftly,
which adds to the swift Motion of a Ship that sails in it. A Ship in a dead
Water, having the Wind blowing rightly and briskly, runs apace; but if it has
a swift Stream besides, it runs the faster.

2. Others take the Word, not as a proper Name, but as signifying Desire, from
Abab, Caryl.
to desire with Earnestness: And then the Sense is thus rendered, My Days are
passed away as a Ship of Desire. That is, A Ship, which being laden with rich
Commodities, the Master and Pilot desire earnestly to bring her speedily to her
Port, that so they may put off their Commodities, and make Sale of such rich
Lading.

3. The Caldee, and others, give a further Note upon it, deriving the Word Abab
from Ebib, which signifies a Stalk growing up early from the Earth, and
bringing forth the first ripe Fruit of any kind; and so it is put for any early
ripe Summer-Fruit, as Plums, Apples, Cherries, etc. and then the Sense is, My
Days are like a Ship, which carries early Fruit: So the Vulgar, like a Ship
carrying Apples.

4. There is another Sense given by those who derive the Word from a Root,
which signifies to hate and oppose, or to be an Adversary; and then it is thus
rendered, My Days pass away as a Pirate's Ship, or as a Ship that goes to take a
Prey, or as a Ship that goes out to take Prizes upon the Sea. Now such Ships
are the swiftest of all others, being prepared on purpose to make way, and
overtake other Ships; their Lading is not Burden, but Ballast, that they may
be swift of Sail: So says Job, My Days pass away like a Ship; not like some
great Merchant-Ship, deeply laden, which can make no great speed in the Sea;
but as a Ship of Piracy, that has nothing in her, but Weapons, Artillery, and
Ammunition, to oppose those they meet with, which sail with every Wind; such as
are your nimble Frigates, Fly-Boats, and Ketches, which sail with every Wind; or
Galleys, which pass without Wind, carried with the Strength of Arms and Oars;
all being Vessels used to run in upon, and surprise a Booty. This also is a
good Interpretation; and so Mr. Broughton translates it, My Days do fly away
as the Pirat's Ship, etc. All show, the Life of Man swiftly passes away.

The Life of Man compared to an Eagle.
Job 9.26. As an Eagle hasteneth to her Prey.
AN Eagle is a very swift Creature, but when she hasteneth to her Prey, she
makes the greatest Speed. The Life of Man is not compared to an Eagle in her
ordinary Flight, but as an Eagle that hasteneth to her Prey, when Hunger adds
Swiftness to her Wings: Thus with swiftness our Days pass away.

The Life of Man compared to a Weaver's Shuttle.
Job 7.6. My Days are swifter than a Weaver's Shuttle, etc.
(...)
A VVeaver's Shuttle is an Instrument of a very swift Motion; and the Word
which is rendered swifter, signifies that which is fitted for the swiftest
Motion.

II. When the Weaver has finished his Web, he cuts off the Thread: So when
a Man has run out the Length of his Days appointed by the Almighty, his Life
is cut off, etc.

The Life of Man compared to Wind.
Job 7.7. My Life is Wind.
Parallels.
THe VVind passes away speedily: So does the Life of Man.

II. The VVind passes irresistibly, you cannot stop the VVind: So no Man, be
he never so strong, can hinder the speedy Motion of his Days.

III. The VVind, when it is past, returns no more: As you cannot stop the
VVind, or change its Course; so all the Power in the World is not able to
recall or direct the VVind; which way the VVind goes, it will go; and so soon
as it comes, it is gone: So when a Man's Days are gone, there is no recalling
of them again: Our Days pass, and shall not return, by any Law or Constitution
of Nature, or by any Efficacy of natural Causes. He remembered that they were
but Flesh, Psalm. 78.3^
Wind that passes away.

The Life of Man compared to a Cloud.
Job 7.9. As the Cloud is consumed and vanishes away: so he that goes down to
the Grave, shall come up no more, he shall return no more to his House, etc
Parallels.
AS the Cloud (such a Cloud as you see hanging in the Air) is consumed, or
gradually spent: So the Days or Life of Man by little and little is consumed.

II. A Cloud comes to its Height, and then is quickly dispersed, and vanishes:
So Man soon comes to his full Strength, and presently is gone.

III. A Cloud is like a Bottle full of Rain, or Sponges full of Water; God
crushes these Sponges, or unstops these Bottles, and they are emptied, and in
emptying vanish away, and return no more: So Man, being emptied of Life,
vanishes away, and returns not again.

Obj. But why then does Solomon affirm the Clouds return again after Rain?
Eccles. 12.2.
how then does Job say, that the Cloud vanishes, so Man goes to the Grave,
and returns no more.

Answ. Solomon in that Place of Ecclesiastes gives a Description of old Age,
and the sad Condition of Man in it: he calls it the evil Day, and wishes Men
would consider their latter End, before those evil Days overtake them: Before
the Light of the Sun, Moon, Caryl.
and Stars be darkened, and the Clouds return after the Rain. In old Age the
Clouds return after the Rain thus; as in some very wet Time, when we think it
has rained so much, as might have spent and quite exhausted the Clouds, and
drawn those Bottles dry, yet you shall see them return again, it will rain day
after day as fast as ever: So in old Age, when Rheums disstill so freely, that
you would think an old Man had emptied himself of all, yet the Clouds will
return again, and Floods of watery Humors overflow. Thus the Clouds of old Age
return, and in this Sense the Clouds of the Air return, after they are consumed
and spent into Rain.

But how does a Cloud return? not the same Cloud numerically, that Cloud which
was dissolved does not return; the same Sun goes down and vanishes out of our
Sight in the Evening, and returns in the Morning, the same individual and
numerical Sun: but that numerical Cloud which vanished, comes not again. Thus
Man vanishes and returns as the Clouds return after the Rain; that is, after
one Generation of Men are dead, they return again in their Children, another
Generation springs up, but there is no other Returning to Life till the
Resurrection; they that die shall not live again here; they shall not return to
their House; their Place shall know them no more.

The Life of Man compared to a Flower.
Job 14.2. He comes forth like a Flower, and is cut down, etc.
MAN is compared to a fading Flower. There are many Rarities and Excellencies
in a Flower. 1. Sweetness, to please our Smell. 2. Beauty and Variety of
Color, to affect the Eye. 3. Softness affecting the Touch, etc. But Job speaks
not a Word of any of these Properties, he speaks not of a flourishing but
withering Flower; not of its springing up, but of its cutting down, or of its
springing up, only in relation to cutting down.

Parallels.
A Flower comes up in the Spring, and seems very beautiful, but its standing is
very short, as you may observe in the Cowslip and diverse other Flowers: So Man
comes up, but his Abiding here is short, his standing is so small, that it is
not so much as mentioned. We are born to die, and we die as soon as we are
born; i. e. We are in a dying State.

II. A Flower is oft-times cut down or cropped off in its budding: So is Man; he
comes up like a Flower, and is cut down; he is cut down by Death; Death is the
Sith which cuts down this Flower.

1. Natural Death, (1.) by Sickness. (2.) By Age.

2. Violent Death. (1.) Casual, when a Man is slain by Accident. (2.) Cruel;
when a Man is slain by Murderers. (3.) Legal; when a Man is slain or cut off by
the Magistrate.

III. A Flower, if it be not cut or cropped off, yet it soon withers away, and is
gone. The very Sun, the Wind, and Air consumes its Beauty. The Naturalists tell
us of a Plant, called Ephemeron, because it lasts but one Day; as also of a
Worm, called Hemerobion, because it lives but one Day. Such a Plant and Worm is
Man. The Heathen Poet gives his Wonder and Observation of the Rose, that it
grows old in the very Budding. The Seventy read these Words of Job in the same
Tenor, he Decays like a budding Flower; as if Death (says Caryl) did rise
early, Eccl. 12.5.
and watch for this budding Flower to cut it down. And though some of these
Flowers stand till they wither, as Solomon in his Allegory shows; that is,
till gray Hairs: yet all the Time of their standing they have been falling. So
that we may well say with the Psalmist: Psalm. 103.15, 16.
As for Man, his Days are as Grass: as a Flower of the Field so he flourishes:
for the Wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the Place thereof shall know
it no more.

IV. The Owner of Flowers knows the best Time to crop them, etc. So God knows
the best Time to crop off or take away by Death any of his choice Flowers. [See
more Man a Flower, page 138, 139.]

The Life of Man compared to a Shadow.
Job. 14.2. He flees also as a Shadow, and continues not.

Jam. 4.14. -- For what is your Life? it is even a Vapor, that appears for a
little Time, and then vanishes away.


THe Learned observe three Sorts of Shadows. 1. Natural. 2. Civil. 3. Spiritual.

1. A natural Shadow is a dark Light, caused by the coming of some thick Body
between us and the Sun. This is a Shadow in a proper and strict Acceptance.

2. By Civil Shadow we understand Protection, Defense or safety, Isa. 45.25.

Col. 2.17. Heb. 8.5. and 10.9. Psalm. 102.11.
3. Spiritual Shadow is taken for a dark and imperfect Representation of Divine
Things. So all the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses are called Shadows.

The whole Life of Man is but as a Shadow: My Days are like a Shadow, that
declineth.

Parallels.
A Shadow is next to nothing; what is there in a natural Shadow? So what is the
Life of Man? he rather seems to live, than lives. A Shadow you know is opposed
to a Substance.

II. A Shadow is a very uncertain Thing: So is the Life of Man. The Shadow, a
Man may be under now, may, before he is aware, be gone. A Shadow is as fleeting
and uncertain a Thing as any Thing in the World. 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
Our Days on Earth are as the Shadow. How is it that there is no abiding no
certainty of our Lives?

III. A Shadow is very swift in Motion; what flies more swiftly than a Shadow
(as common Experience shows)? So the Life of Man is gone in a Moment, like
Lightning, a Dream, a Bubble, the Flower of the Field or a flying Shadow. Our
Days on Earth are as a Shadow; that is: They fly swiftly away like as a Shadow,
and there is no abiding. A Vapor is much of the Nature of a Shadow.

Inferences.
FRom all these Similitudes we may infer, that the Life of Man is very short,
his Days swiftly pass away.

Man that is born of a Woman is of few Days, etc. He comes up like a Flower,
and is cut down; he flies as a Shadow, and continues not: his Life is like
Wind, like a Cloud or Vapor, etc. All swift and fleeting Things.

Psalm. 39.5.
Behold thou have made my Days as an Hand-breadth. The largest Extent of the
Breadth of an Hand is but a Span; the lesser extent only four Fingers. To which
the Measure of Man's Life is compared.

I. Man's Life is Short in Comparison of those who lived before the Flood; some
then lived near a Thousand Years.

II. Much shorter when compared with the Life of God, who is from Everlasting,
without Beginning and without Ending.

Secondly, this may stir us a^^ up, or be a great Motive to us to improve and
redeem our Time. This, I say, Brethren, the Time is short.

I. Be persuaded your Days are few. It Is easy to say it, but hard to believe
it, and live in the Sense of it. The Child hopes to be a Man; a Man hopes to be
an Old Man; and he that is very old hopes to live yet many Days.

II. Be persuaded thy Days are uncertain, when thou lie down, thou know
not whether thou shall rise any more or no; when thou go out, thou know
not whether thou shall return any more or no. What a small Thing may take away
thy Life!

III. Learn from hence to get a true Measure of your Days. David desired a
Measure of his Days, that he might know how frail he was. Some do not measure
their Days by the King's Standard; they measure their Days by the Life of their
Progenitors. My Father and my Grandfather, says one, lived so long, and why
may not I live as long as they did? Others measure their Days by their present
Health and Strength; Others by the sound and healthy Constitution of their
Bodies. Now these Things are not a fit nor lavvful Measure of your Days, but
rather those Things of which you have heard, viz. The Weaver's-Shuttle, the
morning Dew, the Flovver of the Field, the early Cloud, the Shadovv and Vapor
that flies away.

IV. This may reprove and show the Folly of many wicked Men, who, like the
rich Man in the Gospel, say in their Hearts, We have Goods laid up for many
Years, take your Ease, Luke 19.20. Psalm. 49.11.
eat, drink, and be merry, etc. Their inward Thought is, that their Houses
shall continue for ever, and their Dwelling-places to all Generations.

V. It may tend to strengthen the Godly under Afflictions. Let them strive to
bear up with Patience. All their Days are but few, and therefore the Days of
Sorrow cannot be many.

VI. It may stir up all to labor to take hold of eternal Life. If our Days
here are few, let us get a well-grounded Hope of living in Heaven; for they
never die, who live in that Kingdom.

VII. Let us also endeavor to improve the Opportunity of Time; I mean those
gracious Advantages God is pleased to afford us for the everlasting Good and
Well being of our Souls when Time and Days shall be no more. Men of the World
take great Care to improve all Opportunities to enrich themselves, or increase
their outward Substance. They will not lose their Market-time, nor Change-time,
nor Fair-time. They will be sure to come early enough, and every Way to bestir
themselves with Wisdom and Diligence: And shall not we be as wise and as
diligent for the enriching our Souls? Shall we slight Seasons, Sabbaths,
Sermons, Convictions, etc. Let all remember, now is the accepted Time; 2 Cor.
6.2.
Now is the Day of Salvation; now, whilst it is called to Day, or never* Now
Sinners may get an Interest in Christ, Union with God, the Gifts and Graces of
the Spirit; Now they may obtain Pardon of Sin, and Peace of Conscience; Now
there is a Prize put into their Hands; they may be made for ever, if they look
wisely about them; Now they may be made Heirs of God, Heirs of a Kingdom, Heirs
of a Crown, of a Crown of Life, of a Crown of Glory, of a Crown that fades not
away. But if they lose the present Opportunity, they may never have the like
again. Time is, but in a very short Space, it may be said, Time was, nay, Time
is past. Will it not be sad to hear God tell thee, and Conscience tell thee on
thy Deathbed, Now Time is past, it is too late now, these Things shall be
denied you now, you must perish for ever, and be damned in your Sins!

Of Death.
The Body of Man in the Grave compared to Seed that is sown.
1 Cor. 15.36. Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
die.
THE Apostle compares the Body of Man that is laid in the Grave, to Seed that
is sown.

Parallels.
SEed that is sown lies some considerable Time in the Earth before it rises or
springs up: So the Bodies of Men lie some Time in the Grave before the
Resurrection, tho some lie much longer than others; as such who lived in
Adam's, Noah's, and Abraham's Days; yet generally all lie and shall lie some
Time in the Grave, before they rise again.

II. Seed, that it may not abide alone, is first sown and dies, and then it
rises again: Verily, Joh. 12.24.
verily I say unto you, except a Corn of Wheat fall to the Ground and die, it
abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much Fruit. So the Body of Man
must die, or be changed, or it can never arise nor be made glorious to bring
forth the eternal Fruit of Praise to God. As Seed loses nothing by being sown:
So the Bodies of the Saints shall lose nothing by Death; Death, I mean, will
be no vvays to their Disadvantage, but contrariwise to their great Benefit.

III. The Body of the same Seed or Corn of Wheat that is sovvn, rises again.
Every Seed has its own Body: 1 Cor. 15.38.
So the same numerical Body that is laid in the Grave, shall rise again. If it
was not thus, the Dead rise not; he that denies this, denies the Resurrection
of the Dead; And tho after my Skin Worms destroy this Body, Job 19.26, 27.
yet in my Flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes
shall behold, and not another; tho my Reins be consumed within me.

Death compared to a Sleep.
Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall awake.

1 Thessalonians. 4.14. -- Even so them also that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him.


DEath is often called a Sleep in the holy Scripture. Sleep is a Figure or
Image of Death, a fit Resemblance of Death; as will appear by the follovving
Parallels.

Parallels.
SLeep is Rest, or gives Rest to the Body: So Death is or does give Rest to the
Body. And hence Job Job 3.13.
says, speaking of Death: I should have lien still, and been quiet: I should
have slept, then had I been at Rest. We usually say, when a Man goes to sleep,
he goes to rest. There is a fourfold Rest which we obtain in Death. 1. From
Labor and Travel; no work there. 2. There is a Rest from Trouble and
Oppression: There the Wicked cease from troubling, Job 3.17.
and the Weary be at rest. 3. There is a Rest from Passion and Sorrovv: no
Grief shall afflict us there. 4. Which is better than all, there is a Rest from
Sin, a Rest from the Temptations and Drudgery of Satan, a Rest from the Law in
our Members.

II. In Sleep the whole Body rests, but many Times the Spirits of some Men
are troubled; tho the outvvard Man is at rest, yet the inward Man is sorely
disturbed, whereas the Bodies and Spirits too of others are at rest and quiet:
So in the Death of the Wicked, tho their Bodies be at rest, yet their Souls are
tormented. It Is the Opinion of some Men that the Soul sleeps with the Body,
and is wholy senseless of Joy or Mysery until the Resurrection. But that
doubtless is a great Error: For tho it be granted that many Operations of the
Soul do cease when it departs from the Body, yet the Soul sleeps not. There are
some Acts of the Soul which are organical; and there are other Acts which are
inorganical, or immaterial. The Organical Acts, that is, whatsoever the Soul
acts by the Members of the Body, those Acts must needs cease at Death; but the
Soul can act of it self without the Assistance of the Body, Caryl.
as we may collect by many Experiments, while our Bodies and Souls are joined
together. How often do we find our Souls at work, when our Bodies lie still and
do nothing? When Sleep binds up all our Senses, and shuts up the Windows of the
Body close, that we can neither hear nor see? yet then the Soul frames to it
self, and beholds a thousand various Shapes, and hears all Sorts of Sounds and
Voices; the Soul then sees, and hears, and devises, discourses, grieves,
rejoices, hopes, fears, chooses, and refuses: all this the Soul does in Dreams
and Visions of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon Man. What Meditations have
some good Men had in their Sleep! they have had Scriptures wonderfully opened
to them, and have been grieved when they waked to find the Matter gone from
them. God seals up Instruction sometimes to his People in their Sleep. Also in
Ecstasies and Ravishments the Body is, as it were, laid by as useless and
uninstrumental to the Soul. I knew a Man in Christ fourteen Years ago, so the
Apostle says, whether in the Body I cannot tell, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3.
or out of the Body I cannot tell, God knows, etc. Now if the Soul was not
capable of a Separation from the Body, and in that separated State capable of
such divine Ravishments, Paul might easily have resolved the Case and said, he
was taken up in the Body, but he could not tell whether the Soul acted with his
bodily Organs, or without them. He had mighty Operations in his Soul, his
Spirit wrought strangely, and then took in such Revelations of God and from
God, as his bodily Organs could never fashion into Words, or represent by
Speech. He heard (quae fando explicari a quoquam homine non possunt)
unspeakable Words, Beza.
which it is not lawful (or possible) for a Man to utter. The Soul has an Ear
to hear such Words that the Body cannot find a Tongue to express. So John, in
his divine Ravishment, says: I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day: as for his
Body that was, as to that Business, laid aside and suspended as useless in that
Day, and his Spirit called up to that angelical Work, viz. the receiving of
Visions and Revelations from on high, etc. Now as the Souls of good Men,
whilst they are in this World in Sleep, and in Trances, or Ecstasies, are
capable of such glorious Ravishments, etc. So when their Bodies die or fall
asleep, their Souls are with Christ in Heaven: and the Souls of the Wicked they
go into Chains of Darkness, Torment, Luke 16.22, 2^
and Misery. The rich Man died, and was buried, and in Hell he lift up his
Eyes, being in Torment.

III. Sleep is not perpetual; we sleep and wake again: So tho the Body lie in
the Grave, yet Death is but a Sleep as it were; the Man will awake and rise
again.

IV. The going to sleep, and sleeping of some Men, greatly differs from others:
So the Death of the Saints greatly differs from the Death of the Wicked

1. In the Preparation the one makes to go to rest over what the other does.
Some go to sleep before their Work is done: So some die before their Work is
done. As no Saint dies before his Work is done: So there is no wicked Person
that dies, but he dies or goes to sleep before his Work is done. This is our
Working-day; when the Sun of our Life is set, no more Work can be done. The
Time comes, says Christ, when no Man can work. All a Godly Man's Care is to be
ready, when Night comes, to go to rest. But the Wicked take little Thought
about it.

2. Some Men fall asleep in an hurry of Business, and in great Distraction,
when others in a sweet Manner lay their Heads down upon their Pillows: So some
wicked Men die in great Distraction and under sad Horror of Conscience, when
many a Godly Man dies in a sweet and heavenly Manner, declaring to all he has
nothing to do but to die.

3. Some Men dread the Thoughts of going to sleep, for that it is dangerous in
some Cases for some Persons to sleep: So some wicked Men dread the Thoughts of
Death, like him who cried out, I am so sick I cannot live, and so sinful that I
am afraid to die: But most Godly Men are delivered from the Fear of Death, they
go willingly to Bed: Luke 2.29.
Now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, etc. Saints are many times
willing to go to rest, because they are quite wearied out. (1.) Sin wearies
them, and even wares them out, and makes them groan. (2.) The World wearies
them, and makes them willing to go to Bed. Eccl. 5.12.
(3.) The Devil, the God of this World, wearies them with his Temptations. (4.)
Their bodily Weaknesses and disquieting Pains weary them. (5.) The Absence of
Christ also makes them willing to go home.

4. Some Men fall asleep in a dangerous Place, nay, and sometimes in the midst
of their Enemies: So wicked Men die in a dangerous Place, being far from God,
and out of the Covenant of Grace, and besides are surrounded about with evil
Angels, who stand ready to devour their Souls: But a godly Man falls asleep in
Jesus. O that is a sweet Place to sleep in. (1.) He sleeps in the view of Jesus;
Christ knows his Grave, and will preserve his Dust. (2.) He falls asleep in the
Love of Jesus. (3.) He falls asleep in the Covenant of Jesus. I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

5. Some Men's Sleep is much more sweet and comfortable than others, (as we
showed before) some Men's Sleep is very troublesome, their Spirits are troubled:
So the Death of the Godly is sweet, they have Peace and heavenly Joy, being
with Christ; but the Death of the Wicked is troublesome, their Spirits being in
Torment, whilst the Body lies in the Grave. I might also show you the great
Difference there shall be in the awaking of the one, and the other; but that I
will leave to its proper place.

V. A Man that is asleep, taking his natural Rest, may be easily awakened, and
called up by the Power of Man: So the Body, when it is dead, can with
infinitely more ease be raised up by the Power of God; it is but a Call from
Heaven, and we are awakened out of the Dust: The Day is coming, when all that
are in the Grave shall hear his Voice, and come forth, etc. John 5.28.

Inferences.
WHat a blessed Condition are Believers in! They are not only happy whilst they
live, but shall be blessed when they die; their Bodies have not only quiet
Rest, but their Souls also rest in Peace and Quiet.

2. It may stir up all Christless Souls to labor after an Interest in the Lord
Jesus; for if they are not in Christ whilst they live, they are not like to
fall asleep in Christ when they die.

3. We may learn also from hence, what little ground there is for a godly Man
to be unwilling to die, when his Work is done: Are any unwilling to go to sleep
at Night, that have labored hard all Day?

4. Let us labor hard whilst the Day lasts, whilst we have Health and Life,
that we may have done our Work, and be ready to go to sleep.

Death a Departure.
Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, etc.
WE at Death leave one Place to go to another: If godly, we depart from our
Place here on Earth, and go to Heaven; we depart from our Friends on Earth, and
go to our Friends in Heaven; we depart from the Valley of Tears, and go to the
Mount of Joy; we depart from an howling Wilderness, to go to an heavenly
Paradise. Who would be unwilling to exchange a Sodom for a Sion, an Egypt for a
Canaan, Misery for Glory?

Death a Rest.
Rev. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
Parallels.
REst is a desirable Thing to a laboring Man: Paul desired to die; Death, (or
to depart) was greatly desirable in his Sight.

II. Rest is sweet, and therefore desirable to a weary Man: So will Death be to
a poor weary Saint, one that is weary of Sin, weary of the World, weary of the
Temptations of Satan, etc. [See Sleep.]

Disparity.
SOme Men enjoy Rest but in part, they have no perfect Rest: But a godly Man at
Death has perfect Rest; nothing shall disturb or disquiet him any more.

II. Some Men have Rest but for a little time, a short Rest: But the godly
Man's Rest is for ever; at Death he enters into God's everlasting Rest.

III. Some Rest from Labor is not honorable; it is a Reproach to a Man to take
his Rest, when he should be at work: But the Rest of a godly Man at Death is
honorable; it is a Rest that Christ himself entered into, when he had finished
all his Work.

Of the Resurrection.
The Resurrection compared to the Morning.
Psalm. 49.14. -- And the Righteous shall have Dominion over them in the
Morning.
Parallels.
THe Morning comes after the Night is gone: So the Resurrection will come after
the Night of this World is gone; the Time of this World's Continuance is called
Night in the Holy Scriptures: The Night is far spent, etc.

II. The Morning is longed for; many watch and long for the Morning: So the
Godly long for the Resurrection; all the Faithful ever waited for, and greatly
desired that Day.

III. The Morning brings Light, and makes Things manifest, which lie hid, or
appear not what they are in themselves, in the Nightime: So the Resurrection
will make manifest all the hidden Things of Darkness, which appear not to the
Sight of Men; that glorious Morning will sooon discover all.

1. It will make manifest all the horrid and cursed Designs of the Ungodly,
which they from time to time have contrived, and endeavored to carry on
against the Saints and Church of God, many of which God in his gracious
Providence prevented from taking place, and so they were never known; but that
Morning-Light will discover all those hidden Things of Darkness.

2. The Light of that Morning will discover all the Secrets of every Man's
Heart; all the Evil, Lust, Envy, Pride, Revenge, etc. or what else has been
harbored in the Bosoms of Men. See 1 Cor. 4.5.

3. It will discover all the filthy Actions and Abominations of the Wicked,
that are not known to Men, nor fit to be mentioned: Ephesians. 5.12.
For it is a Shame to speak of those Things that are done of them in secret.

4. That Morning will discover all Persons, as well as Things; then it will
appear who are God's People, and who are not; who they were that served God in
Truth, Mat. 3. ult.
and who were Hypocrites, etc.

IV. Toward the Morning the Morning Star appears, which gives notice the Day
approaches: So toward this Morning, there will appear many Signs to give
warning to the World, that the Day of the Resurrection is at hand: Mat. 24.33.
So likewise when ye shall see all these Things, know that it is near, even at
the Door.

V. When the bright Morning is come, the Sun rises, and shines forth
gloriously: So when that Morning is come, Jesus Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, will appear in his Glory, and shine forth to the amazement of
all the World.

VI. The Morning brings Joy and Gladness with it; it makes the Birds to sing,
and send forth their warbling Notes: So the Morning of the Resurrection will
bring Joy and Gladness to all the Righteous; then shall the Saints sing for Joy
of Heart, and be glad in the Lord.

VII. In the Morning Men arise out of their Beds: So in the Morning of the
Resurrection shall all the Saints of God be raised out of their Graves: Thy
dead Men shall live, Isa. 26.19.
together with my dead Body shall they arise, etc. The Dead in Christ shall
rise first.

VIII. We commonly give a guess what kind of Day it will be by the Morning: So
by the Morning of the Resurrection, the Godly will perceive what kind of Day
the Day of Eternity, or Glory of Christ's Kingdom will be.

IX. In a springing Morning Things look fresh and very beautiful, and also send
forth a most sweet and fragrant Scent: So in the Morning of the Resurrection,
the Earth will appear in its B^auty, and the Saints in their Glory: Mat. 13.43.
Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their
Father, etc.

Disparity.
IN the Morning of a natural Day here, wicked Men receive like Benefit with the
Righteous: The Sun rises upon the Just, and upon the Unjust: But in the Morning
of the Resurrection it shall not be so, the Ungodly shall not partake with the
Saints of any of the Blessings and Comforts of that Morning; then that Word
shall be made good, The Righteous shall have Dominion over them in the Morning.
Psalm. 49.14.


In many other respects that Morning will differ from all other Mornings that
ever were before it.

The Resurrection compared to awaking out of Sleep.
Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall awake,
etc.
Parallels.
DEath, we have already showed, is called a Sleep; and after a Man has had his
full Sleep, he awaketh: So when the Dead have lain their full Time appointed by
the Almighty in the Grave, they shall be quickened, and come to life again.

II. Some fall into such a sound Sleep, that they must (when there is occasion
for it) be awakened: So the Dead are fallen into such a fast or sound Sleep,
that they must be awakened: John 5.28.
Marvel not at this, for the Hour is c^ming, in the which all that are in the
Grave shall hear his Voice.

III. When a Man is thoroughly awakened he rises up: So when the Dead are
quickened by the mighty Power of God* they shall rise up out of the Grave, Sea,
or wheresoever else they lay asleep.

IV. There is a great difference between one Man's awaking out of Sleep, and
another; some are awakened before they are willing, and arise up with great
horror and amazement; when others awake in a sweet, peaceable, and quiet
manner, etc. So there will be a great difference between the awaking of the
Godly and the Ungodly, at the last Day.

1 Cor. 15.
1. The Godly shall arise sooner than the Ungodly: The Dead in Christ shall rise
first.

2. The Saints of God shall awake in Christ's likeness; their vile Bodies shall
be fashioned, and made like Christ's glorious Body: But the Wicked shall appear
base and vile in that Day: Let them lie down in never so great Pomp, and
external Grandeur, yet alas, when they awake, they will appear most vile and
contemptible.

3. The Godly shall awake with glorious Robes upon them, fit for the
Consummation of their Marriage with the Lamb, the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth: But the Wicked shall awake in a poor, miserable, and naked Condition:
What Robes shall they have on, unless they be the filthy Rags of their own
Righteousness, with which they were clothed, whilst they lived in this World?

4. The Godly shall have sweet and heavenly Company about them, in the Morning,
when they awake from Sleep; nay, more than all, they shall enjoy the glorious
Presence of Jesus Christ himself: But the Ungodly, when they awake, shall be in
the midst of Devils, and damned Spirits; they must be their Companions for ever.

5. The Godly shall, when they awake, have glorious Attendants, in the Day of
the Resurrection, viz. the holy Angels of Heaven: But the Wicked shall have no
other Attendants, than the black Retinue of the Bottomless-Pit.

6. The Godly, when they awake, are led into the King's Palace, to be married
to the Bridegroom of their Souls, and to receive every one of them a Crown of
Glory: But the Ungodly awake, as condemned Malefactors, to be led to the Place
of Execution.

7. In a word, the Godly shall awake with ^ongs of Joy in their Mouths; but the
Wicked shall awake with Tears and dismal Cries: The one to receive the
Sentence, Come, ye Blessed of my Father; the other to receive the Sentence, Go
ye cursed, etc. Some awake to everlasting Life; Dan. 12.2.
and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt.

The Resurrection-Day a Man's Reaping-Day.
Psalm. 126.5. -- They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy.

Gal. 6.4. In due Season we shall reap if we faint not.


The Resurrection-Day is a Man's Reaping-Day.

Parallels.
MEN sow before they reap: So Men in this World may be said to sow; either they
sow to the Flesh, or to the Spirit, and in the Resurrection-Day they shall reap.

II. That which Men sow, that also they reap: they do not sow Beans, and reap
Barley; nor sow Tares, and reap Wheat: So the very same that all Men in a
spiritual Sense sow, Gal. 6.
they shall reap; They that sow to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption; and they that sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
everlasting.

III. According to the Quantity that every Man sows, so they reap; He that sows
sparingly, or but a little Seed, must expect to reap sparingly, or have but a
small Crop: So they who do much Service for God, or scatter liberally abroad to
his People in this World, shall receive much from the Hands of God at the End
of the World; and he that does but little for God, tho he does it in Sincerity,
must expect to reap accordingly in that Day. He that improves two Talents,
shall receive the Improvement of two; and he that improves five, the
Improvements of five. There will be Degrees of Glory (no doubt) in the Day of
the Resurrection.

But this, I say, He which sows sparingly, shall reap also sparingly: 2 Cor.
9.6.
and he which sows bountifully, shall reap also bountifully.

There is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another
Glory of the Stars: 1 Cor. 15.41, 42.
for one Star differs from another in Glory: So also is the Resurrection of
the Dead, etc.

And, They that be wise shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, Dan.
12.3.
and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever more.

IV. A Man's reaping Time is his rejoicing Time. With what Joy and Gladness
does the Husbandman gather in the Fruits of the Earth: So the Saints spiritual
reaping-Day will be their rejoycing-Day. He that sows in Tears, shall reap in
Joy.

V. When the reaping-Time is come, a Man gathers in the Fruit or Harvest of
diverse Sorts of Seed, etc. So in the Day of the Resurrection, the Godly shall
reap or gather in the Comfort and Increase of diverse Sorts of Seed by them
sown. They shall then reap the Fruit of all the good Sermons they have heard,
and reap the last Fruit of all, the spiritual Prayers they have made, the Fruit
of all the Tears of Godly Contrition they have shed; and all the Sighs and
Groans they have uttered. They shall reap the Fruit of all the good Thoughts
they have had, and of all the good Words they have spoken, and all the good
Works they have done; as also the Fruit of all the Evil, which for Christ's
sake they have undergone.

Obj. Is not a Saint's dying-Day his reaping-Day?

Answ. A Saint at Death gathers the first ripe Fruits, as it were, but his
Harvest is not till the last Day.

The Resurrection-Day the Saints Marriage-Day.
Rev. 9.7. The Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self
ready.
THE Resurrection-Day is the Saints Marriage-Day; this is their espousal-Day:
For I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin
to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.12. But that will be the Day of the Solemnization of their
Marriage-Union with Jesus Christ.

Parallels.
THere is, or ought to be, a most endeared Love in those Parties who intend to
marry one another. Nay, they, before the Marriage-Day, mutually give up
themselves one to the other; sometimes in a solemn Manner before Witnesses they
are espoused --: So the Soul of a Believer is spiritually united to Jesus
Christ whilst in this World. A Saint loves Christ dearly, and Christ a Saint.
Nay, and in Baptism, in a most solemn and sacred Manner, before many Witnesses,
the Soul is publicly espoused to the Lord Jesus; and in the Day of the
Resurrection shall be the Solemnization of the sacred Marriage.

II. The Marriage-Day is much longed for by those who in hearty Affection are
espoused to one another: So the Godly long for that Day, when the spiritual
Marriage shall be consummated between Christ and them.

III. The Bride in the Marriage-Day is usually richly adorned; if a Princess,
or a Person of a noble and honorable Descent, she is excellently clad and
adorned with rare and costly Jewels, that the Bridegroom may take the more
Delight in her: So the Church, and consequently every Godly Christian, shall in
the Day of the Resurrection be most richly clothed with Robes of Immortality.
Rev. 19.7.
The Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready, Psalm.
45.13, 14.
and to her was granted, she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white,
etc. The King's Daughter is all glorious within: her Clothing is of wrought
Gold, she shall be brought to the King in Raiment of Needle Work, etc. Some by
these white and glorious Robes understand the imputed Righteousness of Jesus
Christ: Others, the Righteousness of Sanctification: Some others conclude they
are both intended, and not only so, but also those heavenly Robes, with which
the Bodies of the Saints shall be clothed in the Day of the Resurrection, which
none are able to describe: however, all conclude the Church in that Day shall
shine forth so in Glory and Beauty, that Men and Angels shall admire her. No
Bride ever appeared in such Splendour, or so richly clothed and adorned, as the
Bride, the Lamb's Wife, shall when the Marriage of the Lamb is come.

IV. In a Marriage-Day the Bride and Bridegroom have a full and perfect
enjoyment of each other; and there is nothing in the World wherein there is so
full communication of one Creature to another (says Mr. Buroughs) as there is
in that Condition of Marriage: So in the Day of the Resurrection, when the
Church shall be married to the Lord Jesus, the Godly shall have a full and
perfect Enjoyment of him, whom they so dearly love. The Lord Christ in that Day
will communicate of himself to his People in such a manner, that it is
inconceivable; whatsoever may delight them, rejoice their Hearts, or add to
their perf^ct Happiness, he will not withhold from them. They have now only the
Joy and Comforts of his Spirit; but then they shall have the Joy and Comforts
of his Person: Where I am, there also shall my Servants be. Joh. 14.3.
I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may
be also.

Rev. 19.6, 7.
V. A Marriage-Day is a joyful Day: So will the Marriage-Day of the Lamb be: Let
us be glad, and rejoice, and give Honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb
is come. The Bridegroom rejoiceth in the Bride, Isa. 62.5.
and the Bride in the Bridegroom: As the Bridegroom rejoic^th over the Bride,
so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

VI. In a Marriage-Day the Bridegroom and the Bride have very great Attendance,
and are greatly honored: So Christ and the Church shall have great and
glorious Attendance in the Day of the Resurrection, viz. all the Angels of
Heaven. He shall come in the Glory of the Father with all the holy Angels. The
same, Retinue the one shall have, the other shall have likewise.

VII. The Bride commonly makes great Preparation for the Marriage-Day to have
all Things ready: So the Godly make all due Preparation for the Appearance of
Jesus Christ, that they may be accepted of him in that Day: The Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Bride has made her self ready.

The Resurrection-Day, the Saints Coronation-Day.
2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
God the righteous Judge shall give unto me in that day, etc.
THat Day, that is, the Day of the Resurrection, or Day of Christ's coming.

Note, The Day of the Resurrection will be the Saints Coronation-Day.

Parallels.
CRowns properly belong to Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the Earth, etc.
Saints are Kings, Spiritual Kings, He has made us unto our God, Kings, etc.
Rev. 5.


II. Kings are wonderfully honored on their Coronation-Day: So shall the
Saints in the Day of the Resurrection; the Angels of Heaven shall honor them,
Christ himself will honor them, nay they shall be honored by the Father; If
any Man serve me, Joh. 12.
him will my Father honor.

III. On a Coronation-Day, some look upon it as their proper work, to set the
Crown upon the Head of the Prince who is to be crowned therewith: So in the Day
of the Resurrection, the Lord Jesus will set (as it were) the Crown upon the
Head of his Chosen; Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown
of Life.

Inferences.
Labor to be fully established in the Truth of the Resurrection; see that no
Man deceive you, it is a perilous Age. And to confirm doubting Christians in
this great Principle of the Christian Religion, take a few Arguments.

1. If the Dead rise not: Then Christ is not risen from the Dead. 1 Cor. 15.16,
20.
But Christ is risen from the Dead. Therefore the Dead shall rise.

2. That Doctrine that makes Preaching vain, is a false and pernicious
Doctrine: But such who deny the Resurrection, make Preaching vain. 1 Cor.
15.14. and 15.2.
Therefore a false and pernicious Doctrine.

3. If the Dead rise not: Then those who are fallen asleep in Jesus, are
perished. 1 Cor. 15.18.
But those who are fallen asleep in Christ, are not perished. Therefore the
dead shall rise.

4. If the Dead rise not: Then the Godly are of all Men most miserable. 1 Cor.
15.15, 19.
But the Godly are not of all Men most miserable. Therefore the dead shall rise.

Obj. The Soul of a Child of God at Death is happy and with Christ, and shall
be for ever, whether the Body rise or not* and therefore they are not of all
Men most miserable, unless the Soul be mortal and die with the Body, as some
affirm.

Answ. The Life of the Soul, as well as of the Body, depends wholly upon
Christ's Resurrection; and if Christ be not risen, we are yet in our Sins: and
therefore this makes nothing either to prove Saints happy without a
Resurrection, or for the mortality of the Soul.

5. If the Saints of God in the primitive time, did believe and were well
grounded in the Truth of the Resurrection: Then the Dead shall rise. But the
Saints of the Primitive time did so believe, and were so established. Ergo. See
these Scriptures; Joh. 11.24. 1 Cor. 15.22, 23. Ver. 52.
I know he shall rise again, in the Resurrection at the last day: For as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: but every Man in his own
order, Christ the first Fruits, and afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming: for the Trumpet shall be sounded, and the Dead shall be raised, etc.
For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again; even so those which are
fallen asleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell delivered up
the dead that were in them, and they were judged every Man according to their
Deeds: Rev. 20.13.


6. If all the Saints of God and Holy Apostles waited for the Redemption of
their Bodies: Romans 8.23.
Then the Dead shall rise. But all the Saints and Holy Apostles waited for the
Redemption of their Bodies. Ergo.

7. If the chief Reward of the Godly is reserved to the last day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
viz. to the day of the Resurrection: Then the Dead shall be raised. But the
chief Reward of the Godly is reserved to the last day, or day of the
Resurrection. Ergo, The Dead shall be raised.

8. If the expectation of the Godly Martyrs shall not be frustrated: Heb.
11.35, 36. Psalm. 9 18.
Then the Dead shall be raised. But the expectation of the Godly Martyrs shall
not be frustrated. Ergo, The Dead shall be raised.

9. If the Bodies of the Saints shall be made like Christ's glorious Body, the
Dead shall rise: But the Bodies of the Saints shall be made like to Christ's
glorious Body. Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2.
Ergo the Dead shall be raised.

10. If the Dead at the last Day shall be judged, then they shall rise again
from the Dead: But the Dead shall at the last Day be judged: 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev
20.12, 13.
Ergo the Dead shall be raised.

11. That Doctrine that gives the Scripture, Christ and his Apostles the Lie,
is a cursed, and damnable Doctrine: But those that deny the Resurrection of the
Dead, give the Scripture, Christ and his Apostles the Lie: Dan. 12.2. John 5.28.
Ergo. The Scripture says, that those that sleep in the Dust of the Earth,
shall awake. Christ says, all that are in the Grave, shall hear his Voice, and
come forth; and we have showed the Apostles do affirm that the Dead shall be
raised, etc.

12. If that which sleeps in the Dust shall rise, then the Body shall rise
again; for it is the Body that sleeps in the Dust: But that which sleeps in
the Dust, shall be raised: Ergo.

1 Cor. 15.
Obj. It Is not the same Body. Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, etc.

Answ. If the same numerical Body rise not, it will not be a Resurrection, but
a new Creation; therefore that which the Apostle there intends, is the Manner
of the Resurrection, i. e. how the Saints shall be raised. It Is not the same in
respect of Weakness and Frailty; It is sown a natural Body, and shall be raised
a spiritual Body; it is sown in Corruption, and shall be raised in Incorruption;
it is sown in Weakness, and shall be raised in Power --. Which Thing a Grain of
Corn that is sown, teaches.

Quest. Why shall the same Body of the Dead be raised?

Answ. Because the same Body of Christ was raised that suffered.

2. Because the same Body that suffered for Christ, shall be glorified with
Christ.

3. Because the same Body that sinned, shall be punished: if not the same Body
that sinned, it might reflect upon the Justice and Goodness of God to punish an
innocent Body. Besides, those Scriptures must be fullfilled, which assert the
Resurrection of the Body.

Inferences.
FRom hence we may infer that here is a World to come.

2. That Death is not the last end of Man.

3. Prepare for the Resurrection Day; think of it when thou lie down, and
risest up in the Morning. Thy lying down to sleep, is a Figure of thy lying
down in the Grave; and thy awaking out of Sleep in the Morning, is a Figure of
the Resurrection.

4. Think of the Resurrection in the Spring, when thou see the Flowers of the
Earth bud forth, and spring up; for that is a Figure also of the Resurrection.

Of the Iudgment-Day.
The Iudgment-Day compared to an Assize.
2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Rev. 20.11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, etc.


AFter the Resurrection comes the Judgment, the eternal Judgment.

Note, The Judgment-day may fitly be compared to an Assize, or general
Jail-delivery.

Parallels.
THere is a Judge appointed by the King, or supreme Power of the Nation or
Kingdom, where an Assize is to be held, who receives his Commission, and acts
by the Authority thereof. Jesus Christ is appointed to be the Judge of Quick
and Dead, by the Father, King of Heaven and Earth. The Father judges no Man,
but has committed all Power to the Son, John 5.22.

II. The Judge likely comes to the Bench or Judgment Seat with the Sound of
Trumpets: Christ will come to the Judgment Seat with the Sound of a Trumpet; 1
Cor. 15.52.
The Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible.

III. There is a known Law or Laws in a Kingdom, by which the Judge hears and
determines all Causes: So there is a known Law or Laws, by which Jesus Christ
will judge and determine all Causes in the great Day, viz. the Law of Moses, the
Law of Nature, and the Law of Christ, called the Book of the Gospel; The Books
shall be opened. Rev. 20.


IV. The Judge has many honorable Persons that sit on the Bench with him: So
Jesus Christ will have all the Saints sit with him on the Throne of Judgment,
who shall assent and consent to whatsoever he shall do in that Day. Hence it is
said, Rev. 3.
the Saints shall judge the World. He that overcomes will I grant to sit with
me on my Throne: even as I also overcame and am sat down with my Father in his
Throne.

V. A Judge at Assizes* after he has read his Commission and given his Charge,
calls for the Prisoners: So Jesus Christ will orderly proceed, and c^ll before
him all Nations, all the ungodly that ever lived on the Earth, shall be
arraigned by him, being brought before his Judgment Seat.

VI. A Judge having arraigned the Prisoner, calls in the Witnesses, and then
suffers every Man to speak what he has to say for himself: So Jesus Christ
will call in Witnesses, and indeed every Man's Conscience shall be more than
ten thousand Witnesses against him; Romans 2.14, 15, 16.
and all Mouths shall be stopped, and every ungodly Man shall be found guilty
before Christ.

VII. A Judge after he has found Men guilty, and cast them for their Lives,
passes the Sentance: So Jesus Christ at the last day, having found Sinners
guilty of all the horrid Crimes they shall be charged with, will pass the
fearful Sentence, Go, ye cursed. Mat. 25.


VIII. A Judge after the Sentence is past, orders the manner, time, and place of
Execution: So Jesus Christ will at the last day, after the Sentence of
Condemnation, order the Execution of the Wicked, and appoint them the place
where, and the time how long they shall suffer; the place will be Hell, the
time will be for ever and ever. [ See more in the First Volumn, Christ the Judge
of all.]

Of Heaven.
The Celestial Paradise.
Luke 23.43. Verily I say unto thee, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

2 Cor. 12.2. He was taken up into Paradise.

Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, etc.


PAradise is taken in the Holy Scripture in a twofold Sense.

1. For the Garden of Eden, this is Earthly Paradise.

2. For Heaven, the Seat or Place of Glory, this is Celestial Paradise.

Now the Earthly Paradise being a Figure of Heaven, I shall in the opening of
this run the Parallel principally with respect to the Garden of Eden, and the
State of Adam in Innocence, etc.

Parallels.
PAradise, or the Garden of Eden, was a place of Pleasure: So Heaven is a place
of Pleasure.

II. Paradise was a place created of God, and appointed for Man, whilst he
stood in the State of Innocence: So Heaven is created of God, and appointed for
all those who obtain, through Christ, perfect Righteousness, their Primitive
Glory and Innocence.

III. Adam in Paradise, had all Delight, Joy and Pleasure his Heart could
desire, he wanted nothing to make his Life sweet and pleasant to him: So the
Saints in Heaven, have the fullest Joy, Pleasure, and Satisfaction imaginable;
there is nothing wanting they can desire to please and delight them: Thou will
show me the Path of Life; Psalm. 16.11. Psalm. 36.8.
in thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand Pleasures for
evermore. They drink of the Rivers of God's Pleasures. A River abounds with
Water; so does Heaven, like Paradise, with Divine and Sacred Pleasures.

IV. Adam in Paradise knew no Sorrow, he had Joy without Sadness, Strength
without Weakness, Health without Sickness, Light without Darkness, Life without
Death; for Death had nothing to do with him whilst he stood in his Innocence:
So in Heaven the Godly are delivered from every mixture of Evil, Rev. 21 4.
God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more
Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for
the former things are past away. Here is Joy without Sadness, Strength without
Weakness, Health without Sickness, Light without Darkness, Life without Death.

V. Adam in Paradise, before tempted by the Devil, knew no Sin, he was free,
absolutely free from the least stain, he had not so much as an evil Thought, he
was created in the Image of God, being perfectly Righteous: So in Heaven the
Saints shall be free from Sin, perfectly free, not only free from the Guilt,
Filth, Power, and Punishment of it, but also from the Act of it; they shall not
be troubled with one evil Thought more, they are without Fault before the
Throne of God and the Lamb.

VI. Adam in Paradise enjoyed the sweet and blessed Presence of God, he
conversed, and had glorious Acquaintance and Communion with him; God and Man
lived then in perfect Peace and Friendship, there was no Breach, because no
Sin, and so God's Face was not hid from him: So in Heaven, all the Godly enjoy
the sweet and Soul-ravishing Presence of God, and of Jesus Christ; Joh. 12.26.
Joh. 14.3. 1 Thessalonians 4.17. 1 John 3.2.
Where I am there shall my Servant be. And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am ye may be also;
so shall we ever be with the Lord. Saints there have the Fruition of God and of
Christ, for we shall see him as he is: and this is the highest glory Man can be
raised to, we shall not only see God and the Lamb, but be filled with the Joy
and Delight of God and Jesus Christ. Heaven from hence is called the Joy of the
Lord, if the perfect enjoyment and participation of the glorious Trinity, or
fullness of it, so far as it is capable of Communication, can delight and fill
the Soul with Joy and Happiness, the Godly in Heaven shall have it; God's Face
will never be hid from his Children any more, there will be no more a Breach
between the Soul and its Savior.

VII. Adam in Paradise had the Tree of Life, and Liberty (before he sinned) to
eat of the Tree of Life: So in this Paradise of God, we read of the Tree of
Life, which, as some understand, Rev. 2.7.
is Jesus Christ; And to him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of
Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God; which doubtless signifies
the glorious participation of the Life, Fullness, and transcendent Sweetness of
the Lord Jesus, and of the continuance of the Life of the Saints, in its full
Strength, Vigor, and Glory to Eternity.

VIII. Adam in Paradise had great knowledge, both of God, and the Nature of all
Creatures; God brought all the Creatures to Adam, to see what he would call
them, and whatsoever Adam called each living Soul, Genesis 2.19.
that was the Name thereof; the naming of the Creatures (says Ainsworth) was a
sign of Sovereignty; it also manifested Adam's Wisdom, in naming things
presently, according to their Natures; as the Hebrew Names, by which he called
them, do declare: So the Saints in Heaven shall be perfect in Knowledge, they
shall know as they are known, they shall know all the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and all the Saints that ever lived, by Name, which we may gather by
that Knowledge Peter, James, and John had of Moses and Elias, in the
transfiguration of Christ in the Mount, which was a Figure of Heaven.

Disparity.
ADam's Pleasure and Delight in Paradise was much of it Earthly: But the Saints
Pleasure and Delight in the Celestial Paradise will be Heavenly.

II. Adam in Paradise was troubled with a tempting Devil: But the Saints in the
Celestial Paradise shall not be troubled any more with a tempting Devil, for he
shall be shut up in Chains of Eternal Darkness, to be tormented for ever.

III. Adam soon lost his earthly Paradise, by Sin, and was turned out of all:
But those who are accounted worthy to obtain this Heavenly Paradise, shall
never lose it, nor be turned out of it, but continue in it for ever and ever,
even to the days of Eternity.

Heaven a Crown of Life.
2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

Rev. 2.10. And I will give thee a Crown of Life.

James 1.12. He shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised
to them that love him.


THE Reward of the Godly in Heaven is called a Crown, a Crown of Life, a Crown
of Righteousness, etc.

Parallels.
A Crown denotes any beautiful pleasing Ornament, or profitable thing; hence a
Crown is put for to adorn, and bless with good Things, and so to make joyful:
Prove. 4.9. and 17.6. Psalm 8.5. and 103.4.
The Saints in Heaven shall be beautiful and very glorious, they shall sparkle,
and shine forth like the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, plentifully enjoy
and possess true Blessedness.

II. A Crown is a sign of a Kingdom and Dominion (says Ainsworth): The
glorified Saints in Heaven shall possess a Kingdom, and shall be as Kings and
Princes for ever and ever. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the
poor of this World rich in Faith, Jam. 2.5.
and Heirs of the (or that) Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him?

III. A Crown denotes also Victory; Christ warring against his Enemies, and
overcoming them, has on his Head many Crowns, or Diadems: So the Saints being
Crowned, signifies that perfect Conquest they have (through Christ) obtained,
over Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell, etc.

IV. A Crown signifies Glory, Honor, and external Grandeur: The glorified
Saints shall be honored, and appear in eternal Grandeur, as Kings who have
their Crowns on their Heads.

V. As there is nothing more rich, glorious, desirable, nor esteemed among
Men, above a Crown, or Kingdom: So the Holy Spirit in setting forth the Reward,
and everlasting Glory of the Saints in Heaven, compares it to these things. But
alas! there is no earthly thing, how splendant and glorious soever, can
sufficiently set out the state of the Saints after Death, or the Glory of
Heaven. For Pleasure, it is called Paradise; for Riches and Honor, it is called
a Crown and a Kingdom. A Crown of Life, denoting that Saints in laying down
their Lives for Christ, shall not be at all losers thereby, but only exchange
it for a better; a short momentary Life, for an everlasting Life; a Life of
Joy, for a Life of Sorrow; a Life of perfect Fr^edom, for a Life attended with
manifold Temptations.

Disparity.
OTher Crowns (I mean earthly Crowns) are corruptible: This Crown is
incorruptible.

II. Other Crowns are attended with many Sorrows, Troubles, and Perplexities,
etc. But this Crown is attended with no such thing, for the condi^ion of the
Heirs of this never-fading Crown will be so joyful, that look outwardly, there
is Joy in the Society, Heb. 12.22. if inwardly, there is Joy in their own
Felicity, 1 Cor 2.9. Look forward, there is Joy, in the Eternity of it, 1 Pet.
5.10. So that on every side they shall be even swallowed up of Joy, Isa. 35.10.
Oh! the transcendency of that Paradise of Pleasure! where is Joy without
Heaviness or Interruption; Peace without Perturbation; Blessedness without
Misery; Light without Darkness; Health without Sickness; Beauty without
Blemish; Abundance without Want; Ease without Labor; Satiety without Loathing;
Liberty without Restraint; Security without Fear; Glory without Ignominy;
Knowledge without Ignorance; Eyes without Tears; Hearts without Sorrow; Souls
without Sin: Where shall be no Evil heard of to affright them, nor Good wanting
to cheer and comfort them; they shall have what Good they desire, and desire
nothing but what is good; their Promises shall end in Performances; Faith in
Sight and clear Vision; Hope in Fruition and Possession: Yea, Time it self
shall be swallowed up in Eternity.

To sum up all in a few Words, there is no Joy here comparable to that in
Heaven; all our Mirth here, to that is but Pensiveness; all our Pleasures here,
to that is but Heaviness; all our Sweetness here, to that is but Bitterness;
Even Solomon in all his Glory and Royalty, to that was but as a Spark in the
Chimny, to the Sun in the Firmament; yea, how little, how nothing are the poor
and temporary enjoyments of this Life, to those that the Heirs of Promise shall
enjoy in the Life that is to come?

III. Other Crowns fade away, the Prince is in a moment gone from that, or that
is gone from him: But this Crown abides. It is incorruptible, and undefiled,
and fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you, etc. 1 Pet. 1.4.

IV. Other Crowns are gotten many times by Usurpation: But the Saints shall
have the Crown in a just and righteous way, it is a Crown of Righteousness, of
which Saints are true and lawful Heirs; this Crown is purchased for them by
Christ, and given to them by the free Donation of the Father; besides they are
born Heirs to it by the Spirit: If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
Joint-Heirs with Christ, etc. Romans 8.17.

Inferences.
WE may infer from hence, that God's Children are not such Fools, as they are
accounted by the Ungodly World; they have made a good Choice, in preferring
Heaven above Earth. What Is the Glory of this World to the World to come? Yea,
Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, was but a Wilderness compared with this
Paradise. And indeed, if the Gates of the City be of Pearl, and the Streets of
Gold, what then are the Inner Rooms, and Lodging Chambers, of the Great Monarch
of Heaven and Earth, at whose right Hand are Pleasures for evermore?

II. Let not the Saints grow weary, nor faint in their Minds, when Heirs of a
Crown of Glory that fades not away; methinks they may be contented to undergo
some Troubles in this Life, since by suffering these things for Christ's sake,
they shall be crowned with Glory, Honor, and Everlasting Life; They shall
receive the Crown of Life, etc. Jam. 1.12.

Of Hell.
Hell a Furnace of Fire, the Place of the Damned.
Mat. 13.42. -- And shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall be
wailing and gnashing of Teeth.
WE are now drawing toward a Conclusion; it remains only, that we speak
something concerning Hell, which is the Place prepared for the Damned, the
Torment of whom is set forth by Fire, by a Furnace of Fire, and by utter
Darkness. It has been a long and ancient Controversy, whether Fire here is to
be taken Properly or Figuratively? I shall not undertake to determine, whether
it be real Fire or not: Doubtless the Torment of the Wicked, will be worse than
it is to be cast into any Furnace of Elementary Fire. The Schoolmen affirm, that
the least Torture in Hell, exceeds the greatest that can be devised by all the
Men on Earth; even as the least Joy of Heaven, surpasses the greatest Comforts
of this World, etc. There is scarce any Pain here on Earth, but there is some
hope of Ease, Mitigation, or Intermission; but in Hell, their Torments are
easeless, endless, remediless, and they themselves left hopeless, helpless, and
pittyless. However, we will run a Parallel between a Furnace of Fire, and the
Place of the Damned; for in some things there is a fit Resemblance.

Parallels.
A Furnace of Fire, has been prepared as a place of Torment; the King of
Babylon caused a Furnace to be heat exceeding hot, and that whosoever would not
bow down to his Golden Image should be cast unto it: Hell is a place of Torment
prepared for all Wicked and Ungodly Men, Rev 21.8.
who live and dye in their Sins.

II. A Furnace of Fire that is heated exceeding hot, is very terrible and
amazing to him, who for his wicked Deeds is told he must be cast therein: So
Hell is a very terrible and an amazing thing to think upon; how lamentable is
the Thoughts of it to a guilty Sinner, that is awakened, that sees no Remedy,
but thither he must go?

III. What Torment can be greater than to be cast into a burning fiery Furnace?
So what Torments can be greater than the Torments of Hell?

Disparity.
A Fiery Furnace tho terrible and painful, yet it puts an end to the Lives of
those that that are thrown into it, and the hotter it is, the sooner it
dispatcheth them out of their pain: But the Torments of Hell put no end to the
tortured, neither can the Damned die, but have an ever-dying Life, and an
everlasting Death; it is a Death which has no Death, The Worm dies not.

II. The Torment of a Fiery Furnace can reach but the outward Man, it cannot
destroy the Soul: But the Torments of Hell reach to the very Soul, called the
Perdition or Destruction of Ungodly Men, both of Soul and Body.

III. The hottest Furnace in the World may abate its heat for want of Fuel, and
at length be wholly extinguished; however its Terrors and Pains are but short
and momentary: But the tormenting Fire of Hell never abates its heat, nor ever
goes out, therefore called everlasting Fire; now to add Eternity to Extremity,
and then you will perceive Hell to be Hell indeed.

IV. Other Fire may be quenched: But the Fire of God's Wrath, or Hell Fire,
shall nev^r be quenched, Vt supra.

Inference.
THat as there is no greater cause of magnifying Christ, than for
Redemption-Mercy, and so of Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory: So there is no
greater cause of Sorrow, and intolerable Misery, than to live and dye in Sin,
and so to be cast both Body and Soul into Hell Fire. O! what an alarm may those
two Scriptures among many sound in the Ears of Wicked and Ungodly Men, Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, not Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Raylers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. But whither then must they go? See Rev. 21.8. But the Fearful,
and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death.

Hell utter Darkness.
Mat. 8.12. -- Shall be cast into utter Darkness.

Jude v. 13. -- To whom is reserved the blackness of Darkness for ever.


AS the Torment and Misery of the Ungodly is set forth by a Furnace of Fire; so
it is also by Darkness, utter Darkness, and blackness of Darkness, as the Word
(...) signifies.

Parallels.
GOD sometimes has brought Darkness, upon a People, as a great Judgment, for
Sin and Rebellion against him: So God in just Judgment, will cast the Wicked
into Darkness, into a burning Furnace of Fire, but such Fire as shall give no
Light, therefore called utter Darkness.

II. Where there is Darkness, either by want of Light, or want of Sight to see
the Light, there cannot be any comfortable Enjoyment of any visible Object,
that might afford them Satisfaction and Content, as it does those that enjoy
the Light: So to be cast into Darkness, nay utter Darkness, not only such
Darkness that is a deprivation of Light, or occasioned by want of Sight, but a
Darkness of Terror and Torment, reserved for Wicked and Ung^dly Men, called the
blackness of Darkness: For as the Glory of Heaven shall abound beyond all
comparison with glorious Light, called the Inheritance of the Saints in Light,
Col. 1. So the Horrors and Terrors of Hell will consist in that abounding
Darkness, beyond all comparison.

III. As to be shut up in Spiritual Darkness, is a separation from God, as to
his Presence in a way of Grace: So to be shut up in the thickness and blackness
of the darkness of Hell, is an eternal separation from God, and the enjoyment
of him for ever: when once he shall say [Depart from me] there is a separation
from all Joy and Happiness, [Ye cursed] there is a black and direful
Excommunication. [into Fire], there is the Extremity of pain, [everlasting],
there is the Perpetuity of the Punishment, [prepared for the Devil and his
Angels], there are the Infernal tormenting, and tormented Company. And to
increase the horror and amazement of the Damned, this Fire shall only torment
them, not give them any Light, but they shall be cast out into utter Darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

Disparity.
WHen God brings Darkness upon a Land, as he did upon Egypt, as an Judgment it
has been but for a while, a certain time, and after there has been Light
again; but those that shall be cast out in the Darkness of the Pit of Hell,
shall never see Light more, neither Spiritual, Natural nor Artificial. As there
will be no need of the Sun nor Stars in Heaven: So the Damned shall not have
any Benefit thereby, whatever their Needs and Necessities are.

II. Men may be in Darkness spiritually, and they may be enlightened and saved
through Grace, but to be cast out into the dark and dismal Gulf of Hell, it
totally and everlastingly deprives of any use of Means, for enlightening any
more for ever, Gospel Light shines not at all in that dark and dismal Region,
because they hated the Light thereof in this World, they must now be cast out
into utter Darkness in the World to come.

III. Men may be in Darkness, and yet enjoy many other Comforts, tho they be
deprived of Light: But the Damned in Hell are not only in black and thick
Darkness, but are also deprived of any other Comfort: As they see nothing but
Darkness, so they hear nothing but dismal Screeches, and amazing dreadful Cries,
and gnashing of Teeth.

IV. Men may be naturally Blind, or shut up in a dark Dungeon, and yet may have
much of the Presence of God with them: But the Damned that are in the blackness
of Darkness, that is, the Darkness of Hell, shall utterly be deprived of the
comfortable Presence of God; As they said to God, depart from us: So are they
separated with a Depart ye from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, or, into
the blackness of Darkness for ever.

Inferences.
HOw might this awaken Sinners, and be a means to turn them from Spiritual
Darkness to Light; and from Satan, the Prince of Darkness, to God: Oh! that
these closing, direful, and amazing Lines, might turn many to Righteousness, to
believe, repent, and obey the Gospel, before the Lord Jesus come in flaming
Fire, rendering Vengeance upon all that know not God, nor obey the Gospel.

II. How just will the Condemnation of such rebellious Sinners be, who will
neither be drawn by the tenders of Mercy and Salvation to Jesus Christ, and of
an enjoyment of Heaven through him, nor be deterred from their sinful Course,
by all the threatened Judgments; nay tho it extend to Hell it self, to the Fire
of Hell, to the blackness of Darkness for ever! Oh! were there not Eternity
written upon the Gate of the broad way that leads to Destruction, the Damned
might have some hope, tho it were not till hundreds of thousands of Millions of
Years were expired: But O Sinners! when once this dark dismal Dungeon has shut
its Mouth upon you, and you come with the Devil and his Angels to lie therein,
you can never come out more, never see Light more, never have ease from
intolerable Torment more; no Father, Husband, Wife, etc. can come to light so
much as a Candle, or dip the tip of a Finger in Water to cool your Tongue.

III. Let the Redeemed of the Lord rejoice and magnify the God of their
Salvation, who has given them good hope through Grace, that they are delivered
from Wrath to come, by being called out of Spiritual Darkness into Christ's
mavelous Light, and by him have escaped that dreadful Doom, of being cast out
into utter Darkness.

Moses's Vail removed: OR, A TREATISE OF TYPES.
Adam a Type of Christ.
Romans 5.14. -- Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
sinned, after the similitude of Adam's Transgression, who is the Figure of him
that was to come.
Parallels.
ADam had no Father but God: So Christ likewise had no Father but God. They
were both in an especial manner called the Sons of God; the one by Creation,
the other by eternal Generation.

II. Adam was made Heir of the World: Christ is Heir of all Things, not only of
this World, but of that which is to come.

III. Adam was a common or public Person, representing all his Seed, or
natural Off spring; hence his Sin is charged upon his whole Posterity: By Adam
's Sin were many made Sinners, etc. Christ, the sec^nd Adam, Romans 5.12, 14.
is a common or public Person, representing all his true Seed, or spiritual
Offspring: So that as Adam's in was imputed to all his Children; Verse 19.
so is Christ's Righteousness imputed to all his Children, through Faith.

The first Adam merited Death for his Seed; the second Adam merited Life for
his Seed.

Noah a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
NOah was a Savior, nay, in a good sense, the Savior of the World; for it was
through him, and by his Means and Righteousness, there was a Seed preserved
from the Flo^d, etc. Christ is a Savior, the great Savior, the only Savior
of the World; hence called Jesus.

II. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness, and invited Sinners to Repentance:
Christ was a Preacher of Righteousness, and came on purpose to call Sinners to
Repentance. Noah's Ministry was despised by the Ungodly; so was the Preaching
and Ministry of Jesus Christ by the unbelieving Jews, and others: Those that
refused and rebelled against Noah, and his Ministry, were destroyed by Water;
and those that refuse and rebel against Christ, shall be destroyed by Fire.

III. Noah built an Ark: So Christ builds his Church. 2. Noah built the Ark
according to the Commandment of God: So Christ in building his Church, did
every thing according to the Commandment received from his Father. 3. Noah took
many Trees to build the Ark: So Christ takes many Believers, called Trees of
Righteousness, to build his Church.

IV. Some clean, and some unclean Beasts were received into Noah's Ark: So some
holy and sanctified Persons, and some unsanctified Ones, are received into
Christ's Church, (tho not by Christ's Appointment.)

V. All that were not received into the Ark, perished: So all who get not
spiritually by Faith into Jesus Christ, or are not true Members of the visible
or invisible Church, shall be damned, and perish eternally.

VI. Noah's Ark was tossed upen the rough Waves, and yet was preserved: So the
Church of Christ is tossed upon the rough Waves of a tempestuous World, and yet
preserved.

VII. Noah was the great Repairer of the World; from him descended all the
Inhabitants of the Earth: Christ is the great and glorious Repairer of the
World, and from him proceed all the Inhabitants of Heaven.

VIII. Noah sent a Dove out of the Ark, to see whether or no the Waters were
abated, who returned with an Olive Branch in her Mouth: So Christ sends forth
the Spirit, called a Dove, (or, in the likeness of a Dove,) who brings Tidings
to believing Souls, that the Wrath of God is appeased, etc.

Melchisedeck a Type of Christ.
Heb. 7.3. -- Made like unto the Son of God, etc.
Parallels.
THe Notation of his Name, Melchisedeck, signifies King of Righteousness:
Christ Jesus is the only King of Righteousness.

II. In his Office he was a Type of Christ: (1.) He was King of Salem, -- King
of Peace: Isa. 9.6.
So Christ was called the Prince of Peace, not only a peaceable Prince, but
Prince of Peace, one that commands Peace at his Pleasure in the World, in the
Church, and in the Souls of Men. (2.) Christ is not only Prince of the World,
but peculiarly Prince of Salem, Prince of Jerusalem, viz. the true Church of
God. (3.) Melchisedeck was not only a King, but also a Priest, yea, a Priest of
the Most High God: So Christ is both King and Priest.

III. Melchisedeck was a Type of Christ in his Original; Without Father,
without Mother, without Descent, Heb 7.3.
having neither Beginning of Days, nor End of Life: That is, there is no
mention of these things concerning him in the holy Scripture; we have not his
Genealogy, or Story of his Life; tho none doubt, but he had both Father and
Mother, and Descent, etc. But God on purpose would have all these concealed,
that he might be a more express Type of Christ, who was truly without Father,
in respect of his Manhood, or human Nature; and without Mother, Isa. 53.
in respect of his Godhead: And who can declare his Generation? etc.

IV. Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, and doubtless the lesser is blessed of the
greater; he was a most eminent and renowned Person. Some do conclude he was the
Patriarch Shem, (who was without beginning of days, in resp^ct of the World
after the Flood, and without end of days in respect of the World before the
Flood); but since God has concealed who he was, let us be satisfied. But in
this, doubtless, he was a Type of Christ, who is greater than all that went
before him, great in Power, Office, and Sovereignty, and is sent to bless his
People; it is he alone that blesses all the true Seed, and Heirs of Promise.

V. Melchisedeck was a Priest, not after the Order of Aaron; he was not
anointed with material Oil, nor received his Priesthood from any other, but
only so declared by the Mouth of God. His Priesthood passed not to other Men;
for as he received it from none, so he passed it not to any other; nor did any,
as we read of, succeed him: So Christ received his Priesthood from none but God
himself, and was not anointed with material Oil, but with the Oil of Gladness
only: And as he received his Priesthood from none, so he passes it not to any
other; He has none that can succeed him, but abides a Priest for ever in his
own Person in Heaven.

Abraham a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
ABram, and Abraham, signify an high Father, and a Father of a Multitude: So is
Christ an high and heavenly Father, called the everlasting Father, Father of
all the Faithful, etc.

II. To Abraham, and to his Seed was the Promise made: So to Christ, and to his
true Seed, is the Promise made. Guild. Heb. 9.13.


III. Abraham was King, Priest, and Prophet in his own Family: So is Jesus
Christ in his Church.

IV. Abraham put Hagar and Ishmael out of his House: Gal. 4.
So Jesus Christ cast out the Legal Covenant, and fleshly Seed, out of his
Church; Hagar being a Figure of the one, and Ishmael of the other.

V. Abraham is called the Heir of the World: Jesus Christ is so most properly
and truly. Romans 4.13.


Isaac a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
ISaac was the Son of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, a promised Seed long
before he was born; and so strange was his Birth, that tho he was born by the
St^ength of Nature, yet of Sarah's dead Womb, Genesis 18.12.
when it ceased to be with her as with other Childbearing Women; insomuch that
when the Angel foretold it to her, she thought it impossible: So Jesus Christ
is often called the Son of Abraham, yet the only begotten Son of God by Nature,
who is the Father of all that are taught, and can say in truth, Our Father,
etc. the only true promised Seed, who was long prophesied of, and expected by
all Believers; born and incarnate by the strange and wonderful Power of the
Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin, yea, in such a miraculous
manner, Luke 1.34.
that when it was foretold her by the Angel, she thought it impossible.

II. Isaac was mocked, and basely abused by Ishmael, the fleshly Seed: So was
Jesus Christ by the Jews, who were the Children of the Bondwoman.

III. Isaac was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter: So was Jesus Christ. Tho in
this there was a great Disparity; the one was spared, namely, Isaac, but Jesus
Christ was sacrificed.

IV. Isaac was offered (as it were) and three days dead in his Father's Mind
and Purpose, yet died not; but his Father received him as from the Dead: So
Jesus Christ offered, but in respect of his Divinity died not; and tho his
Humanity lay dead hree days in the Heart of the Earth, yet it revived again: So
both were (says Dr. Tay^or) delivered from Death the third Day; wherein the
Apostle plainly makes him a Type, Heb. 11.16. From whence he received him, as
in a Figure, Type, or Resemblance, etc.

V. Isaac ^as the Learned observe) was a Type of Christ in his Marriage: (1.)
He married one of his own Kindred: So the Spouse of Christ is of the same Flesh
which he himself assumed. (2.) She was wooed by his Father's Servant: So is the
Spouse of Christ by his faithful Ministers. (3.) Rebekah resolved to forsake
all her Friends, and her Father's House, to become Isaac's Wife: So Believers
forsake all in Affection, and actually, when called thereunto, for the sake of
Jesus Christ. (4.) She was decked with Jewels, trimmed, and rarely adorned,
when she came to meet Isaac: So the Spouse, the Lamb's Wife, shall be richly
decked, and gloriously adorned, to meet Jesus Christ, when he comes in the
Glory of the Father, to receive her to himself. Rev. 19.7. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
(5.) She came to meet Isaac: So shall the Saints meet Jesus Christ in the Air
at the last Day.

Jacob a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
JAcob was a Supplanter, as his Name signifies; he supplanted Esau: So Jesus
Christ supplanted (as Guild observes) Sin and Satan, etc.

II. Jacob was hated and persecuted by Esau: So was Christ by Satan, and his
Emissaries. In his great Afflictions he saw an Angel of God ascending and
descending upon him: So Christ, after his Temptations in the Wilderness, and
also when he was in his bloody Agony, was comforted by the Angels of God; they
administered unto him.

III. Jacob endured great Hardship for Rachel, whom he dearly loved: So Jesus
Christ endured many Years Sorrow and Trouble for his Church, whom he loved so
dearly, that he laid down his Life for her sake.

IV. Jacob was called a Prince with God; he wrestled long, and at last was
comforted: So Christ is a mighty Prince, Heb. 5.7.
and prevailed also, being heard in that he feared.

Jacob's Ladder, Genesis 28. a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
JAcob's Ladder, which he saw in a Vision, stood upon the Earth, but the Top
reached to Heaven: So Christ, albeit he was humbled in shape of sinful Flesh,
to the Earth, as it were; yet he was the Most High God, reaching so to Heaven.

II. The Angels went up and down by it: So we ascend up to God by Jesus Christ,
and God des^ends (as it were) by him also down to us.

III. The Lord stood above it, and made Promises of Canaan to Jacob: So God in
Christ, and through him, has made all Promises of Heaven, and ratified them to
us.

Genesis 28.19.
IV. In the Place which was called the House of God, and Gate of Heaven, was the
Ladder seen: So in Christ's Church, the true House of God, we get a clear and
full Sight of Christ.

Joseph a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
JOseph, signifies Increasing; he was the Firstborn of Rachel, and Jacob's
beloved Son: So Christ in his human Nature, in the Days of his Flesh, grew, and
increased in Strength, and in Favor with God and Man; and so also there shall
be of his Kingdom and Glory in the World, who is the Beloved of his Father.

Genesis 37.3^
II. Joseph was very beautiful, and also excelled all his Brethren in true
Virtue: So Jesus Christ is more beautiful than the Children of Men; he was full
of Grace and Truth.

III. Joseph was a Man of great Wisdom, able to expound deep Secrets, etc. In
Jesus Christ are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, who is therefore
called the Great Counselor, and is that blessed Lamb, who has prevailed to
open the Books, and loose the Seals thereof: He has the Spirit without
measure, and thereby opens all the deep Mysteries of God, that lay hid from
Ages and Generations, etc.

Genesis 49.22.
IV. He is called a fruitful Bough, whose Branches run upon the Wall, because
out of him branched two Tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh: Therein (says Dr.
Tailor) he was a Type of Christ, who is not only a fruitful Bough, and called
the Branch, etc. but also a Root, from whom all the Tribes of God branch out,
and flourish. And whereas those Trees are withered, Christ shall see his Seed,
and prolong his Days, and they shall abide to Eternity.

V. Joseph was a Type of Christ in his Actions. (1.) He was sent by his Father,
to visit his Brethren in the Wilderness, who evilly treated him there: So Jesus
Christ came to visit his poor People, who were wandering in the Wilderness of
this World; and when he came hither, was evilly treated by his own Brethren,
the Jews, who conspired to take away his Life, like as Joseph's Brethren sought
to deal by him. (2.) Joseph sed his Brethren, and all his Father's House: So
Jesus Christ feeds the Church of God. (3.) Joseph being innocent, yet suffered
many hard Things: So did Christ. (4.) He did all the Good he could for his
Brethren, who had ill deserved it from his hands: So did Jesus Christ deal by
poor Sinners, who had abused him, and still daily do. (5.) He taught his
Brethren the great Duty of Brotherly Love; See that ye fall not out by the way:
So Jesus Christ, above all Lessons, commends to us the new Commandment of Love,
etc.

VI. Joseph was a Type of Christ, not only in the Actions of his Life, and in
respect of those Things he suffered, and cruel Temptations he met with, etc.
but also in his Advancement, and great Preferment; he by being abased was
raised to Honor: So was Jesus Christ. Joseph was made a mighty Lord, and was
next to Pharaoh: So is Christ advanced in Power and Glory next to God himself.
Every Man was to bow to Joseph: Genesis 41.43. Phil. 2.10. Genesis 41.55. Acts 3.22,
23.
So every one is required to bow the Knee to Jesus Christ. All were to go to
Joseph, they were to depend upon his Word: Go to Joseph, (says Pharaoh) and
what he says to you, do ye: So God the Father has given Christ a Name above
every Name; and whatsoever any Sinner or Believer wants, the Father commands
them to go to Jesus, and to hear him in every thing that he shall say unto
them. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Mat. 3.
hear ye him.

Moses a Type of Christ.
MOses was a Type of Christ in his Person: (1.) He was of mean Parents and
Birth: So was Christ in respect of his Flesh, or human Nature, of a poor
decayed and dri^d Stock, being born of a poor Virgin. (2.) Moses was no sooner
born, but he was exposed to the Wrath of Pharaoh King of Egypt, who sought to
put him to death: So Christ in his Infancy was sought by King Herod to be
slain; but both by God's extraordinary Providence were delivered. (3.) Moses
was of a meek and sweet disposition, above all that dwelt upon the Earth, yet
full of Zeal and Indignation against Sin: So Christ was a Pattern of Meekness
and Humility, Learn of me, etc. Mat. 11.28, 29.


II. Moses in his Office and Function was a Type of Christ. (1.) He was
appointed by God, and sent to deliver Israel out of Pharaoh's cruel Bondage: So
Jesus Christ was appointed and sent to deliver all the Israel of God from the
cruel Bondage of Satan, and heavy Oppression and Burden of Sin. (2.) Moses was
sent to lead Israel towar^s Canaan: So Jesus Christ leads us to Heaven, the
Antitype of Canaan. But in this there is a Disparity: Moses led Israel but
unto the Sight of the promised Land; but Jesus Christ leads us quite into
Heaven, or the Land of Promise. (3.) Moses was learned in all the Learning of
Egypt: Christ was learned to admiration; his Enemies cried out, From whence
has he all this Learning? (4.) Moses gave the Law, having first received it
from the hand of God: So Jesus Christ has given us the Law of the Gospel, as
he received it from his Father. (5.) Moses was Mediator of the First Covenant,
and as so considered, was both King, Priest, and Prophet: Jesus Christ is
Mediator of the Second Covenant, and as so also both King, Priest, and Prophet.
(6.) Moses wrought many mighty Miracles in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the
Wilderness, to confirm the Law, and to show Israel that he was really sent of
God: So Jesus Christ wrought many strange and wonderful Miracles, by Sea and
Land, in Towns and Deserts, to manifest his Glory, to show he was s^nt of God,
and to confirm his Doctrine. (7.) Moses instituted the Passover: So Christ,
the true Moses, instituted the Supper.

III. Moses in his Faithfulness was a Type of Christ; he was faithful as a
Servant; he did all things exactly according to the Pattern showed him in the
Mount: Heb. 3.5.
So Christ in all things was faithful as a Son.

IV. Moses being to deliver the Law, fasted forty Days and forty Nights in the
Mountain alone: Christ being to preach the Gospel, fasted so long in the
Wilderness.

V. He was a Type of Christ in many particular Actions of his Life: (1.) Moses
married an Ethiopian, a Stranger, a Black: So Christ espoused the Gentiles, who
were Strangers to God, and, by reason of Sin, as black as Hell could make them.
(2.) Moses sweetened the bitter Waters of Marah, by a Tree cast into it: So
Christ sweetens all our Afflictions by the means of his Cross. (3.) Moses led
Israel through the Red Sea: Christ leads his Church through a Sea of
Tribulation. (4.) As Moses was transfigured on Mount Sinai, and seemed so
glorious, that the Children of Israel could not behold his Face: So Jesus
Christ also was transfigured in Mount Tabor, so as his Disciples were amazed,
and wist not what they said.

Joshua a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
JOshua, or Jesus, he was a Savior, (as his Name signifies) he saved Israel
from temporal and external Enemies and Calamities: So Christ saves us from all
spiritual and internal Enemies and Miseries, as well as he will from all
external.

II. Joshua led Israel quite into Canaan, not only unto the sight of it, but
into it: So Christ leads us, as we said before, into Heaven. What Moses could
not do, Joshua did do upon this account: So what the Law could not do, being
weak through the Flesh, Christ, our Joshua, has done.

III. Joshua was a mighty Conqueror: So is Christ. Joshua overcame and utterly
destroyed many Kings, that so he might give Israel the peaceable Possession of
the Land of Canaan: So Jesus Christ overcame, and totally vanquished diverse
mighty Kings, and Enemies of our Souls, that so he might give us a certain
Assurance of the eternal Inheritance, viz. (1.) Satan, the great King of the
Bottomless-Pit. (2.) Sin, who, like a cruel and merciless King and Tyrant,
reigned over all the Children of Men. (3.) Death, the King of Terrors, etc.

IV. All the good Promises God made to Israel, were fulfilled by the hands of
Joshua: So all the gracious Promises of God to his Elect, were fulfilled in and
by Jesus Christ.

V. Joshua saved Rahab's House, that had the red Cord hung out at the Window:
So Jesus Christ saves all poor penitent Sinners, that express Faith in his
Blood.

VI. He accep^ed also the Gibeonites, who humbly entreated Peace of him: So
does Christ all sincere Converts, who wisely seek to him for Mercy.

Sampson a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
SAmpson's Nativity was foretold by an Angel of God: So was the Conception and
Nativity of Jesus Christ foretold by an Angel. (2.) Sampson was sanctified from
the Womb: So was Christ much more.

II. Sampson in respect of his great Strength, as some conceive, was a Type of
Christ.

III. He conquered a stout Lion in the Desert, hand to hand, as it were: So
Christ overcame the roaring Lion, the Devil, in the Wilderness, and made him
fly.

IV. He slew many of God's Enemies by his Death: So Jesus Christ by Death
overcame Sin, Satan, Hell, and the Grave.

David a Type of Christ.
Dr. Tailor.
AS all the Kings of Israel were express Types of Jesus Christ, the Head of his
Kingdom, and of all the People of God, etc. So were there two of them, that
were more manifest Figures of him than all the rest; I mean, David and Solomon,
of both which we shall enquire wherein the Resemblance consists. David was so
special a Type of the Lord Jesus, as scarce is any thing noted of Christ, but
some Shadow of it might be observed in David, some of which we shall briefly
touch upon in the following Parallels.

Parallels.
Isa. 11.1.
I. For his Person; David, the Son of Jesse: Christ, the true Rod out of the
Stock of Jesse. Both of obscure and low Parentage, both out of dry and
despicable Roots.

II David was a King of Israel, and had his Kingdom raised out of Humility:
Christ is a King. King of Saints, and King of Nations; and yet at first his
Kingdom was small, and rose by degrees, much after the manner as David's did,
whose Kingdom was the Figure of it.

III. David was a Man after God's own Heart, save in the Case of Vriah: Christ
much more a Man after God's own Heart, Ezekiel 34.24. Jer. 30.9. Hos. 3.5.
a Man without spot. Christ is often called David: My Servant David shall be
the Prince among them. They shall serve the Lord their God, and David their
King, whom I will raise up unto them. They shall seek the Lord their God, and
David their King. Not the Typical David, long before dead, but the Messiah, the
true David, the Beloved of God.

III. David was made the Head of Nations, as he himself speaks, Thou have
made me the Head of Nations, etc. Which was not so fully true in the Type, as
in the Antitype; he spoke it figuratively of Jesus Christ: For literally David
was King but of one little Corner in Judea; but Christ, the true David, has,
and shall have his Dominions from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the Ends of
the Earth.

IV. David was a Prophet as well as a King: So is Jesus Christ.

V David was anointed about the thirtieth Year of his Life: So Christ, the true
David, was baptized, and then anointed by the Holy Spirit, being about the
thirtieth Year of his Age.

VI. David in his Wars had many poor Men that followed him, such as were in
Debt, etc. So Jesus Christ, the true David, had many poor Men who followed him,
and became his Disciples, who were heavy laden under the Burden of Sin, which
is called a Debt.

VII. David had several brave Men with him, who were called his Worthies: So
had Christ, the true David, his twelve Apostles, who were most valiant and
noble Champions for the Truth, besides the seventy Disciples.

VIII. David had many open, and some secret Enemies, as Doeg, Achitophel, etc.
His own Son also rose up in Rebellion against him: So Jesus Christ had, and
still has, many open and secret Enemies: The Jews, who were called his own
People, plotted against him; nay, and one of his own Disciples, that eat Bread
with him, lifted up the Heel against him, and at last treacherously betrayed
him wiith a Kiss.

IX. David was a Type of Christ in his Kingdom, 1. In respect of the Entrance.
2. In respect of the Administration. 3. Of Continuation, etc.

1. David entered not without strong Opposition, much Contempt and Disdain: So
Jesus Christ was vilified: The Stone which the Builders refused, is become the
Head-Stone of the Corner. Acts 4 11.
No Man was more despised of Readiness Courtiers, than David, who was thought far
enough from the Kingdom: So no Man could be more slighted and rejected, than
Christ was by the Scribes, Pharisees, Priests, and other People of Israel.

2. In his Administration, David would judge uprightly, and sing of Mercy and
Judgment; he would endure no hateful Person in his sight: Christ, the true
David, is the most just and righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who most
sincerely dispenses Grace and Mercy to all penitent Sinners, but feeds
impenitent and rebellious Ones with Judgment, etc.

3. In the Continuation of his Kingdom, God promised Mercy to David, and his
Seed for ever: Which Promises are not to be extended to his carnal Succession,
for the Princely Dignity is taken from them; but the spiritual Seed of the true
David was there meant: 1. Christ himse^f, in whom his Kingdom is perpetuated.
2. The true Israel, whether Jews or Gentiles, who by Faith are engrafted into
the Messiah, in respect of whom there shall be no end of his Kingdom.

X. Many things that David speaks in the Book of Psalms, which some are ready
to think he spoke of himself, yet (such a Type was he of Christ, that) they are
directly applicable to none but Jesus Christ, etc.

Solomon a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
SOlomon, or Shelomon, peaceable, the Son of David, greatly beloved, and King
of Israel and Jerusalem: So was Christ the beloved of God, the true Son of
David according to the Flesh, King of Israel, and Prince of Peace, etc.

II. Solomon ex^eeded all other Men in Wisdom and Knowledge: Christ is the
Wisdom of God: In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. C^l.
2.3.
But in this there is great difference between them: 1. Solomon had his Wisdom
by Donation and Gift: Christ, as God, derived it from none. 2. Solomon by all
his Wisdom knew not the Hearts of Men: But Christ does, he knew what was in
Man. 3. Solomon could not infuse his Wisdom into others, to make them wise: But
Jesus Christ is made of God unto us, Wisdom; he makes us wise. 4. Solomon in
all things he did was not wise; but Christ was in all things wis^; in him was
no Folly.

III. Solomon for his Wisdom was admired, and his Fame was spread abroad: But
much more was the Wisdom and excellent Speeches, Doctrine, and Miracles of
Christ spread abroad, John 8.
so that his very Enemies confessed, never Man spoke like him.

IV. Solomon was a Type of Christ, in that he was a King of the greatest
Royalty, Wealth, and Glory, 1 King. 3.13.
that ever was; he so enriched his Subjects, that Silver and Gold were as
common to them as Stones in the Street: Christ enriches all his People
spiritually, the Price of Grace being far above Gold.

V. Solomon was a Type of Christ, 1. In building, 2. Dedicating, 3. Ordering
the Temple.

Mat. 16.
1. He built the Temple: Christ built or builds his Church: Upon this Rock will
I build my Church.

2. He dedicated the Temple, and consecrated it to the Service of God, by which
means Prayers, and other Acts of Religious Worship, were accepted: So Jesus
Christ dedicated his Church by solemn Prayer to God, and by his Blood and
Mediation renders all their Services, John 17.
and other Acts of Religious Worship, accepted by the Father.

3. He ordered all things in the Temple, appointing the several Offices and
Officers thereof: So Jesus Christ, the true Solomon, orders all things
according to his Wisdom in his Church, about the public Worship of God, and
has appointed all Offices and Officers that should be therein.

VI. Solomon was a Type of Christ in his Administration of Justice, which was
the Glory of his Royal Throne.

Yet in many things Solomon was no Type of Christ, etc.

Elisha a Type of Christ.
ELisha signifies the Health of God: Jesus Christ is truly the Health and
Salvation of God; it is he that heals all poor Sin-sick Souls.

II. He succeeded Elijah: So Christ succeeded the second Elijah, viz. John
Baptist.

III. He received the Spirit of his Predecessor in a double measure: Christ not
in a double measure, but without measure.

IV. He cured Naaman of his Leprosy, and raised the Dead: In this he was a Type
of Christ, who cured the Leprosy both externally and internally, and in both
senses raised the Dead also.

V. He had a wicked, ungodly, and covetous Servant, called Gehazi: So had
Christ a wicked and covetous Judas.

His Predecessor was a Type of Christ also in many things, particularly in his
Ascension into Heaven, etc.

Jonah a Type of Christ.
JOnah, a Dove in Name: Christ was the same in Nature.

II. He was three Days and three Nights in the Whale's Belly, yet at last came
forth alive: So Christ was three Days and three Nights in the Bowels or Heart
of the Earth, and yet rose again alive.

III. He preached Repentance to a wicked People: So did Christ.

Zerubbabel a Type of Christ.
ZErubbabel is called the Elect of God, Hag. 2.24. So is Jesus Christ, Behold
my Servant, mine Elect, etc.

II. The Lord promised to make him a Signet, signifying thereby that his
Dignity and Glory should be most excellent, which is only accomplished in
Christ.

III. He was appointed to raise up the Temple of David; 'twas promised that he
should lay the Foundation, and finish it, etc. So was Jesus Christ appointed to
build up and restore the spiritual Temple and Tabernacle of David; he lays the
Foundation, and he finishes it by his Spirit, etc.

Aaron a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
AAron a Teacher, or the Mountain of Fortitude: So is Christ the true Teacher
of God's Word, and in that respect not only the Antitype of Aaron, but of all
true Teachers and Ministers of God's Word, that went before him, and is also
that exalted Aaron, or Mountain of invincible Strength.

II. Aaron was Moses's Mouth to the People: So is Christ his Fathers Mouth to
Men, Exodus 4 30.
in declaring his Will and Mind to them.

III. He was the Blesser of the People: So is Christ the true Blesser of his
People, Lev. 9.22. Acts. 4.26.
in and by him are all the Families of the Earth blessed; him has God the
Father sent to bless you, etc.

IV. He was the High Priest of the Lord; In this he was the express Type of the
Lord Jesus, who is the true and only High Priest of his faithful People.

V. He dyed upon the top of the Mount: Christ was crucified upon the top of a
Mount, called Golgotha.

The High Priest a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
THE High Priest was a Type of Christ: 1. In his Deputation to his Office. 2.
Heb. 5 1.
In his Consecration. 3. In his Apparel. 4. In the Execution of his Office, etc.

First, In his Deputation to his Office.

1. He must be chosen out of the Tribe of Levi: Christ was taken from among Men
of our Flesh and Bone.

2. He must not be Blind, Lame, etc. but wholly without natural Blemish: Hos.
4.6.
to signify Christ should be without Sin, In his Month was found no guile.

3. He was to be a Man of Knowledge, or no Priest to God: which figured forth
that perfect Knowledge that is in Christ.

Secondly, As to his Consecration, it is set down Exodus 29.1. 1. Washing. 2.
Anointing. 3. Sacrificing and Purifying with Blood, and this Consecration to
continue seven days together; which in general, shadowed the surpassing
Sanctity and Purity of Christ, above all Men and Angels, and of his being
anointed with the Holy Spirit above his Brethren, Heb. 1.8.
and of his becoming our High Priest, by the Sacrifice of himself, or by
offering up his own Blood, to atone and make Peace, etc. But whereas the High
Priest needed Sacrifices to offer for his own Sins, in that there is a
Disparity, for Christ having no Sin, needs no Sacrifice for himself.

Thirdly, the High Priest in his Apparel was a Type of Christ.

1. He was to have on a Linen Garment, which signified Christ's Righteousness,
which all that appear accepted before the Lord, must have on.

2. A Girdle, which as Ainsworth, and diverse others observe, signified that
Constancy and Stability that was in Christ, who is as firm as a Rock; as also
to show how fixed and stable all God's People should be, being girt about with
the Girdle of Truth and Verity, and so prepared ready, and strengthened to every
good Work.

3. A Bonnet, which signified God's covering and protecting our Head from all
Dangers, and in him, us, that no Evil may befall us.

4. The High Priest was to have an Ephod, not of Wool, nor Silk, but of Linen,
(the Matter of which rises out of the Earth,) which signifies, says Dr.
Tailor, Ezekiel 44.17.
that Holy Flesh of Christ, which veiled his Diety, as a Garment; it was a long
white Garment, signifying the absolute Righteousness of Christ; which is long
enough to cover all our Nakedness. It was adorned with two Onyx Stones, and in
them the Names of the Twelve Tribes engraven, which he carried on his
Shoulders; signifying that the Names of the Godly are not lightly written, but
engraven in the Love and Memory of Christ, that Christ should carry his Church
and People upon his Shoulders, or support them by his own Strength: Also the
two Onyx Stones, with the Names of the Children of Israel engraven upon them,
and wore upon the High Priests Shoulder, was a great Ornament to him; So Christ
looks upon his People to be as precious Stones, and Jewels to him.

5. The High Priest was to have on, the Breast Plate of Judgment, the most
precious part of all his Garments.

(1.) In respect of the twelve costly and glittering Stones, which were to be
set in four Rows, according to the Number of the Tribes of Israel: these Stones
signified the shining Grace and Holiness of Christ, not only as it shone forth
in his own Person, but also as it is communicated to all his faithful Children,
these Stones shone gloriously: So do the Saints in Grace, and true Gospel
Purity.

(2.) These Stones were of great Worth and Value; signifying what a value Jesus
Christ puts upon his Church, they are as precious stones, and costly Jewels in
his esteem, tho slighted and contemned by Men.

(3.) They were set in the Pectoral, and Aaron must carry them on his Heart;
signifying that Christ has as much care of his own People, as if they were
enclosed in his Heart; they lie near him, and are always upon his Heart, and in
his Mind.

(4.) In Number Twelve, according to all the Tribes: noting there is room
enough in Christ's Heart for every particular Saint, he loves them all, bears
them all upon his Heart, before the Throne of God.

(5.) They stood in four Rows in a comely Quadrangle: signifying the comely
Order that Christ has placed in his Church, some in a higher, and some in a
lower Rank.

(6.) All the Stones, and so consequently all the Names of the Children of
Israel, stood in the Breast Plate in a narrow compass: So by Christ all the
Children of God are gathered together, and sweetly veiled through the Spirit in
Love: In the Breast Plate also, was the Vrim and Thummim, which the Rabbi
David, a Jew, says, It is unknown to us what these signify; it is thought it
was the Workmanship of no Man, but a Sacred Monument immediately received from
God, but all the Learned (I have met with) agree they signified Jesus Christ.
1. Their Names, say some, signify Light; others Beauty and Perfection; in
Christ is all fullness of Light, Beauty and Perfection. 2. There use, was to
receive by them answer from God, in difficult Cases, when the Priest consulted
with him, the Oracle by Vrim gave certain Direction: So Christ is the most
perfect Rule and Direction, shadowed by that. Heb. 1.1, 2.
As God spoke then by Vrim to the Priest; so now by his own Son: Those who
would have their Doubts resolved, must go to the Vrim, go to Christ, and to his
Ordinances, etc.

But to return back, and speak a little further to the Robe of the Ephod, and
Bonnet on the Skirts of the Ephod, Exodus 28.31.
were fastened, the Pomegranets of blew Silk, and Purple, and Scarlet round
about: this Fruit had a most pleasant smell, sweet in it self, and sweetning
other things, and is full of precious Juice and Liquor. 2. Bells of Gold
between them round about a Golden Bell and a Pomegranate, etc. this Vesture or
Garment, might signify the Righteousness of Christ's Human Nature, and by the
sweet Pomgranates, the most excellent savor of his Righteousness and
Obedience, in the Nostrils of God the Father, in the behalf of Man; which also
in a Spiritual Sense was full of precious Juice and Virtue, to qualify and
abate the raging heat of God's Wrath; as the Juice of Pomgranates does allay
the burning heat of an Ague or Fever; as also they might signify what a sweet
savor Christ's Righteousness does cast upon us, when wrapped, as it were,
therein, who by Nature are in a stinking and loathsome Condition. 2. As to the
golden Bells they might figure forth the blessed sound of the Gospel; or, as
some understand, Christ's visible owning of us now in Heaven, and our public
owning of him on Earth, which must be Sincere; we must not only make a sound,
but also have good Fruit; we must not on^y have a Word for God, but a Work for
God; a Bell, a Pomegranate, a Word, and a Work.

6. The High Priest must be heard when he goes into the Sanctuary; signifying,
says Dr. Tailor the Power of Christ, our High Priest's perpetual Intercession,
being entered into the true Sanctuary, viz. Heaven it self for us.

As touching the Miter, or Bonnet upon the Priest's Head, made of blew Silk,
and fine Linen, like to an half Coronet, beautified with a Golden Plate, on
which was written Holiness to the Lord. 1. The Miter might not only signify
God's covering and protecting our Head the Lord Jesus, and us in him, but also
his Kingly Dignity. 2. The Golden Plate in which was written Holiness to the
Lord, figured forth in a most conspicuous manner; that most divine and perfect
Holiness of the Lord our Righteousness, the Holiness of his Person, the
Holiness of his Nature, the Holiness of all his Actions and Passions; his
Holiness, who is the Cause, Stream, and Original of all our Holiness, that is
accepted of God.

Fourthly, The Priest was a Type of Christ in the Execution of his Office.

1. The Priest must kill the Sacrifices, and none but he; signifying Jesus
Christ's vo^untary Action, Joh. 10.18.
in laying down his Life for us, none could take it away from him; he was as
well the Priest as the Sacrifice.

2. The Priest offered the Blood of the Sacrifices to God, and sprinkled it on
the Alter; no Man might offer his ^wn Sacrifice, but he must bring it to the
Priest: Lev. 7.4.
figuring there was no coming to God but by Christ, who offered up his own
Blood to atone for our Sins; no other can offer any Sacrifice to take away Sin,
but him alone.

3. The Priest prepared the Body of the Sacrifice, fley'd it, divided it into
several parts, Lev. 1.6.
washed the Intrails, put Fire unto the Burnt-Offerings, consumed the Fat, cast
the Filth and Dung into the pl^ce of Ashes, etc. signifying that Christ alone
did the whole work of our Redemption, he suffered the heat of God's Wrath and
Justice, he puts away all our Filth, and covers it in his own Grave, and
washes us in the Fountain of his own Blood, etc.

4. The Priest was to teach the People, The Priest's Lips must preserve
Knowledge, Mal. 2.7.
and thou shall seek the Law at his Mouth; this figured forth Christ in his
Prophetical Office, who is the great Doctor and Teacher of God's Mind and Will
to the Children of Men, it is he who has the Tongue of the L^arned, so that
never Man spoke like him, Psalm. 45.2.
it is he who has the Words of everlasting Life.

5. The Priests were to preserve the Oil for Lights, and the Incense, Luke
24.50.
and for the daily Meat Offering, and the anointing Oil, etc. signifying that
Jesus Christ is the Preserver of all Grace, in and for his Church, he only
watches for the safety of his People, he preserves the light of Grace and good
Works in us, and the Oil of Gladness from decaying in our Lamps and Vessels.

There were some Actions more peculiar to the High Priest.

1. He must daily dress the holy Lamps and Lights, Morning and Evening, Lev.
24.2, 3.
before the Lord, to preserve the Lights from going out: So Christ preserves
the Light of his Word and Gospel from being put out, tho Men and Devils with
all their Might have endeavored to do it.

2. He must week^y make the Shewbread, and set it before the Lord continually
and, Exodus 25.30.
more expressly, every Sabbath he must set on the Table twelve Loaves, according
to the number of the Tribes of Israel, and take the old away, etc. In this he
was a Type of Christ, who sets himself continually in the Ministry of the Word
(as the Substance and Antitype of the Shewbread) before the Children of Men,
especially to feed and strengthen his own Children, nay an^ brings forth fresh
Food, new Bread for them every Sabbath.

3. He must yearly (and that in the day of Expiation) go into the Holy of
Holies, Exodus 30.10. Lev. 16.2.
to make an Atonement for himself, for his House, and for all the People, but
not without Blood; signifyi^g that Christ by one alone Sacrifice of himself,
has opened the Sanctuary of H^aven, and by his Ascension has made entrance
into it on our behalf, and there appears before God once for all to make
Intercession for us. The Priest went alone without any Attendants: Heb. 10.12,
19
So Christ has trod the Wine Press alone, no Competitor, no Companion h^th he
in this work, and now pleads alone, as our own, and only Mediator, by virtue of
his own Blood, at the Father's right Hand; There is one (that is but one)
Mediator, between God and Man, etc.

4. The High Priest continually was to decide the highest Controversies, he
must judge between the cl^an and the unclean, he must put the one out, and
receive the other into the Congregation; signifying that Christ only, Christ
alone is the Supreme judge of all Controversies, it is his Word only that can
decide the Case, who is clean, and who unclean, who is to be put out, and who
to be taken into his Church.

The Tabernacle, and what it was the Type of.
THe Tabernacle in some respect, according to the Learned, was a Type of
Christ's Human Nature.

1. It was exceeding glorious within, all the inward parts thereof were
overlaid with pure Gold. This might signify how the Human Nature of the Son of
God was covered with the Diety; that being the true Tabernacle that God has
pitched, and not Man. Saint John says, The Word dwelt (or tabernacled) amongst
us, (speaking of his being in our Flesh) or taking upon him our Nature, it
being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and not erected by Man.

2. The Tabernacle was the place where God met with his People; now God meets
with his People in Christ it is in and through him, we come to know or have the
true Revelation of his Will, and enjoy his gracious Presence, etc. Those who
would be accepted with God, and worship him aright, must wait at the door of
this Spiritual Tabernacle.

Others understand by the Tabernacle, the Church, or Mystical Body of Christ,
wherein God graciously dwells, and has promised also to meet his People.

1. It was moveable, signifying the troublesome State of God's People, whilst
they pass through the Wilderness of this World.

2. The Tabernacle had three places. 1. The outward Court, wherein stood the
brazen Altar. 2. The Holy Place. 3. The Holiest of all. In the first, it
typifies forth the visible or outward Form of the Church, in respect of the
external Exercise of Religion and Worship, hither the common People may come.
The second typified out the Spiritual State, or more close and holy Fellowship
of the Church, which none have admittance into, but sincere and sanctified
Persons, who feed upon the Spiritual and true Shewbread, Jesus Christ. The
third typified Heaven it self, or the Church of God triumphant, where Christ is
set down in Glory, at the Father's right hand, to intercede for us.

3. The Entry to the Holiest of all, was by the Holy Place, and to the Holy
place, was by the outer Court, etc. So our Entry into Heaven, is by being
Members of the visible Church, through Faith, and a good Conscience. He that
would enter into the Holiest of all, must first be Holy; and he that would come
into a State of true Holiness, and Communion with God and his People, must
learn to know where the Candlestick and true Shewbread stands, which is the
visible Church.

4. You read of the fixed Pillars of the Holy Place; they might signify the
Holy Apostles of Jesus christ, and his faithful Ministers, who help to support
the Spiritual Structure, the Church, as Pillars do support a House, etc.

5. The diverse Ornaments and Instruments thereof; might signify the diversity
of Spiritual Gifts and Graces in the Gospel Church; the Tabernacle was
exceeding glorious within, and all the inward parts thereof were overlaid with
pure Gold: Exodus 35. Psalm. 45.
So inwardly, the Church of God is very beautiful, the King's Daughter is all
glorious within.

6. The several cov^rings thereof; typified the Lord's sure and safe Protection
of his Church, by his own immediate Power and gracious ministration of Angels.

7. Gold within, and Skins without; might signify, tho the Church is glorious
within, yet outwardly, to the sight and view of carnal Men, she has no Beauty,
but is looked upon as contemptible.

8. The Tabernacle, and all the Instruments thereof, yea, the very Ash-Pans,
and Snuffers of the Candlesti^k, must be made according to the Pattern showed
in the Mount; which figured forth, Exodus 25.40.
that the Church of God, and all the exercise of Worship that is therein,
whether Doctr^ne or Discipline, must be exactly according to the express
written Word; nothing must be a^ded to, nor diminished from, no Alterations one
way or other must be made.

9. The voluntary Oblation of the People to build the Tabernacle; signifies how
willing Christians should be to contribute of their outward Substance to uphold
God's Church, and the public Worship thereof.

10. The glorious Door of the Tabernacle; might be a Figure of Christ, who
says, I am the Door; Joh. 10.7.
it is by him we enter into the Kingdom of Grace and Glory.

The Veil of the Holiest, Exodus 26.31. and what it figured forth.
IT was glorious, of Embroidered Work; this says Guild, signified the Body of
Christ, filled with the fullness of God, Heb. 7.26.
or beautified with all the most excellent and Heavenly Graces of the Spirit.

Joh. 1.51.
II. It was replenished and wrought full of Cherubims; noting thereby that
serviceable and ready attendance of the Angels on Christ's Natural and Mystical
Body.

III. It was born up by glorious and costly Pillars, overlaid with Gold, on
Sockets of Silver; to show that the Humanity of Christ (especially in his
Sufferings) should be born up by his Deity, which his Manhood overveiled.

IV. By the Veil only, there was entry into the Holiest place of all: So by the
Veil, that is to say, the Flesh of Christ, which was rent (as it were) upon the
Cross, a new and living way is made for us to the Father. Heb. 10.20.


The Ark a Type of Christ.
THe Ark was an assurance of God's Presence amongst his People: So Christ is
the Cause and Assurance, that God in a gracious way is present with us.

II. Where the Ark was, there it was lawful to offer Sacrifice, and no where
else: which might show that our acceptance in God's Sight, is through Jesus
Christ. If Christ dwell not in our Hearts by Faith, if we have not the Ark with
us, Christ with us, God will not accept of our Prayers nor Service.

III. In the Ark was the Pot of Manna; to show, that in Christ is the Life,
Comfort, and Spiritual Nourishment for our Souls.

IV. The Ark had a Crown of Gold round about it; signifying the Majesty of
Christ's Kingdom, or his Regal Power.

V. The two Tables were in the Ark, the Ark kept them: which might signify
Christ's keeping the Law perfectly for us, and deliver us thereby from the
Curse of it.

VI. When the Ark was set in the Temple of Dagon, Dagon fell down and broke to
pieces: So when Christ, and his Truth, are set up in a Man's Heart, or a
Nation, Sin and Idolatry will go down.

VII. Where the Ark was, there was the Glory of God; and when that departed,
the Glory of God departed: So where Christ's blessed Truth and Gospel is, there
is the Glory of God, but when Christ leaves a People, takes away his Gospel,
the Glory of God goes from that People.

Some run a Parallel between the Church and the Ark; others between the Public
Worship of God and it: But in my Judgment, it more clearly was a Type of
Christ, which may comprehend much of what they say in respect of other things.

The Mercy-Seat, Exodus 25.17. a Type of Christ.
IT was called the Mercy-Seat, or, as Ainsworth gives it from the Hebrew Word,
a Propitiation covering; this, says the Apostle applies to Christ, called
God's Propitiation; 1 John 2.2.
it is in Christ Mercy is truly seated; and it is he that has made a
Propitiation for our Sins.

II. It was the Cover of the Ark where the two Tables lay: So Christ is the
true Cover, Romans 3.
and Deliverer from the Curse and Accusation of the Law.

III. It was of pure Gold, noting the spotless Holiness of Christ.

IV. Upon the Mercy-Seat were two Cherubims; these Cherubims signified the holy
Angels, they stretched their Wings on high, covering or shadowing so the
Mercy-Seat. This Word is used for Protection or Defense from Evil, says
learned Ainsworth. And doubtless, it might signify the usefulness of Angels in
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom; they looked down upon the Mercy-Seat, signifying
the Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, or God manifested in the Flesh, which
things the Angels desired to look into; hence the Apostle says in another
place, 1 Pet. 1.
He was seen of Angels, seen with Delight and Admiration. Some by the
Mercy-Seat and Cherubims, understand the Holy Trinity in Unity, viz. By the
Mercy-Seat, being a Figure of christ; and the two Cherubims, the Father and the
Holy Ghost; and by the two Cherubims at the end of the Mercy-Seat, they
understand Christ's standing between God and and the Rigor of his Justice, God
looking on the Law, through Christ, as fulfilled by him, for us; and from hence
communing with us: But that the Father should be represented to us in the
Figure of one of the Cherubims; I see no ground for it, forasmuch as we read of
no Similitude of the Father, save the Person of Christ only. So Deuteronomy. 4.15.

The Table of Shewbread, a Type of Christ.
IT was covered over with Gold, and a Crown about it; noting says Guild, the
Purity of Christ's Humanity, with the Glory of his Deity, and Majesty of his
Kingdom.

II. It had Food (called Shewbread) set upon it, which none were to eat of but
the Priest; only signifying that Spiritual Nourishment which is in Christ, the
Bread of Life, which none receive or partake of, but Believers only, or the
Royal Priesthood of the Faithful.

III. The Bread was always to be upon the Table; signifying, in Christ there is
Food continually for our Souls.

IV. There was much Bread, twelve Cakes, or square Loaves, etc. signifying, in
Christ there is Food and Nourishment enough, for all who see a necessity of
him; or it does show how plentifully God feeds his Elect; his poor shall not
want Bread, his Table is always spread, always richly and abundantly furnished.

The Candlestick a Type of Christ, and of his Mystical Body.
IT was the only thing that held the Light, which enlightened the Sanctuary: So
from C rist all the Light of Grace and ^piritual Gifts come, for the use and
benefit of his Church.

II. It had seven Lamps, to signify that perfection of Light that is in Christ.

III. It was placed in the Sanctuary: So is Christ as a glorious Light placed
in his Church, or Spiritual Sanctuary; Out of Zion the Perfection of Beauty,
God has shined. Some by the Lamps, understand the Ministers of the G^spel were
signified.

IV. It had an upright Stem, which bore the many Branches that issued or
proceeded from the same: typifying Christ Jesus that true and blessed Stalk and
Fountain of Light, from whom all Light flows, and who bears up and keeps
constant in the Truth, all the Branches, and true Light-Bearers of his Word.
Rev. 1.20.


V. The Branches were adorned with Bowls, Knobs and Flowers, etc. So are the
Ministers of his Gospel, or true Spiritual Light-Bearers, with many rare and
most excellent Graces and Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

VI. Aaron dressed those Lamps, and renewed their Oil daily: So our High Priest
Jesus Christ, is the only Enlightner and Fitter of his faithful Ministers. That
they may shine more clearly, and be the greater Ornament to his Church, it is he
that supplies them continually with his Spirit, and the saving Graces thereof.

VII. The Candlestick had Snuffers, and Snuff Dishes of pure Gold; which might
figure forth the Good and Godly Discipline of the Church, whereby those evil
Persons who hinder the Peace and Glory of it, are taken away by Excommunication.

The Altar of Perfume, Exodus 30.1. to 13. a Type of Christ.
THe Altar was made of Shittim Greek, incorruptible Wood, or Wood that never
rots, overlaid with Gold, and having a Crown about it (as had the Ark): this
Altar signified Christ in both his Natures, his Deity yiedling Glory to his
Humanity, and now crowned with Glory and Majesty at God's right Hand, where he
abides for ever incorruptible, etc.

II. The Altar had Horns on the four Corners thereof; overlaid with Gold, which
were not only for Ornament, Ezekiel. 43.16. Heb. 3.4.
but to keep things from falling off the Altar, for the Horns were upward: And
Horns usually signify Power and Might; these four Horns, says the learned
Ainsworth, signified the Power and Glory of Christ's Priesthood, for the
Salvation of his Church, gathered from the four Corners of the Earth.

III. The Incense was only to be offered upon this Altar; to show that all our
Prayers and Services must be performed in Christ's Name, Re^. 8.3, 4, 5.
or offered up upon the Golden Altar of his Mediation.

IV. The Incense was to be first beaten, made fit, and well prepared, before it
was to be put on the Altar; Psalm. 41.2. Psalm. 51.
noting how our Prayers (which are compared to Incense) ought to proceed from a
humble, contrite and broken Spirit, which we offer up in the Name of Jesus
Christ.

V. The Incense was kindled by Fire upon the Altar: So must our Prayers be holy
and fervent; we must pray with much Zeal, or be set on Fire by the Spirit and
powerful Heat and Operation thereof, if we would have them accepted upon the
Golden Altar, etc.

Rev. 8.3, 4, 5.
VI. The Incense was offered up by the Priest: So are the Prayers of all the
Saints made acceptable to the Father, through the Oblation and Intercession of
our High Priest.

VII. No strange Incense was to be offered upon this Altar. This figured, the
Prayers of the Saints must be according to the Will of God, Mat. 21.22. 1 John
5.14. Romans 8.26.
by his Spirit, and in Faith, not in a vain or formal manner, after the
Tradition of Man; we must not intermix them with any Superstitious and
Idolatrous Devices, or Human Inventions, we must offer up no strange Prayer, no
Prayer to Saints nor Angels.

8. The Perfume was to be perpetually before the Lord; which signified not only
the continual exercise of Prayer, which daily we should use, Heb. 7.25.
but also the perpetual Intercession of our Savior, in the Heavens, for us.

9. The High Priest only made this Perfume, and it might not be applied to any
other use, than to burn before the Lord; teaching us that Christ only gives
Direction how we should pray, and that we should in Prayer only design the
Glory of God.

10. After the clearing of the Lamps of the Candlestick, Evening and Morning,
then the Incense was burnt, showing that all our Prayers and Duties must be
according to the Directions of God's Word and Spirit.

11. The Incense was made of diverse Spices; Psalm. 51.
So must the Prayers of the Godly be seasoned with diverse Graces, viz. true
Repentance, lively Faith, and unfeigned Love.

12. The Incense was offered up in the Holy Place, without the Veil of the
Holiest, near to the Testimony before the Mercy-Seat; So we must always have an
Eye to Christ in our Prayers, who is the true Mercy-Seat, we must come to God
by him, etc.

13. Once a Year the Altar was sprinkled with the Blood of the Expiatory
Sacrifice; signifying how Christ is, by shedding of his Blood, consecrated our
blessed Mediator; and that no Prayer is acceptable to God, but through Faith,
in the Blood of Christ.

The Altar of Burnt-Offering, Exodus 27.1. to 9. a Type of Christ.
Parallels.
ALtar in Hebrew, Mizbeach; in Greek, Thusiasterion; Ainsworth.
so named of Sacrifices offered thereon: it was anointed, dedicated, sanctfied,
to be most holy, that it might sanctify the Gifts offered thereon: This Altar
and Sacrifice, signified Jesus Christ, sanctifying himself for his Church and
People, that so he might sanctify them.

II. This Altar was but one, and in one place, and the Sacrifice only to be
offered upon it; signifying thereby that we have but one Altar of Redemption
and Salvation, viz. Jesus Christ alone; who only once, and in one place,
offered up a sufficient and unreiterable Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind.

III. This Altar had four Horns also: [See Altar of Incense.]

IV. It had a brazen Grate in the midst of it, which let the Ashes and like
things fall through, etc. whereon the Fire was put, which might signify two
things. 1. The Humanity of our Savior, who bore the Fire of God's Wrath for
our Sins; thus Guild. 2. Isa. 53.12.
It signifies, says Ainsworth, the place wherein the Holy Fire always
burns; that is, the Heart which sustaineth also the Sacrifice, 2 Timothy 1.3.
Romans 1.1, 2. Heb. 7.14.
and where all Ashes and Excrements of Corruption are inwardly conveyed away,
as they are discovered by the Word and Spirit of God; as also our
Sanctification by Affliction.

V. In that the Altar was to be made of Shittim Wood, and overlaid with Brass,
that it might endure the Fire; it might figure out the Human Nature of Christ,
supported or sustained by the Diety, to endure God's Wrath for our Sins.

VI. They that served at the Altar, lived of the Altar: So they who preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

Disparity.
THE Altar was one thing, and the Sacrifice another: But Christ is both the
Altar, Sacrifice, and Sacrificer too; he offered up his Body by the Eternal
Spirit, as a Sacrifice acceptable to God the Father.

The Brazen Laver, Exodus 30.18. to 25. what it was a Type of.
THE Brazen Laver served for the Priesthood to wash their Hands and Feet in,
before they ministered before the Lord; typifying that inward washing by
Christ's Blood, wherewith all the Holy Priesthood of Christ must be sanctified
in Heart and Life, before their Services can be accepted in the sight of God;
and that none ought to minister the Word of Life but Godly Persons, who are
washed in the Laver of Regeneration: Psalm. 50.
Unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to take my Words into thy
Mouth? etc.

II. After the Priests had washed themselves clean, and arrayed themselves,
they entered into the holy Place: So after the Godly are inwardly washed by the
Blood of Christ, and have received by Faith his Righteousness to adorn them,
they become fit Members of the true Gospel Church.

III. They shall wash themselves, says the Lord, lest they die; to show, that
all Persons must be purged by Faith in Christ's Blood, Mark 16.16.
or die eternally.

IV. He that touches (or washes) in the Laver, it being anointed with the
holy Oil, (as all other Things in the holy, and most holy Place were) shall be
holy, says the Lord; signifying, that all they who by Faith touch the Lord
Jesus, who is anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, shall be
spiritually sanctified, accepted, and accounted holy before the Lord likewise.

The Sacrifice of Beasts a Type of Christ.
THe Beasts that were appointed for Sacrifice were to have Horns, signifying
the Kingly and Priestly Office of Christ; Horns (as we have elsewhere shown)
being a Symbol of Power, etc.

II. They were to be of a tame sort, (not wild and savage Beasts, who by force
are brought to the Slaughter); signifying the Meekness and Mildness of Jesus
Christ, who was patient like a Lamb led to the Slaughter. Isa. 53.


III. They must be of the Male Sort, which generally are the strongest;
signifying the Excellency and Strength of Jesus Christ.

IV. They ought to be without blemish, and the best of the Flock or Herd, and
presented of voluntary Will; noting two Things, (1.) That Christ should be
perfectly holy, and that he should willingly lay down his Life. (2) That we
should dedicate to God the best of our Days, Time, and Strength, and not offer
unto the Lord a corrupt Thing; and also perform all our Services to him with a
free and willing Mind.

V. They were to be presented at the Door of the Tabernacle, to be slain;
signifying, that Christ s Blood makes our entry into the Church of God here,
and into Heaven it self hereafter.

VI. They must lay their hands upon the Head of the Beast, who brought him;
noting thereby, our Sins being laid upon Jesus Christ; and that we must lay the
hand of Faith upon him, if we would have Benefit by his Death.

VII. Then the Burnt-Offering was slain; signifying, that so it behoved Christ,
the great Antitype, to be slain or crucified for our Sins.

Mark 16.15. M^t. 28.18, 19.
VIII. The Blood thereof then was sprinkled about the Altar; noting the
All Sufficiency of Christ's Death, and Plenty of his Bloodshed, with the large
spreading or preaching thereof universally throughout the whole World.

IX. The Skin thereof was plucked off, and the Flesh cut in pieces; thereby
showing the Grievousness of Christ's Sufferings.

X. The Body, the Head, and the Fat, and all was laid on the Fire; signifying
how Christ should suffer for us both in Body and Soul: Isa. 53.12.
My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death.

XI. This Burnt-Offering was called a sweet Savor unto the Lord, which in
Christ's Death is solely and only accomplished; for it is thereby God's Wrath is
appeased, and his Justice satisfied.

XII. The Ashes were to be carried without the Host, and put into a clean
Place; shadowing thereby, how Christ should be buried without the Gates of
Jerusalem, in a Tomb wherein never Man lay, and that his Body should not see
Corruption.

XIII. The Fire which consumed the Burnt-Offering came down from Heaven;
signifying, that that Wrath which seized on Jesus Christ in the Garden, and on
the Cross, came from Heaven, or that it was God's Wrath, due to us for our
Sins, that consumed him. Or, as others (it may be on better reason) give it,
that that which moved Christ to suffer for Mankind, was wholly his heavenly,
sacred, and divine Love.

XIV. This Fire was to be continually upon the Altar, signifying the
Unchangeableness of Christ's Love to his Elect, and rec^nt Virtue of his Death
and Merits.

The Burnt-Offering of Fowls, Levit. 1.14. a Type of Christ.
THe Fowls that were appointed for Burnt-Offerings, were to be Turtles or
Pigeons; signifying the Meekness and Innocence of Christ.

II. The Neck of the Fowl was to be pinched with the Nail, that the Blood might
go out, but not that the Head should be plucked off from the Body; signifying
how Christ should die, and shed his Blood, yet thereby his Deity, as the Head
or principal Part, should not be divided from his Humanity; nor yet by his
Death should he, who is our Head, Joh. 14.
be taken from his Church, but should rise again, and be with them by his
Spirit forever.

III. The Blood thereof was strained or pressed out at the side of the Altar,
before it was plucked, and laid upon the Altar to be burned; signifying thereby
the straining or pressing out of Christ's Blood in his grievous Agony in the
Garden, before he was taken, Luke 24.44.
and stripped to be crucified, etc.

The Daily Sacrifice a Type of Christ.
THe Daily Sacrifice was a Lamb: So our Savior, not daily, but once for all
was offered unto the Father himself, as a Lamb without spot.

II. It was slain in the Morning, and in the Evening; to show, that Christ was
a Lamb slain from the Morning of the Creation, or in the Decree of God, from
the Foundation of the World, tho not actually till the Evening of the World, or
latter Days.

III. It was to be offered up with fine Flower, beaten Oil, and Wine; to show,
that Christ by his Death and Oblation becomes not only a Redemption for us, but
also spiritual Food, Gladness; and cheering Comfort.

IV. Where this Sacrifice was offered, Exodus 24.42.
the Lord promised and appointed to speak unto Israel, and show himself;
signifying, that in Christ, and through his Death and Bloodshed, the new
Appointment, or Covenant of his Grace, and Manifestation of his Love and
Favor, is established to his Church, and faithful People.

The Sin-Offering a Type of Christ.
THe Blood of the Sin-Offering was to be poured out; showing how the Blood of
Jesus Christ, our true Sin-Offering, should be poured forth.

II. The Priest (says the Lord) shall dip his Finger in the Blood of the
Beast, and sprinkle thereof seven times before the Lord; shadowing the
Perfection of that Expiation and Satisfaction for Sin, which Christ should
make, in the virtue, quality, and perpetuity thereof; the Number of Seven being
the Number of Perfection. Heb 9.29.


III. The Priest shall bring in the Blood of the Bullock into the Tabernacle of
the Congregation; showing thereby, how Christ should enter into Heaven, by his
own Blood, Heb. 9.1^.
having obtained eternal Redemption for us.

IV. The Priest was to take some of the Blood, Mark 16.15. Mat. 28.
and put it upon the four Horns of the Altar; signifying thereby, that the
preaching Remission of Sins by the Atonement of Christ's Blood, should be
proclaimed to the four Corners of the Earth.

V. The Bodies of those Beasts, whose Blood was brought into the Sanctuary by
the High Priest, was burnt without the Host or Camp; signifying, that Christ
should suffer without the Gate; teaching us also to go forth into a public
Profession, Heb. 13.11, 12.
and bear his Reproach.

VI. The Priest was to eat the Sin-Offering in the holy Place, whose Blood was
not brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation; signifying, that Jesus
Christ does not only reconcile us to God, but also feed and nourish the Souls
of all his Royal Priesthood, unto eternal Life.

VII. The Priest shall make Atonement; still this is repeated, always
signifying, that it is Christ, our High Priest, and his Sacrifice only, that
makes a real Atonement and Reconciliation for our Sins.

The Meat Offering, Lev. 2. what it was a Type of.
THe Meat Offerings, as Ainsworth observes, were nine, and all of them came to
the Altar: (1.) The poor Man's Meat-Off^ring, Lev. 5.11. (2.) The
Jealousy-Offering, Numb. 5.15. (3.) The Meat Offering of Initiation, which
every Priest offered when he first entered into his Service. Levit. 8.26, 28.
(4.) The Meat Offering which the High Priest offered every day. Lev. 6.20. (5.)
The Meat Offering of fine Flower. (6.) The Meat Offering baked on a Plate. (7.)
In a Drying Pan. (8.) In an Oven. (9.) Wafers.

1. The Minchah, or Meat Offering (says he) was primarily a Figure of Christ's
Oblation, Ephesians. 5.2.
who gave himself for us, an Oblation and Sacrifice to God, for a
sweet smelling Sav^ur. Sacrifice and Oblation (Minchah) thou would not; but
a Body have thou prepared me, etc. Above, Heb. 10.5, 8, 9, 10.
when he said, Sacrifice and Oblation, and Burnt-Offerings for Sin, thou
would not, etc. Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God, etc. by
which Will we are sanctified through the Offering of Christ once for all. So
that in the Oblation of Christ's Body, this Legal Service was accomplished and
ended.

2. It figured (says he) the Persons of Christians, who through him are
cleansed and sanctified, to be pure Oblations unto God.

3. It figured (says he the Fruits of Grace and good Works, that Christians
are to perform both toward God and Men. (1.) Toward God: Let the lifting up
of my Hands, says David, Psalm. 141.2.
be as the Evening Minchah (or Oblation) So when God told the Jews, I will not
accept a Minchah, (or Meat Offering) at your Hands; he adds, For from the
rising of the Sun, Mal. 1.10, 11.
even to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles,
and in every Place Incense shall be off^red unto my Name, and a pure
Meat Offering: Which is fulfilled, when Men pray every where, lifting up holy
Hands, etc. (2.) Toward Men; see Heb. 13.16. Phil. 4.18.

4. All the Meat Offerings were of Wheaten Flower, except the
Jealousy-Offering, and the waved Sheaf, yea, and ought to be of fine Flower;
signifying the Purity and Perfection of Christ, as also that we should offer
our best Things to the Lord.

Ephesians. 5 2. Romans 12.1.
5. Oil and Incense was put thereon: The Oil (says he) signified the Graces and
Comforts of the Holy Ghost; and the Incense or Frankincense showed how
acceptable Saints and their Services are unto the Lord.

6. It must be brought to the Priest, and he shall bring it to the Altar;
shadowing, that it is by Christ, and his Oblation, that we and our Works and
Duties are accepted of God.

7. That which was burnt thereof was a Memorial, and sweet Savor before the
Lord; signifying, that the Death of Christ, and his Merits, should be an
eternal Memorial before his Father, to be merciful unto us.

8. It must be without Leaven, to show, that Christ was without Sin, and that
we must worship God in Sincerity, 2 Cor. 5.9.
without Malic^ in our Hearts, and without Hypocrisy.

9. All Meat Offerings were to be seasoned with Salt, signifying thereby, that
as Salt seasoneth, and ke^peth from Corruption; so Christ seasoneth us, and all
our Services, and makes them acceptable to God; and that his Grace preserves
us from spiritual Corruption.

10. The Priest and his Sons shall eat (says the Lord) of the Meat Offering in
the holy Place, without Leaven. Thus, says Ainsworth, the Meat Offering
signified the Maintenance and Livelihood of God's Ministers. This is to be
understood of the Meat Offering alone; but the Meat and Drink Offerings added
to other Sacrifices, were not to be eaten, but burnt, and poured all upon the
Altar, etc. before the Lord; which figured forth (says he) the Graces and good
Works whereby we honor Christ, and relieve his poor Saints; as also our
Communion with Christ and his People in his House, and blessed Participation of
his Death.

11. It must have no Honey in it; tho Honey be sweet, and contrary to the
Nature of sour Leaven, yet being much eaten, it breeds Loathsomness, and is
not good, but turns to Choler, etc. Both these were forbidden in this
Sacrifice, viz. both Leaven and Honey; to signify the Perfection of Christ, and
the excellent State of Believers in him, as they are sincere, and without
guile, before the Throne of God and the Lamb. Besides, it may signify, that
there is enough in Christ alone, without the Sweets of carnal Delights, to
satisfy a gracious Heart.

The Peace Offering, and what it was a Type of, Levit. 3.
IN many things this Offering was alike with the Rites of the Burnt, or
Sin-Offering, and much of the same Signification; and therefore we shall only
speak to it wherein it differed from them.

His Oblation, or his Korban, which the Greeks translate Gift; and so Korban is
by the Evangelist expounded, Mark 7.11. Peace Offering, or Pay-Offering: So
Ainsworth, (Hebr.) a Sacrifice of Payments, or of Pacification, etc. whereby
Men paid unto God Confession and Thanks for their Peace and Prosperity: Thy
Vows are upon me, O God, Psalm. 56.13.
I will pay Confessions unto thee. These Sacrifices were of sundry sorts,
either for Confession or Thanksgivings, Levit. 7.11, 12.

1. The Peace Offering was to be eaten the same day, which might signify how it
behooves us to hasten, and not delay to come to Christ, and keep God's
Commandments; or, Psalm. 119.60. Heb. 3.12, 13.
as Ainsworth has it, with speed, whilst it is called to day, to be Partakers
of Christ, eating his Flesh by Faith* and every day to be thankful to God for
all his Mercies: If any of the Peace Offering be eaten at all on the third Day,
it shall not (says the Lord) be accepted, neither shall it be imputed to him
that offers it; it shall be an Abomination, and the Soul that eats it,
shall bear his Iniquity. Which may show us what a dangerous thing it is to
defer or put off a hearty closing in with Christ to an after-Time, etc. On the
third Day, what remained was to be burnt, which Ainsworth says, chiefly
signified Ch^ist's rising from the Dead on the third Day, to abolish all Legal
Offerings.

2. The Peace Offerings were to be eaten with Cakes of leavened Bread, and yet
with Bread unleavened: The Bread brought with the Sacrifice of Confession, as
you have it in Maim. Treatise of Offering, was thus prepared: He took twenty
Tenths (or Bottles) of fine Flower, and made of them ten Bottles leavened, and
ten unleavened; the ten that were leavened, he made of them ten Cakes; and the
ten that were unleavened, he made of them thirty Cakes, equally of every sort,
viz, ten Cakes baked in the Oven, ten Cakes hastily fried, etc. And the Priest
took one of all four Cakes, one of every sort, etc. Leaven, as it figured
Corruption of Nature, Hypocrisy, or Malice, as it is noted by Ainsworth, was
usually forbidden in all Sacrifices; but yet Leaven in the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving or Confession was accepted, which might hold forth God's gracious
acceptance of us in Christ, being sincere, (signified by the unleavened Cakes)
notwithstanding our manyfold C^rruptions and Infirmities, figured by the
leavened Cakes. Or, as that learned Author notes, to signify how careful we
should be to prepare our selves, Leaven being used sometimes in a good sense,
denoting Grace; See Ainsworth on Levit 7.13.
and also to teach us to temper our Joys with Sorrow and Affliction^ in this
Life; as the Prophet's Heart (says he) was leavened. Psalm. 73.21.

2. If any unclean Person (says the Lord) eat of the Flesh of the
Peace Offering he shall be cut off from his People; Levit. 7.20.
signifying the fearful Destruction and Punishment that attends all carnal
Professors, who dare adventure to rely upon, or partake of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.
and yet lead an unclean and wicked Life.

4. The Offerer shall bring the Sacrifice with his own hand: teaching us, that
every one is to have a particular Faith in God for himself, in order to his
being accepted in Jesus Christ, and to be himself truly thankful unto God.

5. The Heave Offering was so called, because it was separated from the rest,
and heaved up toward Heaven, and after given to the Lord; signifying all our
Acknowledgments, Ainsworth.
that all good things come down from God; and to show that all our Ways should
tend Heavenwards, according to that of the Prophet, They shall dwell on high;
and of Paul, Isa. 33. Phil. 3. Guild.
Our Conversation is in Heaven, etc. Others understand, it signified Christ's
being lifted up upon the Cross.

The Solemn Yearly Sacrifice of the Bullock and He-Goat, a Type of Christ,
Levit. 16.
OF the two He-Goats it was by Lot, that the one was taken, and the other
escaped, etc. The Manner (says Ainsworth) was thus: They had two Lots, the one
had written upon it, [For Jehovah]; and on the other, [For a Scape-Goat]. Now
God by these Lots showed which of the two he would have die: figuring clearly
unto them, how that Jesus Christ, the lively Antitype of them was to die by
God's Decree, or according to the determinate Counsel of his own Will, Acts 4.
that we might escape eternal Damnation thereby.

II. He on whom the Lot fell, was made a Sin-Offering for the People; to
signify, that Christ should by God's Decree become an Offering or Sacrifice for
our Sins.

III. The Blood of the He-Goat, as also the Blood of the Bullock, was brought
into the Vail, and was sprinkled upon the Mercy-Seat, on the East Side, which
was toward the People: So are the Merits of the Blood of Jesus brought within
the Holiest of all, viz. Heaven it self, Heb. 9.23.
before the Throne of Mercy, pleading for us.

Levit. 16.16.
IV. The Priest was to make an Atonement for the Holy-Place, because of the
Uncleanness of the Children of Israel, And so he shall do (says the Text) for
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, etc. This showed the horrible Nature of
Sin: For tho the People never came into the Holy-P^ace, much less into the Most
Holy Place; yet such was the Power of their Iniquities, that the holy Altar,
Ark, and Sanctuary it self was defiled in the Sight of God, and could not be
cleansed without Blood: So our Sins do defile God's Church, and his most holy
Ordinances therein performed, so that neither we, nor any of our best Services,
can meet with acceptance, but by the means of Christ's Blood and Merits.

V. No Man was to be in the Tabernacle, when the High Priest went in to make
Atonement, only the High Priest himself, etc. plainly signifying, that Jesus
Christ, our High Priest, has no Partner with him in working our Salvation: He
his own self bare our Sins in his Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24.
etc.

VI. The Altar of Incense was sprinkled with the Blood of the killed Goat,
shadowing, that Christ, through the shedding of his own Blood, should be
consecrated our Intercessor, and by the Means and Merits thereof our Prayers
should be accepted.

Heb. 8.6.
VII. The High Priest was to cast off his glorious Garments, when he made this
Atonement; Verse 4. Phil. 2.
signifying, that Christ should be abased, and lay aside (as it were) his
glorious Robes, or va^l his Deity, and appear in the Form of a Servant, that so
he might finish the Work of our Redemption.

VIII. The Day of Atonement shall (says the Text) be a Sabbath for ever;
shadowing thereby, that through the Atonement and Expiation of Christ, he has
obtained everlasting Rest for us; and that in his Death all typical Sacrifices
should end.

IX. Once only in a Year this Atonement was made; to show, that not often, but
once for ever, without repetition, Christ should make a perfect Atonement for
us by his own Blood, Heb. 9.24.
and thereby enter into the highest Heavens, to appear in the presence of God
for us.

The Scapegoat a Type of Christ, Levit. 10.20, etc.
THe Scapegoat, called in Hebrew, Azazel, that is, the Goat gone away, etc.
was so called, because he escaped alive; representing Christ Jesus alive in his
Divine Nature, tho put to death in his Humane Nature, or alive, after he rose
again from the Dead.

II. He was presented alive, that by him Reconciliation might be made, and this
after the other Goat was sacrificed; signifying, acccording to the Learned, two
Things: (1.) The Resurrection of Christ. (2.) Our rising with him, from the
Death of Sin, to a Life of Grace, by the operation of the Spirit, etc.

III. Aaron shall put or lay both his Hands upon the Head of the live-Goat, and
confess over him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel, Levit. 16.21.
etc. and he shall bear them, etc. Figuring thereby, how Christ should bear all
our Sins, viz. the Punishment due to them: The Lord has laid on him the
Iniquities of us all. Isa. 53.


IV. And so the He-Goat was sent into the Wilderness, or Land not inhabited,
which the Greek calls Abaton, wayless, or inaccessible; figuring the utter
abolishing of our Sins by Jesus Christ, both from the Face of God, that so they
may not appear before him against us, to condemn us, or be imputed or charged
upon us, nor have any Dominion or Power over us.

They were to confess upon the Head of the Goat all their Iniquities;
signifying, if we would have our Sins c^rried away, and for ever to be forgot,
we must confess them, etc. By this (says Ainsworth) it appears, that as the
killed Goat figured Christ killed (or put to death) for our Sins; so this
living Goat figured him also, who bore our Griefs, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6.
and carried our Sorrows, etc. And because Christ was not only to die for our
Offenses, but also to rise again for our Justification; and because these two
Things could not fitly be shadowed by one Beast, which the Priest having
killed, could not make alive again: therefore God appointed two, that in the
slain Beast Christ's Death, and in the live Beast his Life and Victory might be
shadowed. See the like Mystery in the two Birds, for the cleansing the Leper.

The Sacrifice of the Red Heifer, Numb. 19. a Type of Christ.
THe Color of this Beast was red. As other Sacrifices of Beasts prefigured
Christ; so this (says Ainsworth) in special figured him. Red signified his
human Nature, and Participation of our Afflictions, and the Bloodiness of his
Agony, and grievous Passion.

II. She must be without blemish, and upon whom never Yoke came: This signified
the perfect Holiness of Christ, who never bore the Yoke of Sinfulness, nor was
subject to the Laws or Precep^s of Man.

III. The Heifer was burned without the Host, and her Blood sprinkled seven
times before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which signified Christ's
Suffering without the Gates of Jerusalem. Heb. 13.11, 12.


Circumcision, what it was a Type of.
CIrcumcision was the cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh; signifying the
cutting off the Lusts of the Heart and Life, or parting with the Corruption of
Nature, Col. 2.11.
which rebels against the Spirit.

II. Circumcision puts the Body to pain: Genesis 43.25.
So those who come under the Circumcision of the Heart, are sensible of much
spiritual Pain upon the account of Sin.

III. As that Part cut off was never set to the Body again, but was taken quite
away: So in this spiritual Circumcision, Sin must not be parted with for a time
only, but must be cast off for ever.

IV. The Circumcised Person was admitted into the Church and Family of God: So
he that is spiritually circumcised becomes a fit Person for Baptism, and so to
be admitted into the Church of God.

V. Such who were not circumcised, were not to be admitted to the Privileges of
the Church, and outward Worship of God: So the Uncircumcised in Heart and Life
ought not to be admitted unto the spiritual Privileges of the Gospel, and
Communion of the Saints.

VI. The uncircumcised Person was looked upon by God's People as an hateful
Person; see with what contempt David beheld Goliath upon this account, 1 Samuel 17.
This uncircumcised Philistine, etc. So those who are not circumcised in Heart,
are hateful to God.

VII. Circumcision was a Sign of the Righteousness of Faith: So the spiritual
Circumcision of the Heart, i. e. putting away the Body of Sin, etc. is a Sign
of the Truth of Grace, and of an Interest in the Righteousness of Christ Jesus.

The Rock which was smitten, out of which came Water, Exodus 17. was a Type of
Christ.
1 Cor. 10.4. And that Rock was Christ, (viz. a Figure of him.)
IT was a Rock which in appearance is dry and barren, and a very unlikely thing
to afford Water: So Christ in his outward State, in the Days of his Flesh,
seemed very unlikely to carnal Eyes, to afford such spiritual Waters of Grace
and Salvation.

II. It seemed wonderful, that it should send forth Water in such abundance: So
Jesus Christ, to the Wonder of Men and Angels, sends forth the Water of Life in
abundance to all those that believe on him.

III. That Rock sent forth its Water to the People of Israel, when they were
ready to perish for Thirst, there being no way to relieve them: So Christ
refreshes the Souls of poor Sinners that come unto him, when they can find no
Help, Comfort, or Refreshment any where else, John 8.24.
but without him must perish eternally. If ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your Sins.

IV. The Rock was smitten, before it yielded Water: So Jesus Christ was smitten
of God, and crucified, that his precious Blood might be poured forth, to
consummate the Redemption of our Souls.

V. The Rock was smitten for a rebellious People, who murmured against God, and
who deserved no such Grace and Favor from him: So Christ was slain for us, who
were Rebels and Enemies to him by evil Works, who deserved nothing but his
eternal Wrath and Displeasure.

Dr. The. Tailor.
VI. The Water out of that Rock followed the Children of Israel, through the
Wilderness, over all Hills and Valleys, unto Canaan; all the Dryness of that
dry and barren Desert could not dry it up: So the Waters of Life streaming from
Christ, that sacred Rock, follow the true Israel of God, quite through the
Wilderness of this World, until they come to the heavenly Canaan; yea, all the
Persecutions and Temptations in the World, whatsoever, cannot dry it up.

The Pillar of Cloud and Fire, Exodus 14. a Type of Christ.
Numb. 9.15, 16, 17.
THe Pillar of Fire was a certain Guide to the Israelites, whilst they pass from
Egypt to Canaan: So Jesus Christ is our true Guide by his Word and Spirit, till
we come to the heavenly Canaan, or Land of Immortality.

II. It was a Guide to them by Night, that they might not lose their Way: So
Christ is our Guide, in the dark Night of Trouble, Temptation, and Desertion.

III. The Pillar of Fire was not only a Guide to them, but it also afforded
them much Light, which made their Journey comfortable to them; Persons may have
a sure Guide in a Night, and yet be in Darkness, or have but little or no
Light: So Jesus Christ is not only a Guide to his People in their passing
through the Night of Mortality, but also a Light; a Light to them that sit in
Darkness, as well as a Guide for their Feet into the Way of Peace; Exodus 14.20.
he is upon this account the Comfort and Joy of God's Israel.

IV. The Pillar of Fire was Darkness to the Egyptians, tho it gave Light to
Israel: So is Christ's Salvation, Joy, and Comfort to the Godly, but a
Stumbling Block, and Stone of Offense unto the Wicked.

J. K.
V. The Pillar of Fire did not afford the Israelites Light only, but Heat also,
(as a worthy Writer observes) by which means they were kept from the piercing
Cold of the Night: So Jesus Christ, the Antitype of this Fiery Pillar, affords
us much spiritual Heat, by his Word and Spirit, which are compared to Fire; by
which means we are kept from the cold and lukewarm Temper or Frame of Heart,
which God's Soul hates, and thereby preserved fervent in Spirit, burning in
Love and Divine Zeal to God, his Saints, and to Holiness.

Exodus 14.20.
VI. This Pillar, in going behind, between the Camp of Israel and the Egyptians,
was a blessed Defense and Protection unto them: So Jesus Christ is the Defense
and Safeguard of his People.

VII. The Pillar of Fire, if the Enemy had strove with it, or made resistance
against it, would have burned and consumed them together: So all that rebel
against Christ, or resist him, shall be devoured: Who would set Briars and
Thorns against me in Battle? Isa. 27.4.
I would go through them, I would burn them together.

The Pillar of Cloud.
THe Pillar of Cloud was a great Refreshment to the Children of Israel by Day,
during their long Journey in the Wilderness, (the Sun in those Countries
shining sometimes very hot) which might (had it not been for this Cloudy
Pillar) have been very destructive or grievous to them, during so many Years
Travels: So Jesus Christ, as Mediator, is as a Cloud or Screen between the hot
Beams of God's Wrath, and poor Believers. It Is he who keeps us from being
consumed by the Wrath of him, Heb. 12. ult.
who is to the Wicked a Consuming Fire.

II. It was a Fire and a Cloud, yet both but one Pillar: So Christ is God and
Man, and yet but one Person; and the same Christ, who is a Savior to the truly
Penitent, will destroy all ungodly and impenitent Ones.

The Passover a Type of Christ.
1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.
THe Passover, or Paschal Lamb, was a most lively Figure or Type of Christ;
nay, as a worthy Divine observes, this one Legal Sacrament preached (not
obscurely) to the ancient Jews the whole Doctrine of the Gospel. This will
appear in five Things: (1.) In the Choice of the Sacrifice. (2.) In the
preparing of it. (3.) In the Effusion of the Blood, and Actions about it. (4.)
In the Eating, and the Conditions therein. (5.) In the Fruits and Use. Ephesians.
3.21.


Parallels.
I. In the Choice of the Sacrifice, the Lord appointed it to be a Lamb; notably
signifying Jesus Christ, whom the Baptist called, the Lamb of God, taking away
the Sins of the World.

II. It was to be a Lamb without blemish; signifying the most absolute
Perfection of Jesus Christ.

III. The Paschal Lamb was to be taken out of the Fold; signifying, that Christ
should be taken from amongst Men, or, from among his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 17.15. one
of the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh.

IV. The Lamb was to be a Year old, and also it must be slain; signifying, that
Christ in his full vigor and strength should be put to death.

V. The Lamb was to be roasted with Fire; which might signify the Manner of
Christ's Death: He was crucified and pierced; he endured the Fire of
Afflictions, and the Fire of God's Wrath, that was due to us for our Sins.

VI. The Lamb was roasted whole; to signify, says Dr. Tailor, that Christ bore
the whole Wrath of God, both in Soul and Body. Not a Bone of the Lamb was to be
broken; to show, that not one Bone of Christ should be broken. John 19.36.

VII. The Blood of the Lamb was to be saved in a Basin; it must not be shed
upon the Ground, nor trodden under foot; signifying the Preciousness of
Christ's Blood, and that great Esteem God the Father, and all true Christians
have of it.

VIII. The Blood of the Lamb must be sprinkled upon the Lintel, and Sides of
the Doors of the Israelites; which held forth, that the Blood of Christ must be
applied by Faith; for our Justification stands not only in the shedding of
Christ's Blood, but also in the sprinkling of it upon our Consciences.

IX. It must be sprinkled upon the Posts and Doors, so as the Israelits could
neither go out of Doors, nor come in, but they must see on all sides the Blood
of the Lamb; signifying, that they and we should, both at home and abroad,
going forth, and coming in, and on all occasions, have the Passion of Jesus
Christ before our Eyes, in holy Meditation and Contemplation.

X. It was not enough for the Jews to have the Lamb slain, and the Blood shed
within the House, but the Blood must be sprinkled without Doors; signifying (as
some observe) If Christ's Blood, ( i. e. the Merits of it,) be received into
our Hearts for Justification, the sprinkling of it will appear, and be seen
outwardly in a holy Life, and real Sanctification.

Verse 22.
XI. The Blood of the Lamb was to be sprinkled with a Bunch of Hyssop dipped in
it, which might signify, that such who would be sprinkled with Christ's Blood
must obtain true Faith; for Hyssop bears a Resemblance to Faith in threee
things: (1.) It is a ground, low, and weak Herb: Faith in it self, and as it is
in Believers, is weak, and teaches Humility. (2.) It will grow on a Rock or
Wall: So Faith roots it self in Christ, that true spiritual Rock. (3.) Hyssop
has a cleansing and healing quality: So Faith purifies the Heart and Life of a
Sinner, and heals all the Sores of a wounded Conscience.

XII. They were to eat the Flesh of the Lamb; to signify, that we must
spiritually feed upon Jesus Christ, viz. believe on him, which is called an
eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood.

XIII. Every particular Lamb was to be eaten in one House; signifying the Unity
of the Church of God, or the spiritual Conjunction and Agreement of all the
Faithful, in one Bread, and one Body. 1 Cor. 10.17.


XIV. Only Israelites, and not Strangers, were to eat of it; to show, that none
but the true Seed, viz. Believers, have Right to Christ, and the blessed Rites
of his House.

XV. They were to eat it with bitter Herbs; to signify, that Repentance and
godly Sorrow for Sin, ought to be in those who come to receive and partake of
Jesus Christ, and that they should remember with Grief of Soul what their Sins
brought upon their Savior, and what the filthy and bitter Nature of Sin is.

XVI. They were to eat it with unleavened Bread; to signify that those who come
to the true Passover, should keep that Feast with the unleavened Bread of
Sincerity and Truth, hating false Doctrine, Hypocrisy, and every evil Work.

XVII. They must eat it in remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt: So
those who come to the true Passover, ought to remember how God has by
Christ's Blood delivered them from Wrath and Hell.

XVIII. They were to eat it with their Loins girt, and their Staves in their
hands, and their Shoes on their Feet; to show, that we who feed upon our
Passover, should have the Girdle of Truth, and our Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and that we are but Strangers and Pilgrims
here.

XIX. They were not to eat the Paschal Lamb, until they had purged all Leaven
out of their Houses; which shows what Care every Christian should take, to
purge out the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness out of their Hearts. The Jews
were to search for Leaven, and not suffer a Crum or small Morsel to remain in
their Houses: So careful should all those be to purge out every Sin, and let no
Iniquity remain in them, who come to the Lord's Table.

WHEREIN the Brazen Serpent was a Type of Christ, as also the Manna, and diverse
others Types, we have showed in the First Volume: And the Parallels of the
First and Second Temple, we have insisted upon under the Head of Metaphors
concerning the Church of God, to which we refer you.

And finding to what a Bigness this Second Volume is swollen, I must be forced
to break off, and leave these my poor Labors to the Blessing of God, praying
they may prove to the Advantage of his despised and afflicted Church; desiring,
what Profit any Christians may receive here-from, they would not forget to give
the Honor to God, who only deserves it: to whom be Glory in the Church, by
Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End. Amen.

FINIS.
Philologia Sacra. The Second Part: WHEREIN The SCHEMES or FIGURES in Scripture
are reduced under their proper HEADS, with a Brief Explication of Each:
Together with A TREATISE OF The TYPES, PARABLES, ALLEGORIES, etc. in the Old
and New Testament.
CHAP I. Of the Figures of a Word.
THE Word (...) Schema, principally and properly signifies the Garb, Habit, or
Ornament of the Body; and by a Metaphor is translated to signify the Beauty, or
Ornament of Speech, as Lib. 3. Rhet. cap. 8.
Aristotle and In Bruto and Orat. perf.
Cicero, say. The Latins render it Figure, (as some say) because
Stage Players, by the variation or shifting of their Habit, represented diverse
Figures of Men: These Figures are called Rhetorical Lights and Ornaments, and
do not change the sense of Words, as Tropes do, but give an Imbellishment or
Beauty to Speech.

There are Figures (...) of a Word, and Figures (...), of a Sentence; the
first, belong to the Matter, or as it were the Body of an Oration; the latter,
to the Form, or as it were, the Soul of a Sentence.

The former are, when a Speech is figured in Words repeated in a certain order,
or, that mutually agree in sound, for Emphasis, or Ornament's sake. The latter
are such, whose Emphaticalness consists not in Words singly, but in the things
themselves giving weight and gravity to the Speech. Lib. 5. Instit. Orat. c. 1.
Vossius says, That a Scheme properly signifies two things, viz. The exterior
Garb, and the Gesture of the Body; as Dancers, who caper at the noise of
musical Instruments: For Schemes of Words may in this, be resembled to Habit,
or Garb, because without them the Speech is naked, as a Man without his
Clothes; and Schemes of Sentences, may be compared to Artificial Gestures,
because, without these, it will be like a Man who moves or walks in his natural
Place or Posture; of the first, we will produce some Examples.

(...) Conjungo to join together.
1. Epizeuxis (...), in Latin Subjunctio, is when the same word or sound is
continued or repeated in the same Sentence, as Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord,
a God merciful and gracious, etc. Deuteronomy. 23.43. The Stranger that is in thy
middle (or within thee) shall ascend above thee, up, up, and thou shall descend
down, down, (so the Hebrew) which denotes, that the Servants or Vassals of the
sinning Israelites, above whom they bore such a sway, should become their
Masters, and bring them into Thraldom. 2 Kings 4.19. And he (the Son of the
Shunamite) said to his Father (when he began to be sick in the Field) my Head,
my Head, that is, my Head most grievously aches. Psalm. 22.1. (...) My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Which Repetition fervently denotes the overmuch
cruelty of the Enemy, and the mournful Condition of Israel in Captivity: Esa.
6.3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts: This triple Repetition denotes
the Mystery of the Trinity or three Persons in one Divine Essence; see Jer.
22.29. Ezekiel. 21.27. Mat. 23.37. Luke 22.31. and 23.21. John 5.24. Act. 9.4.
Rev. 18.2. Lev. 24.8. 2 Samuel 18.33. Esa. 28.10. Hos. 2.21. Ezekiel. 34.17. where
you have Examples of this Figure.

Ab (...) re, and (...), duplico to double.
2. Anadiplosis (...) (called in Latin Reduplicatio, in English redoubling) is,
when the last word of the former Sentence is repeated in the beginning of the
next: as Psalm. 121.1, 2. Psalm. 122, 2, 3. Psalm. 98.5. Romans 8.17. Psalm. 115.12.
Romans 9.30. and 10.17. Phil. 2.8. Jam. 1.3. Psalm. 113.8. This Figure helps to
evidence and expound things, as in the alleged Examples.

Viz. Anadiplosis.
3. Climax (...), Gradatio, or a climbing by steps; this is a continuation of
the former Figure * in more degrees, so as that the last of the antecedent
Sentence, must be a part of the following; as Hos. 2.21. And it shall come to
pass in that day, I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and
they (that is the Heavens) shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the
Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they (that is, the Corn and the Wine, and
the Oil) shall hear Jezreel. This Gradation may be fitly called an Epitome of
Physical Theology, which by a fair Prosopopaeia enumerates all the Causes of
the Conservation of Universal Nature, and particularly of Man: See it at large
expounded in our Philologia Sacra, Book 1. p. 95.

John 1.1. John 1.1.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word
-- this (Word) was in the beginning with God. The true Divinity of Christ, and
his distinct Subsistence from the Father, are most fairly expressed by this
Gradation. In the third Proposition there is an inversion of the Terms, viz.
(God was the Word) for (the word was God.) A like Climax, respecting his Office
and Benefits, is subjoyned, ver. 4, 5, etc. See more Examples, Joel 1.3, 4.
Romans 5.3, 4, 5. and 8.29, 30. and 10.14, 15. 1 Cor. 11.3. Jam. 14, 15. 2 Pet.
1.5, 6, 7. Matthew. 10.40. Romans 1.30. 1 Cor. 3.23.

4. (...) Anaphora, from (...) refero, to bring back, or rehearse, is when the
same word, or more, is repeated in the beginning of diverse Clauses or
Sentences: as Deuteronomy. 28.3. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and Blessed shall
thou be in the Field, ver. 4. Blessed shall be the Fruit of thy Belly, and the
Fruit of thy Ground, and the Fruit of thy Cattle, etc. ver. 5. Blessed shall be
thy Basket, etc. ver. 6. Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed
shall thou be when thou go out. The like Anaphora, respecting the Curses of
God upon the wicked and rebellious, we read, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. This Figure
is very frequent in Scripture, take these few places instead of many; Psalm.
3.1, 2. Psalm. 29.3, 4, 5, etc. Psalm. 67.5, 6, 7. Psalm. 115.12, 13. Psalm. 118.8,
9, 15, 16. Psalm. 148.1, 2, 3, etc. Psalm. 150.1, 2, 3, etc. Isa. 2.7, 8. Jer.
4.23, 24, 25, 26. -- 5.17. -- 50.35, 36, 37. -- 51.20, 21, 22, 23. Micah. 5.9,
10, 11, 12. and 7.11, 12. Zeph. 1.2, 3. 1 Cor. 13.4, 7, 11. and 12.8, 9, 10. 2
Cor. 11.26. And in the Repetition of Pronouns, and Particles, Psalm. 94.5. Romans
8.35, 38, 39. 2 Cor. 7.11. Phil. 4.8, etc.

From (...) prope, near to, and (...) verto, to change.
5. (...) Epistrophe, Conversion, is a Figure when the same Word or Phrase, is
repeated in the end of diverse Sentences. Examples of the repetitions of single
Words (among which, we reckon the Hebrew Affixes) are to be read, Deuteronomy. 32.10.
Ezekiel. 26.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Romans 8.31. (...); If God be for us, who can be
against us? 2 Cor. 11.22. Are they Hebrews? so am I; are they Israelites? so am
I: Are they the Seed of Abraham? so am I, etc. Examples of Phrases, or little
Sentences are, Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. where their Help, and their Shield,
frequently concludes the Sentence. Psalm. 136.1, 2, etc. See Deuteronomy. 27.15, etc.
Psalm. 24.9, 10. Joel 2.26, 27. Ezekiel. 33.25, 26, 27. -- 36.23, 24, 25, etc. Amos
4.6, 8, etc. Hag. 2.8, 9. Lam. 3.41, etc. Mat. 7.22.

6. (...) Symploce, Complication, the word is derived of (...), to wrap or
couple together; and is a Figure, when the same Word or Phrase both begins and
ends a Sentence, which joins the two last Figures (viz. Anaphora and
Epistrophe) together; Psalm. 118.2, 3, 4. Let Israel now say, that his Mercy
endures for ever; let the House of Aaron now say, that his Mercy endures for
ever, etc. So Psalm. 136.1, 2, 3. Jer. 9.23. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. and 14.15. 2
Cor. 9.6, etc. Psalm. 47.6. Romans 14.8.

7. (...), From (...) after, (...) again, (...) to take, and (...), a taking.
Epanalepsis, Resumptio, a taking back, is when the same Word is repeated both
in the beginning and end of a Sentence, as Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say, Rejoice: See Psalm. 53.2. 2 King. 18.33. 1 Cor. 21.22.
2 Cor. 4.3. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. and 14.15. 2 Cor. 9.6. Psalm. 8.1, 9. and 46.1.
ult.

8. (...) Epanados, Regression or turning back, (derived of (...) again, and
(...), an ascending, or climbing, from (...), upwards, and (...), a Way,) is a
Figure, when the same word is repeated in the beginning and middle, or in the
middle and end, so as that there is an Inversion of them; as Isa. 5.20. Woe unto
them who call good evil, and evil good; who put darkness for light, and light
for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Ezekiel. 7.6, 7.
Gal. 2.16. 2 Cor. 2.10, 15, 16. John 8.47. Ezekiel. 36.6. Romans 7.19. Psalm. 114.3,
4, 5, 6. Ezekiel 32.16. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4, etc.

(...), Polyptoton, in Latin Casuum varietas, a variety of Cases, or the
change of the Case or Termination (from (...) variously, and (...) falling,
derived from (...) to fall,) is when words of the same Root, Primitive, or
Original, are used in a different Termination with respect to Mood, Tense,
Person, Case, Degree, Gender, Number, etc. As, Psalm. 68.15, 16. Isa. 24.16.
Hos. 10.1. Mich. 2.4. Romans 2.21, 22, 23. and 4.18. 2 Cor. 9.8. and 10.12. Gal.
2.19, 20. Ephesians. 1.3, etc. There is an elegant Polyptoton in those Lines of the
Learned Picus, Earl of Mirandula.

Namque tua est nostris major Clementia Culpis;
Et dare non dignis, res mage digna Dei.
Quanquam sat digni, si quos dignatur amare,
Qui quos non dignos invenit, ipse facit.
Genesis 50.24. The Lord when he visits, in visiting, will visit you; see Romans
11.36. Eccles. 12.8. Dan. 2.37. John 3.13. 1 John 3.7. 2 Timothy 3.13. Heb. 6.14.
Joh. 17.25. Isa. 19.2, etc.

CHAP. II. Of a Paronomasia.
(...), Paronomasia, Agnomination, or Likeness of Words (of (...) which in
Composition, signifies with Alteration, and (...) a Name, or from (...) to
change, or allude to a Name or Word) is when by the change of one Letter or
Word, the Signification thereof is also changed. This Figure is frequent in the
Latin, and is very ornamental, as Nata salo, suscepta solo, patre edita Coelo
-- ab exordio, ad exodium. -- And the native Beauty of it being peculiar to the
Original Languages can hardly be shown in English. There are many in the
Hebrew, of the Old; and the Greek of the New Testament, which the Learned may
find in Glassius; take however a few English Examples, by which you may judge of
the rest; as, Friends turned Fiends. You are like to have a bare gain out of
this Bargain. Bolder in a Buttery than in a Battery. -- Wine is the Blood of
the Vine. -- No stumbling but tumbling; Errors will cause Terrors.
Scripture-Examples are many, as 2 Cor. 10.3. Though we walk in the Flesh, yet
do we not war after the Flesh. 2 Cor. 6.9. As unknown, and yet known; see 2
Cor. 4.8, 9. and Mat. 8.22. Examples in the Hebrew Text are, Isa. 57.6. and
65.12. Genesis 18.27. Exodus 25.27. and 32.18. 1 Samuel 13.7. Psalm. 69.30, 31, 32.
Isa. 5.7. and 13.6. Joel 1.15. Jer. 1.11, 12. Jer. 48.43. Isa. 24.17. Genesis
9.27. Isa. 65.11. In the Greek Text, Mat. 16.18. Man. 16.18. expounded.
Tu es (...) and super hac (...) edificabo Ecclesiam meam, etc. where there is
an allusion to the Name of Peter, tho Christ speaks of himself; Peter having
confessed him to be the Son of the Living God, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. which plainly
appears by the Context; -- As if Christ had said, The Name I give thee is not
in vain, for thou have acted conformable to it, when in thy Confession, thou
have expressed the true Rock, upon which thou (and all Believers) art to be
built. Erasmus thus paraphrases it. -- I also, because I would not have so
magnificent a Testimony unrequited, affirm, That thou art truly Peter, that is,
a solid Stone, so fixed that thou shall not waver hither and thither, according
to the giddy humor of the Vulgar. And upon this Rock of thy Profession (viz.
my Self) will I build my Church, that is, my House and Palace, as upon an
immovable Foundation, which all the open Violence, or private Stratagems of
Hell shall not be able to destroy. Satan will employ his various Artifices to
ensnare you, and will stir up a wicked Generation to circumvent, trepan, and
persecute you; but mine All-powerful Protection shall be your invincible
Defense during your sound and solid Profession; the Church is my heavenly
Kingdom, the unbelieving World is the Devil's, none of the former have need to
fear the latter, if he be a Peter, that is, like thee. In the Syraick Tongue,
in which Christ speaks, the same word (...), signifies both Peter a Proper
Name, and Petra a Rock, a Noun Appellative. Hence Bellarmine clamors, Saying,
We have what we would viz. that Peter is that Rock of whom Christ speaks. If
Augustine (says he) had considered that Cephas signifies nothing but a Rock,
Lib. 1. de Pont. Romans c. 10.
and that the Lord had said, thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock, etc. he had
made no doubt of the Truth of our Sentence. But the Jesuit gains nothing by
this (...): as it is a Proper Name, has a different Signification from Cephas
as it is a Common Name, as Abel, Deborah, Rachel, Jona, etc. signify one thing
when they are Proper Names; and another when they are Common Names, although there
be no change in the Word or Denomination; the Syriack joins a Masculine Pronoun
(...) he, to the first Cephas, and the Feminine (...), haec, this, to the
latter Cephas, which is of the Feminine Gender when it signifies a Stone, as 1
Cor. 10.4. Mat. 23.42. Mark 16.4. Most faithfully therefore has Matthew
expressed the Words of Christ in Greek, which alone is to be esteemed
Authentic: and it is certain, that the Holy Spirit did on purpose change the
Speech in the authentical Greek Text, to make it perspicuous, lest any body
through Error or Inadvertency should apply those things to Peter, which must be
understood of the Doctrine and Confession of Christ, or Christ himself,
proposed in that Confession. From the whole we may infer what a weak Foundation
the Pope's Supremacy is built upon.

Mat. 11.17. We have piped, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you,
and ye have not lamented. In the Syriack Tongue in which Christ spoke, there is
a fair Allusion in those words [Danced, Lamented] for both are of the same
Root, and differ only in Conjugation.

CHAP. III. Of Antanaclasis.
Ab (...), Reciproco, Refringo.
AN (...), Antanaclasis, which signifies Refraction, or Reciprocation, is a
Figure when the word is repeated in a different, if not a contrary
Signification; Examples in the Hebrew Text are Judge. 15.16. where the same word
signifies an Ass, and a Heap. 1 Samuel 1.24. And the Boy was a Boy, (so the
Hebrew) that is, as we render it, The Boy was young. See Psalm. 141.5. Eccles.
7.7. Psalm. 58.9, 10. Isa. 37.18. and 58.10. and 66.3, 4. Jer. 7.18, 19. Jer.
8.4, 14. and 34.17. Ezekiel. 20.24, 25. and 41.24. Mat. 8.22. Follow me, and
suffer the Dead to bury their Dead; -- the first [Dead] denotes the wicked, who
are spiritually dead in Sin; the second [Dead] such as are naturally dead, or
departed from this Life. Mat. 26.29. I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit
of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom:
Here the first word [Drink] is properly understood; but the latter
Metaphorically, denoting their partaking together of the Joys of Heaven. Joh.
1.10. The World was made by him, and the World knew him not: The former [World]
notes the whole Universe; the latter, Unbelievers, etc. see Joh. 2.23, 24. and
Joh. 4.31, 32, 34. Romans 2.26, 28, 29. Romans 3.21, 27. Romans 7.23. Romans 9.6. They
are not all Israel which are of Israel, that is, all who are born of Israel,
according to the Flesh, are not true spiritual Israelites, Romans 12.13, 14.
where there is an Antanaclasis in the Verb (...). 2 Cor. 11.24. the first
[breaking] is taken properly; the second [breaking] Metaphorically, for the
Passion of Christ, as Luke 22.19. See Isa. 38.13, etc. and 1 Cor. 15.28. Mat.
5.19. Matthew. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, shall be called least
in the Kingdom of Heaven: the first (least) expresses the sense of the
Pharisees, who esteemed some of the Precepts of Christ amongst the least; --
the second (least) alluding to the former, signifies the same with none, or not
at all, viz. He shall be none in the Kingdom, or he shall not enter there at
all.

Mat. 18.1. Matthew. 18.1.
The Disciples say unto Jesus, Who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? V.
4. Christ answers, Whosoever shall humble himself as this little Child, the
same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven: The first word [greatest] in the
sense of the Disciples, signifies him that has Pre-eminence over others; the
second [greatest] alluding to the former, denotes a Participation of the
Kingdom of God, without respect to inferiors; the sense is, whosoever humbles
himself, shall enjoy his part in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Mat. 19.16. Matthew. 19.16.
The Young Man says unto Christ, Good Master, etc. Ver. 17. Christ answers,
Why call thou me good? there is none good but one, that is God: The first
good, denotes any Goodness communicated to the Creature by the Lord, such as
may be found in a mere Man (for such the Young Man judged Christ to have;) the
latter [good] alluding to the first, expresses the Essential Goodness of God,
who is the Fountain and Original of all the Good in the Creature: The sense
therefore of the words of Christ, is, Either call me not good, or believe me to
be the true God, and (...) God-Man. See Joh. 4.31. Joh. 6.28. Acts 26.28.
Sometimes there happens an Ellipsis in this Figure, the latter being understood
by the former, as Joel 2.13. Rend your Hearts, and not your Garments; here is a
double Proposition: 1. Rend your Hearts. 2. Rend not your Garments, the first
is Metaphorical; the other Proper.

CHAP. IV. Of the Figures of a Sentence in Logism.
WHat these are, we have before defined: They are distingush'd thus; (1.) Such
as are in Logism, or in a Sentence without Collocution, or talking together.
(2.) Such as are in Dialogism, or by way of Dialogue, or mutual Conference.

There are five of the first sort, viz.

I. (...), Exclamation, is a pathetical Figure, Exclamation ab (...), to
exclaim.
whereby the Speaker expresses the Passion, or vehement Ardor of his Mind, by
various Interjections expressed or understood, to move the Affections and Minds
of those he speaks to; O! Alas! Behold! are Signs of it; this Figure is made in
Scripture:

1. In way of Admiration, Psalm. 84.1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord
of Hosts! Psalm. 133.1. Behold, how good, and how pleasant (it is) for Brethren
to dwell together in Unity! Romans 11.33. O the depths of the Riches, and of the
Wisdom, and of the Knowledge of God! How unsearchable (are) his Judgments, and
his Ways past finding out! see Psalm. 8.1. and 144.15.

2. In a way of Wishing or Praying. 1 Chronicles. 11.17. O that one would give me
Drink of the Water of the Well of Bethlehem, which is at the Gate! Psalm. 14.7.
O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! See Psalm. 42.2. Isa.
64.1. Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body
of this Death! See Gal. 5.12. Job 6.8. Psalm. 55.6.

3. In Praise. Mat. 15.28. O Woman, great is thy Faith! Mat. 25.21, 23. Well
done good and faithful Servant!

4. In a way of Sorrow, and Complaint. Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me! Isa. 6.5. Woe is me, for I am undone!

5. In way of Commiseration or Pity. Josh. 7.7. Alas! O Lord God, wherefore at
all have thou brought this People over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of
the Amorite, to destroy us! Ezekiel. 9.8. Ah Lord God, will thou destroy all the
Residue of Israel, in thy pouring out thy Fury upon Jerusalem! Luke 13.34. Lam.
1.1.

6. In a way of Indignation, Detestation, and Reproof. Isa. 1.4. Woe to the
sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, a Seed of Evildoers, etc! Ezekiel.
16.23. Woe, woe to thee, says the Lord God, etc. See Mat. 11.21. and 17.17. Luke
24.25. Jer. 44.4. Acts 13.10. O full of all Subtilty and Mischief, thou Child
of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert
the right ways of the Lord! Acts 7.51. Romans 9.20.

7. In a way of Joy, and Exultation, as Psalm. 57.7. and 135.21. Blessed be the
Lord out of Sion, which dwells at Jerusalem, Hallelujah, that is, praise ye
the Lord: See 1 Cor. 15.55.

8. In a way of Obsecration or Beseeching. Psalm. 118.25. Save now, I beseech
thee O Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, send now Prosperity! Rev. 22.20.

9. In a way of Reprehension. Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched
you! etc. See Acts 7.51, 52, etc.

10. In a way of Derision, Mat. 15.29. Of Fear, 1 Timothy 6.11, etc.

Epiphonema ((...)) signifies Acclamation, and is wont to be subjoyned to an
Exclamation, as a certain species of it. It is a little Clause or apt Sentence
added after the thing is expounded, From (...) acclamo, to cry out.
exhibiting a certain Emphasis (and (...)) briefly and concisely, as Psalm.
2.12. Psalm. 3.8. Mat. 22.14. Luke 10.30. Acts 19.20. Mat. 19.27. Mark 7.37, etc.

II. (...), Epanorthosis, Correction or Amending, is the Reinforcement of the
Clause last uttered, by what follows, or a re-calling of what one said, to
correct it. From (...), ^orrigo, to correct.
It is stated in a threefold manner;

1. When that which was said is wholly disowned, and corrected by a more apt,
more proper, and significant Expression: as Mark 9.24. when the Father of the
Child that was possessed with a dumb Spirit, said, Lord, I believe, but
recollecting himself and confessing his Infirmity, immediately subjoyns, help
thou mine Unbelief. Joh. 12.27. John 12.27.
Christ prays to be saved from Death, Father, save me from this hour; yet
immediately correcting that Prayer, which shows the reality of his human
Nature, that prompted him to express himself so, he adds, But for this Cause
came I unto this hour (see Mat. 26.29.) Romans 14.4. Romans 14.4.
Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands
or falls: as if he had said, There is but one Lord of all, Christ Jesus: To
him he stands, if he be firm in Faith; to him he falls, if he sins, as thou
suspectest: He has the Prerogative and Power of judging in himself, but thou
have not, etc. And whereas he had made mention of his Fall, he immediately adds
the Correction, He shall be held up, for God is able to make him stand; that
is, to clear up all suspicion of Evil.

2. So in those Phrases where the denial of the Affirmative is subjoyned, where
nevertheless the Denial is rather to be understood comparatively, or
respectively, as Joh. 16.32. John 16.32.
Ye -- shall leave me alone; the Epanorthosis, the Figure we speak of, follows,
and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me: Christ was alone, with
respect to Men, but not with respect to God. 1 Cor. 7.10. 1 Cor. 7.10.
But to the married I command, -- the Correction follows, Yet not I, but the
Lord. Both commanded, the Lord principally, as the Sovereign Lawgiver, and
Paul, as his Servant and Minister. 1 Cor. 15.10. 1 Cor. 15.10.
I labored more abundantly than they all; the Apostle subjoyns a Correction,
lest it should savor of Arrogance, in ascribing that to himself, which was the
work God, -- yet not I, but the Grace of God, which was with me. He was set on
work by Divine Grace, which was the primary Cause of all his Labor and
Success. Gal. 2.20. Galat. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: he speaks of Spiritual Life, which
he attributes not to himself, but to Christ the Prince of Life, as the supreme
Author and Cause of it: see Gal. 1.6. etc. Prove. 6.16. Romans 8.34. Gal. 4.9. 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 John 2.2.

3. When a positive and affirmative Antecedent is corrected by the Particle
[if] (which is very familiar and frequent in Cicero's Writings.) as Gal. 3.4.
Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain: As if he had
said, Ye have not only suffered in vain, but with Loss and Detriment also, etc.

III. (...), Aposiopesis, Reticentia, a holding ones Peace, derived from (...)
after, and (...) obticeo, to be silent, is, when the course of Speech is so
abrupt or broken off, that some part is concealed, or not uttered; yet by that
means to aggravate it; This is used in Scripture;

1. In Promising, as 2 Samuel 5.8. Whosoever smites the Jebusite -- we are to
understand (he shall be Chief and Captain,) as 1 Chronicles. 11.6. see 1 Chronicles.
4.10. Luke 13.9. And if it bear Fruit; you must understand (well, or it is well)
which is not in the Greek, but supplied in our English Bible.

2. In Commination, Genesis 3.22. And now lest he put forth his hand, and take
also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever. In these words of the
Lord, being angry with Man for his Sin, and violation of the Divine Law, we
must by an Aposiopesis, understand what is omitted, viz. I will drive him out
of the Garden, and forbid him my Presence, which was done, as the next words
declare. See Ezekiel. 34.8. with ver. 10. Genesis 20.3. Behold thou art a dead Man,
for the Woman which thou have taken away; that is, if thou do not restore
her, as is gathered from Verse 7. See Genesis 25.22.

3. In Complaint, Psalm. 6.3. My Soul is also sore vexed; but thou O Lord, how
long? that is, will thou be averse to me, or delay Help. Luke 19.42. If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things unto thy Peace, so
the Greek, we are to understand (which belong) unto thy Peace.

4. In swearing, this Figure is frequently used, 1 Samuel 3.14. Psalm. 89.35. Isa.
14.24. and 62.8, etc.

IV. (...), Apostrophe, Aversion, or turning away, Apostrophe from (...) from
and (...) to turn.
is a breaking off the course of Speech, and a sudden diverting it to some new
Person, or thing. This is made;

1. To God, Neh. 4.4. in the middle of his Discourse of the re-building of the
City, Nehemiah converts his Speech to God, Hear, O our God, for we are
despised, etc. See another Example, Chap. 6.9. Psalm. 33. the Psalmist in the
third Person speaks of God, and his Works and Attributes, concluding Verse 22
with an Apostrophe, directed to God, Let thy Mercy O Lord be upon us, according
as we hoped in thee: so Psalm. 82.8. Psalm. 109.21. Jer. 11.18. and elsewhere
frequently.

2. To Men, whether living or dead, 2 Samuel 1.24. to the Daughters of Israel;
and ver. 26. in that lamenting Epicedium of David, there is a passionate
Apostrophe, to dead Jonathan: see 2 Samuel 7.23. where there is an Emphatical
Apostrophe of God, to the People of Israel, Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Esa. 7.14.
Psalm. 6.8. and 103.24. Esa. 1.5. Jer. 5.10. Romans 11.13. Sometimes this
Apostrophe is directed to some second Person, yet uncertain who it is, which by
a Synecdoche of the species denotes any body, Psalm. 27.14. -- 34.11, 13. Romans
2.17. -- 9.19, 20. -- 12.20, -- 13.3.14.4, 10. 1 Cor. 7.16. Gal. 4.7. -- 6.1.
Sometimes to whole Cities, by which their Inhabitants are Metonimically to be
understood, as Mat. 11.21, 23. And to a Man's own Soul, Psalm. 42.5, 11. Why art
thou cast down, O my Soul? Psalm. 43.5. Psalm. 103.1, etc. 104.1. -- 146.1, etc.

Note that an Imperative, Commanding, or Exhortatory Apostrophe is frequently
Indicative and Vaticinatory or Prophetical, that is, such things as are to come
to pass, are foretold by the Prophets in the form of commanding, Esa. 6.9, 10.
(see Mat: 13.14. Act. 28.26, 27.) Esa. 47.1, 5. and 23.16. Take an Harp, Isa.
23.16:
go about the City thou Harlot that have been forgotten; upon which Musculus
thus comments, Per formam Apostrophes, etc. By the form of an Apostrophe, he
expresses the care of restoring Tire. He does dot exhort her to do this, but
under this Figure foretells what she shall do after her Restitution, seventy
Years from that time, -- she shall act as an Harlot, who when released from any
great Affliction, falls afresh to the practice of her Meretricious Arts, and
Inticements, to allure the unwary Youth to her Snare; She takes her Harp, (for
the Whores in those Countries were skilful in that sense-inticing Art of
Music) quavers her Notes, in consort with her charming Voice, gadding about
the City to insinuate into the Affections of Young Men. So Tire, when restored,
will fall again to Merchandising, Vid. Gram: Sac. p. 339.
in as brisk a manner as before its Devastation, etc. Jer. 6.1, 6, 26.

3. To Brutes, or things wanting Reason, Joel 2.12. Be not afraid ye Beasts of
the Field; for the Pastures of the Wilderness do spring, etc. See Psalm. 148.10.

4. To things mute and altogether void of sense, where, by a Prosopopoeia, a
Person is attributed to them; 2 Samuel 1.21. Ye Mountains of Gilboa, let there be
no Dew, 2 Samuel 1.21: Ye Mouroains, etc.
neither let there Rain be upon you, nor Fields of Offerings, because the
Shield of Saul was cast away there, upon which place, Brentius says
excellently, This is Prosopopoeia, very familiar with such as are full of
Indignation: For as such as are in a mad fit of Anger, snatch up the next thing
that comes to hand for a Weapon, to annoy or assault their Adversary; so to
such as are oppressed with a weight of Grief, whatsoever is obvious to them or
in view, seems to be the cause of their Misfortune; yea such things as are
insensible, and contribute nothing to it. So Job in his Affliction, cursed the
day of his Nativity, and the night in which it was said, a Man is born: Wherein
was the Day or Night guilty? in nothing surely. So the Mountains of Gilboa are
cursed by David, when yet they did no hurt: For Saul might have tarried at
home, and acted righteously, which would have hindered that Mischance. But by
this Prosopopoeia, the Affection and Passion of him that grieves is denoted,
who would have all destroyed, provided the thing he loves, be safe. Other
Examples are, 1 Kings 13.2. Psalm. 114.5, 6. Psalm. 148.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Jer.
47.6. Ezekiel. 13.11. (in the Hebrew) and 21.16. and 36.1, 4, 8, etc. Joel 2.21.
Micah. 6.2. Zech. 11.1, 2. Hos. 10.8. Luke 23.30. 1 Cor. 15.55, etc.

Apostrophe to the Heavens and the Earth.
In Specie, an Apostrophe is directed sometimes to the Heavens and the Earth;
Deuteronomy. 32.1. Esa. 1.2. Jer. 2.12, 13. and 22.29. upon which Arias Montanus in
libro Joseph. Cap. 6. says, Coeli aliquando testes adeo appellari solent, etc.
The Heavens are wont sometimes to be appealed to as Witnesses by God, because
of their Integrity and Certainty. For nothing transacted on Earth, can be hid
from the view of Heaven, which by its daily Motion perlustrates all things.
Heaven lives, feels, hears, and sees to God, to whom all things live, etc. By
the very Text and Parallel Phrases, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Psalm. 50.1, 4. Romans 8.20, 22.
it is evident that these Apostrophes were used for Conviction and Detestation
of the Malice, Stubbornness and Ingratitude of Men, whose Duty it was to
receive the gracious Invitations of a Merciful God, and sincerely to obey him.

Jerome in his Commentary on Isa. 1.2. says, Quia per Moisen Testes vocaverat
Dominus Coelum and Terram, etc. Because the Lord by Moses called Heaven and
Earth as Witnesses, when he prescribed Israel his Law after their
Prevarication; Deuteronomy. 32.1.
he calls them again as Evidences, that all the Elements may know, that the
Lord had just Cause to be angry, and distribute Vengeance to the Infringers of
his holy Commands: the meaning is, If Heaven and Earth were endued with
Understanding and Reason, they would certainly accuse this People for their
Wickedness. For they and all things contained in them, carefully observe their
appointed Station, and do answer the end they were intended for: But Man alone,
for whom all things were made, becomes refractory and disobedient.

Prosop poeia from (...) a Person, and (...), to make o^ feign.
V. (...), Prosopopoeia, (signifying the feigning of a Person) is when an
inanimate thing is introduced, as speaking like a rational Person. This
Prosopopooeia we have treated of in the first Volumn, Book 1. p. 92. among
Metaphors, but that differs from this Figure, (1.) With respect to Subject, for
that relates only to certain things inanimate, which are not Persons; whereas
these concern Men also. (2.) With respect to the Predicate and Attributes: For
in that, such Attributes of all kinds, from animate things, chiefly Men, as are
translated to inanimate things, are treated of; but in this what relates only
to Speech, and when mention is made in that of Speech, attributed to inanimate
Creatures, there is regard had only to its Action or Act; but in this, there is
respect to the formality of Speech, or Words actually pronounced, etc.

Some distinguish this Figure into Imperfect and Perfect; the Imperfect they
call that whereby the Speech of another is lightly and obliquely represented;
or when one gives a short Narrative or Exposition of what another person spoke.
The Perfect is, when the proper Person is wholly laid aside, and another Person
or Thing is introduced as speaking; or when the very formal words of the Person
introduced are recited, which from De Repub. 3.
Plato and Aristotle, de Poetis, is called (...), or Imitation: In the Sacred
Scripture either the true Person is introduced as speaking, or an inanimate
thing; the first is done openly or covertly: Openly as when the Verb of saying
is premised, and a clear Intimation given that another Person speaks. Covertly,
when the Verb of saying is omitted; in an Apert Prosopopoeia, the Speech is
uttered of the thing it self; or else feigned and framed to signify another
thing: the former is either good and true, or false and evil. Examples of these
in order.

1. A good and true Speech is proposed by the sacred Writers, whenever the
Words of God himself, and our Savior Christ, or of Angels and good Men are
expressed: Psalm 2.7.
Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9. The Lord said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. Thou shall
break them with a Rod of Iron; thou shall break them in pieces like a Potters
Vessel. Psalm. 50.16. But unto the wicked, God says, What have thou to do to
declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Verse
17. Seeing thou hate Instruction, etc. Isa. 66.1. Thus says the Lord, the
Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool. And so very frequently the
Prophets introduce God himself speaking, not only that their Speech may have
the greater Authority by it, but chiefly because (as 2 Pet. 1.21.) The Prophecy
came not in old time by the Will of Man; but holy Men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost: It Is therefore doubtful, whether (speaking accurately)
this kind of Speech belongs to this kind of Rhetorical Prosopopoeia; because
God is the real Author of the Scripture, and immediately both spoke and writ it
by the Prophets, who were his Ministers and Amanuenses; Men do not introduce
God as speaking, but God moves them by Inspiration to represent him; see Heb.
1.1.

As for the Speech of Angels and good Men, we need not produce Examples, Note.
the Scriptures are full of them; in reading of which we are carefully to heed
the (...), or Circumstances of every Text, and the Speaker, that the Fallacy of
Composition and Division may be avoided. Jer. 26.17, 18, 19. Jer. 26.17, etc.
the Elders of Judea are introduced, as speaking for Jeremiah; but if any will
attribute to them, Ver. 20, 21, 22, 23. he goes against their words, and the
scope of the Prophetical Text: For these Verses have a coherence with the last,
and continue the historical Relation of the Execution of the Sentence, and the
deliverance of Jeremiah by a Just Judgment from the lawless Violence of the
King, the Example of which is contained in those four Verses; on the contrary,
the words of Paul, Act. 19.4, 5. are to be joined together to prevent Error.

2. A false and evil Speech is proposed, when the Devil and wicked Men are
introduced as speaking; Psalm. 3.2. Many there be which say of my Soul, There is
no help for him in his God. Psalm, 12.4. Who have said, With our Tongue will we
prevail; our Lips are our own; Who is Lord over us? Isa. 14.13. For thou have
said in thy Heart, I will ascend into Heaven; I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God, etc. Mat. 23.16. Woe unto you ye blind Guides, which say,
Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear
by the Gold of the Temple, he is a Debtor, etc. Of this kind of Speech we will
give some useful Observations.

1. An Historical Narration, although most true, yet all things therein said, are
not believed to -- For when a Canonical Writer treats of a thing, and speaks of
what is falsely or foolishly done or said by another, he does not approve of
it, but only relates it: The things in Scripture are of two sorts, -- some are
(...), by way of narrative, or recital; and some (...), by way of Assertion,
and Approbation; things related of the latter kind are always true; but not of
the former. Here likewise we must distinguish between the History it self, and
the Speech introduced by him that speaks; the first is always true, the latter
not, etc.

2. When the wicked or false Speech of another is related, a true Sentence,
Kings 21.10. the words of Jezebel, writing to the Citizens of Jezreel are thus
related; Set two Men, Sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him,
etc. the words (Sons of Belial) are not Jezebel 's, who would fain destroy
Naboth by a color and pretext of Right and Justice; but they are the words of
the holy Spirit, which Exegetically and according to Truth, describe those
suborned Wretches that would testify against the innocent, as Ver. 13, etc.
Isa. 28.15. Because ye have said, We have made a Covenant with Death, and with
Hell, are we at Agreement; when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through, it
shall not come unto us, R. Kimhi in Loc.
for we have made Lies our Refuge, and under Falsehood have we hid our selves.
It was not they that called it Lies and Falsehood, but the Prophet so intitles
their Hope. The words of the false Prophets are hereby to be understood, who
lyingly advised them to hope well: Isa. 30.10. Which say to the Seers, see not;
and unto the Prophets, prophesy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth
things, prophesy Deceits: It is not those Unbelievers, but the holy Spirit that
calls those Visions which they sought for, Delusions, for such indeed they
were, Page 360. Vsitatum est, quod ingeniosi Homines, etc.
etc. Brentius upon Isa. 44. thus speaks of this Scripture-way of Expression,
and brings more Examples. It Is usual for ingenious Men to paint out Impiety of
words in colors, and obtrude it upon Men as true Piety. But the holy Spirit
acknowleges not, nor owns, such things as are framed and pretended to cloak and
excuse Impiety; but sees (because there is nothing invisible to him) into the
most private recesses of the Mind; and judges according to what he finds in the
very secrets of the Heart. Deuteronomy. 29.19. the wicked blesses himself in his
Heart, saying, I shall have Peace tho I walk in the stubbornness of my Heart,
to add Drunkenness to Thirst. -- Who would be so impudent as publicly to say
that his ways are wicked, and that he would persevere in them: See Psalm. 14.1.
Isa. 28.15. and 44.17. Jer. 18.12. the holy Spirit recites the words of the
wicked, not the words of their Mouths, but the words of their Hearts: For the
ungodly do not call their own Ways evil, but in regard they are really so, the
Spirit so calls them as his own Sentence.

Yet all things, which the Devil and wicked Men are said to speak, are not in
themselves evil and false, although pronounced with a fallacious and fraudulent
Intention -- this may be seen in the words of unclean Spirits; Mar. 1.24. I
know thee who thou art, the holy One of God: See Luke 4.34. Acts 16.16, 17. In
the words of Caiphas the Jewish High Priest, Gregor. Lib. 23. Moral. cap, 3.
John 11.49, 50, etc.

Whatsoever is related in Scripture, may be reduced to these four ways, viz.

When good Things are well spoken. When evil Things are ill spoken. When good
Things are ill spoken. When evil Things are well spoken.
1. Good Things are well spoken, when righteous and holy Things are well
preached; as Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

2. Evil Things are ill spoken, when a perverse or wicked Action is persuaded
to; as Job 2.9. Curse God, and die.

3. Good Things are ill spoken, when something is not pronounced with a right
Mind and Understanding; as Joh. 9.28. the Pharis^es say to the blind Man that
had his Sight restored, -- Thou art his Disciple; which was true; but they
spoke it maliciously, and by way of Contempt. Joh. 11.49, 50. It is expedient
for us that one Man should die for the People, that the whole Nation perish
not: This was good (yea the greatest Good in the World) but he spoke it out of
spite to Christ, and a greediness to destroy him, without any respect to the
Grace of Redemption, of which he was ignorant.

4. Evil Things are said well, when by the Mouth of the Speaker Vice is
expressed so, as to condemn and confute it.

3. Speeches prudently feigned and composed to signify another thing, are to be
read in Scripture- Parables, especially the Writings of the Evangelists, which
shall be treated of at large in this Work, in the Chapter of Parables, to which
we refer you. To this belongs when a Speech is attributed to persons, to be a
sign of the very state of Things, Isaiah 3.6.
and is figured as the thing signified by that Speech; as is intimated, Isa.
3.6. When a Man shall take hold of his Brother, of the House of his Father,
(saying) Thou have clothing, be thou our Ruler, and let this Ruin be under
thy hand: Ver. 7. In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be a Healer;
for in my House is neither Bread nor Clothing; make me not a Ruler of the
People: The rareness or fewness of Governors capable to exercise that Dignity,
Isaiah 4.1.
is denoted in this Dialogism, or feigned Speech: Isa. 4.1. And in that day
seven Women shall take hold of one Man, saying, Vid Gram. Sacra. 263, 264.
We will eat our own Bread, and wear our own Apparel, only let us be called by
thy Name, to take away our Reproach. -- This is a Prophecy of the want of Men,
because of the frequent Slaughters that were to come, and the Desolation of
Women. See other Examples, Mat. 23.39. with 21.15, 16.

4. A Covert Prosopopoeia, when the Verb of saying is omitted, called (...),
(or Imitation) it is either simple or connex; the simple are such as are without
Collocution: Isa. 21.3. Therefore are my Loins filled with pain, Pangs have
taken hold of me, as the Pangs of a Woman that travelleth; I was bowed down at
the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it: Ver. 4. My Heart
wandereth, Horror affrights me, he has made my amiable Night terrible, (so the
Hebrew.) After that Divine Oracle which foretells the Destruction of Babylon by
the Medes and Persians, this Mimesis of the King of Babylon is subjoyned, by
which he expresses his Anxiety and Terror, as if the thing was then a doing:
You may find the fulfilling of this described, Dan. 5.6, 9, 10, 30. Other
Examples you may read, Jer. 49.10, 11, 14. Psalm. 2.3. Psalm. 82.8, 9. and 89.3.
Eccles. 4.8. Prove. 23.35. Isa. 14.16. and 22.13. and 33.18. and 56.12. and
58.3. Jer. 3.17. and 6.4, 5, 6. and 8.14. and 11.19. and 20.10. and 30.17. and
31.3. Lam. 3.42. and 2 15. Micah 2.11. Acts 1.4, 5. and 15.5. and 17.3. 1 Cor.
15.32. Col. 2.21, etc.

5. There is a connex Mimesis in a Dialogism, or the Discourse of two or more;
Dialogism. Psalm. 118.19, etc.
as Psalm. 118.19, etc. which is an eminent Example of this, and is thus
expounded by Junius, Parall. 1, 37. Open to me (says the godly Man) the Gates
of Righteousness, being entered at them, I will praise (Jah) the Lord; to this
Petition an Answer is annexed, as if the Church, who is the Mother, were
teaching her Children the Causes or Ways of Salvation, -- Ver. 20. This is the
Gate of the Lord, into which the Righteous shall enter, viz. Christ, who is the
Way, the Truth, and Life. This Entrance being shown or expounded, the Godly
congratulate, saying Ver. 21. I will praise thee, etc. as if they had said,
When we behold this Entrance which the Lord has opened, we cannot but praise
and admire the greatness of his Favor and Goodness; especially when we
consider, that all good things bestowed upon Mankind, proceed from the
Benignity of the Deity, tho unthought of by them. Pray therefore what is this
Gate? Ver. 22. The Stone which the Builders refused, is become the (...),
Angularis, ab (...), summus* chief, and (...). Angulus, a Corner.
head Stone of the Corner (that is, not only the support of the Building, but
what gives Entrance into it,) which, Ver. 23. is the Lord's doing, and exceeds
the Capacity of humane Art, or Understanding. But when will this be? Ver. 24.
This is the Day which the Lord has made, not by constant Labor or Artifice.
Therefore it is just, that we should place all our Joy and Comfort in him
alone, and in an assured Confidence of our Deliverance proclaim his Glory,
because he has vouchsafed us so glorious a Redemption: Ver. 25. Save now, I
beseech thee, O Lord, etc. that is, grant full Salvation to the Members of thy
Church, and prosper the ways of thine Anointed, whom we celebrate with this
joyful Acclamation: Ver. 26. Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord:
not only in himself, or in his own Person, but transfusing Divine Benediction
by the Voice of the Gospel into those who believe in his Word, saying, We have
blessed you out of the House of the Lord; that is, from Heaven, or the highest
Places, as the House of the Lord is frequently called in Scripture.

To this we may refer the whole Book of Canticles, which is a continued
Dialogism, or Dialogue; and the 63 Chapter of Isaiah, wherein there is a
Conference between Christ and his Church, respecting the glorious Triumph of
Christ over Death and Suffering, manifested in his Resurrection. See also Jer.
47.6, 7. [So much of the speaking of a real Person.]

6. Speech is also attributed to a mute or inanimate thing: Speech attributed
to a mute or inanimate thing.
as Judges 9.8. and the following Verses, where Trees are represented as
Persons, speaking and reasoning amongst themselves in the Parable of Jotham; as
also 2 Kings 14.9. By the same Reason, Speech, or certain Words are attributed
to Destruction and Death, Job 28.22. to Fir-trees, Isa. 14.8. to the Dead,
Verse 10. See Ezekiel. 32.21. to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. See
also Romans 9.20. 1 Corinthians. 12.15, 16, etc. some refer hither, Prove. 1.20, etc.
and 8.1, etc. to Chap. 9.7. where Wisdom, commending it self, and inviting Men
to partake of it, is introduced. But the soundest Divines do rightly understand
Christ by this Wisdom; which Chap. 1.20. and 9.1. is called (...), in the
Plural by way of Excellency; as if it were said, He is the very Wisdom of the
most wise God, and the very Author of it. Chap. 8.14. he attributes Counsel,
Strength, and Prudence to himself, Ver. 17. and to love them that love him;
Ver. 24, 25. that he was brought forth before the Depths, etc. Ver. 22, 27, 30.
That he was Existent before the Creation of the World. Ver. 23. Anointed, or
set up from everlasting, viz. to be a King and Governor. Ver. 30. Sporting
always before him, viz. the Father, -- All which, and other things there
written, must of necessity be attributed to a true Person: See Matthew. 11.19.
Luke 7.35. and 11.49. (as also Matthew. 23.34.) 1 Cor. 1.24, 30. Collos. 2.3.
Therefore this Prosopopoeia is to be referred to the first Class, not to this
latter.

CHAP. V. Of an (...), (Erotesis) or Interrogation.
(...), to ask, or question.
TO the foregoing five, we may add this Figure in Logism, viz. (...), which
signifies Interrogation, or asking a Question; which because it is peculiar to
the Idioms of the Hebrew and Greek, of the Old and New Testatment; we will
briefly and particularly treat of, (1.) With respect to its Force, Energy, or
peculiar Emphasis, (2.) With reference to its use. The first we will consider
according to the order of Interrogative Words.

The Interogative Particle [Who] besides its ordinary Grammatical
Signification, which simply denotes asking, (Psalm. 15.1. and 24.3. Isa. 42.24.
and 63.1, etc.) sometimes signifies an absolute Negative, when the Speech is of
Persons; as Psalm. 94.16. Psalm 94.16.
Who will rise up for me against the Evildoers? or, who will stand up for me
against the workers of Iniquity? as if he had said, No Man can help me; so have
I been dealt withal: It is only God can relieve me, as ver. 17. Psalm. 106.2.
Psalm 106.2.
Who can utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? who can show forth his Praise? that
is, None can do it; yet Psalm. 9.14. David says, That I may show forth all thy
Praise in the Gates of the Daughter of Sion: which Text R. Kimhi thus
reconciles; viz. In the former Text we are to understand the Praise of God,
with reference to those great things which he had done for his People in
general: In the latter, what he had done for David in particular. We may add,
that the first place may be meant of the most perfect Praise of Jehovah, in the
celebrating of which, no Proportion can be stated so as to correspond with it:
The latter, an earnest endeavor to return Thanks and Praise to the very utmost
of humane Faculty: See Psalm. 40.5. Psalm. 113.5. Who is like unto the Lord our
God? that is, there is none amongst Men, who can so really condole your Case,
and so mightily help you; for God was, and is, both willing and able. He speaks
here of a Divine Grace, Aid, and Help: There is his gracious Encouragement
given for our Hope in the next Verses.

Isaiah 58.3.
Isa. 58.3. Who can declare his Generation? that is, none can, because he is
eternal. Heb. 1.5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art
my Son, etc. Ver. 13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit on my
Right Hand, etc. That is, he never said so to any of the Angels: See Isa.
40.13, 14. Luke 14.5. John 8.46. Romans 8.31, 33, 34, 35. and 11.34, 35. 1 Cor.
9.7, etc.

Sometimes it does not absolutely deny, but restrictively, so that the Particle
quis, who, is put for quotusquisque how many, which denotes fewness, or
paucity; as Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine Anger? that is, they
are indeed but few, to wit, the Servants of the Lord; as Ver. 13, 16. Isa.
53.1. Hosea 14.10, etc. Sometimes it denotes the Difficulty of the Question
asked: 1 Samuel 2.25. If a Man sin against the Lord, who shall intercede for him?
That is, how difficult is it to appease the Lord, when he is angry for our
Sins? Prove. 31.10. Who can find a Woman of Strength? (or Activity, viz. a
virtuous Woman?) this does not signify that such are no where to be found, but
that they are rare: See Mat. 19.25, 26. Mark 10.26. with ver. 23, etc.

The Interrogative [an, nunquid, whether] besides its common Signification,
which simply and affirmatively asks a Question; Genesis 18.21. Numb. 13.19. Romans
3.3, 5, 6, etc. sometimes denotes an absolute Negation, as Genesis 18.14. Whether
is there any thing too hard for the Lord? that is, there is nothing too hard
for him: Ver. 17. Whether shall I hide from Abraham the thing I am about to do?
that is, I will not hide it from him; Genesis 30.2. Whether am I in God's stead,
who has withheld from thee the Fruit of the Womb? as if he had said, Can I
arrogate that to my self, which is the Work of God? (that is, I can by no means
do it) He made thee barren, and he only can make thee fruitful. See Genesis 50.19.
Job 40.20, etc. Joel 1.2, etc.

On the contrary, a Negative Interrogative, A Negative Interrogative.
as [is not] is to be understood affirmatively, as Genesis 13.9. Is not the whole
Land before thee? that is, the whole Land is before thee; Genesis 37.13. And
Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy Brethren feed (the Flock) in Shechem? that
is, they do so: Exodus 4.14. Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother, whom I know to
be eloquent? that is, I know that he is so: See Deuteronomy. 11.30. Josh. 10.13. Ruth.
2.9. and 3.1. 1 Chronicles. 21.17. (see 2 Samuel 24.17.) Job 7.1. Psalm. 56.8, 13
Eccles. 6.6. Isa. 50.2. (with 59.1.) Jer. 23.24. Joel 1.16. Amos 2.11. and
5.20. Obad. 5.8, 9. Jonah. 4.11. Mat. 7.22. Mark 12.24. (see Mat. 22.29.) Joh.
4.35. and 6.70. and 11.9. 1 Cor. 10.16. Heb. 1.14, etc.

We are specially to note, that there are some Places, which affirmatively ask,
Observation.
in which there is an affirmative Sense, or in which the Negative Particle (No)
is to be understood; as 2 Samuel 15.27. The King said unto Zadok the Priest (art
not) thou a Seer? that is, thou do perfectly see how things go; see Ezekiel.
8.6. 1 Samuel 2.27. 1 Kings 16.31. Jer. 31.20. and 23.23.

The Interrogative [(...), quomodo, how, How.
] sometimes absolutely denies; Exodus 6. 12, 30. Deuteronomy. 7.17. Judge. 16.15. Psalm.
73.11. and 137.4. Mat. 12.26, 34. and 23.33. Mark 4.13. Luke 6.42. Romans 10 14,
15. 1 Cor. 14.7, 9, 16. 1 Timothy 3.5. Heb. 2.3, etc.

[ Why, wherefore, (...),] is often put for Prohibition; Genesis 27.45. Why should
I be deprived of you both in one day? that is, let me not be deprived of both:
1 Samuel 19.17. Why should I kill thee? that is, let me not kill thee: See 2 Samuel
2.22. 2 Chronicles. 25.16. Psalm. 79.10. Eccles. 5.5. and 7.17, 18. Jer. 27.13, 17.
and 40.5. Ezekiel. 33.11. Dan. 1.10, etc.

The use of Interrogations The use of Interrogations.
is various, and almost serves every Affection: There is,

1. An Interrogation, which denotes Absurdity Absurdity.
in a way of exploding it; as Joh. 3.4. How can a Man be born when he is old?
can he enter the second time into his Mother's Womb? as if he had said, This is
absurd, and in my Judgment, cannot be; Joh. 6.52. How can this Man give us his
Flesh to eat? as if he had said, This is most absurd: See Ver. 60. and Chap.
12.34.

2. Admiration, Admira^ion.
Genesis 17.17. Shall a Child be born unto him that is an hundred Years old! and
shall Sarah that is ninety Years old bear! This is an Interrogation, admiring
the Divine Power, and comparing it with his own and his Wives Impotency; as
Romans 4.19, 21. More Examples, see Genesis 27.20. and 42.28. Cant. 3.6. Psalm.
133.1. Isa. 1.21. and 63.1. Ezekiel. 16.30. Mat. 21.20. Mark 6.37.

3. Affirmation, Affirmation.
of which we have given Examples in the foregoing Pages.

4. Demonstration Demonstration.
of a certain Subject, of which some thing is affirmed or predicated, Ezekiel.
8.6. Son of Man, see thou what they do? as if he had said, Behold, thou art
(...), a Spectator, or Witness of their Impiety, Idolatry, and Abomination.
Mat. 11.7, 8, 9. there are certain Interrogations proposed by our Savior, the
scope of which is to show who John was, and in his Commendation to affirm or
deny some things. And sometimes in this manner the Question and Answer are
joined; both which are equipollent to a connexive Enunciation, whose Antecedent
is taken from the Question, and the Consequent from the Answer: as Psalm. 25.12.
What Man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose. Ver. 13. His Soul shall lodge in Goodness, and his Seed shall
inherit the Earth: that is, these things shall be conferred on him that fears
the Lord: So Psalm. 34.12, 13. Psalm. 107.43. Jer. 9.12. Hos. 14.10. See also
Prove. 22.29. with 29.20.

5. In a matter of Doubt; Doubt.
Genesis 18.12. Therefore Sarah laughed within her self, saying, After I am waxed
old, shall I have Pleasure? these words denote diffidence and doubt, and the
unlikelihood in her Judgment of what was promised, as the following words of
the Lord manifest. Romans 10.6. But the Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks
on this wise, Say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? Ver. 7. Who
shall descend into the Deep (or Abiss?) These Interrogations of Doubt, are
brought to denote the uncertainty of self-Righteousness, which Righteousness by
Faith wholly takes away; consult the next Chapter.

6. Exaltation Exaltation.
and Extenuation. Rab. Kimhi in his Comment on Jer. 22.23. says, that the
Interrogative Particle (...) ( quid vel quam, what, or how,) is used in a
double Signification, viz. to exalt a thing, as Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy
Goodness? Psalm. 139.17. How precious also are thy Thoughts unto me, O God? Or
to extenuate a thing, as Psalm. 8.4. What is Man, that thou art mindful of him?
that is, how inconsiderable, and unworthy is he of thy Grace and Favor? So
Psalm. 144.3. See also Isa. 2.11, to 22. with Psalm. 146.3, 4. 1 Samuel 9.21. 2 Samuel 7.18. Genesis 23.15. Exodus 3.11. 1 Kings 9.13, etc.

7. Expostulation, Expostulation.
Accusation or chiding.] Genesis 12.18. Pharaoh chid Abram, What (is) this (that)
thou have done unto me? why did thou not tell me that she was thy Wife? Ver.
19. Why said thou, She is my Sister? So Genesis 31.26, 27, 30. and 44.4, 15.
Other Examples are, Psalm. 11.1. Psalm. 50.16. Isa. 5.4. and 58.3. Ezekiel. 12.22.
Dan. 3.14, etc.

8. Indignation Indignation.
] as Psalm. 2.1. Why do the Heathen rage, and the People meditate vain things?
That these are words of Indignation, appears, Ver. 5. Mat. 17.17. O faithless
and perverse Generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer
you? this was an Apostrophe to the Apostles by way of Indignation, as appears
from Ver. 10.

9. By way of Insultation Insultation.
and Irony,] as Psalm. 42.3. While they continually say unto me, Where is thy
God? So Psalm. 79.10, etc. More Examples see Jer. 22.23. and 23.33. with Ver.
36. Joh. 18.38.

10. By way of Lamentation, Lamentation.
] as Psalm. 3.1. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? (or, Lord, how
numerous are my Enemies?) Psalm. 22.1. Lam. 2.20. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Hab. 1.17.

Miseration.
11. By way of Commiseration or Pity,] as Lam. 1.1. How does the City sit
solitary that was full of People, etc. Lam. 2.1. How has the Lord covered the
Daughter of Sion with a Cloud in his Anger? etc. so frequently in the
Lamenations.

12. By way of Negation, Negation.
concerning which we refer you where we have spoke a little before of the
Emphasis of an Interrogation.

Optative or wishing.
13. By way of Wishing,] as 2 Samuel 23.15. Who will make me drink of the Water of
the Well of Bethlehem? That is, O that some body would make drink: See Romans
7.24.

14. By way of Prohibition, Prohibition.
or Disswasion from a thing, of which you may see the fourth and fifth
Paragraphs before going.

15. By way of Rejection or Refusing,] as Numb. 23.8. How shall I curse him,
whom God has not cursed? and how shall I defy (or detest,) him whom the Lord
has not defied (or detested?) As if he had said, -- I neither can, nor dare do
this thing; see Judge. 11.12. 2 Samuel 16.10. 1 Kings 17.18. 2 Kings 3.13. Hosea
14.9. Joel 3.9. Matthew. 8.29. Mark 5.7. Luke 8.28. Joh. 2.4.

CHAP. VI. Of the Figures of a Sentence in Dialogism.
FIgures in a Dialogism, of which we have given a Description before, are five
in Number, which we will briefly expound and illustrate with Examples; as,

Aporia, ab (...), animi pendeo, etc.
1. (...) or (...), Doubting or Deliberation, is a Figure when we deliberate, or
reason with our selves, what we ought to say or do; as Psalm. 139.7. Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit? or, whither shall I fly from thy Face (or
Presence)? etc. See the four following Verses. Other Examples are, Lam. 2.13.
Luke 16.3, 4. 1 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 1.22, 23, 24. Romans 7.24, 25, etc.

An^oenosis, ab (...) with, and (...), to communicate.
2. (...), Anacoenosis (which signifies Communication, or an imparting of a
thing to another) is a Figure, when we deliberate or consult with those things,
with whom we argue for, or against; as Isa. 5.3, 4. Now therefore, O
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of Israel, judge I pray you, betwixt me and my
Vineyard, etc. so Luke 11.19. Acts 4.19. 1 Cor. 4.21. and 10.15, 16. and 11.13,
14. Gal. 3.1, 2, 5. and 4.21, etc.

3. (...), Occupation, is when that which may be objected, is anticipated and
avoided: -- this is done either covertly, or tacitly; or open and plainly. Of
the first sort we reckon, when the Objection is not mentioned, but only the
Answer; Romans 9.6. It cannot be that the Word of God should take no Effect; for
they are not all Israelites, that are of Israel (so the Greek:) This obviates
an Objection, viz. If Israel be rejected, the Word of God will be ineffectual;
I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed, etc. An open or plain Prolepsis,
Prolepsis.
is when the Objection is stated and answered: this is often joined with a
Prosopopoeia, -- the parts of this are (...), Hypophora, and (...),
Anthupophora: The first is the Adversaries Reason, or Objection; the latter,
the Solution or Confutation of it. Examples are, Isa. 49.14. But Sion said, The
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me: The Answer of this
Objection follows, Ver. 15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, etc. See also
Mat. 3.9. Romans 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 27, 29, 31. and 4.1, 2, 3. and 6.1, 2. and 7.7.
and 9.14, 19, 20. and 10.18, 19. and 11.1, 11, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 15.35, 36, etc.

4. (...), Permission, is when we seriously or ironically permit or grant a
thing, and yet object the Inconveniency or Unreasonableness of it: Examples of
a serious Epitrope Epitrope.
are, Romans 2.17. Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and
make thy boast of God, ver. 18. And know his Will, etc. as if he had said,
I grant it is so; but why is thy Conversation so disagreeable to that outward
Profession? Ver. 20. and the following Verses show this to be the meaning. See
also Romans 9.4, 5. Gal. 4.15, 16.

An Ironical Epitrope is, when we seem to grant a thing, which is indeed a
Prohibition of the contrary. Of this Illyricus says, Clave Script. Part. 2.
Col. 302. It is a species of Permission, when we grant what is unjust to any,
not as judging what he says right, but as it were giving way to his Obstinacy,
Malice, or Fury. As angry Fathers use to say to their dissolute Sons, -- I see
you will ruin your self; take your Course, run on headlong to destruction.
Examples you may read, Jud. 10.14. Prove. 6.32. 1 King. 22.15. Eccles. 11.9.
Isa. 29.1. Jer. 2.28. and 7.21. Lam. 4.21. Ezekiel. 20.39. Amos 4.4, 5. Mat.
23.32. and 26.45. Joh. 2.19. and 13.27. 1 Cor. 15.32. 2 Cor. 11.19. Rev. 22.11.

5. (...), Synchoresis, Concession, Concession.
is when a certain Saying is granted, yet withal declared to be unprofitable or
of no advantage; James 2.19. Thou believe that there is one God, thou do
well; the Devils also believe and tremble. See Romans 11.19, 20, etc. 1 Cor. 4.8.
2 Cor. 10.1, 2, 11. and 12.16, etc.

CHAP. VII. Of other Schemes of Sentences and Amplifications.
I. Schemes taken from Causes.
(...), Aetiologia, Aetiologia.
according to its Signification, is the rendering of a Reason of a Word or Deed;
as Romans 1.13, 14. Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes
I purposed to come to you, (but was let hitherto) that I might have some Fruit
among you also, even as among other Gentiles. I am debtor both to the Greeks,
and the Barbarians, etc. Ver. 15, 16. -- I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
that are at Rome also: For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; For it is
the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believe, etc. See Romans 3.20.
and 4.14, 15.

(...), signifies Translation, Metastasis.
and is when the Cause or Blame is transferred from one to another, as Romans
7.8. Paul says, that the Law augments Sin; yet Ver. 14. following, shows that
it is the fault of our corrupt Nature. -- See Romans 8.3. 1 Cor. 4.6, etc.

II. Schemes taken from Adjuncts and Circumstances.
(...), Topographia, that is the Description of a Place, is, when a Place is
accurately described, exhibiting it, as it were to our view; as the Description
of Hell, Isa. 30.33. Luke 16.24, etc. the New Heaven, and the New Earth, in the
Elect, which shall be eternally glorified, Isa. 65.17, etc. Rev. 21.1, etc. of
Sin, or the Church environed with broad Streams, Isa. 33.20, etc. By which
Description, its Safety and divine Defense from Enemies is noted. Of the New
Temple and the Admirable City, Ezekiel. 40. -- See Psalm. 42.6. Psalm. 60.7, etc.
Psalm. 89.12. with Ver. 11.

Here note, That the Climates or distinct parts of the Earth, as the East,
West, Observation.
North, and South, when mentioned in Scripture, are to be understood with
respect to the Situation of Judaea, Jerusalem, and the Temple, where the
Prophets lived in the Land which God gave the Jews: only we must except some
Places in Ezekiel, who lived and wrote in Babylon. Note also Note
that the Sea signifies the West. viz. The Mediterranean Sea, which is on the
West of Judaea, Numb. 2.18. Josh. 16.3. Ezekiel. 42.19, etc. Jerome on Ezekiel. 46.
says, It Is a customary way of speaking in Scripture, because of the Situation
of Judea, to call the Sea the West. We may except Psalm. 107. where in the
Hebrew Text, the Sea signifies the South, viz. the Red Sea, which was on the
South of Judea: See Psalm. 72.8. Exodus 23.31, etc.

Chronographia
(...), Chronographia, a Description of Time, (...), Pragmatographia, a
Description of a Thing or Action, and (...), Prosopographia, a Description of a
Person, are rather the Circumstances ((...)) of an historical Speech simply and
plainly delivered, than Schemes; tho by some accounted as such.

H^potyposis.
(...), Hypotyposis, signifies Representation, and is, when a thing is so
represented to the Eye, so as that it may seem not to be told, but to be acted;
as in that Description of the horrible Desolation of the Earth, Isa. 1.6, etc.
the whole 34 Chapters. Jer. 4.19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 31. Of Idols, Isa.
44.9. and 46.6. The Humiliation and Passion of Christ, Isa. 53. Of Famine or
Hunger, Lam. 4.8, 9. Of the Triumph of Christ, Col. 2.14, 15, etc. The Holy
Spirit not only exhibits verbal but real Hypotyposes; of which see our Treatise
of Types, Article 3. To this Head, some refer (...), an Image, or
Representation of a thing, viz. When the glorious or illustrious Figure,
Picture, or Species of a Thing or Person is produced: as when Christ is
represented by the Sun, Mal. 4.2. also when God is likened to a Giant, or
mighty Man, scarce sober after drinking hard, and quarrelling with all he meets
with, to denote his Wrath against wicked Men, and how severely he will punish
them, Psalm. 78.65, 66. When Christ is expressed by a Spouse and a Warrior,
Psalm. 45. When the prosperous wicked Man, is proposed as a green Bay Tree,
Psalm. 37.35, 36. So that this is only an illustrating Similitude.

Pathopoaeia.
(...), Pathopaeia, an Expression of Affection, is when Affections are clearly
expressed by a plain Speech: As of God, Isa. 49.15. Jer. 31.20. Hos. 11.7, 8.
of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4.14, 15. 2 Cor. 2.4. Gal. 4.19, 20. See Luke 18.9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Isa. 3.16, 17. Jer. 48.3, etc.

(...), Syllogismus, Syllogism.
Ratiocinatio, Reasoning, specially so called, (which is also called (...),
Emphasis) is, when the greatness of a thing is manifested by some certain Sign;
as when the Stature and Strength of Goliath, is set forth by his Armor; 1 Samuel
17.4, 5, 6, etc. When Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, said that his little Finger
would be thicker than his Fathers Loins; 1 Kings 12.10. The grievousness of the
Burden or Yoke laid upon the People, is noted, when by the Signs of external
Peace, the greatness of in ward and spiritual Peace is denoted, as Isa. 2.4.
See also Isa. 4.1. and 49.20. Mat. 10.30. and 24.20. Luke 7.44, etc. But
speaking more accurately, either these things belong to a simple historical
Narration, or the Tropes and their Affections of which we have treated, Volumn
1. Book 1.

III. Schemes taken from disparates or different things.
(...), Parechasis, Digression, is, when something is added besides the
purpose, or exceeds the intended Narration. Genesis 2.8, to 15. where there is a
Digression, respecting the Habitation which God provided for the Man he
created. Genesis 38. throughout is a Digression, as also Chap. 36. In the Epistles
of Paul, there are many neat Digressions, which are fairly, tho with different
Reasons, brought to serve his present scope, returning by a circle of Sentences
to his first original purpose. Romans 1.1, to ver. 8. Romans 1.1, to 8.
the Apostle from his Name, digresses to his Vocation, ver. 1. then to define
the Gospel, ver. 2. then to describe Christ, ver. 3, 4. again he comes to his
own Vocation, v. 5. at length he greets the Romans with Grace and Peace, and so
ends the Circle. His Scope runs thus, Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles,
separated unto the Gospel, ver. 1. the Gospel is the Doctrine of the Son of
God, ver. 2, 3. the Son of God is true God and Man, ver. 3, 4. By this Son of
God and Man, Paul was called to the Apostle-ship, to preach among the Gentiles,
ver. 5. the Romans are Gentiles, ver. 6. therefore let Grace and Peace from God
the Father, and our Lord, Jesus Christ, be to the Romans, ver. 7. See 1 Cor.
1.13, etc. Ephesians. 3.1, etc. Col. 1.3, to the end. There are many of these
Digressions in the Epistles of Peter, and in his Sermons, as they are described
by Luke in the Acts, etc.

(...), Metabasis, Transition, is, when the thing, or things, to be spoken, is
briefly hinted or pointed at; as 1 Cor. 12.13. But covet earnestly the best
Gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way. The first Words respect
what went before, and is their (...), or Sum; the latter prepares them with the
Argument of what follows. -- See 1 Cor. 15.1, 2. and 11.17.

IV. Schemes taken from Opposites, or Contraries.
(...), Antithesis, Contention; is, when a thing is illustrated by its contrary
opposite: -- As when the Fortune of the wicked is opposed to the Fortune of a
good Man. Psalm. 1. and 37. See also Isa. 1.21. and 5.3. and 43.32, etc. 59.9.
Lam. 1.1. Ezekiel. 16.33, 34. Romans 5.6, 7, 8. and 8.13.15. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Phil.
3.7, 8, 9, 14. 2 Pet. 2.19, etc.

(...), Antimetabole, Commutation or Inversion, is a kind of a delicate
Permutation (or Change) of Contraries one to another, as Mark 2.7. The Sabbath
was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath. More Examples, see Joh. 15.16.
Romans 4.1, 2, 3. and 7.19. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9. 2 Cor. 12.14, etc.

(...), Anticategoria, adverse Accusation, or a transferring to the Adversary,
is, when we fasten that upon our Adversary which another was accused or
suspected of: as Ezekiel. 18.29. and 33.17.

(...), Antistrophe, Inversion, is, when we retort any thing proposed as
granted into the contrary. It is also called (...), violent: We have an Example
in the Answer of Christ to the Woman of Canaan; Mat. 15.26, 27. which bears
this Sense, -- Because thou art a Dog (says Christ) the Children's Bread must
not be thrown to thee, -- Yea but (says she) because I am a Dog, you ought not
to deny me the Crumbs which fall from the Table, etc.

(...), Oxymaron, signifies one that is wittily foolish, and is, Ab (...)
acumen, and (...) stultus,
when Contraries are acutely joined, which seem at first sight to be nonsense,
but upon better view to be Elegant; as Job 22.6. To strip the naked of their
Clothing. Now the naked have no Clothes, and so cannot be stripped, -- so that
naked by a Synecdoche, signifies to be ill habited. Jer. 21.19. He shall be
buried with the Burial of an Ass: that is, with an unburied Burial, viz. not at
all: See 2 Chronicles. 36.6. and Josephus Lib. 10. Ant. Cap. 8. Acts 5.41. Acts 5.41.
Rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer Shame for his Name; (...) to
be worthy, and (...) to be disgraced, or contumeliously used, are Contraries,
but the Apostle joins them by a most elegant Oxymoron, -- denoting, that it is
the greatest Dignity to be treated unworthily for the sake of Christ; because
the Ignominy of the Godly in this World will be their Glory in the Presence of
God.

1 Timothy 5.6. 1 Timothy 5.6.
The Widow that lives delicately, (or in Pleasure) (...), vivens mortua est,
living she is dead, or as we render it, she is dead whilst she lives. -- By
Life in the former part, is meant temporal Life, by the latter, spiritual Life,
viz. Dead in Sin. Profane Writers much use this Figure, sometimes in a single
Word, as (...), a faint-hearted Bragger, (...), a rich Beggar, that is, a
covetous Man; (...), bitter-sweet, (as in Wedlock) (...), a wise Fool, that is,
a Simpleton, that conceits himself wise. Sometimes in two or more words, as
Sophocles says, (...), the Gifts of Enemies are not Gifts; (...), a lifeless
Life, a living Carcass. So Epiphanius says of Joseph, (...), the Husband and
not the Husband of Mary. Cicero -- If they are silent they say enough, -- so
Harmonious discord, he is mad with Reason, poor in the midst of Riches. --
Hence Scipio Affricanus said, Nunquam se minus otiosum esse, quam cum otiosus,
nec minus solum, quaem cum solus esset, etc. Vossius says, that in the very
word Oximoron, there is an Oxymoron, because it is compounded of Words that
signify Acuteness and Folly, as if a Man could speak simply and wisely at the
same time.

(...), Apodioxis, Rejection or Detestation; is, when any thing is rejected
with Indignation, as extremely absurd and intolerable; Psalm. 50.16, etc. God
rebukes the wicked that presume to preach his Word, -- so Christ rebukes Peter,
that would prevent his Passion, Mat. 16.23. and his Disciples, Luke 9.55. that
would have Fire from Heaven to consume the inhospitable Samaritans; so Peter
deals with Simon Magus, that would purchase the Holy Ghost for Money; Acts 8.20.

(...), Anthypophora, a contrary Inference; is, when the Objection is refuted
or disproved by the opposition of a contrary Sentence. It is also called (...),
Antieisagoge, and (...), Anticatalexis, Compensation, because it takes away the
Question, by opposing a stronger Argument; as Mat. 21.23, etc. this differs
from that Antipophora Chap. 6. for that answers a tacit, this an express
Objection.

V. Schemes taken from Comparates.
(...), Syncrisis, Parathesis, Comparison; is an Amplification of the Sacred
Speech by the comparison of such things as are like and unlike, greater or
less, -- as in a Proposition and its Answer, or the Proposition only, leaving
the Answer to be found out, of which sort there are many Examples in the
Parables of our Savior; of which see Gram. Sacr. p. 483, etc. and Illyricus
Part 2. Clavis Script. 4. Tract in the Titles of Similitudes, as also our
Treatise of Parables.

VI. Schemes taken from Division.
(...), Merismos, Distribution, is when the Whole is largely expounded by a
Deduction from the Parts (properly or analogically, so called) as Isa. 24.1, 2,
3. Ezekiel. 36.4. Romans 2.6, 7, 8. Joh. 5.28, 29.

Synathroismos.
(...), Congeries, a Heap or Pile; is when things of several Species are piled
or huddled together; Isa. 1.11, 13, 14. and 3.16. Romans 1.29, 30. Gal. 5.19, 20,
21, 22.

(...), Anabasis, Increase; is when the Speech ascends by degrees from the
lowest to the highest, -- or when the latter Words increase in Vehemence beyond
the former, still adding the Vehemence to the Oration: See Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. (
Acts 4.25, 26, 27.) Isa. 1.4. Psalm. 7.5. Psalm. 18.37, 38. Ezekiel. 2.6. Dan. 9.5.
Hab. 1.5. Zech. 7.11, 12. 1 Cor. 4.8. 1 John 1.1. Sometimes there is a progress
from the highest to the lowest; Ezekiel. 22.18. in the names of Metals; see Phil.
2.6, 7, 8.

VII. Schemes taken from Definition.
(...), Epexegesis, Interpretation, is when Words of the same Signification are
joined to illustrate a Sentence, as Psalm. 17.1. Psalm. 35.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 18.1,
2. Jon. 2.3, 4, 6. Zech. 6.12, 13. to this they refer (...), Epimone,
Commoration, viz. When one persists in his Speech, changing only the Words or
Sentences: Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. and 12.31, 32. Col. 2.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 7.36,
37, etc.

When that which was before obscurely delivered, is in the same Sentence more
clearly expounded, they call it (...), Hermeneia, which signifies
Interpretation; Isa. 1.22, 23, etc.

(...), Periphrasis, Circumlocution; is, when a thing is pronounced or
described with many Words. Some say that the Reason of this, is, because Truth
may be proposed more splendidly, or that which is unseemly may be avoided. Some
Interpreters say, That the Phrase Genesis 20.16. Genesis 20.16.
To be a covering of the Wives Eyes, is a Periphrasis of a Husband, because she
was really his Wife, and because it was his Duty to protect her (hence it is
said Ruth 3.9. Spread thy Skirt over thine Handmaid; that is, receive me into
thy Protection in a way of Marriage) then from the Duty of the Wife, who is to
reverence and obey her Husband; for the Women were to be veiled, to betoken
Subjection, Genesis 24.65. 1 Cor. 11.5, etc. The entire words of Abimeleck to
Sarah, Genesis 20.16. runs thus, Behold, I have given thy Brother a thousand
pieces of Silver: Behold, he is to thee a covering of the Eyes unto all that
are with thee, and with all other, and be thou advised, (so the Hebrew) as if
he had said, Thou did tell me Abraham was thy Brother, to whom (so falsely
represented) I have given a present of a thousand pieces Silver, for a
Recompense of what he suffered --. But he is thy Husband, not thy Brother, and
is so acknowledged by all thy Family: Therefore let him be so known to all
Strangers, and let this Passage forewarn you, by which you have wilfully put
your self in hazard, and dissemble no more that way, etc. So a parting or
double way is called the Door of Eyes in the Hebrew, Genesis 38.14.

It is said by a Periphrasis (they are the words of Vossius, lib. 4. Instit.
orat. cap. 13.) that when mention is made (...), of Men's retiring to a place of
Ease, they covered their Feet, Judge. 3.24. 1 Samuel 24.4. For the Hebrews,
Greeks, and Romans wore (not Breaches as we do, but) long Gowns or Coats, which
covered their Feet at that time. This may be an Instance of the Modesty of the
sacred Style. See more Examples; Judge. 5.10. 2 Samuel 3.29. 2 Kings 18.37. Esa.
36.12. 2 Chronicles. 26.5. Job 10.21, 22. where there is a Periphrasis of Death: See
Job 16.22. So Job 18.14. Death is called, The King of Terrors; that is, which
terrifies the wicked; ver. 13. it is called, The first born of Death; that is,
most cruel and funest, the Metaphor being taken from the Right of
Primo-geniture, to which belonged a double Portion, and other Prerogatives; and
therefore from these, whatever was excellent and chief in its own kind was by
the Hebrews called the firstborn (other Phrases respecting Death: See Genesis
15.15. and 25.8. and 42.38. 2 Kings 22.20. Psalm. 94.17. Psalm. 115.17. Esa.
14.15. and 38.10. 2 Cor. 5.1 Phil. 1.23. 2 Pet. 1.13, 14, etc.) Job 26.13. the
Whale is called a Serpent like a Bar, or oblong, because of his immense Length:
See other Examples, Eccles. 12.1, 2, etc. Prove. 30.31. 2 Samuel 5.9. with Josh.
15.8. 2 Samuel 5.6. Ezekiel. 1.22. where there is a Periphrasis of Crystal: Ezekiel.
24.16. and 21.15. a Wife is called the desire of the Eyes, as ver. 18. Ezekiel.
26.9. there is a Periphrasis of a battering Ram; -- a Periphrasis of Gems of a
bright Luster; Ezekiel. 18.14. as a Carbuncle, Ruby, Chrysolite, etc. See more
Examples, Ezekiel. 31.14. Micah 7.5. Zeph. 1.9.

In the New Testament Men are called (...), born of Women; Mat. 11.11. See also
Luke 21.35. Job 1.9. Luke 2.23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Mat. 1.18, 23. and 24.19. Mark
13.17. Luke 1.31. and 21.23. Rev. 12.2. There is a Periphrasis of Rest; Psalm.
132.3, 4, 5, etc. the meaning of which, that he would not rest till it be done,
etc.

VIII. Schemes taken from Testimony.
(...), a Sentence, is a certain general, brief and seasonable Saying, Gnome,
Chriae, Noema.
of the Manners or Affairs of this Life, without the allegation or citing of an
Author ( Prove. 1.2. they are called words of Prudence or Understanding.) But if
an Author be quoted, it is called (...) Chria, (that is, a profitable Saying)
as Seneca says, ita vivendum esse cum Hominibus, tanquam Deus videat, sic
loquendum cum Deo, tanquam Homines audiant: that is, We must so live with Men,
as if God had seen us; and we must so speak with God, as if Men heard us. And
as Craesus in Xenophon says, (...), Arts are the Fountains of good Things.
Demosthenes says, (...), The Laws are the Soul of a City, etc.

But if an Allusion only be made to a Sentence or famous Saying, or if it be
accommodated to a certain Person, it is called (...) (Noema) that is,
Cogitation, or thinking; which is frequent in profane Rhetoricians. But,

Concerning the sacred Scripture, It abounds with the most sweet and useful
Sentences in the World: John 6.68. Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the
Words of Eternal Life. A fair description of which, we have Eccles. 12.11. The
words of the Wise (are) as goads, (by which Men are pricked forward to their
Duty, as Oxen are pricked forward to go on, or labor) And as Nails (which keep
Men within the bounds of Duty, as Planks are fixed when they are nailed through)
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, (he speaks Metaphorically of Divine
Preaching, as 1 Cor. 3.6. Jam. 1.21. For the Masters of Assemblies are such as
founded or instituted Colleges, or such as in the public Assemblies of the
Church taught the Word of God, as the Prophets and Priests in the Old Testament
did) which are given from one Shepherd, (that is, God, the only Pastor of his
People; Psalm. 23.1. that is, the supreme Governor and Protector. He alone is
the Author of his written Word, speaking immediately by his Prophets, etc.

More especially and by way of brief Analogy, Citations of the Old Test. in the
New.
we will make some Observations of the Quotations of the Old Testament quoted
in the New, (1.) Quoad formam internam, with respect to the internal Form,
which is the sense of Scripture Oracles. (2.) The external Form, which is the
Manner or Character of speaking, and the Mode or Way of Allegation.

1. The internal or inward Form, with respect to which, the Allegation is made
either according to the sense intended by the Holy Spirit; or its Analogical
Accommodation. (1.) The Sense intended by the Holy Spirit, is either literal,
or typical and mystical. In an immediate literal Sense, there are frequent
Quotations which concern Christ, of whom the Prophets prophesied, (...), word
for word; as Esa. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and
thou shall call his Name Emanuel; which in the proper and proximate sense is
cited with respect to Christ; Mat. 1.23. -- compare also Deuteronomy. 18.15. with Act.
3.22. Psalm. 2.7. with Act. 13.33. Heb. 1.5. and 5.5. Psalm. 8.2. with Mat.
21.16. Psalm. 22.18. with Mat. 27.35. John 19.24. Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. with Heb.
10.5, etc. and Psalm. 45.6, 7* with Heb. 1.8, 9 and Psalm. 68.18. with Ephesians. 4.8.
and Psalm. 69.9. with Romans 15.3. and Psalm. 102.25. with Heb. 1.10. and Psalm.
110.1. with Mat. 22.24, 45. Mark 12.36. Luke 20.42, 43, 44. Acts 2.34, 35. 1
Cor. 15.25. Heb. 1.13. Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.6. and 7.17. Psalm. 110.22. with Mat.
21.42. Mark 12.10. Acts 4.11. 1. Pet. 2.7. So Esa. 11.10. with Romans 15.12. and
Isa. 28.16. with 1 Pet. 2.6. and Isa. 42.1, etc. with Mat. 12.17, etc. and Isa.
45.23. with Romans 14.11. and Esa. 61.1. with Luke 4.18, 21. and Amos 9.11. with
Acts 15.15, 16. Mic. 5.2. with Mat. 2.6. and Zech. 9.9. with Mat. 21.5. John
12.14, 15. and Zech. 11.12. with Mat. 27.9. and Zech. 12.10. with John 19.37.
and Zech. 13.7. with Mat. 25.31. Mal. 3.1. with Mat. 11.10. Mark 1.2, etc.

Junius and Tremellius, Tarnovius and Rivet, refer to this place, Hos. 11.1.
Out of Egypt have I called my Son; which Mat. 2.15. is cited and applied to
Christ.

2. There are Citations in a mediate and typical Sense out of the Old
Testament, respecting Christ and his Mystical Body the Church: As Exodus 12.46.
about the Paschal Lamb, applied to Christ, John 19.26. the Brazen Serpent,
Numb. 21.8, 9. with John 3.14, 15. Jonas Chap. 2.1, 11. with Mat. 12.39. Adam
and Eve, Genesis 2.23, 24. with Ephesians. 5.31, 32, etc. To this Head also may be
reduced those Allegations, which are Expositions of an Allegorical Speech, as
in Phil. Sacr. p. 375.

An Analogical Accommodation (which Cajetan called a transumptive sense) is
when the words of the Old Testament are used in the New, and accommodated to
the Event, and for Convenience or Similitude are attributed to a Person or some
certain thing, extending it beyond the scope the first holy Writer; as Mat.
13.35. the saying, Psalm. 78.2. I will open my Mouth in a Parable, I will utter
dark Sayings of old; is analogically said to be fulfilled in Christ: For, as
God the Father by the Prophets opened the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven to
his People at all times; so Christ who was, (...), the hypostatical Word of the
Father, thought meet to express himself in Parables. Yet in the 78 Psalm, true
Examples are given; but Christ uses feigned Narrations, (...), both which agree
in this, that they are called Parables, that is, Similitudes, viz. such as are
brought in by Christ, and recited by the Psalmist on purpose to admonish the
People by those Examples, of what they were to expect from God by their
Perseverance in, or Apostasy from the Faith: See 1 Cor. 10.6, 11, etc.

The words Esa. 53.4. viz. He has born our Griefs (or Infirmities) and carried
our Sorrows (or Diseases) are cited Mat. 8.17. Now if you respect the Person or
adequate Subject of whom the Prophet speaks; the Allegation or Citation is,
(...), according to the word, or literally to be understood: but if you will
have respect to the thing of which Matthew treats; it must be only by way of
Analogy and Accommodation. For here there is an account given of Christ, with
respect to his healing diverse Diseases, in which he is said to accomplish what
was foretold by the Prophetical Oracle, and in a literal sense to bear our
Spiritual Infirmities in his Passion and Death, as it is expounded 1 Pet. 2.24,
25. More Citations you may find, Deuteronomy. 30.11. with Romans 10.6. in the
description of the Righteousness of Faith; see also Esa. 43.19. compared with
Rev. 21.5. Mat. 2.17, 18. with Jer. 31.15. Mat. 13.14. with Esa. 6.9. Mat.
15.8. with Esa. 29.13. Luke 23.30. Rev. 6.16. with Hos. 8.10. Acts 13.40, 41.
with Habak. 1.5. Romans 9.27, 28. with Esa. 10.22. Romans 9.29. with Isa. 1.9. 1
Cor. 1.19, 20. with Isa. 29.14. and 33.18. Rev. 1.7. with Zech. 12.10. and Rev.
11.4. with Zech. 4.14, etc.

2. As to the exernal Form.
As to the external Form, or the kind of speaking, or the manner of Citation,
the following things are observable. (1.) The frequent Quotation of the
Septuagint, or the ancient Greek Translation of the Old Testament, of which, as
Hierom notes, In quest Heb. super Genesis To. 4. fol. 102.
Hoc generaliter observandum, quod ubicunque sancti Apostoli aut Apostolici
viri loquantur ad Populos his plerumque Testimoniis abutuntur, quae (per
Translationem Septuagint. Interpretum) jam fuerant in Gentibus divulgatae; that
is, This is to be generally noted, that wheresoever the holy Apostles or
Apostolical Men spoke to the People, they did for the most part use these
Testimonies, which (that is, the Translation of the Seventy Interpreters) were
now published to the Gentiles. And that even in those things where there is a
manifest difference between that Translation and the Original Hebrew Text, as
Luke 3.36. wherein, the Genealogy of Christ, the Name Cainan is put in which is
not in the Original Hebrew, but in the version of the Seventy, of which more
hereafter.

The words ((...), restoring Sight to the blind) as it is cited, Luke 4.18. are
not in the Hebrew Text of Isa. 61.1. but in the Septuagint: Compare Zech. 9.9.
with Mat. 21.8. and Psalm. 8.2. with Mat. 21.16. Upon which Part 2. Clavis
Script. p. 103.
Illyricus thus says, In septuaginta Interpretum versione citanda notandum est,
Apostolos in Novo Testamento non immerito aliquid dedisse imbecillitati
Christianorum, and communi consuetudini, quod non aliter aliquoties dicta
Scripturae citaverint, quam sicut jamdudum apud vulgus ex illa versione
innotuerint sic enim illi pusillis Christi lac praebentes, ac ad eorum captum
sese accommodantes, loqui non dedignati; sic videmus etiam Parents aliquando
cum Infantibus balbutire; that is, In the Citations of the seventy Interpreters
in the New Testament, we are to note, That the Apostles yielded much to the
Weakness of Christians and common Custom, and that seasonably, in not quoting
those Places otherwise than the Capacity of the Vulgar could reach: For they
giving as it were Milk to those tender Babes of Christ, and accommodating
themselves to their Understanding, disdained not to speak after that manner. So
we see Parents sometimes lisp to their little Ones.

Rivet says thus In Isagog. Scrip. cap. 10. p. 138.
They (viz. the holy Penmen of the New Testament) followed this Interpretation
in those things only, which did no way prejudice the Truth of Faith, especially
when they had occasion to discourse of any dangerous departure from that very
version received among the Greeks; or, as he adds, The Apostles and Apostolical
Men used that common Version by a Liberty no way dangerous, to win upon the
Greeks or Gentiles, who had great Veneration for it, tho not in every part
perfect. Yet we must carefully note, that the Apostles did not always quote the
Septuagint, as by the comparing of diverse places may appear; as Esa. 25.8. for
the Hebrew word there, (...).
which signifies in sempiternum, for everlasting, the Septuagint has it (...),
prevailing or overcoming; but St. Paul translates it (...), in Victory: Matthew
and John, as Jerome witnesses in his Comment on Esa. 6. made their Quotations
from the Hebrew, whereas Luke was very skilful in the Art of Medicine, and
better read in Greek; therefore his Style is elegant both in his Gospel, and in
the Acts of the Apostles, savouring more than they of human Eloquence, and more
using Greek than Hebrew Citations. Examples from John and Matthew are Zech.
12.10. which the Septuagint renders (...), They will look upon me, because they
have insulted (for (...) transfixed or pierced) but John 19.37. cites it out of
the Hebrew, (...), They shall see him whom they pierced: compare the Version of
the Seventy, Hos. 11.1. with Mat. 2.15. Mic. 5.1. with Mat. 2.6. Esa. 42.1, 2,
3, 4. with Mat. 12.18, 19, 20, 21. these and other Passages are to be opposed
to such as do overmuch extol that Greek Version, and attribute divine and
authentic Authortiy to it, because the Evangelists and Apostles sometimes made
use of it, which kind of reasoning might carry a show of Validity had they
always used it, which it is certain they did not, and the Reason why they cited
it sometimes is given before. Citations from sense, not word for word.


2. Testimonies, and Prophecies of the Old Testament, are alleged and
produced in the New, not always according to the Letter, or word for word, but
frequently by change of the Phrase in diverse Respects; as,

1. Sometimes words are left out, which are not for the present purpose,
Detraction 1.
as appears, if you compare Deuteronomy. 24.1. with Mat. 5.31. and Deuteronomy. 25.5. with
Mat. 22.24. and Esa. 9.1. with Mat. 4.15. and Esa. 42.4. with Mat. 12.21. Some
observe more especially that the sacred Writers when they make Allegations, do
for brevity and perspicuity sake, cite the first and the last, and cut off the
middle, as Esa. 28.11, 12. with 1 Cor. 14.21. and Esa. 40.6, 7, 8. with 1 Pet.
1.24, 25. and Zech. 9.9. with Mat. 21.5, etc.

Sometimes words are added for Illustration or Exposition's sake, Adjection 2.
as Genesis 2.24. with Mat. 19.5. where ((...), they two) are emphatically added,
And they two shall be one Flesh: So Deuteronomy. 6.13. compared with Mat. 4.10. where
the exclusive word is added with great evidence, viz. Thou shall worship the
Lord [thy God] and him [only] shall thou serve: See also Esa. 64.4. with 1 Cor.
2.9. where these words are added, Neither has it entered into the Heart of Man.

There is sometimes a Transposition of Words, which nevertheless diminishes
not, Transposit. 3.
nor varies the sense, as Esa. 64.4. compared with 1 Cor. 2.9. where the
hearing of the Ear, and the seeing of the Eye are transposed; so the
Destruction of Altars and the killing of the Prophets, are transposed; 1 Kings
19.14. with Romans 11.3.

There is sometimes a change of the words themselves, Change 4.
and sometimes of their Accidents: The change of words themselves happens, (1.)
From the diversity of reading in the Hebrew Text, especially when the Quotation
is from the Septuagint; who having made use of Bibles not pointed, did
frequently read and expound it otherwise then, it is in the Hebrew; Genesis 47.31.
And Israel bowed himself upon the Head (...), of the Bed (he worshipped or
adored his Lord God, so as that he bowed his Body to his Beds-head) but the
Septuagint have it (...), Et adoravit I^rael super summitatem virgae s^ae Heb
11.21.
And Israel worshipped upon the end or top of his Rod or Staff; for they read
it as if it had been (...), which signifies a Rod or Staff, the difference
being only in the Points. This Version the Apostle exactly follows, Heb. 11.21.
And whereas there is a different reading even in the Greek, some Copies having
(...), ejus, of his; some (...), suus, his: There arises a double
Interpretation here, viz. That Jacob through Age being in Bed, leaned upon his
Staff, and thanking God for the promise of a Sepulture with his Fathers; hence
say some, it should be thus, Et inclinavit se Baculo suo innixus; And he bowed
himself, leaning upon his Staff, or, that he bowed himself to the Scepter which
Joseph held, and honored his Son in his Office; that that Dream might be
fulfilled which Joseph had of the Obeisance of the Sun and Moon, mentioned Genesis
37.9. which the vulgar Version, and that of Erasmus will have rendered, And he
adored, leaning on the top of his Rod, etc. Another Example you have Psalm.
40.7. Mine Ears have thou opened; of which Metaphor, see our sacred Philology,
Book 1. Vol. 1. cap. 7. But the Septuagint render it (...), But a Body have
thou prepared for me; which Version the Apostle cites, Heb. 10.5. Heb 10.5*
This reading may be explained two ways: First of Christ's human Body; hence
the Syriac elegantly translates it; But with a Body have thou clothed me: and
so the Version agrees excellently with the original Hebrew. Because thou have
prepared a Body for me, and have made me an obedient Servant (which is
symbolically noted by the digging or boring of the Ears) that I may offer the
self-same Body as a Sacrifice to thee for the Sins of Mankind.

Secondly; as a Body, in opposition to Figures and Shadows, as Westhemerus
says, VVesthemerus lib. de Tropis Sac. Scrip. p. 148.
Sacrificium and Oblationem noluisti, id est, Ceremonias illas V. T.
repudiasti, sed Corpus apt asti mihi, etc. That is, Sacrifice and Offering thou
would not; that is, thou have abrogated the Ceremonies of the Old Testament,
but thou have prepared a Body for me; that is, the Truth, of which, those
Sacrifices were only Shadows; a Figure thou would no longer, the time coming
wherein the Body, that is, the very thing it self, and Truth was to be made
manifest, Col. 2.9, 17. Hunnius in his Comment says, That these words from the
Greek Translation are by a very good Reason retained, because that Body
provided or fitted for Christ, or taken in the Incarnation, is to be opposed
(as a thing adumbrated, and the true propitiatory Sacrifice) to the Rites of
the Law, which contained only a Shadow, not the absolute Image or Substance of
things.

(...).
2. Exegetically, that is, by way of Illation or Inference, as Psalm. 68.18. Thou
have received Gifts among Men (so the Hebrew) which Ephesians. 4.8. is thus quoted,
(...), And gave Gifts unto Men; both are true, and the one is the Consequence
of the other, or an Illation from it. Esa. 1.9. Except the Lord of Hosts had
left us a Remnant ((...), reliquum) this Romans 9.29. is called (...), Seed: So
from the Septuagint, Esa. 10.22. If thy People be as the Sand of the Sea, etc.
it is said Romans 9.27. Si fuerit (...), If the number of the Children of Israel,
etc.

Esaiah 28 16. Romans 9.27. 1 Pet. 2.6.
It is said, Esa. 28.16. He that believes shall not make haste, which Romans
9.27. is quoted, Whosoever believes on him, (...), and 1 Pet. 2.6. (...),
shall not blush, be ashamed, or be confounded: the latter follows from the
former; He that believes makes no haste, but patiently expects the fulfilling
of Divine Promises; and therefore he will certainly partake of them; whence it
follows, that he has no cause to be ashamed of his hope, etc.

Amos 5.27.
Amos 5.27. I will cause you to go into Captivity beyond Damascus: this is
quoted, Acts 7.43. thus, I will carry you away beyond Babylon. Both were
fulfilled: for the Israelites were not only carried away into Syria only, whose
Chief or Metropolitan City Damascus is, but also beyond Babylon, into Persia
and Caspia, as appears, Esd. 8.17.

Micah 5.2.
Mic. 5.2. And thou Bethlehem Ephratah, tho thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me that is to be a Ruler in
Israel. This Text is thus cited Mat. 2.6. And thou Bethlehem in the Land of
Juda, art not the least among the Princes of Juda; for out of thee shall come a
Governor, that shall rule (or feed) my People Israel. In the former Text it is
called Bethlehem Ephrata, of which you may read Genesis 35.16, 19. and 48.16. In
the latter, it is called, The Land of Juda, by a Synecdoche, for a City seated
in the Land of Juda: For at that time the Epithet of Juda was more used, and to
Herod himself better known then the Surname of Ephrata, which perhaps at that
Season, grew out of use, or was less known to the Vulgar. In the former Text
Bethlehem is called little, with respect to external Splendour and Eminency: But
in the latter it is called not the least, because of that singular Honor which
accrued to it by the Nativity of the Messiah. In the former it is said, among
the thousands of Juda; but here among the Princes of Juda, of which, see our
first Book, Chap. 3. Sect. 3. there the Messiah is called a Ruler in Israel,
but here a Captain (or Governor), who shall feed the People: which eminent
Metaphor is elsewhere expounded as it respects the Office of Christ.

So much for a change in Words themselves, the like may be found in their
Accidents, such as respect, (1.) Number, as that which is said, Psalm. 32.1. in
the singular Number, viz. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose
Sin is covered, is cited, Romans 4.7. in the plural; so Esa. 52.7. with Romans
10.15. in both places the sense is the same, for the singular is put for the
plural synecdochically. Compare Deuteronomy. 6.16. with Mat. 4.7, etc. (2.) Person,
Gram. Sacr. p. 680.
of which Examples are given elsewhere. (3.) Mood and Tense, of which there is
an eminent Example in the Citation from Esa. 6.10. which is made Mat. 13.14,
15. John 12.40. Acts 28.26, 27. where there is an emphatical Change of the
Imperative Mood into the Indicative, and of the Present Tense of the
Subjunctive into the Future Tense of the Indicative.

Now before we proceed it is to be noted, Note,
That sometimes there is such a Change made in the Quotation, that we cannot
clearly show from what place of the Old Testament it is taken, as Ephesians. 5.14.
wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee Light; which some refer to Esa. 60.1. and others to Esa.
26.19, 21. But it seems to agree most with the first place, because of the
likeness of the Scope.

Another sacred Sentence of a doubtful Original we meet with, Jam. 4.5. Do ye
think that the Scripture says in vain, the Spirit that dwells in us lusts
to Envy? which words are thought to be cited from Genesis 8.21. others think them
to be rather taken from Numb. 11.29, etc.

3. The Writers of the Old Testament are wont from two or three alleged
Testimonies to make up one entire Citation, or, as Salmeron says, Tom. 1. p.
109. To produce one Testimony from diverse Prophets put together, as Mat. 21.4,
5. of which the first part is taken from Esa. 62.11. and the latter from Zech.
9.9. The Evangelist calls it the Prophet, in the singular Number, to denote the
Harmony and Agreement that is betwixt the Prophets. Compare Mat. 21.13. with
Esa. 56.7. and Jer. 7.11. and Mark 1.2, 3. with Mal. 3.1. Esa. 40.3. and Acts
1.20. with Psalm. 69.25, 26. and Psalm. 109.7, 8. Romans 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. which are taken from Psalm. 14.2, 3. Psalm. 53. Psalm. 5. Psalm. 140.
Psalm. 10. Esa. 59.7, 8. and Psalm. 36. Compare Romans 9.33. with Esa. 28.16. Esa.
8.14. and Romans 11.26. with Esa. 59.20. or 27.9. or 4.4. or Jer. 31.34. and 1
Cor. 15.54, 55. with Esa. 25.8. Hos. 13.14. and 1 Pet. 2.7. with Psalm. 118.22.
and Esa. 8.14. Heb. 9.19, 20. with Exodus 24.6, 7, 8. and Numb. 19.6.

Testimonies are not only cited from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but
also from the Books of the ancient Rabbis, as we have already touched upon. In
2 Timothy 3.8. there is mention made of Jannes and Jambres, upon which Schikard In
praefat. Be^hinath Happeruschin
says, Haec nomina Magorum Aegypti nuspiam in Scripturis, at in Targum, etc.
These names of the Egyptian Magicians are no where to be read in Scriptures,
but in the Targum, of Jonathan Ben Uziel, upon Exodus 7.11. they are expressly
found: Paul therefore quotes this famous Paraphrase of the Law: Yet others say,
that this Targum of Jonathan, is of too late a Date, if we consider the Style
and Matters treated of, than that Paul could peruse them; but that he and the
Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase, rather received it from common Opinion or
Tradition: And Schindler affirms, that the Names Juhanes and Mambres were
expressed in the Talmud tract. Sanhedrim. Pliny in his Natural History, lib.
30. cap. 1. speaks of Names something like these, and represents them as a
Faction that opposed Moses, etc.

To this we may refer what we read in the 9th Verse of the Epistle of Jude,
concerning the Controversy between the Archangel Michael and the Devil, about
the Body of Moses; and also the Prophecy of Enoch concerning the coming of the
Lord to Judgment; ver. 14, 15. of which Junius says, that the former is taken
from Zech. 3.1, 2. where that Divine Rebuke is read; And that by Michael we are
to understand Christ, called the Archangel, because he is the Prince of Angels:
See Dan. 12.1. But the Body of Moses is not to be understood properly but
figuratively of the Truth and Complement of the Law given by Moses (see Col.
2.17.) of which Complement (which is in Christ) he was a Type; Zech. 3.1.
he was a Type; And he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the
Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his Right Hand to resist; Zech. 3.1,
etc.

We meet with three Citations from profane Writers, quoted by the Apostle
Paul, as (1.) Acts 17.28. Acts 17.28.
For in him (that is the Lord God) we live, move, and have our being, as
certain also of your own; Poets have said; For we are also his Offspring,
(...), which piece of a Verse Clemens Alexandrinus 5 Str^mat. fol. 123.
says, is taken from Aratus in Phaenomenis, and recites the entire place of
Aratus consisting of some Verses. In Aratus this is attributed to, or spoken of
Jupiter, which Paul took notice of, as perversely and altogether unjustly
ascribed to that imaginary, false, and fantastical God, and therefore restores
that Sentence to the only true God. This Aratus flourished in the time of
Ptolomy Philadelphus, and was illustrious in the Court of Antigonus the Son of
Demetrius, who governed the Macedonian Monarchy in the 105 Olympiad: Mac. 2.1.
see Sextus Senensis, lib. 2. Bibliothec. sanctae, Tit. Aratus. In the Golden
Verses of Pithagoras, there is the like Sentence, (...).

1 Cor. 15.33.
2. (...), Corrumpunt Mores bonos colloquia (vel consortia) prava; Bad (or evil)
Discourse (or Society) corrupts good Manners. This Sentence consisting of a
Senary Iambick, some attribute to Menander, therein following Jerome in his
Epistle to the Orator Magnus. Others ascribe it to Euripides: However it is,
the Verse is made Canonical by the Apostle. And the word (...) (rendered
Communication) really signifies a Fellowship, or keeping Company with impious
and lewd Persons, from (...), caetus, a Congregation or gathering together: See
Esa. 22.13.

3. Tit. 1.12. one of themselves, a Prophet of their own, said (...), The
Cretans are always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies; ver. 13. This Witness is
true. There is a most elegant Oxymoron, in these words of Paul; The Cretans are
always Liars; but he that said this was a Cretan, therefore (it may be
concluded) he was a Liar; 596. l. 7.
yet says Paul, his Testimony is true: And hence perhaps he calls him Prophet;
this Greek Verse is thus rendered in Latin ( Cres semper Mendax mala Bestia,
venture iners est. Erasmus Adag. 12, 29. says thus, Divus Hieronimus in
Commentariis, quos in hanc scripsit Epistolam, etc.
Jerome in his Commentaries written upon this Epistle, intimates that this
Verse is found in the Works of Epimenides, in a Book, whose Title was, De
Oraculis, of Oracles. Hence Paul calls him a Prophet, whether by way of Irony,
or because of the Subject he treated on, we will not determine. The beginning
of this Verse (...), was made bold with by Callimachus a Poet of Cyrene, in a
Hymn, wherein he celebrates the Praises of Jupiter, and lampoons the Cretans
very satyrically for their Vanity and Boasting that he was buried among them;
whereas (as this Heathen Zealot fancies) Jove was immortal: Hence Ovid said,
Nec fingunt omnia Cretes, the Cretans do not always lie; hence also rose the
Proverb, (...), (to play the Cretan) was put for to lie. The occasion of this
Discourse was, that the Cretans had a certain Sepulcher with this Epitaph,
(...), that is, Here lies one whom they call Jupiter. Because of this
Inscription, the Poet charges them with a Lie, in these words, (...); that is,
The Cretans are always Liars, evil Beasts, slow Bellies: Therefore, O King, the
Cretans have built a Sepulcher for you: But thou have not died, for thou always
live, etc.

4. To conclude, we will only add the Passage we read, Acts 17.22, 23. Ye Men
of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious; for as I
passed by, and contemplated on what ye worship, (or beheld your Worship) I
found an Altar with this Inscription, (...), To the unknown God: Whom therefore
ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you, etc. Upon which Jerome
excellently says Epist. ad Magnum Oratorem Romanum Tom. 3. operum, f. 148.
(after he had recited some sayings of learned Ethnicks, quoted by the Apostle)
This Leader of the Christian Host, and this invincible Orator, pleading the
Cause of Christ, discreetly urges that accidental view of the Inscription of
that Heathenish Altar, as an Argument to prove the true Faith. He learned of
the true David, to snatch the Sword from the Enemies Hand, and chop off his
Head with his own Weapon, etc. Of this (...), or Inscription on that Altar
Ludovicus Vives says, In lib. 7. de Civit. Dei cap. 17.
That in the Attican Fields there were very many Altars dedicated to unknown
Gods, hinted at by the Evangelist Luke, Acts 17. as also by Pausanias in his
Atticks, (...), (the Altars of unknown Gods) which Altars were the Invention of
Epimenides the Cretan. For when that Country was visited with a sore Plague,
they consulted the Delphian Oracle, whose Answer is reported to be, That they
must offer Sacrifices, but named not that God to which they should be offered.
Epimenides, who was then at Athens, commands that they should send Beasts
(intended for the Sacrifice) through the Fields, and that the Sacrificers
should follow with this Direction, that wherever they should stand, there they
must be sacrificed to the unknown God, in order to pacify his Wrath. From that
time therefore to the time of Diogenes Laertius, these Altars were visited.
More of this may be seen in Sixtus Senensis, lib. 2. Biblioth, Tit. Arae
Atheniensis Inscriptio. See also Wolfius Tom. 1. Lectionum Memorabilium, p. 4.
v. 20, etc. So much of Schemes or Figures.

Schema hujus Mundi citius prolabitur Vndis.

In Jesu Coelo
solo spes rata, firma quies.

1 Cor. 7.31. (...).

Praeterit hujus Mundi Figura.

FINIS.
A TREATISE Of all the TYPES, PARABLES and ALLEGORIES of the Old and
New Testament, with the Expositions of the Learned upon such as are obscure,
etc.
IN treating of a Type, we are to remark, 1. Its Definition, and that (1.) With
respect to its Name. (2.) With respect to the Thing it self. 2. Its Division.
3. Its Canons, or Rules: of which in order.

Article I. Of the Definition of a Type.
IN the Definition, (1.) We are to respect its Etymology. (2.) Its Homonymy, or
various Acceptations. The Greek word (...) (Typos) which generally is used in
this Affair, is derived of (...), (which signifies to beat or strike, and is
formed of its mean Praeter-Tense) has various Significations. As,

1. In a general Signification (...), a Type, is called the Print or Mark,
which is made by beating, as John 20.25. what we call, the print of the Nails,
is in Greek, (...), the Type of the Nails; that is, the Impression or Holes
left by the Nails beaten or driven through his Hands.

2. More particularly, It denotes an Example or Exemplar, which, in certain
Actions we imitate, this goes before, and is to be imitated; see Phil. 3.17. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Pet. 2.21. Acts
23.25. Romans 6.17. What we translate Form of Doctrine, in the Greek, is (...),
that Type of Doctrine; that is, in which God has prescribed the Rule, Form and
Example of Obedience, and Life to us, viz. to believe the Gospel, and live
acordingly, Phil. 1.27.

Arist. ^th. 1. c. 3. and l. 2. c. 7.
3. In another Signification (...), a Type, is called a Description not very
exact, viz. that which is made summarily, briefly, and less completely.

4. It has also another Signification with Physicians, who call that Form and
Order observed or noted in the Increase or Abatement of Diseases; (...), a
Type, denoting the Symptoms of the Disease, and what it is: Hence Galen writ a
Book entitled, (...) of Types. As to other Senses wherein Lawyers and
Politicians take it, consult Stephanus in Thesaur. Graecae Linguae, Tom. 3.
Col. 1691.

5. But to approach nearer to our Scope and Business, (...), a Type, denotes a
Figure, Image, Effigy, or Representation of any thing, and that either
painted, feigned, or engraven or expressed by any other way of Imitation. Acts
7.43. So, Isocrates in Evag. encom. calls (...), the Images of Bodies, ((...).)

6. Divines understand nothing else by Types, but the Images or Figures of
things present, or to come; especially the Actions and Histories of the
Old Testament, respecting such as prefigured Christ our Savior in his Actions,
Life, Passion, Death, and the Glory that followed. In which Sense some judge
this Appellation to be (...), written or inscribed, and refer Romans 5.14. to it,
where Adam the first Man, is called (...), Figura futuri, the Figure of him
that was to come, (viz. the last Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45.) and 1 Cor. 10.6. (...),
now these things were our Types; and ver. 11. (...), now all these things
happened to them for Types. These two Texts we translate Examples, or
Ensamples. But in the former place ( Romans 5.14.) a Type seems not properly to
denote what we here intend, for there is a certain Comparison made between Adam
and Christ, which carries rather a Disparity than a Similitude in it. The
Protasis, or Proposition, is in v. 12. As Adam conveyed Death together with Sin
to all that were born of him (ut Adamus omnibus ex se natis cum peccato mortem
communicate.) The Apodosis, Rendition, or Return, is not expressly set down, but
insinuated in the foregoing words, as if he had said, So Christ conveys or
communicates Life to all those that by Faith are given to, and implanted in
him. A Type therefore in the said place denotes a Similitude generically, and
relates to the fifth particular. In the latter Example (...) a Type, signifies
an Example, Shadow, or Umbrage of things to come, as the words annexed make
out, yet not properly relating to the Types in hand. To this some refer Heb.
8.5. Acts 7.44. where (...), a Type, is taken for the Pattern and Image shown
to Moses in the Mount [ Exodus 25.40. in the Hebrew it is called (...), an
Exemplar (Pattern) Figure or Form] denoting that the Structure of that
Levitical Tabernacle, was a Type or Prefiguration of the Truth, which was to be
expected under the Gospel Dispensation: So Gregory Nazianzen says, Orat. 42.
(...), p. 683.
That the Universal Law was a shadow of things to come, as the Apostle
declared, and as God commanded Moses to do all things, (...), according to the
Example showed him in the Mount, viz. of things obvious to sense, which
afterward were to be discovered by Faith. Piscator says that by (...), a Type,
Heb. 8.5. the (...), or Arch-Type, is to be understood; that is, the principal
or primitive Exemplar or Pattern of those heavenly and spiritual things, which
were prefigured by the Tabernacle, and the Ceremonies relating to it, as
Anti-Types, viz. the Death of Christ upon the Altar of the Cross, and his
Entrance into the heavenly Sanctuary, which things were spiritually revealed to
Moses.

But we may be satisfied that by Type (or Example) in the aforesaid place, we
are to understand the Disposition and Form of the future building of God's
House under the Evangelical Dispensation, (and so it belongs to the fifth
Signification) according to the Signification of the Hebrew word (...) (Banah)
aedificavit, he has built.

II. Synonimous Terms, (1.) The word Typos used by the Seventy, answers to
(...), Exodus 25.40. and (...) Amos 5.26. but neither of these concern us in
this place: yet we may refer to this that general Appellation, (...) (Mashal)
which denotes a Similitude, or the Comparison of one thing to another: Also a
Parable, Proverb, Axiom, dark or figurative Speech: See Ezekiel. 24.3. In the
Arabic Tongue we meet with the word (...) (Schibh) which denotes a Similitude,
Type, or Parable, from (...), he was like, etc. (2.) From Greek Writers, as
well Canonical, as Ecclesiastical, we may mention some Synonimous Appellations;
as from the New Testament, we find that the Types of things to come are called,
(1.) (...), a shadow of things to come, Heb. 8.5. (...), shadow of heavenly
things, and Heb. 10.1. (...), the shadow of good things to come; because
Christ, with his Blessings and Works performed for the Salvation of Mankind,
was proposed to the Godly in an obscure Way, or a shadowy Description of his
Lineaments in the Old Testament. Hence some think that Romans 13.12. the
Old Testament is represented by Night (or Darkness) and the New Testament by
Day (or face to face.) (2.) (...), an Example or Pattern; the Priests of the
Old Testament are called Heb. 8.^.
(...), to serve to those things (that is to be exercised in those parts of
Divine Worship) which were Types and Figures of things to be expected in the
New; here there may be an Ellipsis of the Preposition (...), and so the sense
is, that their Priesthood or Ministry expired (...) in the Exemplar or Shadow
of heavenly things, because by their Priesthood, the Celestial and Spiritual
Priesthood of Christ was prefigured as in Types; the like Appellation we have
Heb. 9.23.

3. (...) a Sign, Mat. 12.39. where Christ applies the three days stay of Jonas
in the Whales Belly, as a Type of himself, (...), the Sign of the Prophet
Jonas. Here Christ accommodates his Speech to the words of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who asked a Sign of him; otherwise a Sign and a Type differ in
Signification, the one being of a larger, the other of a narrower
Signification: Every Type is a Sign, but every Sign is not a Type: Every Sign
may represent the thing signified although unlike; but the condition of a Type, is
that it must bear a Parity, Proportion, or Likeness to the thing typified.

4. (...), a Parable, Heb. 9.9. which Term in the Hebrew Books of the
Old Testament frequently answers the word (...), but is put in this place for
such typical or prefigurative Things, and Actions, as are related in the
Old Testament: So Heb. 11.19. the Phrase of Abraham's receiving his Son in a
Figure, (which Son was by him adjudged as good as dead) (...) in a Parable or
Similitude, is well expounded, that he was a Type or Similitude of Christ. In
Ecclesiastical Writers we meet with the same Appellations, or such as are very
near, only we are to take notice, (1.) That they confound the Allegory with the
Type frequently: So Augustine Tom. 1. oper. lib. de vera Relig. cap. 56. says,
an Allegory (under which Term undoubtedly he comprehended Types) is fourfold,
viz. respecting History, Fact, Preaching, and Sacraments. (2.) Gregory
Nazianzen puts the Antitype for the Type, Orat. 42. (...), Page 692. his words
are, (...); that is, Yet really the Brazen Serpent was not hanged up to prevent
the biting of Serpents, nor yet as a Type of Christ, who suffered for us, but
as an Antitype. (3.) In the Latin Tongue the words Exemplar, Figura,
Praefiguratio, are much used, that is, a Pattern, Figure, or representing a
thing to come. But the word Type was most usual to denote Privileges to come,
by the donation of Patents to such as were Denizens of the City of Rome, when
it was Imperial.

The Correlative, or that which answers a Type, is the Antitype, Anti^ype.
that is, the thing represented by the Type, or that which answers to it; as 1
Pet. 3. where when the History of eight Souls saved by Water (in the Deluge)
Genesis 6.7. and 8. is mentioned, the Apostle subjoyns ver. 21. (...), 1 Pet. 3.21.
(i. e.) to which the Antitype Baptism does now also save us; so the Greek, by
which the Apostle denotes, that Baptism which is a Medium, or means of
Salvation in the Gospel Dispensation, is the Antitype, or Answers to the Type,
of that great Preservation of those few faithful Persons that were saved in
that Universal Deluge, commonly called Noah's Flood.

This Antitype, or thing prefigured, has other Appellations in the
New Testament, as first, Col. 2.17. where it is called (...) a Body, which is
opposed to (...) a Shadow, and signifies only the very thing or genuine
Essence, whose (...), Obumbration, or Shadow, or Picture was prefigured in the
time of the Old Testament; hence it is said ver. 9. of the same Chapter, that in
him (viz. Christ) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, (...) bodily. In the
time of the Old Testament God dwelt in the Temple of Jerusalem, and upon the
Ark of the Covenant, in the Mercy-Seat, but it was (...) typically. But when
the Fullness of Time was come, the whole Fullness of the Deity dwelt bodily,
truly, and in a most eminent manner personally in Christ's Humane Nature.

2. Consult Heb. 10.1. where you will find a Metaphor taken from Painters, who
first with a Charcoal are wont to draw a (...), that is, a rude Adumbration or
Delineation of the thing they intend to paint, and afterward perfect it with
true and lively Colors, till they make a fair Picture. By the Frist of these,
the Apostle in this place, means the (...), or Shadows of the Old Testament; by
the latter, the Truth and Complement of the Old Testament Types, which the
Apostle calls (...), Images.

Heb. 9.23.
Heb. 9.23. (...), things in the Heavens, or, (as the Explication subjoyned has
it (...)) heavenly things, are called such things as are understood to typify
the heavenly Priesthood of Christ, and other things mentioned in the Old
Testament: So ver. 24. they are called (...), true, by which is hinted, that
the Images, Prefigurations, or Adumbrations of those good things, were but
exhibited only in the Old Testament: See John 1.17. where it is said, That Grace
and Truth came by Jesus Christ: In which place, Grace is opposed to the Curse
of the Law, and Truth, to the Ceremonies, Shadows and prefigured Types thereof.

The Definition of the thing as thus: A typical sense is when things hidden (or
unknown) whether present, or to come (especially when the Transactions recorded
in the Old Testament prefigure the Transactions in the New) are expressed by
External Actions, or Prophetical Visions. The Division of Types follows.

Article II. Of the Division of Types.
HEre we shall wave the wranglings of Critics, who spent many words to confute
each other, and give the best account we can of the real Division of Types,
which may be reduced to two sorts. (1.) Prophetical Types. (2.) Historical
Types; of which in Order.

Article III. Of Prophetical Types, and Typical and Symbolical Actions.
PRophetical Types are such, whereby the Prophets who were divinely inspired by
External Symbols, figured or signified things present, or to come, in their
Speeches, or Writings, either by way of Warning, Admonition, or Prophecy. This
must be considered, (1.) with respect to Actions. (2.) Visions.

1. Prophetical Actions are typical, when some thing mystical and hidden, is
adumbrated or shadowed by those things which the Prophets by Divine Command
acted; as for Instance; Esa. 20.2. Esa. 20.2.
The Prophet goes out naked; (that is, without his Prophetical Garments) to
prefigure the fatal Destruction of the Egyptians and Ethiopians: Jer. 13.1.
Jer. 13.1, etc.
and the following Verses, the Prophet by Divine Command gets himself a linen
Girdle, puts it upon his Loins, hides it in a Rock by Euphrates, afterward
takes it from thence, but it is putrified, or marred, or rotten: By which Type
the Blessings God gave the People, their Ingratitude and Wickedness, and the
Destruction that was to come upon them, are prefigured, as by the Context
appears. Chap. 16.2, 5. There is a Command to abstain from Matrimony,
Procreation of Children, mourning Feasts for the Dead: By which Type God
denounces most woeful Calamities which were to come upon his People for their
Sins: See Chap. 18.2, 3, etc. ver. 6, and 11. And 19.12, 13. and 27.2. and
51.63. Ezekiel. 2.8, etc. The Prophet eats the Volumn, Book, or Roll reached to
him, to witness, the Gift of Prophecy, divinely inspired into him, which
afterward he was strenuously to exercise against the Rebellious People: See
Chap. 4.2. and 13.3. and 24.3, 16, to 22. where you have Instances relating to
this Head, Hos. 1.2. Hosea 1.2.
and the following Verses, gives the Names of Wife of Whoredoms, and Children
of Whoredoms, to a lawful Wife, and lawfully begotten Children; by which Type
he denotes and taxes the spiritual Idolatry of the People of Israel; See
Tarnovius Exercit. Bib. largely upon the place. The like Symbolical Action we
read Chap. 3. to this we may also reduce the typical Action of the Prophet,
which is described, 1 Kings 20.35. We may add likewise to these, that Action of
Christ, when he cursed the barren Fig Tree, which presently withered. For that
Curse was not produced from any rash, or unseasonable Malice, or a desire of
Revenge; but by it, our Savior would typically show, (1.) The Destruction that
was to come upon the People of Israel, considered as such obstinate Persons,
who by no Admonitions, or Threats, would suffer themselves to be amended or
reformed: See the Parable Luke 13.6, 7. (2.) The power of Faith, whose Analogy,
or deep Mystery, Christ himself expounds.

To this Head we may also refer the Action of the Prophet Agabus, in Acts
21.10, etc. who took Paul's Girdle, and bound his own Hands and his Feet, to
intimate Paul's Captivity at Jerusalem, etc.

Article IV. Of Prophetical and Typical Visions.
THese may be thus distinguished, viz. such as were shown to Men sleeping, or
waking: To Men asleep their Dreams have been sent from Heaven. In these there
is a twofold difference, some are mere, or naked Sights or Views, (...).
which without Figures, and the mystery of Types, represent deep things, and
future Events: such was the Dream of Joseph, Mat. 1.20. and 2.13. of the Wise
Men, Mat. 2.12. But these concern not this Head; some are (...), or such
Dreams, which are hidden or involved in Figures and Types; these Dreams came
sometimes to Believers, sometimes to Unbelievers.

To the former Class belongs;

First, The Dream of the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 28.12. And he dreamed, and
behold, Genesis 28.12. of Jacob 's Ladder.
a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven; and behold,
the Angels of God ascending and descending upon it: Verse 13. And behold, the
Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord, etc. Certain Interpreters, by
reason of the Antitype, refer this Vi^ion to the Patriarch Jacob himself,
making the Ladder to signify the Journey of Jacob; the ascending Angels his
Keepers when he traveled, and the descending Angels, when he returned; they
say, that God stood on the top of the Ladder, since he is the Moderator or
Governor of the whole Affair, because by his Providence Jacob is taken from
his Parents, led in his Journey, entertained by his Father-in-Law Laban, and led
back again. This Interpretation, they say, is made by God himself, ver. 15. But
Christ is a more sure Interpreter, who, Joh. 1.51. makes himself the Antitype
of that Vision. Verily, verily, I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see Heaven
opened, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man:
That is, from day to day, ye shall more and more understand, that I am he who
is prefigured in that Vision of Jacob's Ladder. That Vision holds forth,

1. The Personal Union of two Natures in the Messiah, which is prefigured by
the Ladder standing upon the Earth, whose top reached Heaven, denoting the
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature, by the Symbol of the Ladder touching
Heaven and Earth.

2. The Fruits, Benefits, or Blessings ((...)) of the incarnate Word, or the
Word made Flesh, expressed by the Ladder's touching Heaven; because through
Christ, the Ascension or Entrance into Heaven, is open to all Believers, Joh.
3.14, 15, 16. and by him only, Acts 4.12. As the Patriarch saw but one Ladder;
so the going up and coming down of the Angels, denotes, that they were no
longer to be hurtful to Mankind, but most friendly: (See Luke 2.9, 13.) For
they come down as Ministering Spirits for the help of the Saints, Heb. 1.14. and
go up again, carrying their Souls into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.22. Here is
also a Blessing annexed by the Lord, ver. 14. And all the Families of the Earth
shall be blessed in thee; that is, in thy Seed. This is that Blessing which
comes upon us through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Gal. 3.8, 9.

3. Here is the principal End for which the Land of Canaan was delivered into
the Possession of the Posterity of Abraham and Jacob, viz. That there may be a
certain Seat or Habitation for that People, of whom the Messiah was to be
expected.

2dly, The double Dream of the Patriarch Joseph, Genesis 37.5, etc. which was
expounded by Joseph's Brethren, ver. 8. and his Father, ver. 10. very agreeable
to the Event of the thing, as Chap. 41. and the following Chapters

3dly, The Dream of Daniel of the four Beasts that came out of the Sea, Dan. 7
3, etc. which were Types of the four Monarchies of the World, viz. the
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman, etc.

To the latter Class belong,

1. The Dream of Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis 41, of the fourteen Cows and the
fourteen Ears of Corn, by which the future State of Egypt, and the neighboring
Country, with respect to Fertility, and the scarcity of Corn, is prefigured, as
Joseph himself expounds it, Chap. 41.25, etc. and is evidenced by the Event
ver. 47, 54, etc.

2. The double Dream of Nebuchadnezzar; the first is described, Dan. 2.29, Dan.
2.29.
etc. viz. of the great, large, splendid, terrible Image of a Man, whose Head
was Gold, his Breast and Arms Silver, Belly and Sides Brass, Legs Iron, Feet
part Iron, part Clay, and of the Stone hewn out without hands, which brake
them to pieces; becoming afterward a great Mountain. By which typical and
symbolical Image: the four universal Kingdoms or Monarchies of the Earth are
again shadowed, or adumbrated, as the Prophet himself expounds it, Dan. 2.37.
and the following Verses.

But by the Stone cut or hewn out without hands, the spiritual Kingdom of the
Messiah is denoted, which when these Monarchies were in being, began to lift
up, or erect it self; but at length whatsoever shall remain of the said
Kingdoms, he will break in pieces and consume, ver. 44.

So much of Visions which appeared to Men asleep. Such as appeared to Men awake
are of a twofold kind, (but of the manner of Appearance, viz. whether with
Ecstasy, or without, is not our work to dispute at present) viz. some have the
Exposition or Interpretation of the Types and Symbols, annexed, and some have
not.

Prophetical Visions ap^earing to Men awoke. Jer. 24 1, 2. etc.
Visions of the first sort are to be also differenced, forasmuch as the
Interpretation of the Vision is taken either from the thing it self, or from
its Appellations or Terms, and so it is by an allusive Reason.

Of the first sort are the Visions of Jeremy, Chap. 24. of the two Baskets of
Figs, good and bad; by the good Figs, the Restoration of the Jewish and
Christian Church which was to come, is prefigured; and by the bad Figs, the
carrying away of Zedekiah and the People of Israel into Captivity, is also
prefigured, as it is expounded in the fifth and the following Verses.

Ezekiel. 8.9, 10, 11.
The 8, 9, 10, and 11, Chapters of Ezekiel agree in the Description of the same
Vision of the Prophet, which had four parts; the first part of the Vision
obumbrates the Wickedness of the Jews which remained at Jerusalem, Chap. 8. The
second figures out the Destruction of the Citizens in the very City, except
those whom God had marked, as Chap. 9. The third prefigures the Fire, by which
is denoted the flaming Anger and Indignation of the Lord, who by Plague and
Famine afflicted the Inhabitants before the taking of the City, and after its
taking, utterly burnt and destroyed the whole City, with the Temple; and hence
the Glory of the Lord departed, as Chap. 10. The last denotes the Persecution
and Ruin of those that escaped the Burning and Destruction of the City, as
Chap. 11. So Chap. 37. ver. 1. and the following Verses, there is a Vision of
Bones made alive again, and reduced to their former State, by the Immission of
the Spirit; by which the Restitution of the Jews, and the Deliverance of the
Universal Church, its Resurrection from Death, and its eternal Glory is
adumbrated or shadowed forth, as appears ver. 11, and 23. with the Verses
immediately following both places. The Vision in the 8th of Daniel, of the two
horned Ram, and of the He-Goat with one horn, is expounded by Gabriel, ver. 19.
to relate to the Kings of Media, Persia, and Greece, etc.

Amos 7.1, 4, 7. is a relation of certain Visions, by which, as by Types and
Symbols, a Famine to come, Warlike Devastations, and the Captivity of all the
Israelites after the Extinction of Jeroboam's Family is denoted, as it is
expounded in the same Chapter; see Chap. 9.1. where you have a Vision, that
denotes God's departure from the Temple, his forsaking the Jews, and his most
sure Judgments against them.

Zechary 1.8, etc: there is a Vision of a Man riding upon a red Horse, standing
among the Myrtle-trees in the bottom, and behind him, red Horses, bay, and
white, (so the Hebrew); by which is figured our Savior Christ, dwelling in the
Church among the godly, and Angels ministering to him, as Chap. 1. ver. 18. The
four Horns denote the Enemies of Israel who invaded them, as the Syrians,
Assyrians, and Babylonians on one side, viz. the North; the Ammonites and
Moabites from the East; the Edomites and Egytians from the South, and the
Philistines from the West. The four Carpenters, ver. 20. which cast out the
Horns aforesaid, do figure out those Instruments which God shall make use of,
and gather from all parts, to destroy the Babylonians, and those Enemies of the
Church, who hindered the building of the Temple, and the City Jerusalem. Chap.
2. ver. 1. there is represented a Man, holding a measuring Line in his hand, to
measure Jerusalem; by which the rebuilding of the City in time to come is
denoted, Chap. 3. ver. 1. Joshua the High Priest is represented as a Type of
Christ, as is plainly intimated, ver. 8.

Chap. 4.2. there is mention of a Golden Candlestick, which is a Type of the
Church, and most precious in the sight of God, the Explication of which, with
reference to each individual Member, is given by our Savior himself.

The flying Roll, Chap. 5.1. denotes the Judgments of God against the
impenitent, and unmannerly Jews. More Examples may be read in this and the
following Chapter.

To the latter Clauss belong the Visions we read of, Lib. 1. p. 285.
Jer. 1.11, 12, 13, 14. Amos 8.2. of which we have spoke before.

We have treated so far of Visions, whose Antitypes are expounded in the very
Text, but there are others which are not so expounded: Therefore we must take
their Exposition either from the Circumstances of the Text, or from other
places of Scripture; or from the Event, Complement, or fulfilling of the
Prophecy; such are Isa. 63.1, etc. where there is a Dialogue proposed by the
Prophet, Page 421. l. 1.
between Christ and the Church, respecting his own most blessed Passion and
Merit. And although there is in that place no direct mention of such a Vision, yet
the Circumstances do fairly intimate it, viz. That such a Vision appeared to
the Prophet.

In Ezekiel the 40th to the end, we have a Typical Description of the Temple
and City: The Antitype of which, is not the City and Temple rebuilt by
Zerubbabel and Nehemiah after the Captivity, (as the Hebrew Rabbis, and others
have dreamed) but the Mystical Temple of God, his true Church, and the heavenly
and spiritual City, as the Learned Doctor Haffenrefferus most learnedly
expounds it. Lastly, the Revelations of John, in which the future State of the
Church, by diverse Visions, both symbolical and typical, is represented (the
Explication or fulfilling of which the Event must show) is properly reduced
under this Head. So much for Prophetical Types.

Article V. Of an Historical Type, and its first Division.
AN Historical Type is the mystical Sense of Scripture, whereby things acted or
done in the Old Testament, (especially what respected the Priesthood and
Worship of the Jews) prefigured and adumbrated things acted in the New
Testament-times, with respect especially to Christ the Antitype, who is, as it
were, the Kernel enclosed in all those Shells of Old-Testament-Ceremonies,
Types or Actions, etc.

This may be thus distinguished, (1.) that like an Allegory, it is either
innate, (or natural) or inferred. The Innate is that which is expressly
delivered in the Scriptures, or when the Scripture it self shows or intimates,
that some Ceremony, or thing transacted, does adumbrate the things related or
done in the New Testament, especially Christ in a mystical sense. This is done,
either expressly and implicitly, or tacitly and implicitly; or, which is all
one, the Scripture either shows it expressly, or tacitly insinuates the thing
transacted to be a Type of Christ: Of the first kind we have many Examples.

Examples of Types.
The Prophet Jonas was swallowed into the Whales Belly, and vomited out after
three days (as Jonah 1.17. and 2.10.) this is a Type of Christ, who lay three
days in the Grave, and of his glorious Resurrection, as Christ himself expressly
says, Matthew. 12.40. and 16.4. Luke 11.29, 30.

The Brazen Serpent which Moses by Divine Command lifted up in the Desert,
against the bitings of Serpents, as Numb. 21.8, 9. is expressly said to be a
Type of Christ, who was lifted up upon the Cross, and healing Believers of the
biting of the Infernal Serpent; John 3.14, 15.

The Constiution and Sacrifice-Offerings of the Levitical Priesthood in the Old
Testament, did typically prefigure Christ the High Priest, as Heb. 5. and the
following. More Examples may be found upon a diligent search and Meditation of
the Scripture.

Examples of the latter sort are these: The Mercy-Seat, Mercy-Seat.
or the Covering of the Ark of the Covenant, Exodus 25.17. which typified
Christ, Romans 3.25. so you may compare Josh. 1, etc. with Heb. 4.8. that the
Manna Manna.
was a Type of Christ is told us, John. 6.32.33, etc. The Paschal Lamb, Pascal
Lamb.
Exodus 12.3, etc. was a Type of Christ, as 1 Cor. 5.7. John 19.36.

The Scapegoat, Lev. 16.10, 21. was a Type of Christ, as John 1.29. 1 Pet.
2.24. -- So was Isaac, Genesis 22.2, 12. with Romans 8.32. and Heb. 11.19. So
Sampson, Judge. 13, etc. compared with Matthew. 2.23. where that which is spoken
of Sampson, Judge. 13.5. is accommodated to Christ the Antitype: Yet the Phrase
(...), (he shall be called a Nazarene) not used as some say, respecting the
words concerning Sampson, but to other Sayings of the Prophets, Isa. 60.21,
etc. Isa. 11.1. Zech. 6.12.
in which the Messiah is called (...), Netzer, Surculus, a Branch, whence
Narareth is derived; hence the Syriack has it (...) Natzerath, or Notrath, See
Piscator upon the place, and Junius in Parallellis. Solomon. Firstborn Son.
Matthew. 2.23. and the Reason they give is, that it is said it was written,
(...) by the Prophets, in the plural Number, etc.

That King Solomon the Son of David, was a Type of Christ, appears Heb. 1.5.
Acts 2.30. and 13.12. where the Promise made to David, spoken in a literal
sense of Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Chronicles. 17.11. is referred to Christ.

The firstborn Son of the Lord, as the People of Israel are called Exodus 4.23.
when they were to go out of Egypt, is a Type of Christ, the only begotten Son
of God, Mat. 3.17. who is said to be called from his Exile in that Nation, Mat.
2.15. where that which is literally said of the Israelites, Hos. 11.1. is
accommodated to Christ the Antitype, etc.

An illated or inferred Type is that which is conseqentially gathered to be
such by Interpreters; this is either by fair Probabilities agreeable to the
Analogy of Faith -- or extorted, and without any Foundation in, or shadow of
Sense, from the literal Sense of the Text.

Judge. 13.14, 15, 16 Chapters.
Of the first sort, the Homily-writers and Expositors produce a great many. As
the doings of Sampson in marrying a strange Wife, and destroying his Enemies by
his Death; although no where in Scripture applied to Christ, yet it is expounded
as a Type of Christ, who was spiritually (as it were) married to the Gentiles,
and conquered his Enemies by Dying. More Examples are, Genesis 37, etc. respecting
Joseph, Numb. 16.47. respecting Aaron (See Isa. 59.2. and Genesis 2.22, 23. Dan.
6.22. Judge. 16.2, 3. 1 Samuel 17.49. 1 Samuel 22.2. with Luke 15, 1, etc.

Of the latter sort, are the wild fantastical Conceits of Papists, and some
others, who make Types where there are none. For Instance, Lib. 1. summae cap.
90.
Turrecremata makes the Son of David, yea, Christ himself, a Type of the Pope
of Rome: For he expounds the words 2 Kings 7.13. thus -- I will establish the
Throne of his Kingdom for ever: that is, says he, I will cause the Supremacy,
or Kingdom of the Pope, always to endure, with several other things of the same
ridiculous Tenor; which we omit as useless to our undertaking.

Article VI. Other Divisions of an Historical Type.
ANother Division of an Historical Type is this; some immediately respect
Christ, first Sort are such Things as prefigure, and lively set forth his most
holy Life, his most bitter Death, his most glorious Resurrection and
Exaltation, as in the Examples before recited. Of the latter Sort are, the
universal Flood, in which, by the peculiar Blessing of God, Noah Noah.
and his Family were saved, which is called a Figure or Type of Baptism, 1 Pet.
3.21. (to which Psalm. 29.10. may be applied) which, by the Power and Efficacy
of the most precious Blood of Christ, saves Men, and is to them the Laver of
Regeneration and Renovation of the Holy Spirit. The Parallel of this Type, with
the Antitype, may be read in the learned Gerhard, Tom. 4. loc. de Bapt. Sect. 8.

The Bodily Circumcision Circumcision.
is a Type of Heart- Circumcision; the former is called (...), the Circumcision
made without Hands; the latter, (...), the Circumcision of Christ, Col. 2.11.

So our Divines propose some Types of the Lord's Supper, as the Tree of Life
Tree of Life.
in the midst of Paradise, Genesis 2.9. see Rev. 22.14. John 6.53, 54, 55. The
Bread and Wine Brea^ and Wine.
brought forth by Melchizedek, and given to Abraham, Genesis 14.18, 19. The
Paschal Lamb eaten yearly ( in (...)) in Commemoration of the Deliverance of
the Israelites from literal Egypt, Exodus 12.27. with 1 Cor. 5.7. and 1.26. the
Manna, Manna.
Exodus 16.15. the Water that came out of the Rock, Numb. 20.11. the Blood of
the Covenant, Exodus 24.8. Heb. 9.20. the Shewbread, Exodus 25.30. the live
Coal, Isa. 6.6. the Explication of which, amongst other Types, may be read in
Gerhard, tom. 5. de sacr. Euch. sect. 12.

The Types of the New Testament Church (as learned Men say) are Paradise, Genesis
2.8. Noah's Ark, Genesis 6.14, etc. the Calling of Abraham, Genesis 12.1. Joshua
24.2. See more Examples, Exodus 26.1. Josh. 2.18. and 6.23. Psalm. 87.1. Gal.
4.22. Mal. 3.3. Yet some of these are reputed Allegories rather than Types.

Types are either of Things, or of Ceremonies: the Types of Things done are,
when Abraham's offering his Son, in Obedience to God's Command, and Love to
him, typified God the Father, delivering his Son to Death for the Love of
Mankind, Romans 5.8. and 8.32. So Joseph's being sold into Egypt, and afterward
advanced, typified the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ, Phil. 2.6, etc.
Ceremonial Types are, when the Ceremonies, and whole Constitution of the
Levitical Worship in the Old Testament, prefigured Things in the New; an
evident Explication of which the Epistle to the Hebrews gives.

Article VII. Canons or Rules expounding Types.
Canon I.
IN Prophetical Types we must exactly take notice where Christ manifests
himself with respect to his Office and Merit; and where he sets forth other
Divine Things, as Judgments, and Blessings.

The Reason of the Canon is; Because the Son of God, before the Fullness of Time
was come, Gal. 4.4. did at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners ((...))
adumbrated and made himself manifest, with his Merit and Passion, to the
Fathers and Prophets of the Old Testament, partly by plain Promises, and partly
by Typical Visions, and thus he rejoiced in the habitable Parts of the Earth,
Prove. 8.31. In which respect he is said to be a Lamb slain from the Foundation
of the World, Rev. 13.8. For the general Understanding of these Types, the
Learned give this Rule: Whatsoever Text of the Old Testament treats of the
Grace of God, of Propitiation, Redemption, Benediction, and Destruction of
Enemies, so that the Light and Explication of it may be found in the New
Testament, or that the Circumstances and Emphasis of the Words themselves
discover it; that Text is to be expounded of Christ, together with his Merit
and Passion.

Genesis 28.
Thus the Vision of Jacob's Ladder, prefigures Christ, the true Ladder, by which
the Saints ascend into Heaven, as appears by the Circumstances of the Text,
which treats of the Propitiation of God, his Divine Protection, and his
Blessings upon the faithful Posterity of Believers; Besides, Christ applies
this to himself, John 1.51.

Isa 63.^.
Isa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. There is a Prophetical Colloquy, which respects not
only Christ, but also his most bitter Passion, and most glorious Victory; for,
(1) the Text discourses of the Propitiation of God, the Redemption of Men, and
the Destruction of Enemies. (2) The three foregoing Chapters expressly treat of
the Merits and Blessings of Christ. (3) It Is expounded of Christ, Rev. 19.11,
13, 15. (4) The Circumstances of the Text, and the Emphasis of the Words
clearly evidence i^ to be as before expounded: of which more in another Place.

Canon II. There is oftentimes more in the Type than in the Antitype.
IRenaeus lib. 2. chap. 40. says thus: A Type and Image (of a Thing) is
sometimes different from the Truth, according to its Materiality and Substance:
But according to the Habit and Lineament it ought to keep a Similitude, and to
show by Things present, Things which are not present. The Reason of the Canon
you have Art. 6. God designed one Person or Thing in the Old Testament to be a
Type or shadow of Things to come, not in all Things, but with respect to some
particular Thing, or Things only; hence we find many Things in the Type, which
are not to be applied to the Antitype (which it typifies in some certain Thing
only, not in all) especially the Failings and Sins of the Saints of the Old
Testament, who did typify Christ, are by no means, neither ought they to be
attributed to the most holy and unspotted Jesus. For as a Picture may represent
all the Lineaments of the Party pictured exactly, although there may be some
accidental Spot in it, that is not in the Person. So the Life of the Saints may
be a Type and Image of Christ, although they are liable to Frailties and
Infirmities incident to humane Nature, which are no Representations of any
thing in Christ. The Use of this Canon is shown in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where the Priesthood and ritual Sacrifices of the Old Testament are fairly
accommodated to Christ the Antitype, yet that there were many Things in that
Priesthood, which do not quadrate; as that the Priest was to sacrifice for his
own Sins, Chap. 5.3. which does not quadrate with Christ, Chap. 7.27. that
Priesthood was (...), weak and unprofitable, Chap. 7.18. and there were many
Priests, neither of which can be applied to Christ, who made all perfect and
unchangeable, Chap. 7.24, 25.

Canon III. There is oftentimes more in the Antitype than in the Type.
Oportet Figuram minus habere quam Veritatem, quia, etc.
CHrysostom, Homil. 61. on Genesis says: It is necessary that the Figure have less
in it than the Truth, because otherwise it would not be a Figure of Things to
come. The Reason of this Canon is the same with the foregoing. For since no one
Type can express the Life and particular Actions of Christ, therefore there is
altogether more in the Antitype, or other Thing adumbrated, than can be found
in Types. And when we say that there is more in the Antitype than the Type, it
is to be understood, not only with respect to the Thing, but also with respect
to the Manner. Of this Moses and Joshua were Examples, each of which was a Type
of Christ. Moses typified Christ as a Redeemer, and Joshua typified him, as he
brings his People to Heaven, their true Country. But the Manner varies in both
Places, and in that respect there is much more in the Antitype than in the
Type. In the Type there is only a bodily or humane Deliverance; in the Antitype
an heavenly and a spiritual. In the Type there is only a simple or single
Redemption; in the Antitype such a Redemption, as is made ( intercedente (...))
by a redeeming Price, viz. the Blood of Christ, Romans 3.24. The Redemption in
the Type, and the Introduction into the Land of Canaan is made by Moses and
Joshua, as by the Ministers of God, Heb. 3.5. In the Antitype our Redemption
and Salvation is wrought by Christ, as ( per (...)) by the principal Author or
Cause of Salvation, Act. 3.15. and 4.12. Heb. 5.9. So Moses, when he is called
(...), Mediator, Gal. 3.19. may be termed a Type of the Mediatorial Office of
Christ, with respect to the Thing it self; although there be an eminent
Disparity in the Manner. Moses is called a Mediator, because of his Office of
Interpreting and Teaching, Exodus 19.3. Deuteronomy. 5.5. But Christ is not only a
Mediator in that respect, but for the great Blessing and Benefit of his
Satisfaction, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. etc.

Canon IV. There must be a fit Application of the Type to the Antitype.
THis Application, besides other Things, (if it be inferred) comprehends this
also, that there may be a Comparison made betwixt the Type and the Antitype, as
far as the Scripture and the Analogy of Faith will bear it. Here Bellarmine
faulters egregiously, lib. 1. de Missa, cap. 9. where going about to prove that
there is a true Sacrifice offered in their Mass, he wrests the Type in the Old
Testament, Genesis 14. in the History of Melchizedek. For whereas this is a Figure
of Christ in a peculiar respect, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7.17. and that he truly
sacrificed Bread and Wine, Genesis 14.18. he concludes it necessary, that Christ
also sacrifice Bread and Wine, etc. But besides this, that Articles of Faith
are not to be proved by Typical Accommodations, (if not in the Scriptures, as
this is not) but by certain and illustrious Evidences of Scriptures, which
Bellarmine Lib. 3. de V. D. cap. 30.
himself grants. We will encounter this Papistical Quibble, and affirm, that
this Application of the Type to the Antitype is not only in the least little
consonant to Scripture, (For the Parallel is quite otherwise proposed, Heb. 7.)
but quite contrary to it, and a Disparagement to, if not a justling out the
only Sacrifice of Christ and his everlasting Priesthood.

Canon V. When there are many partial Types of one and the same Thing, then we
are te judge not from one Antitype, but of all jointly taken.
THE Reason of this Canon depends upon the foregoing Canons. For in as much as
the Things of the New Testament are prefigured in the Old, (...), at sundry
Times, and in diverse Manners, Heb. 1.1. Therefore if a right Judgment of the
Thing prefigured ought to be made by Types, we must not examine or meditate
upon one Type singly, but many of them together. Here Socinus and his Followers
err, when he parallels the Redemption and Mediation of Moses, with that
purchased and done by Christ. But besides that Moses is here a Type of Christ
only with respect to the Thing, (ratione rei) but not (ratione modi) with
respect to the Manner, as we said Can. 3. For we may allege that we bring our
Judgment according to the Canon concerning our Redemption by Christ, and his
Mediatorial Office, not from that single Type of Moses, but from others joined
with it. For the Manner of our Redemption, which consists in the appeasing of
divine Wrath and Satisfaction for our Sins, was more proximately and immediately
(though not fully) adumbrated by the Sacrifical Types, chiefly the Scapegoat,
Lev. 16.21. The Redheifer, Numb. 19.2. Nevertheless you are to note here, that
the grand Foundation of our Belief in this Point, is not built upon Types, but
upon clear Scripture Texts, that unfold the Mystery of our Redemption.

Canon VI. In expounding the Types of the Old Testament we are to examine
accurately, whether the Shadow, or the Truth, represented by a Shadow, be
proposed: That is, whether the Prophets prophesy of Christ under the Umbrage or
Shadow of Types, or in express Terms ( viz. speaking of our Savior in a
literal Sense.)
THE Reason depends upon that Custom of Prophetical Speech, yea of God
himself, speaking by the Prophets, by which they are wont to make a sudden
Transition from the Type to the Antitype, from a corporeal to a spiritual
Thing; and when the Speech is of another Thing, to turn themselves to Christ,
the Kernel (as it were) of the Scripture, and prophesy of him not under the
Shadow of Types, but in express Terms. As for Instance, it is said Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. Calvin, in his Commentary upon
this Psalm, says, that it is to be understood Literally of David, but Typically
of Christ. So the Place Micha 5.2. But thou Bethlehem Ephrata, etc. out of thee
shall come forth unto me a Ruler, (or Captain) this the same Calvin expounds
not literally of Christ, but of some Politic Governor, as a Type of Christ.
When yet these, and all Texts of the same Purport are to be understood of
Christ literally, which the Coherence and Scope of the Text does clearly prove,
etc.

Canon VII. The Wicked, as such, are by no means to be made Types of Christ,
etc.
THE Adultery of David, and what is related of the two Harlots, and the Incest
of Amnon and Thamar were accommodated by certain Writers to Christ, as Azorius
the Jesuit Lib. 8 cap. 2. Instit. Moral.
, and Cornelius a Lapide In praesat. Fent. Can. 40.
. But these are impious and groundless Conceits, as the most of the Learned
affirm. Gretzer the Jesuit lib. 1. de Cruce cap. 6. affirms, that the Oak, in
which Absalom did hang by the Hair of the Head, is a Figure or Type of the
Cross of Christ; and that Absalom prefigured Christ. This Man is certainly a
very daring and Non-sensical Type-maker, to make such an impious Typical
Explication. For Absalom received just Punishment for his Rebellion against his
Father, etc.

It cannot be denied but that the Punishments of some Malefactors are
accommodated to Christ, as an Antitype. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs on a Tree. In which Words he gives (not obscurely) the
Typical Sense of Deuteronomy. 21.23. (which is with respect to the Fact it self, or
the civil Punishment, or with respect of the Cause or ceremonial Reason added.
Respectu (...) sive rationis additae Ceremonialis.
) In the said Place of Deuteronomy the Body of the Person hanged, is commanded
to be taken down and buried, for this Reason, because he that is hanged, is
accursed of God. For otherwise neither according to the Law of Nature, nor
according to the Civil Law, neither of himself, is he that is hanged, accursed
or execrable to God. Doubtless therefore by this Ceremonial or Levitical
Aetiology (viz. a rendering a Reason) [in respect of which the Person hanged, is
said to be accursed in the Sight of God, as Things of old were according to the
Levitical Ministration.] Respect is had by Moses to Christ the Mediator, as the
Apostle expounds it in the aforesaid Place, He is made a Curse and Sin for us,
2 Cor. 5.21. For tho the Reason, or Occasion of hanging, in the Old Testament,
be vastly different from Christ (for they that were hanged then, were hanged
for their own Crimes, but Christ bears the Punishment of other Men's Sins
imputed to him); yet, in hoc ipso tertio, in this very third, or meaning, they
are Types of Christ, in as much they were accounted Ceremonially accursed by
God. See 1 Pet. 2.24. Deuteronomy. 21, etc.

Canon VIII. One Thing is sometimes a Type and Figure of two Things, even
contrary Things, but in diverse respects.
THus the Deluge, wherein Noah was saved, was to Believers a Type of Baptism.
But in regard the Wicked were drowned in it, it typified the Damnation of
Reprobates at the Great Day. To this Head some refer the Places where Christ,
who is called a Rock and a Cornerstone, is said to be to the Godly a Rock or
Stone of Salvation, but to the Wicked a Rock of Offense. So Christ is called a
Lion for his Strength; but the Devil is so called for his Cruelty. But the two
later are rather a different Explication of one Metaphorical Appellation with
respect to different or diverse Things.

Canon IX. In Types and Antitypes an Enallage, Permutation or Change sometimes
happens, as when the Thing figured and adumbrated takes to it self the Name of
the Figure, shadow or Type: and on the contrary, when the Type and Figure of
the Thing represented takes to it self the Name of the Antitype.
EXamples of the first Sort may be read Ezekiel. 34.23. and 37.24. Hos. 3.5. where
Christ is called David, who in many Things was a Type of Christ. John 1.29, 36.
Christ is called a Lamb, because the Paschal-Lamb was an eminent Type of him:
Thus he is called our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. Romans 3.25. Christ is called (...),
the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat, not because of the Propitiation he made for our
Sins, 1 John 2.2. but because the Covering of the Ark of the Covenant (which
the 70 render by (...) Which Moses calls (...)
) was a Type of him.

The New Testament Church is frequently called Sion, Isa. 2.2, etc. Jerusalem,
Gal. 4.26. Rev. 21.2. because these were Types of it. The Ministers of the
Gospel are called the Sons of Levi, (say some) for the same Reason, viz. that
they typified these; but this is disputed. Of the later Kind you may read
Examples (1) in Prophetical Types, when the Name of a Person or Thing (which
properly agrees with the Antitype, for which the Type is proposed) is given or
attributed to any, as Esa. 7.3. and 8.1, 3. So the honest Wife of Hosea the
Prophet, and his Children born in lawful Wedlock, by the Command of God, are
called a Wife of Whoredoms, and Children of Whoredoms, Hos. 1.2. Because of the
Israelites, Hos. 1.2.
who were the Antitype, and guilty of this ( viz. spiritual) Whoredom. See ver.
4, 6, 8.

In Historical Types, as when hanging was called in the Old Testament the (...)
* (...)
the Lord; because it was a Type of Christ, who was made a Curse for our Sins,
Gal. 3.13. See Esa. 45.1. with 8. verse.

To conclude with a general Canon, (...), Imagines gerunt nomina sui Prototypi
--, that is, Pictures or Figures are called by the Names of the Persons they
represent; as, Caesar's Statue or Picture is called Caesar --: and so of
others. See Genesis 41.26. Dan. 8.20, etc.

OF PARABLES. Wherein shall be given (1.) the Definition of the Word, and
Thing. (2.) Its Division. (3.) Canons respecting it.
(...). Collatio. Comparison.
A Parable is called so (...), which, besides other Significations, which this
Subject is unconcerned in, (for it signifies objicere, conjicere, detorquere,
committere, appropinquare, transmittere, etc.) denotes conferring, comparing,
or the Collocation of different Things Jerome Tom. 3. Epist. 151. ad Algasium q.
6. p. 359.
calls it a Similitude, because, as a previous Shadow of Truth, it represents
it. Tossanus says, that it denotes the Comparison of Heavenly Things with
Earthly; It answers to the Hebrew (...)
Mashal: Properly and strictly it signifies an artificial Narrative of a Thing
done, to signify another Thing. So Glassius says.

Mat. 24.32. Mark 3.23. where the Word ((...)) a Parable is used. (2.) It Is
used to signify any Thing obscurely and figuratively expounded, as Mat. 15.15.
where Peter calls the Words of Christ a Parable, ((...)) ver. 11. which is
expounded ver. 17, etc. (3.) It Is used to denote a Proverb or Adage, as Luke
4.23. where that vulgar and overworn Saying of the common Proverb, Medice cura
teipsum, Physician heal thy self, is called a Parable. (4.) For a Type of the
Old Testament, prefiguring a Thing in the New, Heb. 9.9. and 11.19. where the
Word, which we translate Figure, is in the Greek (...), Parable. (5.) For
special Doctrine, which yet is to be understood more universally, and extended
more largely, so Luke 14.7. (6.) It is taken properly and strictly for an
artificial Narration of a Thing (as it were) transacted, to signify another
Thing, as Mat. 13.3, 10, 13, etc. Chap. 21.33, 45. and 22.1. with several other
Places, of which you may read more in the first Volume.

Hebrew and Greek. The usual Word in the Hebrew is (...), Maschal (according to
the Syriack and Chaldee (...), the Letter being changed into, as Mat. 13.18,
24, etc. and 15.15. and 21.33, 45. and 22.1. Mark. 3.23.) from the Root (...),
which signifies to rule or liken (or assimilate) that so the original
Signification of (...) might be (...), a ruling Sentence, viz. an eminent and
authentic Saying, or a Similitude and Comparison. In these Texts the Hebrew
Word signifies Parable.
This Hebrew Word denotes (1.) the Comparing of one Thing with another, as
Ezekiel. 24.3. (2.) A famous or received Saying, as 1 Samuel 10.12. Ezekiel. 18.2. (3.)
An obscure Saying that needs Exposition, Ezekiel. 20.49. See 21.5. (4.) A Thing
gravely spoken, and comprehending great Matters in a few Words, Job 27.1. Number.
23.7, 18. Chap. 24.3, 15. so Psalm. 49.5. and 78.2. (5.) That which is sad and
complaining, (or grievous Mourning and Lamentation.) Mich. 2.4. (6.) That which
is Ironical and insulting, as Esa. 14.4. Jer. 24.9. Deuteronomy. 28.37. 1 King. 9.7.
So Hab. 2.6. Prove. 1.1. with ver. 6. See Jer. 24.9. Deuteronomy. 28.37. 1 King. 9.7.
Hab. 2.6. The Sentences of Solomon are called (...), (...).
Parables or Proverbs, Prove. 1.1, etc. As for New Testament Instances, peruse
Mat. 20.1, etc. John 10.6, etc.

2. The Nature and Definition of a Parable.
Azorius, Gillius, Morton; but this is not right, for several Reasons showed by
the learned Glassius, p. 440. to which we refer. A Parable, according to
Jerome, is a Comparison made of Things differing in Nature under a certain
Similitude. Varinus describes it, (...): i. e. A Parable is a Comparison,
signifying a Similitude in order to explain, or make the Things treated of
perspicuous.

We define or describe a Parable thus: A Parable is a Similitude or Comparison,
by which some certain Affair or Thing is feigned, and told, as if it were
really transacted, and is compared with some spiritual Thing, or is
accommodated to signify it.

A Parable differs from an History, (1) with respect to the Object: for History
is a Narrative of Things really done, but a Parable only of a Thing feigned,
and adapted to instruct, which yet is not a Lie, as Augustine well says, lib.
2. Quaest. Evang. q. 41. Non omne quod fingimus mendacium est, sed quando id
fingimus quod nihil significat, tunc est mendacium. Cum autem fictio nostra
refertur ad aliquam significationem, non est mendacium, sed aliqua figura
veritatis. Alioquin omnia, quae a sapientibus and sanctis Viris, vel etiam ab
ipso Domino figurate dicta sunt, mendacia deputabuntur, quia secundum usitatum
intellectum non subsistit veritas in talibus dictis. Hence Horace says, Ficta
voluptatis causa sunt proxima veris. And if Fables, accommodated to teach or
instruct, are not Lies, much less are Parables.

2. They differ with respect to use; An History gives you a plain simple
Narrative. A Parable does not only tell a Thing as if really done, but has
withal some reference to some other Thing in order to instruct, either
implicitly or explicitly.

A Parable differs from an Example, which the Greeks call (...). For an Example
is but Part of an History, when a Thing, rightly done, is defended or justified
from Instances or Practice of the like Thing done before: or when a Thing ill
done is demonstrated by a like Example. Thus Christ excuses his Apostles when
accused for plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath, Mat. 12. by the Example
of David's eating the Shewbread, 1 Samuel 21.6. compare Mat. 12.41, 42. Luke
14.1, etc. and 10.29, 30, etc. where you have the Parable of him that fell
among the Thieves. See also Luke 16.19. the Parable of the Rich Man and
Lazarus, etc.

The Division of Parables is thus. In a Parable there are two Parts. The first
is the Thing brought as a Similitude: the second is the Application of that
Thing, which is (as it were) the Marrow, Kernel or Mystical Sense of it. In
Scripture we find three Sorts of Parables. (1) Some relate a Thing done and
produced as a Similitude, as the Parable of the Leaven. (2) Some relate to a
Thing not done, but of which there may be a Possibility or Probability; as the
Parable of the Householder, Mat. 20. (3) Others relate to a Thing impossible; as
when the Trees went to anoint (or choose) themselves a King, Judge. 9.8.

More Examples of Parables read in Mat. 13.3, etc. Luke 8.4, etc. Mat. 22.2,
etc. respecting the fourfold Seed --; the Tares --; and Marriage of the King's
Son, Mark 13.34. The Man taking a far Journey.

Canons of Parables.
1. PArables are more frequently used in the New than in the Old Testament. In
the Old Testament are these Parables, Judge. 9.8. applied ver. 16. 2 Samuel 12.1.
The Parable of Nathan to David, Esa. 5.1. The Parable of the Vineyard
expounded, ver. 7. Ezekiel. 17.2, etc. The Parable of the two Eagles explained,
ver. 12. Ezekiel. 33.2. Of the Watchman, applied to the Prophet, ver. 7.

In the New Testament are these Parables, Mat. 13.3, etc. Mark. 4.3, etc. Luke
8.4, etc. Mat. 13.24, etc. Mark 4.26, etc. Mat. 13.31. Mark 4.30. Luke 13.18,
19. Mat. 13.33. Luke 13.21. Mat. 13.44. and ver. 45, 46, 47. Mat. 18.23. Luke
7.41. John 10.1. Luke 12.16, 42. Mat. 24.45. Mark 13.34. Luke 13.6. and 14.16.
Mat. 18.12. Luke 15.4, and ver. 8. and ver. 11. Luke 16.1. and 18.2. Mat. 20.1.
Luke 19.11. Mat. 21.28, 33. and 22.2. and 25.1, 14, etc.

2. Christ with good Reason used a Parabolical Way of Preaching --: these
Reasons partly concern God, viz. a Fulfilling of the Scripture, as Mat. 13.34,
35. with Psalm. 78.2. Or, secondly, Men, who are teachable and Godly (1) for
their Information, Mark 4.33. John 3.12. (2) To excite and stir up a Fervor in
them of being taught, as Mat. 13.9. Mark 4.9. Luke 8.7. See Mat. 13.10. Mark
4.10.

Sometimes they are used to stubborn and unteachable Men, who despise the Word,
to inform them, stir them up (peruse Mat. 13.9. with Psalm. 48. 2 Timothy 2.25.) to
check and convince them, Mat. 21.33, 40, 41, 43. See Luke 7.43. See 2 Samuel
12.6, 7. 1 King. 20.39, 40, 41, 42. Mat. 13.11. Mark 4.11, 12.

3. In Parables, if they be taken entirely, there are three Things, the Root,
the Bark, and the Sap or Fruit. The Root is the Scope to which it tends. The
Bark is the sensible Similitude, and the Sap or Fruit is the Mystical Sense,
etc.

4. In the right Explication and Application of Parables the Scope of them is
principally to be heeded, viz. the Drift of the Spirit, which may be gathered
from foregoing and subsequent Things, with which it has any Connection. See Mat.
20.16. and 19.30. and Mat. 13.31.

5. In Parables there is no necessity of being too sifting and anxious about
every single Word, nor ought we to expect a too curious Adaptation or
Accommodation of it, in every Part, to the spiritual Thing inculcated by it:
but only to mind the Applicatory Part; as the Edge of a Sword is only designed
to cut.

6. Parabolical Theology is not argumentative. That is, any Exposition or
Accommodation of them beyond their Native Scope, or wherein the Interpretation
disagrees with the Analogy of Faith, or where it is superstitiously wrested;
this is like the wringing of the Nose, till it brings Blood, Prove. 30.33.

7. It helps very much in the Understanding of Parables, if Men know the
Natural Properties of such Things, Arts or Mysteries, as are proposed in the
Similitudes. As what Treasure is, what a Jewel or Pearl is, what Mustard,
Tares, etc. are.

8. Whereas it is frequently said, that the Kingdom of Heaven is like this or
that Thing, we are not to understand that it is so in all its Parts, or in
every Respect, but only in such Things as are declared in the Similitude. So
Christ is compared to a Thief only in this respect, because he comes in a Time
when unlooked for, or when unexpected, Luke 12.39.

9. All Parables do not conclude in the same, but in a different Manner. Some
from Likeness (a simili) as the seven Parables, Mat. 13. Some from Things
unlike, as that of the unjust Judge, Him that desired three Loaves, and the
unjust Steward, etc.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table OF THE FOURTH BOOK.
A.
Afflictions. AFflictions compared to Fire, in five respects. Page 378 When
Afflictions may be said to be very grievous, Page 388, 389 The Nature, Kind,
and Cause of Afflictions largely opened, Page 377, to 390
Ambassadors. Ministers of Christ are his Ambassadors, Page 282
Angels. Angels why so called, Page 49 They are compared to Watchers; the
Reason why, showed in five Things, Page 50 Their Work and Office, Page 50, 51,
52 Why they are called God's Host, opened, Page 53, 54 Why they are compared to
the Face of a Man, etc. opened, Page 57 Why to a Flame of Fire, opened, Page 62
Why compared to Horses, white, red, etc. Page 63, 64
Anchor. Hope a sure Anchor, showed at large in eleven Particulars. Page 26,
27, 28
Arrows. Afflictions God's Arrows, Page 389 What more particularly are God's
Arrows, Page 390

B.
Babylon. THe Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon. Page 297 First;
Negatively. 1. By Whore of Babylon is not meant Jerusalem, 2. Not the Turkish
Empire, 3. Not Rome Heathen, 4. Not Protestants of any Denomination, Page 300,
to 303 Secondly, In the Affirmative. That by the Whore, or Mystery Babylon, is
meant the present State and Church of Rome, clearly evinced, Page 322, to 326
Baptism. Baptism how taken, Page 36, 37 Called a Burial. Page 35
Babes. Saints called Babes, wherefore, showed in eighteen Particulars, Page
140, 141
Blind. Wicked Men blind, showed in five Partic. Page 230
Bitter. How a Saint may be sustained under bitter Afflictions, Page 389
Breast Plate. Why Righteousness is so called, Page 10, 11
Builders. Why Ministers of the Gospel are called Builders, opened in ten
Particulars, Page 277, 278
Bulls. Wicked Men why called Bulls, Page 235, 236
Burden. Sin a Burden, showed in three things. What a Burden Sin is, opened,
Page 344 The least Sin a Burden to a tender Heart, Page 344
Bush. The Church compared to a Bush on Fire, showed in six things, Page 106,
107, 108

C.
Captives. Wicked Men Captives, with the Nature of their Captive-State, opened,
Page 201, to 204
Clouds. Christ 's Ministers why compared to Clouds Page 269 False Teachers
compared to Clouds without Rain, Page 294
Captain. What kind of Captain Christ is, showed, Page 158
Cedars. Saints compared to Cedars, opened in five Particulars, Page 181, 182
Children. Saints called Children of God, opened, Page 142, 143
Conscience. What Conscience is, opened, Page 69 Conscience a Witness, showed
in ten Particulars, Page 70, 71, 72 The Excellency of a good Conscience, Page
73 How a good Conscience may be known, Page 74
City of God. The Church called the City of God, showed in twenty Particulars,
Page 76, to 83 What a City Sion is, Page 84
Church. Church the Antitype of Solomon's Temple, Page 87 Church the Antitype
of the second Temple, Page 89
Courage. Saints like a Lion for Courage; wherein their Courage ought to be
showed, opened in eight Particulars, Page 188

D.
Day of Grace. WHy so called, Page 367 How to know when the Day of Grace draws
toward an end, showed in five things, Page 368
Darkness. Diverse Metaphorical Notations of Darkness, Page 383 Hell a Place of
utter Darkness, Page 411 Affliction called Darkness, Page 383
Death. Death a Sleep, why so called, opened in three things, Page 399
Dead. Wicked Men dead in Sin, what meant thereby, opened in seven Particulars,
Page 227, 228
Debt, Debtors. Sin a Debt, why so called, opened, Page 332, 334 How our Debts
are satisfied for, and yet freely forgiven, largely opened, Page 236, to 238
Wicked Men why called Debtors, Page 200
Devil. Wicked Men compared to the Devil, Page 254 Devil why called a Lion, and
a Serpent, Page 363
Dignity. The great Dignity of Ministers, Page 286
Dogs. Wicked Men compared to Dogs, in sixteen Particulars, Page 232, etc.
Doves. The Property of Doves, and why the Saints are compared to them, opened
in 13 things, Page 192
Deceivers. Their many Ways to deceive, laid open, Page 295
Door. What the Door is into the true Church, Page 278, 279

E.
Eagles. SAints compared to Eagles, in ten things, Page 141 Why wicked Men are
compared to Eagles, Page 253

F.
Faith. FAith why called a Shield, Page 16 How you may know true Faith, Page
15, 16, 17 The Necessity of Faith, Page 19, 20 The Difference between a weak
and strong Faith, Page 20, 21 The Excellency of Faith, Page 15, 16
Family. The Church called a Family, Page 128, 129 The Nature and Excellency of
the Government thereof, Page 128, 129
Foxes. Wicked Men why compared to Foxes, Page 241, 242
Forgiveness of Sin. What it is we ask of God in that Petition, Forgive us our
Debts, Page 340, 341 No Forgiveness without Christ's Blood, or Reconciliation
made by him, Page 342
Fowler. Satan why called a Fowler, and what a subtle Fowler he is, opened in 5
Things, Page 362, 363
Floods. Afflictions compared to Floods, in 9 Things, Page 386 In what respect
God may be said to sit upon the Floods, ibid
Field. This World why called a Field, Page 392
Furnace. Afflictions why compared to a Furnace, Page 381
Fools. Wicked Men Fools or Idiots, opened, Page 111, 112

G.
Garden. THe Church why called a Garden, opened in many Particulars, Page 112,
113
Girdle. Truth why called a Girdle, opened in 10 Partic. Page 4, to 8
Government. The Nature of Church Order and Government, opened in 12 Partic.
Page 129 The Excellency of a Family or Church consists in its good and orderly
Government, Page 130
Gold. The Nature of Gold, and why Faith is compared to it, opened in seven
Party. Page 15, 16, 17 The Excellency of tried Faith above Gold Page 18 The
Godly why compared to Gold, Page 190, 191
Goats. Why wicked Men, as Hypocrites, etc. are compared to Goats, Page 243,
244 Why the Devil is called the God of this World, Page 359
Godliness. Godliness a great Mystery, proved by nine Arguments, Page 371, 372
Gray-Hairs. Sin and Judgments upon a People, why called Gray-Hairs, in six
Things, Page 357 England at this time gray headed, Page 359

H.
Hardness. CHrist's Soldiers must endure Hardness, opened in seven
Particulars, Page 154, 155
Harvest. Day of Grace why called Harvest, in 8 Things, Page 370
Heirs. Saints why called Heirs, Heirs of God, in six Things, Page 145
Heart. Heart of Flesh, why so called, and how such a Heart may be known, in
four things, Page 194
Heaven. Heaven, why called Paradise, Page 407 Heaven called a Crown of Life,
Page 409
Hell. Hell why called a Furnace of Fire, Page 410
Heat. Affliction compared to great Heat, in 8 Things, Page 387
Horn. The little Horn, Dan. 7. proved to be the Pope, Page 361
Hunter. Satan why called a Hunter, and what kind of Hunter he is, opened in
eight Partic. Page 361
Hope. Hope a Helmet, why so called, Page 22, 23 A Definition of Hope, Page 22

I.
Jewels. SAints why called God's Jewels, together with the Nature of Jewels,
opened in seven Things, Page 198
Imitate. Saints imitate God, in five Things, Page 144
Judgment-Day. Judgment-Day compared to an Assize, in eight Particulars, Page
406

L.
Lambs. WHat meant by Lambs in a large Place, Page 192, 193
Laborers. Ministers why called Laborers in 6 things, Page 259 Christ's
Laborers ought to be sufficiently provided for, largely proved, Page 260, 261
Lilly. The excellent Nature of the Lilly, and why the Church is compared to
it, in 8 things, Page 115, 116
Light. Light sown for the Righteous, in five respects, Page 384
Life. Life of Man compared to a swift Post, Page 393 -- To a swift Ship, ibid
-- To a Weavers Shuttle, and to the Wind, Page 394 -- To a Cloud, and to a
Flower, Page 395 How we may know a Man who has a Principle of spiritual Life
in him, Page 229
Lions. Why Saints are compared to Lions, showed in five Things, Page 188, 189
Why wicked Men are compared to Lions, Page 237
Locusts. What meant by the Locusts out of the Bottomless Pit, Page 137
Love. Why Love is compared to Death and the Grave, Page 30 Why to Coals and
Flames of Fire, Page 31 Christ's Love why compared to Wine, opened in eight
Things, Page 34

M.
Man. WHy Man is compared to Earth, opened in seven Things, Page 133, 134 Man
why called a Worm, and how fitly he may be compared thereto, opened in ten Par.
Page 136 Man like a Flower of the Field, Page 138, 139 Wicked Men mad, or
besides themselves, opened in six Things, Page 234
Marriage-Day. The Resurrection-Day, the Saints Marriage-Day, and
Coronation-Day, Page 404, 405
Merchants. Saints spiritual Merchants, in ten things, Page 168, 169
Ministers. Ministers why called Angels. Page 258 Work of a Minister hard, in
five Things, Page 289 Who is a true Minister, and how to be chosen and
ordained, Page 289 The Necessity of a Gospel- Ministry, Page 290
Mother. Why the Church of God is called a Mother, Page 110 The Church compared
to the Moon, Page 86
Morning. The Resurrection compared to the Morning, in nine Particulars, Page
402
Mountains. Why wicked Men are called Mountains, Page 225, 226
Myrtle-Trees. The Nature of the Myrtle-Tree, and what Fruit it bears, and why
the Godly are compared to it, in seven Things, Page 184

N. WIcked Men naked, Page 247

O.
Olive Tree. THe Nature of the Olive Tree, and why the Church is compared
thereto, Page 91

P.
Palm Tree. WHat the Nature of it is, and why the Godly are compared to it,
opened in nine Particulars, Page 175, 176 The Godly, like the Palm Tree,
flourish under heavy Pressures, Page 177
Papists. Papists confuted about Transubstantiation, Page 38, 39 Papists
spiritual Thieves, Page 246
Pilgrims. Saints compared to Pilgrims, opened, Page 175
Priests. Why the Saints are called Priests, Page 200
Prince. The Devil why called Prince of Darkness, Page 360
Planters. Ministers Planters, why so called, opened in fourteen Particulars,
Page 275, 276
Plague. Sin a Plague, Page 349 The Plague of the Leprosy a Figure of Sin,
showed in seven Things, Page 344
Poison. Sin compared to Poison, in seven things, Page 350, 351
Poor. Wicked Men poor and miserable, showed in seven Things, Page 250
Providence. Providence of God wonderful in preserving of his People in these
Days, Page 108 Providence of God compared to Clouds and Darkness, Page 377, 383
Prayer. Saints must pray always, what meant thereby, Page 160 Special Seasons
for extraordinary Prayer, Page 160 Prayer a great Ordinance, in six Things,
Page 160, 161 What hinders the Saints Prayer, Page 161

R.
Race. WHat a Man must do, who would run the spiritual Race, opened, Page 162,
to 165
Rod. Wicked Men the Rod of God, in five Things, Page 201 Afflictions called a
Rod, Page 379 What Voice is in the Rod, Page 380
Rock. The Heart of a Sinner compared to a Rock, in seven Things, Page 251 How
to know a hard and rockie Heart, showed in five Things, Page 252
Rulers. Good Rulers, their Qualifications, and how chosen, and govern, Page
287 Ministers of the Gospel, why called Rulers, Page 287

S.
Salt. GRace compared to Salt, in seven things, Page 1, 2 Saints compared to
Salt, Page 166
Satan. Satan's Subtilty in warring against the Soul, Page 153
Saints. Saints Joynt-heirs, and yet every one shall have Possession of the
whole Inheritance, Page 145
Sepulcher. Hypocrites why compared to a Sepulcher, in four Things, Page 115,
116
Sickness. Sin a Sickness, Page 352 What a Sickness Sin is, opened, Page 352,
353
Sin. The evil and abominable Nature of Sin, largely opened, by diverse
Metaphors, Page 331, to 350
Singing. Singing of Psalms an Ordinance of God, Page 107
Spirit. The Spirit of a Man, why called the Candle of the Lord, showed in four
Things, Page 68
Ship. Why the Church is compared to a Ship, Page 118
Shepherds. Ministers compared to Shepherds, in 8 things. Page 280
Sluggards. Wicked Men called Sluggards, Page 207, to 210
Stewards. Every Saint a Steward, why so called, Page 195 Why Ministers are
called Stewards, Page 272, 273
Soldiers. Saints Soldiers of Jesus Christ, largely opened in twenty two
Particulars, Page 149, to 157
Spokesmen. Ministers Christ's Spokesmen, opened in six Things, Page 268, 269
Swine. The Nature of Swine, and why wicked Men are compared to them in many
Partic. Page 216, 217
Sleep. Death why called a Sleep, Page 394 The Difference between the Sleep of
the Godly and the Ungodly, Page 394
Summer. Day of Grace called Summer, in 5 things, Page 369

T.
Tares. WIcked Men compared to Tares, Page 222, 223
Thieves, Thief. Wicked Men called Thieves, Page 245 Sin why called a Thief,
Page 331
Thorns. Wicked Men why compared to Thorns, Page 124
Trade. Godliness a Trade, opened in thirteen Particulars, Page 371, to 376 The
excellent Trade of the City of God, Page 84, 85
Truth. The Excellency of Truth, Page 7, 8 Truth taken variously, Page 3
Trumpeters. Ministers why called Trumpeters, Page 263, to 267
Types. A Treatise of Types, Page 413, to the End.

V.
Vessels. SAints compared to Vessels, Page 186, 187
Vipers. The Nature of Vipers, and why wicked Men are so called, Page 248
Vineyard. The Church compared to a Vineyard, Page 99, 100
Virgin. The Church compared to a Virgin, Page 103, 104
Vomit. What meant by turning to the old Vomit, Page 354
Uncleanness. Sin an unclean Thing: nothing so unclean as Sin, opened in five
Things, Page 355 The woeful Uncleanness of Man by Nature, Page 356

W.
Watchmen. MInisters why called Watchmen, Page 263, 264
Wells. Why False-Teachers are called Wells with-Water. Page 293
Willow-Trees. Why Saints are compared to Willow-Trees, Page 183
Winter. Afflictions compared to Winter, in 8 things, Page 382
Wilderness. This World a Wilderness, in eight respects, Page 341
Wheat. Saints compared to Wheat, Page 178, 179 A Trial of Wheat from Tares,
Page 177
Wormwood. Afflictions compared to Worm. in 3 things, Page 388
Wounds. What a kind of Wound Sin is, opened in ten Particulars, Page 346 When
a Wound may be said to be deadly or incurable, Page 345, 346
World. The End of the World, why called Harvest, Page 392

FINIS.

