Proposals by E. L. to raise One Million Three Hundred Thousand Pounds.
A General Tax for five Years to be laid on all Measures, Wett and Dry, Long
Measures, Scales, and Stilliards, wherewith any sort of Merchandise or
Commodity is sold or exchanged.

Each of these to be stamped every Year once, and pay as underneath for each
Stamp.

The Wett Measures as by a computation taken out of the Excise Office, will
amount to 100000 l. per Ann.

This is now practiced in some Foreign parts. The Dry and Long Measures, Scales
and Stilliards, etc. at an easy computation is 100000 l. per Ann. The Traders
not selling by Weights and Measures, and Mills, is computed at 60000 l. per Ann.

12 d. For each Flaggon, Pott, Mugg, Tankard, etc. not Silver, containing Two
Pennyworth of Ale or Beer; or any other Liquor not exceeding Sixpence per
Quart, or not hereafter named.

6 d. For each Pint or lesser Measure, containing one Pennyworth of Ditto.

2 s. For each Flaggon, Pottle, Gallon, containing four Pennyworth of Ditto.

3 s. For each Tankard, Bowl, or Pott, etc. of Silver, containing two
Pennyworth of Ditto.

1 s. 6 d. For each Pint, etc. of Silver, containing one Pennyworth of Ditto.

5 s. For each double Tankard, etc. of Silver, containing more than two
Pennyworth of Ditto.

2 s. For each Quart Pott, etc. wherein Wine, Brandy, or any other Spirit, Oil,
Vinegar, Mum, or any other Liquor, above Sixpence per Quart, is sold.

1 s. For each Pint, etc. of Ditto.

6 d. For each lesser Measure.

5 s. For each Pottle, Gallon, or larger Measure, containing Ditto.

For all Silver Tankards, single and double, as above.

5 s. For each Yard or Ell, or if marked on the Compter or elsewhere.

10 s. For each Woollen drapers Yard.

Each Linen Draper, or any one that sells Linnens, shall be obliged to have
both Yard and Ell.

All dealers Wholesale, shall be obliged to have Yards or Else thus Stamped.

5 s. For each Bushel or larger Measure.

2 s. 6 d. For each half Bushel.

1 s. For each Peck.

6 d. For each lesser Dry Measure.

5 s. For each Hostlers Peck. 2 s. 6 d. each half Peck, and 1 s. for each
Quarter of a Peck.

Each Inn or House, where Horse are entertained, shall be obliged to have these
three Measures, or pay the Forfeiture, as underneath, for want of any of them.

5 s. For each pair of Scales or Stilliards held up by the hand when used.

10 s. For each pair of Ditto fastened above when used.

All Manners of Earthen Ware, etc. shall have a Lidd of Pewter, or the like
Metal, so as they may be Stamped.

If any sell Bottle Ale or Beer, they shall be obliged to rack it off into one
of these stamped Measures. If not, to forfeit as underneath.

That no Vintner or Wine Seller, shall sell Wine in Bottles, or Flasks by
Retail, except the Oil be taken off in presence of the Buyers. Mum and all
other Liquors, as Ale and Beer, upon the like forfeiture as underneath.

If any Person shall buy, sell, exchange, or barter, with any Measure, Scale or
Stilliard, not stamped, shall pay for the first offense 10 l. for every offense
after 20 l. half to be paid to the Informer, the other half to the King.

If any Person shall buy, sell, exchange or barter with any Measure, Scale or
Stilliard not his own, he shall pay the said forfeiture; so shall the Lender as
well as the Borrower.

If any Person presume to counterfeit, or put a false Stamp upon any Measure,
Scale, etc. he shall pay 50 l. Be imprisoned a Year, or lose his Ears, etc.

That a Tax be granted on all Mills for five years.

20 s. per Ann. For each Water-Wheel, whether for Corn, Fullers, Paper, or
other use, and the same for each Horse-Mill, Windmill, etc.

That each Trader that neither sells by Weight nor Measure, shall pay 10 S. per
Annum. Such as these, Atturnys, Scriveners, Shoomakers, Glaziers, Glovers,
Cutlers, Stationers, Booksellers, Furriers, Pinners, Needlemakers, Coopers,
Turners, Combmakers Writing-Masters, Schoolmasters, Dancing-Masters,
Fencing-Masters, Taylers, Painters, Pattinmakers, Farriers, Poulterers,
Potters, Barbers, Wigmakers, Cabinet-Makers, Fishmongers, Joyners, Carpenters,
Spurriers, Gilders, Fletchers, Masons, etc.

These Taxes to be put into the Excise Office, and will be but very little
trouble. The General Stamping being but once a Year.

The Charge in Collecting, will amount to about 7000 l. per Ann. allowing as
follows, one Commissioner to be added, 20 l. to each Collector, 10 l. to each
Supervisor, 5 l. per Ann. to each Gager, and proportionably of the rest.

No Measure to be Stamped but in presence of Collector, Supervisor and Gager, or
two at the least.

It is to be noted, that the first Years Revenue may be Collected in two
Months, after this shall be enacted; or Three Months at most.


