Englands Monthly Observations and Predictions, for the Year of our Blessed
Savior, 1653. Foretold by those two Famous Astrologers of our Age, Mr.
William Lilly, and Mr. Culpeper.
The Tune is. Fair Angel of England.
man in frock coat and hat, gesticulating man sat at a table, with astrological
paraphernalia

WHat learned Astrologers writes this Year,
I purpose now unto you for to declare,
Especially Lilly a man of great learning,
In famous Astrology by our discerning.
And likewise Cullpeper, a man of great fame
Known all over England even by that name,
What they have foretold you here shall find,
Strange and remarkable if it you will mind
January.
In January small news you shall hear,
Unless it be so to fill you with care,
The poor Country men will be grounded indeed,
When he has no fodder his Cattle to feed.
From Spain; and Italy, we shall hear news,
God grant poor men may not be sold for old shoos
O trust to your selves where ear you see me
Though I have good judgment in Astrology.
February,
In February men will not be dumb;
Though Angels of gold have quieted some,
Nor yet shall this government altered be,
Though turbulant spirits do strive to be free.
We shall make a peace with some sorrain nation,
Then for our own good to keep ffirm our station
And though many thunderbolts seek to disturb us
It does not lie in their power yet for to curb us.
March.
All Urope this Month shall be at a stand
At our preparations by Sea, and by Land
Though we amongst our selves cannot agree
Yet England, by others now feared shall be.
The hearts of the dutch men this month shall wax cold,
Then by the courage of our Seamen bold,
And if I mistake not they shall seek their peace
And so shall the honor of England increase.
April.
The commonwealth this Month of April.
Shall stand in great fear some things will fall ill
For Taxes Increase and moneys grow scant
And the poorer sort shall be in great want.
We shall have a fear although we are strong,
The Scot, or the Dutch, will do us some wrong
Not by their power: but by treacheries,
Although we from them have taine many a prise.
May,
Now this Month of May. it cannot be good,
It seems to begin with horror and blood.
Fevers and other diseases most strange.
About the City and Country shall range.
And this Month all Urope shall make preparation
For war as I guess nations against nations
Yet if we fight. we still shall see,
England shall still victorious be.
The second Part, to the same Tune. a crowd of people looking at an army in the
sky
June
Our governors shall labor to keep us still quiet,
From civil desention, mischief and r^yot,
And good moderate people shall labor each day,
To persuade rude people to love and obey.
This month we expect some newese from the north
And I do guess some matters of worth*
From Scotland and Holland and from other parts,
But God send our Country, men true loyal hearts
July.
This July the Land shall quieted be,
And in good condition as all men shall see,
Holland once more shall sue for a peace,
And there will be hopes the mischief will cease.
If no peace be granted they will do us small harm,
Although about us like Locus they swarm,
For our brave Seamen we need not to doubt,
Will after some knocking put them to the rout.
August.
Much thunder and lightning in this month will be.
The Air much distempered the people shall see,
Many Sea Fights and blood shall be shed,
And many for want of wit are missed:
But after a while good news shall we hear,
Come from the West to banish our fear,
A Mutiny in Spain is likely to be,
And we in this Nation shall hardly agree.
September.
This month of September if things fall out right,
Holland and we shall give over to fight.
By means of Ambassadors we are made friends.
And Holland be willing to make us amends:
The wings will grow high and may us affright,
But there is no Enemy against us dare fight,
Then be of good comfort and be not cast down,
For we shall live quiet, though fortune may frown
October.
The 1 week of this month we shall hear good News,
Our Merchants return and nothing shall loose.
From the Western parts with joy and content,
After much toyling and labor is spentt:
Our Land now shall flourish and Holland decline,
And to see us prosper our Foes shall repine,
If God be with us, who can us with-stand,
It is he alone that protecteth our Land.
November.
In this month of November good people shall strive
Out of this Nation Tithes for to drive,
Who squze the countryman out of his estate,
Even by their tyranny of their deceit:
Enough for to make all the people to rise,
Against those that over them thus tyranize,
Who cannot be quiet until they be eased.
And til that time come they will not be pleased,
December.
I would not have Merchants now for to grieve,
Their ships shall come home their minds to relieve
For providence keeps them, then do not despair,
This month of December good news you shall hear,
And since it is now the last month in the Year,
I would not have any possessed with fear,
Let Us pray unto God our comfort in chief,
At the end of the year for to end all our grief.
Printed for W. Gilbertson.


