THE Universal Scorbutic Pills, AND Radical Purifier of Nature.
Operating by Purgation and Urine, with the greatest ease and success in
various Diseases and Infirmities: gently cleansing the whole Body (by those two
principal evacuations) from all Scorbutic, Corrupt and depraved humors:
thereby casting out the Seeds of Diseases; restoring decayed Parts, and
rectifying disordered Faculties; correcting and quickening the Digestions,
opening Obstructions, and relieving the Head, Stomach, Spleen, Kidneys,
Bowels, etc. pained or otherwise distempered: purifying the Blood and Nervous
juice, procuring thereby a sound habit of Body. Thus working as a true
Catholic Purgative and Diuretic; the provoking matter that causes Pains,
Oppressions, Gripes, Fluxes, Feavors, Convulsions, etc. is discharged by Stools
and Urine. The seminal and continuing Causes of the Scurvy, Consumptions,
Dropsies, Jaundice, Agues, etc. is hereby daily diminished and rooted out. Salt
Rheums, itching, sharp, and corroding humors, the foundation and supply of
Rheumatisms, Gouts, Inflammations, Tumors, Impostumes, Ulcers, Kings Evil,
deformities of the skin, etc. is hereby gradually drained out and exhausted, by
the use of this wholesome abstersive, and balsamic cleanser; lightning and
freeing the Body from all impurities and superfluous humors, from whence
Diseases take their rise, and receive their growth.

These Pills are durable in full virtue many years; most necessary provision
for all Country Inhabitants, Travelers, Soldiers, Seamen, Planters, etc.
ready upon all occasions for prevention or curing: successfully proved upon
diverse persons of Honor and Quality, for many years in a constant Practice, by
the Author an eminent Physician: And fortunate are they that are provided with
this singular medicine for their help.

The Antivenereal Pills, or Magnetic Remedy.
Being a Specific Antidote against the spreading virulency of the Venereal
Lues, or French Disease, running of the Reins, and other dangerous symptoms
arising thence. The most secure and private Remedy, now in great request and
use, against this surprising and deceitful lurking Malady. Prepared by the same
Author, most expert in these Cures, as by his History and Mystery of this
Disease, lately Printed, fully appears.

LONDON, Printed for the Undertakers, 1675.

Who faithfully procures these choice Medicines sealed up, from E. M. Dr. of
Physic; with directions for their use in all Cases: Sold by Mr. Horn, at the
South Entrance of the Royal Exchange; Mr. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet;
Mr. Hensman in Westminster Hall; Booksellers.

To the judicious and discreet Reader.
THE Honor and Esteem of Physic in former Ages was so great, that Kings and
Princes did own and allow Medicines (of which they were Authors and Inventors)
to be called by their own Names. And Physicians of the greatest fame, as they
were diligent in the preparation and trials of Medicines; so were they
ambitious their names should give Title to Medicines of their own invention and
industry. But this last Age revolting from the ingenious labors of the Ancient
Heroes, resigning the Art of Medicines (the most excellent and necessary part
of Physic) into the hands of Tradesmen; Medicines thereby fell much lower in
repute; now accounted a vulgar business, that some of our Doctors (not the
wisest) think it too inferior for them to own or meddle with. But the vanity
of these men, and the villainy of those that betrayed this Noble Art into a
Trade, does manifestly appear in a late serious Tract, entitled the Ancient
and Modern Practice of Physic, examined and compared, etc. By the Author of
these Medicines. Illiterate men of mean and broken fortunes, (taking advantage
upon this absurd neglect of the Professors) have craftily and gainfully
obtained the Custom of setting forth their trivial slight Medicines, so that
some worthy Physicians now reviving the primitive practice, are at present
discouraged from offering the products of their Art to the World, for fear of
scandal, and being accounted in the number of those Quacks. But the publishing
of Medicines thus shamefully defamed by ignorant pretenders, must be restored
into esteem by the learned, which will prove most advantageous to the people:
and it is their interest to encourage skilful experienced Artisti, that they
may not lock up their rare inventions, and fortunate experiments, confining
them within the narrow compass of a private practice; but rather that they
expose their Arcanum' to public use, that all who stand in need may partake
thereof.

Thus the meanest of the people, may purchase the best of Medicines: and such
as travel abroad, or live remote from able Physicians, may be furnished with
able Curing Medicines. Those who will not undergo, or cannot bear the charge of
a course of Physic, may receive great relief by a single Medicine. And such as
languish under the means, the places of their abode does afford, will have help
brought to them from far. Physicians then will be stimulated to out vye and
excel each other in the rarity and excellency of their Remedies, being to
undergo a public Trial. And when men of the greatest knowledge and experience
shall thus produce their Comprehensive Catholics and appropriate specific
Medicines; a treasury will be laid open, and what is most excellent and rare,
will be known and conveyed through the Nation, for the ease and relief of the
Infirm and languishing.

These public great advantages, as great reasons being considered; the learned
Physician need not be ashamed to publish an extraordinary Medicine of his own
designment and elaboration (although ignorant bold fellows have abused the
Custom) for if Physicians must shun all that they do, then must they leave
their practice too. And if a Printed Sermon, or any piece of learning, cried
about the Streets, be no disparagement to the work nor the Author, why the
publishing of a Medicine? If a Treatise of Diseases, of Anatomy, etc. be
laudable; why not a discourse or discovery of an incomparable Medicine? If
speculations and notions of the Head; why not works of the Hands and Head,
being serviceable to many thousands that are not at all benefited by learned
discourses? If Persons of Honor and Quality expose their Cattle and produce of
their Land, at Market and Fair, why not men of Arts, the products of their
learned ingenious labors, being useful to the people? He that picks straws all
day is as serviceable to the public* as he that studies and labors many years
to acquire a noble Medicine, and then conceals it. And thus much by way of
Apology and Defense, to obviate the rash Censure of some inconsiderate men, and
silence the reproachful tongues of others, envious at this undertaking, as
being contrary to their interest.

Now concerning these Medicines, they are not asserted infallible (since man is
mortal) but as certain* efficacious, and full of help as lies in the power of
natural means: and this experience for many years fully confirms: and allowing
one in ten may miss of their hope herein; yet it were great imprudence to
refuse the trial hereof (at (...) rate) not knowing whether you be one of the
nine to be Cured, or the tenth that may fail: and the ^ery (...) will not have
cause to complain, for as much as a mitigation or intermission will be gained
even b^m. (...), if you will trust learning and experience, Art and
indefatigable industry, for a safe and powerful (...) ^ed and improved by long
Practice, you have it here.


