A Brief CHARACTER OF THE ANCIENT CHRISTIAN QUAKERS. Written by W. M. A Witness
for the Truth, as it was in the Beginning.

LONDON, Printed for S. Clarke in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1695.

A Brief CHARACTOR Of the Ancient CHRISTIAN-QVAKERS.
FIrst, In the North of England there was a few Religious People, that could
find no Satisfaction to their Immortal Souls, amongst the several
Will-Worshipers [having been amongst them] Met often together, to wait upon
God, with frequent Prayers unto him, That they might attain to that Holiness of
Life the Saints Enjoyed, Recorded in the Holy Scriptures; Crying unto God as
did Holy David, Psalm. 42.1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so
pants my Soul after thee, O God.

And it pleased God to satisfy their Thirsting and Breathing Souls, by giving
them more Grace, which was Purchased for us all, by the Sufferings and Death of
his dear Son, our Savior, Christ Jesus, which descovered the way of Truth unto
them, whereby they were enabled to walk in the delightful Path of Righteousness
to pleas God, and so received power (through the alone help of this Inward and
Spiritual Grace) to overcome all the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil. Yea, the Lord discovered unto them so much of his Divine Power, and
Love, in their Assemblies, that their Bodies was made to Tremble, as Moses,
Habakkuk, etc. at the power of Gods Presence, which some Rude People Seeing,
called them, in Scorn, Quakers, Isa. 66.5. Jer. 33.9.

2. About the Year 1653. God sent some of them, to Declare to People, what God
had done for their Souls, Declaring sometimes in Marketplaces, sometimes in
Steeple Houses, and Meettings; and many Thousands were Converted to the Truth,
as it is in Jesus: That a worhy Man in the South, who was Converted to the
Truth, through the power of their Ministry, Write a little Book, which he
called The Principles of Truth, says in p. 14.15. etc. By this Gift of God in
our Hearts, we further Believe, That Christ Jesus Rose again from the Dead,
according to the Scriptures, and Sits at Gods Right Hand in a Glorious Body;
and we Believe, That our low Estate and humble Bodies shall be made like unto
his Glorious Body, through the working of his Mighty Power, whereby he is able
to subdue all things unto himself, and that this Mortality shall put on
Immortality. For though we Believe that Christ Jesus has Lighted every Man
with his Light, whereby Man may come to know himself Lost and Undone, as before
is said, yet therefore is not every Man Saved, though the Grace that appears to
all Men is Sufficient in it self; but some have the Grace of God bestowed upon
them in vain, not liking to retain God in their Knowledge, though something
within them shows them what is Good, but they reject the Council of God within,
or against themselves, to their own Destruction, Luke 7.30. (see the Margin)
and yet it does not follow, that the Grace is Insufficient of it self, no more
than it follows, that Christ's Death is Insufficient, because he tasted Death
for every Man, and yet every Man is not Saved. Neither does Regeneration, or
the Believing in the Light of Christ within, make void the Death and Sufferings
of Christ without at Jerusalem, no more than Believing the Scripture Testimony
without, concerning Christ's Death, make void the Work of Regeneration and
Mortification within; But as the Apostle says in another Case, so I say in
this, For as the Man is not without the Woman, neither is the Woman without the
Man in the Lord: Even so is not the Death and Sufferings of Christ without at
Jerusalem, to be made void and of none effect by any thing within, neither does
the Light within make that of none effect without, but both in the Lord answer
his Will: For though there is, and may be, a Knowledge, and Belief, of what
Christ Did and Suffered without the Gates, in his own Body, upon the Tree, and
yet Sin alive in the Heart, and the Work of Regeneration not known, yet it
cannot be so where the Light within is believed on and obeyed, so as to have its
perfect Work in the Heart, to Regenerate, and make all things New, and to be of
God, this Man can never make void what Christ has done and suffered without,
and yet this New Birth, or Christ formed within, and dwelling in the Heart by
Faith, does not limit or confine Christ to be only within, and not without
also; but both within and without, according to the Good Pleasure of the Father
to Reveal and make him Known. For he Fills all things, and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot Contain him; and yet he is at Gods Right Hand, far above all
Heavens, in a Glorious Body.

By JOHN CROOK, an Ancient Labourer in Christ's Vineyard, yet on this fide the
Grave, to the Joy of many Souls.

To which I add, the Poets Verses.
ETernal Love ought to be our Chief ame,
Life, in our Saviors Death, we duly clame,
In his dear Merits, all our hopes must be
Zone, of our Everlasting Life, is he,
A Bright Meridian of Eternity.
But how came this great Mystery to pass?
Eternal Wisdom the prime Author was.
The thing is deep, and Mortal Minds are lost,
Heaven knows alone, what this dear Blessing cost.
Consider then, and let us still Adore
Omnipotence, which our weak Nature bore.
Compassioning us, he laid a side
Known Glory, and dispising shame, he Died
Sovereign over Death, with Death he yet Complied.
But to return, They, for their faithful witnessing to the Truth, Suffered many
Stonings, Finings, and Imprisonments (from Cruel Men) yet God never forsook
them, so that they Sung Praises unto his Holy Name, when in Dungeons.

3. Their Message, and Labor, was to turn Peoples Minds to the Gift, or
Talent, of Light or Grace in their own Souls (the way to Life) that it might be
every ones Chief Teacher, and Leader, into all Truth, Neh. 9.20. John 1.9. Tit.
2.11. 1 Cor. 12.7. Romans 1.19. Which caused the said J. C. to Write, What
unwearied Pains Truth made many to take; to run too and fro, to Inform and
Fore-warn their Relations and Acquaintance, least they should neglect the Day
of their Visitation; and they knowing the Truth should be Guilty of their
Blood, because they had not forewarned them, is known to many Witnesses. See
Truths Progress.

4. They waited upon God in Silence, (in all their Meetings) their Minds fixed
on Gods Grace; and out of Earthly Thoughts. And none Spoke until Gods Spirit
Moved any one to Speak. Durst not Pray or Preach mearly from Head Knowledge.

For, says the said J. C. How careful were those that came to Witness the
[Truth] at the beginning, to keep Low and Humble, that they might not be drawn
from their Own Measurs, least their [Own] Words should become their Burden,
and they be Condemned in themselves, for uttering that [as in the Name of God]
which came not from the Spirit of the Living God. And says R. Barckley, in
Page 453 in his Works, To Pray and Preach without the Spirit, is an offense to
God; not profitable.

5. They Met from House to House, and sometimes in Orchards, and did not limit
themselves to Licensed Meeting Houses; and were for Meeting in a great Town,
rather than in a private Village.

6. They did not like to Lie a Night in such a place, where the People provided
more variety of Food for them, than the Family used to do for themselves being
very Temperate. For Temperance (says the Wise) Augments things that are
Pleasant; and ordinary Fare is made equal in Sweetness to the greatest Dainties.

7. They did not concern themselves in giving in their Names, or Voices, for
the Electing of Parliament Men: Their Kingdom not being of this World.

8. They were come to the Fullfilling of that Scripture Prophecy, of Learning
War no more, so could neither Fight with Carnal Weapons, nor hire Men to Fight:
Trusting only upon God to Deliver them out of the Hands of all Enemies; Yea,
Loved their Enemies.

9. They were always true to their Words and Promises unto all; Yea, when in
Prison, for Truths sake, the Jaylors would sometimes Trust us with the Keys of
the Prison (though many Fellons there) having the same Confidence in us, as
Pharoah's Jailer had in Joseph. For, says the Wise, He that breaks his
Promise, forfeits his Faith, (which was the Security) and so is become as an
Infidel, unto him to whom be Promised.

10. They, when cast into Prison for good Conscience sake, or their Goods taken
from them for their Testimony, greatly Rejoiced that God had counted them
worthy to Suffer for his Name, without repining against their Persecutors, nor
durst they ask their Goods again, Luke 6.30. nor go to Law to gain them, or use
Law Tricks to avoid their Suffering, trusting in God alone for their
Deliverance, 2. Cor. 12.9.

11. They bore a Conscientious Testimony against the oppression of Tyths; and
being cast into Prison for the same, could not give Money to Lawyers, Jaylors,
etc. for Liberty, waiting Gods time for Deliverance. Nor could they consult
with Lawyers to save their Goods from the Claymers of Tyths. For in so doing,
says R.B. page 209, 529. they lose the Glory of their Sufferings, by not
appearing as the Innocent followers of Christ.

12. They durst not use Vain, and Idle Words, Foolish Jesting, nor Wagers,
either for Money, or Goods. Their Words being few and Savory, Ministering Grace
to the Hearers, Mat. 12.36. Having a Bridle for their Tongue, for God sees all
our Actions, Prove. 15.3.

13. They gave a good Example, as to plainness in Apparel, accounting such
Professors in Religion Proud, that wore Party-colored Stuff, or such as was
Striped, or Shining, or Flowered; and that wore Long-Scarfs, Silk-Gowns, Curled
Periwigs, High Heads, Rich Hats, or other costly Array, 1 Timothy 9.10. Knowing
that such Examples strengthened the Proud Spirit in others, which the Lord is
about to bring down. For Truth, says J. C. made many Burn their Pictures,
Laces, and other needless Attire and Superfluities.

14. They bore a Testimony also against such Professors of the Truth, as
Delighted in Feasting at Marriages, etc. And that were for Rich Furniture in
their Houses, Clothing the Walls in them with Stuff, Brass, Pewter, etc. while
many poor, honest People wanted convenient Clothing for their Backs. For, if
God has given thee abundance, do not cast how to enlarge thy Barn, Shop, etc.
but repair immediately to the Bellies of such as are needy, and oppressed with
want (to such people I mean, as are Honest and in want, and have not Hears to
seek Relief of the Parish) and make them the Storehouses of thine Increase.
Whatsoever is given in this kind, is not Lost, but Lent; the Lord himself will
Repay thee an Hundred sold; so as thou gives it not in Vain Glory, to be seen
of Men.

15. They durst not give Flattering Titles unto Men or Women, to their Faces;
as my Lord, your Worship, Sir, Master, or Mistress, except to such as was
really their Masters or Mistresses, nor much Bowing to them, anciently called
Worship, knowing that it exalted the Proud Spirit in them the more.

16. Those of them that were Tradesmen, having got sufficient to maintain
themselves, strived not for much Riches, (knowing it to be a Snare) left their
Trades, or the most part thereof, to the Younger, or their Apprentices. Not at
all (says I. C.) affecting great things for themselves, nor to get a Name in
the Earth, but to stand approved in Gods Sight, which they valued beyond the
judgment of the Wise, and the Honorable in the Earth, or of any of the Sons of
Men, is also fully known to them that were Converted in the beginning. See also
Chap. 13. Sect. 7 and 8 in No Cross no Crown.

17. They could, in much Love, begin and finish all concerns relating to their
Society, as to Marriages, Relief of the Poor, Admonishing Evil Persons, end
Differences, etc. to prevent Suits at Law. At the end of their Religious
Meetings (a Religious Meeting being a Church, Romans 16.3, 5. Col. 45.) where the
least esteemed of in the Church, had Liberty to Judge, 1 Cor. 6.4. Leaving
every Meeting to their own Power. See W. P's. Rejoinder to John Faldo.

But of latter times some have swerved from the said good Order in the
Churches, which caused another worthy Man, an Ancient Labourer in Christ's
Vineyard, to give in his Testimony (amongst others) part thereof is as
follows, viz. We Believe in his Name [Christ Jesus] and he only is our Lord,
Lawgiver, and the Shepherd of his Sheep; and they hear his Voice, and the Voice
of a Stranger, they will not follow.

These Sayings are professed by us all, but I find but a few in the practice of
them.

I might mention the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and a Cloud of
Witnesses, both before and since, that they neither did Command, nor Compel,
Conformity, in matters of Conscience, relating to Church Discipline, but I
shall (upon this occasion, and at this time) rather mention the Truth, which we
received in the Beginning.

The breaking forth of it, was very Glorious, after so long a Night of
Darkness. Oh! How acceptable was it to my Soul, with many more? It can never be
forgotten.

How contrary was Compulsion, and Driving into Conformity to it? Even as Light
is contrary to Darkness. Oh! How did Love and Unity abound amongst us, that
received the Truth in the Love of it? Every one sitting under his own Vine, and
Drinking of the Fountain of Life, which the Lord has opened in us; and walking
in that Liberty, wherewith Christ had set us free.

Not a Word of Conformity, or Church Discipline, for many Years, and then we
Loved one another, even as Christ had Loved us, freely for his Name sake; and
went hand in hand together, serving the Lord, and one another, and the least
breathing that was after God in any.

How glad were we to see the Faces one of another? And how did our Harmony
sound in all our Meettings, before Conformity was brought in amongst us; and
Cried up as the only Mark of Christianity? Without it neither Hand, nor Eye,
unless with a Frown; nor Buying, nor Selling, where its Power reaches.

This Conformity has been the cause of Divisions, and Persecution in Ages
past: First Enforce, then Persecute; and much Innocent Blood has been shed by
it. It had its being in the Apostasy; and is most cried up in the thickest
Darkness; beginning at the Pope to the meanest Profession.

But I did once thing, it could never have crept in amongst us, at least so
soon, being somany faithful Testimonies against it, both in Word and Writing;
still fresh in our Remembrance. But the Enemy of the Souls of Mankind, is busy
Now, as in Ages past, with his Subtle Devices, to beguile the Souls of the
Simple; transforming himself into an Angel of Light; and putting upon him the
finest Dress, in the purest Profession that the Sons of Men can make mention
of, to draw away the Heart from the Lord, from waiting upon him, for the purest
Stream of Life and Love, into the Puddle of Conformity, finding it the easiest
way of entrance; having many specious pretenses, and fine coverings.

Oh! my Heart is grieved for it, and I am often bowed down before my God,
because of these things; and I am not alone, but there is a little Remnant with
me, whose Names are Written in the Book of Life; and whose Garments are Washed
in the Blood of the Lamb; and wears the Seamless Coat, that is Woven from the
top to the bottom.

And these things lay upon me to clear my Conscience, I could not keep silent
any longer, that I might be clear of the Blood of all Men; having not long to
be on the stage of this World, I might lay down my Head in Peace, as many of my
Brethren have done before me; who finished their course with the same Testimony.

18. They did cast none out of their Religious Society, but such as the World
saw them to be great Sinners. And if at any time they declared that such
Persons had cut themselves off from their Society, by often, and wilful Sinning
against God, yet, notwithstanding, did not make it their business to render
them Odious to all People; but in Christian Love labor to win them to the
Truth again, knowing there was hopes, while the parties saw themselves to be
Sinners.

Remembering what our Lord Teaches us, by his Example (of Charity to Persons
and Churches) in his Epistle sent to the Seven Churches of Asia. The Good that
was found in them he approved of, and Encouraged, and reproved only the Evil.
He did not overlook the Good in them, because of the Evil, neither did he
approve of the Evil, because of the Good: But, says he, I have somewhat
against thee, Repent, etc.

Let us learn to be like-Minded, least any, by false and confused Judgment,
heap Judgment and Condemnation upon their own Heads. Taking the advice of the
said J. C. who says, I Exhort all to come to the Light and Spirit of Christ
within them, to show unto them their miscarriages, and whether they hold the
Truth, as it was in the beginning.

Lastly, Let none that are Guilty, think to wipe their Mouths, and say, These
things concern not me. Well, to the Witness in thee thou art brought, from
whence there is no Appeal; for if that condemns thee, God is greater. See
Truths Propress, page 10.

Concluding in the Words of R. B. p. 683. That the Evil either in Opinion, or
Practice, ought neither to be Spared, Encouraged, nor Fomented, under any
pretense of Love whatsoever.

FINIS.

