NEWS FROM THE GREAT TURK. A Blasphemous Manifestation of the Grand Seignior
of Constantinople, against the Christians; of his entrance into Christendom,
and the Particulars of his Great ARMY. As it was sent to a Merchant of note in
London. AS ALSO What Forces are preparing against him by the Venetians, and
other Christian Princes, viz. The Duke of Florence, and Duke of Parma; The
Great Master of Malta. All faithfully Translated out of the Italian and French
Copies. Published by Authority; that all Christians may take notice of the
great Pride and horrid Blasphemy of the Turks.

LONDON; Printed for Jo. Handcock in Popes-head-Alley. 1645.

NEVVES FROM THE GREAT TURK.
SULTAN BRAIN, Might^ Emperor, Son and Nephew of God, the Invincible King of
the Turks, of Greece, of the Valticke, of Salmuria, of Damascus, of Phrygia,
of the Great and Lesser Egypt, of Alexandria, of America and Africa; King of
all the Kings in this World, chief Saint of Paradise; Bishop of whole Asia,
Africa, and America, and of the most part of Europe; chief head of Linco;
Guardian of the Sepulcher of Mahomet, and that of God; Lord and King of all
Kings, Prince of all Princes; Terror and scourge of all Christians; of the
Ottomans, and of the Circumcised Hope, and Inestimable precious Stone, and most
gracious Jewel.

The immortal memory of Sultan Murat, Grand Seignor of the Turks, our
Predecessor and beloved Brother, did always intend to take from the
Christians their little Rock, which is possessed by those that are called by
the name of Religion of Malta; and withal to suppress their Galleys, because
of the continual damage which they do upon our Seas. And whilst the said
Grand Seignor was busy to bring his design about, he dyed; Charging us to
take this care upon us, which so much the more willingly we do resolve to put
in execution, because the said Galleys not regarding our displeasure, took not
long since a Ship of ours, where the Sultan Sesera was, with the Aga, who dyed
in the fight, to our great grief: therefore We Command all our Bashaes in
Constantinople, and all the Kings, to be with their Galleys in a readiness the
first day of the full Moon, in the month of April; And that all those
Galleys which are in our River of Arcenall, be set out armed and ready at the
same time; together with all the Ships that are in our Harbors, and our
whole Militia is to do the same; for our Will is, That this our Army shall be
the terror, not only to Christendom, but to the whole World, that by the
multitude of our Galleys and Ships, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, in
admiration thereof shall be changed; the Fishes shall hide themselves in the
deepest bottom of the Sea, for the fearful noise of our Ordnance, that the
Beasts and the Forests shall be afraid, and the very trees rooted out and
beaten down; And all Christendom shall by this our great might feel our
anger and wrath, for the loss of our Sultan and the said Aga.

The said Sultan, by this his blasphemous manifestation, declares as if he
meant wholly to bend his force toward the Isle of Malta, notwithstanding is
entered in Candia, being the Dominion of the Venetians, where he has already
taken some Forts, whereof some upon Composition; and notwithstanding, after he
had taken possession of them, has put them most treacherously to the sword
without any mercy, which is not to be wondered at, by reason that the great
Sultans, his Predecessors, when they made war against the Venetians and
Hungarians, did always put them most cruelly to the sword, whether they
delivered their Towns up by Composition, or otherwise. It is credibly reported
by some that have been eyewitnesses thereof, that this Great Turks Army
consists of above 300000 men, whereof most of them are Janisaries; 6 great
Galliones, that are of 1000 tun each; 600 Galleys, 1000 small Boats to land
men and ammunition with; 1500 Camels laden with Powder; Besides diverse Ships
from Algier, laden with all sorts of Ammunition, as stakes, nails,
Iron-workes, and such things as they commonly make use of, insomuch as it is
thought that they never came out with such a great Army, as at this time. It
is much to be wished, that all Christian Princes were reconciled together, and
endeavored to join their Forces together, to oppose that cruel enemy that
seeks to make himself Monarch of the World, and to bring the Christians under
his usurping power.

By Letters from Venice it is certified, that their Ships have met with some
part of the Turks Fleet, which were coming from Algier, and have fought with
them, and have sunk twenty of their Galleys and four of their men of War.

They make great preparations at Venice against the Turk; many Christian
Princes offer their help to the utmost. By Letters from thence it is certified
thus; That the French Ambassador the Lord of Gremovilie, having made his
public entry the 14th of July last, the next day after had Audience in the
Council, where he was received with great honor and having showed his Letters
of Credit, made an Oration, offering in the behalf of the King of France his
Master, his utmost help in this War, which was received thankfully.

The great Duke of Florence has likewise presented by his Ambassador, all his
power, as well by land as by water, his Galleys, Ships, Men, and his own
person. The Duke of Parma, that is there at present, offers 1500 Dragoones; 500
horse, and 3000 foot; it is said he shall be General, and sent toward Palma.
The great Master of Malta offers likewise 8000 Soldiers, and 2000 slaves. In
the mean time, the Great Turk goes on his way, bringing all under his Power
where he comes, whilst they feed themselves with these offers.

FINIS.

