THE OPINIONS OF THE Barons of the Exchecquer. AND DIRECTIONS TO ALL Justices
of the Peace, AND CONSTABLES, etc. For the Legally Convicting of all Persons,
that are taken in Conventicles, and unlawful Meetings.
Given at the Court of Exchecquer, upon Justice Balch's Case.
Published by Special Authority.

THe Justices of Peace of Middlesex having a good while since received His
Majesty's Orders in Council, to put the Laws in Execution, and to Suppress
Conventicles; some of the said Justices accordingly issued out their Warrant to
Mr. Hodges, a Constable, requiring him to Suppress the Conventicle kept by One
Dr. Annesley; and to seize such Persons, as should be found met there, upon
pretense of a Religious Worship, contrary to Law: The said Constable repairing
thither, found above 200. Persons so Assembled; One of whom being seized, and
carried before Mr. Justice Balch, was (upon his refusing to Declare his Name)
Committed to Prison: But sometime after owning himself to be called White, and
being thereupon Discharged, brought his Action of Two Thousand Pound, for false
Imprisonment against Mr. Balch, and Mr. Hodges. The Case being debated by
Council Learned on both sides, before the Barons of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer (the latter End of Last Term) Verdict was given against the said
White, and he condemned in treble Costs, as the Law directs: the Court further
unanimously Declared the Law to be,

1. That if those in a Conventicle refuse to open the Door upon a Justice of
Peace his Warrant, Entrance being demanded, the Door may be broken open.

2. That the Persons apprehended there, are Convicted upon their being brought
before a Justice of Peace, without Oath; incurring the same Penalty, as if they
were Convicted by Oath; as the Law directs in such Cases.

3. That those Persons that are in Conventicles, though not brought before a
Justice of the Peace, may notwithstanding be Convicted by the Oath of Two
Witnesses, of their being There; incurring also the same Penalty, as if they
were; as the Law directs, etc.

4. That if any Person so seized, denies his Name, he may be Committed to
Prison.

LONDON, Printed for R. H. and are to be Sold by Walter Davies, in Amen-Corner,
near Paternoster Row, 1682.


