GOOD NEWS FROM MUNSTER:

BEING, An Exact and true Relation of certain Passages of Intelligence from the
Province of Munster in Ireland.

As of taking of Ballincolly Castle near Cork, and cutting off of many Irish
Rebels that were sheltred there; and stopped the passage between Cork and Bandon.

And likewife of the relieving of the Kings Castle of Limrick by Captain Cole,
with the Kings Pinnasse; who in her return took a Dunkirker richly laden with
Ammunition;

FAITHFVLLY COLLECTED, (From the mouth of a Gentlman of good rank and credit,
Peter Courtup Esquire, sometimes High Sheriff of the County of Cork, lately
landed at M^m^^d from Cork in Munster.) By JOHN POVVELL, Preacher of God Word,
Vicar and Pastor of Newmarket in Munster, until the Irish Rebellious Wolves
scattered his flock, and scared their Shepherd, who lost by this Rebellion
400. l. in Temporalties, besides his Spiritual means of 150. l. per annum.

WITH A Letter sent from Amsterdam, and read in both Houses of Parliament, the
11. of this present June, 1642.

Discovering what courses are there taken for the raising of Ammunition to be
sent to the North. With a List containing the particular number of the said
Ammunition.

Die Lunae, 13. Iunii, 1642.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That these Letters and list of Ammunition
be forthwith printed and published. I. Brown Cler. Parl.

June 14. LONDON, printed for Andrew Coe. 1642.

From Amsterdam. June 12 New style, June 2 old style. To John Beauchamp
Merchant of London.
For the Cloth Trade at present, I would advise you to write to hic whollyy
not to boy in a piece at present, although he pretends losing his workmen or
the like: for losing his workmen, I doubt at this time money is not so riese in
that Country, and men so forward to buy, that I think little fear, but that
if he Turns off or leave buying, his workmen will be glad to come again at
more settled tmes; And it may be, sell better cheap. Therefore about all
excuses, as the state stands write him absolutely not to take off any untiel
further advise for if things go badly there, and come to pilaging or
destruction, you should have all the cloth he had in the house to be reckoned
to be your cloth.

I fear a storm to arise the North, and I see it daily grow blacker and
darker, for store of monyes is made over to pe sent thither, witness the
risinn of the exchange here so suddenly; And at bresent here is Order to buy
store of pistoles for Horsemen and powder, and near upon 20. brass pieces to
be sent for the North parts, but the Order is not from the Parliament.

News from Ireland, reported by Peter Courtup Esquire, sometimes High Sheriff
of the County of Cork in the Province of Munster, lately landed at Mine-head,
from thence.
SIR William St. Ledger Lord President and General of Munster finding the
passage between Cork and Baudon Bridge pesterd with Irish Rebels that were
sheltered and succored in a Castle somewhat adjacent unto the said road, gave
order that forthwith a considerable force of Horse and foot should issue forth
against the said Castle, called by the name of Ballencholly Castle, and that
Captain Chidley should go Commander of the said Force; withal, that a
Basilisco should be taken forth of the Fort of Cork for the better expediting
of their Designs against the said Rebels in Ballincally Castle, which
accordingly was effected, there were of Horse 100. of Foot 200. and after their
coming to the said Castle, and demanding the said Castle to be rendered up to
them for his Majesty's use, and they refusing of it, they with the piece of
Ordnance made a breach for entrance, and with the loss of some 4. or 5. men,
entered the Castle, and put to death near about 80. men; after this Exploit
they cause the breach to be made up again, and left 40. of their men in the
said Castle: All this while the Lord of Muskrey being in view of the said
Forces with 7. or 8000. men, durst not advance against our Forces to relieve
the said Castle, such is the spirit of fear and cowardice that God has
possessed the Irish Rebels hearts with in vengeance, that were here a sudden,
considerable, well-provided Aid sent over into Munster, our English there
would quickly (by the help of God, who has wonderfully of late stretched out
his arm of mercy toward the Protestants there) be not only Masters of the
field, but Commanders of all the Cities and Castles, Forts, and Forts of
Munster, but before Captain Chidley and his Forces left the said Castle, he
charged the Soldiers to whom he committed the custody and command of the said
Castle, that they should have an especial care to have a strong and faithful
sentinel for fear there should be any more men in the Castle in any secret
place that they had not discovered, for that in wars before this, Captain
Banret an Irish man pretending to be true to the Queens Majesty, repaired unto
the Lord President Carew, to have some Musketeers to guard this Castle being
then his, otherwise he should be made a prey unto his Countrymen that were in
Rebellion, whereupon the Lord President allowed him 24. Musketeers, of whom the
said Barnet promised to be chary of as of his own life, but he within three
days after at supper, caused all thse men to be slain by 80. Armed men that
issued out of a Vault under ground in the same Castle giving them this watch
word that when they heard him offer to drink to them, saying, Here Is is to you
all Gentlemen Soldiers in a cup of red Wine, they should presently surprise
them and cut them off, which accordingly they did, so dangerous a thing it is
to trust Protestants under the command of Papists, notwithstanding their deep
Protestations, oaths pretended love and loyalty; the sad Tragedy of these 24.
made the 40. men left in the said Castle more vigilant, and looking about under
the hutch, they found a boy, to whom they promised his life, if he would
discover unto them the way to the Vault, but refusing to do, after some
torture they inflicted on him, they put him to death; not long after, a
handsome Irish woman came up out of the Vault, and hung about one of the
Soldiers necks, and kissed him, desiring him to save her life and ^oe what he
would with her, but he answering her, that it was not in his power, left her,
and another Soldier cleft her head into two pieces; and then the Soldiers
betook themselves to the further discovery of the said Vault, which they found
out by her coming forth, and presenly cast in such abundance of moist Hay
fired, that with the smother thereof, enforced Armed men that were there to
come up, there were 17. which our men cut off, and now keep the Castle
quietly, and thereby have cleared the way between Cork and Bandon-bridge.

Likewise, that the Kings Castle of Limrick, under the command of Captain
George Courtney, was relieved upon intelligence sent unto the Lord President of
Munster from the said Captain Courtney of his great want both with provision
and Ammunition, by the Kings Pinace under the Command of Captain Cole, and
upon the return of the said Pinace, there did appear at the mouth of the
Harbor of Limrick, two Dunkirks, thereupon the Pinace having eight brass
Pieces, besides Murderers and Fire-workes, let fly at them both, but the one
escapt, and the other the Kings Pinace took in, which Vessel being near
about an hundred Tun they found an Irish Merchant of Limrick, worth before
these wars there, 1500. pound per annum in Lands, besides his other stock of
Merchandise, four score Barrels of Powder, 700. Muskets, besides abundance of
Swords and Match, and the very Ballast was all Ordinances, which Captain Cole
has brought about to, Cork, God send us more such good puchases that may
hinder the Rebels and help our Friends.

A list of the Ammunition, as follows:
Four pieces of Battery of 18 pound Bullet. One piece carrying 12. pound
bullet. Two Culverings carrying 8. pound bullet. Six Field pieces carrying 6.
pound bullet. Two Mortar pieces. For Granado's sixteen. An hundred barrells of
powder. Two thousand pair of Pistols ready prev^^^^. ^^ A thousand Carabines.
Three thousand Saddles. Bullets. Ladles. Sponges. Carriages. Harness for
Dr^^^^ Horses. The Mortar pieces are a foot and a hal^e in (...) the mouth
metal and all. Shooting Granado's of 11 or 12 inches.
FINJS.

