A PRIVATE LETTER, From an Eminent CAVALIER, To his highly honored friend in
London; Freely relating the present state of His Majesty's Forces.

LONDON, Printed, Sept. 10. 1642.

A Private Letter from an Eminent Cavalier, to His highly honored friend in
London, freely relating the present state of His Majesty's Forces.
SIR,
I Am much beholding to you for such occurrences as I have received from you,
and I can do no less than take this opportunity to gratify you by way of
relation: We are both for the King, and therefore I need not straiten my self,
but speak liberally my thoughts concerning his Majesty's affairs.

We laid for our selves a very reasonable foundation, for when we could not
make Yorkshire so much ours, as we desired, nor possess our selves of Hull,
by reason of Hotham, (being too much injured and weakened by the loss of the
Navy) we thought it safest to be assured of Newcastle, and so to be secured, as
to the Scots (for we know they are too apt to think that England is a better
soil than theirs) as also to place a General (my Lord Cumberland) with a
considerable strength of Horse in Yorkshire, and a more considerable power,
the commission of Air and Terminer, to secure us from any Insurrection in
Yorkshire, and those multitude of Roundheads in the West Riding, and so to
preserve the peace of that County, that so, if they do us not that good we
expected yet they may not annoy us, and lay obstructions in our way. To the
same purpose his Majesty did prudently take pro concesso, in all his Speeches,
that that County was his (though we knew to the contrary) and that neither He
nor His Posterity should forget their loyalty, (which let me tell you is not
worth the remembering.)

Well we leave them (who deserve not our owning) and having issued out
Commissions for Horse, and a full Infantery, at least 16000, we were content, it
should be given out, we would draw toward the West, but we resolved upon the
South, and to make Nottingham our Randevous, Leicestersh. Northamptonshire and
Warwicksh. the Seat of our War; Nottingham being a place every way well
fortified, (fit to secure His Majesty's Person, our Magazine, and to make our
retreat to, if need were, and the other County (chiefly Leicestersh,) being
abundantly provisioned for Horse and man (which would recompense our want of
moneys when our stock is spent) and replenished with store of Roundheads, a
good prey and encouragement for our Soldiers: In those said Counties we
designed to strengthen our selves, with the possession of Warwick, and the
Castle, Coventry and Northampton; only there was an unhappy mistake, for at
that time when we went for Warwick, we should have gone to Northampton; The
cast of a Dye did it such avidents the greatest and best designs are subject
to.

Thus I give you the reason of that foundation we thought best to lay, and
upon which we had as good reason to conclude, that we might have built upon it
(which we desired) a monument of Honor to His Majesty, some share of that to
our selves, and plenty of fortune: For let me tell you, if we had once been
thus well provided for, set down in the foresaid Counties, and secured to our
selves those Towns (where would have been a pretty beginning of encouragement
to our Soldiers; We would in a short time by the help of the Commission of
Array (and that of Air and Terminer too, if need had been) have made better
provision for our selves at London, for we have a just sense of all their
practices against us, and where the foundation of our mischief was laid.

Now I must tell you in your ear, It is our unhappiness, our Plot is much
weakened, for Petoes holding out Warwick Castle beyond all expectation till
succors came near him, and Coventry following Hotham and his steps, and our
enemies force coming upon us before we were aware, or indeed prepared for
them, and they understanding our design (and all openings are weaknings) and
present condition by some that are about us, but not of us, has done us so
much mischief, that I can by no means like of His Majesty's present
condition: Our retreat at Southampton was an ill omen and though we lost not
many men, for our Commanders were prudent, and marched away orderly, yet we
strengthened our adversaries hands and weakened our own. But besides, the Gentry
of these Counties do not draw after them such numbers of commons as His Majesty
presumed upon, and we are not assured of the Trained bands any where.

In Leicestershiere upon frequent summons, they came in thinly, and on Tuesday
last at Leicester, they were so bold as openly to say they were for the King
and Parliament, we know that language well enough. In Nottingam-shiere we
cannot secure our selves in any, but Captain Digbies band, and hence our
Maxim is not to trust the trained band, but we will make the best use of them
we can, and that is of their arms, which I may tell you we have need enough
of, for besides that we have but an indifferent number, we cannot come at them:
Some say that Yorkshiere will not supply the King, with carriages to bring
them, the Officers may be bribed, something is in the wind, and when they come,
we shall be defective as to that part.

Our Infantarie cannot encourage a temperate man, for we have not above 1200.
Their poverty I pass over, for we may make them richer in time, but many are
too young, raw, and most very incapable of discipline. We have pretty store of
Horse, some say there are 5000 or more, I cannot say (for I must speak the
truth) more than 2000, if so many. Here we make good use of the Catholics, but
your Citizens Horse, sure are fed like Aldermen to these, they look very
poorly, and surely the Captain upon advance money deceived too purpose, for
many horses are not worth 5 Marks, and many a troop has but 40 horse, this the
Captains put up as their own. But the Kings guard troop, the Prince, Prince
Rob. the Lord Willoughby and S. William Penniman, are very well set off, only
one thing because I am a Protestant, I must not like nor own that many of the
Kings guard troop are Papists, and there are some Popish Commanders, how this
come about I know not, specially seeing it is a principle with the wisest, that
no Papists should have command, for fear of the ill report it would make among
the Kings Leidge people, another thing I dislike, that the Irish Commanders are
paid and not the English, which in time will discontent them, and disservice
the King: Our Commanders are good for the generality, but we cannot say much
for our Artillery, some 7 field pieces we have, which we planted in Leicester
lately, but because we had a suspicion of our enemies, whom we heard they were
inclining toward a march, we called a Council of War about 10 of the clock on
Wednesday night and never left till we had resolved to withdraw our Artillery
from Leicester, and our arms and ammunition there, which was the best part of
our store, and might have been as well theirs as ours (had they been wise
enough) to a safer place, and so they are gone toward Nottingham; We expect
some 10 pieces from York; I forgot to tell you the good plot we have to hold
them in hand about a treaty, to which purpose we sent them propositions by my
L. Dorset, and prudent Southampton, we made account this fair hair would have
taken with them and put them upon delays, wherein would have consisted our
reparation and good, their evil and ruin, so in the interim of Treaty we
could have drawn up our force, and provided a considerable Infantry, and
supplied those defects we are yet under: the Round heads are grown arrant
Politicians and we suspect Say and Seal weakened this Plot: when we become our
selves, we shall repay all with usury, however this advantage results out of
that design, that his Majestys loving Subjects will believe he is a peaceable
Prince; you hear how we served that old Puritan Porphyry, we owed him a good
turn, so Coventry had been our boo^y and resigned to us, had not he interposed,
we rid him of all his arms, till he can use them better, and burnt a part of
his house, disabled his tennants and now he must live a while upon the public
faith brave P. Rupert was our chief, we had I confess too many troops there
for such a service, and our Commanders were too resolute, it cost Colon.
Steward and Lieutenant Colo. Richardson their lives, also we lost 2 common men,
we must commend one Abbot, who did like a Soldier, however we obtained our
end. This instant we have an express come to Court, that tells us our friends
grow less and less, for the L. Westmerland cries peccavi, the L. Mountagu
like a good old blad stood it out as long as he was able, but is now prisoner,
the L. of Newport also is willingly a prisoner at Northampton, I fear al will
forsake us. I could give you many particular relations, but I am in too much
have, I will take another time. Silence my name, you know my hand, and that I
am.

Yours.

FINIS.

