THE PROPHECY OF A White KING of BRITAIN. TAKEN Out of the Library of Sir
Robert Cotton, that most famous Antiquary of England, in the Saxon Character.

LONDON, Printed for G. Linsey, and are to be sold at his Shop against
London-Stone. 1643.

THE White KINGS PROPHECY.
WHen so Lion of Rightfulnesse is dead, there shall rise a white King in
Britain, first Flying, and after Riding, after Ligging down; and in this
ligge down he shall be lymed, after that he shall be led. And there shall be
showed whether there be an other King: Then shall be gadred togider much folk,
and he shall take help for him: And then there shall be Merchandice of men,
(as of an Horse, or an Ox: And there shall be sought help, and there shall
none arise, but bed for head: And then shall one gone, there the Sun arises,
another there the Sun gone down: After this, it shall be said by Britain
(King is King) King is no King. After this he shall raise up his head, (and he
shall be taken him to be a king, be many things to done, But wise men Reading,
And then shall a range of Gleeds, and that ever each has beraveing) he shall
have it for his own, And this shall last seven years, Lo raveing and
shedding of blood: And Ovens shall be made like kyrkes, And that as one sowes
another shall reap, and death shall be better then wretched life, and Charity
shall be of few men; After then shall come through the South with the Sun, on
Horse of tree, and upon all waves on the Sea, the Chicken of the Eagle sailing
into Britain, and arriving anon, to the house of the Eagle, he shall show
fellowship to them beasts. After a year and a half shall be war in
Britain, then shall a sooth be naught worth, and every man shall keep his
thing, and gotten other men's good; after the white king feeble shall go
toward the West, betlipped about with his folk, to the old place been running
water, then his enemies shall meet him, and march in her place shall be
ordained about him in Host, on the manner of a shield shall be formed, then
shall they fighten on Oven front, After the white king shall fall into a
kirkeyard over a Hall. After the Chicken of the Eagle shall nestle in the
highest Rooch of all Britain, nay he shall naught be slain young: nay he
naught come old, for then the Gentile worthiness shall naught suffer wrong be
done to him, But when the Reame is in peace then shall he die, and two years
after shall come a new Rule from Heaven and setle holy kirk as hit shall ever
more stand, and bring three Countries into one, England, Scotland, and Wales,
unto the day of doom and the holy Cross be brought into Christian men's hands,
and there shall be made a Temple that never was made, such none.

The Original hereof was found by the Lady Poston of the County of Norfolk,
amongst the evidences of Edw. the fourth his time.

IN Tempore EDW. 4th. The Latin of this ensuing English is to be seen in Sir
Robert Cottons Library, that famous Antiquary of England, in the Saxon
Character, the style of the Latin and this English fitly suiting that ancient
tone.

FINIS.

