royal blazon or coat of arms W3 R M2
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROITPROPOSALS BY THE GOVERNOR and
ASSISTANTS OF THE King and Queen's Corporation, For Encouraging and Carrying on
The Linen Manufacture in England.
WHEREAS for the Encouraging, and more Effectual Establishing the Linen
Manufacture in England, Their Present Majesty's, at the Humble Petition of
several Persons well Skilled in every Branch of the said Manufacture (as has
been lately certified by Mr. Attorney General in his Report to His Majesty in
Council, wherewith His Majesty was fully satisfied) were Graciously pleased to
Grant Their Letters Patents of Incorporation to them and their Successors for
Ever, bearing Date the Seven and Twentieth Day of May last, together with
diverse Privileges and Immunities; And thereby were likewise pleased to Honor
them with the Name of Governor and Assistants of the King and Queens
Corporation for the Linen Manufacture in England, As by the said Letters
Patents may appear. Pursuant to which Grant the Patentees, with the Assistance
of diverse Worthy Persons since Joined with them, have raised a considerable
Stock, and Set up the said Manufacture, and already made as Fine Linen as
comes from Foreign Parts.

NOW in Order to the Establishing the same in all parts of the Kingdom, both
for Advancing of Land, and Setting the Poor at Work, They at a Court of
Assistants held this Five and Twentieth Day of October, One Thousand Six
Hundred and Ninety, have, and do Agree upon these Proposals.

I. That WHEREAS the General Joint Stock of the Company consists at present of
Three Hundred and Forty Shares, They have agreed to lay open their Books at
their Warehouse, being Salisbury Exchange in the Strand, until the Four and
Twentieth Day of January next, for all Persons that are desirous to come in.

II. That every Person that will be Interested in one Share in the said Joint
Stock, He being thereby made a Freeman, and Entitled to all the Privileges of
the said Corporation, shall pay Fifty Pounds for his said Share, and so for
every Share to Robert Hooks Esquire, the present Treasurer of the said
Corporation, who for the purpose aforesaid will attend at the said Salisbury
Exchange, on Wednesday from Three in the Afternoon till Six, and on Saturday
from Nine in the Forenoon till Twelve in every Week, being the certain Court
Days of the said Company, or to the said Treasurer at his House in
Basing-hall-street, London, any other Day of the Week. And every such Person or
Persons at the same Court shall be Entered so many Shares in the Companies
Books, as he or they shall have so paid for.

III. That upon the Six and Twentieth Day of January next, a General Court of
all Persons Interested shall be held at their Warehouse at Salisbury Exchange
aforesaid, to consult of the necessary Affairs of the Company.

The Proposals are to be had at Mr. Nicholas Dwpin Esquire at the said
Salisbury Exchange, Gratis.
GOD Save King William and Queen Mary.

