A RELATION Of all the passages and proceedings in Somersetstire, and Bristoll,
with their valiant Resolution to fight for the King and Parliament.

With a speech made by his Excellence the Earl of Essex, concerning the Kings
Proclamation read at a Conference on Thursday the eleventh of August, 1642.

ALSO, CERTAIN REASONS WRITTEN by a private Gentleman, showing the cause
wherefore Arms are raised by both houses of PARLIAMENT.

Ordered by the Lords that this be forthwith Printed.

John Brown Cleric Parlamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for W. Gay, 1642. August 13.

A brief Relation of the proceedings in Somersetshire, and Bristoll, etc.
UPon Monday the eighth of August, the Marquess of Hartford, wi^^ other Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, lodged altogether at Welt, and had gathered together
about 500 horses, well armed, and upon Wednesday, the Gentlemen, viz. Sir Ralph
Hopton, and others with all their horse came from Wels, near Shepton Mallet,
upon a great Hill, which the people observing Posts were sent unto Sir John
Horner, Master Popham, and others, certifying that these Cavaleers were coming
to destroy them, whereupon every man made ready for their coming, but the
Cavaleers returned from the Hill to Shipton, and broke into many honest men's
houses, and plundered them, and then the Country rising being in fear of
their lives, they stayed not, but went again to Wells. And on Friday morning
they all marched to a great Hill four miles from Wells, being the place
appointed for that days meeting whither came to meet them all that quarter of
the Shire, very well armed; and some of the Committees met them, and Sir Ed.
Hungerford lent arms unto 200 Volunteers, and within an hour there came in of
the Country about 40000 to oppose the Marquess with the hazard of their lives
and there came out of Wiltshire about 300 horsemen, and 300 out of Bristoll with
Pistols and Carbines, and from Gloncester, there came about 300 (...) of
Volunteers. These with the rest discovered abundance of stoutnesse, and
resolution and there was two wayne load of powder, bullet, and match, sent from
Bristoll, and four small fieldpieces, and when the Soldiers were put into
order, they marched within sight of Wells, and pitched upon a great Hill, and
the day being near spent, and no victuals to be had for the present, yet such
was the courage and resolution of the people that they would not depart that
place, but lay all night upon the Hill and spent the time in prayer and singing
Psalms, and the next morning the Country within ten miles about sent in
provision, of all sorts, with Wayns and Carts; that there was sufficient and to
spare, After breakfast the Soldiers were very earnest to fall upon the Town,
whereupon the Committee and Deputy Lievtenants sent five propositions unto
them, which if they did not presently yield into the Soldiers, would fall upon
them, and they desired an hour or two time to consider of it, and in the mean
time the Marquess, Knights, G^ntlemen and Cavaleers forsook the Town, and rode
away.

Upon all this relation you may clearly see the condition and stout resolution,
of that Country.

A COMPARISON BETVVEENE The late troubles in Scotland, and the present
Distractions in England; compared with some Antiquities.
Written by a private Gentleman.
IT has been ever held a rule or Maxim amongst all Nations to make the
defense of Religion the chief ground or cause of their War; sometimes for
mere politic ends and by respects, sometimes to plant it where it is not, and
sometimes to regulate it where it is; Amongst these the last seems most
dangerous, because it seldom happens, but within the Territories of one and
the same Prince, and so produces the miserable effects of Civil War. But to
come to my present purpose, wherein I intend in a comparative manner briefly to
discourse of the late troubles that have happened in Scotland, and in England.

And because my Needle has not been touched (being the first that has written
upon this subject) If I vary in the Compass, or meet with a Rock, I shall
expect some favor, although I will not s^e for any special passon as not
worthy of it: for he that follows himself follows the worst Master, that is.

The cause of all those troubles in Scotland, was innovation in their Religion
and violation of the ancient Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, as did
sufficiently appear by their several declarations. The chief plotters and
contrivers of those distractions and distempers were Bishops, Papists, and a
malignant par^y of others, that were ill affected to the Protestant Religion,
who had a malicious and wicked intent to inthrall and bring into bondage both
the souls, persons, and estates of three Kingdoms at once. And by making use of
the great favor, power, and authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Clergy began to fail after a Cynosure, which was elevated to the thirty sixth
degree, and began to follow the steps of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury in the time of Hen. 2. who forswore himself (by denying the power
of the King) to enlarge the power of the Pope and to bring the Canon Law into
this Land, In the passage whereof Hen. 2. played Adrestus part, and stabbed
himself.

In England (as in Scotland) our grievances are of two kinds, either such as
concern the innovation of our Religion, or such as concern our Laws and
Liberties as has been often declared both by Petitions and Declarations. The
fountain from whence these our evils have sprung has (by too much experience)
been found to arise from the before named Incendiaries of mischief, the Papists
and Popish affected Clergy, with other of that malignant party. The Papists who
are never wanting to use their utmost power and best skill to stir up Wars and
dissentions between Kingdoms joined themselves in their plotting and
contriving with the Archbishop, as finding him a fit Instrument to work upon,
being the darling of the time, as Mounford was in the time of Hen. 3. the
Clergy were gotten to that height that they commanded both persons and causes,
their authority was advanced to that Supremacy and Greatness, that none might
so much as question their doings. No doubt, but these men now thought
themselves as great as Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, did in the time of
Edw. 1. who took on him to be equal with the King, saying in one of his
Epistles to the Pope, that the Plough of the holy Church is drawn by two Oxen.
of equal strength and beauty, the King and himself. Now they intended to make
their Cannons and Decrees of that force, that none should dare presume to
dispute on the lawfulness of them, like that learned Synod in the Reign of
Rich. 2. when Thomas Arundel was Archbishop of Canterbury, where they decreed,
that none should dispute upon the Articles, determined in the Church nor doubt
of the authority of those Decrees: the offenders to the contrary should be
pronounced Heretics. Such was the misery that began to overtake us by the
potent greatness of these aspring spirits, that they incroached temporal
Jurisdiction, and would have had the whole sway in their own hands: but as
Suidas says, for Priests to be temporal Judge, is to knit, that which will
never be twisted, and for a Divine to meddle in Secular affairs is as if a
bird in the Air should with the Mouldwarp work in the earth.

To season this lump of matter every Kingdom has many distinct and particular
Laws or Customs after a government once settled not before: as a batch of bread
consists of many distinct loafs after the distinction which before is contained
undistinguished under one lump. A man consists of many distinct members, which
at the first conception was not distinct.

In the next place I will give a touch of the effects that have happened by the
plots, counsels, and endeavors of these croaking Frogs, or rather Spiders of
the Commonwealth, who by issuing forth their deadly poison, have cracked the
Venice glass of our peace and tranquillity.

When Scotland perceived their Religion betrayed, and their liberties
inthralled, and by the power and policy of these Instruments their Sovereignes
ear stopped from their just complaints they openly declared their grievances
and desired justice against the Infringers of their peace; whereupon their
Enemies, perceiving the ends were not only likely to be frustrate, but their
lives and fortunes questioned, they turned their invective counsels to advise
his Majesty, that their Declarations were libellous their Petitions and
behavior rebellious. And so began to enforce by the terror of an Army, that
which policy could not accomplish. And like Guido Godfrey and others in the
Reign of Hen. 3. began to act the part of their lawless rage by seeking
utterly to destroy all those, that withstood their malicious and wicked
enterprises, and by projects, and many heavy taxes oppressing the people at
home, hoping by force to overthrow and cut off one Nation at a blow, and so to
dreane the purses, and poll the estates of the other, that there should be no
ability to gainsay them. And although at this instant there was no present
Levies of Arms against the Subject in England, yet the danger and success both
of an offensive or a defensive war do oftentimes prove to be of equal hazard,
from which I conclude, that the design against England at that time was the
same, and as great if not greater, then against Scotland.

I will not crush out my notes in this behalf in any new division, and the
portion I shall allow will not be large: therefore in this place I will come to
give a touch, that when things were brought to this head, the Jesuits and
Papists (who are always thirsty after blood) now plot and contrive by all
means the forwarding of these Wars as the only way to promote the Catholic
cause. And perceiving that the want of money was likely to prove a great
hindrance to their design, they began to make great proffers, they will now be
deemed his Majesty's best Subjects. And as if the taxes under which the
Protestants were too light a burden, they will lay greater upon themselves: an
hired servant that received not above forty shillings per annum, must pay five
shillings toward the promotion of this cause. The Bishops and other of the
Clergy who desired to go hand in hand with them under color of an Aid, grant
large Subsidies in their Synod. And therein showed such forwardness that no
doubt to advance those Wars they would have imitated the Clergy in Hen. 2. time
which (although for another purpose) sold their Chalices to advance their own
ends: And it is to be observed, that the beforementioned persons that were (as
I have said) the chief Agents and promoters of the Wars and difference between
the two Nations England and Scotland, are the only Incendiaries and causers of
the present difference between the King and the Parliament.

These persons when they were in the height of their glory, might justly have
most cause to question their own strength; Christ all that fairly glistereth
does quickly break, and as the ascent of usurped Royalty is slippery, so the
top is shaking and the fall great.

A Parliament was now called in Scotland, and likewise another in England, his
Majesty being graciously pleased to make sweetness and clemency the entrance
to settle these distempered States, and (though it be a matter much questioned
by those that observe the success and event of things, whether his Majesty did
it by compulsion and politic counsel rather then out of affection to his
Subjects, or desire and intent to settle the distempers of both Kingdoms) he
begins first with Scotland, hears their Petitions, grants their desires, and
settles all their grievances.

Here the current began to run smooth and clear, now all rough waves seem to
be gone and past, the Sun shines bright and clear, and the strength of our
hopes gave us almost full assurance of the like happy success.

His Majesty hastens his return from Scotland, declares his hearty desire to
effect the like work in England, he is received with exceeding great
acclamations of joy; some assurance is now given to our thirsty hopes; the
Parliament begins to move in its proper Orb. But here (me thinks) my discourse
wants one of the three dimensions. It is long and broad enough, yet it wants
depth to show the occasion or reason of this sudden change.

Great things we know are seldom effected without much difficulty (especially
when they meet with strong opposition.) The malignant faction begin again to
muster their forces, they perceive that if the Parliament should be suffered to
go on prosperously, their present plots and enterprises would not only be made
stustrate and void but the knot so broken and their wings so clipped, that they
should never be able to put in practice any more notorious Acts suitable to
their desires.

The Devil in acting of his plots never wants Instruments.
Now they renew the former pernicious counsels, and consider that their ends
will not stand in competition with a Parliament, and therefore endeavor to
overthrow not only some Members of both Houses, but also the very effence and
being thereof, so that herein will appear the disparity of the subject of my
discourse, that the Parliament in Scotland, did finish that in three months
that the Parliament in England, has labored after above twelve months, and
yet cannot accomplish.

Here (me thinks) this Skeen in my hand is so twisted by reason of the ensuing
lines of my discourse, that I cannot without entangling wind it upon a proper
bottom. The Parliament in England (which has always been held the sovereigne
cure to heal the distempers of the Kingdom, and the safest and most faithful
Counsel of the Kings of this Land, without whose advise in the most
flourishing times of this Kingdom, the Kings thereof would not undertake any
great design: which was the reason that Ed. 3. being animated to go with the
King of France, to the holy Wars refused to go without the consent of his
Parliament, and caused a Parliament to be called for that purpose. But through
the unheard of opposition that has been from time to time made against the
Parliament, and their proceedings either by increase and multiplicity of
business, or new plots and devices continually framed and contrived by the
malignant party which have often endeavored the ruin and destruction of the
whole Kingdom, that during all this space of time (without most eminent danger
to the whole State) they have had no leisure to render to offenders the just
reward of their merits, no means (his Majesty being seduced by wicked Counsel)
to redress all our grievances having sufficient labor and toil with all
their might to underprop, and uphold the tottering fabric of this distempered
Kingdom, so that although there appear some disparity between the happiness
of the success of the Parliament in England and Scotland, yet herein (me
thinks) my notes have the virtue of a Look ingglasse to show and represent that
which is before, as well as that which is behind. In this behalf this short
discourse being fully looked upon as in a glass, may show the apparity of the
the cause as it stood lately betwixt the two Nations England and Scotland and
as it now stands between his Majesty and the Parliament, the causes and the
Agents being still the same* the Papists and Popish affected Clergy still
joining together, and do at this present proffer great sums of money, and
other assistance for the advancing of Civil Wars in England. And although this
that I have said be sufficient for my present purpose, yet (me thinks) I hear
Tilbury speak. It cannot fall within the compass of man's knowledge to utter
the malicious intents and purposes of these persons. And as Pliny shows that
all Homers Iliads were written in a Nutshell, the whole matter of my discourse,
it may be you shall judge it all shell and no kernel, but my metal is
moulten, and my bellows by often blowing have let out all their breath.

The Earl of Essexs Resolution.
ON Thursday the eleventh of August, a Proclamation was sent from the King to
the Parliament, proclayming the Earl of Essex, and all that serve under his
command, or adhere to him, Traitors, which being read in the House of Commons,
they desired a conference with the Lords, at which conference it was declared
by the House of Commons that they had considered of the reasons of their taking
up of Arms, which was for defense of the Kingdom, the Laws of the Land the
Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject, and therefore
resolved that all those terrifying threatenings in the Proclamation should not
make them desist from going on in the defense of so just a cause.

Whereupon the Earl of Essex said that he would use his best skill and utmost
endeavor, even to the loss of his dearest blood in the place they had
conferred on him in mayntaining the said cause.

FINIS.

