THE RESOLUTION Of the Earl of ESSEX To the King most Excellent MAJESTY.

WHEREIN Is declared his Honorable Intentions to attain nothing but what
shall tend to advancement of His Majesty's honor and the good of the
Commonwealth.

Whereunto is annexed, The Declarations of the Lords and Commons concerning the
Actions of the Malignant Party of this Kingdom.

Ordered that this be printed and published,

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Pa^l. D. Com.

August 13. Printed for T. Rider. 1642.

The Resolution of His Excellency the Earl of ESSEX.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, having practiced by several
endeavors to suppress the actions of the evil affected part of this
Kingdom, to which end they cut off all Monopolies and Taxes that lay heavy
upon the Subject, withal seeking to reform all those misdemeanors which were
lately crept into the Church and Commonwealth, bringing to condign punishment
all such as were offenders, that their examples might deter others from
committing the like wicked crimes and Misdemeanors.

Which the Malignant party seeing and knowing that their painted dissimulation
would not endure the test if brought to trial they by all means that possibly
they could, endeavored to cause a division between the King and Parliament,
striving to foment jealousies and Fears, which were not thought of, and
therefore causeless not of any dangerous consequence, either to His Majesty's
Honor or Person.

Nevertheless so far they prevailed with His Majesty, as that he absented
himself from His parliament, and withdraw himself into the North, where after
some Months residence they caused His Majesty to engage himself in a war
against His Parliament, and so consequently against His Subject.

To which end by His Majesty's command the Gentey and Commonalty of Yorkshire
were caused to bring in their Horses and Arms.

Which being effected, these new raised Forces was cau ed to march against
Hull, where they besieged it, using many Hostile Actions and attempts against
the Inhabitants of the said Town.

Which the Lords and Commons being informed of, and finding the great detriment
that such actions and warlike attempts might do to the Subject, if suffered to
go on; wherefore they sent to his Majesty a Petition for Pacification.

Which Petition was received by His Majesty with little or no show of Love or
kindness, as may appear by the sequel of His Answer to the said Petition.

Which the Lords and Commons finding, thought it high time to secure the whole
Kingdom, His Majesty being resolved to proceed in the course which he had
begun, wherefore they resolved that an Army should be raised under the command
of His Excellency the Earl of Essex.

Which he according to his Allegiance to His Majesty, and duty to his Country,
with willingness accepted of it, for which cause they wrought His Majesty to
be incensed against him.

Which caused His Excellency to declare his Resolution, that he is resolved to
put nothing in Act, but what what shall tend to His Majesty's Honor, safety
and security, and the good both of Church and Religion.

Likewise the Lords and Common do declare, That they will always prefer the
general good before their own lives and fortunes, for the defense and
maintenance whereof they are resolved to hazard the same.

The Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, that they only aim at, and desire nothing
more then to maintain the purity and power of Religion, and to honor the King
in his just and Regal Prerogatives, esteeming nothing like the Liberty, Peace,
and Safety of the Kingdom, nor thinking any thing to be too good to be
hazarded in discharge of their consciences for obtaining it: Always reposing
themselves in the protection of Almighty God, which they are confident will
never be wanting in his blessing toward them, while they seek his glory, as
they have found him wonderfully going along with them in all their proceedings.

WE the Lords and Commons are resolved to expose our Lives and Fortunes for the
defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings Person,
Honor and Estate, the Power and Privilege of Parliament and the just Right
and Liberties of the Subject.

And We do require all those who have any sense of Piety, Honor, or
Compassion, to help a distressed State, and to come in unto our aid, and
assistance: This being the true cause for which we raise an Army, under the
Command of the Earl of Essex, with whom in this cause we will live and dye.

Ordered that this be printed and published,

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


