Two angels flanking the royal blazon or coat of arms of the kings of Portugal
Luciadum Regnum cujus vide stemmata Christi,
Mittit enim rebus stemmata quisque suis.


A Genealogical History OF THE KINGS OF PORTUGAL.

And of all those Illustrious Houses that in Masculine Line are branched from
that Royal Family.

CONTAINING A DISCOURSE Of their several Lives, Marriages, and Issues, Times of
Birth, Death, and Places of Burial.

With their Arms and Emblazons according to their several alterations, as also
their Symboles and Mottoes.

All Engraven in Copper Plates.

Written in French by SCEVOLE and LOVIS DE SAINCTE-MARTHE, Brethren, and
Advocates in the Court of Parliament of PARIS, Unto the Year, M.DC.XXIII.

Rendered into English, and continued unto this present Year, M.DC.LXII.

By FRANCIS SANDFORD, Rouge-Dragon, Pursuiuant of Arms.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for the Author, ANNO, 1662.

TO THE MOST Glorious Monarch, CHARLES II. KING of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and
IRELAND, etc.
Royal SIR!
THose Presents which in themselves are rich and beautiful, cannot lose any
thing of their esteem, though tendered by the meanest hand; the Diamond falls
not under its true value, when found among the low-prized Pebbles: Nor will (I
hope) this History (which with all due Reverence I presume to lay at Your
Majesty's Feet) be thought worthless, although presented to the greatest of
Kings, by the least and lowest of his Subjects.

Yet my presumption bears with it a more extentive Modesty, than to possess me
with a belief, that what I now bring, can, as far as it is any thing of mine,
be worthy the least regards of Majesty. For it is Worth Consists in it self; and
being a Genealogical History of a Royal House Indubitably Descended from our
English Kings, cannot I hope find a less Gracious Acceptance from our Great
Monarch, than it has formerly done from His most Christian Majesty, in Favor
of those who but disputably have maintained it to be a Branch of the Royal Stem
of France; but it may much more engage Your acceptance, when Your Majesty
considers, that out of this Renowned Stock Your Majesty has made choice of
Your most Excellent Queen.

For from Philippa the daughter of the great Duke of Lancaster, John of Gaunt,
descended that numerous issue, which has since supplied PORTUGAL for above
Three hundred years with a Succession of Heroic and Valiant Kings, and was not
discontinued, but by the Power of the Castillians, under Philip II, III, IV.
Kings of Spain, and has been as miraculously restored in the Person of K. John
IV. so that as King John I. much augmented the Glory of that Nation by allying
himself with England, another King John has no less renewed it, not more by
redeeming his Kingdom out of the hands of Ambitious Seisers, than in being
Father to that Daughter, by whom in the Persons of Your Royal Majesty, and our
Gracious Queen KATHERINE; a second and much firmer union is contracted between
these two so anciently allied Crowns.

But here, Dread SIR, I do conclude (lest I should too long disturb Your Royal
thoughts,) with those Prayers which all good Subjects are bound to make; That
as the Portuguesses have acknowledged that Match with England, to be the most
happy and fortunate that ever any of their Kings contracted, both for the
strength, and glory of that Kingdom; So that Heaven would likewise give Your
Majesty as numerous, and as glorious an issue by this second Match, that
Generations to come may have cause to Bless that Day wherein a Monarch of Great
Britain did Espouse an Infanta of PORTUGAL. Thus prays,

YOUR MAJESTY'S most Faithful, and most Obedient, Subject and Servant, FRANCIS
SANDFORD. Rouge-Dragon, Pursuiuant at Arms.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
I Need not a better Authority for the Reputation of this History, then to
inform you, That the first Part thereof, from Henry Count of Portugal, to
Anthony Prior of Crato, with the Second Book, containing the Pedigrees of the
Royal House of Braganza, and other Princes of the Blood of Portugal, is
Translated out of the Genealogical History of the Royal House of France,
written by Scevole, and Lovis de Saincte-Marthe, Persons Eminent for their
Knowledge in Antiquity, and most exact in the Descents of the Kings of France,
and no less curious in this of Portugal, as being a Branch of that Royal Stem.

The later Part, continued from Anthony, to the Sixth Year of the Reign of King
Alphonso VI. being this present Year, One thousand six hundred threescore and
two; is taken out of the Letters of Francisco Loredano, a Noble Venetian, and
an Able Statesman, employed Ambassador from that Republic, to most of the
Princes and Potentates of Europe; Englished by an Ingenious young Gentleman,
not long since.

To these French and Italian Authors, I have made several Additions out of Don
Antonio de Sousa de Macedo, a Portuguesse, concerning the several Changes of
the Arms of that Kingdom; The Ceremonies used at the Coronations and Burials of
the Kings of Portugal, from Conestaggio an Italian; And the Modern Additions to
the Descents of the Younger Houses, either out of Nicholaus Rittershusus, a
Germain, or from the faithful Report of some of the Nobility of the Portugal
Nation.

Having chosen rather to make use of Authors that were strangers, and unbiassed
with Interest, than Natives of that Kingdom, both for the Satisfaction of my
Reader, and also because the Exploits of that Warlike and Industrious People;
would seem from their own Relations almost incredible: For if we consider the
small Beginnings out of which they have gained such vast Territories, we cannot
but confess, That they have outdone most of the greatest Conquerors; for those
with mighty Armies subjected the Old World, but these with small Numbers, have
not only carried Victory to the East, but found out New Worlds to Conquer: So
that the Dominions of Alphonso the first King of Portugal, are not the Tenth
part of those Kingdoms possessed by King Alphonso VI.

If I have too much made use of the French Idiome in this Translation, most
Gentlemen will (I presume) pass by that Error, it being almost impossible to
meddle with that Language, and not to receive some Impressions thereby. The
Errors of the Press, I have entered on the other side of the Leaf in the
Errata, which I would entreat you to Correct; and then I hope you will find the
Satisfaction expected in the perusal of this History. Farewell,

F. S.

WE having perused this Book, which is for the most part a Translation out of
French, of a Genealogical History of the Kings of Portugal, do not find that
the same does materially vary from the Sense of the Authors; nor that there is
in it any thing contrary to the Rules of Armory.

EDWARD WALKER Garter, Principal King of Arms. WILLIAM DVGDALE Norroy, King of
Arms.


ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 32. for Idolatrous, read Idolators. p. ibid. l. 36. for
Histories, r. Historians. p. 2. l. 12. for Father, r. Brother. p. 3. l. 43.
after to be built, (add) in that Cathedral. p. ibid. l. 44. to, an Epitaph,
(and) in Latin. p. 5. l. 36. to, Confine this Princess (add) his Mother. p. 7.
l. 31. for 1186. r. 1185. p. 8. l. 17. to, who dyed (add) without Issue. p. 19.
l. 43. to, some Historians (add) of Castille. p. 27. l. 33. for Alphonso VI. r.
Alphonso IV. p. 36. l. 16. for eracinated r. ^^rat^^ated. p. 55. l. 10. for
Forty, r. Three and Forty. p. 61. l. 34. for Calecur, r. Calecut. p. ibid. l.
35. for so named, r. of that Denomination. p. 81. l. 3. blot out Elected. p.
94. l. 18. for 1510. r. 1580. p. 105. l. 4. for Messal, r. Missal.

This Book is to be sold by the Author, Francis Sandford, at his Lodgings next
door to the Heraulds-Office, upon St. Bennets-hill: Or by Edward Mottershed,
Printer, living upon the aforesaid Hill, over against Doctors Commons.

The Genealogy of the Kings of Portugal.
1. HENRY OF BOURGONGNE Count of PORTUGAL, was second Son of HENRY OF
BOURGONGNE that dyed before his Father, and Grandson of ROBERT OF FRANCE Duke
of BOURGONGNE, which ROBERT was Son of ROBERT, and Grandchild of HUGH CAPET,
both Kings of FRANCE. He dyed in the Year, One thousand one hundred and twelve.
2. URACCA Countess of Tristamare. ALPHONSO I. of the name, King of PORTUGAL,
dyed Ao 1186. 3. URACCA Queen of Leon and Galicia. SANCEO I. of the name,
second King of PORTUGAL, he dyed Ao 1212. 4. ALPHONSO II. of the name, third
King of PORTUGAL. He died Ao 1233. 5. SANCEO II. of the name, fourth King of
PORTUGAL, dyed Anno 1246. without issue. ALPHONSO III. of the name, fifth King
of PORTUGAL, dyed Anno 1279. 6. DIONYSIUS or DENIS, sixth King of PORTUGAL,
dyed Anno 1325. 7. CONSTANCE Queen of Castille. ALPHONSO IV. of the name,
seventh King of PORTUGAL, dyed 1357. 8. ALPHONSO, DIONYSIO and JOHN, dyed all
young. PETER, eighth King of PORTUGAL, deceased Anno 1368. 9. FERDINAND, ninth
King of PORTUGAL, dyed Anno 1383. 10. BEATRIX of Portugal, Q. of Castille.
DIONYSIO of Portugal, eldest Son, dyed young. MARY of Portugal, Lady Marquess
of Tortosa. JOHN I. of the name, tenth King of PORTUGAL, a Natural Son,
deceased Anno 1433. ALPHONSO dyed, aged Ten years. EDWARD, eleventh King of
PORTUGAL, dyed Anno 1438. 11. ALPHONSO V. of the name, twelfth King of
PORTUGAL, ob. 1481 12. JOHN II. of the name, thirteenth King of PORTUGAL, dyed
An. 1495. 13. ALPHONSO Prince of Portugal, dyed young, without issue.
JOHN Prince of Portugal, dyed young. JANE took upon her Religious Habit.
LEONOR Wife to the Emperor Frederick III. JANE Queen of Castille. FERDINAND
D. of Visco. JOHN Duke of Visco, dyed young without issue. JAMES Duke of Visco,
slain by King John II. his Brother-in-law. EMANUEL fourteenth King of PORTUGAL,
dyed Anno 1521. ISABELLA wife of the Emperor Charles V. 14. PHILIP II. King of
Spain, seized upon the Kingdom of PORTUGAL, and was Nineteenth King. 15. PHILIP
III. of the name King of Spain, was twentieth King of PORTUGAL. 16. PHILIP IV.
of the name, King of Spain, now Reigning, 1662. who possessed the Kingdom of
PORTUGAL until the Year, 1640.


BEATRIX Duchess of Savoy. MICHAEL Prince of Portugal and Castille, dyed
young. JOHN III of the name, fifteenth K. of PORTUGAL, dyed Anno 1557. JOHN
Prince of Portugal, died An. 1554 SEBASTIAN sixteenth King of PORTUGAL, was
slain in Africa. S. prole. 1578.
MARY Princess of Spain. ISABELLA and BEATRIX dyed young.
LEWIS of Portugal, D. of Beia. ANTHONY the Bastard, eighteenth King of
PORTUGAL. He dyed 1595. EMANUEL of Portugal. CHRISTOPHER of Portugal. PHILIPPA
LOUISA.

FERDINAND of Portugal, dyed S. prole. HENRY the Cardinal, seventeenth K. of
PORTUGAL, ob. S. p. 1580. EDWARD Infant of Portugal. EDWARD D. of Vimarana,
dyed young. MARY married to Alex. D. of Parma. KATHERINE wife of John I. of the
name, Duke of Braganza.

LEONOR wife of John II. King of Portugal. ISABEL married to Ferd. II. of the
name Duke of Braganza.

PETER Duke of Conimbra. PETER elected King of Arragon. JOHN Duke of Conimbra
JAMES Card. of Portugal ISABEL Queen of Portugal.
HENRY Duke of Visco, and Master of the Order of Christ. JOHN Grand Master of
the Order of St. James. JAMES, G.M. of the Order of St. James. ISABEL Queen of
Castille. BEATRIX Duchess of Visco, Mother of King Emanuel.
FERDINAND great Master of the Order d'Avis. ISABEL Duchess of Bourgongne
ALPHONSO First Duke of Braganza, a Natural Son. FERDINAND I. of the name,
second Duke of Braganza. FERDINAND II. of the name, third Duke of Braganza.
JAMES fourth Duke of Braganza. THEODOSIUS I. of the name, fifth Duke of
Braganza. JOHN I. of the name, sixth Duke of Braganza. THEODOSIUS II. of the
name, seventh Duke of Braganza. 17. KATHERINE of Portugal, dyed in her Infancy.
JOHN II. of that name, Duke of Braganza, by the universal consent of the three
Estates, was Crowned King of PORTUGAL, Anno 1640. by the name of JOHN IV. 18.
THEODOSIUS Prince of Portugal, dyed in his youth. ALPHONSO VI. of the name,
Three and twentieth King of PORTUGAL, who Reigns at present, 1662. PETER
Infant of Portugal. JANE of Portugal, dyed young. KATHERINE of Portugal, Queen
of England.
EDWARD of Portugal, dyed in Prison at Millan. ALEXANDER of Portugal.








MARY Queen of Castille. LEONORA Queen of Arragon.

ALPHONSO of Portugal, Lord of Portalegre. ALPHONSO of Portugal, dyed without
issue. ISABELLA Lady of Biscay. CONSTANCE married to Nounez Gonsalva de Lara.
MARY wife of Tellez son of Alphonso Infant of Moline. ISABELLA the younger
married to John-Alphonso Lord of Albuquerque.
FERDINAND of Portugal, dyed young. BLANCH of Portugal, Abbess of Loruano.
FERDINAND of Portugal, Infant of Serpe. LEONORA Queen of Denmark.
FERDINAND of Portugal, Count of Flanders. PETER King of Majorca. HENRY of
Portugal. THERESA Queen of Leon. MAUD Queen of Castille. SANCE an Abbess.
BLANCH. BERENGARIA.
THERESA Countess of Flanders.
THERESA Wife of Ferdinando Mendez.

1 HENRY Of BOURGONGNE Count of PORTUGAL. CHAP. I.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. CASTILLE. De gueules a un
Chasteau d'or. Dom. Anto De Sousa Lusit. Liberat. fol. 767. Appen. Cap. 3.
Henricus portavit Crucem in vexillis. Inquiunt Doctor Fra. Seraphin, de Freitas
de Just. Imper. Lusit. Asiat. C. 18 n. 17, etc. qui not avit Crucem fuisse^
coeruleam deducto color ex domo Ducum Burgundiae, ac Regum Galliae unde ille
princeps procedebat. Cruce^ portavit vel ex sua particulari pietate, vel quod
illis temporibus Crucem pro insignibus solebant portare qui fuerunt in sancto
bello Jerusalem, in quo ipse fuit, ut narrant. Maria dial. 2 C. 3. post maed;
Brandan in Monarch Lusit. p. 3. lib. 8. C. 22.

AMong so many Kings and Princes, who draw their Source and Original from the
House of FRANCE, and that have in several parts of the World given testimony of
their Piety, joined with apparent Valor, in their Wars against the Sarazens,
Moors, Turks, and other Infidels, the generous Prince HENRY OF BOURGONGNE Son
of Henry, and grandson of Robert of France, Duke of Bourgongne, whose Father
was King Robert, has rendered his memory so much the more illustrious and
famous, as being a worthy Son, an imitator of his Fathers virtues, and the
Establisher and Founder of the Kingdom of PORTUGAL. He was the first that
swayed the Scepter, and who has given Original to twenty Kings, who have there
since reigned for the space of near five hundred years, with such power, that
they have by the force of their own Arms, Conquered and Subjected to their
Dominion several Kingdoms and strong holds in Afric, Persia, East India and
America, which has facilitated the means to Civilize those people that were
heretofore wholly barbarous, and of Idolatrous and Mahumetans, to convert them
to Christianity. So that we must acknowledge, that these Princes (originally of
the most august Family of the French Kings) have very much merited from the
Christian Religion.

Several Histories of France, Portugal, Castille, and other Nations have very
much labored to find out and discover from what Country, and what House this
Prince HENRY deduced his Original. His extraction having been unknown for a
long time, and concerning which there has been almost as many Opinions as
Writers. Some have written that he descended from an Emperor of
Constantinople, others from a King of Hungary, some from William Count of
Bourgongne, brother of Raymond Count of Outre-Soane, and others also from Guy
Count of Vernoeil in Normandy, brother of this William. Aux Antiquitez de la
Gaul Belgique.
Furthermore there are that report, that he was son of Henry, Duke and Earl of
Limbourg, and Duke of Lorraine. Lastly, others (which have followed the Error
of Richard of Vassebourg a Modern Historian) are of Opinion that William was
his Father, who was called Baron of Joinville, whom they make to be Governor of
Lorraine in the absence of his Father the great Godfrey of Buillon elected King
of Jerusalem.

But all these Opinions, and Imaginary descents, have been worthily refuted by
Theodore Godefroy Advocate in the Court of Parliament of Paris, in a Treatise
which he has published of the Original of the Kings of PORTUGAL; having first
revived this Opinion, and clearly justified by proofs and undeniable reasons,
that they are descended in Line Masculine from the Royal House of FRANCE by
this HENRY the chief of his Branch.

And he groundeth principally upon the Authority of the Fragment (which yet
remains) of an old Latin History of France, which begins at the decease of
King Robert, and is continued to the Reign of Philip the first; An History
composed by a Monk of the Abbey of Saint Benedict Lez Fleury upon the Loir in
the Diocese of Orleance, who lived in the time of the same HENRY; This Fragment
(with other Historians) has been published at the end of the last Age by the
Learned Peter Pithou.

Note here the terms of this Ancient Author which has been translated: Our
design is not here to mention how many times the King Andefonse (he is called
also Alphonso the VI. King of Castille and Leon) generously behaved himself
against the Sarazins, Bragm. Hist. a Rege Roberto ad Philipp. I.
nor the number of the Battles in which he has vanquished them. It Is he which
wrested from them, and subjected to his Empire the strong City of Toledo. He
espoused Constance daughter of Robert Duke of Bourgongne, and had a daughter by
her which he gave in marriage to Raymond Count of Outre-Sonne. As for his other
daughter begotten out of marriage, He espoused her to HENRY one of the sons of
the sons of the same Duke of BOURGONGNE, and upon the Confines of Spain,
opposed them both against the Agarenes. He names also the Infidels under whose
yoke Spain at that time mourned, and of which they possessed a good part.

This is the more to be credited, for that the Historian who wrote it, was
co-temporary with the Prince of whom we speak, as may be gathered by other
Passages of his History.

Jo. Mariana Hist. Hisp. lib. 10. cap. 1.
Several give unto HENRY the Title and Quality of Count of PORTUGAL, and agree
in this Point, that he was established Earl thereof in the One thousand
fourscore and ten, by the King of Castille his Father in Law, who gave him this
County in Dower, in hope (as this King did verily believe) he would war upon
the Moors in Portugal, as Hugh the first of the name Duke of Bourgongne his
elder brother had done in Arragon; in which he was not deceived; for he served
as a Rampire to check the course of those Barbarians. But it is otherwise to be
presumed, and that the same Queen of Castille Constance, Th. Godefroy.
who was Aunt by the Fathers side of this HENRY, and lived in the time of the
marriage, might have contributed her recommendation for the attainment of this
Province of Portugal in Dower: and Note also that the Count of Outre-Soan, who
espoused the other lawfully begotten Daughter of the same King, as we have
said, had in Marriage with her only a sum of money.

Godefroy is not only of this opinion, for it was also followed by Jaques
Augustus de Thou President in the Court of Parliament, in the History of his
time; by Prudencio de Sandoval Bishop of Pampelona in Navarre, and
Historiographer of Philip the III. King of Spain in the History of Ferdinand I.
and other Kings of Castille; by Andrew du Chesne the Kings Geographer in the
Histories of Bourgongne and Vergy; as also by Antonio de Vasconcellos a
Portugues, of the Order of Jesus, and Rector of the University of Evora, in the
Latin History of the Kings of Portugal, which he has written in a most
elegant Style.

This natural Daughter of King Alphonso, Duarte Nunez en Chron. des Reis de
Port.
and of Ximena de Gusman wife of HENRY OF BOURGONGNE, was named TERESA France
in the Year One thousand fourscore and nine, accompanied with a good number of
Lords for the succor of the King of Castille, among which there are named
seven Counts; the principal of which were Raymond the son of William Count of
Bourgongne, Raymond of St. Gilles, and Toulouse, Chronique M S. de S. Denis.
this HENRY (who by mistake is surnamed of Lorraine in the History) Rotrou de
Perch, and William Viscount of Melun; they are all said to be at the same
Battle; for which cause some suppose it had the appellation of the Seven
Counts: But the Histories of Spain speak otherwise.

The Count HENRY Ordered the City of Conimbra for his principal residence and
that of his Court; Vasconcellius Anacephaloeosi I.
and the City of Braga for Metropolitan of the other Churches. He vanquished
and put to flight some Moorish Kings at Visco and Lamego, and seized also upon
Lisbonne (it has since been the Capital City of the Kingdom) which not long
after they recovered again.

But this great Prince being impatient of repose without honor (if we Godfrey
of Buillon and other Princes for the recovery of the Holy Land, where he
performed wonders. Duarte Nunez.
Being upon his return from this Voyage (of which some make a doubt) he
vigorously continued his War against the Moors, nor did his great age cause him
to discontinue the performance of his Martial Affairs. And lastly, His Death.
Vasconcellius.
he dyed at the Siege of the City of Asturia in the Year One being then aged
about Threescore and ten years, yet there be some that extend the Course of his
Life to a longer period. He was inhumed in the Cathedral Church of the City of
Braga, Duarte Nunez.
which is one of the chief of the Kingdom of Portugal. In the Year One thousand
five hundred and thirteen, Diego de Sousa being then Bishop (who was descended
from Prince HENRY) caused a Chapel to be built, in which he reposed the bones
of this Prince, and wrote an Epitaph, which declared him to be Son of a King of
Hungary. But Edward Nunez, In his Chronicle of Portugal.
a judicious and learned person, has with reason refuted the error of this
Original. He often names TERESA, Queen, as being a Kings Daughter. She
deceased about the Year One thousand one hundred and thirty. Her body lies
near unto that of her Husband Count HENRY. Andr. Resendius. lib. 4. Antiquit.
Lusit.
Although the greater number of Writers give her the Qualification of a Natural
Daughter; there is an Author of this Time, famous, and well read in the
knowledge of the Portugal Antiquities, who assures us that in the Ancient
Chronicles in Manuscript, she is called the Daughter of the Queen Ximena de
Gusman lawful Wife of King Alphonso, Dom. Anton. de Sousa denies that Teresa
was a Bastard, and also writes that her younger Sister Uracca usurped the
Kingdom of Castille against her. These are his words: Tharasia matter Alphonsi
primi Regis lusitaniae, filia erat Legitima, and natu major Alphonsi 6. Regis
Legionis and Castellae cumque. pater mortuus fuerit sine filio masculo, ut est
notorium, ipsa extabat haeres Legitima Regnorum ejus, Q^ae tamen Uracca soror
junior usurpavit, quapropter inter utramque orta sunt bella. Appen. ad Lusit.
Lib. Cap. 4. Actio Prima.
and also Nunez and Vasconcellos seem to be of the same opinion, which is
confirmed by the quality of Ximena, who was descended from one of the most
Illustrious Houses of Spain. The History of Portugal has been written by
several Authors, and i^ several Languages, among others, by Edward Galvan;
Stephen Garibay; the same NuneZ or Nonius Leo, a Portugal Lawyer; John de
Maris; John de Barros; Lopez de Castagneda, Damiano de Goez; Hierosme Osorio
Bishop of Silva; John Mariana, the same Vasconcellos; Hierosme Francchi
Conestaggio; Joseph Texera, Theodore Godefroy, and others, who have conjointly
treated of the History of SPAIN.

Children of HENRY OF BOURGONGNE Count of PORTUGAL, and of TERESA OF CASTILLE
his Wife.


Nunez. Vasconcellius.
URACCA OF PORTUGAL, Wife to Veremond Paaez de Trava Count of TRASTEMARE.

Her Marriage.
married to FERDINAND MENDEZ a Puissant Lord in Gallicia.

Natural Children of HENRY OF BOURGONGNE Count of PORTUGAL.
France in the Year One thousand one hundred seven and forty; Alphonso his
Brother, the Miracles performed by St. Bernard Abbot of Clervaux. He incited
this King to Found the rich Monastry of Alcobace, into which this PETER
retired, and there passed the rest of his days in great humility, where he was
also entombed.

2 ALPHONSO I KING OF PORTUGAL. CHAP. II.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. MAURIENNE ou Savoye.

TO the Count of Portugal, Henry of Bourgongne, and the Countess Teresa of
Castille his wife, succeeded this Prince their Son; His Birth.
and was born at Guimareans in the July, in the Year One thousand fourscore and
fourteen, who did more and more augment the glory of this Family.

Being only Eighteen years old at the death of his Father, he was, by some of
the Portugals, judged too young to undergo and manage those grand Wars, begun
as well against the Moors, as those of Leon; and therefore they endeavored to
marry Theresa Widow of the defunct, to the Count of Trastamare; who upon this
occasion should undertake the Government of Portugal. But the young Prince
ALPHONSO not suffering it, opposed him with so much courage, that having
Vanquished the Count, he was constrained to withdraw. And nevertheless by the
Agreement afterward settled betwixt them, he caused him to marry his Sister
Uracca of Portugal, as we have said before, by which we may presume, that the
Marriage of Teresa with the Count of Trastamare was only proposed. It Is true,
which we add, That ALPHONSO so ill resented his intended Deprivation from the
Government, that it urged him to confine this Princess to a Prison, Vignier
sou^ l'an. 1147.
in which she finished her life. Whereupon not long after began that cruel
War with Alphonso VII. King of Castille and Leon, his Cousin; from which
nevertheless he ever came off with honor; and, according to some, wounded this
King in a Battle, put the flower of his Nobility to the Sword, Vasconcello^^
to the number of seven Earls that accompanied him, and took the Queen of
Castille his wife prisoner. Whom some believe to be, (as it is probable she was)
the Mother of ALPHONSO.

Afterward the Count of Portugal directed the course of his War against Ismar
and four other Infidel Kings, whom he defeated at Ourique in a pitched field,
^aribay. Mariana. Nunez.
and also that Puissant Army by them raised, some Historians write, that upon
the day of (...) Air in that form he was Crucified, Vasconcellius.
who bowing his body downward, and casting his eyes on the ground, expressed
these words, ALPHONSO, thou shall overcome in this sign; which came to pass,
for the five Sarazen Kings were killed upon the place, i^ memory of which
signal Victory, to the end there might remain a perpetual mark thereof to
Posterity, The Arms of Portugal are changed.
ALPHONSO changed the Azure-Cross, which he did before bear in a silver field
for his Arms, into five Escocheons also Azure, every one of them charged with
five pence of silver, and this in commemoration of the thirty pieces of silver
for which our L^^^ was ^^^d by the Jews. Nunez. Vigu^^r.
In the same Year of our Salvation, One thousand one hundred and nine and
thirty, in pursuit of the Conimbra, leaving the name of Duke, which he had
before changed into that of Count.

And. Favine. Lib. 6. c. 18. Alphonso Henriquez first King of Portugal, having
conquered from the Moors the City of Evora Anno 1147. there placed a Garrison,
or number of brave-spirited Knights to defend it, who made themselves known
under the name of Fellow-Brethren of St. Mary of Evora.

The same King Alphonso not long after gave them the strong Castle d'Avis, and
therefore the Knights of this Order were called, Brethren d'Avis, who preserved
the memory thereof in their Arms, which they took thus.

D'or a la Croix Fleur de^isee de Syn^ple, and en point deux Osieaux kin^^ que
des Corbeaux de sable.

Le Ordin de Avis t^^o su principio en al anno de 1147. en tiempo del Rey Dom
Alonso primero Rey du Portugal. L'lamose al principio la Cavalleria de Ebora,
porque tuuo su Conve^to en la Ciudad d'este d^mbre, Su primer Maestre sellamo
D^m Ferdinando Monteiro; despues sucedio en el Maestrado D^m Fernand, Tannes a
qui el Rei Dom Alonso de Portugal die el Castillo de Avis anno 1161. y f^endo
allirans la dado el Convento primero, sell^mo DE AVIS. ^so por segnal una Cruz
como la de Alcantara, y por Armus la misma Cruz en Campo d'Oro, y at pie della
dos Aves negras por alusion del ^ombre de AVIS. Thus much out of Dom Damiano a
Goas; Rade^ de Andrada; and the Count of Lansarote, in his Nobility of
A^dalu^ia.

Memorable was that Assembly Convened by this King Alphonso in the City of
Lamogo, consisting of the three Estates of the Kingdom, where were made many
Laws which they justly account their Fundamentals, Nunez. Vasconcellos.
as unalterable as those of the Me^ds and Persians, made Sacred by the
observation of them both by Prince and People; among which it was enacted,
First, That the said King Alphonso's son, Grandson, and so forward, should
reign after him for ever. But if the King have only daughters, the eldest
should be Queen after her father, upon condition she be married to a Native of
Portugal, and that he be a Nobleman, who shall not take upon him the name of a
King, until he has a son born, nor wear a Crown on his head, nor take the
right hand of his Wife.

But the last clause is most to be considered, which my Author has faithfully
transcribed out of the said Laws.

Sit istadex in sempiter^um quod Prima Filia Regis ^^^piat maritum de
Portugale, ut non veniat Regnu^ ad Extra^^s; and si ^asaverit cum Principe
extranto, non sit Regina: quia (...) volum^^ nostrum Regnum ire de Portugal^^
sibus qui nos sua fortitudine Reges fecerunt, sine Adjutorio alien^, per suam
fortitudinem, and cum sanguine suo.

This Law was put in execution after the death of Ferdinando the 9th King of
that race; for Donna Beatrice his daughter being married to John the first of
the name, King of Castille a Foreign Prince, was excluded, and John the first
King of Portugal, though illegitimate, was advanced to the Throne.


In the mean time an Army composed of diverse Nations, viz. English, Flemmings,
Normans and Lorrainois, being embarked in England, and bound for Jerusalem,
Robt. de Monte.
to give succor to the Christians under the Conduct of William Longespe Duke
of Normandy (my Author means Earl of Salisbury) passed by the coast Spain,
Shield with Croix Fleur de Lis de Synople
where making some stay, at the instance of King ALPHONSO, they besieged and
took the City of Lisbonne which the Moors possessed; the Siege having continued
five months; They were at length defeated by the Christians, who delivered this
City into the hands and power of ALPHONSO, he also Conquered from them the
Cities of Leirta, Santarem, Evora, Elvas, Beja, and several other Towns and
Fortresses, which make at present the better part of the Kingdom of Portugal,
which he annexed to the Province situate between the Rivers of Dourho and
Minho, and that of Tars^s Mo^tes, as also a part of Estremaduru (where are
Br^ga, Conimbra, Visco, and other Cities) Provinces which descended to him by
succession from his Mother the Countess Teresa.

Now fell out the dispute betwixt Ferdinando King of Castille and Leon, Idem.
Badaios, which the Castillian urged belonged unto him, as being enterprised
upon the Moors; being come to blows, the King of Portugal having by an accident
been hurt before the fight, fell within the power of the King of Castille his
Enemy, but afterward a peace being concluded betwixt them, the Portugues
remitted unto Ferdinand part of the Provinces of Galicia.

Alboias King of Seville, whom he also subdued, Vasconcellos
and after the Victory obtained, instituted a Military Order, called, Of the
Eagle; The device was An Eagle Purple enfermed within a Circle Or.

After all these Wars ALPHONSO had attained to a very great age, nevertheless
he ceased not to exercise himself in his Martial affairs, with his Valiant Son,
who seconded him in his high and generous Enterprises.

But that hindered not his inclination to Piety, and the erection of several
Churches and Monasteries, Idem
among others he Founded that of St. Croix at Conimbra, which he so richly
endowed, and with so stupendous a revenue, that the famous University of this
City has a sensible apprehension thereof, and that it is at this day the most
Famous and Flourishing of all Spain. ALPHONSO also Founded the Monasteries of
St. Bernard of Alcobace, and of St. Vincent near Lisbonne, in the same place
where he encamped at the Siege thereof. In short, the Portugal Historians give
him the reputation of having Built and Founded an hundred and fifty Churches
and Religious Houses.

In fine, this great Prince being aged Fourscore and eleven years, Nunez.
and after he had Reigned Six and forty, His Death.
departed out of this life into a better, in Conimbra, the Ninth day of
December, in the Year One thousand one hundred fourscore and six, (and not two
years before, as some believe) and lies in this Church of St. Croix. King
Emanuel, one of his most Illustrious Successors, erected for him (a long time
after) a most Magnificent Tomb.

There are diverse opinions among Authors, Nunez.
about the House from which Queen MAUD wife of ALPHONSO did descend, His
Marriage.
Pingonius.
whom he married in the Year One thousand one hundred and six and forty (and
not two Dami. a Gotz.
) For those which write the History of Portugal and Savoy, Vasconcellos.
say that she was Daughter of Amides the second of the name, Count of Savoy or
Maurienne, and of Maud Daughter of the Count of Albon (they would say Viennois)
his second Wife. In the Hist. of Arragon.
But Hierosme Surita writes, that she was Sister of Peter, Count of Lara and
Molona, and Daughter of Henry, Count of Lara, and of Ermensi^d^ Vicountess of
Narbonna; An opinion which is reproved by Nunez. And nevertheless it may be
that he married both the one, and the other; certain it is, that Queen Maud
dyed in Anno One thousand one hundred threescore and eighteen,

Children of ALPHONSO I. KING OF PORTUGAL, and of MAUD OF SAVOY his Wife.
Bernard, Abbot of Clerveaux in Bourgongne.

Portugal.

LEON. D'argent au lion de pourpre. Party de PORTUGAL. Comme cy devant.
VRACCA OF PORTUGAL, Queen of LEON, Her Marriage.
was married unto Ferdinand II. of the name, King of LEON and Galicia; And
notwithstanding she had a son by him which carried the name of Alphonso, and
was King of Leon after his Father, yet this Marriage was dissolved by the Pope,
because of the proximity of blood betwixt them.

FLANDERS. D'or an lion de sable.
TERESA OF PORTUGAL, Countess of FLANDERS, whom the Flemmish Historians call
MAUD, Her Marriage.
and this name was given her when in the Year One thousand one hundred
fourscore and four, she was espoused to Philip of Alsace Count of Flanders,
Party de PORTUGAL
who dyed at the Siege of Ptolemais or Acre in Syria, in the War against the
Infidels in the Year One thousand one hundred and ninty one. In gest. Philippi
Aug.
During his absence the Queen Countess Rigord and other Historians, as being
the Daughter of a King, and the Wife of a Count) did with great prudence govern
his Estates and Seigneuries.

After the death of Philip, she was re-married (and was first wife) unto Eudes
III. Duke of Bourgongne, Her Death.
but was divorced by the Authority of the Church. Ma^or. History of Flanders.
Em. Sueyro. Nunez.
TERESA lived to a great age, and afterward dyed the sixth day of May, in the
Year One thousand two hundred and eighteen, by an accident Furnes. For her
Coach falling into a Fenne; she could not be drawn out until she expired, since
which time this place has been called, The Queens Ditch. Her body was first
inhumed in the Monastery of Dunes, and afterward removed to the Abbey of
Clervaux; It Is probable it was so ordered, because she was issued from the
Ancient Dukes of Burgundy by the King her Father. This Princess is much
commended for her great Courage and Prudence, she made Adam, Bishop of
Tourouenne the Executor of her last Will and Testament. She also had the
happiness to see her Nephew Ferdinand of Portugal established in the County of
Flanders.

Idem.
Some write, that the eldest Daughter of King ALPHONSO, was Maud, who espoused
Raymond the son of Raymond, Count of Barcelona, but the more judicious are of
opinion, that this alliance is not creditable.

Bastard Children of ALPHONSO first of the name, King of PORTUGAL.
Vasconcellius.
ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, Knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem at Rhodes,
a man Courageous, witness several high enterprises he undertook: but he quit
this Order near the end of his life, and returned into Portugal, where he dyed
in the Year One thousand two hundred and seven, some by mistake, name him Pedro
Alphonso.

Uracca Sancez married unto Goncalo de Sousa, Nunez.
created by King Sanceo the first Count of MENDEZ, and from him is descended
the Illustrious Family of SOUSA in Portugal.

3 SANCEO I. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL. PORTUGAL
CHAP. III. Comme cy devant.

Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL ARRAGON.

IF Alphonso the first was a GREAT and MAGNANIMOUS King? this his Son and
Successor did not degenerate; For (in the Judgment of many) he seemed to be
equal in Piety toward God, in Prudence and Ingenuity in the management of his
Estate, and in Martial Prowess, of which he gave a sufficient proof at the
famous Combat of Seville, against the Sarazens, of whom there fell so great a
number, that the River of Betis was for some space of time made red, and
tinctured with their Blood.

His Birth.
He took his first Breath at Conimbra the Eleventh day of November, Nunez.
in the Year One thousand one hundred and four and fifty.

Before he came to the Crown, two Mahumetane Princes having besieged the City
of Badaios, he came to the relief thereof so opportunely, that he raised the
Siege, and afterward gained a memorable Victory. Vasconcellos.
He performed several other Noble adventures. But most miraculous was that
Trophie he obtained upon the Puissant King of Marocco, Miramolin. For neither
the assistance of thirteen other Kings, wherewith he was accompanied, nor the
infinite number of Sarazens his followers, (and who had besieged SANCEO in
Scalube,) could hinder him the gaining a Victory upon so many Enemies conjured
to the Ruin of him, and also of his House.

After so many Wars, observing Portugal to be almost Desert, and the Land
unmanured; He favored so much laboring men, and rendered himself so great a
Proficient in the Knowledge of Agriculture, that he was ordinarily called THE
LABOURER, Idem.
as if he had been the whole course of his life exercised in this Employment;
although indeed he was entirely born a son of Mars. A great lover he was of
Architecture, and took the care to re-build several Cities and Castles ruined
by those Wars.

History of Flanders.
It fell out, that a Fleet of Ships composed of Danes, Frisons, and Hollanders,
Holy Land to War upon the Infidels; were by foul weather driven into the Port
of Lisbonne; And then SANCEO taking this opportunity (as his father had done
before him) so ordered it, Vasconcellius.
that they assisted him in the Reduction of the City of Silva in the Kingdom of
the Algarbies, a place at that time most flourishing, and strongly Fortified;
which has since been made the Metropolis of that Kingdom.

But as the Time and the Affairs of the World are often crossed by sinister
events, it happened that another Miramblin, also King of Marocco, came and
assaulted Portugal, committing several Ravages and Spoils, and there leaving
the marks of a most sad desolation, unfortunately followed with Rain and
Inundations, Nunez.
then with extreme Drouths, Famine, and other contagious diseases, which swept
away so great a number of people, that Portugal was reduced to a miserable
estate for the space of eight or ten years: Vasconcellius.
So that the Moors took advantage by these calamities to seize upon several
Cities and places. Accidents which caused King SANCEO to contract a League with
them for the space of five years, during which time there fell out another
War betwixt him and the King of Leon, all which misfortunes hindered his
Voyage beyond Sea, which he had resolved against the Infidels; having only sent
to the oppressed Christians some pieces of Money. This League being ended, the
Sarazens began again their incursions.

The last memorable Action of War performed by King SANCEO, Elva from the
Moors, His Death.
which they had possessed a long time, and not long after he dyed in the Year
One thousand two being aged eight and fifty years, and having Reigned seven and
twenty. He was interred in the Church of St. Croix, where King Emanuel raised a
Tomb for him like unto that of his father. He left behind him great Treasure,
and remarkable sums of money, of which (by his Testament, which he had made
two years before his death) he disposed for Legacies to his Children, and
several Churches.

In the Year One thousand one hundred fourscore and one, the same King SANCEO
was conjoined in Marriage with DOULCE, Nunez. Surita. Vasconcellius.
His Marriage.
or ALDONSE OF ARRAGON, daughter of Raymond Berengarius, Barcelona, and of
Perrenella daughter and Heir of Raymer King of Arragon. The which Queen DOULCE
dyed in the Year One Nunez.
After her Death the King her Husband suffered himself to be transported to
unlawful Loves, and had several Bastards. Which incontinence did somewhat
eclips the luster of those Virtues with which he was adorned.

Children of SANCEO I. King of PORTUGAL, and of DOULCE OF ARRAGON his Wife.
Sanceo.

His Birth.
FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL Count of FLANDERS, PORTUGAL.
Escartelle de FLANDERS.
born in the Year One thousand one hundred fourscore and The Queen Teresa,
called Maud of Portugal Countess of Flanders his Aunt by the Fathers side, His
Marriage.
D'or au Lion Rampant de sable.
procured his Marriage with JANE Countess of FLANDERS, eldest Daughter and
Coheir of Count Baldwin, Constantinople; In the right of which Marriage
contracted in the Year One thousand two hundred and eleven, the Prince
FERDINAND styled himself Count of Flanders. PORTUGAL.
This Marriage was made also at the instance and persuasion of Philip Augustus
King of France, supposing thereby to make a Friend of this Prince, Party de
FLANDRE.
who promised to remit and render into the possession of Lewis Count of Arto^,
the Kings eldest Son, the Towns of Air and St. Omer. But FERDINAND being in
possession of the County of Flanders, it repented him, that his promises should
deprive him of the right which he pretended to have to those Towns that he had
quitted; This caused him to be more easily induced by the Princes and Barons of
his Country to alienate himself from the affection of the King of France, and
to adhere to the pernicious designs of his enemies.

So it was, that this Great Monarch having put to Sea with a confiderable force
to pass into England, all the Princes and Barons of France showed themselves
ready and willing to accompany him, except the Count of Flanders, who freely
declared, that he would not move, except the King would first restore to him
the Towns he had from him. And although he had recompense offered him for the
same Towns, yet he returned home with the demonstration of ill will against
France. Rigord. G. Brito in Philippo.
This caused the King (who would not suffer so rash a boldness from his
Vassal,) to set Sail straight for Flanders with that Army he had prepared for
England, and had so happy success in this Action, as to subdue the Count to his
obedience, and in a small time to gain a notable Victory upon his Army. By this
means the Cities of Cassel, Ypre, Bruges, and Gaum, and the rest of Flanders
was reduced into the hands of the King, where he left his Garrisons. But he had
no sooner turned his back, but the Count FERDINAND re-entred with a fresh Army,
at the sight of which all the same Cities were again surrendered.

Sometime after, the Flemmings continuing in their disaffection, Mejeri
Merchant.
resolved to revenge themselves upon the King, and to that purpose joined their
power with the Emperor Otho IV. King John of England, and other Philip; But at
their Rencounter, which was near unto Bonines, the French behaved themselves
with so much resolution, that they carried a glorious Victory, by so much the
more signal, because several Princes and Grandees were there made Prisoners,
Rigord. F. Aemile.
among others this Count of Flanders, who was conducted to the Castle of the
Louure at Paris, in Triumph, and had the unhappiness to see the Parisians
rejoice at his misfortune, and at his arrival to entertain him with scorn and
dirision.

He was a Prisoner until the beginning of the Year One thousand two hundred
seven and twenty, when Queen Blanch of Castille his Couzin, and Mother History
of France.
and sent him back into his own Country, with intention to oblige him hers,
Nunez.
in opposition to the Revolted Princes. So that those Authors misapprehend, who
have written that FERDINAND dyed a Prisoner. His death.
For six years after his release, his death happened in the City of Noyon, in the
Year One thousand two hundred thirty and three, being seven and forty
Marquettes near unto the City of Lisle, an Abbey of Monks of the Cistertian
Order, and his heart intombed in the Church of our Lady in the same City of
Lisle, where you may read this Epitaph.

FERNANDI proavos Hispania, Flandria Corpus, Cor cum viceribus continet iste
locus. Mejer. Marchantius. Sueyro. Pingonius.
The Countess JANE of FLANDERS his Widow espoused for her second Husband, in the
Year One thousand two hundred two and thirty, second of the name, Count of
Maurienne and Piedmont, son of Thomas Count of Savoye, which Thomas in the
right of the Princess his Wife, used also the Title and appellation of Earl of
Flanders and Henault.

She finished her days in the Year One thousand two hundred four and having
Founded several Hospitals, Churches and Religious Houses in the Cities of
Bruges, Gaunt, Ipre, and Lisle, the Church of the Beguinees in the same City of
Bruges, the Abbey of Marquettes abovementioned, and the Cordileires and
Jocobines at Valenciennes, which are so many famous Monuments of her Piety.

Daughters of FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, and of JANE, COUNTESS OF FLANDERS, his
Wife.
5. MARY OF FLANDERS was promised to Robert, Count of Artois, In Theatro
Genealog.
whom she never married. Hierosme Henninges is mistaken, saying, That she was
married to Thomas of Savoye son of Count Thomas. For it was Jane her Mother, as
we have before expressed.

5. SIBILLE OF FLANDERS, whose Husband was Guiccard III. of the name, BEAUJEU.
Lord of Beaujeu, as writes Claud Paradine in his Genealogical Alliances, who
reports, Her Marriage.
That there is mention made of her in the Records of the Church of Beaujolois;
D'or au lion de sable, au lambel de gueules de trois pieces.
adding also, Her Death.
That she dyed in the Year One thousand two hundred six and twenty. But this
Guiccard being deceased Ten years before, as the same Author notes; Party de
FLANDRE qui est de mesme sans le Lambel.
it is not to be credited, that he had Children he had three; For the Marriage
of Ferdinando father of the Princess, was Consummated but five years before the
decease of Guiccard, and SIBILLE was at that time too young. Indeed Andrew de
Chesne seems to doubt whether she were the Daughter of Ferdinand, saying, That
if she was of the House of Flanders, she might be Sister of Philip of Alsace
Count of Flanders.

Here follow the Children of SANCEO I. King of PORTUGAL.
PORTUGAL MAJORCA
and Count of Urgel, His Birth.
was born in the Year One thousand one hundred fourscore being come to age,
Escartelle, Au 1. and 4. D'or a quatre pals de gueulles, l'Escu brise d'unbande
aussi de gueulles. Au 2. and 3. de PORTUGAL
whether it were for the displeasure that happened between him and the King of
Portugal Alphonso II. his elder Brother, or the desire he had to Travel, and to
profit himself by the conversation of strangers, is not certainly known; but
depart the Kingdom he did, and was sometime in the Court of the Miramolin King
of Morocco.

His Marriage.
From thence he took his journey into Arragon, where he espoused Aremburga
Countess of Urgel, a rich Heiress, in whose right he was Lord Urgel, and other
rich Seigneuries. PORTUGAL MAJORCA Escarbelle de URGEL.
She dyed without issue in the lifetime of her Husband, and for testimony of
the conjugal love she did bear to this Prince, she gave him her County, with
the right she had in the City of Valedolit, and in some other Lordships she
possessed in the Kingdom of Galicia. But because that Ponce de Cervera
pretended to the County of Urgel, and those other Seigneuries, PETER parted
with them all to his Cousin James King of Arragon, Hier. Zurita in his Hist. of
Arragon.
Surnamed the Conqueror, Son of King Peter, who had received him with
affection, and also in recompense gave him some Lands in Arragon for his
Portion and lawful Appennage, which appertained unto him in the right of his
Mother the Queen of Portugal Doulce of Arragon.

Now, James having a desire to appropriate to himself this County of Urgel,
came to a Treaty with Prince PETER OF PORTUGAL, by which he made it over to
this King of Arragon, with the other Lands in Galicia, and in exchange this
King gave him the Kingdom and Isle of Majorca, and the others adjacent. But the
Moors of this Country having rebelled, Nunez.
and King PETER observing that the King of Tunes was preparing a powerful Army
for their assistance against him, Vasconcellius.
and finding himself not capable to resist them, made another exchange with the
King of Arragon; For he having returned him the Kingdom of Majorca, James
remitted him the Cities and Places of Segorbia, Morella, and others.

His Death.
The same Prince PETER gave assistance to William Mongriu Archbishop Saragoca,
with which he subdued the Isle of Juica or Ebuse, History of Portugal.
in the Year One thousand two hundred five and thirty, about which time he
likewise dyed.

One thousand one hundred fourscore and nine, His Birth.
and died young in the lifetime of King Sanceo I. his Father. He lies in the
Abbey of St. Croix at Conimbra, in the Sepulcher of his Fathers.

Son of King Ferdinando II. which Marriage was Consummated without
Dispensation. LEON. D'argent au lion de pourpre.


After the accomplishment of which, there succeeded in Portugal several evils
and misfortunes, Party de PORTUGAL.
the Plague, Famine, and Tempests; Calamities which were attributed to this
unlawful Marriage, of which Pope Celestine III. being informed, Jo. Mariana de
reb. Hisp.
sent into Portugal, William Cardinal of St. Angelo his Legate, who caused the
Prelates of this Kingdom, and those of Leon, to meet at Salamanca, and there
was resolved the Divorce and Dissolution of this Marriage; which was done
although they had three Children; one Son named Ferdinand, who died young, and
two Daughters.

Vasconcellius.
After this Dissolution the Princess TERESA resolved to forsake the World, and
to incloyster her self in the Nunnery of Loruano, which she restored and
enlarged with great Revenues. She there most Piously passed the rest of her
days, and in the reputation of great Holiness. Also her Tomb having been
opened in the Year One thousand six hundred and seventeen, Spain, Philip III.
her body was found entire, and her face so ruddy, as if the Princess had been
alive, or had departed but some few hours before.

Her Marriage.
was Wife of HENRY first of the name, CASTILLE De gueulles a un chasteau d'or.
Party de PORTUGAL
King of CASTILLE, eldest Son of Alphonso VIII. But they were also separated,
because of their proximity of Blood, and that by the sentence of Momin Bishop
of Burgos, and of Tells Bishop of Palencia, whom the Pope Innocent III. had
delegated for the Cognizance and decision of this separation. Henry Reigned but
a short time, Nunez.
and died by the hurt of a Tile, which, as he was playing with some Lords of
his Court, Mariana.
fell with violence upon his head, in One thousand two hundred and seventeen.
And deceasing without Children, his Cousin Ferdinand III. succeeded him in the
Kingdom of Castille. After the Dissolution of this Marriage with Henry, the
Princess MAUD retired into the Monastery of Arouce in her Country of Portugal,
which she Founded, and is there interred. Her Death.
If she deceased the second day of May, in the Year One thousand two hundred
fourscore and ten, Vasconcellos, she attained unto a very great age.

Lorvano. She Founded the Monastery of the Order of St. Francis at Alanquer;
Land which she had for her Portion, or appennage; Her body was ensepultured in
the Church of the same place of Lorvano.

Guadalaiara in Castille, died in that Kingdom, her body was afterward
conveyed into Portugal to St. Croix de Conimbra.

Vasconcellius.
and was educated with her Sister the Queen Teresa, in the Abbey of Lorvano;
she lies interred also in the same place of St. Croix de Conimbra, with her
Ancestors.

Bastards of King SANCEO I.
Tristemare in Galicia, and two other Counties, was a Knight full of Valor and
Courage; Being employed by the King of Leon in his Wars, he twice defeated
the Armies of the King Alphonso II. his Brother. Nunez.
He lies at Cofins of the Order of St. John, in the place of Campos. He and
his Sister Uracca were begotten upon Mary Anez de Fornellos.



Porto, fighting for the Portugues; He is interred in the Monastery of Grio; He
and his Brother and Sisters, had for their Mother, Mary Paaez de Ribera.



Albuquerque.

Francis of Conimbra, upon the River of Monda. Her body lies near unto that of
Sanceo I. her Father.

4 ALPHONSO II. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL. CHAP. IV.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL CASTILLE.

THis King was born upon the day of the Feast of St. George, His Birth.
the three and twentieth of April, in the Year, One thousand one hundred
fourscore and five, and succeeded King Sanceo the First his Father, at the Age
of Seven and twenty years.

Following the steps of his Ancestors, he behaved himself Valiantly in several
Conflicts against the Moors. By the assistance of a Naval Army consisting of
those of the Belgique Nations, he recovered out of the hands of the Infidels
the City of Alcassere de Sal; which was performed at the instance Matthew
Bishop of Lisbonne, a man of an holy life. Vasconcellius.


In pursuance of which ALPHONSO vanquished the Kings of Seville, and of Jean,
who came to lay Siege to the City of Juica.

But if he was plausable in his Military and public Affairs, he could not
avoid the reproach which Posterity has cast upon him in his History, Nunez.
in what concerned his Domestic, having ill treated his Brothers and Sisters,
and his Brother-in-law the King of Leon, not suffering them to enjoy the
portions and inheritance which belonged unto them, nor performing the Testament
and last Will of the King their Father. By reason of which there ensued great
Divisions, until that the Pope, unto whom the younger Princes made their
recourse, used his Censures and Interdictions against ALPHONSO, and constrained
him to submit to Arbitration for the Determination of their Differences, and to
undergo the Execution of that Judgment which should be given.

He was tall of stature, of an able body, and so corpulent, that his subjects
surnamed him, Vasconcellius.
The Gross, which, it may be, shortened his life; for he lived only Eight and
forty years. And after he had Reigned One and twenty years, His Death.
he expired, Anno, One thousand two hundred three and thirty, Edwardo Nunez,
and Antonio Vasconcellos do note; and not in the Year, One thousand two hundred
twenty and four, as others have written.

He was inhumed in a Chapel, Mariana.
which he Ordered to be made in the Abbey of Alcobace, near unto the Sepulcher
of URACCA OF CASTILLE his Wife, Daughter of Alphonso VIII. others say IX. of
that name, King of Castille, and of Elianor of England his Wife; and Sister of
Blanch of Bastille, Queen of France, Nunez.
Mother of the King St. LEWIS. Some years after George de Mello Abbot of the
Monastery, caused the Corpse of King ALPHONSO, and of the Queen his wife, to be
transported to the Chapel of St. Vincent.

Children of ALPHONSO II. King of PORTUGAL, and of URACCA OF CASTILLE, his Wife.


Bolongne in France, then King of Portugal, after his Elder Brother; continued
the Posterity. PORTUGAL-SERPE


PORTUGAL-SERPE
because he was Lord of this place in the Kingdom of Castille, espoused
SANCE-FERNANDINE DE LARA, Daughter of the Count Ferdinando de Lara. Party de
LARA. Gueulles a deux chaudieres d'or lune sur l'autre chacune chargee de trois
traits de sable courbez en fac^, auec sept, Serpenteaux d'or sortant de chaque
cost des orcilles des ances, trois en dedans, quatre en dehors. Erpold
Lindenbruch in Hist. Daniae Regum.
This Prince of SERPE is intombed at Alcobace, and from them came one only
Daughter, who follows.

6. LEONOR OF PORTUGAL, who is said to have been married to a Prince Heir
apparent to the Kingdom of DENMARK; He was (as some say) VALDEMAR, Son of
another Valdemar second of the name, King of Denmark, who outlived his Son,
deceasing in the Year, One thousand two hundred one The Father was also allied
to this House of Portugal, as you shall see hereafter. Erpold Lindenbruch in
his History of the Kings of Denmark, makes mention of these two Marriages; he
corrupts the name of the Princess LEONOR, whom he calls Bormegera, adding
also by mistake, That she was Sister of the Count of Flanders. He notes her
death to happen in the Year, One thousand two hundred and twenty.

Alphonso II. died young.

His Marriage.
LEONOR OF PORTUGAL their Sister, was (according to some Historians of
Allmaine,) third wife of VALDEMAR II. DENMARK. D'or a trois Leopards d'azure
couronnez, armez and lamp^ssez de gueulles, lescu seem de coeurs aussi de
gueulles.
One thousand two hundred and forty one. Hierosme Henninges reports her to be
Sister of Ferdinando of Portugal Count of Flanders; but it may be that he
means Lord of Serpe. He adds that she had by this Danish Prince seven Sons,
and three Daughters; three of which Sons, viz. Eric VII. Christopher I. and
Abel, Party de PORTUGAL
were successively Kings of Denmark. From Christopher, descended Eric VIII.
Father of Eric IX. and of Christopher II. all also Kings of Denmark. Valdemar
IV. Son of this last King, was Father of Margaret Queen of the Potent Kingdoms
of Denmark, Sweden, and Norwey.

Natural Sons of King ALPHONSO II.
One thousand two hundred four and thirty, and lies in the Monastery of
Alcobace.

Those that have written, that this King ALPHONSO II. had another Natural Son,
named Martin-Alphonso, are mistaken, for he was Son of King Alphonso III. as
shall appear hereafter in his place.

5. SANCEO II. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL. CHAP. V.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL HARO. D'argent a l' Abre de
Granica de Synople, a deux Leups de fable traversez au pied de cost Abre, vest
a dire l'au devant, and lautre d'erriere l' Abre, laquelle est enter ces deux
loups a l'Orle de gueulles charge de sept Croix en sa^^ir d'or.

AMong the Children Alphonso II. and of Uracca of Castille, His Birth.
this Prince who came into the World in the Year, One thousand two hundred and
the Eighth day of September, was the eldest.

Who brought with him from the womb such mortal infirmities, as made most
believe, he would sooner arrive at the grave, than the Scepter, the Queen his
Mother having tried all humane remedies, applied herself to Divine, making a
Vow to God, that if he lived past his adolescency, she would make him pass the
Hood of Canons Regular of the Order of St. Augustine, which she inviolably
performed, and from which habit this King was surnamed CAPELLO. Nunez.
Vasconcellius, Mariana.
Also he appeared more apt and proper for a monastic and quiet life, than to
the exercise of War, and the Government of his Kingdom, to which he succeeded
at the age of Six and twenty years.

Also the Queen of Castille Berengaria, (his Cousin) who had the Government of
this Prince, observing him to be of a weak Judgment, endeavored to match him
to some Lady of an Illustrious House, that in defect of her Husband, might be
capable of the management of his affairs. But some Grandees of the Kingdom
opposed this design, prevented her, and clandestinely married him to
SANCE-MENTIE-LOPEZ DE HARO, His Marriage.
daughter of Diego-Lopez de Haro, Lord of Biscay, and of Uracca natural
daughter of Alphonso IX. King of Leon. After which several of the Prelates
having made Remonstrance to the Pope of the unlawfulness of the Marriage, which
had been effected without the Dispensation of the Holy See, which was required
by reason of the proximity of blood betwixt the parties, and for that the King
also continued in the evil Government of his Estate, during which time several
mischiefs had been committed, they supplicated Pope Gregory IX. for a remedy.
Nunez.


Who sent therefore his Legate Apostolic, the Bishop of Sabine, Mariana.
into Portugal, after whose departure the oppression, disorders, and popular
Sedition still remained as before; these calamities caused the Prelates and
some of the Grandees to make their second application to Rome, at what time
Innocent IV. sat in the Holy Chair; who Ordered (with a Salvo to the Authority
Royal, and the Children of King SANCEO, if he should have any) that the Count
of Bolongne, Alphonso his younger Brother, should take the Reins of the
Government, and the administration of affairs into his hand; as he did
accordingly.

But SANCEO unwilling to quit his Kingdom and lawful inheritance, made his
recourse for assistance to the King of Castille, who sent him an Army, with
which he entered the field, but with so little success, that he was forced to
disband his Soldiers, and secure himself by retiring to the City of Toledo in
Castille, from which time he addicted himself wholly to devotion and a private
life, distributing Alms to the poor of what he had brought out of Portugal,
living with great austerity, and supporting his exile and other calamities,
with an admired patience and constancy. But there were yet among his Subjects
those who remained unshaken in that duty and fidelity which they had sworn,
who made his re-establishment their endeavors; His death.
but their design was interrupted by the news of his death One thousand two
hundred six and forty, in the same City of Toledo; he lies in the Cathedral
Church, his body being interred in a Sepulcher which he had prepared in his
lifetime.

Some Historians, and among others Mariana in the thirteenth Book of his
History of Spain, extends his Life to fifty years, and his Reign to three and
thirty, John Vasee says six and twenty, but they are both in an error, for
Edward Nunez has made appear in his Chronicle of Portugal, who tells us more
certainly, that he lived only Nine and thirty years, and Governed thirteen. And
dying without issue, he had for his Successor to the Crown, his younger brother
Prince Alphonso, of whom we have spoken.

5. ALPHONSO III. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES. CHAP. VI.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. BOLONGNE. D'or a trois
Torteaux de gueulles, 2. 1. CASTILLE. De gueulles a un Chasteau d'or.


A Year after this Portugal, he ascended the Throne by the decease (without
issue) of his elder brother King Sanceo II. both sons of King Alphonso, also
Second of the name, and of Uracca of Castille, being at that time aged about
Six and thirty years. His Birth.
For he was born at Conimbra the Tenth day of May, Anno, One thousand two

The Queen of France, Blanch of Castille, his Aunt by the Mothers side,
entertained him in the Court of her son the King St. Lewis, His Marriage.
and also procured his Marriage (in the Year, One thousand (according to the
Historian of Portugal, Nunez, and not ten years after following the opinion of
other Writers) with MAUD OF DAMMARTIN Countess of BOLONGNE, eldest daughter of
Rainaud Count of Dammartin in his own right, and of Bolongne in the right of
the Countess Ida his Wife, which MAUD was at that time Widow to Philip of
France, younger son of King Philip Augustus.

This Prince ALPHONSO, after his Marriage, had the Title of Count of Bolongne;
And gave such notable testimonies of his Virtue, that the Pope elected him
Captain of those Knights of the Cruciada, who were judged worthy to carry their
Valor into the Holy Land against the Enemies of our Faith, but he was diverted
this Honor, by the necessity of his return into Portugal, to put an end to
those troubles which were moved by the ambition of those who presumed upon the
pliable nature of King SANCEO II. his brother.

After he was come to the Crown, he found difficulty enough to establish
himself, wherefore he was necessitated to reduce some Places by force, and to
carry himself severely toward his Nobility.

Homebred stirs being quieted, Nunez.
he gave his mind to the Building of several Cities of his Kingdom, and also
Founded two Monasteries of the Order of the Jacobines, one at Lisbonne, the
other at Elvas, and the Abbey of Nuns of the Order of St Clare at Santarem;
and furthermore, he instituted several Fairs for the increase of Commerce with
his Neighbors, delighting much in Traffic, and for the encouragement
thereof, remitting his Customs.

But as all these generous Acts acquired him a grand reputation, Mariana.
yet he also underwent an unhappy scandal, Nunez.
for notwithstanding his lawful Wife the Princess MAUD was then living, he
endeavored to violate the holy Laws of Marriage; For under pretext that this
Princess was too old, and so incapable of bringing him Children, he espoused
another Wife, (about the Year, His 2d. Marriage.
One thousand two hundred and threescore,) which was BEATRICE Alphonso IX. King
of Castille, and of Mary Vilena, daughter of Peter de Gusman; some write, that
the King of Castille gave in Dower to this BEATRICE his daughter, the Kingdom
of Algarues, a good part of which ALPHONSO III. gained out of the hands of the
Moors.

In consideration of this alliance, Castella aurea in Campo ru^ro per circum,
sunt Insignia Regni Algarbiorum uniti Lusitanio; ea primo posuit Sancius 1. Rex
2. quoniam Algarbia cepit a Sarracenis; sed, eo Regno ad ipsis Infidelibus
recupecato, cessarunt Castella; quousque ALPHONSUS 3. Rex 5. eo iteeum obtento,
Castellorum restituit circum. Fuit aurem numerus Castellorum diversus usque ad
tempus Johannis 2. qui reformans in omnibus Regium scutum secundum regulam,
reduxit Castella ad septem (qui numerus perfectus) prout apparent hodie. Dom.
Anto. de Sousa. Lusit. Liberat. Appen. Cap. 1.
he added to the Arms of Portugal, A Border gueulles charged with seven
Castles Or. Which some believe to be the Arms of the Kingdom of Algarvie,
Vasconcellius.
the Title of which King ALPHONSO also joined with that of Portugal. The Border
and Castles are added to the Arms of Portugal.


Now MAUD understanding the design of the King her Husband, to take another
wife; From France she undertook a journey into Portugal, and there made her
protestations and opposition against this unlawful Marriage, which ALPHONSO
regarded not, but slightly passed over. When this would not move him to
Justice, the Princess and her kindred, (of the number of which was the King St.
Lewis) made their appeal to Pope Alexander IV. with whom their complaint and
the Princesses tears took such effect, Mariana.
that he first mildly admonished ALPHONSO to receive again his lawful wife, and
forsake BEATRIX, but continuing refractory and stubborn, the same Pope thundered
out his Excommunications against him and his Kingdom, prohibiting Divine
Service throughout all his Dominions, under which Interdiction he lay the space
of two years, and to the death of MAUD happening in the Year, Nunez.
One thousand two hundred when the Prelates of the Kingdom so carried the
matter to Pope Urban IV. that he not only removed this Excommunication, but
also approved the Marriage; this proceeded principally from the Relation of
kindred the said Pope had to the King ALPHONSO, and for the peace and welfare
of the Kingdom.

MAUD having made her last Will and Testament in the Year, One thousand two
hundred forty and one, bequeathed unto her Husband King ALPHONSO, the Sum of
Twenty thousand Livets, Idem.
beside the right she had to another Sum of Four thousand l. due unto her by
the Count and Countess of Flanders. Also to others she left many pious
Legacies, and ordered for the Executors of this her last Testament, Robert
Bishop of Beauuais, her Cousin Matthew de Try, and others; Gifts which were
approved by Gaucher de Chastillon sieur de Monjay her Kinsman, who had espoused
Jane her daughter, Mariana.
descended from her first Marriage.

Nunez.
Lastly, His Death.
King ALPHONSO having lived Threescore and nine years, Vasconcellius.
and Reigned Three and thirty, finished his days at Lisbonne, the Capital City
of his Estate, in the Year, One thousand two hundred threescore He received the
honor of Sepulture within the Church of St. Dominick in the same place; and
from thence, ten years after, his body was transported to the Chapel dedicated
to St. Vincent in the Abbey of Alcobace, where lies also Queen Beatrix of
Castille his Wife.

T^a^te du droit de succession sur la Portugal de la Royne Catherine de Medicis.
Some are of opinion, that he had by the Countess of Bolongne two sons, the
elder of which, named after him Alphonso, dyed young; the younger called
Robert, lived in France, and was Count of Bolongne, from whom are descended the
other Earls unto Jane de la Tour, who exchanged this County for that of
Lauregais, and had issue her daughter Magdelene de la Tour, Mother of Queen
Katherine de Medicis, wife of Henry II. King of France. The same Queen, as
being descended from Robert, pretended a right to the Kingdom of Portugal after
the death of the Kings Sebastian and Henry. And at what time the Estates were
assembled to Advise of a Successor to the Crown, she sent her Ambassadors also
thither to represent her Right and Pretentions, as also did several other
Princes upon the same account. At the same time there was published in France a
Treatise (which is reputed to have for Author Peter Beloy afterward the Kings
Advocate in the Court of Parliament of Toulouse) concerning the right and
lawful succession of the Kingdom of Portugal appertaining to this Queen
Katherine, Mother of the most Christian King Henry III.

En Chronica des Reis de Portugal.
But the Castillian and Portugal Historians, among others Edward Nunez, will not
admit of this descent of the House of Bolongne, nor that ALPHONSO III. had any
children by Queen MAUD his first Wife. But to confound this extraction, and to
prove it only imaginary, he grounds upon diverse Circumstances, and pregnant
Conjectures, which he particularly touches upon in the Chronicle of the Kings
of Portugal, by him published in his own Language; Conjectures drawn from the
time, as also from the consideration of the Age of the Princess, and the words
of her last Testament (in which there is mention made only of her daughter by
the first Bed.) And lastly, from the Contents of that Supplication Beatrix
might lawfully continue and live together, and that their Children after them
might be capable of the possession of their Estates.

Children of ALPHONSO III. King OF PORTUGAL, and of BEATRIX OF CASTILLE, his
second Wife.


Portalegre, PORTUGAL-PORTALEGRE.
Chasteauvieux, His Marriage.
Marvau, and of Arouce, was joined in Marriage with YOLAND OF CASTILLE,
daughter of the Infant Emanuel, son of Ferdinando III. King of Castille, Party
de CASTILLE.
and of Constance of Arragon his Wife. And because that ALPHONSO married his
daughters to Castillian Lords, De gueulles au Chastean d'or.
and would have given them those places of his appennage in Portugal, his
brother King DIONYSIO opposed him. But this difference was at last appeased, by
exchange made betwixt the King and this Lord of Portalegre, who consented to
part with places upon the Frontire of Castille, for those that were situate
within the middle of Portugal. He was inhumed in the Church of St. Dominick at
Lisbonne, and left issue a Son, and four Daughters, which follow.

7. ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, Seigneur of Leiria, dyed without Children.

7. ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, BISCAY. Comme cy devant.
Wife of JOHN Lord of BISCAY, surnamed the Purblind.

7. CONSTANCE OF PORTUGAL, Party de PORTUGAL.
espoused to GONCALE-NUNEZ DE LARA, LARA. Party de PORTUGAL.
son of John Nunez de Lara, called the Good.

7. MARY OF PORTUGAL was conjoined in Marriage with TELLEZ son of Alphonso,
Infant OF MOLINA.

7. ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, surnamed the Young, to difference her from her elder
Sister of the same name, was married unto JOHN-ALPHONSO, Lord of Albuquerque,
son of Alphonso-Sanceo, who was Nephew of Dionysio King of Portugal.

Here follow the Children of King ALPHONSO III. and of BEATRIX OF CASTILLE.
Lisbonne.

Loruano, then of that Das Holgas at Burgos. This Princess was exceeding rich:
For the King of Castille, her Grandfather by the Mother, and King Dionysio her
Brother, gave her the Seigneuries of Monmor le Vicil, and Campo-Major.

Beatrix her Mother in Castille, for to visit the King her Grandfather, she
there dyed in the City of Seville, being young. Her body was brought home, and
buried in the Abbey of Alcobace.

Natural Children of ALPHONSO III. King OF PORTUGAL.
Lisbonne in the Church of St. Blaise.

Lawrence-Gilles, Baily of the Commandrie of the same Church of St. Blaise.

Pedro-Alphonso, Roderick, and Diego-Alphonso; and Garsia Mendez, Prior of
Alcaceua of Sautarem.

Diego-Alphonso son of Alphonso Dionysio; married Yoland Lopez daughter of Lopo
Fernandez Lord of Ferreira, and of Mary Gomez Tauiera, and had issue Alvaro and
Lopo Dia, from which Lopo descend those of Sousa, which at present are called
Diabos.

Alphonso III. by a Moorish Woman, has given original to the Lords so called;
some (but erroneously) suppose this MARTIN was son of King Alphonso II.

Alphonso honored with the Title of a Count.

6. DIONYSIO KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES, surnamed, Father of his
Country. CHAP. VII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL ARARGON.

TO King Alphonso III. succeeded this his eldest son, whom he had by Beatrix of
Castille his second Wife. His Birth.
The time of his Birth was in One thousand two hundred threescore and one, upon
the Ninth day of October, being the Feast of St. Dionysius, wherefore he was
called by the name of that great Areopagite.

He was a Prince both Pious, Just, and Liberal, and moreover, so singular an
Admirer of Truth, of which he was so Grand and Religious an observer, that he
was never known to make breach of his promise, often saying, That, Nothing was
more offensive, than an Untruth.

He had arrived at the Eighteenth year of his age at the death of his father,
at what time he took the reins of the Government into his own hand, when the
Queen his Mother fearing that by his too prodigal Liberality and profuseness,
he would exhaust the Treasure of the Kingdom, desired to take a part with him
in the administration of his affairs. But this, King DIONYSIO would not consent
unto, which so much incensed the Queen, Nunez
that she retired into Castille, under pretext of a Religious desire she had to
give assistance to the King her father, and being gray with age, she there
finished her mortal life, before which nevertheless King DIONYSIO went into
Castille, where he obtained a reconciliation, and had the happiness to comfort
her at her last gasp.

But King Sanceo of Castille making little reckoning of performance of the
agreements of Marriage made betwixt his Children, Mariana.
and those of King DIONYSIO, gave ground to that War set on foot betwixt
them, in the beginning of which Sanceo deceasing, his Son and Successor
continued it, who was so Canvased by the Portuguesses, that he was constrained
to Demand the Peace; Vasconcellius.
which not long after he violated, and so again, to his great prejudice, drew
upon himself the just Arms of King DIONYSIO. But their discords ended in
another agreement sealed and confirmed by the knot of other alliances of
Marriage reciprocally contracted between their Houses of Castille and Portugal.

Nunez.
The differences between the Kings of Castille and Arragon, and Alfonso de la
Cerda, who pretended to the Kingdom of Castille, being put to the Arbiterment
of this King DIONYSIO, he showed the admirable effects of his wisdom in
composing their discords, and left them to the enjoyment of a most happy peace.

But the Divisions and Civil War happening betwixt him and his son and
Successor the Prince Alphonso, jealous and envious of the affection which the
King did bear to Alphonso-Sanceo his natural brother, gave him some trouble in
his declining years, for though the Bastard had fled into Castille, Mariana.
Nunez. Vasconcellius.
yet this young Prince ceased not to continue discontents toward his father,
who having held the Scepter six and forty years, and lived threescore and four,
dyed at Santarem in the Year, His Death.
One thousand three hundred twenty and five, the seventh day of January. His
body was brought and Dionysius, called Odiuelles, Religious of the Order of the
Cistertians, by him founded, and situate three Leagues from Lisbonne. Nor was
this the only Foundation of his raising: For the Monastery of Nunns of the
Order of St. Clare at Conimbra (which Queen ISABEL OF ARRAGON his Wife Founded,
and where she was inhumed,) owes much to his Liberality.

Aub. Miraus. Hill. de Costo. Marin. Siculus.
He espoused this Princess in the Year, His Marriage.
One thousand two hundred fourscore and two, who was daughter of Peter III.
King of Arragon, and of Constance, who had for father Manfroy King of Sicelie,
and for Grandfather by the Mothers side, Vasconcellius. Perpinian.
the Emperor Frederick II. ISABEL was born One thousand two hundred threescore
and eleven. In the whole course of her life, especially in her younger years,
she wholly dedicated her self to Piety and Devotion, exercising several works
of Charity, principally toward the poor and indigent, and was the instrument
of the accord and reconciliation betwixt the Princes her kindred. She veiled
her self a Nun of the third Order of St. Francis. In fine, as she made a
journey into Castille, to endeavor an Agreement betwixt her Son the King of
Portugal, Alphonso IV. and the King of Castille, Alphonso IX. her Nephew, she
found out her heavenly rest at Estremos, in the Year, One thousand being aged
Threescore and five years. And because there had been several Miracles wrought
at her Tomb, it was first beautified by Pope Leo X. then in our days, and in
the Year of Jubilee, Pope Urban VIII. Canonized her, and entered her in the
Catalogue of Saints, the Five and twentieth day of May, being the Feast of the
Trinity; this was performed at the entreaty of Philip IV. King of Spain, and of
Queen Elizabeth of France his Wife.

Several famous men have written the Life and Actions of this good and Pious
Princess, among others John-Peter Perpinian, and Antonio Vasconcellos,
Jesuits, and Aubert le Mire, grand Dean of the Church of our Lady at Anuers;
but more particularly than all the rest, P. Hillarian de Cost, a Friar Minor
of the Order of St. Francis de Paula, has most ingeniously treated thereof.

This King DIONYSIO, This Order of Chr^stus, had Co^mandries not only in
Portugal, and Algarue; but in Africa and the Indies also, and especially in
Brasille, which made the Mastership thereof seem so wealthy, that is amounted
to the yearly rent of an Hundred thousand Ducates. And this was the reason why
it was annexed inseparably (as well as that D'Avis) to the Crown of Portugal;
The Kings thereof having taken the Title of Perpetual Administrators of the
Orders D'Avis, and of Christus. And. Favine. fol. 188.
A. Favin^.
in the Year, One thousand three hundred and eighteen (others say twenty)
Instituted the Military ORDER OF CHRIST, The Order of Christ instituted.
which is the chief of the three Orders of Portugal. The Knights live according
to the rule of the Cistercians, wear a black Robe, and upon that a Cross Patee
Red, surmounted by a Plain Cross White. This Order was Confirmed by Pope John
XXII. The King gave unto the Knights the Towns and Lands which the Templars
(but a little before abrogated) had in Portugal, and for their principal abode,
the City of Tomar.

This Prince was so great an Admirer of Learning, that he established the
Famous University of Conimbra in his Kingdom. Vasconcellius.
He was a Lover of Poesy, unto which he sometimes addicted himself. And so
much favored Laboring men (by the example of one of his Ancestors) that he
bestowed upon them several Immunities and Privileges, giving them the
appellation of The Nerves of the Earth. In Brief, His excellent Government, his
Ordinances and Rules for the order of Justice, and the Cities and Towns which
he either built or restored; did deservedly merit him the name of Father of his
Country. So that whatsoever his Illustrious Predecessors made themselves
Renowned for, in Martial Performances, he commanded and acquired by those of
Peace, and Policy.

Children of DIONYSIO King of PORTUGAL, and of St. ISABEL OF ARRAGON his Wife.


CASTILLE.
Queen of CASTILLE, Her Marriage.
Escartele Au 1. and 4. de gueulles au Chasteau d'or. Au 2. and 3. d'argent au
lion de pourpre.
was espoused to FERDINAND IV. King of Castille, who dyed in the Year, One
thousand three hundred and ten: He was son of King Sanceo IV. From this
Marriage proceeded King Alphonso IX. who by Mary of Portugal had issue Peter,
surnamed the Cruel, also King of Castille. By a Love-Mistress he had several
Bastards, among others Henry Count of Tristemare, who usurped the Kingdom of
Castille by aid of the French. Her death.
CONSTANCE deceased in the Year, Party de PORTUGAL.
One thousand in the Month of November.

Natural Children of DIONYSIO King of PORTUGAL.
Albuquerque, was affectionately loved by the King his father, Vasconcellius.
to the great displeasure and jealousy of his lawful Son, who forced him to
fly into Castille, as we have said; But returning into Portugal with a Force,
they had some disputes, after which they came to an agreement.

Barcellos, wrote a Book of the Illustrious Houses of Portugal; Nunez.
he received the honor of Burial in the Church of St. John de Tourouce.

7. ALPHONSO IV. KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES. CHAP. VIII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL CASTILLE. 1. and 4. de
guuelles au Chasteau d'or 3 au 2. and 3. d'argent au lion de pourpre,

THe beginning of One thousand two hundred fourscore and His Birth.
was remarkable in Portugal for the Birth of this Prince, which fell out to be
at Conimbra in the Month of February. He came to the Crown at the age of Thirty
five years. And either for the tartness of his Disposition, or the grandeur of
his Courage, was called the Bold.

He still continued in that unwarrantable Hatred toward his brother Sanceo,
whom by his own Judgment he banished the Kingdom, deprived of his Honors and
Dignities, seized upon his Lands, and confiscated his Goods. Sanceo was at that
time in Castille, who by Letters made his application to King ALPHONSO, but his
Prayers wrought little effect upon the hard and obstinate heart of his brother,
wherefore seeing entreaties would not soften him, the Bastard resolves to force
that with the reason and Justice of his Sword, which his supplications could
not obtain, raises an Army, enters Portugal, takes several places, and lays
the Country waste; The King also draws into the Field, where he performs the
like acts of Hostility, but at length an agreement was made betwixt them.

The end of this War, was the beginning of another Commotion, betwixt the
Father-in-law and the Son, this King of Portugal and the King of Castille
Alphonso XI. Vasconcellius.
who being incensed for that the Portuguesses would marry the Princess
Constance (daughter of the Infant John-Emanuel, descended from King Ferdinand
of Castille, called the Holy) to his Son the Prince Pedro; These Princes were
upon the point of another Cruel War, but that Pope Benedict XII. and the King
of France, Philip IV. perfected a reconciliation betwixt them, showing these
two Kings the danger that Spain at that time did undergo, by reason of the
progress the Moors had made, and that their Armies would be better employed
against the Enemies of their Faith, the Infidels, than in the ruin of
themselves; To whom the Holy Queen of Portugal, Isabel of Arragon, having
joined her prayers, things were at last agreed.

So the two Kings, of Enemies, being made Friends, Garibai. Mariana. Lib. 16.
C. 7.
joined their Forces against their common adversaries the Moors, conducted by
Albohacen King of Fez, and Joseph King of Granada, who had laid a straight
Siege to Tariffa, The famous Battle of Tariffa, or Salado. 1340.
which they resolved to raise maugre the almost numberless number, and (to be
imagined) invincible Troops of these Barbarians, they gave them a Field near
unto the River Salado, in which famous Battle, the two Christian Kings (both
ALPHONSO's) engaged them with so indefatigable and undaunted Resolutions, that
they obtained a most Famous Victory, and a Glorious Trophy, which happened in the
Year, One thousand three hundred and forty. An incredible number of these
Infidels were killed both upon the Field, and in the pursuit. And if we will
believe the Castillian Historians, there dyed of them Two hundred thousand, the
Portugal Histories say Four hundred thousand, with the loss only of twenty of
the Christians. These two Kings by this wonderful Victory, gained a grand
reputation in the world, and that reputation a security to their estates. The
King of Portugal took prisoner with his own hands, the son of Albohali, then
King of Salamanque, whom he brought Captive into Portugal.

Nunez.
at the instigation of some evil instruments of his Court, he stained his
reputation in the cruel Execution of Agnes de Castro, of whom his son was most
passionately enamoured, taking her as his Wife after the death of the Princess
Constance; from this Original sprung that most Unnatural War betwixt the
father and the son, which was looked upon by Historians, as a judgment from
God, who had permitted, that ALPHONSO should suffer the same injuries from his
son, which he had done to his father.

His Death.
ALPHONSO IV. dyed at Lisbonne in the Month of May, Mariana.
One after he had performed the Kingly Office, One and thirty years, and five
Months; Nunez.
and lived Threescore and seven. He lies in the Cathedral Church with the
Queen BEATRICE OF CASTILLE his Wife, who was daughter of King Sanceo IV. and of
Mary of Molina his Wife. He was a Lover of Justice; Magnanimous; and resembled
in many good parts King Dionysio his father, but was far inferior to him in the
Virtue of Liberality; he is blamed also for the immoderate love he had to the
exercise of Hunting.

He took for his Device, a Stone, upon which stood an Eagle with his Wings
expanded; This was the Soul, ALTIORA PETO, to signify, that he aspired to High
and Celestial things.

Children of ALPHONSO IV. King OF PORTUGAL, and of BEATRIX OF CASTILLE, his
Wife.
Penelle, and lies in the Church of St. Dominick at Santarem. Nunez.


Alcobace, at the feet of King Alphonso III. his great Grandfather.

Odiuelles, (a Monastery of Religious, dedicated to St. Bernard) near unto King
Denis his Grandfather.



Alphonso XI. CASTILLE.
King OF CASTILLE AND LEON, Escartele^ Au 1. and 4. de gueulles au Chasteau
d'or; au 2. and 3. d'argent au lion de pourpre.
eldest son of King Ferdinand IV. Her Marriage.
She was espoused unto him in the Year, One thousand three hundred eight and
thirty, and they had issue Peter the Cruel King of Castille. MARY deceased
Evora, and was interred in the Chapel Royal, having in her lifetime suffered
many indignities. For Alphonso her Husband forsook her, and bestowed his
affections upon Leonora de Gasman his Concubine. An History of Spain tells us
that she dyed in the Year, Party de PORTUGAL
One thousand three Her too much freedom, and prodigal Carriage to Martin
Tellez a Portugal Lord, Mariana. Lib. 16. C. 22.
was the cause why she was poisoned by her brother, nay, some stick not to say,
by her own father. Alphonso XI. left this world in the Year, One thousand three
hundred and fifty; after he Portugal his Father-in-law, vanquished the Moors at
Teriffa, as we have before written.

ARRAGON. D'or a quatro pals de gueulles.
King of ARRAGON, Her Marriage.
eldest Son of King Alphonso IV. and of Teresa Countess of Urgel. This Marriage
was consummated in the Year, One thousand three hundred eight Party de PORTUGAL
Peter being at that time a Widower, his first Wife was Mary of Navarre. He
deceased at Barcelona in the Year, One thousand three hundred fourscore and
seven, aged Seventy five years; By this Princess of Portugal he had only a
daughter named Beatrix, who dyed young, and was entombed in the Cathedral
Church of Lisbonne, near unto the body of Beatrix of Castille her Grandmother.

8. PETER KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES. CHAP. IX.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL MANUEL.

AS this King is adored on the one side for being a most zealous Defender of
his Laws and Ordinances, and an observer of Justice with such care, that he
banished his Kingdom, all those that made breach thereof, and so acquired the
excellent appellation of The Justicer: So on the other side he is reprehended
also, and blamed, to have put them in execution against the Criminals with such
rigor and severity, that he was therefore called the Cruel. It being
remarkable, that at this time there Reigned three Kings in Spain that had this
same surname; The other two were Peter King of Castille, and Charles II. King
of Navarre. But PETER, of whom we speak, was so much transported to the virtue
of Liberality (in which he had a community with King Dionysius his
Grandfather) that he often used this expression, That a King that let slip one
day without the distribution of same Benefit, was not worthy of the Title of
the Dignity Royal.

His Birth.
He first saw the light of day in the Year, One thousand three hundred and
twenty, the Nineteenth day of the Month of April; and was also in the John
Manuel Duke of Penastel, Marquess of Vilena, and Siegnour of As^alona, who was
son of the Infant Emanuel, issued from Ferdinand III. King of Castille, as has
been said before. N^^^z.
PETER had been before married to Blanch the daughter of Peter King of
Castille, whom he repudiated. This Princess CONSTANCE was Entombed in the Abbey
of St. Francis at Santarem.

Among the Ladies of Honor which attended her at Court, the principal was
Agnes de Castro, daughter of Pedro-Fernando de Castro, the most Excellently
qualified Lord of Galicia, Ga ibay.
and nearly related both to the Kings of Castille, Mariana.
and Portugal. This Lady being adorned with many beauties both of body and
mind, attracted the Affection of Prince PETER in the life time of his Wife
Constance, and after whose decease he clandestinely married, as he afterward
confirmed by his Solemn Oath.

But some Lords of the Court having conceived a secret envy against her,
supposing her to be instrumental to incite the young Prince to prefer and
agrandize her relations and kindred, persuaded the King Alphonso IV. to put her
to death; Nunez Vasconcellius.
which was accordingly executed: But the young Prince PETER conceived so great
a displeasure and indignation thereat, that he not only took Arms against his
father, but put to cruel torments the Instruments of this wicked assassination.

During his whole Reign he deported himself so to the Kings his Neighbors,
that although they were continually infested with grand Wars and troubles,
with which the Kingdoms of Castille and Arragon were often afflicted; his
Estate on the contrary, had the happiness to enjoy under him a blessed and
happy Peace.

He raised two Proud and Magnificent Tombs in the Abbey of Alcobace, one for
himself, the other for Agnes de Castro; whose Effigies was to be seen upon this
Monument, adorned with a Royal Diadem, to signify, that he owned her for his
Queen and Wife; Also he caused Royal Obsequies to be performed at her Burial.

In fine, when he had ruled the Scepter of Portugal for the space of ten years,
seven months, and eight days, he expired at Estremos in January, His death.
in the Year, One thousand three hundred threescore and seventeen. He had
Mariana. Nunez.
MONSTRAT ITER, which he took in Memory of the three Kings, who were conducted
by the Star, going to adore our Lord, at his Nativity.

Children of PETER King OF PORTUGAL, and of CONSTANCE MANUEL his Wife.
Lewis, dyed in his infancy.



ARRAGON. D'or a quatre p^ls de gueulles. Party de PORTUGAL
Marquess of Tortosa, and Lord of Albarazzin, son of Alphonso IV. King of
Arragon, and of Leonora of Castille his Wife. This Prince was slain in a place
called Chastillon, by the command of his Brother, there having several quarrels
fell out betwixt them, and upon a suspicion that he had, that this Prince would
attempt the Crown. This violent death happened in the Year, Mariana. Lib. 17. C.
8.
One thousand three hundred

Natural Children of PETER King of PORTUGAL, by Agnes de Castro.


His Marriage.
daughter of Martin-Alphonso Tellez, and sister to Elianor, PORTUGAL TELLEZ.
Wife (or rather Love-Mistress) of King Ferdinando of Portugal his brother. His
Memory is worthy of blame, for having imbrued his hands in the blood of his
Wife, Nunez.
whom he put to death under a false pretense that she had forfeited her honor,
and violated the Laws of Marriage; An act so much the more mournful and
Tragical, as being committed by the Artifice and Machinations of Queen Elianor,
Mary's Sister, envious that she had married a Prince of so accomplished a
Personage, loved and honored by all, and into whose hands (after the death of
Ferdinando his Brother) would fall the Government and Management of the Affairs
of the Kingdom; so that the Queen having charged him with no less a Crime than
of Designs against the Life of the King; he was forced to fly into Castille,
where he dyed, being kept a Prisoner by King John I. from this Marriage came
one Son. Viz.

10. FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, D'AUALOS.
Seigneur of Eca in the Kingdom of Galicia; was several times married, but last
of all unto ISABEL D'AVALOS, daughter of Peter-Lopez d'Avalos, son of the
Constable of Castille, Ruy Lopez, by which Wife, and others which he married,
and by several Concubines, he ^^d to the number of two and forty children; from
some of which are issued the Lords of Eca.

The second Wife of JOHN OF PORTUGAL, CASTILLE.
Natural son of King Peter, was CONSTANCE OF CASTILLE, who was also a
Bastard-daughter of Henry II. King of Castille, by whom he had three daughters.

10. MARY OF PORTUGAL, CUNHA.
Wife of MARTIN-VASQUEZ DE CUNHA, to whom she brought in Dower the County of
Valence, and from this Marriage (according to some) the Counts of Valence are
descended.

10. MARY OF PORTUGAL, espoused to the Count, MINHO.
PETER MINHO.

10. N. OF PORTUGAL, Wife of Lope-Vasquez de Cunha. CUNHA.


The same Prince, JOHN OF PORTUGAL, had also these Bastards following,

10. ALPHONSO DE CASCAES, married BLANCH DE CUNHA. CUNHA.


10. PETER Seigneur de Guerra, who has left a long Posterity.

10. FERDINAND, Lord of Braganca.

Peter, from whom are descended the Lords of Colmenercio, and the Counts of
Villar, as you shall see hereafter in the Descents of the Bastards of the House
of Portugal.

Peter, and Agnes de Castro, was espoused to SANCEO OF CASTILLE, son of Sanceo
Count of Albuquerque, who was Bastard-Son of King Alphonso XI. and of Leonora
de Guzman his Paramore; they had issue Vracca of Albuquerque, (afterward named
Leonora,) a very wealthy Lady, married to the Infant Ferdinand of Castille,
called d'Antaguera; he was King of Arragon by Election, and they had two Sons,
Alphonso V. King of Arragon and Sicelie, from whom are descended some Kings of
Naples; and John King of Navarre and Arragon, who has given original to Kings
of these two Monarchies.

Another Natural Son of PETER King of PORTUGAL, and of TERESA LAURENS.


9. FERDINAND KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES. CHAP. X.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. TELLEZ.

TO King Peter succeeded His Birth.
born in the Year of our Mariana. Vasconcellius.
One thousand three hundred and forty, the Twentieth day of February; and in
the Twenty seventh year of his age he began his Reign, his Father having left
him to the enjoyment of a Rich and Flourishing Kingdom.

His person was comely, and his aspect pleasant, and most accomplished he had
been in all perfections, had it not been that he was unstable and wavering in
his Resolutions.

Mariana.
He pretended a right of Succession to the Crown of Castille after the death of
King Peter, as being Great Grandchild of King Sanceo IV. and in this end he
contracted an alliance with the King of Arragon; but to no purpose, for having
to do with so Valiant a Prince, as was King Henry II. Bastard-brother of the
same King Peter, he discontinued his pretentions.

He gave his promise for the Marriage of Leonora daughter of the King of
Arragon, and contracted the same agreement with the King of Castille, to
espouse his Daughter also of the same name; but being ill counseled, and
continuing in his Levity, he abandoned these honorable and advantageous
Marriages, to contract an unlawful one with LEONORA TELLEZ, Daughter of
Martin-Alphonso Tellez, Nunez. Vasconcellius.
and of Aldouce de Vasconcellos, notwithstanding she was before married to
John-Laurens de Cugna, under color that her former Marriage was unlawful, as
being contracted without Dispensation, and notwithstanding the propinquity of
kindred betwixt the Parties; This gave disgust to several of the Portugal
Lords, who retired into Castille, as did also Cugna.

The King FERDINAND was yet so rash, as to renew his former Claim and
Pretentions to the Kingdom of Castille, but Henry King of Castille, being the
more expert Soldier, had much the advantage of him, who entered into the Field,
marched into Portugal, stormed several Towns, laid waste the Country, and at
length begirt Lisbonne with a straight Siege; But their differences were at
last composed in the Conjugal Bed (the ordinary way of reconciliation between
the two Royal Houses of Portugal and Castille) by several Marriages contracted
betwixt them.

After the death of Henry, History of Castille.
FERDINAND renewed his old quarrel against John King of Castille his Successor,
and called in the English to his succor, who were in the end so burdensome,
that he was for the second time, enforced to come to an agreement.

He begirt the Cities of Lisbonne and Evora, with strong Walls, The Dignities
of Constable and Marshal first created in Portugal: Nunez. Vasconcellius.
Mariana.
and was the first that created the Dignities of Constable and Marshall in
Portugal. And dyed in the same City of Lisbonne, His death.
the Nine and twentieth day of October, Anno, One thousand three hundred
fourscore and three, having Reigned Seventeen years, and lived Three and forty.
He lies in the Church of Santarem, near unto his Mother Constance Manuel.

He took for his Symbol, a Sword which transpierced two hearts, with these
words, CUR NON UTRUNQUE; by which, he would have understood, that by the
sagacity of his Judgment, he could penitrate into the most secret thoughts.

Children of FERDINAND King of PORTUGAL, and of LEONORA TELLEZ.
One thousand three hundred fourscore and two, to the great joy of the King his
father; but that contentment lasted not long; for he dyed within four days
after his birth.

CASTILLE.
born in the Year, Her Birth.
One thousand three hundred threescore and twelve: Escartele Castille and de
Leon.
She had been, by King FERDINAND her Father, promised in Edward of England, Son
of Edmond of Cambridge, (my Author means, I believe, Party de PORTUGAL
Edward Duke of York and Albemarle, Son of Edmond of Langley Duke of York) to
Frederick of Castille Duke of Benevente, Natural Son of Henry II. King of
Castille, then to Ferdinand Son of the same King. But in the end, to knit the
Peace of the two Kingdoms of Castille and Portugal with a firm knot, BEATRIX
was first contracted to JOHN King OF CASTILLE, Mariana. Lib. 18. Nunez.
who was at that time Widower to Leonor of Arragon, his first Wife, by whom he
had children: Then three years after this Contract, in May, Anno, One thousand
three hundred fourscore and three, their Marriage was Solemnized at Elvas with
great Magnificence, at which the King of Cyprus, and Charles Prince of Navarre,
were present.

By reason of this Marriage the King of Castille pretended to have a right of
Succession to the Kingdom of Portugal, after the death of Ferdinando his Wives
Father, and endeavored therefore to make himself Master thereof by the force
of his Arms.

But that Natural hatred betwixt these two Nations of Castille and Portugal,
was so eracinated, that the Portugals would not permit him the Succession; But
from this Marriage there came no children. So King John of Castille dyed in the
Year, One thousand three hundred fourscore and ten, Ladies Nobly born, and well
educated, ought not to be the Wives of two Husbands.

A Natural Daughter of FERDINAND King OF PORTUGAL.
Her Birth.
One thousand three hundred threescore and four; CASTILLE.
Being Nine years old, was promised in Marriage to the Vasconcellos calls him
Ferdinand) Count of Gigion, Party de PORTUGAL
and Seigneur of Norogna, who was Natural Son of Henry II. King of Castille;
their Marriage was consummated in the Year, Her Marriage.
One thousand three hundred threescore and eighteen, against the grain of
Alphonso, who was at that time only Eighteen years old, therefore this Match
gave original to many troubles. For King Henry his Father moved with
displeasure for that he neglected his Wife, deprived him of all his Lands and
Seigneuries; So that the Count was constrained to fly to Avignion, where he
made his complaints to Pope Gregory XI. and also to the King of France Charles
V. Nunez
Afterward having rebelled against Henry III. he was besieged within his
County of Gigion with his Wife and Children; And to compose their Differences,
Charles VI. King of France, was chosen Arbitrator, who understanding the
injustice of his cause, sent him back to his King, forbidding him the refuge of
France. Thus afflicted in the Year, One thousand three hundred fourscore and
fifteen, he secretly retired toward Rochel, where his Wife ISABEL and his
Children gave him the meeting, and where they had no assistance but what came
from the Viscountess of Thouars, who gave them the Town of Marans for a
Habitation. It Is to be believed, that some of their Children returned again
into Spain, among whom was Peter de Norogna Archbishop of Lisbonne,
Vasconcellius.
John de Norogna, Ferdinand Count of Ville-real, from whom are descended the
Houses of Ville-real, and of Meneses; Alphonso had issue also Sanceo de Norogna
Count of Odemira, who had Children. Alphonso and ISABEL had also a Daughter
named Constance of Norogna, second Wife of Alphonso of Portugal first Duke of
Braganca, but they left no Posterity; In Brief, the Illustrious House of
Norogna in Portugal, derive their original from this Marriage. The same Count
of Gigion Alphonso had also three Bastard-children, among the rest
Martin-Henriquez who served Charles VII. King of France, whom he sent
Ambassador to the King of Castille. From him, it is probable, is descended that
Family in the County of Foix, who bear the Name and Arms of Castille.

9. JOHN I. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL And the ALGARVES. Surnamed, With the
Good Memory, and Father of his Country. CHAP. XI.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. LANCASTER. 1. and 4. d'Azure
seem de Fleurs de Lis d'or, au 2. and 3. de gueulles a trois Lions passant
guardant d'or; au lambel d'ermine brochant sur le tout.

THE defect of the birth of this Prince, who was natural Son of Peter King of
Portugal, was in some sort covered, and, as it were, repaired by his singular
virtues; Being most Pious, Magnanimous, Liberal and Clement.

His Birth.
The Eleventh day of April One thousand three hundred fifty and seven, and was
but Seven Year old when the King his Father established him Grand-Master of the
Knights of the Order D'Avis.

In the time of King Ferdinand his Brothers Reign, he had been imprisoned at
the instance of Queen Leonora his Wife, who had contracted envy against him,
for having reproved her too free and familiar carriage with the Count of
Andrie: for which, neither she nor the Count were backward in the procuration
of his Death. But God, who has the disposition of Crowns, had Ordered it other
ways.

For JOHN found out means to shake off the Bonds of his Captivity; and after
the Death of his Brother, this Queen Elianora administering the Affairs of
State, otherwise than it belonged unto her, and continuing in her unlawful
Loves, to the great dissatisfaction of the Portugues; They persuaded the
Grand-Master to take away the life of this Count, which he did accordingly; by
this act acquiring to himself so great an affection, that they Proclaimed him,
Defender and Protector of the Public Liberty; and then he was made General in
the War against John I. King of Castille, who aspired to the Succession of
the Kingdom of Portugal, in the right of Beatrix his Queen, as we have told you
before.

Vignier.
But the people more willing to submit to the Government of a Prince of the
Blood of their Natural Kings, than to that of a stranger; And observing the
lawful Line of the Heirs-Male to fail in Ferdinand, they elected this JOHN his
Brother, King, notwithstanding he was born out of Marriage; This was performed
in a general Assembly of the Estates of Portugal, held in the City of Conimbra,
in the Year, One thousand three hundred But this Election suited not with the
desires of Prince JOHN, who told them that he was well content with that
Honorable Title which had before been given him; But the Portugues, besides
that hatred they did bear the Castillians, considering his rare qualifications,
judged him more fit and proper for the Dignity of the Crown, than any other,
earnestly entreating his acceptance thereof, as one whom they judged capable
of defending them from their Enemies.

Mariana.
The Principal of which was the King of Castille, who, incited by the Queen of
Portugal, Leonor his Wives Mother, raised a considerable Army, with which he
laid a Siege to Lisbonne; defended this City was with so much resolution, that
after the Castillians had sat down before it some months, Vasconcellius.
they were constrained to raise their Camp. Upon their retreat, the Portugues
animated by the presence of their generous Prince JOHN, fell into the pursuit
of them unto Aljuberot, The Battle of Minberot.
where both Armies drew up and began the Fight, and where the Castillians were
worsted. This notable Victory happened to be in August, Froisard.
Anno, One thousand three hundred From which year some have computed the time
of the Reign of JOHN, and write that he was then Proclaimed King.

Nunez.
After this generous exploit, gathering the fruit of this his Victory, he
conquered from his Enemy, and reduced to his obedience, those Cities and Towns
which had been lost in the former War. In the mean time the King of Castille
being deceased, Henry III. his Son and Successor having had the sad experience
of his Fathers losses, and the new King of Portugals successes, was willing to
let fall his Fathers pretentions, to hearken to a peace at last concluded
betwixt these two Kings, and afterward continued with King John II. Son of
this Henry.

So that now King JOHN OF PORTUGAL seeing himself in the enjoyment of a happy
peace, and also in a good correspondence with his Neighbors: Notwithstanding
he was grown in years, that checked not his resolution from aspiring unto high
and pious designs; He turned his Arms therefore against the Moors and Sarazens
of Afric, and by the example of his Valiant Sons, Godefroy.
subdued the strong Town of Septe, which stood Spain, to the great prejudice of
the Christians. And considering his Kingdom to be of too small an extendure,
Mariana. lib. 20. c. 7.
to Dignifie the numerous issue he had by his happy Marriage, he projected to
acquire them possessions by the force of his Arms, in other Kingdoms. Insomuch
that he gave beginnings to those famous Conquests which have since been
prosecuted and continued by the illustrious Kings his Successors.

The exercise of his Arms was no Remora to impede the progress of his Justice,
witness the Code of Justinian, Vasconcellius.
which he caused to be translated into his own Language, Nunez.
to the end his Subjects might observe it as his Royal Ordinance; And for a
Monument of his Piety, he founded the Monastery of the Order of St. Dominick,
dedicated to the holy Virgin, giving it the name of BATTLE, in remembrance of
that signal Victory there gained upon the Castillians, and caused it to be
built in the same place where he was Conqueror. And because the Cathedral
Church of Lisbonne was first subject to the Archbishop of Merida, and then to
that of Braga; he obtained the erection thereof into an Archbishopric, from
Pope Boniface II. which was done in the Year, One thousand three hundred
fourscore and ten. The Magnificence of this Prince yet appears in those superb
Structures of several Palaces and Royal Mansions, which he built in the City of
Lisbonne, and in those of Saintre, Sanctare^, Almerin, and other places.

In fine, after so many Hernick performances, Vignier.
King JOHN (whom Froissard by mistake calls Dionysius) finished the course of
his life at Lisbonne, His death.
August, in the Year, One thousand four hundred three and thirty, after he had
lived Threescore and sixteen years, and Reigned Eight and forty years, Four
months, and Nine days. Vasconcellius.
His body was with Funeral Pomp (at that time a thing unaccustomed) conducted
by men of all Estates, in a Chariot of Triumph, his Sons accompanying it, and
deposited in the same Monastery of BATTLE. He was so lamented by his Subjects,
that they gave him these glorious Titles, of, With the good Memory, and of,
Father of the Country. In short, he had in the course of his life several
rencounters and conformities parallel with those of the Valiant French Prince
Charles Martel.

This King JOHN OF PORTUGAL united his Forces and Designs against the
Castillians with John of England, Duke of Lancaster, And du Chesne, in his
History of England.
one of the younger Sons of Edward III. King of England, who pretended to the
Kingdom of Castille, in the right of his second Wife Constance daughter of King
Peter the Cruel; this English Prince assisted him with a Fleet well furnished
with Soldiers, and more firmly to contract this Alliance, King JOHN (after he
had obtained Dispensation from the Pope for the Vow he had made as a Knight of
the Order d'Avis) espoused PHILIPPA OF LANCASTER his Daughter; Nunez.
His Marriage.
this Marriage was Celebrated One thousand three hundred fourscore and seven;
The Duke of Lancaster promising himself, Vasconcellius.
that by this course he should more easily make his way to the Kingdom of
Castille. The Queen PHILIPPA dyed a long time before the King her Husband,
about the Year, One thousand during that preparation of War which he made for
his Voyage into Africa, leaving, with the grief of her Death, a Noble and
Flourishing Progeny, which did not degenerate from the Virtues and Excellencies
of their Father.

His Device was a Rock, the Chief of which was transpierced with a Sword, held
by an Arm issuing out of a Cloud, with these words, ACUIT UT PENITRET; for to
signify, that he exercised his Soldiers to things trouble some and difficult;
that they might the more easily perform the high and generous Enterprises.

Children of JOHN I. King OF PORTUGAL, and of PHILIPPA OF LANCASTER, his Wife.
November, Anno, One thousand four hundred; and was inhumed in the Cathedral
Church of Braga.



Mount-Maiour le Vieil, PORTUGAL-CONIMBRA.
and Regent of the Kingdom of Portugal, was a Prince whose Travels had
excellently qualified him; having gained much experience by the frequentation
of several people of Europe, Asia, Party de ARRAGON.
and Afric; he was in the Court of the Emperor Sigismond, and left not
unvisited that of the great and renowned Sythian, Tamerlane; after several
dangerous adventures, D'or a quatre pals de guculles.
he returned home, in the Year, One when passing through Castille, the
Inhabitants left their houses to meet him in his journey, Mariana. lib. 24.
cap. 16. and lib. 22. cap. 7.
reporting what they had seen with wonder, as if a man, fallen from heaven, had
come to visit them.

He was by the Portugues so affectionately beloved, that after the Death of
King Edward his elder brother, the Government of the Kingdom was committed unto
him during the Minority of Alphonso V. his Nephew; which he managed for the
space of Ten years, with great Fidelity and Prudence; Nunez. Vignier.
when Alphonso Count of Barcellos, his Natural Brother, a Prince both
Ambitious, and Envious, and who by the means of this PETER, had been before
exalted to the Dukedom of Braganca, most ingratefully opposed him, rendered him
a dangerous and obnoxious person unto the King their Nephew; and also charged
him with a scandalous accusation, the heads of which were, That he had
performed the Office of Regent much to the prejudice of the Kings interest: had
got into his own hands the whole treasure of the Kingdom; and that also he
designed to ascend the Throne by the Deposition of the King his Nephew. To
these Articles the Duke would have answered, and cleared himself, but the King
who was willing and apt to believe any thing that might secure him his Crown,
being possessed with a prejudicate opinion, would not hear of his Answer; but
on the contrary Resolved to take him off. The Duke had timely intelligence
thereof, who to avoid the effects of the Kings Anger, and to secure his person,
shut himself up in his Town of Conimbra; and there finding that he could not be
upon the Defensive part, without the Offensive; forgetful of his Duty; put
himself into the head of a considerable Army, with which he marched toward
Lisbonne, resolving to make himself Master thereof, but he fell into the hands
of the Ambushes prepared for him by the Kings party; where, His Death.
after a hot dispute near unto the River Alfaruberie, Mariana. Vasconcellius.
Duke PETER was killed upon the Field, being shot through the One thousand four
hundred forty and nine, and on the Twentieth day of May.

His loss nevertheless was much lamented, as being a Prince worthy of a longer
life, and better Fortune: He lived unto the age of Seven and fifty years. His
body lay the space of three days without Burial, until that by the
supplication of the Queen of Portugal his Daughter, Wife of Alphonso, it was
brought, and interred in the Monastery of Battle, the Sepulcher of the Kings
his Predecessors.

This Duke was so much the more Praiseworthy, (following the footsteps of some
Princes of his House) because he joined the use of his Pen with that of his
Sword, he writ several Books both in Prose and Verse, and Translated some
Latin Authors into his own Language. There is yet to be seen of his Verses in
Portugal, which Treat of Morality, and are replenished with Learning, and
Precepts of Wisdom.

In the Month of September, Anno, Mariana. lib. 20. c. 16.
One thousand four hundred eight and twenty, His Marriage.
Duke PETER married ISABEL OF ARRAGON, James of Arragon, Count of Urgel, and of
Isabel the Daughter of Peter IV. King of Arragon, by which Princess he had Six
Children, here underneath mentioned.

Children of PETER OF PORTUGAL, Duke of CONIMBRA, by ISABEL OF ARRAGON, his
Wife.
ARRAGON.
Barcelona, Escartele de PORTUGAL
was eldest Son of Peter of Portugal Duke of Conimbra, and of Isabel of Arragon
his Wife; and was established Constable of the Kingdom of Portugal by the
Regent his Father, after the decease of his Uncle by the Fathers side Prince
John.

One thousand four hundred five and forty, he had the Command of an Army
committed to him, for the succor of the King of Castille, and for the
Reduction of some of his Subjects that had rebelled; Afterward the
Catalonians, and some of the Grandees of Arragon having revolted from the King
of Arragon and Navarre, John II. They caused this Prince PETER to return out of
Afric, where he fought against the Moors, and acknowledged him for King of
Arragon, and Count of Barcelona, September, in the Year, One thousand four
hundred threescore and four; maintaining that these Estates did lawfully belong
unto him, as being Son of the eldest Daughter of the Count of Urgel descended
from the King of Arragon: so that PETER was Proclaimed King: And
notwithstanding he had assistance from his Cousin Philip Duke of Bourgongne,
yet he could not maintain himself in his Estate, for after the loss of a Field
disputed betwixt him, and the Prince Ferdinand Son of King John, he was
constrained to retire to Mauresa. But nevertheless he carried still the Royal
Title; And on his journey to Barcelona, he fell sick at Granolie, and there
deceased the Thirtieth day of June, His Death.
in the Year, Mariana. Lib. 23. C. 20.
One thousand four some say in the precedent year. His body was inhumed at
Barcelona in the Church of our Lady, near unto the Sea. It Is believed he was
poisoned, but some think, that being overmuch wearied, and troubled at the
evil success of his affairs, he dyed with grief, without leaving any Children.

His Device was an Haulk, with these words, MOLESTIA PRO LAETITIA; signifying
thereby, That the honor of the Kingdom which he had accepted of, had been
accompanied with more vexation and trouble, than satisfaction and contentment.

PORTUGAL CONIMBRA. Escartele^, Aupremier de Jerusalem. Au 2. contre escartele^
de PORTUGAL and D'ANGLETERRE. Au 3. d'or au lion de gueulles. Au 4. d'argent au
lion aussy de gueulles a la queve fourche. Sur le tout burelle d'argent and
d'Azure au lion de gueulles brochant sur le tout, qui est CYPRE.
JOHN OF PORTUGAL, Duke of CONIMBRA, and Cyprus, second Son of Peter Duke of
Conimbra, succeeded his Father in this Dutch; hoping to advance his Fortunes by
his Marriage, he espoused CHARLOTE OF CYPRUS, His Marriage.
Daughter of John II. King of Cyprus of the House of Lusignan, and of Helene
Palealogus his Wife, which CHARLOTE was Heir apparent to the Kingdoms of Cyprus
and Jerusalem. But the Prince JOHN her Husband dyed without issue, before the
King his Father-in-law. Therefore Mariana and other Authors are mistaken, that
give him the qualification of King of Cyprus. For he was only Regent of this
Kingdom, a Title which he had, when in the Year, One thousand four hundred
threescore he was admitted into the Order of Knights of the Golden Fleece, by
Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, in the Chapter held at the Hague in Holland.

His Widow married for her second Husband Lewis of Savoy, Count of Geneva,
Brother of Amides Duke of Savoy, and Son of Duke Lewis by Anne of Lusignan his
Wife. In her right he took the Title of King, and possessed himself of the
Kingdom of Cyprus, but at last he was defeated by his Wives Bastard-brother;
PORTUGAL-CONIMBRA. Party de CYPRE. Comme cy dessus, fors que culieu de 2.
quartier doit estre mis l'escusson qui est sur le tout.
and since, this Kingdom has been usurped by the Turks.

11.

JAMES OF PORTUGAL, third Son of PETER OF PORTUGAL, Duke of CONIMBRA, etc.
turned Soldier in his youth, and was taken Prisoner in that Battle which his
Father lost with his life, in the Year, One thousand four hundred forty and
nine; Isabel of Portugal Duchess of Bourgongne, who sent him to Rome, Calixtus
III. created him a Cardinal by the Title of St. Eustace, PORTUGAL-CONIMBRA.
in the Year, One thousand four hundred fifty and six, being at that time but
young. He was Modest, of a Pregnant Wit, and a good Scholar, Comme cy devant.
which foundations made men hope great things from him, for those Virtues with
which he was accomplished. He is reported to be of a temper so chaste,
Onuphrius. Fr. Ciatonus.
and continent; that falling extreme ill, and being counseled by his
Physicians to have the knowledge of a Woman for a remedy: He refused, saying,
That he would rather dye, than be polluted. He was Archbishop of Lisbonne, and
dyed at Florence the Sixteenth day of April, His death. 1459.
Anno, One thousand four hundred fifty and nine. His body being interred
Miniat, an Abbey of Monks of the Order of St. Benedict.

PORTUGAL Party de PORTUGAL.
ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, espoused to the King of Portugal Alphonso V. her Cousin, as
you may read in his Story.

Peter Duke of Conimbra, CONIMBRA.
and of Isabel of Arragon his Wife, was a Nun in the Abbey of Odiuelles.

Her Marriage.
Seigneur of Ravenstein, CLEUES-RAVENSTEIN.
a younger Son of Adolphe Duke of Cleues, and of Mary of Bourgongne his Wife,
from which Marriage descended Philip of Cleues Seigneur of Ravenstein, De
gueulles au raise pommette and Fleuronne^ d'or, de huict pieces perce^ d'argent.

Escartele de BOURGONGNE qui est contre escartele au 1. and 4. d'azure a trois
Fleurs de lis d'or a la Bordure componnee d'argent and de gueulles. Au 2. and
3. band d'or and d'azure de six pieces, a la Bordure de gueulles.

Sur le tout d'or au Lion de sable, qui est FLANDRES.

Party de PORTUGAL-CONIMBRA.


Lieutenant General in the City of Gennes for the King of France Lewis XII. his
Cousin, afterward General of a Fleet against the Turk: He left no issue.

Here follow again Children of JOHN I. King of PORTUGAL, and of PHILIPPA OF
LANCASTER, his Wife.
PORTUGAL-VISCO
Duke of VISCO (fourth Son of King John) and Grand Master of the Order of the
Knights of Christ, has recommended his Name and Memory to Posterity, for his
high designs, and generous performances; for he had the Glory to have
undertaken, and happily accomplished many dangerous Navigations. Step. Garibay.
After he had given testimony of his Valor in the Reduction of the strong City
of Septe in Africa, he resolved to put himself to Sea for the Discovery of the
unknown World. Nunez. Mariana.
And because he might attain to his design with the more facility, he addressed
himself earnestly to the study of the Mathematics, and of Astrology, rejecting
the enjoyment of Marriage, as a thing that was altogether incongruous to the
designs of a contemplative Life. And that he might more easily apply himself to
the Comtemplation of the Stars, he bestowed a good part of his life upon the
Cape of St. Vincent, because the Air was there serene and clear, and seldom or
never troubled, or overcast with Clouds. In fine, being satisfied in his
Judgment, that there were Islands yet undiscovered in the Atlantique Ocean, he
was resolved to hazard the proof thereof upon his own proper costs and expense:
So that first of all he discovered the Isle of Madera, so called, because of
the Forests wherewith it was replenished; he peopled it with several
Collonies, it having been before a Desert, the next discovery was the Canaries,
unknown for a long time; in these Voyages he found out also several Ports in
the Atlantique Sea. Lastly, He so well instructed the Portugues in the
direction of their Navigations according to the Course of the Stars, that with
no less glory, than utility, they have made large Conquest in Afric near unto
Ethiopia, and of several Isles in the main Ocean, and the Indies. And that he
might more commodiously attend upon his affairs, toward the end of his life,
this Generous Prince established his Habitation at Sagra in the Kingdom of the
Algarves, at the Cape called Sacra, from which Port he might with ease send his
Ships into the East. His Death.
But being prevented by death, in the Year, Mariana. Lib. 23. C. 3.
One at the age of Threescore and seven years ( Mariana adds Ten years more)
the progress of his glorious designs was interrupted. He adopted for his Son
Ferdinand of Portugal his Nephew, one of the Children of King Edward his elder
brother; The Corpse of Henry was interred within the Church of Aljuberot.

James, PORTUGAL
and Constable of Portugal, was fifth Son of John I. of the name, Comme cy
devant.
King of Portugal, and of Philippa of Lancaster his Wife; he followed the steps
of his Illustrious Ancestors, His Marriage.
is commended for his Piety and Prudence, PORTUGAL
and also to have affected the welfare of his Country. He married ISABEL OF
PORTUGAL, Party de PORTUGAL-BRAGANCA. Qui est d'argent au Sautoir de gueulles,
charge de cinq Escussons de PORTUGAL; un au melieu, and les aultres aux quatre
bouts du Sautoir.
Daughter of his Natural Brother Alphonso I. Duke of Braganca, and of the
Countess of Barcellos Beatrice, who was Daughter of Avarez Pereira. His Death.
His decease happened at Alcacar de Sal, about the end of the Month of October,
in the Year, One and in the Three and fortieth year of his age. As for the
Princess ISABEL his Wife, she departed this life in the Year, One thousand four
hundred threescore and five, in the Arceval, where she was to visit her
Daughter Queen Isabel of Castille.

Children of JOHN OF PORTUGAL, etc.
Mariana.
11. JAMES OF PORTUGAL, dyed shortly after his Father, some write that he
succeeded him in his Honors and Dignities: which others make a doubt of.

CASTILLE.
11. ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, Queen OF CASTILLE, Her Marriage.
Anno, Escurtele de LEON.
One thousand four hundred seven and forty, was conjoined by Marriage unto JOHN
second of the name, King of CASTILLE, Party de PORTUGAL.
Henry III. and of Katherine of Lancaster his Wife. He dyed at Valedolit the
Nineteenth day of July, in the Year, One thousand four hundred fifty and four,
leaving among other Children, a Daughter named Isabel of Castille, Wife to the
King of Arragon, Alphonso V. She was a Magnanimous Princess.

PORTUGAL-VISCO
11. BEATRICE OF PORTUGAL, Her Marriage.
was the Wife of her Cousin FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, Duke of Visco, Party de
PORTUGAL
a younger Son of King Edward. This Princess had for her Son, among others,
King Emanuel of Portugal, in the Year, One she effected the peace betwixt the
Kings of Portugal, Alphonso V. and of Castille, Ferdinand V. and is much
commended by Historians, for her singular Prudence, and grand Authority.

11. PHILIPPA OF PORTUGAL never married.

John I. King of Portugal, Vasconcellius.
and of Philippa of Lancaster, Grand Master of the Order d'Avis, Seigneur of
Atouguie, and of Sanueterre, was given in Hostage by his Brother King Edward,
to the General of the Sarazens Aben Sala, until that the said King should
deliver up into their Hands the Town of Septe, according to the Composition
made after the fatal Battle of Tangier. In the mean time Edward's death
procured his deliverance, and although he had Ordered it so in his Will, yet
FERDINAND ceased not to continue in the hands of these Barbarians the space of
six years, where he suffered many hardships; which he underwent with much
constancy, and incredible patience; and was moreover of so holy a life, that he
deserved to be Registered in the Rubric of Martyrs. His Death.
He dyed Ao, One thousand in the One and fortieth year of his age. His bones
were brought out of Afric into Portugal, and reposed in the Abbey of Battle.

John I. King of Portugal, and of Philippa of Lancaster, dyed young.

Her Marriage.
ISABEL OF PORTUGAL second Daughter, BOURGONGNE.
was espoused in the Year, One thousand four hundred nine and twenty, unto
PHILIP Good, Duke of BOURGONGNE, Escartele^ Au 1 and 4. de FRANCE a la bordure
componnee^ d'argent and de gueulles qui est BOURGONGNE modern.

Au 2. band d'or and d'azure de six pieces, a la bordure de gueulles qui est
BOURGONGNE l'ancien. Party de sable au Lion d'or, qui est BRABANT.

Au 3 des mesmes Arms de BOURGONGNE l'ancien; Party de LIMBOURG qui est
d'argent au Lion de gueulles couronne^ d'or.

Sur le tout de FLANDRES, qui est d'or au Lion de sable. Le tout party de
PORTUGAL.


and dyed in the Year, One thousand four hundred threescore and thirteen.

Natural Children of JOHN I. of the name, King of PORTUGAL.
Portugal (John IV. Father of King Alphonso VI. now Reigning, Ao 1662.) are
descended.

England; first to Thomas Fitz-Allan Earl of Arundel; secondly to Gilbert Lord
Talbot, but had issue by neither; her third Husband was Thomas Fettiplace of
Shefford in the County of Berks, Esquire; by whom she had issue John Fettiplace,
servant to King Henry VI. from whom is descended Fettiplace of
North-Denchworth, Pusey, and Letcombe, in the same County.

Joseph Texera, a Portugues, has committed a notorious error (as he has
often done in writing the Genealogies of his Kings) when he reports, That
King John I. of the name, beside Blanch and Isabel, had three other lawfully
begottten Daughters, viz. Philippa, whom he writes to be Wife of Eric King of
Denmark, Jane, of Henry III. King of Castille, and Leonora, of the King of
Arragon, Peter IV. For which this Texera is justly reproved by Edward Nunez in
that Censure which he has published against him.

10. EDWARD KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES. CHAP. XII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL ARRAGON.

NOthing was more John, first of that name, his Father: He had this name given
him in memory of Edward III. King of England, Grandfather to his Mother
Philippa of Lancaster. Having found his Kingdom flourishing, in peace, rich,
and his people Warlike, and well exercised in Military affairs, by reason of
the former Wars, there was hope that he would have augmented those Conquests
made by his predecessor; But providence permitted this hope to be frustrated.

Nonius.
The beginning of his reign was employed in the War of Afric, Mariana.
at the Siege of Tangier, which succeeded not according to his desire;
Vasconcellius.
so that for the accomplishment of a Treaty which he made with the Moors, into
whose hands he promised to render in a certain time the City of Septe, he was
constrained to give them in Hostage the Prince Ferdinand his Brother, who dyed
in their hands; The Estates of Portugal thinking it not reasonable to quit unto
those Infidels a place of so great importance.

It was also in the beginning of his reign, that the Popes Martin V. then
Eugenius IV. assembled the Council of Basil, at which all the Christian Princes
were exhorted to give their assistance; King EDWARD resolved to go thither in
person. Idem.
But the grand affairs that at this time lay upon his hands, impeaded his
Journey. For to supply which default, he sent thither a Solemn Embassade, of
which Alphonso Bishop of Port, and the Count of Ouren were chief. They
obtained of the Pope, That from that time forward the Knights of the Military
Orders of St. James, and St. John, should be dispensed for Marriage. As also
that the Kings of Portugal might from that time be Anointed and Sacred as the
Kings of England were.

The same King EDWARD was of a temper courageous, and that which is rare in a
Prince, joined the exercise of Arms with the knowledge of Letters and
Sciences; Mariana.
and so earnestly dedicated himself to the study of Philosophy, that he
composed many rare and excellent Works; among others, a Treatise of the
Administration of Justice, and the Duty of a Prince, another of the Office of
the Faithful Counselor, and a third also of the Art of Riding and Managing of
Horses. His Eloquence and Piety History makes famous. He was a favourer of
Learned men, and of all those that he observed to be excellent in any Art,
giving them access to his person, and conferring familiarly with them, for the
advantage and information of his judgment.

Among those evils wherewith he was afflicted, Vasconcellius.
that of the Plague was the most fatal, which happened in his Kingdom, and from
which his Royal person it self was not exempted. For he was touched with a
contagious Disease upon the opening of a Letter which one sent him from an
infected place, suddenly after which he dyed in the Abbey of Tomar (whither he
had retired September, His Death.
in the Year, One thousand four hundred eight and thirty, which was the Seven
and thirtieth Year of his age, and the Fifth of his reign; He had his Burial in
the Abbey of Battle. His Marriage.
In the Year, One thousand four hundred eight and twenty, this King EDWARD
Despoused ELEANOR OF ARRAGON, L. Marin siculus. Mariana. Lib. 20. Cap. 16. and
Lib. 21. Cap. 13.
Ferdinand of Castille, King of Arragon and Sicilie, and of Eleanor of
Albuquerque his Wife, the Princess had in Marriage Two hundred thousand
Florins. She was then aged Twenty seven years, and not Six and thirty, as
writes Mariana; for the Portugal Historians note her Birth to be in the Year,
Her Birth.
One thousand four hundred and one.

Peter Duke of Conimbra, Brother to the Defunct, at which the Queen conceived
so great a displeasure, that she made her complaint to her Brothers, and the
King of Castille, but in vain, so that leaving Portugal, she retired to Toledo,
where she dyed a sudden death in the Year, Her death.
One thousand four hundred five and forty, the February, not without suspicion
of poison. Her body was first inhumed in the Abbey of Religious of the Order of
St. Dominique, founded in the place where she chose her abode, but afterward
transported to that of Aljubarot, by the care of the King her Son.

King EDWARD had for his Device, a Lance environed with a Serpent (the one is
the Symbol of War, and the other of Wisdom) with this Inscription, LOCO ET
TEMPORE; to represent, that War must be prosecuted in time and place, and in
such occasions to use Prudence and Discretion.

Children of EDWARD King OF PORTUGAL, and of LEONOR OF ARRAGON, his Wife.


PORTUGAL-VISCO
and of St. James, and Constable of Portugal, he accompanied King Alphonso V.
his Brother in his Wars of Afric, D'argent a cinq Escussons d'azure peris
en Croix chacun charge de cinq besants d'argent posez en sautoir a la bordure
de gueulles, aussi chargee de huict chafleaux d'er.
at what time he took the Fort of Alcacer a Maritime Port. Afterward he was
again sent into Afric, where he performed several acts of Hostility against
the Mahumetans, among others the prize of the Town of Anafe, and then returned
Triumphant and Glorious into his own Country.

He married his Cousin Beatrice of Portugal, His Marriage.
a younger Daughter of his Uncle John of Portugal, Grand Master of the Order of
St. James, and Constable of the Kingdom. She was a Princess prudent and
deliberate, it was she that finished the Peace betwixt the two Kings, Ferdinand
of Arragon, Escartele d' ARRAGON.
and Alphonso of Portugal, upon the difference they had concerning the Kingdom
of Castille, as we have told you before. Some Historians write, That the King
of Portugal, D'or-a quatre pals de gueulles.
John II. Nephew of FERDINAND, His Death.
put to death this Prince his Father-in-law; But others, better informed,
Cetobriga, above ten years before John came to the Crown of Portugal,
PORTUGAL-VISCO
viz. the Eighth day of September, Anno, One thousand four hundred threescore
and ten, being only Seven and thirty years old, Party de PORTUGAL.
which was the Flower of his age: His Corpse was interred at Badaios within the
Church of the Conception, which had been founded by the Duchess Beatrice his
Wife, who there placed a Convent of Nuns.

Children of FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, Duke of VISCO, and of BEATRICE OF PORTUGAL,
his Wife.
PORTUGAL-VISCO
12. JOHN OF PORTUGAL, Duke of VISCO after his Father, dyed without issue.

PORTUGAL-VISCO qui est Escartele de PORTUGAL and d' ARRAGON.
12. JAMES OF PORTUGAL, also Duke of VISCO, succeeded in the Duchy after the
decease of Prince John his eldest brother; But because he maliciously conspired
against King John II. his brother-in-law, he came to a mournful and tragique
end. For in the Year, One thousand four hundred fourscore and three, this young
Prince, being but in the Twentieth year of his age, was killed by the Kings own
hand; Mariana. Lib. 24. C. 23. Vasconcellius.
which some Authors believe, was done to the intent that way might be made to
the Crown for his Bastard-son, George Duke of Aviero after his decease; But
this design took not effect, for the King better counseled, gave the Estate of
the Defunct unto his Brother Emanuel, and furthermore, appointed him Heir of
the Kingdom by his Testament, which he enjoyed accordingly.

Natural Children of JAMES OF PORTUGAL, Duke of VISCO.
13. ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL was highly advanced, PORTUGAL.
for King Emanuel gave him the Duchy of Visco, and Dignified him with the
Office of Constable of Portugal, which he had in the Year, One thousand five
hundred, Comme cy devant.
but he dyed four years after, leaving no Children but one only Daughter, named,

14. MARY OF PORTUGAL, who was espoused to the Marquess of VILLE-REAL.

12. EDWARD OF PORTUGAL all Children of Ferdinand of Portugal, PORTUGAL-VISCO
Duke of Visco, by Beatrice of Portugal his wife, and died in their minority.

12. DIONYSIO OF PORTUGAL all Children of Ferdinand of Portugal, PORTUGAL-VISCO
Duke of Visco, by Beatrice of Portugal his wife, and died in their minority.

12. SIMON OF PORTUGAL all Children of Ferdinand of Portugal, PORTUGAL-VISCO
Duke of Visco, by Beatrice of Portugal his wife, and died in their minority.

12. EMANUEL King OF PORTUGAL, youngest son of Ferdinand of Portugal, Duke of
Visco, and of Beatrix of Portugal his Wife, succeeded King John II. and
continued the Posterity.

Her Marriage.
12. LEONORA was Queen of Portugal, PORTUGAL.
as you may observe in the History of John II. King of Portugal her Husband, by
whom she had one only Son, which was Prince Alphonso, Party de PORTUGAL-VISCO
deceasing before his Father, as shall be discoursed hereafter.

Her Marriage.
12. ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, PORTUGAL-BRAGANZA.
was Duchess of BRAGANZA; There shall be more ample mention made of this
Princess in the Story of Ferdinand II. of the name Duke of Braganza her
Husband, from this Marriage came three Sons, Party de PORTUGAL-VISCO
and one Daughter, viz. James of Portugal fourth Duke of Braganza, who
continued the Line, Philip and Denis of Portugal, Margaret their Sister dyed
young without having been married.

12. KATHERINE OF PORTUGAL, dyed young.

Here are continued Children of EDWARD King of PORTUGAL, and of LEONOR OF
ARRAGON, his Wife.
Lisbonne.

Her Marriage.
was in the Sixteenth year of her age, espoused ( Ao One thousand four hundred
and fifty, AUSTRIA. De gueulles a la Face d'argent.
and in the City of Rome) unto the Emperor Frederick III. Austria, who was
eldest Son of Archduke Ernest, and of Zimburge of Massovia his Wife; Party de
PORTUGAL
Aneas Sylvius, afterward Pope under the name of Pius II. being at that time
principal Secretary to Frederick, negotiated this Marriage. The Princess was in
the Year following, Crowned Empress by Pope Nicholas V. Her death.
She dyed in the City of Neustat in Austria, in the Year, One thousand four
hundred threescore and seven, being

As concerning the Emperor her Husband, he had undergone a tedious War against
the Archduke Albert his brother, for Austria, and also against Mathias Coruin
elected King of Hungary, for that Kingdom; to which he pretended a Right of
succession. Onuphrius.
He departed this life in the City ofI Lints Austria, the Ninteenth day of
August, Ao One thousand four hundred fourscore and thirteen, which was the Four
and fiftieth of his Empire, and the Threescore and eighteenth of his age. From
this Marriage issued one Son and a Daughter, viz. The Emperor Maximilian first
of the name, Grandfather (by his Son Philip also first of that name, King of
Spain) to the Emperors Charles V. Hier. H^nninges in Theatr. Geneal.
and Ferdinand I. Cunegonde of Austria, Maximilian's Sister, was married to
Albert IV. of the name, Duke of Bauaria, and from them those other Dukes draw
their original.

Nun^us.
first to Charles of Navarre Prince of Viana, eldest Son of John King of
Navarre and Arragon; Mariana.
then to Edward the Fourth King of England. But she espoused neither the one,
nor the other, Her death.
and at last died unmarried at Lisbonne in the Abbey of St. Clare, Ao One
thousand four hundred the Twelfth day of June. She had the honor of Burial
within the Church of St. Eloy.

Castille, was conjoined in Marriage (the Twentieth day of May, CASTILLE.
Escartele au 1. and 4. de gueulles au Chasteau d'or, au 2. and 3. d'argent au
Lion de pourpre qui est LEON.
in the Year, Her Marriage.
One thousand four hundred five and fifty, at Cordona,) to HENRY IV. King of
Castille, eldest Son of King John II. and of Mary of Arragon his Wife. France,
Charles VII. at that time confederate with the King of Castille, who for this
purpose sent to the Castillian his Ambassador the Archbishop of Tours. But
this Marriage being Celebrated in a time of War, and great trouble, men
presaged nothing from the effects thereof but evil events, Party de PORTUGAL
which accordingly fell out. HENRY and JANE had issue one Daughter, which was
Jane of Castille, (some erroneously call her Elizabeth) affianced unto Charles
of France, Mariana. lib. 22. c. 17.
Duke of Berry, then of Guyenne, younger Brother to Lewis XI. King of France;
But this Duke being variable and inconstant, abandoned her, and applied himself
to Mary of Bourgongne, only daughter of Charles the Hardy, Duke of Bourgongne,
whom he likewise married not.

So that the Princess of Castille had for Husband her Nephew Alphonso V. of the
name King of Portugal, who challenged the Kingdom of Castill in the Right of
this his Wife, as you shall see more fully hereafter in his History. King Henry
was reputed in the opinion of the world, incapable of Children, which gave
suspicion to many to doubt whether this Princess were really his Daughter, or
supposed to be so; nevertheless he owned her by his Testament made before his
death, which happened to be at Madrid, o One thousand four hundred threescore and
fourteen, in the month of December, and in him finished the direct Line of the
Kings of Castille descended from Henry the Bastard; from whom, (being of a
courageous and high-flown spirit;) this Prince did much degenerate, who was a
person of a weak judgment, and of little Merit.

Two years after Queen JANE OF PORTUGAL, Idem. Lib. 23. Cap. 11. and Lib. 24.
Cap. 4. and 9.
his Widow, Her death.
dyed at Madrid in the month of January, others more truly report June, One
thousand four hundred threescore and fifteen. She was interred in the Church of
St. Francis. It Is doubted likewise, whether she dyed in Childbed, or whether
her life was shortened by Poison caused to be given her by the King of Portugal
her Brother; which last is rather to be believed, because she is taxed to be
incontinent, and to suffer her self to be transported to unwarrantable
affections.

A Natural Son of EDWARD King of PORTUGAL.
Edward by Jane Manuel Cousin of Eleanor of Arragon; Vasconcellius.
He was educated with great care, and brought up unto Virtue, by Nonio Alvarez,
Pereira Lord of Braganca. After he had approved his Valor in that War against
the Infidels and Moors of Africa; being inspired with devotion, aand contempt
of earthly things; He forsook the world, and took ^n him a Religious habit, in
the Convent of the Carmelite Friars of Lisbonne; which he founded, and where he
lived most Religiously: Yet afterward he had given him the Bishopric of Septe
in Afric; and then that of Ingonte. In fine, King Alphonso V. invited him to
Court, where he gave him the charge of Master of his Chapel, of whose Wisdom
and good Counsel, this King was a strict observer.

11. ALPHONSO V. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES; Surnamed, The
Affrican. CHAP. XIII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. Party de CONIMBRA. 1. and 4.
de PORTUGAL au 2. and 3. d' ANGLETERRE. Party de CASTILLE. LEON qui est
d'argent au lion de pourpre.

TO King Edward His Birth.
born in January, Ao One thousand four hundred thirty and two.

He was but six years old when he succeeded to the Crown. His minority causing
great agitations for the Regency, his Grandees having revolted from Queen
Eleanor of Arragon his Mother, who pretended thereto by the Testamentary Will
of her Husband; but the Duke of Conimbra, Uncle by the Fathers side to the
young King, carried it, as we have before written.

And notwithstanding this Prince had prudently and faithfully administered the
affairs of State, yet some persons envious at his Virtue, having given the King
some evil Impressions concerning him, he was easily induced to Commence a War
with the Duke, which he so sharply prosecuted, that he gave a total rout to his
Army, and killed him upon the Field, which Action was the more unnatural and
tragical, His first Marriage.
because the same Duke had a double relation to this King, both by Affinity,
and Blood; for (in the Year, One thousand four hundred forty and eight) the
Princess ELIZABETH OF CONIMBRA his Daughter had been espoused to ALPHONSO. But
it often falls out, that Passion, that dangerous Counselor of Princes, shuts
her eyes to all manner of Respects.

This War being stifled, the King of Portugal, by the example of his Grand-sire
and Father, turned his Arms against the Moors. Vasconcellius.
He had made a promise to Pope Calixtus, to fall upon the Turk in Asia, and for
that purpose had accepted the Crossiade: but the death of that Sovereign Bishop
happening in the mean time, he cancelled that design of assaulting the Turk.
Nevertheless he resolved to pass into Afric, and to make his way, transported
a good Army, besieged the Fort of Alcacer near unto Septe, which he subdued by
fine force, and entered in Triumph. Nonius.
Not long after the King of Fez having two several times laid Siege to the same
place, it Portuguesses, that they were constrained to retire with shame and
prejudice.

Africa, but not attended with the former success. Afterward he set Sail the
third time for that Country, better accompanied than before: Vasconcellius.
For he transported Thirty thousand men, with whom he reduced the strong City
of Arzille, at the assault of which he gave such proof of his Valor, and
became so terrible to the Infidels, that they also quit and abandoned the City
of Tangier. But as he made his entrance into the same City, the loss of his
Uncle Ferdinand coming into his memory afresh, somewhat allayed the
satisfaction he received in the Prize of this place. Also so many memorable and
glorious Conquests, acquired him, as another Scipio, the Surname and Title of,
The Affrican.

The Queen his first Wife that virtuous Princess, ceased not to bear him still
that respect, affection, and honor required, notwithstanding that fatal
Difference that had been betwixt him and her father. Mariana. Lib. 22. C. 17.
She deceased at Evora in the Month of December, in the Year, One thousand four
hundred fifty

So ALPHONSO being a Widower, took a resolution to marry a second Wife, and for
that purpose cast his eyes upon Jane of Castille his Niece, His second Marriage.
Daughter of King Henry IV. and of Jane of Portugal his Sister. Having
therefore obtained a Dispensation from Pope Sixtus IV. Vignier.
he espoused One thousand four hundred threescore and fifteen, others say that
it was in the year following; then having been proclaimed Kings of Castille
after the death of Henry, they sent their Summons to Ferdinand King of Arragon,
and his Wife the Princess Elizabeth of Castille Sister of Henry, who pretended
to be true and lawful Heir, to desist from the enterprise which they
endeavored upon the Kingdom of Castille, maintaining that Jane was not
Daughter of King Henry, for all that he had owned her for such by his
Testament, and for his Heir. But this Summons was of little effect, for they
ceased not by the strength of their great Forces, and those of their partakers,
to maintain themselves in the Title by them usurped, and in their Actual
possession.

This was the reason why the Duke of Areual, and the Marquess of Villena,
Confederates of the Portuguesses, and in whose protection the Father had left
his Daughter, with those of their followers, strengthened with some French
Troops, with the succors of Alphonso, took Arms against Elizabeth, and
endeavored the seizing some places. Upon which motive Ferdinand also drew into
the Field, Mariana. lib. 24. c. 10.
and begirt the Castle Taure with a strait Siege; To the relief of which the
King of Portugal came in person with his associates; the Armies being come to
blows, they disputed it with so much Gallantry, that the Castillian lost the
day, (according to the Portugal Castille agree not in this point;) nevertheless
they were not forced to raise their Siege.

The King of Portugal having recruited his Army with a good number of
Soldiers, came to another engagement with the Army of Ferdinand, but the issue
of this second Battle was contrary to the other: Vasconcellius.
For he was vanquished, and unfortunately put to flight, which gave an absolute
check to the course of his designs, and of ever arriving at his pretentions in
Castille. Likewise also the Marquess of Villena, and other Lords of his party,
being suborned, and corrupted with gifts, abandoned him, and ranged themselves
on the stronger side, being that of Ferdinand.

The Arragonians took this advantage; and to confirm their cause, obtained a
Bull from the Pope, which he made to be published in Castille, by which the
Marriage of King ALPHONSO with Jane, was declared null, and of no validity,
notwithstanding it was Consummated by his Authority, and according to his
Rescript: But he declared that, by that his Bull he had been circumvented.

In this extremity the Portuguesses yet stood upon their guard, hoping to
France. And to that intent sent their Express to King Lewis XI. P. Mathieu on
l' Histoire de Lovis XI. liver 7.
from whom they only received a fair reception, and good words; for it fell out
to be in that nick of time that Lewis had made a League with Ferdinand, that he
might the better prosecute the War with the Count of Roussillion, so that the
grand affairs that he had at that time against Charles Duke of Bourgongne,
would not permit him to give succors to ALPHONSO; Philip de Commines.
It Is the judgment of an Historian of that time, that if he had assisted him,
it is very probable he might have brought his Enemy to a Composition, and to
that point which he desired.

Vasconcellius.
Then in this despair observing that all things went contrary to his
expectation, Mariana.
he designed to perform (as a private and unknown person) the Voyage to
Jerusalem; where in his youth he had made a Vow to go fight the Turks, which he
had undertaken, had not he been diverted by the King of France. At his return
into Portugal, he found the Prince his young France. Mariana reports, that this
was by Letters at his departure from Paris.

Idem. Lib. 24. Cap. 20.
So ALPHONSO constrained to submit to Time and adverse Fortune, looked upon a
Peace as the best expedient he could make use of with his enemies, Nonius.
which was concluded at Alcantara, in the Year, One thousand by which he
excluded himself from any farther Pretentions to that Kingdom. This Peace was
confirmed and Sealed by the agreement of several Marriages contracted betwixt
the Children of the Adversary Kings: It being remarkable, that in the Treaty of
this Peace, it was particularly declared, That it should continue the space of
an hundred and one years; those which effected it, putting, as it is usual so to
do, Connostaggio au l ure de l'union de PORTUGAL au Royaume de CASTILLE.
the Uncertain for the Infinite. But this limited number proved Prophetical.
For the time an hundred and one years, continued from the end of this War,
until that in the Year, One thousand five hundred and fourscore, this Kingdom
was subdued by Philip II. King of Spain (descended from Ferdinand and
Elizabeth) against King Anthony of Portugal, when he rendered himself absolute
Master thereof. So that the words and Agreements of the Treaty of Peace, did at
last meet with the quality of the Event.

Now ALPHONSO transported with indignation, that the Queen his Wife had been
deprived of that Right which she had to the Kingdom of Castille, and vexed with
the sinister events that had happened to his Estate: but principally that his
Wife had put on the habit of Religious in the Monastery of St. Clare which she
had founded at Santarem, Mariana.
was carried away with such an extreme excess of Melancholy, His Death.
that it cast him into a Sintra, being the place of his Birth. Lib. 24. Cap. 21.
His decease happened the Eight ( Mariana writes the Last) day of August, Ao One
thousand four hundred fourscore and one, having held the Scepter Forty years,
and lived Fifty. He lies at the Royal Abbey of Battle, with his Ancestors.

This Prince is commended for his Valor, Sobriety, Continence, and Liberality,
as also to have been the first of the Kings of Portugal, that placed a Liberary
in the Royal Palace, by which we may believe, that in imitation of his Father,
he also was a lover of Learning.

Children of ALPHONSO V. King of PORTUGAL, and of ELIZABETH OF CONIMBRA his
first Wife.




One thousand four hundred fifty and two, Her Birth.
was desired in Marriage by three great Monarchs, Vasconcellius.
Maximilian King of the Romans afterward Emperor first of the name, Charles
VIII. King of France, and Richard III. King of England. But she refused all
these matches; and at what time her Father made his expedition Africa, being
only Eighteen years old, yet had so great a confidence of her Wisdom, that he
left her Regent of his Estate in his absence, where she governed his affairs
with great care.

At his return being transported with a holy zeal, and misprision of the World,
she made it her supplication to the King her Father, that he would permit her
to pass the Habit of a Nun, and to encloyster her self, her request he granted,
and so she went first to Aveiro, then to Odivelles, where she passed the rest
of her life in great Humility. Her death.
She died at May, Anno, One thousand four hundred fourscore and ten.
Vasconcellos is very large in the Story of her Life and worthy Actions.

12. JOHN II. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES, Lord of GUINEE,
Surnamed, THE GREAT. CHAP. XIV.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. PORTUGAL-VISCO PORTUGAL.
Escartele d' ARRAGON.

AMong the troubles Alphonso V. was afflicted toward the end of his Reign, he
had at the least this contentment and happiness, to have a valiant Son; as was
this Prince; who first saw the light of day at Lisbonne, where Queen Elizabeth
of Conimbra his Mother brought him into the May, His Birth.
in the Year, One thousand four hundred fifty and five.

In his younger years he behaved himself with so much Gallantry in the second
expedition of Africa, but more particularly at the prize of Argesille from the
Moors, that the King his Father conferred upon him the Order of Knighthood;
Vasconcellius.
Afterward also he gave testimony of a great Courage in the War of Castille;
And upon Alphonso's journey into France, he commanded this young Prince to take
upon him the Government of his Estate, with the Title of King. At his return
his Father persuading him to retain this Title and Royal quality, during his
absence in Africa, as a good Son, he refused this proffer, and relinquished
the Dignity of King; saying, That he received a much greater contentment to see
his Father re-established in his Kingdom, than that he himself had Command of
the whole Earth.

Mariana. Lib. 24. C. 23.
he succeeded him, and took in hand the Scepter, when he was of the age of Six
and twenty years. No sooner was he mounted upon the Throne, but he caused
Justice severely to be administered, without exception, permitting the Judges,
and other Ministers of State, to seize upon the Malefactors wheresoever they
were to be found, not exempting the Houses of the Grandees it self,
notwithstanding that Privilege, and Ancient Custom that might be alleged to
the contrary. This caused many of his own Relations wickedly to plot against
him, and to hold intelligence, and contrive conspiracies, with the Castillian
to his ruin. The Chief of these were Ferdinand Duke Braganza, and James Duke
of Visco; the contrivances and pernicious designs of the first having been
manifestly discovered by his own Letters at his Indictment, so that being
convicted, he was condemned, Vasconcellius.
and then publicly executed, and his Goods confiscated; which so much amazed
some of them, that they fled into Castille.

But for all this the audacity of the Conspirators was such, that they ceased
not yet to contrive the death of the King, of which he had information, and not
long after got the Duke of Visco into his power, where he lost his life, being
assassinated by the Kings own hand. The severity of which action, has by some
been called Inhumanity, and Cruelty: but this default was recompensed with
several perfections of Body and Soul, with which he was adorned.

He designed to prosecute the high and glorious designs of the King his Father
for the Discovery and Conquests of strange Regions, proposing a beginning by
the Western Coast of Ethiopia, History of Portugal.
and giving Commission to John Cane a Portugal Knight, to search out a Country
which is on the other side the Equator, where being arrived, he found it to be
the Kingdom of Congo, the inhabitants whereof were so humane, and docile, that
some of them suffered themselves to be brought into Portugal, and there, with
the Language, they were instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion,
and then Baptized. At their return they persuaded their King and his Subjects
also to be Baptized. With this King, and with others of Ethiopia JOHN entered
into League, and caused in this Country to be raised the Citadel of St.
George, since called, the Mine, from which the Kings his Successors have
extracted a good quantity of Gold.

In the beginning of this Voyage the Portuguesses having arrived at a Cape,
which by estimation is the greatest of the World, they conceived so happy
success in their enterprise, by the advantage thereof, that they gave it the
appellation of, The Cape of good Hope, anciently being called the Front of
Africa; it opened them the way to the knowledge of the Estate of the Indian
Princes, and to penetrate further into Ethiopia, where they found reigning that
Prince, which we vulgarly call Prester John; because he is named in his
Language, Belulgian, which signifies, A Precious Stone of incomparable
excellence, a Title and old Surname usurped by the Ancient Emperors of
Ethiopia, who maintain themselves to be descended from the Blood of Solomon by
the Queen of Saba.

Some time after the same King JOHN II. Nun^z.
sent a great Army into Africa, which landed in the Isle of Gesire, which is
the mouth of the River Luc, where the Portuguesses endeavored to raise a Fort
against the impeachments of the King of Fez; but this King, after he had cut
off their passage of retreat, forced them to quit their prize, and by
composition to return into their own Country.

In the mean time King JOHN being advertised of the Donation made to the King
of Castille, Vignier.
Ferdinand, by Pope Alexander VI. of those new Regions which had been
discovered by his Subjects, the Portugal being interessed therein, as
prejudicial to the discovery that for his part he had made upon the Coast of
Ethiopia, for this reason entered into a difference with the Castillian; which
caused the Pope on his own accord, to give unto King Ferdinand the Indies newly
found out, and to the King of Portugal the Coast of Africa: But to the intent
that the one might not attempt any thing upon the other, he caused to be drawn
upon the Globe a Line falling from North to South, which passed toward the
West, above Four hundred miles distant from the Isles of Cape-verd, that it
might not touch upon Africa.

This, with other violent Actions of King JOHN, drew upon him the odium of
several persons, Mariana.
in such manner, that they were followed with conspiracies against his life;
His Death.
that at last he was found poisoned in the place of Alvor in his Kingdom of
Algarvie, Vasconcellius.
the Five and twentieth day of October, in the One thousand four hundred
fourscore and fifteen; after he had lived Forty years, and reigned Fourteen;
His body was first inhumed in the Cathedral Church of Silues, until that in the
Year, One thousand four hundred fourscore and nineteen, King Emanuel his Cousin
and Successor, and his Estates, caused it to be brought to the Abbey of Battle.

He was very Pious, and Charitable to the Poor, for whose Retreat, and Relief,
he founded and endowed a fair Hospital at Lisbonne. His Prudence appeared in
the government of his Kingdom, and by the placing his favors upon persons of
desert; keeping a most exact Register of the names of those that had faithfully
served him, and who were capable, and endued with qualities required, in the
administration of his affairs; He had a spirit elated, and ambitious of the
greatest things.

About the Year, One thousand four hundred threescore and ten, not being above
Fifteen years old, Mariana.
His Marriage.
he married LEONORA OF PORTUGAL, or OF VISCO, his Cousin, Daughter of his Uncle
Ferdinand of Portugal Duke of Visco, and Constable of the Kingdom, by George
Duke of Aueiro, with some intention to leave him the Crown; The Queen his Wife
opposed this design, not willing that her Brother the Prince Emanuel should be
deprived of the Right he had to the Kingdom by the decease of his Cousin
Alphonso the young Prince, and to which he succeeded after decease of King JOHN.

Who took in his Device, a Pelican, a Bird so Natural and affectionate to her
young, Idem. Vasconcellius.
that she wounds her breast, and feeds them with her own blood, with this
Inscription, PRO LEGE ET GREGE; witnessing thereby, how much he both loved, and
cherished his people; for whose defnce and Religion, he had exposed his life to
several hazards; Some have noted, that he was the first among the Kings of
Portugal, that adorned the Helmet of the Portugal Arms with a Sphere for
Creast, which he took as a presage of the new Discoveries which were made
during his Reign, and of some of the Kings his Successors, under both the Poles.

Children of JOHN II. of the name, King of PORTUGAL, and of LEONOR OF VISCO,
his Wife.
PORTUGAL
There is remarkable in this young Prince, Comme cy devant.
looked upon as the Hope and Prop of the Royal House of Portugal, a notable
example of the Inconstancy and frailty of humane things. His Marriage.
For after that (in sumpteous apparel, and great magnificence,) he had (in
November, PORTUGAL
Ao One thousand four hundred fourscore and) espoused the Princess ELIZABETH OF
CASTILLE, Party de CASTILLE.
eldest Daughter of Ferdinand V. and of Isabel, King and Queen of Castille and
Arragon, in the City of Stremos, this Marriage, (which it was thought, would be
one day the Earnest of a perpetual Concord betwixt the two Neighboring Crowns)
continued not above seven months only, for the young Prince finished his life
at Sanctarem, His Death.
by a sad and unhappy accident, Battle. His Widow in second Marriage was
espoused to the Great Emanuel Successor of John II. Father of this ALPHONSO.

Some Authors write, that this death came by the Judgment of God, for his
Fathers cruel usage of some Princes of his own Blood.

So the Crown of Portugal, that had continued Three hundred and fifty years in
a direct Male Line, from Father to Son, or from Brother to Brother, fell into
the Collateral of the Dukes of Visco.

A Natural Son of King JOHN II.
Conimbra, has given original to the Dukes of Aueiro, who shall be mentioned
in the Second Part of this History.

12. EMANUEL KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES, on this and the other side the
Sea in Afric; Lord of Guinee, and of the Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce
of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India. CHAP. XV.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL CASTILLE-ARRAGON. CASTILLE.
Escartele d'argent au lion de pourpre qui est LEON. ARRAGON. ARRAGON-SICILIE.
CASTILLE-ARRAGON comme cy dessus. PORTUGAL. Party D'AUSTRICHE ou ESPAINE.

Qui est Escartele, Au premier aussy. Escartele, Au 1. and 4. de CASTILLE; Au
2. and 3. de LEON.

Au 2. grand quartier d' ARRAGON; Party d' ARRAGON-SICILIE.

Au 3. quartier de gueulles a la fasse d'argent qui est AUSTRICHE.

Sousteun de bande^ d'or and d'azur de six pieces, a la bordure de gueulles,
qui est de BOURGONGNE la primiere Branche.

Au 4. quartier d'azur, a trois Fleurs de Lis d'or, a la bordure compounee
d'argent and de gueulles, qui est BOURGONGNE de la second Branche.

Sousteun de Sable au Lion d'or, arm and lampasse de gueulles qui est BRABANT.

Et sur les trois and quatriesme grands quartiers d'or au Lion de Sable qui est
FLANDRES.

Party d'argent a une Aigle esployee de gueulles, becquee and membree d'or, qui
est du Marquisat du Saint Empire.

THe continued success

The King of Portugal his Grandfather by the Fathers side, had issue a younger
Son, who carried the name of Ferdinand, and was Duke of Visco, who by a
Princess of his own Blood (called Beatrice, daughter of his Uncle John of
Portugal, Grand Master of the Order of St. James, and Constable of the
Kingdom,) had among other Children this King EMANUEL, born in the City of
Alcochet the last day of May, in the Year, One thousand four hundred threescore
and nine. His Birth.
He was first honored with the Title of Duke of Beia; then being in the Six
and twentieth year of his age, succeeded to the Crown of Portugal after the
death of John II. his Cousin, dying without Children in the Year, One thousand
four hundred thirty and five.

Hier. Osorius in Hist. Reg. Emanuel. Mariana.
Whether he should prosecute, or decline the designs of the King his
Predecessor for the Conquest of new discovery; after the deliberation, and
advice required in a matter of that moment, it was resolved, That he was
obliged to prosecute them, as well for the Honor, as the Profit and great
advantage, that would thereby accrue to him and his Estate.

Then being set on edge by the example of the Kings of Castille his Neighbors,
who had made discovery of the West Indies, he endeavored for his part to find
out with his Ships, all that Country on the further side the Cape of Good Hope
(at which the Fleet of King John II. had before arrived) unto the East Indies,
from whence he knew that the precious Stones, Spices, Drouges, Perfumes,
Medicinals, and other singular and precious commodities were imported for the
accommodation of whole Europe.

One thousand four hundred fourscore and nineteen, Osorius.
he sent Vasquez Gama a Portugal Gentlemen with four Ships, who in two years
Voyage discovered the whole Western Coast of Ethiopia, with the Isles of
Quiola, Mosambique, Monbaze, Melinde, and at last arrived at the Kingdom of
Malabar, otherwise called Calecur, so named from the Capital City so named,
which is the place of all the East most frequented by the Merchants, and from
whence the greatest quantity of Spices is shipped for this part of the world.
Wherefore after that the Portuguesses had been favorably received by the King
of this Country, and observed with great danger (which was occasioned by the
unfaithfulness of the Moors) that which they, knew their Prince EMANUEL to be
most desirous of, they returned to bring the honor to their Country of the
Discovery of things not known, nor seen, since the Creation of the World, by
any Nation of Europe, which Antiquity it self thought to be impossible.

Caravelle about the Year, One thousand five hundred, under the Command of
Pedro Alvarez Cupral, Idem. Osorius.
which endeavoring to steer the same course with the former, was by storm
driven upon the Coast of Brasille (at that time known by the name of St. Croix)
joining to Peru. By others nevertheless it is believed, Mariana. lib. 26.
that it was Americ Vespure a Florentine, who under the Countenance of the same
King EMANUEL, discovered the Country of Brazille: But be it as it will, Lopez
Castagneda in the History of the East Indies. John de Baros.
Cupral having informed himself of the state of this Country, steered the
course that he formerly intended, and passed by the Kingdoms of Quiola,
Mosambique, and Melinde, with the Kings whereof he contracted an Alliance in
the name of EMANUEL his Master, and there raised several Fortresses. Finally,
he arrived at the Port of Calecut, the King whereof at his first entrance
entertained him with friendship, desiring also to enter into a League with the
King of Portugal. Damian de Goez.
But the Moors and Sarazens that held a Commerce in his Kingdom, so wrought
upon the King, that they changed his mind, and he became a mortal enemy. This
was the ground of a cruel War betwixt them, which lasted above Thirteen
years, in which time the Portugals performing many notable actions of War,
Osorio.
acquired a grand reputation, and Empire in the East, the experience of their
Valor causing the Kings of Cochan, Coulan, and Cananor, Neighbors of Calecut,
to seek their friendship, by a Peace with their King EMANUEL.

In the mean time the Portugal Garrisons of Africa under the Government of John
Meneses the Kings Lieutenant, in the City and Fortress of Arzille, and of
Roderick de Castro, engaged the Moors with happy success, and routed the Army
of the King of Fez, Vegnier.
upon his endeavor of the surprise Tangier. Jo. Pet. Mapheus in Hist. Ind.
At the same instant a Squadron of three Ships commanded by John Nunez, arrived
at the Indies, where they engaged the King of Calecut, who was shamefully
defeated by a number much inferior to his, in pursuit of which they obtained
several other signal Victories.

Sometime after the same King of Calecut fell upon the King of Cochin with such
fury, (because he had given entertainment to the Portuguesses) that he was
forced to forsake his Kingdom; Osorius.
which he chose rather to suffer (like a Noble Prince) than to renounce that
League of Amity and Faith which he had promised to the King of Portugal, who
was so sensible of this Action, that he judged himself obliged to re-establish
him, and for that purpose sent ten Ships under the Conduct of the famous
Captain Alphonso d'Albuquerque, Alphonso d'Albuquerque in his Commentaries.
who chased the Calecutins out of the Kingdom of Cochin, re-established their
King, and built a Fort for his Retreat; then having given some allarums to the
King of Calecut in his own Country, they returned Richly laden with Spices.
Osorius.
This Infidel King having raised another Army Cochin to repel the
Portuguesses, but this great Army found so sharp an entertainment, that they
returned home, less by the number of Eight thousand, which were there killed,
without the loss (a Miracle if true) of one Christian.

Thuanus lib. 1.
This happy success gave encouragement to King EMANUEL to send Francis Almeida
his Viceroy to the Indies, to Establish and confirm his Empire, and also to
maintain the Kings his Confederates in security against their Enemies. Osorius.
This Viceroy in his Voyage to establish a Lieutenant Quiola, fell upon the
King of Mombaze, because he would not declare himself subject to the King of
Portugal his Master, and also upon the King of Onor, which is on the Coast of
Arabiae, on whom he gained a famous Victory, and fired the City thereof. At his
arrival in the Indies, there came an Ambassador from the King of Narsingne, J.
Pierre Maffee.
the most considerable of East India, on the other side the River Ganges, to
Contract a friendship with the Portuguesses, saying, That he was incited to
search them out, for the wonders that they were reported to have accomplished
in those parts.

Lopez de Castagneda.
At which time the King of Zophala in Ethiopia came to an engagement with the
Portuguesses, where they not only put his Army to flight, but chased him to the
Gates of his own Palace, Aut. de Saint Romain.
and for the third time were Victors over the Naval Army of the King of
Calecut: the like good fortune attended their actions in Africa, where they
reduced into their power, the strong Town of Zafin situate in the Province of
Morocca, or Mauritania Tingitana, and then raised that Siege which Mahumet King
of Fez had laid to the Citadel of Arzille.

About this time Helen the Widow of the King of Ethiopia (vulgarly called
Prester John,) who had the Government of the young King Atani Tingil her
Grandchild, likewise sent her Ambassador to King EMANUEL, to conclude a Peace
with him. In a Letter which she wrote him, she made mention of a Prophecy:
That in the later days, there should descend from the French Region, a Prince
that should extirpate and abolish all the Nations of the Moors and Barbarians.

Babylon, Osorius. Lib. 6.
which was joined with those of the Kings of Cambaye and Calecut, given by the
Valiant Almeida, constrained also this King to render himself Vassal and
Tributary to the Portuguesses: Who with their new supplies sent to the Indies,
discovered the Isle of St. Laurence, and then delivered from the servitude of
the Arrabes, the Isle of Zacocora inhabited by the Christians.

On the other side Alphonso d'Albuquerque Captain of another Army, subdued the
Isle of Ormus, situate in the mouth of the Gulf of Persia, and compelled the
King thereof to render himself subject to the King of Portugal; being at that
time Vassal to the Sophy of Persia. The same Albuquerque successor of Almeida,
subjected the City of Goa by fine force, Thuanus.
which Benastarin also owns him for her Conqueror.

But we cannot without admiration inform you, being a thing which surpasses
almost humane belief, that the Generous Albuquerque assisted with a small
number, subdued the opulent City of Malaca situate in the mouth of the golden
Chersonesus, a City surrounded with strong Bulworks, Vasconcellius.
defended by Thirty thousand Soldiers, and fortified with Eight thousand
pieces Moluccos.

In the mean time Zeiam Prince of the Puissant City of Azamor in Mauritania,
having violated the Faith he had given to the Portuguesses; Nonius.
Osorius.
EMANUEL to be revenged, sent a Fleet of Two hundred Ships, Vignier.
attacqued this City with such fury, that the Besieged after they had endured
some assaults, were glad to quit the place to the Portuguesses; who encouraged
by the success of so much prosperity, pursued their Conquests, took and sacqued
several other Towns and Fortresses; and defeated the Armies of Cherif Lord of
the Province of Zela in Mauritania, and also those of Mahumed and Nazec Kings
of Fez and of Mequinesie.

Osorius.
One thousand five hundred and fifteen, the Ambassador of David King of
Ethiopia arrived in Portugal, sent to negotiate a Peace with King EMANUEL; so
much was the Renown of his Puissance and Authority spread almost over the whole
Universe.

But the sweetness of so much Prosperity, was at last somewhat distempered with
the bitterness of Adversity; when in the same year, one of the Portugal Armies
consisting of a considerable number of Ships, was at their return defeated in
Africa near unto the River Mamora, by that of the Kings of Fez and Morocco.

For as this great Monarch in all his famous Designs, made the glory, and
advancement of the service of God his principal end; so had he a diligent care
for the establishment of the Christian Religion in Ethiopia, India, Afric,
Mariana. Lib. 26. Cap. 17.
and diverse other Regions. And for other Monuments of his signal Piety, he
caused to be built several Temples, which he richly endowed; he did the like in
Portugal, Vasconcellius.
as the Magnificent Church of Bethleem dedicated to the holy Virgin, upon the
River Tagus near unto Lisbonne, and the Monastery of St. Jerosme in the same
place, another stately Church at Tomar, and the Convent of the Cordeliers at
Evora; as also a House at Lisbonne, called De Misericordia, for the Relief of
poor Gentlemen. He also Founded the Royal Palace in the same City, and another
at Conimbra.

Idem.
After so many notable Victories, he sent a stately Ambassade to Pope Leo X.
with several rich presents, besides a Rinocere, and an Elephant, which was
(according to a Portugal Historian) the first that Rome had ever seen come from
the Eastern parts.

In fine, His Death.
EMANUEL departed this life at Lisbonne the Thirteenth day of December, in the
Year, One thousand five hundred twenty and one, Mariana.
having Reigned Six and twenty. He was inhumed in the same Church of Bethleem,
Vasconcellius.
which he left unfinished; But Queen Katherine King John III. his Sons Wife
built the High Altar, and also erected two stately Monuments for this King and
Queen, a place since designed for the Mortuary of their Kings.

Osorius.
Besides the works of Piety which we have observed in this King, he had also the
care to convert unto the Christian faith, a good number of Jews, and to
exterminate the Sarazens his Kingdom. He remitted to the Ecclesiastiques, the
tenths which they paid to his Demain for Sales and Acquisitions, caused
several profitable Laws to be digested into better Order, and Administered
Justice with all Integrity. Also by his Wisdom, and by so many signal Acts, and
prosperous Voyages, he rendered his Kingdom, Rich, and Flourishing, abounding
in Gold, Silver, Pearl, precious stones, Spices, and other excellent
Commodities, so that the Portuguesses called his Reign, The Golden Age. He was
furthermore admired for his Sobriety, and to have abstained from Wine the whole
course of his life. He was a great Lover of Hunting, Hawlking, and Music.

His Device was a Sphere, and a terrestial Globe environed with the Sea, with
this Circumscription, PRIMUS CIRCUNDEDISTI ME. To signify, that, His Fleets
had compassed the whole Circle of the Earth.

Idem.
This great King was thrice married; His first Marriage.
First ( Ao One thousand four hundred fourscore and seventeen, Mariana.
in the Month of October, and in the City of Alcantara, Vasconcellius.
) to the Princess ISABEL OF CASTILLE, eldest Ferdinand and Elizabeth King and
Queen of Castille and Arragon, and Widow to the Prince of Portugal Alphonso,
Son of King John II. his Cousin and Predecessor. Not long after this Marriage,
the young Prince John of Castille, Isabels brother, deceased, so that she
became heir apparent to the Kingdoms of her Father and Mother, of which King
EMANUEL and she were declared Princes. But a little while after, the Three and
twentieth day of August, Ao One thousand four hundred fourscore this young
Queen dyed in Childbed, at Saragoca in Arragon, her Body was transported to
Toledo; and interred in the Nunnery of St. Isabel, which King Ferdinand her
Father had founded.

Idem.
Two years after, the Thirtieth day of October, His second Marriage.
Ao One thousand five hundred, King EMANUEL espoused (after Dispensation
granted by Pope Alexander VI.) his second Wife, at Setubal, (not at Valence as
some write) being the Princess MARY OF CASTILLE, Sister of Isabel his first
Wife. She also dyed in Childbed at Lisbonne, in the Year, One thousand five
hundred and seventeen, aged Five and thirty years, and was buried in the
Monastery of our Lady.

His third Marriage.
The third and last Wife of King EMANUEL, was LEONOR OF AUSTRIA, Sister to the
Emperor Charles V. and Daughter of Philip I. of the name, and of Joane, King
and Queen of Castille. This Marriage was Celebrated in the Year, One thousand
five hundred and nineteen, and lasted but two years. Leonor espoused for her
second Husband Francis I. of that name, King of France, who had before married
Queen Claude a former Wife. She deceased at Validolit, Mariana.
others say at Badaios (where March, Anno, One thousand five hundred eight and
fifty, in the Sixtieth year of her age.

The History of King EMANUEL has been most elegantly written in the Latin
Tongue, by Hierosme Osorio Bishop of Silve in the Algarvies, by Damian Goez a
Portugal Knight in his Language, who was employed in several important Voyages
and other affairs; His Conquests also have been recorded by Lopez de
Castagneda, and Anthony de St. Romain, in their Histories of East India; by
Alphonso d'Albuquerque in his Commentaries, John de Baros in the History of
Asia, Peter de Maris in his Dialogues, John-Pedro Maffee of the Order of Jesus
in the History of the Indies in a most eloquent style; but incomparably well
worded by John Mariana, and Antonio Vasconcellos of the same Order.

Children of EMANUEL King OF PORTUGAL, and of ISABEL OF CASTILLE his first Wife.
Castille and Gironne, PORTUGAL
born in the Year, His Birth.
One thousand four hundred fourscore and eighteen, Escartele Au 1. and 4. de
PORTUGAL Au 2. and 3. contre-escartele.

Au 1. and 4. de CASTILLE.

Au 2. and 3. de LEON.


August; was acknowledged for the Prince, and Heir apparent of the Kingdoms of
Castille and Arragon, but he lived only two years, His Death.
and dyed, Anno, One thousand five hundred, at Granada, where Donna Joane his
Aunt by the Mothers side, came to the Succession of the Estates of Castille,
Arragon, Sicilie, and several others, which she transmitted to the Emperor
Charles V. her Son.

Children of EMANUEL King OF PORTUGAL, and of MARY OF CASTILLE his second Wife.


PORTUGAL-BEIA. Escartele de PORTUGAL and de CASTILLE.
Seigneur of Septe, Maure, Couillan, and Almade, and Constable of Portugal,
second Son of King EMANUEL by his second Wife MARY OF CASTILLE, was born in the
City of Abrantes, the third day of March, in the Year, Nonius.
One thousand five hundred and six; At what time the Emperor Charles V.
Sandoval.
His Birth.
his Brother-in-law undertook the Voyage of Afric for the Conquest of the
City of Thunes from the Moors, and the protection of Muleasses, Mariana.
who had made his application to this great Emperor for assistance; John III.
his Brother had sent to the Emperors succor.

In this expedition the Duke of Beia gave proof of his Valor, and experience
in Deeds of War, to which he joined the knowledge of the Methamaticks, and
other liberal Sciences.

He had the choice of two wives offered him; the first was Mary afterward
Queen of England; the second, the Princess Barbara of Poland, Daughter of King
Sigismond first of the name; J. Texera.
but he would embrace neither, because (as some Historians write) he had
clandestinely espoused a Gentlewoman named YOLAND, whom he took to Wife for her
excellent beauty, being much inferior to this Prince both in Extraction and
Riches. It is added, that he would not declare his Marriage, observing King
John his eldest Brother to have many male-children.

The same Prince LEWIS dyed in the Year, His Death.
One thousand five hundred fifty and five, aged Forty nine years, and Nine
Months, and was inhumed Bethleem. By his Will he appointed the Prince Anthony
his Heir to his whole Estate, not giving him other appellation therein than,
His Son, without adding Natural, by which we may believe, he took him for his
lawful Son.

A base Son of LEWIS OF PORTUGAL, Duke of BEIA.

Arem, whose Story follows in his place.

His Birth.
was born in the City of Abrantes the Fifth day of June, PORTUGAL.
Anno, One thousand five hundred Escartele de CASTILLE Comme cy dessus.
and was conjoined in Marriage with Guiamare Coutinho, daughter of Francis
Coutinho Count of Marialua, and of Beatrice Meneses, by which Wife he had two
Children that dyed in their infancy, His death.
and being Seven and twenty years old, dyed Anno, One thousand five hundred
four and PORTUGAL.
in the same place of Abrantes, where he was born, there his body rested,
Escartele de CASTILLE. Party de PORTUGAL
until the Year, One thousand five hundred fourscore and two, when Philip II.
King of Spain his Nephew, caused it to be removed, and interred in the Church
of the Monastery of Bethleem near unto Lisbonne.

Lisbonne, PORTUGAL
Bishop of Evora, and Abbot of Alcobace, born in the same City of Evora, Comme
cy devant.
Anno, One thousand five hundred and nine. His Birth.
He had attained but the Eighth year of his age, when Pope Leo X. associated
him Nonius.
and gave him the Title of St. Blaise, in the Year, One thousand five hundred
and seventeen. He expressed himself to Vasconcellius.
Liberal, and Humane, and very diligent in his Episcopal function, administering
the Holy Sacraments of the Church in person. To these Virtues he added an
extraordinary Piety toward God, Charity in behalf of the Poor, and much
affection to those which made profession of Learning.

In fine, having only arrived at the Eight and twentieth year of his age, he
deceased Anno, His Death.
One thousand five hundred seven and thirty, and was Bethleem near Lisbonne.
Onufrius and Ciacon make mention of this Prelate in their Works which treat of
the Popes and Cardinals.

Portugal and the Algarves, shall have his Story hereafter.

PORTUGAL
Sixth Son of Emanuel King of Portugal, His Birth.
Escartele de CASTILLE.
and of Queen Mary of Castille his second September, in the Year, One thousand
five hundred and fifteen, and being but Fifteen years old, Party de BRAGANCE
finished the course of his life at Lisbonne the Twentieth day of October, His
death.
Anno, One thousand D'Argent au sautoir de gueulles charge de cinq Escussons de
Portugal.


He received the honor of Burial in the Monastery of our Lady at Bethleem,
with several Kings and Princes of the House of Portugal, and from this Prince
are descended the two last Kings of Portugal, viz. John IV. and his Son King
Alphonso VI. who Reigns at present, 1662.

His Marriage.
The Princess ISABEL OF PORTUGAL his Wife, Nonius.
was Daughter of James of Portugal fourth Duke of Braganza, Vasconcellius.
and of Eleanor of Mendoza his Wife.

Children of EDWARD OF PORTUGAL, and ISABEL OF BRAGANZA his Wife.
PORTUGAL-GUIMARENS.
Duke of Vimerana, His Birth.
and Constable of Portugal, was the only, and posthumus Edward, and not being
above Fifteen years old, King John III. his Uncle (Anno, Nonius.
One thousand five hundred fifty and five) qualified him with the Dignity of
Constable of the Kingdom of Portugal, Vasconcellius.
after the decease of his Uncle Prince Lewis Duke of Beia younger Son of King
Emanuel. The same King John created him also Duke of Vimerana.

This Prince EDWARD (which some esteem to be but little favored by King
Sebastian his Cousin) was never married. He had attained the Six and thirtieth
year of his age, His death.
when he departed this world at Evora, (not in the Year following, as writes
Hierosme Heninges in his Theater of Kings and Princes) leaving his Cousin John
of Portugal Duke of Braganza, his Successor in the Dignity of Constable.

FARNESE, PARMA. D'or a six Fleurs de Lis d'Azure 3. 2. and 1. Party de PORTUGAL
was Espoused (in the Year, Her Marriage.
One thousand five hundred threescore and) to ALEXANDER FARNESE first of the
name, Duke of Parma and of Placentia, Dukes of Parma.
eldest Son of Prince Octavio, and of Margaret of Austria his Wife, and
Grandson of Peter Lewis first Duke of Parma of the House of Farnese.

This Princess MARY dyed at Parma in July, Anno, Her death.
One thousand five hundred threescore and seventeen, and the Prince ALEXANDER
December, in the Year, One thousand five hundred fourscore and twelve. He lies
Vaast at Arras.

From their Marriage issued, among others, two Children, the elder of which was
Rainucio Farnese, who succeeded to his Fathers Estates, and as being Heir to
his Mother, was of the number of those that pretended a right to the Crown of
Portugal, after the decease of King Henry. And notwithstanding that his
Dominions were remote, yet besides the Favor of the Church, which it was
believed he had sufficiently; it was also thought that it would be agreeable to
the Portuguesses to have a young King (as was Rainucio) that they might educate
and instruct him after their own fashion, and manners. But King Philip of Spain
having the power in his hand, rendered himself peaceable possessor

Rainucio espoused Margaret Aldobrandin Pope Clement VIII. his Niece, and had
issue Alexander Farnese second of the name, Duke of Parma and Placentia, who
after the death of his Father remained under the Tutilage and Government of
Edward Farnese the Cardinal his Uncle, younger Son of Duke Alexander first of
the name. Margaret Farnese (Sister of Rainucio, and Edward) was married to
Vincent de Gonzaga first of that name, Duke of Mantua; but they were separated
by the Authority of the Church.

Her Marriage.
Duchess of BRAGANZA, PORTUGAL-BRAGANCE.
younger Daughter of Prince Edward, was married to John of Portugal her Cousin,
sixth Duke of Braganza, who was one of those Princes that were Competitors for
the Kingdom of Portugal, in the right of this Katherine his Wife, D'argent au
sautoir de gueulles charge de cinq Escusson de Portugal.
alleging that she ought to precede the King of Spain Philip II. Son of the
Empress Isabel of Portugal, as being Daughter of Edward, this Isabels Brother,
whom she did represent. And caused to be written in the University of Conimbra,
diverse reasons in her favor, which they sent to several Kings, and foreign
Princes. Katherine grounded principally upon these reasons, a Party de
PORTUGAL. H. Franchi Conestaggio.
That in all Successions of Crowns, the last possessor was to be succeeded jure
hereditatis, which allowed the benefit of representation, that she representing
the Infant Don Edward her Father, Brother of Henry, ought to precede all the
other pretendants, the Catholic King because issued from a Daughter, the
Prince Anthony for being Illegitimate; Raynucio Farnese, as being farther
removed from Henry by the decease of Mary of Portugal his Mother (the Law never
allowing a Grandchild that benefit) But especially by the prime and
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (put in execution against Beatrix Daughter of
Ferdinand King of Portugal, who having married out of the Kingdom to the King
of Castille (as you may note page 35. See also a clause of the Law of Lamego.
Fol. 6.
) her right of succeeding was utterly lost, and King John chosen in her stead)
she was to be preferred before all Claimers or Competitors whomsoever, in
regard of her being both born, and married within the Kingdom.

They had issue Theodosius II. of the name, seventh Duke of Braganza, Father of
John II. of that name, eighth Duke of Braganza, Crowned King of Portugal, by
the name of John IV. who by this just Title left the Kingdom to his Son King
Alphonso VI. Reigning at present. 1662.

Here are continued Children of King EMANUEL, by MARY OF CASTILLE his second
Wife.
One thousand five hundred and seventeen.

AUSTRICHE-ESPAGNE.

Escartele Au premier quartier aussi Escartele.

Au 1. and 4. de CASTILLE.

Au 2. and 3. de LEON.

Au 2. qua^tier D'ARRAGON.

Party de ARRAGON-SICILIE.

Au 3. de gueulles a la Fasse d'argent qui est AUSTRICHE Soustenu de l'ancienne
BOURGONGNE.

Au 4. quartier de la second branche de BOURGONGNE.

Soustenu de BRABANT.

Sur les trois and quatriesme quartiers de FLANDRES.

Party de Marquisate de St. Empire. Le tout Party de PORTUGAL


born at Lisbonne in the Year, One thousand five hundred and three, the Fourth
day of October, Her Birth.
and having arrived at the Three and twentieth year One thousand five hundred
twenty and six) espoused at Seville, Her Marriage.
to CHARLES OF AUSTRIA, fifth of that name, Emperor and King of Spain, eldest
Son of Philip of Austria first Joane Queen of Castille and Arragon his Wife.
This Empress ISABEL brought to her Husband the Sum of Nine hundred thousand
Ducates in Dower. They were married by the Cardinal Salviati Pope Clement V.
his Legate.

Her death.
She dyed in the City of Toledo the first day of May, in the Year, One aged only
Six and thirty years, and her body was transported to Granada.

The Emperor her Husband deceased the One and twentieth day of September, Ao
One thousand five hundred eight and fifty, having carried the honor and
reputation of one of the greatest and most virtuous Monarchs that have
commanded since Charles the Great. Having gained several signal Victories upon
the Turks and Infidels; he most of all showed the grandeur of his Courage in
this, that he, which had so many times vanquished others, remained now
Victorious upon himself, in quitting the Empire, with the other Estates and
Kingdoms which he possessed, and all worldly pomp, to retire into a place of
Solitude, and there to pass the remainder of his life, that he might the better
apply himself to the service of God, which he did after he had held his Empire
Six and thirty years, and his Hereditary Kingdoms Forty. He left one Son,
Philip II. King of Spain, who in the right of his Mother, was of the number of
the pretenders to the Kingdom of Portugal, and rendered himself Master thereof,
as you have heard before. Charles V. had also two Daughters, the elder of
which, Mary of Austria was espoused to the Emperor Maximilian II. and the
younger was married to John Prince of Portugal, Son of King John III. and had
issue King Sebastian.

SAVOYE.

Escartele Au 1. and 4. de pourpre au cheval gay effraye and contourne d'argent
qui est le HAUTESAXE.

Party de Fasse d'or and d sable de six pieces, a la cou^onn^ de sinople, perie
en band brochant sur le tout, qui est la BASSESAXE.

Ante en point en form de t^iangle, d'argent a trois hout^rolles d'Espee de
gueull s 2. and 1. qui est ANGRY.

Au 2. quartier d'argent au Lion de sable, l'Escu s^n e de billettes de mesme
qui est du Dache de CHABLAIS.

Au. 3. de sable, au Lion d'argent arm and lampasse de gueulles, qui est
d'Aouste.

Sur le tout de gueulles a la Croix plain d'argent, qui est l'Escu de SAVOYE
modern. Party de PORTUGAL.


born at Lisbonne the last day of December, Her Birth.
in the Year, One thousand Her Marriage.
was conjoined by Marriage (in March, Anno, One thousand five hundred twenty
and one) with Charles III. Duke of Savoye, Philip Duke of Savoye, and of Claude
of Bretagne his Wife. This Duchess dyed at Nice, Her death.
in the Year, One thousand five hundred seven and the Eighth day of January, at
the same age with the Empress her Sister, which was Three and thirty years. As
for Duke Charles her Husband, he departed this life at Verceil, Anno, One
thousand five hundred fifty and three, the Seventeenth day of August, being
aged Threescore and

From this his Marriage with the Princess BEATRICE OF PORTUGAL, came the Duke
Emanuel-Philibert his Successor, who by Margaret of France, had his only Son
Charles-Emanuel Duke of Savoye.

This Duke Emanuel was of the number of those Princes Competitors for the
Kingdom of Portugal, although he was Son of the younger Daughter of King
Emanuel. An Historian writes, that among the pretenders that were strangers,
the Portuguesses were more inclined to him, than to any other; and this
inclination proceeded from the opinion they had, that in regard of the quality
of his person, he was fitter than any other to defend them from their enemies,
and if need were, he might vigorously resist King Philip if he should stir,
both by reason of his Valor, and for the means he had to molest him in his
Duchy of Millain, joining unto Piedmont, using chiefly the Alliance and
Neighborhood he had with the French, who laid claim to that Dukedom. But his
pretentions succeeded not according to his desire, for he dyed immediately
after this overture was made.



Children of EMANUEL King of PORTUGAL, and of ELEONOR OF AUSTRIA his third Wife.
Nunius.
CHARLES OF PORTUGAL, born at Evora, in the Year, His Birth.
One thousand five hundred and twenty, the Eighteenth day of February, Lisbonne
the Fifteenth of April, Anno, One thousand five hundred twenty and one.

Her Birth.
came into the world at the end of the Year, Vasconcellius.
One thousand five hundred twenty and Notwithstanding this Princess was adorned
with singular Beauty both of body and soul, and had been courted by several
Princes, yet would she never be brought to marry any, but lived with the honor
and pudicity required in Princesses of her Quality; then being aged Seven and
fifty years, she paid her last debt to Nature at Lisbonne, Anno, Her death.
One thousand five hundred threescore and Eighteen. Her body was inhumed in the
Monastery of our Light, of the Order of the Warfare of Christ, which she caused
to be built near unto Lisbonne.

13. JOHN III. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES, on this, and the
other side the Affrican Sea, Lord of Guinee, etc. CHAP. XVI.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL AUTRICHEESPAGNE.

Escartele

Au premier quartier aussi escartele.

Au 1. and 4. de CASTILLE.

Au 2. and 3. de LEON.

Au 2. quartier d' ARRAGON.

Party d' ARRAGON-SICILIE.

Au 3. d' AUSTRICHE.

Soustenu de BOURGONGNE de la premier branch.

Au 4. de BOURGONGNE de la second branche; soustenu de BRABANT.

Et s^r ces deux derniers quartiers est un Escusson de FLANDRES.

Party de L'Escu du Marquisate du St. Empire.

THIS Prince was the eldest Son of Emanuel King of Portugal, and of Mary of
Castille his second Wife. His Birth.
The place of his Birth, Lisbonne; The time, the Sixth day of June, in the
Year, One thousand five hundred and two.

At the age of Twenty years he succeeded to the Crown of his Father, and wanted
no courage to continue his high designs, as well to maintain himself in those
memorable Conquests, that he had so happily accomplished, as for the gaining of
other Isles, Kingdoms, Cities, and Countries. To this effect Nonio Acuna his
Viceroy in the Indies, took and ruined the Isle of Bethleem, then subjected
Bacin and Daman, two famous Indian Cities, slew Sultan Baduc the puissant King
of Cambaie, and subjected the City of Dium, where he built a Cittadelle. The
success the Christians had in these parts, so perplexed the Turk, that he sent
a powerful Fleet commanded by the Bassa of Egypt, to drive the Portugals from
Dium and other places, which they had in that Country: This Army joined with
that of Cambaie, but at the rencounter they received so sharp a welcome from
the Defendants commanded by Antonio Silueria, Vasconcellius.
that a great number of them were killed upon the place.

Andrade.
Nine years after this, the second Siege of Dium, was with much resolution John
Mascaregna, against the Sultan Mamudin, not less notorious than the other,
being that then also the Turk assisted the Indian with his Forces.

The like success smiled for a time upon the Christians at Safin in Africa,
where they valiantly endured Six months Siege by the Cherifs Army consisting of
an hundred thousand Soldiers, but not long after the Cherif or King of Suez
worsted the Portuguesses, which so much cooled their resolutions, that King
JOHN deliberated to abandon all his Forts of Africa, the more firmly to settle
and establish himself in the Indies, Guinee, and Brasille, but this council was
not followed, for only quitting and dismantling the Inland Forts, he retained,
and fortified the Port Towns of Septe, Tangier, and Mazagan, with all things
necessary for a resistance.

Vasconcellius.
This King JOHN obtained from the Pope, That the City of Evora should be erected
into an Archbishopric, the Cities of Portalegre, Leiria, and Miranda in
Portugal, into Bishoprics, as also, of Cochin and Malaca in Asia, of Baia in
Brasille, of Cape Asinaire in Guinee; and in Ethiopia he established John
Bermudes for first Patriarch of the Latin Church.

Andrada.
Following the steps of the King his Father, to him was attributed the honor of
having planted the Gospel in the Eastern parts of Asia, in Ethiopia the Higher,
and other remote Provinces; as also in the Molucco Islands, and Japon, where he
sent that famous Jesuit Francis Xauier, afterward Canonized, the fruit of
whose labors appeared in the conversion of many Infidels to the faith.
Insomuch that it is remarkable, that under the happy Reign of this Prince JOHN,
there were twelve Pagan Kings baptized, with the greater part of their people.
He performed many other profitable works for the advancement of Piety; caused
several Monasteries to be reformed according to their Ancient Rules, and was
one of the first Kings that favored, and greatly increased the Order of the
Society of Jesus, for whom he erected several Colleges in Portugal, and his
other Dominions.

Nunius.
He was a devout Prince, and naturally so benign and clement, that he even
showed himself slow in Ordering punishment to the Malefactors, and when
Judgment was given against such, (which he did in person once a week) he rather
inclined to Forgiveness, than Condemnation. A Lover he was of Peace and
Tranquillity, a favourer of persons of merit, and parts, having given
entertainment in his Kingdom to strangers of diverse professions. He transferred
the University of Lisbonne to Conimbra, V^sconcellius.
and richly endowed it, augmented the Salaries of the public Professors, and
rendered this Achademy one of the most famous of Europe. He raised also several
proud Structures at Evora, and restored the Aquaeduct of this City, which place
he so much delighted in, that he made it the most ordinary place of his
dwelling.

Mariana.
In the Year, One thousand five hundred twenty and five, His Marriage.
and in the Month of February, he espoused Katherine of Austria at Salamanca,
she Charles V. and fourth Daughter of Philip I. of the name King of Spain, and
of Queen Joane his Wife. She dyed at Lisbonne, Anno, One thousand five hundred
threescore and seventeen, having Sebastian, who succeeded this King JOHN, for
the respect and reverence which he did bear this Princess his Grandmother, did
for some time bridle the impetuosity of his rash designs.

King JOHN III. her Husband, deceased twenty years before her of an Apoplexy,
His Death
in the City of Lisbonne, the Eleventh day of June, in One thousand five
hundred fifty and seven, after he had lived Fifty and five years, and reigned
Five and thirty and an half. His body was interred in the Church of the
Monastery of Bethleem, which being begun to be built by his Father, was
accomplished by him and the Queen his Wife.

The Symbol or Devise of this King, was a Rock composed of five Collumnes,
upon which was exalted a Cross, and for the Soul of the Device, IN HOC SIGNO
VINCES; presenting thereby, (in imitation of Constantine the great, and of one
of his Ancestors) that in this sign of the Redemption of Mankind, and of the
Death of the Savior of the world, he vanquished the enemies of our Faith.

Children of JOHN III. King OF PORTUGAL, and of KATHERINE OF AUSTRIA his Wife.
Almerin, February, in the Year, One thousand five hundred twenty and six, dyed
young.

November, being All Saints day, Ao One thousand five hundred thirty and one,
and departed this world three years after.

Evora, May, in the Year, One thousand five hundred thirty and three, and
deceased also in his infancy.

Evora the Six and twentieth day of April, Ao One thousand five hundred thirty
and five, dyed likewise in his youth.

PORTUGAL.
The place of his Birth was Evora, His Birth.
upon the third day of June, in the Year, Comme cy devant.
One thousand five hundred thirty and seven. About the sixteenth year of his
age he espoused JOANE OF AUSTRIA, His Marriage.
second daughter of the Emperor Charles V. and of Isabel of Portugal his Wife,
PORTUGAL
Party d' AUSTRICHE.
who was January, His Death.
Ao One thousand five hundred not having arrived at the Seventeenth year of his
age. Comme cy devant.


He left this Princess JOANE with child, who after delivery of her posthumus
Son King Sebastian, returned into Castille, and in the absence of her Brother
King Philip II. who was at that time in the Low Countries, governed his
Kingdoms with Prince Charles his Son, her Nephew, and then departed out of this
life into a better, Mariana.
in the Year of Salvation, One thousand five hundred threescore and eighteen.
She founded a Nunnery for barefooted Sisters at Madrid, and had this happiness,
not to see the loss and miserable death of her only Son, happening but few Months
after her decease.

A Son of JOHN Prince OF PORTUGAL, and JOANE OF AUSTRIA his Wife.
15. SEBASTIAN the last King OF PORTUGAL in descent, of this branch.

John III. born the ninth day of March, in the Year, One thousand five hundred
finished his days in his infancy.

John III. first saw the light of day at Conimbra, Her Birth.
the Fifth day of October, AUTRICHE ou ESPAGNE.
Anno, Her Marriage.
One thousand five hundred twenty and seven, Salamanca (in March, Anno, One
thousand five hundred forty and three) to Philip II. Escartele Au premier
quartier aussi escartele.

Au 1. and 4. de CASTILLE.

Au 2. and 3. de LEON.

Au 2. qua^tier d' ARRAGON.

Party d' ARRAGON-SICILIE.

Sur lesquels deux premiers quartiers est pose l'Escu de Portugal.

Au 3. d' AUSTRICHE, Soustenu de BOURGONGNE de la premier branche.

Au 4. de BOURGONGNE de la second oranche; soustenu de BRABANT.

Et sur ces deux derniers quartiers est un Escusson de FLANDRES. Party du
Marquisate du St. Empire.

Le tout Party de PORTUGAL.


at that time Prince, and afterward Spain. She was the first of four wives,
that he had, Her death.
and dyed at Validolit the Twelfth day of July, in the Year, One thousand five
hundred four days after she was delivered of her only Son Prince Charles, who
dyed before the King his Father, and had a sad, and Tragical end. The same King
Philip II. deceased the Thirteenth day of September, in the Year of Grace, One
thousand five hundred fourscore and eighteen, Spain, and Eighteen in Portugal.
The body of the Princess Mary his Wife, was conveyed to Granada, and there
interred. She never carried the Title of Queen, for her Husband came to the
Crown a long time after her decease.

Lisbonne, the Eight and April, One thousand five hundred twenty and nine, was
second Daughter of King John III. and dyed young.

Lisbonne, the Fifteenth day of February, in the Year of our Redemption, One
thousand five hundred and thirty, dyed in the Cradle.

A Natural Son of JOHN III. King of PORTUGAL.
Bracara, and Primate of Spain, was a Prelate well read in Philosophy,
Divinity, and other good Learning; these excellent parts had laid a foundation
for higher expectations, Vasconcellius.
when Death surprised him in the flower of his years, to the great affliction
of King John III. his Father.

15. SEBASTIAN KING of PORTUGAL and the ALGARVES, on this, and the other side
the Sea in Africa, Lord of Guinee, and of the Conquest, Navigations, and
Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India. CHAP. XVII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL.

THAT Prejudice which young Princes and their people receive by ill weighed
councels, and imprudent deliberations, is apparent in this King, when their hot
courage, accompanied with rashness; throws them into the precepice of a
deplorable ruin. This was King SEBASTIAN's condition, who being in the first
Flower of his age, without experience in Deeds of War, embarked himself in a
dangerous (yet glorious) enterprise, against the Advice of his nearest Friends,
and most faithful Councellers, leaving his Kingdom emptyed of Money, naked of
Nobility, without a certain Heir, and in the hands of ill-affected Governors.
So that in Fine, he miserably perished, and by this unhappy Event gave great
advantages to the Infidels, and grief to his Subjects, which was the more
increased, for that the Kingdom of Portugal having for a long time enjoyed the
calm of an happy Peace, and so much Prosperity, was not only agitated with
furious Tempests, and intestine Wars; but also fell into the hands of a
stranger.

This King SEBASTIAN was only Son of Prince John of Portugal, and of Joane of
Austria his Wife, No^ius.
born a posthumus (in the Year, One thousand five hundred fifty and four) the
Twentieth day of January, His Birth.
on which day is celebrated the Feast of St. Sebastian, Vasconcellius.
in memory of whom

After the death of his Grandfather King John III. being but Three years old,
he succeeded to the Crown of Portugal, and during his minority, was under the
Government of Queen Katherine of Austria. But afterward this Princess, not
being able to undergo so great a charge as that of the Regency, transferred it
by the Estates to Cardinal Henry, great Uncle by the Fathers side to King
SEBASTIAN; who having attained to the Fourteenth year of his age, began to take
the Reins of Government into his own hand.

Vasconcellius.
The Moors taking advantage by the infirmity of his age, thought it now a fit
time to endeavor the reduction of some of his best Garrisons in Africa. So
that Mahomet King of Mauritania, the Son of Cherif Abdala, came Magazon with a
strait Siege, and had it not been by Roderick de Sosa nobly defended for the
space of Three months, they had carried it.

Thuanus.
No better was the Fortune of the Infidels Ten years after, when they Goa, and
Chiaule. For Attaida and Mascaregna so resolutely opposed, that after Six
months Siege before the one, and Nine before the other, they were forced to
retire with loss and shame.

Now was King SEBASTIAN in the Twentieth year of his age, who being of an able
Body, and of a Courageous, and Martial Soul, not content with those Dominions
which he possessed, resolved to make Conquest of new, not considering, that
this design was not to be effected, without great hazard, and in the alteration
of that repose his Kingdom had so long enjoyed. He had first designed a War
against the Indians, but that his Kinsmen and Subjects would not consent unto.
But as there was some difficulty wholly to withdraw the young Prince (who had a
Warlike spirit) from this Enterprise, such as were near him, labored to divert
him by means of another which they laid before him, turning all his Resolution
upon Afric, to engage the Moors which live in that part called Mauritania
Tingitana, where the Portugals maintained (to their great Charge) upon the
Coast of Barbary, the three Fortresses of Septe, Tangier, and Magazon, the
Inlet and Key of Spain, by which the Moors have heretofore conquered it; But
this diversion whereunto they persuaded the King, produced sad effects,
principally proceeding for want of Judgment, for although it were difficult
wholly to dissuade him from the expedition of India, and therefore convenient
to represent unto him some other Action; yet should they advisedly have
foreseen, not to divert him from one mischief, to thrust him into a greater.

The young King stayed not long to put this design in execution. For in the
Year, One thousand five hundred threescore and fourteen, he assembled King
Sebastian's first Voyage into Africa.
and with four Galleys, and some Ships, and Carvels passed into Africa, under
color of visiting his Forts, Co^^staggio.
although he really desired to effect more than he made show of; There they
came to some Skermishes with the Moors, at which he was almost always found in
person, where discovering his own weakness, and vexing himself that he could
not perform what he desired; He returned back to Lisbonne, still devising some
new manner of War, which so disquieted his conceit, that he neither said nor
did any thing to other end; deliberating not as a King, but as a private
Soldier, to accustom his body to labor, intending thereby to habituate
himself more to the hardships and miseries of War. This inclination (in which
the heavens had some part) was not contradicted by any of his Council; For
although these actions of the Kings were rash, yet Ambition, and fear of his
displeasure, were of such force, That the Nobility, Magistrates, and other
persons (who might have forced him) durst not open their mouths, nor oppose
themselves against his Will; and if any did mutter or speak to the contrary,
they were men of base Quality, and not admitted.

The Cardinal Henry his great Uncle, Brother to John III. Conestaggio.
his Grandfather, and Queen Katherine (in whom Flattery should have found no
place) had small credit with the King, neither did they use the Authority they
might have had, both fearing they should not prevail; but lose (with the Kings
disgrace) that small command was yet remaining in them: So as by a fatal
silence, they suffered this young Prince for the second time to return into
Africa.

And the more to inflame King SEBASTIAN, it fortuned that Muley Mahomet chased
out of the Kingdom of Morocco by his Uncle Muley Moluc, endeavored his
re-establishment by the aid of the Christians; Errera.
and for this purpose entreated succors from SEBASTIAN, persuading this King,
that by the advantage of those Friends that he could make in his own Kingdom,
he should be able to defeat Moluc, and to open him a way to trace the whole
Empire of Morocco.

SEBASTIAN drawn on by this vain hope, Vasconcellius.
embraced the Moors offer, and finding himself not able to perform this
expedition without another Confederate, endeavored to draw into this Action
his Uncle by the Mothers side, the King of Spain, Philip II. to which effect an
Interview was appointed at Guadalupa; There the Kings met, Nonius.
and proposals were made of a match betwixt King Philips Daughter, and King
SEBASTIAN, and as to the War of Africa, the Spanish King liked well of it, so
that it might be prosecuted by his Lieutenants, but not that he should
undertake it in person, excusing himself that he could not assist him with a
considerable force, pretending he had occasion for Soldiers to resist the Turk
in Italy; so that from the Catholic King he could expect but small supplies.

Italians, Germans, and Irish (after he had with great pomp caused the Royal
Standerd to be hallowed in the Cathedral Church of Lisbonne) SEBASTIAN set Sail
for Afric with an Army of Eighteen thousand men, King Sebastian's second
expedition into Africa.
Mariana in Summario de Hist. Hisp.
and the assistance of a great number of the Nobility of his Kingdom, among
which were several Princes and Lords, descended from the Royal Family.

At his arrival, Muley Moluc, Conestaggio.
fearing that the event of this War might fall out to his disadvantage, offered
him ten miles Circuit about every one of his Fortresses of Africa for Tillage;
But SEBASTIAN would not hearken to any Composition, unless he would yield into
his hands the Towns of Tituan, Alarache, and the Cape of Aghero, which the
Cherif refused.

In the mean time the Portuguesses being dissuaded from marching by land to lay
Siege to Alarache, to avoid the iminent danger which the Army would fall into
thereby, were so ill councelled, and so unfortunate, as to forsake that by Sea,
the far more advantageous, and of less hazard.

The Battle of Alcacer.
The Armies then coming to an engagement the Fourth day of August, Thuanus Hist.
sui temp.
One thousand five hundred threescore and eighteen, in the Plain of Alcacer.
King SEBASTIAN's Horse had for sometime the better of the Moorish Cavalry,
Errera.
but the grand advantage the Moors had of the Christians in number (being ten
to one) so much prevailed, that what they could not perform by their valor,
Nonius.
they executed with their number, so that the Christians wearied with
Conquering, were at last wholly defeated. Conestaggio.
The King was first wounded in the right Arm with the shot of a Harquebuze,
whereof making small account, he went ordering things in all parts of the Army;
But being at that time deprived of the greatest Treasure which young Kings
ought to have in so important occasions, a person sage and advised, to whom he
should give ear; when he began to see his men break, he fell furiously with
some Gentlemen that were about him, into the Enemies ranks, valiantly fighting
to give encouragement to the Soldiers. Those that saw him, wondered at his
Courage, for although they had killed three Horses under him without any whit
daunting him, yet was he indefatigable in charging, striking, and relieving all
parts of the Army where it was most oppressed. But being but a man seconded by
few, he cannot resist the Enemies fury, nor make his Friends partakers of his
Valor: so that being unhorsed, he was taken and disarmed. His Death.
And upon a dispute happening among the Moors for this royal Prisoner, was by
them most inhumanely butchered

Vasconcellius.
Such was the death of this unfortunate King, wherein did rencounter all things
that might make it deplorable; his youth, the expectation of his Virtues, the
want of Succession, the violence of his Death, and the prison of his body,
remaining in the hands of the Moors.

He was endued with excellent qualities; which were of no advantage to him,
wanting, because of his youth, that Virtue which ought to govern our Actions.
Conestaggio.
For all his designs which carried him to a precipitate end, were built upon
his Magnanimity, Liberality, his desire of Military Glory, the Disposition of
his body, and the Vigor of his Courage. So that we may well say of this
unfortunate young Prince, that which was sometimes spoken of Alexander the
Great, That Nature had given him Virtue, and Fortune Vices. For to say truly,
SEBASTIAN had his Virtues from Nature, and his Vices from his Education.

Mariana.
This Battle was the more remarkable, for that the two other Kings, Moluc and
Mahumed dyed there also, the first with the violent access of a natural
disease, the other was drowned in passing the River of Mucazen, to save himself
by flight. There dyed Three thousand Moors, and as many Christians, or more;
among which were many persons of Honor; For besides the Captains of the
strangers, and the Duke of Aueiro: there was slain Alphonso of Portugal Count
of Vimioso; Lewis Coutinho Earl of Rodondo; Vasco de Gama Count of Vidiguera;
Alphonso of Norogna Earl of Mira, John Lobo Baron of Alvito, Alvara of Mello
eldest Son to the Count of Tentugal; James brother to the Duke of Braganza,
John de Silveira eldest Son to the Earl of Sorteglia, Christopher of Tauora,
and many others of account, so as some Noble Families were there wholly
extinct; and Theodosius Duke of Barcellos, and Anthony Prior of Crato, with
many others, were taken Prisoners.

Errera.
The Body of King SEBASTIAN pierced with seven wounds, not being known till two
days after the fight, was brought unto Alcacer, and afterward the King of
Spain Uncle to the Defunct, by the permission of the Cherif King of Morocco,
caused it to be conveyed to Septe, where it rested, until that in the Year, One
thousand five hundred fourscore and two, it was from thence transported into
the Kingdom of Portugal, and with Magnificent Funeral Pomp (performed in the
presence of the same King) interred in the Monastery of Bethleem, Conestaggio.
with the Kings of Portugal his Ancestors.

And here I cannot omit to inform you of that Ceremony used by the Portuguesses
in bewailing their dead Kings, The Ceremony used by the Portuguesses in
bewailing their dead Kings.
Idem.
and performed by them upon the news of the death of this King SEBASTIAN. First
there parted from the Magistrates house, a Citizen on Hors-back, covered
himself and his Horse all in Black, with a great Ensign in his hand likewise of
Black, bearing it on his shoulder that it might trail on the ground, after him
followed three old men on foot in Mourning weeds, with three Scutchions in
their hands, like Shields or Targets, bearing them high upon their heads
without any figure upon them, but all Black; Then followed some Citizens of the
same Magistrates, and other inferiors in great numbers: All these went through
the principal Streets of Lisbonne, and coming to the steps of the Cathedral
Church, which is near unto the place from whence they parted; those which hold
the Scutcheons, mount up certain degrees, and one of them lifting up his
Shield, cries with a loud voice, People of Lisbonne, lament your King
SEBASTIAN, who is dead: Then all the people weep, and cry: Having ended his
words, he breaks his Scutchion as a vain thing, striking it on the place where
he stands: Then proceed they on, and being come to the New Street, ascending
the Stairs of the little Church of our Lady of Oliuera, another of them which
carried the Scutchions, pronounces the same words the former had done, and
breaks his Shield in the same manner; The like is done by the third upon the
stairs of the Hospital: So as all the three Scutchions being broken in those
places, they all return home, and thus is the Ceremony ended.

The same King was at the time of his death aged Four and twenty years, Nonius.
Seven Months, and Fifteen Days, Vasconcellius.
and had Reigned about Two and twenty.

He never married, although there were proposals made of three several wives,
Isabel of Austria Daughter of the King of Spain, Margaret of France Daughter of
King Henry II. and also another Isabel of Austria Daughter of the Emperor
Maximilian I. and Widow of the King of France, Charles IX.

He had his Piety by inheritance, having made his Religion flourish, and
established it in Brasille and the Indies, where he founded several Churches
and Colleges, but more especially those of the Jesuits.

About two and twenty years after his decease, Thuanu^.
there was a man in Italy who reported himself to be the same King SEBASTIAN,
and that having escaped from the Battle of Alcacer, he had wandered up and down
for a long time, without making himself known. Which being represented to the
Senate of Venice with many Circumstances, some believed it to be a truth,
others were doubtful, and also many there were that supposed him to be an
Imposter. But certain it was, that having been imprisoned at Florence, and from
thence conveyed to Naples, and put in the Galleys, he there came to a miserable
end.

The Cardinal Henry of Portugal being exceeding old, Vasconcellius.
against the common course of Nature succeeded King SEBASTIAN his Nephews Son.
Mariana.
Which young Prince in that War which he undertook in Afric, endeavoring
to deliver a Nation from servitude, by his imprudence rendered the greater part
of his Nobility slaves to the Arabes, and Moors, Conestaggio.
and of a free Nation, as it was, in a small space of time was reduced under
the obedience of the Castillians, which they for so many years held for their
capital Enemies; as writes Hierosme Franchi Conestaggio, a Gentleman of Genoa,
who has most judiciously discoursed this last War of the Portuguesses in
Africa, as also the end of this Branch of the House of Portugal, the Change of
their Government, and the Union of this Kingdom to the Crown of Castille. The
same Subject has been ellegantly Written by Jaques Augustus de Thou, in the
History of his time; and by Antonio Errera, Historiographer to the King of
Spain, Philip II.

13. HENRY CARDINAL of PORTUGAL, then Elected KING Of PORTUGAL and the
ALGARVES, etc. CHAP. XVIII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms Emanuel King of Portugal, and of Mary
of Castille his second Wife, His Birth.
this HENRY was Vasconcellius.
born the last day of January, in the Year, One thousand five hundred and
twelve. He was first of all Archbishop of Brachara, Nonius.
and Primate of Spain, then of Lisbonne, and lastly also first Archbishop of
Evora, where he founded a fair College for the Jesuits.

One thousand five hundred forty and six, Pope Paul III. adopted him to the
Sacred College of Cardinals. During the Reigns of his Brother, and Nephews Son
John III. and Sebastian, he was Inquisitor Major of the Faith in Portugal.

After that Katherine of Austria, Widow of Prince John of Portugal his Nephew,
Mother of young King Sebastian, had quit the Regency of the Kingdom, the
Estates conferred it upon this Cardinal HENRY, great Uncle to the young King,
in the Year, One thousand five hundred He exercised this Charge until the King
came to age, who upon his second expedition into Africa, wanting a careful
person to whom he might leave the Government of the Kingdom in his absence,
went to Evora, where HENRY at that time lived. And although this Prince was not
greatly pleasing to him, yet did he entreat him to take this care in his
absence, which the Cardinal would by no means accept, excusing it by reason of
his age, and indisposition to Rule; so that the King made choice of four
Governors to command in his name, which were George d'Almeda Archbishop of
Lisbonne, Peter d'Alcasoua, Francis de Sada, and John Mascaregnas, to whom he
gave a plenipotentiary power.

Conestaggio.
After his death in Africa, these Governors committed the management of
affairs to the Cardinal, Thuanus.
who not long after was Proclaimed, and Sworn King by the Portuguesses:
Conestaggio.
The Ceremony of the Portuguesses in swearing their King
The Form of the Oath was performed in this manner; The XXV. of August, the
Hospital Church of All Saints was hanged with Silk Tapestry, in the which they
erected a Throne, upon which was placed a Seat of Cloth of Gold; thither came
the King in the morning, in the habit of a Cardinal; going from the Palace,
there marched before him eight Attabales, or Drums on Hors-back, after the
Moresco manner, and nine Heralds all on Hors-back, carrying upon their Cloaks
their Coats of Arms: after followed on foot, almost all the Officers of the
Court, those of the Chamber, and other Magistrates; behind them was the Duke of
Braganza on Hors-back bareheaded, bearing in his hand a Sword, with a Scabard
of Gold, as Constable: a little after came the Cardinal upon a Mule, the which
Alvara de Silva Count of Portalegre, Lord Steward of his Household, led by the
reins; there followed after many Noblemen and Gentlemen on Hors-back, with a
great number of people on foot: The Cardinal environed with a great multitude,
ascended the Stairs of the Hospital, being entered the Church, having heard
Service, and ended his Prayers, he seated himself in the Chair of State
prepared on the Throne, where presently Francis de Sada (one of those that had
been Governors) put the Scepter in his hand, and Michael de Mora Secretary,
standing a little distant, said (reading it with a loud voice) That King HENRY
by the Death of King Sebastian, did succeed in the Realm, and therefore they
had delivered him the Scepter, and that he was come to take the accustomed
Oath, to maintain and observe unto his people, and to any other, all Liberties,
Privileges and Conventions, granted by his Predecessors: which done, the
Secretary kneeling before him with an open Book, the King laid his hand
thereon, swearing so to do: Then did the Attabales sound, every man crying,
Reale, Reale, for HENRY King of Portugal: This done, he rose, and with the same
company, holding still the Scepter in his hand, he returned to the Palace, the
Attabales sounding, and the Heralds crying from time to time as before.

Conestaggio.
Now being seated in the Royal Throne, The Deliberations of King HENRY at his
coming to the Crown.
although he was Threescore and seven years of age, and not healthful, yet
looked he about him, and (as it were determined from above, that Portugal
should fall by degrees to its declination) did not provide for the State,
according to that opinion that was conceived of him: but the Realm by reason of
their miseries past, remained as a body empty and afflicted, which needed a
wise Physician to restore it. For as one mischief comes not alone, the new King
did more torment it; for although many supposed, that he being old, a Priest,
and of an exemplary life, should lay all passions aside, and be careful to
settle the state of the Commonwealth in better order than he had found it; yet
notwithstanding he could not temper himself, with such a disposition as was fit
for his Quality and years: But as it often falls out in them which have been
oppressed, who coming to Rule, seek Revenge upon their enemies, even so did he
(not imitating the example of Lewis XII. King of France, who disdained to
requite the wrongs done to him being Duke of Orleance) who resolved to revenge
the injuries done to him being Cardinal, if they may be justly called injuries,
when as Princes be not respected of their inferiors as they ought: For not
being greatly favored by the King his Predecessor, the Ministers, and
Favorites of his Nephew, did not use him with that Respect as was required,
conceiving (that being so old, and Sebastian so young) that he would never have
attained to the Crown: By reason whereof he deprived almost all the Officers of
the Court, and some of them that did manage the Kings Treasure, of their
Offices; and advanced his own Servants.

In the mean time, the Estates of the Kingdom beseeching him to take care for
the declaring of his Successor to the Crown, he Convoked a Solemn Assembly of
the same Estates in the City of Almerin, to hear the Claims of those Princes
which pretended to the Kingdom. The number of whom was many; viz. Antonio
Bastard of Portugal, King HENRY's Nephew; the Catholic King Philip II. the
Duke of Braganza in the Right of the Duchess his Wife; the Duke of Savoy; the
Prince of Parma; the Queen of France, Katherine de Medicis, Mother of King
Henry III. and Pope Gregory XIII.

His Death.
During this Assembly, Conestaggio.
King HENRY left this World the last day of January, in the Year, One thousand
five hundred and fourscore; it being remarkable, Thuanus.
That he began to die in the beginning of the Eclipse of the Moon, and finished
with it; Vasconcellius.
as if that celestial Sign had wrought that Effect in him (being a King of a
weak body) which it does not in stronger; Mariana.
or at least, not so suddenly, as Astrologers do write. Neither is the hour to
be neglected, being the same wherein he was born, Threescore and eight years
before, having Reigned Seventeen Months, and eight days; so that in him ended
the Male Line of the Kings of Portugal of that Branch; since derived from the
Collateral of the Dukes of Braganza. He was of a thin Body, small of Stature,
and of a lean Face: As for his Judgment, it was indifferent, endued (besides
the Latin Tongue) with some Knowledge. Always held to be Chaste, and did
never blemish this Angelical Virtue, but with the desire of Marriage in his
later days. He was acounted sparing, giving rather than denying; for he
refused seldom, but he gave sparingly. Ambitious he was of all Jurisdiction, as
well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, zealous in Religion; yet in the Reformation of
religious persons, more strict than was convenient. He was Bishop, Governor of
the Realm, Inquisitor Major, Legate Apostolic, and King: But the more he
soared, the more he discovered his weakness; suffering himself in his most
important Affairs to be governed by his Ministers, Conestaggio.
not being able to determine the Cause of the Succession: Opinions were grafted
in him with great obstinacy, retaining a continual remembrance of wrongs; so
that Justice was in him, but an unjust execution of his own Passions. In Fine,
He was endued with great Virtues, and with fewer, and lesser Vices, yet were
they equal in this; for he had the Virtues of an Ecclesiastical person, and the
defects of a Prince: During his life, he was feared of many, and beloved of
few, so as none lamented his death; only such, as were well-affected (desiring
the Dispute of Succession had been determined before his death) had a sensible
apprehension of his loss.

His Body rested some time at Almerin, until that Philip II. King of Spain,
caused it to be brought to the Monastery of our Lady at Bethleem,
notwithstanding that HENRY had Ordered his Sepulture at Evora, where he had in
his lifetime erected a stately Marble Tomb.

His Device was an Anchor, and a Daulphin, with this Inscription, FESTINA
LENT, for to denote, That in the execution of all Actions; Diligence, with
Diseretion, and a Mediocrity was to be used.

14. ANTHONY The Bastard, Proclaimed King of PORTUGAL, and the ALGARVES, etc.
CHAP. XIX.
THE Prince Lewis of Portugal Duke of Beia his father, whose John of Jerusalem,
and Prior of Crato.

He had embraced this Profession against his inclination, so that Pope Gregory
XIII. was the more willing to dispense with the Vow he had made; which
Dispensation was obtained at the instance and pursuit of King Sebastian of
Portugal, who so highly esteemed this Prince ANTHONY his Afric, he made him
his Lieutenant General, notwithstanding that Prince Edward of Portugal the
Constable, was present.

Conestaggio.
At the second expedition that the same King Sebastian undertook for Africa,
Jac. Augustus Thuanus.
he also accompanied him, and assisted him at the Fatal Battle of Alcacer, in
which he was made a Prisoner, and reduced to a miserable Captivity for the
space of Forty days; After which by an especial Providence, he found means to
recover his liberty.

Being upon his return, he had intelligence that his Uncle the Cardinal Henry,
after the Death of King Sebastian, was Elected King of Portugal.

During whose Reign (as you have read) the Estates having been assembled to
advise of a Successor to the Crown, ANTHONY was of the Number of the
Competitors, urging, That he ought to be preferred, as only Male-child of the
Posterity of King Emanuel: In pursuit of which, after the Decease of Henry, he
was by the consent of the Three Estates, also Elected King the Nineteenth day
of June, in the Year, One thousand five Conestaggio.
in the City of Sanctarem; then afterward Confirmed in that of Lisbon, Texera.
Metropolis of the Kingdom; then received in the Quality of King at Setubal,
and acknowledged for such, by all the Towns and Fortresses of Africa, and
Isles subject to the Dominion of Portugal; as also by the famous University of
Conimbra.

But the King of Spain, Philip II. H. F. Conestaggio.
pretending on the contrary to be lawful Successor to the Crown, in the Right
of the Empress, Isabel of Portugal, his Mother, incontimently raised a
considerable Army, Thuanus. Texera.
under the Conduct of his Martial favorite, that famous Captain, Ferdinand de
Toledo Duke of Alva, who entered the Frontiers, and seized upon diverse Towns by
accord, which the Popula^s hearing of, which were with ANTHONY at St. Arem,
Proclaimed him King, that so they might have a head to their confused body.
After which ANTHONY repaired to Lisbonne, and there was sworn, sent the Count
of Vimioso to Setaval, whence he expelled the Governors, who there had
intended to admit the Spanish Galleys, so that all the places about Lisbonne
were at his devotion. But Alva very much prevailed, as well through his own
good Discipline, as the Inconstancy, Headiness, and unskilfulness of his
enemies: so that he soon conquered the whole Kingdom of Algarves;
Notwithstanding the Pope (thinking it not convenient in Reason of State, that
the Catholic King, whose power was already so formidable in Italy, should
grow more potent by the addition of a new Kingdom) had sent his Legate to
exhort him to desist from Arms, offering him a Judge to decide the Rights of
the Pretendants: H. F. Conestaggio.
but the Spaniard being loath to put that to Compromise whereof he was already
assured, deceived him with delays so long, until the Victory was even in his
hands; so that the fea^s of ANTHONY increased as his hopes decayed: The Duke of
Braganza, and the greatest part of the Nobility, making their peace with the
Enemy to their best advantage, no hope of Relief remaining from other Countries
(a foundation built upon succors from the Enemies ill-willers being always
unsure, since they will not declare themselves unless their Companions be
strong) and his Army which he had levied, being composed either of unwilling
minds, or unable bodies, since all were Mechaniques, Mariners, Slaves, or
religious persons, whose vaunts before the Fight did more inflame, than their
valor in Fight did defend him, whom they had inflamed. Yet such as they were,
they banded together under the leading of ANTHONY, ANTHONY's A^my defeated near
Lisbonne.
at Alcantara expecting the Enemy, in the Year, One thousand five hundred and
fourscore, where they were put to rout, chased to Lisbonne Walls, and the
Suburbs sacked a thousand Portugals being slain in Fight, partly in their
Trenches, and partly at Viana, whither he was so sharply pursued by Zanches
d'Avila Marescal of the Field, that in the habit of a Mariner he hardly escaped
in a small Boat, both Captivity from his Pursuers, and drowning through the
violence of the wind and waves. The year following, viz. One thousand five
hundred fourscore and one, he escaped into France from Setuval in a Flemmish
Ship which he did hire by the aid of a woman and a Religious person, where he
incited the Duke of Alenzon to annoy the Catholic King in Brabant, and the
Queen Mother (who seemed discontented with the Spaniard, for interrupting the
course of Justice, by the violence of Arms) to assist him with Men and
Munition for the recovery of Portugal, and the Defense of the Terceraes, which
stood out in his Cause, and had vanquished Peter de la Baldes, with the loss of
Four hundred of his men, who had been sent thither to reduce those Islands to
the obedience of the King of Spain.

Portugal was now peaceably enjoyed by the Catholic King, who had made his
Magnificent entry into Lisbonne, granted a General Pardon to all ANTHONY's
Faction, excepting the Religious, and some few particulars, and received the
Oath of Allegiance to himself and Dom Diego his son, from the States of the
Kingdom. At this time ANTHONY was armed by the Queen Mother with Sixty Sail,
and Seven thousand men for the assurance of the Islands, and the surprising of
the Indian Fleet under the leading of Philip Strozzi Colonel of the French
Infantry, and Monsieur Brisack, against whom they sent the Marquess of St.
Croix with a formidable Army, who engaged with the French near the Island of
St. Michael in a bloody fight, wherein Strozzi, Strozzi, and the Count of
Vimioso slain.
and the Count of Vimioso were slain, much blood spilt on both sides, but the
French received the Foil, and yet not so weakened, but that ANTHONY retained the
Island in his hands, from whence he after Sailed into France, leaving Emanuel
de Silva Governor behind. After the Report of this Victory the Catholic King
imagining his assurance of Portugal to be good, departed into Castille, leaving
Cardinal Albert Archduke of Austria, Viceroy in his stead, having first
received a new Oath to his Son Dom Philip, because Dom Diego his eldest Son was
deceased.

Conestaggio.
But because he meant to make his Conquest entire, the year following (1583.) he
sent the Marquess of St. Croix, with a greater Navy than Monsieur de Chattes,
being joined with those Portuguesses which were under Emanuel de Silva, made a
valiant resistance, but being oppressed with so great a number of Enemies,
being Ten thousand trained Soldiers at least, the French yielded upon
Composition, and Emanuel de Silva was taken, and beheaded; After which Victory
Faiole was reduced to obedience, after some small resistance, Portugal wholly
subjected to the Catholic King.
and thus was the Conquest of the Kingdom of Portugal wholly completed, and
subjected to the Catholic King.

ANTHONY being returned into France, (the Sanctuary of afflicted Princes;) from
thence he writ a long Letter to Pope Gregory XIII. representing the Right he
had to the Kingdom of Portugal; adding, That he had been justly Elected King:
That the Marriage of Prince Lewis his Father, had been declared lawful, by the
Sentence of the Bishop of Angra, the Popes Legate: That King Henry his Uncle
had unjustly Sentenced him in his own Defense; for his Legitimation having been
proved, the Crown had in Justice fallen upon him the said ANTHONY, before Henry
himself, as being the Son of his elder Brother, whose Sentence was revoked and
annihilated by Pope Gregory: To whom, Pope Sixtus the Fifth succeeding, the
same King ANTHONY writ him also another Letter, as well to Congratulate with
him in his Election, offering him the Vows of an obedient Son; as to implore
his help toward his Establishment in his Ancient Possession, and Royal Dignity.

Camdenus.
ANTHONY, not long after, obtained Letters of Recommendation from Queen
Katharine, to Elizabeth Queen of England; in which, ANTHONY entertained in
England.
she forewarned her, and other Princes, to beware of the Spanish Greatness, who
now enriched with the Addition of Portugal, East India, and many Islands in the
Atlantique Sea, might in time over shadow all his Neighboring Princes. Queen
Elizabeth, always Provident of her own, and her Subjects Safety, easily
listened to this Council, and bountifully relieved ANTHONY, which she thought
she might do without Offense, considering, that she acknowledged him her
Kinsman, descended of the Blood Royal of England; nor was there any League made
betwixt the Spaniards and English, that the Portugals might not be received
into England. Here then ANTHONY resided, till that fatal Blow was given to
their (as they called it) Invincible Armado, when Queen Elizabeth judged it
more Honorable to attaque her Enemy, than again to be assailed by him;
suffered a Fleet to be set forth against Spain, commanded by Sir John Norris,
and Sir Francis Drake, and some other private Perons: The Hollander likewise
joined some Ships; so that the Fleet consisted of about Eleven thousand
Soldiers, and Fifteen hundred Mariners.

With this Fleet ANTHONY, with some few Portuguesses, set Sail out of England,
having before assured the English, That the Portuguesses would revolt from the
Spaniard and appear for him; and that Muley Hamet, King of Morocco, would
strengthen him with Twenty thousand men.

The first place the English Fleet put into, was the Groyne in Gallicia, the
base Town they easily took; but endeavoring the higher, were repulsed, and
forced to raise their Siege, upon Report that the Count of Andrada was coming
with Forces to cut off their passage to their Ships, which Norris resolving to
prevent, marched up to them, defeated them, and had the slaughter of them for
Three Miles; after which, having pillaged, and burnt some Villages, they
returned to Sea, steering their Course for Portugal.

They had labored some time with contrary Winds, plying to and fro at Sea,
when Robert the young Earl of Essex fell into them, who out of Military Glory,
Hate of the Spaniard, and Commiseration of ANTHONY, had left the Court, without
the knowledge or consent of the Queen, in hope, by Reason of the influence he
had upon the Soldiery, to be chosen General of the Foot. Two days after his
Conjunction with them, they arrived in Penicha, where they landed after the
loss of some men, and reduced the Castle to ANTHONY'S Obedience.

Sir John Norris marches ditectly to Lisbonne.
Hence the Landforces under the Command of Sir John Norris, marched directly,
and with all possible speed toward Lisbon, about Sixty Miles distant, Drake
promising to follow with the Fleet by the way of the River Tagus. The Army
being arrived at Lisbon, though they had before at a Council of War determined
to encamp on the East Side of the Town, the better to bar Succors from coming
out of Spain; now contrary to their own Resolutions, sat down before St.
Katherines Suburbs on the West Side; whereas at first they found no Resistance,
so they found little help, but what the prayers of some few disarmed men gave
them, who now and then cried out, God save the King ANTHONY: And indeed other
help they could not afford him, Albertus Archduke of Austria the Viceroy
having before disarmed the Portugals.

The next day when the English, weary with their long march, betook themselves
to their Rest, the Spanish Garrison sallied out upon them, who were at first
resisted by Brett; and his Companies, till more coming up to their Assistance,
forced the Spaniards to give back, the Valiant Earl of Essex chasing them to
the very Gates; but the English had several Commanders of Note, and no small
quantity of private Soldiers slain.

In sum, when they had now stayed two days before the Town, and perceived that
the Portugals, notwithstanding the great brags and fair promises of ANTHONY,
did not at all incline to a Revolt, and that no Advice came of any Assistance
from Muley Hamet King of Morocco; but that instead of them, fresh Forces
flocked in great Numbers from the East-parts into the City, whilst their Army
was lessned by a violent Sickness, their Provision and Ammunition failed, and
their great Guns for Battery arrived not, they raised their Siege, and took
their way toward Cascais, a small Town at the mouth of the River, the
Spaniards following them at a distance, but not ever daring to fall in their
Rear. The Town of Cascais they took, blew up the Castle; and so,
notwithstanding all the entreaties of ANTHONY, set Sail for England, firing in
their way Vigo, a Port-town, deserted of its Inhabitants.

Thuanus.
So that now after a second Repulse, ANTHONY was forced to retire into France,
where he was favorably received by King Henry the Great, under whose
protection he passed the rest of his life; His Death.
and having lived Threescore and four Years, dyed at Paris, the Five and
twentieth day of August, in the Year, One thousand five hundred fourscore and
fifteen. His body was deposited in the Church of the Cordileires in the same
City. There was found in his Cabinet a Latin Paraphrase upon the penitential
Psalms, with some Prayers in no Vulgar Style, which gave Testimony of his
Piety, whose Epitaph in Latin Verse, has been written by Frederick Morel, the
Kings Greek Professor in the University of Paris.

Children of ANTHONY Prior of CRATO, Bastard of PORTUGAL.
PORTUGAL.
resided for some time with his Father in France, and England, then retired
into the Low Countries unto Maurice Count of Nassau, PORTUGAL
afterward Prince of Orange, His Marriage.
whose Sister EMILIA of NASSAU Daughter of William Prince of ORANGE, Party de
NASSAU-ORANGES.
and of Anne of Saxony his second Wife, EMANUEL married in the Year, One
thousand Escartele Au. 1. quartier d'Azure au Lion d'or arm and lampasse de
gueulles, l'Escu seem de billettes d'or, Qui est NASSAU.

Au 2. d'or au Lion de gueulles; arm and lampasse d'azur.

Au 3. de gueulles a la Fasse d'argent.

Au 4. de gueulles a deux Leopards d'or arme^z and lampassez d'argent.

Sur le tout un Escu aussi escartele; Au 1. and 4. de gueulles a la band d'or.

Au 2. and 3. d'or au Cor d'azur, lie and virole de gueulles; charge sur le
tout de cinq p ints d'or equippollez a quatre points d'azur.


afterward he traveled unto the Court of the Infanta Elizabeth the
Arch-dutchess, where he received a favorable entertainment.

Children of EMANUEL OF PORTUGAL, and of EMILIA OF NASSAU his Wife.
16. EMANUEL OF PORTUGAL.

16. LEWIS OF PORTUGAL, before named William, had for Godfather at the time of
his Confirmation, Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarre.

16. MARY OF PORTUGAL.

16. LOVISE OF PORTUGAL.

16. ANNE OF PORTUGAL.

16. JULIANE OF PORTUGAL.

16. MAURICE OF PORTUGAL.

16. SABINE OF PORTUGAL.

France and England, undertook the Voyages of Africa and Italy, afterward
returned into France, and sheltered himself under the protection of King Henry
the great, to whom Anthony had presented, and recommended him by a Letter writ
to his Majesty not long before his decease. From which time he continued his
residence in the Court of that great King, and then in that of King Lewis the
Just, his Son and Successor, the one and the other having honored him with a
particular favor, which upon all occasions they gave him testimony of.





ALthough in several places of this History, where I have met with the Persons,
I have given you an account of their Pretentions to this Crown of Portugal; yet
because they lie scattered in their Stories, and cannot be well compared one
with another, (and being it is the Opinion of many, That the Right and Title to
that Kingdom resides in the Kings of Spain; An Error, springing either from
their Ignorance in the Descent of those Princes; An apprehension that Sixty
years Possession by the Austrian Family could make a Title indubitable, which
was never warranted by the Right of Birod, or by the Laws of Portugal: Or, that
many being wilfully Ignorant, would have others to be so too) I have therefore
thought it necessary to spend this Sheet for the Entrance of the Table of the
Competitors, their several pretentions, and to clear the Title of King John IV.
to that Crown.

I. The Pretention of the People.
THe People Claimed, Jure Regni, alleging, That the Issue-Male of their Kings
failing, the Election belonged unto them, fortifying this Reason by the Example
of the Election which was made of their King, John I.

But against the People it was answered, That they had no greater Privilege of
Election in this Kingdom, than in the rest of Spain, all which Realms fall by
Succession, when there is any lawfully descended of the Blood Royal: And that
in Portugal they have less Liberty than the rest, growing from the Gifts of the
Kings of Castille, and from the Conquest of the Kings of Portugal. And
forasmuch as the People did not give the Realm to their Primative Kings, they
could not since be invested with any Power to Choose one. And for that which
they alleged concerning the Election of King John I. it was answered, That
this Reason did so little serve their turn, that it was rather an Argument
against them, to prove that the Kingdom in that Case was Successive: having
themselves secretly confessed, That they had no Right to Choose, whilst there
remained any one lawfully descended of the Royal Issue; Inferring, That
Beatrice being married to a Stranger, The Realm was in the same estate, wherein
according to the Law of Lamego, they were to choose the next Prince of the
Blood; which Choice proceeded from Duty, rather than any unlimited Power in the
People. But to put this Dispute out of doubt, there had been Four several
Examples put in Practice against the Peoples Election.

1. Alphonso III. Successor to his Brother Sanceo II. left the Crown to his Son
Dionysio, by the Right of Inheritance. 2. Emanuel in the same Right succeeded
John II. his Fathers Brothers Son. 3. Emanuel upon his journey into Castille,
declared, That if he deceased without Children, the Succession did belong to
James Duke of Braganza his Sisters Son. 4. And Henry the Cardinal in the same
manner without Election succeeded Sebastian, to whom he was great Uncle. So
that Consequently, That Custom was to be observed in the Succession of a
Kingdom, which had been ever practiced.

II. Of the POPE.
THe Popes Title was not forgot, who Challenged to be Jure divino Arbitrator
(if not Donor) in all Controversies for Crowns, but especially in this, because
Alphonso the first King to obtain that Title, became Tributary to the Sea of
Rome. But this was slighted and disregarded, as not worthy an Answer.

III. Of Katherine de Medicis.
KAtherine de Medicis Widow of Henry the Second King of France, was the Third
Competitor for the Crown of Portugal, as being descended legitimately from
Alphonso III. King of Portugal (vide page 22.) charging all that Reigned since
to be Usurpers, and that the Kingdom ought to return by direct Line to the
Heirs of the Lawful Children of Alphonso, and the Countess of Buillon, whom
they said to be this Katherine Daughter of Lawrence de Medicis, and of
Magdalene of Buillon and de la Tour, the only remainder in Direct Line of that
House, and Heir to the County, the which although she did not then possess,
being incorporate by the Kings of France, as a matter of importance seated upon
the Limits of France and England; yet they gave unto the Queen in Recompense,
the Earldom of Lauregais, which she enjoyed.

But against the most Christian Queen it was pleaded, That her Pretention was
improbable, and prescribed, seeing that the Successors of the Earl of Buillon,
had never made any mention thereof, neither is it credible, that since this
Pretention was incorporate to the Crown of so mighty a Realm, such Wise and
Potent Princes as were Francis I. and Henry II. would have forgotten to call it
in question. But the truth was, the Countess Matilda left no Children, as it
appears in her Testament, in the Public Registers of Portugal, making therein
no mention to leave any by King Alphonso, nor to have had any. It was likewise
proved, That Matilda or Maud had no Children, by a formal Request found in the
same Registers, by the which all the Prelates in the Realm did beseech Pope
Urban, That it would please him to disannul the Curse which he had laid upon
the Realm, and that he would approve the Marriage of Beatrix the second Wise of
Alphonso, that he would make their Children Legitimate, that there might be no
hindrance in the Succession of the Kingdom; whereby it was concluded, That if
there had been any lawful Children of Maud, they could not have persuaded the
Pope to prefer the Bastards of Beatrice. It was added, That these Reasons
were not unknown in France, and that of late there had been a Book Printed, of
the Genealogy of the Houses of Medicis and Buillon, continued unto Katherine
the most Christian Queen, whereby it did clearly appear, That Maud left no
Children by Alphonso her second Husband, having been formerly married to Philip
Son of Philip Augustus King of France; by which Marriage she had one Daughter
named Jane, who did not succeed her Mother in the County, dying before her
without Issue: So as Robert Son of Alix Sister to Matilda, came to the
Succession, and this is that Robert from whom they would draw the descent of
Queen Katherine, being the Nephew, and not the Son of Maud. So as not being at
all proved, that Alphonso III. had any Children by his first Bed, but the
contrary by many Reasons, the Queen had no Reason, they said, to Pretend.

The Interest of the other Pretenders more nearly concerned, this ensuing Table
will make clear.

Emanuel Fourteenth King of Portugal.
Beatrice Duchess of Savoye, Defunct. Emanuel Philibert D. of Savoy,
Competitor.
Isabel the Empress, Defunct. Philip II. King of Castille, Competitor.
John III. Fifteenth K. of Portugal, Def. John Prince of Portugal, Defunct.
Sebastian 16th King of Portugal, Defunct.

Lewis Duke of Beia, Defunct. Anthony Prior of Crato, Competitor.
Henry Cardinal, and Seventeenth K. of Portugal, after whose death these
several Princes laid Claim to that Kingdom. Edward Duke of Vimerana, Defunct.
Mary Duchess of Parma, Defunct. Raynucius Duke of Parma, Competit.
Katherine Duchess of Braganza, Competit.

IV. Of Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoye.
THe Fourth that pretended to this Crown, was Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoye,
as Son to Beatrix younger Daughter to King Emanuel, though it is to be
supposed, that he laid not his Claim out of any hopes to prevail whilst he was
descended of the younger Daughter, and Philip II. King of Spain of the Elder;
but it is rather to be thought, that he was incited to put in his Claim, by the
rest of the Pretenders, who knew, that of the Competitors that were not
Natives, he was the fittest Person of all others, to resist and annoy King
Philip, not only by reason of his Personal Valor, but also because of his
Countries bordering upon the Duchy of Milan, which with the assistance of the
French his Neighbors on the other side, and Pretenders to that Dukedom, he
might with ease at all times invade.

V. Of Anthony Prior of Crato.
HE was the Fifth Competitor for the Realm of Portugal, who alleged, That his
Mother was lawfully wedded to his Father, and endeavored by all means to Clear
the Aspersion of his illegitimation. But Anthony was held Directly Unlawful,
having always lived in that opinion, and was so held by his Father Lewis at
his Death (as it appeared by his Testament) That of Four Witnesses that were to
prove his Legitimation, Two were convinced to be false, for they recanted,
confessing they had been suborned by Anthony; and the other Two were suspected,
being near Kinsmen, and disagreeing betwixt themselves: And that although he
had demanded his Legitimation at Rome, and had obtained it, yet could not any
Royal or Pontifical Legitimation serve for the Succession of a Kingdom.

VI. Of Raynucio Prince of Parma.
THe Sixth who made Claim to this Kingdom, was Raynucio the young Prince of
Parma, who demanded it in the right of his Mother the elder Daughter to the
Infant Edward, alleging, That Jure Progeniturae, the Male-line was to be
served before the Female; so that until the Line of his Grandfather Prince
Edward were wholly extinct, neither Philip II. nor the Duke of Savoye could
have any pretense to that Kingdom: And against the Duchess of Braganza he
argued, That he ought to precede her, as being descended of the elder Sister.
Against the Duke of Parma it was not denied, but that he preceded the
Catholic King, and so consequently the Duke of Savoye; but as to the Duchess
of Braganza, she pleaded, That Raynucio could not aid himself with the benefit
of Representation, being the Son of her Sister deceased, and therefore out of
the degree wherein the Laws allow it.

VII. Of Katherine Duchess of Braganza.
THe Seventh Competitor for the Crown of Portugal, was Katherine Duchess of
Braganza, younger Daughter of Prince Edward, alleging, That in all Successions
whatsoever, these Four Qualities were to be considered, viz. The Line, the
Degree, the Sex, and the Age; that the better Line ought in Justice first to
take place, although others should have advantage in all the othet three
Qualities, That in all Successions of Crowns, the last Possesser was to be
succeeded Jure hereditatis, which allowed the Benefit of Representation: That
she representing the Infant Don Edward, the better Line did by Representation
precede Raynucio (the Law never allowing a Grandchild that benefit) and that
by her better Line she did exclude King Philip, who was descended of a
Daughter, but especially by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (put in
execution against Beatrice Daughter of Ferdinand IX. King of Portugal, who
having married out of the Kingdom to the King of Castille, her Right of
succeeding was utterly lost, and King John I. chosen in her stead) she was to
be preferred before all Claimers whomsoever, in regard of her being both Born
and Married within the Kingdom. Nor can it be thought hard measure to the Dukes
of Parma (being descended from Prince Edwards elder Daughter, to be excluded
the Succession to the Crown of Portugal, and the Dukes of Braganza derived from
the younger, and Married to a Native of Portugal, to have the undoubted Right)
if we consider, that by the same Law of Lamego the Crown descended to King
Emanuel himself, which otherwise had belonged unto the same Beatrice Queen of
Castille, only Daughter of King Ferdinand IX.

VIII. Of Philip II King of Castille.
PHilip II. King of Castille was the Eighth and last Pretender; who having
employed all the best Wits in Christendom, to confute and disprove all other
Claims, and to prove and maintain his; Alleged, That the Succession of Crowns
was to be decided by the Law of Nations, not of the Empire, upon which only her
Jus representandi Patrem was grounded, That the nearest male in degree to the
last Possesser, ought to succeed; That the Infant Don Edward being deceased
before his Brother Henry was King, could have no right in himself, and
therefore could derive none to his Posterity, for Nemo dat quod in se non
habet, that it was very unreasonable, that Katherine should be less prejudiced
in her self for her Sex, than King Philip should be for his Mother.

THE Several Emblems, and Mottoes of the Kings of PORTUGAL

Emblem of King ALPHONSO IV. of Portugal ALPHONSO IV.
ALTIORA PETO Emblem of King PETER of Portugal PETER
MONSTRAT ITER. Emblem of King FERDINAND of Portugal FERDINAND
CVR NON VTRVNQVE Emblem of King JOHN I. of Portugal JOHN I.
ACVIT VT PENETRET. Emblem of King EDWARD of Portugal EDWARD
LOCO ET TEMPORE Emblem of King JOHN II. of Portugal JOHN II.
PRO LEGE ET GREGE Emblem of King EMANVEL of Portugal EMANVEL
PRIMVS CIRCVMDEDISTI ME. Emblem of King JOHN III of Portugal JOHN III
IN HOC SIGNO VINCES Emblem of King SEBASTIAN of Portugal SEBASTIAN
SERENA CELSA FAVENT Emblem of King HENRY of Portugal HENRY
FESTINA LENT.

PHILIP II, III, IV. Of that NAME, KINGS OF SPAIN, And 19, 20, 21. KINGS of
PORTUGAL. CHAP. XX.
BUt it was no Arguments could confute, or annul the certain and indubitable
right of the Duchess of Braganza, which was clear to the World, both by her
Descent, and by the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, and this King PHILIP knew
well, and therefore, though he carried on his affairs very heartily to the eyes
of men, and seemed unbyassed with proper Interest, by offering to submit his
Title to a Disputation, professing, That the Laws of Portugal were more
favorable to him, than the Law of Castille, and openly acknowledging, That if
he should chance to die before King Henry, his eldest Son being a degree
farther off, would come behind some of the Pretenders, of whom himself had the
precedence. Though, I say, he carried himself thus fair to the World, yet he
clandestinely wrought with Father Leon Henriques a Jesuit, and Confessor to
King Henry, and Ferdinando Castillo, a Dominican, and of the Kings bosom
Council, to endeavor by all means possible to divert all Designs in prejudice
of his Claims, and especially that Catherine Duchess of Braganza might not by
Henry be declared to be the next Heir apparent; which he, conscious of the
justice of the Title, was very willing to have done.

And whilst these two Fathers prosecuted his interest there with the old, and
almost doting King Henry, the vigilant PHILIP provided an Army in readiness,
with which he resolved to enter into Portugal, and with his Sword make good his
disputable Title, as soon as that old Kings death should give him the
Warning-piece to fall on.

Yet when that was given, and PHILIP ready to march with an Army of Twenty
thousand men into Portugal, he had like to have been prevented; for Pope
Gregory the Thirteenth pretending still his right to Dispose, or at least to
Arbitrate all Difference concerning that Crown, had sent Cardinal Riario Legate
Apostolic, with Order to dissuade the Catholic King from raising Arms, and
that done, to pass into Portugal, and in his Holiness name and behalf, to
Arbitrate the Right between all Pretenders; which designs of the Popes, this
crafty Spanish Fox circumvented, for having pre-advice of it, and resolving to
pursue his own intentions of assuring to himself the Kingdom of Portugal, and
yet approve himself an obedient Son of the Church, he gave Order in all places
where the Legate was to pass, he should be most Magnificently entertained, so
that by such sumptuous Treatments, the time might be dexterously protracted,
and he possessed of that Kingdom before the Legal arrived at Court; which was
accordingly done, and the Legate returned thanks for his Magnificent
Entertainments, though he was displeased at the ill success of his Negotiation.

But to proceed to the manner of his possessing himself of this Kingdom: No
sooner did the News arrive at the Spanish Court of the death of King Henry, but
Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke D'Alva, was commanded with an Army of Twenty thousand
men to march toward Lisbonne, and in the Name and Right of his Catholic
Majesty, to make Conquest of the Kingdom, if he found opposition.

But all the appearance of opposition which he found, was made by Don Antonio
the Bastard-son of Lewis the Infant, who having got into Lisbonne in the Head
of a tumultuary Rabble, rather than a well-formed Army, endeavored at first to
make some resistance, but was soon discomfited, and the Suburbs of Lisbonne
being sacked to satisfy the Soldiers, the City was surrendered to him, whither
soon after the King came, and so by a mixed Title of Descent and Arms, took
possession of the Kingdom, Ao 1510. Katherine Duchess of Braganza being
enforced to surrender to him all her interest and pretensions; which you have
read at large in Anthony.

The Nobility and People of Portugal were, without doubt, extremely amazed to
see themselves so suddenly surprised, and made Subject to a Foreign Prince, and
especially to a Prince of that Nation, against whom they had a natural
Antipathy: but finding themselves in a condition not able to make any
resistance, they thought they should gain more by submitting freely to that
King, than by being forced to it; and therefore they made their humble
submission, which PHILIP met as it were halfway, and condescended in the
General Assembly of Estates, to be sworn to these Articles or Capitulations
following.

I. That the said PHILIP King of Spain, etc. should observe all the Laws,
Liberties, Privileges, and Customs granted to the People by the former Kings
of Portugal. II. That the Vice-King, or Governor, should be always the Son,
Brother, Uncle, or Nephew of the King, or else a Native of Portugal. III. That
all chief Offices of the Church or State, should be bestowed upon the Natives
of Portugal, and not upon Strangers; likewise the Governments of all Towns and
places. IV. That all Countries now belonging to the Portugal, should so
continue, to the commodity and benefit of the Nation. V. That the Portugal
Nation should be admitted to all Offices in the Kings House, as well as the
Castillians. VI. That because the King could not conveniently be always in
Portugal, he should send the Prince to be bred up amongst them.
These Articles were shut up, or concluded, with a Blessing upon such Kings as
should observe and keep them, and a Curse on those who should break or violate
them. And some Authors likewise affirm, that there was another Clause added to
them, signifying, That in case (which God forbid) that the King which then was,
or his Successors, should not observe this Agreement, or should procure a
Dispensation for this Oath, the Three States of the Kingdom might freely deny
Subjection and Obedience to the King, without being guilty either of Perjury or
Treason.

Though these Articles were thus sworn to, and the Cardinal Albertus Archduke
of Austria, Son to the Emperor, and Nephew to the King of Spain, appointed
Vice-King of Portugal, PHILIP the Second durst not in Person yet leave the
Kingdom; for he perceived by their Murmurs and visible Discontents, that their
Submission to him, proceeded more out of Fear, than Love; and that as he had in
a moment gained that Kingdom, so he should as soon lose it, if he should but
give them the least opportunity.

For that the People were highly discontented, might easily appear by their
attentive listening after old Prophesies, among which, was one of an old Hermit,
who told Alphonso the first King of Portugal, Of the great Victory that he
should obtain over the Five Kings of the Moors; that he and his Posterity
should Reign happily Kings of Portugal, but that in the Sixteenth Generation
his Line should fail, but that God at length should have mercy again upon them,
and restore them.

Others had respect to a Letter written by St. Bernard to the same King
Alphonso (the Original of which is reported to have been given to the Portugal
Ambassadors, by Lewis the Thirteenth King of France, Ao One thousand six
handred and forty one) the substance of which was to this effect: That he
rendered thanks to him for the Lands bestowed upon him, that in recompense
thereof, God had declared unto him, That there should not fail a Native of
Portugal to sit upon that Throne, unless for the greatness of their sins God
would chastise them for a time; but that this time of Chastisement should not
last above Sixty Years.

Other Prophesies there were of this Nature, and to this Effect, which put the
People in hopes of a Deliverance, and many of them flattered themselves, That
Don Sebastian was yet alive, and would come and deliver them; nay, so foolish
were some of them, that though they believed him slain at the Battle of Alcacer
in Barbary; yet they thought he should live again, and miraculously come to
redeem them.

But that which most of all expressed the Peoples Discontents, was, what was
publicly spoken by the mouths of their Orators, the Priests in their Pulpits,
who would ordinarily in their Sermons utter Speeches much in prejudice of the
Spaniards Title, and in Favor of the Duchess of Braganza; nor were they
sparing to do so in the presence of the King himself, who would therefore often
say, That the Portuguez Clergy had made the sharpest War with him.

Father Lewis Alvarez a Jesuit, preaching one day before the Viceroy, took
his Text, Surge, toll Grabatum tuum, and ambula; and turning himself to the
Duke, said, Sir, the meaning of that is, Arise, Take up your Pack, and be gone
home: But above all this, might the Discontents be perceived in the Noblemens
Chapels, especially in the Duke of Braganza's, where they were wont to sing
the Lamentations of Jeremy, applying all the scorn and reproach of the
Israelites to themselves; as Aquam nostram pecunia bibimus; because of the
Excize put by the Spaniards upon Wine, and other Necessaries: And that, Servi
Dominati sunt in nos; and that, Cecidit Corona Capitis nostri; most commonly
ending with this Invocation, Recordare Domine, Quid acciderit nobis Intuere and
respice opprobrium nostrum: Haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos.

Yet did King PHILIP bear all these Affronts with an incomparable Patience,
dissembling with an admirable Prudence his Passion (if he had any) for these
Discontents; for he knew, the only way to win this Nation to an Obedience and
Compliance, must be Lenity at first, whatever he intended to practice
afterward; and that he had by his exact keeping of his Word and Oath, won much
upon this People, appears, in that during his whole Reign, and the Reign of his
Successor, PHILIP the Third, who followed his Fathers footsteps, though not
with that Craft and Dissimulation, they made no Attempts, nor were inclinable
to a Revolt.

Those Attempts made by Anthony (which you may read in his story) and some
small bustles with one or two Counterfeit Sebastians not worth mentioning, were
the only storms, that happened in this Kingdom during the reigns of PHILIP the
second, and third; for they keeping their words in most things, though some of
their privileges they infringed, had almost brought the people to a
willingness to be their slaves, whereas PHILIP the fourth committing the whole
charge of the Government to Count Olivarez, (who though without doubt an able
Statesman, yet would seem to have a way in policy by himself, which no body
else could understand the reason of) lost the whole Kingdom, and all its
Territories.

For such was the new rigorous ways which he would prescribe in the Government
of Catalonia and Portugal, both people very tender of their Privileges, the
least breach of which should have been seconded by a potent Force to have
suppressed them, in case they should attempt an Insurrection, when instead of
having such power in readiness, the Catalonians had rather opportunity given
them to rebel, and spurs to provoke them to make use of the opportunity; for
some Soldiers being scatteringly quartered among them, but too few to curb
them, they looked upon that as a greater intrenchment upon their Liberties than
any before, and a design utterly to enslave them: wherefore converting their
patience into fury, they took Arms, massacred those Soldiers, slew their
Viceroy, and put themselves under the French Protection.

This Revolt of the Catalonians was a president to the Portugals, who had
extremely suffered under the breach of their Privileges: for contrary to the
second Article sworn to by King PHILIP the Second, which said, That the Viceroy
or Governor, should be either Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew to the King of
Spain: The Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, who had no relation at all to the
Kings of Castille, was made Governess, which they might, and perhaps would have
born, had they not been incensed by a more feeling injury Anno 1636. when the
Tax of a fifth part was imposed upon all the Subjects of that Kingdom; an
intolerable grievance, and thought so insufferable by the Southern parts of
the Nation, that they rose in Arms to oppose it, and had set the whole Kingdom
in a combustion, had it not been timely quenched by the timely care and
industry of the then Governess, the Infanta Margarita of Mantoua.

Yet this small stir gave an Item to the Court of Spain, of the readiness of
the people to revolt, which made Olivarez endeavor by all ways possible to cut
off the means of their being able to do, but whilst he endeavored to prevent
them, he gave them the means to do it, though he failed not to make use of
those courses which in probability might ensure that Kingdom; the chief of
which was, the endeavoring to allure from thence the Duke of Braganza, whom the
people of Portugal looked upon as the person who of right ought to be their
King, and who was the only Native of the Kingdom who might restore again the
Line of Alphonso; besides, he was a Prince, who for Power, Riches, and Number
of Tenants, not only exceeded all the Nobles of Portugal, but even of Spain it
self.

And indeed the Duke of Braganza was one of the most glorious Subjects in
Europe, being allied to most Kings in Christendom; which made the Kings of
Spain, though they were Competitors for the Crown of Portugal, treat this
Family with more honor than any other of his Grandees, receiving them almost
with as much respect, as if they were Sovereign Princes; which appeared in
PHILIP the Second, who most of all desired to abase this Family, yet would
always when the Duke of Braganza came to visit him; meet him in the middle of
the room, and not permitting him to kiss his hand, seat him with himself under
the Canopy of Estate.

To draw him therefore out of that Kingdom, Olivarez first politickly offered
him the Government of Milan, a place of great trust and honor, but he modestly
refused it, as not in a condition at that present to undertake so great a
Command, and indeed expressing an unwillingness to go out of Portugal.

But his unwillingnesse to go from thence, made the King of Spain, and Count
Olivarez the more willing to draw him from thence, it was therefore given out,
That the King himself was resolved to go in person to reduce the revolted
Catalonians, and that therefore all the Nobility should be in a readiness in
four months time to attend his Majesty in that Expedition. But the Duke of
Braganza being suspicious of the Spaniards, because he knew himself suspected
by them, and likely to be, whilst the Portuguesses so much affected him; to
assure himself of the ones Love, and to avoid (if possible) the others Suspect,
retires himself to his Countrey-house at Villa-Viciosa, and there follows his
Sports of Hunting, etc. not at all regarding matters of State, withal sending
an Excuse to Count Olivarez, That his Affairs at present were in so low and
mean a Condition, that he could not appear to attend his Majesty in that Pomp
and Splendour that became a Person of his Quality; and that therefore he should
do his Majesty more Service in staying at Home, when the other Nobles were
abroad, than he could possibly do by attending him.

This Plot thus failing, made the Court of Spain more suspicious of the Duke
than ever before; Count Olivarez therefore resolves to employ his utmost Art of
Dissimulation to entrap him, which he sets upon by a Fetch so far about, that
to the eye of Reason, it might put the Duke into ambitious Thoughts of
endeavoring to assume his Throne, and in a way to accomplish those Thoughts,
rather than any way prejudice him; but it appeared afterward that Olivarez
Design in so far trusting the Duke, was only because the Duke should trust him.

In Answer to Braganza's Letter of Excuse, the Count assures him that his
Majesty was very well satisfied with his Reasons of not attending him in the
intended Expedition against Catalonia, and that he was very sensible of his
good Inclinations to his Service: That for his own part, he was very sorry that
his Affairs were in so low a Condition; for he could not but Commiserate his
Interest as his own. That his Majesty, to let him know how great Confidence he
reposed in his Fidelity, had appointed him General of the Militia of that
Kingdom, and had for his present Supply, sent him Sixty thousand Crowns,
leaving it to his Choice to reside in what place near Lisbon he pleased.

This strange Confidence put in the Duke by the King of Spain, much amazed the
greatest Politicians, who thought it reasonable, That the Spaniard should have
permitted the Duke still to have kept retired in the Country, rather than to
have given him such a Command, and called him to Lisbon into the continual View
of the People, who looking upon him as the Heir of that House which had ever
been represented to have the only Right to the Crown, might easily be inflamed
with a Desire to have a King of their own.

And these things was the Princess of Mantour very sensible of, and therefore
continually solicited the King to know his Reason, or to desire him to remove
those apparent Opportunities which he had given the Duke of Braganza to effect
a Revolt: But she not only received intricate and enigmatical Answers from the
King, and Duke D'Olivarez; but likewise had the former Actions seconded with
one, which made her of Opinion that his Catholic Majesty had a mind to toss
the Kingdom into Braganza's hands whether he would or no; for on a sudden,
without any notice given to her, all the Spanish Garrison in St. John's Castle,
which commanded the City of Lisbon; and indeed upon the strength of which, the
whole safety and security of the Kingdom depended, were suddenly drawn forth,
and the Castle left to the disposure of Don John of Braganza.

But this was the last Act of Count Olivarez Confidence in the Duke; for by
trusting him so much, he now thought that he could not but reciprocally repose
Confidence in him; and therefore next Summer, Ao One thousand six hundred and
forty: He again by Letters sollicites him to leave Portugal, and come to
Madrid, first telling him, That his Catholic Majesty gave him many Thanks, and
greatly applauded his Loyalty in the Exercise of the Office of General, and was
very sensible of the good Effects which his Authority had wrought over the
Portugals. Next he represented unto him the present declining Condition of the
Spanish Monarchy; not only by Reason of the Disorders in Flanders and Italy,
and the preparations of the Turk; but more especially, for that their most
potent Enemies the French, were now in Assistance of the Revolted Catalonians,
entered into Spain: That it highly concerned his Catholic Majesty to drive
these out of his Territories, which could not be effected, but by a very
powerful Force; that he being one of the prime Grandees of the Kingdom, might
by his presence in the Head of a good number of his Tenants, encourage others
to a suitable Assistance, that to that purpose his Catholic Majesty expected
him every Moment, having designed for him great Honors, Privileges and
Dignities suitable to his Merit.

But as cunning an Angler as Olivarez was, yet he failed of his Mark, the Bait
would not yet hook in the Fish; for though the Duke of Braganza was accounted
no very great Politician, yet his own Safety taught him to know that all these
Trusts, and fair Promises, were but gilded Allurements to draw him to his
Destruction; having therefore supplied the King with a considerable number of
his Tenants and Friends, he found Excuses for his own not going in Person; and
to take off all suspicion of Jealousy or Thoughts, that he had any Design
against the State, he retired again to his Countrey-house. Thus did these two
great Personages by Craft and Dissimulation, endeavor to supplant each other,
only the one strove the others Destruction, the other only studied his own
Safety and Preservation.

During all these passages, the Vice-Queen Margarita of Mantoua, was very
vigilant in her Government, and foreseeing what in Reason might be the issue of
these proceedings, wrote very importunately to the King, assuring him, That if
it were not suddenly prevented, the Kingdom would infallibly be lost. To which,
his Majesty returned her no Answer; and Olivarez in his slighting her judgment
(as fitter to Govern a private House, than a Kingdom) desired her, That if her
Capacity would not reach to the height and drift of those Mysteries of State,
yet that her Wisdom would prompt her not to discover them.

Yet without doubt Olivarez was inwardly perplexed to see all his Plots thus
fail, and foul means he durst not openly attempt, such was the Dukes Potency,
and the great Love the People bore him; he therefore at last has Recourse to
Treachery, and to that intent gives secret Advice to Don Lopez D'Ossis, and Don
Antonie D'Oquendo, That when they had relieved Flanders with Men and money,
they should with the whole Fleet put into Portugal, and then as soon as the
Duke should according to the Duty of his new Place and Office come aboard, they
should immediately set Sail, and bring him away to Cales: But this Plot was by
a strange Divine Providence prevented; for that Fleet was totally Routed by the
Hollanders upon the Coast of England, in the Year, One thousand six hundred
thirty and nine.

17. JOHN IV. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL, Algarvia, Afric, Arabia, Persia,
India, and Brasil, etc. CHAP. XXI.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL. MEDINASIDONIA.

NOw was the time come, wherein, according to St. Bernards Prophecy, the
Kingdom of Portugal was to be released from the Tyranny of Strangers, and
restored again to the Government of a Native King, to which all things seemed
so well to quadrate, that we cannot imagine there was less than a Divine Hand
in it; for though (all Plots failing against the Duke of Braganza,) the
Spaniards beginning to fear somewhat, drew out as many of the Native Soldiers
out of the Kingdom as conveniently they could, thinking thereby to lessen the
ill humors which began now to appear, yet they did thereby only the more stir
up and inflame those discontents which were taken at Vasconsellos managing all
Affairs of State.

For although the most Illustrious Infanta Margarita of Mantoua was a Princess
of great judgment and knowledge in State Affairs, yet she permitted her self to
be so much overruled by Vasconsellos Secretary of State, or at least was so
much overruled by him, whether she would or no, that he either by some secret
consent of his Catholic Majesty, or led on by his own ambitious spirit,
confiding in the great favor he had at Court, never permitted the Infanta to
enjoy other than the title of Vice-Queen.

And insufferable was the Government of Vasconcellos to the Portuguesses, who
as much hated his obscure Birth, as they did his evil Customs: He was a man
wholly composed of Pride, Cruelty, and Avarice, that knew no moderation but in
excesses: small lapses were by him made capital crimes, chastising with all
severity those whom he did but suppose dissatisfied with his Government; And
exercising with all rigor the Spanish Inquisition, punished not only the
actions, but the very thoughts of men. The infringing of the greatest
Privileges of the Portugal Nation seemed to him but a trifle; which continued
oppressions, in the end so exasperated the whole People, that animated by the
knowledge of their own strength, by the many diversions of the Spanish Nation,
by the late example of the Catalonians, and incited by the absolute ruin which
they saw hung over their heads, whilst Six thousand of them were yearly listed
and forced to serve the Spaniard in his foreign Wars, they resolved to loose
his Yoke from off their Necks, and to disclaim his obedience, by the election
of a King of their own.

Some have been of opinion, That this Conspiracy was at least of Ten years
standing, agreed and assented to by most of the Grandees of Portugal: I date
not affirm it, nor deny it; for such great actions of State do resemble
Lightning, which once past, leave but the greater darkness: the Air of
State-mysteries is not to be flown in by less than Eagles; I shall therefore
omit to search into so great a Privacy, and only recount the Public Action.

On Saturdoy the First of February, Anno, One thousand six hundred and forty,
(and Saturdayes have been often observed to be propitious to the Portugal
Nation,) all the Nobility of the Kingdom, led on by the Marquesses of Ferreira,
and the Count of Vimioso, took Arms, and accompanied with a great multitude of
the Inhabitants of Lisbonne, and some Portuguese Soldiers came to the Castle,
which situate in the midst of Lisbonne, serves both for a Palace and a
Castle: this was the residence of the Vice-Queen, and hither assembled all the
Magistrates for Governing of the Kingdom, the Guards which were two Companies
of Spaniards, and two of High Dutch, either before gained by secret
intelligence, or frighted with the great numbers of the Portugals, or desire of
Novelty, or else perhaps unwilling to make resistance against those to whom
they were most of them joined by friendship or Marriage, without the least
opposition, abandoning their Post, gave them free admittance.

Whilst these things had happened, the Secretary Vasconsellos was in the
Chambers of his Office (upon some reasons he had by the Discontents of the
People, to suspect an Insurrection) at that instant writing into Spain, of the
Alienation of the minds of the Nobility from the Spanish Government, and
ernestly pressing that some rigorous Resolution might be taken to prevent it;
which Letters afterward taken, did sufficiently demonstrate his ill will to
the Portuguese Nation.

Whilst he was thus busied, the confused noise of the Soldiers pierced his
ears, at which wondering not so much at the tumult, as at what should be the
cause of it, being accompanied only with a Dutchman, and another of the Guard,
he would have gone down, but was hindered by the Portugals, who came running up,
crying, Kill the Traitor, Kill the Enemy of our Blood; whereupon not knowing
where to save himself, he fled, with those two accompanying him, into an inner
Chamber, and there with his Sword in his hand, accompanied and assisted by
those two that were with him, disposed himself to sell his Life at the dearest
rate he could: but his Valor stood him in no stead, for those two who
endeavored to defend him, being slain with two Musket Shot, he seeing it vain
to defend himself there longer, leapt desperately out of the Window, rather to
seek his Death, than out of any hopes to save his life; for no sooner was he
down, but numberless Swords were embrued in his Blood, the very women and
children running to tear in pieces his dead body, with the same alacrity as he
used to torment them, when alive.

In the mean time the Marquess of Ferreira was gone to secure the Vice-Queen,
whom having committed to the Guard of Two hundred Musquetteers, he calls a
Council, and in a short Discourse sets forth the miseries the Kingdom had
endured whilst it lay subject to the Spanish Government, who had sought no
other end but their destruction: Then putting them in mind of the Valor and
Merits of their Nation, he exhorts them to condescend to the Election of a New
King, nominating to them the Duke of Braganza, as the most worthy of the Crown,
not so much for his Power, Riches, or the Greatness of his House, as because
the Kingdom was his indubitable Right; he being the only Person left of that
Stock, which for so many years had gloriously governed Portugal.

A long Discourse was superfluous to those who were before persuaded. A public
shout interrupted the Marquesses Speech, all of them crying with a loud voice,
That they would have JOHN Duke of Braganza for their King. In the whole
multitude there was not a face, much less a voice that did gainsay this general
Vote, either because they did all really rejoice to see that they should again
have a King of their own Nation, or because none could without danger oppose
themselves to the torrent of so a Public Will.

The Duke was at this time at his Countrey-house at Villa-Vitiosa, whether by
accident, or because he would always have had occasion to excuse himself, if
the business should not have succeeded, I cannot guess: but by reason of his
absence they thought fit to make choice of two Governors, whom, to avoid the
pretenses of others, they nominated to be the Archbishops of Lisbon and
Braganza.

These began immediately to exercise their Command, and were obeyed with so
much quiet, that in all that great and populous City of Lisbon there was none
slain, but only those beforementioned; the prisons were opened, nor was there
any that suffered any wrong, either in their goods or life: All the Shops were
opened as if there had not happened any Change of Government.

Only the house of Vasconcellos was sacked, with so much anger and despite, that
they did not pardon the very Doors and Windows; nay, such was the fury of the
people, that had they not been hindered by the Soldiers of the Guard, they had
levelled it with the ground. As for his carcass, it suffered all those
disgraces which a people wronged both in their liberties and estates, could
inflict: they ran like mad men to express living sentiments of Revenge upon his
dead and senseless Corpse, vaunting who could invent the newest ways of disgrace
and scorn, till at length almost wearied with their inhumane sport, they left
it in the street so mangled, that it did not seem to have the least resemblance
of a man; from whence it was the next day carried by the Fraternity della
misericordia, and thrown into the Burying-place of the Moors.

The Marquess of Alemquer, after he had by command from the Governor assured
the strongest posts of the City, sent several Soldiers into the streets,
crying, Long live King JOHN the Fourth; which the people hearing, distracted as
it were with very joy, leaving their Trades, ran up and down proclaiming him
with voices of Jubilee, the greatest part through excess of passion, not being
able to refrain from tears.

The Messengers did not run, but fly to the Duke of Braganza, to give him
notice of his promotion to the Crown: The first arrived on Sunday morning
before day; he feigned a great alteration at this Advice, whereupon some have
presumed to say, That he had not any knowledge of the Design. He seemed at
first not to believe it, but told the Messengers, that though he might have
desert, and a spirit fit for the Crown of Portugal, yet he had neither will nor
ambition to desire. That his enemies wronged him, by tempting him with
Stratagems as far from his Genius, as his Faith. But at the arrival of the
Count of Monte Santo, who came to accompany him to Lisbon, he seemed of another
mind; and having been with him in private discourse for the space of about two
hours, without any further delay, then what the relating the business to his
Wife, and to the Prince his son, made, he departed with the Count from Villa
Vizosa, accompanied with about five hundred persons.

Yet others there be that affirm, That he was not only acquainted with the
design of the Revolt, but of Council about it, and that some time before the
Nobility having had a private Meeting at Lisbon, it was at first propounded,
That they should reduce the Kingdom into the form of a Commonwealth; but that
not being approved of by the major part, the Archbishop of Lisbon stood up,
and in a most eloquent Speech, having laid before them the miseries they had
endured under the Spanish yoke, recommended unto them JOHN Duke of Braganza, as
the indubitable Heir of the Crown, and their rightful Sovereign.

This Motion needed not to be seconded with many Arguments to induce a general
Consent, they all most willingly assented to it, and concluded to send Gaston
Cotigno, a man of a fluent and voluble tongue, to acquaint the Duke with their
intentions, and to persuade him to accept the Crown, and free his Country.

Gaston being arrived, with many well-coucht words acquaints him, That there
was now a pregnant opportunity offered to recover the indubitable right of his
Ancestors to the Crown of Portugal: That the Nobility and Clergy were wholly
inclined to redeem themselves from the Tyranny of the Castillians, by securing
the Crown upon his head: That the universal Odium of the whole People to the
Spanish Government, the present low Condition of the House of Austria,
distracted on every side with War; the assured Assistance that France and other
Nations, emulating the greatness of Spain, would lend, were as so many Motives
to persuade them not to let slip so fair an opportunity to regain their
liberty: That if he by Refusal, should be the sole Enemy to his Countries
Freedom, they would effect it themselves, and reduce it into a Commonwealth;
with many other Arguments used he, which his Love to the House of Braganza, his
hatred to the Castillians, or his own Ingenuity prompted to him.

The Duke's amazement permitted him not to return a sudden Answer: but after a
little pause, he replied, That he was highly obliged both to him and all the
Nobility, for their affections to him, but that this was a Business required
great deliberation: That there was no Medium between a Throne and a Chair of
Execution, that therefore he would first advise with himself, and not rashly
attempt so hazardous a business.

He therefore communicates the whole business to his Duchess Donna Lucia,
Sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a woman of a Noble, Heroic, and
Masculine Spirit, with her he consults whether he were best accept of the
Propositions of the Nobility, or to prevent all hazards go to Madrid: and being
anxious what course to take, his Wife nobly told him: My friend, if thou go
to Madrid, thou do incur the danger of losing thy life; and if thou
acceptest the Crown, thou do no more: consider then whether it be not better
to dye Nobly at home, than basely abroad.

These words of his Ladies (say some) animated him to a resolution to accept
the Crown; so he returned Gaston in answer, That he would conform himself to
the councels of the Nobility, resolving to live and run all hazards whatever
with them, for the regaining of his Countries Liberty.

In the mean time the Marquess of Ferreira used his utmost endeavors for the
reducing of those Castles which still held out for his Catholic Majesty. The
first day the Castle of Colline was rendered, which for its situation was judged
inexpugnable, yet the Captain of it no sooner saw it besieged, but moved either
with Gold, or Fear, he delivered it up on Articles. The Tower of Belem, and
that De la Cabera were suddenly surprised before they within had any notice of
what was done; The strong Fortress of St. Giuliano, a modern Fortification, and
built to defend the Mouth of the River, was ready to surrender, when a
Castellane, who was there a Prisoner, and under Sentence of Death for the
Surrendry of a Fort in Brazil, shut out the Captain, who was gone to Parlie
with the Portuguesses, and resolved to defend it many days: he might have held
it out the Siege, but finding neither Ammunition nor Provision, consumed, as
was believed, on purpose by the Captain, who unwilling to have the Blot of a
Traitor cast upon him for so sudden a delivery, thought it fitter to be forced
by necessity to open the Gates to the Marquess.

After the Surrendry of Fort San Giuliano, the Marquess of Ferreira in the name
of the King, gave the Sacrament of Fidelity, or an Oath of Allegiance to all
the Orders, to wit, to the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, which was received
with so much readiness, that had not the Marquess seen the necessary Orders
observed, the People had run into certain inconveniences, so much they strived
to prevent one another in willingness to perform this duty.

On Thursday the Sixth of February, His Majesty made his entrance into
Lisbonne, with all these applauses that a beloved King can expect from his most
loving Subjects. The rich Liveries given by the Nobles, the Triumphal Arches,
the Streets hung with Tapestry, the multitudes of the People flocking to see
him, and the excellent Fireworks, (which were so many, that a Spaniard cried
out, Es possible que se quita un Reyno a el Rey D Felippe, cun solas Luminarias
and vivas sinmas excercito in Poder, Gran senal y efeto sin Duda del Brazo de
dios todo Poderoso! Is it possible that King Philip should be deprived of a
Kingdom, with only Lights and Fireworks, without a powerful Army! certainly
this is an evident Token that it is the Almighty hand of God,) were the least
demonstrations of that Cities love and joy: so great was the concourse of those
that flocked to see their new King, that though his Majesty entered into the
City by Noon, he could not through the Throng arrive at the Palace till Two
hours after Sunset: curiosity and love which usually have the force to stir up
all affections, made this People flock so fast to the sight of their Prince.
And because it is prudence in a Public joy, to accommodate ones self to the
will of the most, even those who either for envy, or some other cause, hated
the House of Braganza, did not cease to make some demonstration of reverence
and mirth, and by how much the more they thought themselves observed, by so
much the more they strove to seem other than they were.

His Majesty being arrived at the Palace, instead of reposing himself, addicted
himself wholly to consult about carrying on the War; knowing well that only
labor produces true rest. The first consultations were concerning the
expugnation of the Tower of St. John, which of all the Forts in the Kingdom
only held out for the Catholic King. To reduce this Citadel, the Marquess of
Ferreira was sent in person with a numerous Army, though for the most part
tumultuary, and ill ordered; but what they wanted in discipline, they supplied
in affection; not refusing to engage themselves in the extremest dangers: for
two days the Marquess found strong ressistance, but on the third day it
yielded, as it is supposed, forced rather by bullets of Gold, than of Iron. Don
Antonio de Mascarendas, with a Portuguess Garrison was appointed commander of
this Fortress, which he very diligently repaired, not only of the damages now
received by Battery, but with other necessary fortifications, to bring it to
greater perfection.

The Kingdom thus suddenly reduced to the devotion of King JOHN the fourth, the
several Governors were commanded to their Countries to levy Forces. who listed
the inhabitants indifferently from the age of Eighteen to Sixty; in whom they
found so much disposition, that many offered their estates, and their lives,
and would follow the colors, although they had license to depart.

On the 25. of the same Month, followed the Coronation of his Majesty,
accompanied with all those applauses demonstrations of joy, which could proceed
from a people of infinite Riches, who weary of the Command of strangers, were
consequently ambitious of a King of their own Nation.

In the public Place before the Palace upon a most sumptuous Theater, was
erected a great Stage, and upon that a less, upon the top of which but three
steps higher, stood a Chair of State under a Canopy, all covered over with
Cloth of Gold. About noon His Majesty came forth of his Palace Royal in a Suit
of Chestnut colored Velvet embroidered with Gold, and buttons richly set with
Diamonds: about his neck was a Collar of great value, whereunto hung the badge
of the chief Order of Knighthood, called El Ordine di Christo. He was girded
with a gilt Sword, his Robe was Cloth of God lined with white, wrought with
Gold and flowers, the Sword was born before him by Don Francisco De Alello
Marquess of Ferreira, High Constable of the Kingdom, and before him was the
Kings Banner displayed by Ferdinando Tells de Meneses Earl Marshal, before him
went D. Manrique De Silva, Marquess of Govea, Steward of the Kings Household,
and so in order his Nobles and Grandees of the Realm one before another, before
all went Portugal King at Arms, with the Heralds Pursuivants, etc.

His Majesty being ascended the Stage, and having placed himself in the Chair
of Estate, had the Crown set upon His Head, and the Scepter delivered to him,
with the accustomed Ceremonies by the Archbishop of Lisbon; which done, he
spoke to His Majesty to this effect.

Behold, O most Sacred Majesty, these your Subjects who do more rejoice to see
this day, than of all the days of their lives: They rejoice to see the Crown of
Portugal, returned into its Ancient stock, they rejoice to have found a Father
who will govern them like Children, not Tyrannize over them like slaves. They
here, Great SIR, offer their estates, their lives, and oblige themselves to run
through all the accidents of fortunes, to establish that Crown upon your Head,
which now with so much devotion, with so much readiness they have placed upon
it. They cannot sufficiently express their affections to Your Majesty; could
they bring their hearts, and lay them down at your Majesty's feet, they would
not refuse to do it, so sure are they that they have found a King all goodness,
all love, who will not let slip any means for the Establishing of the Crown,
for the quiet of his Subjects, for augmenting his Dominions, and for the
conservation of those privileges which have been written with the blood of our
progenitors: Be your Majesty graciously pleased to accept this common
resentment expressed by my mouth, there being nothing that more comforts the
minds of good Subjects, than the pleasing of their Prince.

The good old Prelate spoke these words with so much feeling, that the tears of
his eyes testified the affection of his heart.

To this speech of the Archbishops, His Majesty returned answer, in expressions
equal to his love and greatness: That the weight of the Scepter, and subjection
to the Crown, were things always dissonant to his Genius; That he had of late
years given them sufficient testimony of it, whilst they were not more
affectionate in offering, than he was ready to deny the taking upon him the
weight of the Kingdom. That his now condescending to their desires, was only to
provide for the Kingdom, which had been acquisted, and agrandized with the
blood of his Predecessors, and to take it from the hands of those, who besides
their unjustly possessing it, had rendered themselves unworthy of it, by
endeavoring by all means to ruin it: in sum, he concluded with thanks for
their love, offering himself ready to adventure his health, and life, for their
preservation, the redeeming them from slavery, and maintaining of their
privileges.

This short discourse ended, His Majesty went to the great Church in the same
order as before, where being set in a Chair of Estate, raised upon a Stage for
that purpose, with a Crystal Scepter in his right hand, at which stood the
Lord Constable, and behind him the Lord Chamberlain, there was placed before
him a Table Covered with Cloth of Gold, and a Cushion thereon, upon the Cushion
lay a Gold Crucifix and a Messal. Here the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga,
administered the ensuing Oath to the King.

WE swear and promise by the grace of God, to rule and govern you well, and
justly, and to administer justice as far as humane frailty will permit, to
maintain unto you your Customs, Privileges and liberties, granted unto you by
the Kings our Predecessors. So God help us God, and this his holy Gospel.

This Oath being administered, the three Estates, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility,
and Commons, took the following Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty, one for
every one of the Estates, pronouncing these words.

I Swear by this holy Gospel of God, touching corporally with my hand, That I
receive for our King and lawful Sovereign, the High and Mighty King DON JOHN
the fourth, our Sovereign, and do homage unto him, according to the use and
custom of his Kingdoms.

This, and the Ceremonies attendant ended, his Majesty, accompanied with all
his Nobles, returned to his Palace, whether notwithstanding it was a very great
rain, all the Grandees went bare-headed, where there was a most sumptuous
Banquet prepared, but his Majesty gave himself wholly to consult of
preparations for the War, showing thereby that Kings in their greatest
felicity and delights, should not forget affairs of State, and taking care for
the preservation of their Subjects.

But amongst debates of the War abroad, there happened one of an affair near
home, concerning the placing or displacing Officers of State; and because His
Majesty knew that the charge of such Officers, must needs be with the
resentment of many, and that there is nothing more alienates the minds of men,
than to see themselves undeservedly deprived of their honors, he took away
only the places of two, to wit, that of the Providitore of the Custom-house,
because he was Son-in-Law to Diego Soarez, and Brother-in-Law to Vasconsellos
the late deservedly-slain Secretary; and that of the Count of Castanhie, who
was President of the Tribunal, or Court of Conscience, because he was too much
interessed with His Catholic Majesty.

As for the Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, late Vice-Queen, and the Marquess
Della Puebla Kinsman to Olivarez, the Castle called Pasos de Angiobregas, was
assigned them, with Fourteen thousand Crowns a year for maintenance. An
honorable Prison it was, nor could they desire any thing but liberty, which
showed a great Nobleness of mind in King JOHN: but Princes always do like
Princes, and much it demonstrates the Magnanimity of the mind, to honor our
Enemies, though they be our Prisoners.

Nor must we here forget the Magnanimous and Courageous Carriage of the
Duchess of Mantoua late Vice-Queen, during these confusions and distractions;
for King JOHN sending to ascertain her, That she should want none of those
Civilities that were suitable to a Princess of her high Birth, Provided she
would forbear all Discourse and Practices which might infuse into any an ill
opinion of his present Government. She returned Thanks to the Duke, (for she
would not style him King) for his Complement: but withal fell into a grave
Exhortation to those Nobles that carried the Message, telling them, That they
should lay aside all vain hopes, and not cozen themselves, but return to their
old Allegiance, according as they were obliged by Oath, which if they did, she
doubted not to find them all pardon.

The rest of the Castillians of Authority were confined in the Castle, and all
the Soldiers took the Portuguese Pay, either because they believed doing so,
to be most for their interest, or else because being most of them linkt in
Parentage with the Portuguesses, they believed the Portugal interest to be
their own.

Shortly after, Lucia now Queen of Portugal, Sister to the Duke of Medina
Sidonia, with her Son the Prince Theodosio arrived at Lisbonne, who were
received with all imaginable expressions of joy: the Queen was soon after
Solemnly Crowned, and the Prince installed, at whose Installation, the Nobles
and Grandees of the Realm, took to him the following Oath.

WE acknowledge, and receive for our true and natural Prince, the high and
excellent Prince D. Theodosio, as Son, Heir, and Successor of our Sovereign
Lord the King; and as his true and natural Subjects, we do him homage in the
hands of the King, and after the death of our true and natural King and
Sovereign of these Kingdoms of Portugal and Algarve, and beyond Sea in Africa,
Lord of Guiana; of the Conquests, Navigation, and commerce in Ethiopia, Arabia,
Persia, India, etc. we will obey his Commands and Decrees in all, and through
all, both high and low: we will make War and maintain Peace with all those that
His Highness shall Command us: And all this we swear to God upon the holy
Cross, and the holy Gospel.

These Ceremonies performed with all fitting Solemnity, the King, to show that
the good of his Subjects was his only care, called an Assembly of the Three
Estates of the Kingdom, who being Convened, and the King seated in His Royal
Throne, Don Emanuel D'Acugna Bishop of Elvas made a Speech to them, to the
following purpose.

THat one of the first Laws of Nature, was, the uniting of men together, from
whence Cities and Kingdoms had their Original, and by which they after defended
themselves in War, and maintained themselves in Peace; That for that cause His
Majesty had called this Assembly to Consult for the better service of God,
Defense in War, and Government in Peace: That there could be no Service of God
without Union of Religion, no Defense without Union amongst men, no Regular
Government without Union of Councils: That His Majesty did expect to be
informed by his loyal Subjects what was for the good of the State; That they
were to render thanks to the Almighty, who had given them a King that would
govern them by known Laws; That His Majesty did not esteem those Tributes
lawful that were paid with tears, and therefore did from that present, take off
from His Subjects all Tributes that had been imposed by the Kings of Castille,
because His Majesty would not Reign over their Goods, nor over their Heads, nor
over their Privileges, but over their Hearts, hoping that they would find out
a sweet expedient to defend their Country against their Potent enemy, who
threatened to make them all slaves, and to destroy, and to annihilate their
Nation. That they would therefore, considering His Majesty's Goodness, and
their own Honor, manifest at once unto the world, That as never Subjects had
such a Gracious King, so never King had such Loyal Subjects.

The Bishop having ended his Speech, the most ancient Officer of the Chamber of
Lisbonne, stood up, and in the name of all the three Estates, (who stood up
likewise,) returned humble thanks to His Majesty, for this gracious bounty,
heartily professing, That they did not only offer up their Goods, but their
Lives to His Majesty's service, earnestly entreating His Majesty to dispose
both of the one and the other, as he pleased. And to manifest that their hearts
and their mouths concorded in this free offer of themselves to His Majesty,
they presently Voted, That Two Millions should be immediately raised by the
Kingdom: but His Majesty wisely and politickly declined the imposing of a Tax
upon his Subject, choosing rather to accept of their Benevolence; which made
every one strive who should offer most; so instead of the Two Millions, there
was in short time brought into the Treasury Four Millions of Gold.

Nor was this Money intended by them, nor employed to any other use than to
maintain the Grandezza and Splendor of the King and Kingdom, there being no
need of Money for the payment of Soldiers, every one offering to serve freely,
and at their own Charge, against their Vowed Enemies the Castillians.

But let us for some time leave the Assembly sitting, and give an account how
this Action was resented into the Spanish Court: Most men's minds were struck
with consternation, but Olivarez came smiling to the King, saying; Sir, I pray
give me las Albricias to hansel the good news, for now you are more absolute
King of Portugal than ever, for the People have forfeited all their Privileges
by this Rebellion, besides the Estate of the Duke of Braganza, with all his
Accomplices, are yours by right of Confiscation, so that you have enough to
distribute among your Loyal Subjects by way of reward. But however Olivarez
seemed thus to dissemble his passion; it was believed, that this news struck
deeper into him than any.

The King of Spain upon the first news of the Proclamation of King JOHN, sent a
Letter to him to this purpose: COusin and Duke: Some odd news are brought me
lately, which I esteem but folly, considering the proof I have had of the
fidelity of your House, give me advertisement accordingly, because I ought to
expect it from you, and hazard not the esteem I make of your self to the fury
of a mutinous Rabble, but let your Wisdom comport you so, that your Person may
escape the danger, my Council will advise you farther; so God guard you.

Your Cousin and King.




To this Letter His Majesty of Portugal returned answer: MY Cousin: My Kingdom
desiring its Natural King, and my Subjects being oppressed with Taxes, and new
Impositions, have executed, without opposition, that which they had often
designed, by giving me possession of a Kingdom which appertains to me;
wherefore if any will go about to take it from me, I will seek Justice in my
Arms: God preserve your Majesty.

DON JOHN IV. King of Portugal.




Thus was this Kingdom utterly lost to the Spanish Monarchy, and not only it,
but with it all that they enjoyed by that Kingdom in the East Indies, the
Tercera Islands, and other Islands in the Atlantic Sea the Kingdom of Algarve,
Brasil, together with all they had in Africa, except the Town of Cexta, which
was the whole remained to the Spanish Nation of all those great Dominions.

But that all men might know the greatness of their loss, and what the Crown of
Portugal enjoys abroad, take here a brief narration:

First, Those Islands of the Tercera, Madera, and St. Michael, so long time
possessed by the Portugal Nation, which though inconsiderable to their other
Dominions, yet deserve to be mentioned; next those many strong places of which
they have made themselves Masters in Africa, as in Guiana, in the Kingdoms of
Congo and Angola, the great Island of St. Laurence, of Soffola and Mozambique:
on the Continent thence passing the Month of the Red Sea, they have settled a
Trade with Socatra and Calaite; thence passing the Bay of Persia, to the Mouth
of the River Indus, they subdued Calecut, Coetium, etc. the Island of Goa,
Ciaul, Daman, etc. thence toward the River Ganges, they possessed Ceilam,
Malacca, Sumatra, Solon, Larantuca, etc. Thence farther they were entered into
the Kingdom of Pegu, into Java-major, and Minor, into the Kingdom of C^ina
where they fortified Macoa: In sum, the Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands, and
Cities, that the Portugal Nation had Conquered, and were possessed of abroad,
may in some measure be compared to the Ancient Roman Empire; nor was their
Valor much inferior to the Romans, if we consider the War they made with the
King of Cambaia, who for Puissance and Military Courage, or numbers of Men of
War, did exceed Xerxes, Darius, or Pyrrhus; the Battles they had with
Ismalucco, and Idaliam in the Kingdom of Decam, both equal to mighty Kings and
their Armies, consisting of the best Warriors of the East; the War they have
waged with the Moors of Malacca, Sumatra, and Molucco, as also with the Kings
of Bengala, Peug, and Siam, etc. with many other formidable powers. Many of
those places most certain it is, were lost while the Catholic King had
possession of Portugal; but with it he likewise lost, and King JOHN IV. had
possession of above Fifty Towns and Forts accounted impregnable, such were,
Mozambique, Cuama, Monomotasca, Mombaza, Masiala, Dui, Damam, Bazaine, Chiaul,
Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochim Conlan, Negapatan,
Meliapor, the Isle of Ceilam, the Kingdom of Jafanapalan, the Cities of Manac,
and Nombrede Jesu; then more Northward, Azarim, Danue Agazim, Maim Trapor, and
many other places, in all which were maintained Governors and Soldiers, and a
Viceroy, residing at Goa, with Courts of Justice, etc. Hither many Kings of
the East used to send Ambassadors to maintain Amity with the King of Portugal,
and to bring Tribute to him. Thus the Portugal Trade in the East extends it
self no less than Four thousand Leagues, by which Trade all the Garrisons are
maintained, and all the Ships (whereof they are oftentimes Two or three Fleets)
and much Wealth sent home every Year; besides those aforementioned, the Crown
of Portugal has several Towns on the Coast of Africa, so strongly fortified,
That the Moors of the Country could never yet recover them, such as Tangier,
etc.

In America they possess the famous Country of Brazile, which stretches it
self One thousand four hundred Leagues upon the Seacoast, containing Fourteen
Governments, and many principal Cities, St. Salvador, Pernambuco, etc.

Thus great a loss did the Spanish Monarchy suffer by the Revolt of Portugal,
which the Catholic King Philip the Fourth was very solicitous to recover, and
to that end and purpose did not only consult with the greatest Statesmen at
home, but likewise with those abroad, from one of whom he to that effect
received the ensuing Letter.

BY the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to write to me on the 6th. of
March past, I am commanded to deliver my Advice touching the best Expedient for
the Recovery of Portugal: Sir, the Clemency used by King Philip the Second,
your Majesty's Grandfather, toward the Kingdom of Portugal, was a fatal
presage of the present Calamities, and future Destruction, not only of Spain,
but the whole Spanish Monarchy, because that Kingdom was only in name, but
never really Conquered, remaining Rich, and abundant with the same, if not
greater Privileges than before; the Grandees and Nobles at Home, the People
not at all Crushed; and (which is more than all) the Government in the hands of
Natives, and all his Majesty's other Subjects excluded from all places of
Power, Honor, or Profit. Sir, The Holy Scripture, which is the Mirror and
Rule of our Actions, teaches, That when Salmanazar conquered the Kingdom of
Israel, he did carry away, not only the Royal Family, but transported all the
Nobility and People into diverse Provinces of his Kingdoms, and into the new
Conquests sent new Inhabitants; yet the Israelites were never such inveterate
Enemies to the Assyrians, as the Portugals with devilish madness have showed
themselves against the Interest and Conveniences of this Monarchy.

Moreover in the same Scripture it is read, That Nebuchadonosor having
Conquered Jerusalem, transplanted all that he found in that Kingdom, leaving
only a few miserable inconsiderable people to remain there.

So Athalia Queen of Judah saw no other way to preserve a Kingdom newly
Conquered, but by extinguishing all the Generation, upon whom the Jews could
cast their eyes in hopes of Revolt.

And Jehu, King elected by God, extinguished all the Family of Ahab, together
with all his dependants, friends, and acquaintance, not sparing so much as the
Priests.

These, Sir, are the Rules that the Holy Scripture teaches to be practiced
upon the Families and People that abhor the Dominion of their own Sovereigns.

It was, Sir, very fatal to stand expecting and hoping for better times and
opportunities for the securing of Portugal.

In the Year, One thousand six hundred and thirty nine, observing the ill
affection of that Nation, my Advice was, That without any delay that Kingdom
was to be secured by Force of Arms; others were of the same Judgments, but Fate
would have it that (for fear of new troubles) by delays way should be made for
Rebellion, than which there could not have been a greater, although that Form
of Government, which was expedient for the Spanish Monarchy, and was always
held necessary for the preserving that Crown, had been put in execution with
the greatest violence imaginable.

But when a Jewel is gone, the main enquiry should be, By what means it may be
found again, not How it came to be lost.

The first means of recovering that Crown, may be (what your Majesty's
Grandfather made use of) to buy your Rights of your own Subjects by Gifts and
Promises, wherein your Majesty is to be as Prodigal, as the Portugals are
insolent in expecting or demanding, and indeed experience teaches, That that
Nation is so addicted to their own Interest, that more may be effected this
way, than by a powerful Army: to him will they be subject who will give most,
or from whom most can be expected herein, Prodigality will be good Husbandry;
for when Portugal shall be returned to the obedience of your Majesty, all that
Wealth which has been bestowed amongst them, will return likewise.

The second means is by course of Arms, but this will be difficult at present,
by Reason of the several Engagements of this Monarchy elsewhere: I suppose Sir,
That in case Portugal should be Conquered by Force, all their Conquests in the
East Indies, etc. will remain in their hands; for thither will they all fly,
and from thence will they be always ready to assist our Enemies; wherefore it
would be very expedient for your Majesty's service, that a Truce were first
made with the Hollanders, upon condition that they make War upon the Portugal
in the Indies, and have whatever they can Conquer, whence will arise this
Commodity that they will want the Wealth of their Conquests, your Majesty being
disengaged with the Hollander, will sooner Conquer them at home, and the
Hollander will only come to receive to day at the hand of your Majesty, what to
morrow the Portugal must deliver up to them: At the same time the Hollanders
and Flemings may scour the Coast of Portugal, and the English may be invited to
a more frequent Navigation in the East Indies and China, whereby the Portugal
Trade may easily be ruined.

The third way is, that the Pope be persuaded to thunder his Excommunications
against the House of Braganza, and against the whole Kingdom, as Perjured and
Perturbators of the public Peace, animating all Christian Princes to assist in
the regaining that Kingdom, upon pretense of advancing the Catholic Faith.

Moreover, diffidencies and jealousies between the Duke of Braganza, and other
people, may easily be fomented by means of Merchants, Strangers, and by
Flemings and Burgundians, under the name of French. And to effect these
diffidencies the better, a Treaty may really be begun with the Duke, which
being discovered by the People (though it be before the Duke could know
thereof) they will destroy him and all his Family, and in such case the Civil
dissentions will open a way for your Majesty to recover your Rights: desperate
evils must have desperate remedies, the Kingdom of Portugal is the Cancer of
the Spanish Monarchy; therefore, Ense recidendum: ne pars symera trahatur. Let
not your Majesty defer the right Remedy, the greatest Rigor is here the
greatest Charity; and to have no Charity, is to have much Prudence; to Bury
this Hydra in its own ashes, will be Triumph enough; to live without this arm,
will be better than to have it employed against ones own head: Let your Majesty
never believe, or hope better of that Nation, than you have seen these Sixty
years past; never think to keep that Country, if not planted with other
People; the detestation against your Majesty's Government, is hereditary.

The Interest of the King, Sir, is very ample, and has no bounds against
Rebels, every action is just and honorable that tends to the recovery of the
Kings right.

Moreover, a Truces is to be made with the Catalonians, whereby they being
freed from the tumultuous courses of War, will have time to take notice of the
French insolences, and growing weary of that Yoke, will at length easily
embrace the next opportunity to return to their obedience, which once effected,
will make the People of Portugal waver betwixt hopes and fears, and beget
variety of opinions amongst them, which for the Conquering of Kingdoms (the
Emperor Julian used to say) was much more advantageous than the force of an
Army, as the Grandfather of your Majesty found in the Succession of Portugal:
To this may be added, That it will be very expedient that your Majesty name
Bishops to dispose of all Governments, and Offices of the Crown, to the most
confiding Persons in that Kingdom, for this will beget distrust amongst them
all, and the ignorant people not knowing whom to trust, will put all into
Confusion, whereby your Majesty's service will be more easily advanced.

This in obedience to your Majesty's Commands, I have imparted my weak advice,
wherein if I have erred, your Majesty's goodness will attribute it to my want
of abilities, not of affection: God preserve the Catholic and Royal Person of
your Majesty, as the Christian World, and we your Majesty's Subjects have need.


But notwithstanding all these endeavors, and these proposed Artifices, nothing
prevailed toward the King of Spain's recovery of this Kingdom, nor was it
probable that any of these Deceits ever should, whilst is considered the
extraordinary love and affection which the whole Nation of the Portuguesses
bore to the Family of their present King, and the inveterate hatred which they
did, and always have born to the Castillians, which was so exceeding great,
that it is believed they would rather have suffered themselves to be extirpated
and routed out, than again submit their Necks to the Spanish Yoke.

And that ever the Spaniard should again recover it per force, is incredible,
if we either consider the Union and Unanimity of the Portugal Nation, and their
Resolutions to undergo the greatest miseries of War can inflict, or the
Interest of all the other Princes of Christendom, who may justly suspect the
encroaching greatness of the Spaniard, and therefore endeavor rather to Lop off
more Limbs from that great Body, than suffer this to be rejoyned.

But it is now high time to return to a Review of the Actions of the Grand
Assembly of the Estates of Portugal, who next Resolved to Dispatch Ambassadors
to all States of Christendom, to enter into Confederacies, for the better
defense and establishment of the Kingdom, and for the Glory and Reputation of
the King.

In the first place, the Father Ignatius Mascarenas a Jesuit, with another
Father of the same Order, was sent into Catalonia, to offer them all assistance
and supplies for their maintenance, and defense against the Catholic King,
for very well did the King of Portugal know that it highly did import his
Interest to correspond with them, that so they might jointly, not only defend,
but also offend the King of Spain, whose Country lying betwixt them both, they
might at pleasure invade, or molest it, either by Sea or Land.

This Embassy of King JOHN'S so rejoiced and encouraged the Catalonians, that
the very next day after the Ambassadors had Audience, they obtained a most
signal Victory in their own defense against the Spaniards, who had assaulted
them with an Army of twenty five thousand men under the Command of the Marquess
De los veles.

Shortly after that the Father Ignatius Mascarenas was dispatched to the
Catalonians D. Francisco de Mello, and Don Antonia Caelle Carravallio, (persons
both of excellent and admired abilities, the one for his great experience and
judgment in State Affairs, and the other for his noble Spirit, and eminent
knowledge in the Civil Law) to go on a solemn Embassy to the most Christian
King Lewis the thirteenth of France.

These attended with a Stately and most Magnificent Train, landed soon after at
Rochel and on the fifteenth of March 1641. made a solemn Entrance into Paris,
being met and conducted in by a great number of Coaches, filled with the
Grandees of the Kingdom, besides numbers of the French Nobility, who came to
attend them on horseback.

Thus accompanied, they were conducted to the Palace appointed for the
Entertainment of the Extraordinary Ambassadors, where they were in a sumptuous
and magnificent manner feasted at the Kings Charges.

From thence they were by the Duke of Chevereux, and the Count de Brulon,
conducted in the Kings Coaches unto his Majesty then at St. Germains, to
receive the first Audience; which was performed with extraordinary shows of
love and respect: for upon the entrance of the Ambassadors into the place
appointed for their Audience, the King rose out of his Chair of Estate: and
went forward three steps to receive them, nor would he permit them to deliver
their Embassy with their Hats off, or to descend so low, as to kiss his hands
at their departure, but in stead of that Ceremony, he affectionately embraced
them in his Arms, promising them the greatest Assistance his Power was able to
give.

They were from the Kings presence conduced to a sumptuous Dinner provided for
them, and after that brought to the Queens Lodging, who was set to expect their
coming: at their entrance she likewise rose, and advanced three steps to meet
them, receiving them with a cheerful and courteous countenance, and not
permitting them to be uncovered.

Amongst other Discourses which they had with her, D. Francisco de Mello told
her, That he feared his Embassy might not be acceptable, because the King his
Master had deprived her Brother of one of his Kingdoms. Whereunto she readily
replied, That though she was sister to the King of Spain, yet she was wife to
the King of France.

After some Discourse in French, her Majesty began to speak to them in Spanish,
which they observing, desired to know wherefore her Majesty had not vouchsafed
them that favor sooner, it being a Language by them better understood; To which
the Queen jestingly answered, For fear they should be frighted, to hear her
speak Spanish, and the Ambassador to improve the jest, replied, Como a tum
Grand Signora si, pero coma a Castiliano no, that it was true considering her
Greatness, but not her Country: The Queen smiling, went on, promising them all
assistance possible, and wishing all prosperity to King JOHN and his Queen; and
so they having delivered her Majesty a Letter from the Queen of Portugal, took
their leave.

From her Majesty they went to visit his Eminence the Cardinal Richlieu, who
being advertised of their coming, came forward to the third Chamber to meet
them, where he received them with expressions of great affection, and promises
and proffers of services, and from thence conducted them to his own Chamber.

Being all three sat, the Cardinal (who was the most experienced and greatest
Statesman of his time) discoursed with them of diverse affairs of great
importance, and they endeavored to explain to his Eminence what was before his
sentiment, that it very much imported the two Crowns of France and Portugal to
be united by an indissoluble League, considering that it was the Chief and
Principal end and aim of the House of Austria, (whose Branches were spread over
almost all Europe) not only to be the greatest, but to be the sole and only
Monarch of Christendom: That to effect those ambitious desires, he had never
made scruple to usurp and seize upon Kingdoms and States upon the least
pretenses imaginable, as had appeared in the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily,
Navarre, the Duchy of Millan, and lately several States in Germany, seizing
upon the Valtoline, whereby they had a passage open to lead an Army of Germans
into Italy at pleasure.

That considering the vast power and interest that this Family had, not only in
Europe, but also in America, it could not but be confessed, That they had a
large foundation of their imaginary Universal Monarchy; but that nothing gave
them so great hopes, as the possession of Portugal.

For by the addition of that Kingdom to the Crown of Castille, they became
absolute Masters, not only of all Spain, but of all the East Indies, of all the
Eastern Trade of Ethiopia, Persia, Arabia, China, Japan, and all that
incredible wealth that was raised out of the Portugal Traffic, whereby the
Austrian Greatness (if not their Monarchy) was principally sustained, that
therefore it concerned all States whatsoever, not only to put a stop to the
raving Tyranny of this devouring Monster, but to suppress and lessen his Power
by all means possible.

That to do this, none was more concerned, or more able, than the Kingdom of
France united with that of Portugal: That this having been called the Right Arm
(as Catalonia the Left) of that great Austrian Colossus, now both being
separated from it, and united to France, will be able to do greater service
against it, than they were ever forced to do for it, not only by assaulting the
Spaniard within his own doors, but by intercepting the Plate-Fleet; which in
its return from the West Indies, it being necessarily forced to pass by the
Tercera Islands, must run in danger of the Portuguez Fleet, or be forced to be
at the Charge of an extraordinary Convoy.

These were the sum of the Ambassadors Discourses to the Cardinal: In answer to
which, his Eminence made offer, not only of all the Assistance of the most
Christian King his Master, but that he would disburse himself for the service
of the King of Portugal, promising that he would presently send thither a Fleet
of Twenty Sail with his Nephew, Admiral and Ambassador Extraordinary.

This Treatment thus ended, the Ambassadors took their leaves, his Eminence
waiting upon them as far as the Stairs; which when they endeavored to hinder,
he replied, That the Ambassadors of the King of Portugal, were to be Treated
with as much Respect as those of the Emperor or Pope.

Few days after, a Juncto of the King of France his Council, were appointed to
Treat with the Ambassadors in the House of the Lord High Chancellor of the
Kingdom, where a Peace was fully concluded between the two Kingdoms of France
and Portugal.

Other Ambassadors were (about the same time that the aforementioned were sent
into France) dispatched into England; for it very much concerned the Kingdom of
Portugal to maintain a good Correspondence with the Crown of England, both in
regard of the Navigation and Commerce of both States, and also the better to
break that Amity and good Understanding which was now held between the Crown of
Spain and that State. Hither therefore were sent Don Antonio D'Almado, and Don
Francisco D'Averado Leilon, both persons of exquisite parts; who,
notwithstanding that the Dunkirkers Chased them, arrived safe in England.

And for all the sturdy endeavors of the Spanish Ambassadors, they were
received on shore with abundance of Respect; yet His Majesty of England would
not give them Audience, or accept of the Embassage from the King of Portugal,
so tender was He of His Honor and Conscience, till Don Antonia de Sosa their
Secretary, had drawn up a Paper, to satisfy Him of the Right and Title of the
Duke of Braganza to the Crown of Portugal. The sum of which was: Upon the Death
of King Henry the Cardinal, without Issue, many pretended (together with the
Infanta Donna Catherina Duchess of Braganza, and Grandmother to this present
King) to the Crown of Portugal; but all their pretenses wanting foundation,
soon fell, except that of Philip the Second, King of Spain, who propt up his
with force.

King Henry was Uncle, equally near to both, but with this difference;
Catherine was the Daughter of a Son named Edward, and Philip was the Son of a
Daughter named Isabella, Brother and Sister to King Henry.

King Philip pleaded, That he being in equal degree with Catherine, was to be
preferred for his Sex.

Catherine replied, That the Constitution of that Kingdom allowing Females to
succeed, and withal the benefit of Representation in all Inheritances, she
representing Edward, must exclude Philip by the very same right that her Father
(if he were living) would exclude Philips Mother.

This Conclusion is infallible in Jure: whereto Philip answered, That
Succession of Kingdoms descending Jure sanguinis, there was allowed no
Representation.

Catherine destroyed that foundation, alleging, That the Succession by the
Death of the last King, was derived Jure haereditatis, and non sanguinis,
because the Succession of Kingdoms was to be regulated by that Ancient way,
whereby all things descended by Inheritance; the other way of Succession being
not known until later Ages, nor ever practiced either in Spain or Portugal in
such Cases.

Briefly in behalf of Catherine it was urged, (which by the Castillians can
never be denied, or answered) That she was no stranger, but a Native of the
Kingdom, to whom alone (according to the Laws of Lamego) the Crown of Portugal
can appertain.



The King having perused and deliberated upon this Paper, gave immediately
Order they should be presently conducted to London, which was done with all
convenient Solemnity, and they lodged in a Palace ready prepared for them: soon
after with great Ceremony they received Audience of His Majesty, in a fair and
Stately Hall prepared for that purpose, where His Majesty sat upon a Throne
raised two steps, and at the entrance of the Ambassador pulled off His Hat, nor
would be covered till they were so too.

To the Propositions made in the Speech of D. Antonia D'Almoda, concerning a
Peace between Portugal and England, His Majesty replied, That he should be very
glad if an expedient might be found out to renew the Ancient Leagues of
Friendship between the two Crowns, without the breaking with Spain.

Some few days after, the Ambassadors were conducted to give a Visit to Mary
Queen of England, who sat in a Chair of Estate ready to entertain them: when
they came into the Presence, She rose out of the Chair, and came as far as the
Carpetting, making low reverence as the Ambassadors bowed; when they came near,
Her Majesty made them be covered, but afterward they spoke with their Hats
off. In conclusion the Queen told them, That she much desired to hold
Correspondence with Her Majesty of Portugal.

In fine, on the Thirteenth of June, One thousand six hundred and forty one, a
Peace was absolutely concluded with the Portugal, notwithstanding the earnest
endeavors of Don Alonza Cardenas, ^^ger Ambassador for Spain, who by Gifts and
Promises, even as far as the restitutio^ of the Palatinate, endeavored to
hinder it.

The Ambassadors that were sent (...) the King of Denmark (notwithstanding the
great Traffic and Commerce that had formerly bin held between that Kingdom and
Portugal) were not (by reason of the great interest the House of Austria had
with those Kings) received; yet the King gave all possible Respect otherwise to
them. From thence they passed into Sweden, and were Magnificently entertained
at the young Queens Court at Stockholm, where a League was soon concluded, and
the Ambassadors dismissed, according to the Custom of that Nation, with Gold
Chains, and the Queens Portraicture in a Meddal of Gold.

The Ambassador D. Tristano De Mendoza Hurtada, that was sent to the States of
the United Provinces, was received with the like Magnificence and seeming
affection, and a Truce concluded with the Kingdom of Portugal for Ten years;
for a Peace the States would not assent to, because they having Conquered many
places in Brasil, Angola, etc which belonged to the Crown and Kingdom of
Portugal, could not make restitution of them, by reason they now belonged to
the West India Company; nor could the King of Portugal allow the Conquest, as
things of right belonging to his Crown, and depending on it.

But now we come to treat of a more solemn Embassy, to wit, that to the Pope:
Long was it debated in the Assembly of Estates, whether an Ambassador should be
sent to Rome immediately, or a more opportune conjuncture of time be expected.
Some were of opinion that the sending an Ambassador without further delay,
would be a testification of their duty, and incline the Popes Holiness to
acknowledge DON JOHN the lawful Heir, and rightful King of Portugal, which
would extremely further and advance the Affairs of the Kingdom.

But others there were who conceived those things rather desirable than
feasible, and were of the opinion they should rather stay till a fitter
opportunity, alleging, that the King of Spain's present power at Rome, might
probably oppose the Reception of their Ambassador: that although the Pope never
was in his heart a Spaniard, yet he would never yield to show himself an enemy
to the Catholic King: That the Spaniards cunningly fomenting the opinion which
all the world had entertainted, that his Holiness did in all things favor the
French interest, would from such a Reception, draw as much as ever they could
ask or desire. That for this cause the Pope (that he might not seem their
enemy) had always granted them whatever they desired; That therefore they
thought it convenient first to sound his Holiness, before they run the hazard
of the disgrace and affront which might fall upon his Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom; That in case the Pope should decline the reception of the Ambassador,
to whom could they repair or appeal to vindicate the injury done to the Crown?
That many Popes had been so fascinated to the interest of their own family,
that the world had very great occasion to believe, that their designs tended
rather to what was best for themselves, than to what was best indeed: That the
Portugal Nation, had as much reason to distrust the Sea of Rome as any, whilst
they had to their cost had examples how they only pursued their own ends. As
particularly Gregory the thirteenth, who at first seemed so affectionate to the
Kingdom of Portugal, that he employed the utmost of his Power for the Interest
of his own Family, approved of all that King had done; that there was none who
had more to give, or at least who had more to promise, than the Catholic King;
so that in any business of Competition he must necessarily gain the better.

But notwithstanding all these Arguments to the contrary, upon the promises of
the King of France, to be a Mediator at the Sea of Rome, for the Reception of
their Ambassadors, by the suffrage of some few Voices, to make the major part,
it was concluded, That Ambassadors should immediately be sent to Rome.

And in pursuance of this Vote, the King immediately made choice of two
Reverend and able Persons, to wit, Michael De Portogallo, Son to the Count
Vimioso of the Blood Royal, Bishop of Lamego, and D. Petableone Rodriguiz,
Bishop of Elvas: No sooner was the news arrived at Rome of their being landed
in Italy, but the Spaniards in Rome mustred themselves together, with
resolution either to oppose their entrance, or at least hinder their reception;
whilst on the other side the French, Portugal, and Catalonians assembled
themselves together, resolving to hazard their dearest Blood in their Cause.

His Holiness seeing these preparations on both sides, feared lest his Country
should be made the Seat of a petty War, and considering that in any case the
dishonor would accrue to him, if whilst under his Command and Protection, the
Person of an Ambassador should be violated, strictly Commanded all his Guards
to take special care to prevent the Violencies intended.

The Spaniards by this Order hindered from what they purposed, their Ambassadors
openly protested, That if his Holiness did receive the Portugal Ambassador,
they would immediately leave Rome. But notwithstanding these protestations, and
all other opposition they could possibly make, in November, One thousand six
hundred and forty one, the two Portugal Ambassadors being met by diverse
Cardinals, Princes, and Cavaliers, well armed, entered into Rome, and were
conducted to the Palace of the French Ambassador, who received them with all
Respect possible, still giving them the precedence.

Hereupon several Manifesto's are scattered abroad by the two Spanish
Ambassadors, the Marquess De los Veles, and D. John Chiumarrero, laboring to
prove that his Holiness ought not to receive the Ambassadors of the Duke of
Braganza, as they styled him. First, because he was a Tyrant, and Usurper of
that Kingdom, which had been in the quiet possession of the Catholic King
these Sixty years. Secondly, Because he was a Rebel, and a Perjured Person,
having sworn Allegiance to the Catholic King. Thirdly, That the Reception of
these Ambassadors would animate other Subjects of the Catholic King to
Rebellion.

But whilst the Spanish Ambassadors are violently shooting such Paper-Bullets,
the Portuguesses used all their endeavors, both by themselves, and the French
Ambassadors, (who had express Order from the most Christian King his Master to
that purpose,) to prevail with the Pope, to give them Audience, and admit their
Embassy: but his Holiness was so fearful to displease the Spaniard, lest he
should afterward take occasion to revenge himself upon his Nephews, that he
utterly declined their Reception, yet not out of any of the Spaniards
Allegations, but upon pretense that certain of the Church Rites had been
violated in Portugal; the Archbishop of Braga, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons, being kept in durance, though it was for very good reasons, as
hereafter shall appear.

Yet the Spaniards were not content with this Resolution of his Holiness, but
(whilst the Portugals were endeavoring to prove their Cause, by both Political
and Legal Declarations, Allegations, and Arguments,) fearing lest the Pope
might chance to alter his mind, resolved to make a quick dispatch of the
Business, and to that purpose Two hundred Banditi were hired to seize upon the
Bishop of Lamego, and carry him to Naples, as the Prince of Sans had been
before served by them, and there put to Death.

But this Design, themselves at length could not agree upon, for the Marquess
De Los Velos, thought it would be better and less dangerous to give the
Portugals a Public Affront in the City, which was concluded to be put in
effect, and to that purpose it was communicated to the rest of the Nation,
(whereof upon several occasions there are always many in Rome) who assembled
together well Armed at the Ambassadors Palace: and so great is the Power of
Revenge: that to the end they might the better effect their design, and yet not
appear as Soldiers, though there were many Gentlemen of quality amongst them,
they condescended to go under the name of Footmen to the Marquess.

The Popes Holiness hearing of the great preparations of the Spaniard, sent to
them to let them know, that he could not but be very much distasted to see such
disorders attempted in a peaceable City, and therefore desiring them for his
Honors sake to desist, and withal sent a Messenger to the Bishop of Lamego, to
assure him that he need not fear any thing, for upon the Word of his Holiness,
he should walk the Streets undisturbed.

But do the Pope what he could, either by threats, desires, or persuasions, the
Spaniards were resolved to prosecute their design, which they put in execution
to their own cost, on the twenty of August, One thousand six hundred forty two.
On which day the Bishop of Lamego going to visit the French Ambassador, one of
his retinue observed, that he was dogged by a Spanish Spy; whereupon a
Counter-Spie was sent to the Marquesses to bring intelligence what they were
doing there, who brought word to the French Ambassadors, that there was great
preparations of Coaches and Men: whereupon the French, Portugals, and
Catalonians, assembled, and armed themselves with Pistols and Firelocks, to
convoy home the Bishop.

By the way they were met by the Spanish Ambassador, accompanied with about
eight Coaches full of Captains and Officers come from Naples, and guarded with
about sixty Footmen, besides diverse others of that Nation. No sooner came they
in sight of the Bishops Coach, but they cried aloud, Che si fermassero all'
Ambasciatore di Spagna; that they should stop for the Ambassador of Spain: but
the Portugals driving on, answered, Che fi fermassero Lavo, that they should
stop.

Hereupon both sides with their Swords drawn leapt out of the Coaches, and
making a stand, one Gun was first fired by the Spaniards side, and immediately
seconded with a brave volley on both sides; when they fell into Swords point,
the Bishops side soon getting the better of it, yet there was slain a Knight of
Malta, an Italian, and a French and Portugal page, but on the Spanish
Marquesses side, there were eight killed upon the place, and above twenty
wounded, the Marquess leaving his Coach-horses dead, escaped out of the back of
the Coach, which stood upon the place till next day, and got into the next shop
without his hat, and trembling for fear, from whence he was carried to the
Spanish Cardinal Albornoz Palace. The Portuguesse Ambassador returned first to
the French Palace, and from thence went safely home.

His Holiness the Pope was extremely perplexed at these disturbances, and
therefore to prevent the like for the future, Commanded a guard of Soldiers to
be put upon the houses, both of the Bishop and the Marquess. But shortly after,
when the Bishop of Lamego had again pressed the Pope, by a large memorial of
the reasons why he should be received, and was absolutely refused, he was by
his Master the King of Portugal called home.

Whilst these things were acting abroad, the Castillians begun to make
continual in-roads into the borders of Portugal, which made King JOHN look more
narrowly into the defense of his Kingdom, fortify all the Frontiers, and train
up his Subjects to military exercises.

The Spaniards in one in-road which they made into Portugal, laid waste all
before them, sparing neither Sex nor Age wheresoever they came, which made the
Portugals in revenge, commit the like outrages in an in-road they made into
Gallicia.

But these were public enmities, and therefore more easy to be opposed; but
there was a private Serpent that lay Lurking at home, which was so much the
likelier to do mischief, by how much it was more secretly hidden. Some few
there were who thought themselves so highly obliged to the Catholic King, as
to endeavor the re-uniting of the Crown of Portugal to his vast Dominions, and
again inslave their Country to Foreigners.

The principal of these was the Archbishop of Braga, always a great Creature
and Favorite of the Count Olivarez, who had at the beginning of the Revolt,
showed himself so opposite to the Freedom of his Country, that many Gentlemen
were once resolved to make him suffer the same fate with Vasconcellos the
Secretary; Nor had he ceased ever since to show visible signs of his
coffeehouse at the Government.

In this Archbishops head was the whole Conspiracy first hatched, and by him
communicated to D. Lewis de Meneses Marquess of Villa-real, and the Duke of
Camigna his Son, two Persons sufficiently Ambitious, and both discontented, as
not thinking themselves sufficiently rewarded according to their Merit: These
the Archbishop tampered with, persuading them, That it was a low and unworthy
thing, much beneath their Birth and Greatness, to suffer themselves to be
subject to a fellow-Subject: That it would be much more Noble and Generous in
them, to return their Allegiance to the King of Spain their Ancient Sovereign,
who was able to bestow more upon a Person deserving in one day, than the Duke
of Braganza could in an hundred years. These and few other Arguments were
sufficient to draw those, who before out of their envy to the House of
Braganza, were inclinable to a change.

These made sure, the Archbishop next draws into this Plot a Gentleman of a
Noble Blood, named, D. Augustine Emanuel, a man of excellent parts, but
somewhat necessitated, nor had ever been looked upon, or put into any
employment, which without any other incentives, were motives sufficient to move
a man to any desperate design. Next him was added to this Conspiracy, Pietro
Baeza, a lately converted Jew, whom the Portuguesses call Upstart Christians;
he was Famous for nothing, but his vast Riches; being a great Criado of the
Count Olivarez, whose Favor, he used often to say, would one day advance him
to high Honor, or to a high pair of Gallows, which last proved very true.

Many private Meetings had these, and some few other Conspirators, where they
debated to bring their Designs to effect; some were of opinion, that before
they could bring it to perfection, more should be acquainted with it, for it
was impossible that so few should ever be able to compass it: But in this
course there arose many fears and doubts, lest too many being acquainted with
it, some should discover it, as had often happened in Designs of that high
Nature: yet at length it was found necessary to draw more into the Plot, for
whilst they were so few, the Business only rested in imagination, but could
never be put in execution.

Having therefore added some more to the number, their next debates were of the
manner how to bring it to effect; some advised that a Power of the Catholic
Kings was to be got in a readiness, but they then thought that the King of
Portugal would raise as great a force, and so prevent a sudden Invasion: Yet in
answer to that Objection, it was by some alleged, That the Spaniard by way of
Intelligence might be let in, which again seemed as difficult, the Militia
being in the hands of Persons most Loyal and Trusty to the King: Others
proposed, That the only way to effect it, was by a sudden and violent making
away of the King; but this advice was opposed by most, who inclined to a
mediocrity, and would rather have found out a way to make his Majesty renounce
his own Right and Title to the Crown, and retire himself from the dangers which
should be presented unto him.

But whilst they thus wavered in opinions, and inclined to that moderation,
which is the ruin of all Designs of this Nature, they gave the King time and
occasion to search out their Plots; for his Majesty having always had a
suspicious eye upon the Archbishop of Braga, and the Marquess of Villa-Real,
and having received now private notice, that they had had sundry Meetings, and
were observed daily to converse with Persons as discontented as themselves,
endeavored by all means possible to know the depth of their Counsel, and at
length intercepts some of their Letters to Madrid, which discovered not only
the whole Plot, but even the names of all the Conspirators.

The Act of Holding Correspondence with the Spaniard, was Treason in it self,
sufficient to take away their lives, being contrary to his Majesty's express
command, its being to this intent, made it but so much the more heinous: His
Majesty therefore not knowing how far it might have proceeded, made no delays,
but presently by the sound of Drum and Trumpet (as the Custom is) caused to be
Proclaimed, That he intended to go forth of the City; upon which all the Nobles
and Gentry, according to the usual manner, assembled at the Palace to accompany
his Majesty, who when he saw them all ready, commanded first that a Council of
Estate should be called, which was done, many of the Conspirators being
assistant in it, who being sat, his Majesty without any noise caused them to
be arrested one by one, which without the taking of this course, he could never
have effected; for if the Conspiracy had been detected, before their Persons
had been seized, they had either been torn in pieces by the fury of the People,
or else had some of them escaped.

It was very strange that of all the Plotters in this Conspiracy, not one
should, either by accident, or otherwise, escape, for the Persons of these now
taken, were no sooner imprisoned, but his Majesty published a Proclamation,
declaring a Free Pardon to all the Accomplices in this Conspiracy, that should
within Four days come and acknowledge their fault, and beg it; but the Kings
diligence had been such before, that there was not one left to accept of this
Grace.

Shortly after those who had been taken, were Arraigned according to Law, found
Guilty of High Treason, and in manner following executed.

On the last day of August, One thousand six hundred and forty one, the
Marquess of Villa-Real, the Duke of Camigna, his Son, the Count de Armamac, and
D. Augustine Manuele, were led along a Gallery to a Scaffold erected for the
purpose, with two stories, on the uppermost of which stood two Chairs, on the
next one, and on the Scaffold it self the fourth.

The first that was conducted forth to Execution, was the Marquess of
Villa-Real, who was clothed in a long black Bays Cloak, and his servants
attending him in mourning, being mounted to the uppermost part of the Scaffold,
he prayed for a good space upon his knees, and then rising up, asked, If there
were no hopes of Pardon? which made the people with one voice cry out, No, let
him die, let him die for a Traitor.

The next funebrious Ceremony of his Execution, was the Proclamation, which
according to the usual manner was made by the Executioner, in these words; This
is the Justice that the King our Sovereign Lord, commands to be executed upon
the person of Don Lewis de Meneses, sometimes Marquess of Villa-Real, that his
throat be cut as a Traitor to his Majesty, Nobility and People of this Kingdom,
that for his Crime his goods be confiscated, and his memory banished out of the
World. Whereat all the people cried out, Justice, Justice.

The Marquess thereupon seeing no hopes of any Repreive, with a sober and
becoming gravity demanded Pardon of all the Spectators, desiring them to assist
him with their prayers to God for the Pardon of this, and all his other sins;
then turning to a Father-Jesuite his Confessor, he prayed him in his behalf to
present himself at his Majesty's feet, and beseech him out of his wonted
goodness, to forgive him that heinous offense committed against him and the
whole Kingdom.

Having ended this Speech, he very patiently sat down in the Chair, and the
Executioner having tied his arms and legs, to the arms and legs of the Chair,
he leaned his neck over the back of the Chair, and the Executioner with his
knife cut his throat, covering him afterward with a black Scarf.

In the same manner his son the Duke of Camigna came to the Scaffold, his
servants all attending him in mourning; as he came to his fathers Corpse he
kneeled down, and several times kissed his feet, begged of the people the
suffrage of one Pater nostre for his fathers soul; then after some prayers, and
Proclamation made by the Executioner, he received the same punishment.

Next that suffered was the Count of Armamac, in the Chair seated upon the
lower story; and after him Don Augustine Manuel upon the Scaffold it self; the
Judges would have had all their necks cut behind, but his Majesty would not
consent thereto, as a punishment too ignominious for persons of their quality.

The same day Pietro de Baeza, and Melchior Correa de Franca, were drawn at a
horse-tail to an extraordinary high gallows, and there hanged, whilst Diego de
Brito Nabo, and Antonio Valente, were executed upon a lower; the Quarters of
these four were set up at the Gates of the City, and their Heads placed upon
several Frontier Towns.

In the Month of September following, for the same offense Antonia Cogamigne,
and Antonio Correa, were likewise executed, the first of which during the whole
time of his Imprisonment, was an example of Penitence, feeding only upon Bread
and Water, and whipping himself very often, with continual prayers to God for
Pardon of that, and all his other sins.

As for the Archbishop of Braga, and the Bishops of Martiria and Malacca, and
Friar Emanuel de Macedo, though they were the persons that had the greatest
hand in the Conspiracy; yet in regard they were Ecclesiastical persons, they
suffered not death, according to their deserts, but were kept in prison, till
the Popes pleasure were known concerning them.

Here must not be forgot a great example of humility and repentance in the
Archbishop of Braga, not only in his life time (when he often writ to the
King, that he might suffer, and others be spared, who were rather drawn in, in
compliance and obedience to him, than out of any ill will to the King and
Kingdom (but also at his death (which happened about Three years after his
Imprisonment) when he gave Order, That as soon as he was dead, his Last Will
and Testament should be carried to the King, wherein he humbly entreated his
Majesty to Pardon the Treason committed against him, and his Native Country,
and that he would permit his body to be buried without the Church of any Parish
of Lisbonne, and that without any Inscription or Tombstone, that there might
remain no memory of a man who had been a Traitor to his King and Country.

This exemplary punishment, and rigorous execution of Justice upon the
forementioned traiterous Delinquents, established the King in his Kingdom,
struck a terror into his enemies, and increased his Subjects love and care of
him more diligently to Watch his Royal Families, and the Kingdoms safety.

But in the mean time daily incursions were made upon the Frontiers between the
Castillians and Portuguesses, with the same Violence, Cruelty and Animosity, as
formerly.

About the beginning of the year, One thousand six hundred and forty two
(notwithstanding the Truce that had been concluded between Portugal and
Holland, and that a great Fleet of Hollanders had been sent to assist the
Portugal against the Spaniard) there passed very high Acts of Hostility between
the two Nations in Africa and America, beyond the Line; for the Hollanders
seeing the disunion of Portugal from Castille, made all speed possible to
perfect the Conquest of those parts before a perfect Peace should be concluded
with Portugal, that so in the Treaty they might pretend Reason, that all things
should continue in the state they were then found.

To this purpose, that is, the expediting their Conquest, the Hollanders
treacherously (whilst there was all quiet and peacable Commerce held between
the two Nations in the Kingdom of Angola) surprised the Portugals that were
Governors of the place, Killed diverse, and Robbed all of the great Wealth they
there found; of which Perfidiousness, as also of the Barbarous Usage of the
Prisoners there taken, Complaints were made to the States General at the Hague,
but no Redress was granted; nor was the King of Portugal of Ability to force it.

In the mean time the Affairs in Portugal were a little discomposed by the
general Discontent and Distaste taken at the Secretary of State, Don Francisco
de Lucena: This man had lived a long time in the Court of Spain, till he was by
Olivarez made Under-Secretary to Vasconcellos; his Readiness to Proclaim King
JOHN, and his Abilities in the place, made the King continue him in it,
reposing in him so great a Confidence, That though some had Advertized his
Majesty that he kept Correspondence with the Court at Madrid, yet the King
would not suspect him, nor permit him to be brought to a Trial.

But about the middle of the Year, One thousand six hundred and forty three;
the urgent Affairs of the Kingdom requiring a Convention of the Three Estates,
they openly refused all Acts that should pass the hands of Secretary Lucena,
positively telling his Majesty, That until he were brought to Trial, no Acts
should Pass in the Assembly of Estates, nor any farther Proceedings be made.

His Majesty was very much Grieved hereat, yet prudently Resolved to give his
Subjects Satisfaction, by delivering up his Secretary to Justice; yet Resolving
he should have a fair Trial, and to that purpose sitting himself to hear the
Witnesses examined. Whilst Process was framed against the Secretary, some
secret Advice came to his Majesty, which caused the Imprisonment of the
Brother, and Three Servants of the Secretary, together with an English Monck,
and a Cavalier of the Habit; not long after, the Secretary was Arraigned and
Condemned for betraying his Truth, in holding Correspondence with the Enemy,
and in neglecting timely to Advertise the Infanta Edward to retire out of
Germany, etc. and according to his Sentence, executed in a Public place in
Lisbon, where at his Death, he protested his Innocence touching any Treachery
toward his Majesty.

The Death of the Secretary both pleased the People, and satisfied the Assembly
of Estates, who now, according to his Majesty's Command, met on September 18.
One thousand six hundred and forty three; and being all sat, and his Majesty
seated in his Throne, D. Emanuel D'Acugna, Dean of his Majesty's Chapel, rose
up, and after Reverence made to the King, spoke to the Effect following.

THat in the space of Sixty Years, that that Kingdom was under the Power of the
Kings of Castille, there had been but Two Assemblies of States; the first to
Inslave, the next to Abuse them. But that since they were under the present
King, within the space of Two Years, they had Two Assemblies, the former to
settle their Liberties, the present to beget a right Understanding between the
King and his People, wherein they had all Freedom to demand whatever was
necessary, That the World might see they are now no longer Slaves, but
Children; no longer Strangers, but Natives; and that they are under rather a
Loving Father, than a Severe Sovereign.

In the former Assembly, said he, His Majesty took all the Customs, and left
the Defense of the Kingdom to your hands, you Ordered what seemed good unto
your selves, you made Choice of a General Assistance by way of Contribution,
but in the leaving thereof, the first Payment was found ineffectual, the second
unequal, the third insufficient; whence arose some Complaints, some imagining
that the fault proceeded from the unequal Division of the Contribution; others
from the Change of Value in Money and Commodities, and others from the
disorderly Gathering and Disbursing the whole. I may easily say, That if there
were any error committed, yet it might be excusable for that; Never had any
weighty affair its Conception and Perfection at once: Then shall Errors cease
to be in Government, when Men shall cease to be in the World. These things are
to be endured with the same Patience that Droughts, Dearths, Inundations, and
such other Disorders in Nature, for the Wit of Man cannot hold forth a Remedy
for all Diseases. But certainly they will be no ground of Reprehension, (though
much of Admiration) to him that shall Consider how His Majesty entered upon a
Kingdom, exhausted by the Castillians of Money and other Necessaries, for
Offense or Defense, and yet how in less than a Year and an half, we should want
neither Shipping, nor Artillery, nor Horse, nor Arms, nor Fortification, nor
Armies upon the Frontiers, three Powerful Fleets put to Sea, diverse Honorable,
and Extraordinary Ambassages, besides many Secret (yet Necessary) Expenses; all
which will astonish any Understanding Man. Now to the end that the People may
have full satisfaction, His Majesty has Commanded, That (before further
Proceeding) it be made appear Particularly how all the Money Received has been
laid out, and then it is Expected, and the present state of Affairs Requires,
That we all Contribute Liberally, Considering that these Charges are but for a
time, but our Liberties are for ever: That we shall never have a better
opportunity to Destroy our Enemy. That Nature teaches, To Hazard an Arm, to
Save the whole Body: The Merchants at Sea cast away some part of their Goods
sometimes, to save the rest; we are now on Shipboard in a Storm, our Goods,
our Lives, our Liberties, our Honor, our Country, are all in Danger.

Moreover, the Barbarous Usage of the King of Castille toward the Infant Don
Edward, calls upon this Assembly for Revenge, that we spend not only our Money,
but our Blood in Affection to Him, and that we make our Enemies spend theirs in
Satisfaction for Him, etc.


This Speech of the Deans was spoken with so much Affection, that it stirred up
and encouraged the States readily to give all Assistance imaginable, both for
Redressing of Grievances, and for the Levying Arms, so that within a small time
after, the King was in the Head of Twenty thousand Foot, and Three thousand
Horse, marching toward the Fronteirs of Castille.

Whilst these great preparations for Hostility were made, the Queen brought
forth into the World a second Son to His Majesty, but first Child after he came
to the Crown, which added to the Magnificence of his Christning, he was named
Alphonso, and his Brother Theodosio dying before his Father, succeeded in the
Kingdom and is at present King of Portugal.

Many Skirmishes had passed between the Castillians and Portuguesses, many
town, had been surprised, many lands wasted, but never happened a set-battel
between them till in the year, One thousand six hundred and forty four, when
both Armies met upon the Border of Portugal in a field called Campo Major. The
Spanish Army which for the most part consisted of strangers, was under the
Command of the Marquess of Forrecusa, and the Portugal Army consisting of
Natives, and some few Hollanders, were commanded by Macchias de Albuquerque.
This fight was maintained with all possible courage and resolution on both
sides; but the Spaniards being more numerous, especially in horse, at length
put the whole Portuguese Army in Disorder, seized on their whole Artillery, and
Baggage, and slew Albuquerques Horse under him, took many Prisoners, and
assured themselves of an absolute Victory. But Fortune which had thus
favorably smiled upon them in the beginning of the Day, frowned as harshly
upon them in the Conclusion; for Albuquerque being re-mounted, Rallied again
his scattered Forces, re-charged the pursuing Spaniards, put them to a total
Rout, and pursued the Chase for above three Miles.

In this Battle the Castillians lost One thousand six hundred men upon the
place, amongst which were the Lieutenant General, the General of the Horse, the
General of the Artillery, the Count de Montixo, five Camp-masters, two
Adjutants of Horse, three Sergeant Majors, three and twenty Cornets, together
with many Knights of the Order of St. James Calatrava and Alcantara: there were
taken about Four thousand Arms, and a thousand Horse.

On the Portuguese side there were not above Three hundred slain, among which
were two Camp-masters, one Sergeant Major, a Captain of Horse, and eight of
Foot, but many Noblemen, Commanders, and Officers taken Prisoners in the first
encounter, were carried away by the Spaniards in their flight.

It was not long after this Battle, that the Marquess De Montalban, D. George
Mascaneras Lord Treasurer, President of the Council of the Indies, and
Councellor of Estate, with some others, were imprisoned upon suspicion of a
Conspiracy against the King of Portugal: but it being upon Examination found,
that the suspicion was by the Spaniards cunningly raised, to deprive King JOHN
of his most able Ministers, and to make the World believe the Portuguese
Nobility were discontented with their King; they were set at Liberty, and their
Honors fully repaired by a Proclamation of the Kings.

For the Spaniards ceased not by all means and devices, which the Will and
Policy of the most wicked Statesmen could invent, not only to weaken the
Portuguess Nation within it self, by breeding discontents (if possible) between
the King and the three Estates, but likewise to undervalue them, and make their
credit be slighted and disregarded by other Kingdoms and States, their
Confederates and Allies.

Yet besides these subtle Ambages, the King of Castille did not desist the
endeavoring to oppress this Kingdom by force of Arms; but not only the resolved
and immutable unity of the Portuguess Nation, was a strong Tower and invincible
Fortress against the Spanish Power, but so extremely was the House of Austria
involved in Wars and Disasters on every side, that that vast Body was rather in
a condition to crave help and assistance from others, than indeed to oppress
them. For besides the Wars in Catalonia, which had put itself under the
protection of the most potent King of France, in the Low Countries, which had
proved so tedious and so chargeable a War to Spains; in Italy, in this Kingdom,
and in Germany, there happened several Commotions and popular Tumults in some
of the King of Spain's Dominions, which not only robbed the King of a present
supply of Treasure, but were otherwise retardments to the prosecution of his
Wars in other places.

The first of these Commotions began in the Island of Sicily, where the people
gathering together in a tumultuous manner, forced the Viceroy to take off all
new Imposts and Taxes which the Kings present necessities had enforced him to
lay upon them. This encouraged their neighbors on the adjacent Continent, the
Inhabitants of the Famous City of Naples, in hopes to rid themselves of their
oppressions, to rise in like manner in Arms; which they did, encouraged and
commanded by one Thomas Aniello, or vulgarly Masaniello, who though of so mean
and obscure a birth as a poor Fisher-boy; yet to the wonder of the World for
ten days Commanded this mighty City, and freed it from all Gabels, so that
ever since these two Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily have rather been a great
charge, than any benefit to the Spanish Monarch.

These Troubles, and the Austrian Families being every where encompassed and
embroiled in Wars, together with the earnest desire of the King of Castille to
prosecute a vigorous War against Catalonia, and Portugal, were I suppose the
motives which persuaded the Catholic King to end those Wars, which had lasted
in the low Countries for above ninety years, by owning now at last (what he had
so long refused) the united Provinces free States, so an obsolute peace was
concluded on, and proclaimed at all the chief towns in the Netherlands, on the
5. of June, One thousand six hundred and forty eight, a Peace no less
advantageous to the Spaniards, than disadvantagious to the Portugals, by reason
of the pretenses the Dutch had to Brazil, and other places in the West Indies.
King JOHN of Portugal about the beginning of the year, One thousand six hundred
and forty nine, thought his Son the Prince Theodosio arrived at an age fitting
to keep a Court of himself; Lodgings were therefore appointed for him, divided
from the Royal Palace, and Officers of his Household nominated and appointed by
the King, amongst whom the Earls of Villa nova, of Miranda, of Valdereis and
Fernando, Tells de Monezez, (who had formerly been Governor of the City of
Port,) were entrusted as the principal Gentlemen of his Chamber.

The King likewise thought fit to add a third to the two former
Superintendants of his Revenue, whom he nominated to be D. Rey de Moure Tellez,
whose former Office of Steward to the Queen, was at the same time conferred on
D. Antonio de Silva Lord of Billas.

Notwithstanding the Truce, the Hollanders still continued their outrages on
the other side the Line, but principally in Brazil, where they seized upon many
of the Portugal sorts, impeded the Traffic, abused and murdered the Subjects,
which made His Majesty resolve to call the Earl of Castle Melhor from his
charge of being General of the Portugal Forces upon the Frontiers of Gallicia,
and committing that to the young Viscount de Villanova de Servera that the Earl
might be employed as Viceroy to Brazil to curb the Flemmings insolences, and
to secure the Portuguess Merchants Ships from their Pyracies, the King
appointed a Fleet of forty Ships of War, and six thousand Men to attend that
service as Convoys.

His Holiness the Popes anger as yet continued toward the Kingdom of Portugal,
for he had not only hitherto refused to receive Ambassadors from thence, but to
supply those Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Offices of
the Kingdom, which by the death of the former possessors were vacant: this the
King found a great inconveniency in, and therefore thought fit once more to
attempt his Holiness; and to present him the names of such of his own Subjects,
whose piety, learning, or other sufficiencies he thought might make them
capable of such dignities; As first, for the Archbishopric of Braga, (formerly
acknowledged to be the primacy of all Spain, notwithstanding the pretensions of
Toledo) he nominated Don Pedro de Lancastro, President of the Justice of the
Palace of the House of Ameiro, and descended from JOHN the second King of
Portugal. For the Archbishopric of Evora, His Majesty nominated D. Francisco
Barrez Bishop of the Algarez, Bishopric he bestowed upon the Father Dennis Des
Anges an Augustine Monk, and Confessor to His Majesty: for the Bishopric of
Guarda was appointed D. Antonio Pobo, great Prior of the Military Order of St.
James: for the Bishopric of Lamego, D. Antonio de Mendosa Commissary of the
Bula de la Croisaida: for the Bishopric of Lerida, D. Deigo de Souza
Inquisitor of the holy Office: for that of Conimbra, Don Sebastian Casar de
Menerez, who was before nominated for the Bishopric of Porto, but that was
given by his Majesty to D. Pedro de Menerez, once named Bishop of Miranda, of
which last place D. Pedro de Porros Tutor of the Prince D. Theodosio was now
named Bishop. These choices of his Majesty, the Pope after some time Confirmed
D. Francisco de Souza, who was sent as extraordinary Ambassador,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Spaniards received, not unlikely out of a
fear that they would Officiate without his Confirmation, and so in a manner
Renounce the Power of the Sea of Rome.

But in the midst of this settling of Ecclesiastical affairs, Arms were not
silent, for upon the Borders there happened a Skirmish between the Castillians
and Portuguese about the latter end of April, One thousand six hundred forty
and nine, Lord of Themer Court, Lieutenant General of the Portuguese Horse, and
Monsieur Du Quesne the Commissary General gained a Victory over a small Army of
the Spaniards, defeating Seven hundred of the Spaniards, and taking diverse
Prisoners, amongst whom was the Nephew of the Marquess of Melinguen Lieutenant
General of the Castillian Army at Badajox, who was after exchanged for the
Count Fiesque Lauagna, who for some years past had been Prisoner in Castille:
in this Conflict the Portuguese lost but Twenty five men, the Chief of which
was Sieur de la Touch, a French Captain, who had behaved himself most
Valorously.

The Commotions of the Perisians against the King of France, had given the
Spaniard great hopes of better success than they had many years had, but the
middle of the Year, One thousand six hundred and forty nine, happily concluding
them, the news of their Pacification, and that of a great Victory gained by the
Portuguesses against the Hollanders in Brazile, caused a general joy over all
Portugal; for the King appointed Public Thanks to be given, and Te Deum to be
Sung in all Churches.

Hopes to revenge the late defeat given by the Lord Therimicourt, and desire to
do some Valiant Act before he departed from his Government, made the Marquess
of Leganez Governor of the Spanish Forces at Estramadura, give an Alarm to
the Portuguese Frontiers, and enter into the Country with Two thousand Horse,
and Six thousand Foot, but the Valiant Count of St. Laurence assaulting him,
forced him to retire with shame, and excuse himself that he marched out only to
meet the Marquess of Mortare, who was appointed to succeed him in the
Government.

Yet this small and worthless Alarm, made the King of Portugal, who knew that
too much care could not be had of the Safety of his Kingdom, to send Orders to
the Governors to look more exactly to the Countries committed to their Charges,
than formerly, and strictly to give Charge to Don Juan de Menezez Governor of
Porto. The Viscount Ponte de Lima Governor of the Countries between Douro and
Mimbo, to the Count of Arogna Governor of Trasmontes, and Don Roderigo de
Castro Governor of Beira, to repair with all expedition to their several
Commands.

Nor was his Majesty less careful of his Dominions abroad, than of those near
home, which made him dispatch the Baron of Alviro to be Governor of Tanger, and
D. Francisco de Norogna to Mazagan, both strong Forts in Africa; the last of
which had been near surprised by the Moors of Barbary, but the Commander of
that Party which assaulted it, being slain by a Valorous Frenchman, they were
beaten off with loss, for which service the King bestowed upon the Frenchman a
Pension of Six hundred Crowns per annum.

And whilst His Majesty was distributing his Bounties, he could not forget the
Lady Dona Maria Manuel, Widow to the some-time before deceased D. Antonio
Coello, D. Caravallio, who had ever since His Majesty's coming to the Crown,
been one of His Privy-Councellors, and was one of the Chief Persons that went
Ambassadors into France, to renew the Alliance, and conclude a firm League
between the King of Portugal, and Lewis the Thirteenth King of France; His
Majesty therefore in consideration of his services, bestowed a valuable Pension
on his aforesaid Widow.

There was almost daily in-roads made upon the Frontiers in some places or
other, amongst the rest, the Baron of Themericourt entered with a strong Party
into the Spanish Territories, surprised the Suburbs of the City of Albuquerque,
and brought away a very rich Booty, without the loss of so much as one Soldier
upon the place, and not above Twenty wounded.

The succor of the distressed Subjects of the more distressed King of England,
about the Year, One thousand six hundred and fifty, gave occasion to the King
of Portugal to manifest his affection to the English Nation, which he did by
giving assistance to the Gallant Prince Rupert, who being by His Majesty of
England made Admiral of those few Ships which in the Year, One thousand six
hundred and forty eight, returned to their Allegiance, had ever since been
pursued by the more Potent Fleets of the English Rebels, and was now by them
driven to seek the protection of his Portugal Majesty, who notwithstanding that
the Fleet of the Rebels with threatening Bravado's, demanded the said Kings
leave, either to assault them in his Port, or to force them to come out
bravely, protected them under his Castles.

In Revenge of which, the Rebels of England, who styled themselves a
Parliament, Proclaimed an open War with the Portugal Nation, which his Majesty,
notwithstanding his great Engagement at that present, both against the
Spaniards at home, and the Hollanders on the other side the Line, resolved to
endure, rather than deliver up the faithful Subjects of England into the hands
of Murder, Tyranny, and Treason; and therefore in part to cry quittance with
the English, who had taken Prize several Ships belonging to this Nation, he
made seizure of all the English Ships and Goods within his whole Dominions, but
only those he had before Protected.

But at length Prince Rupert finding a clear Passage from out his Ports, where
he had for many Months been blocked up, the King, by Reason of his other large
Expenses in defense of his Kingdom, finding himself unable to maintain a War
against the English; and Nature dictating us to the Preservation of our Selves,
Resolved, more moved out of Necessity, than Inclination, to send an Agent into
England to conclude a Peace.

The Person deputed to go on this unpleasant Employment ( viz. to Court Rebels)
was D. Suarez de Gimeraines, who had for his Assistance and Interpreter, Mr.
Miles an English Merchant, these two Embarked upon a Hamburgher hired for that
purpose by the King of Portugal, arrived in England, in January 1650. About the
beginning of February, D. Suarez had Audience before a Committee of the
pretended Parliament, to whom he made a Speech in Latin to this Effect.

THE Serenissimo King of Portugal my Master, sends me hither to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England that on his behalf, and in his Name, having
first most friendly saluted you (as I now do with the greatest Affection of my
heart that I am able) I may jointly tender and make known to you the Royal
Desire which my Master feels within himself, to conserve, and more and more to
knit the knot of that Amity which uninterrupted, has ever been between the
Serenissimo Kings of Portugals their Ancestors, and this Renowned English
Nation.

It being my part to endeavor what lies in me, to remove all obstacles that may
hinder the most vigorous effect of this hearty union, and conjunction of so to
preserve inviolably the ancient peace between us.

This I come to continue, hoping and wishing all happy success therein; this I
come to intimate and offer unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
with that sincere and pristine affection, which hitherto the experience of many
ages has made manifest.

Nor shall you need to scruple the sincerity of my intention and purpose, by
reason of the diverse past attempts (not to say fights) between your power and
ours, since they have not been such as have broken or dissolved our amity, nor
have had their rise or approbation from the King my Master; nor as we believe
from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, but more probably carried
on either by the impulse of their own private affections, or by the defect of
that circumspection which in such cases is ever necessary.

But as I hope particularly and fully to prove (and indeed to demonstrate) this
truth unto the Parliament of the Republique of England, so I am assured they
will not only rest satisfied therein, but shall also have accruing to them a
newer force, and sense of mutual friendship between us, since the jars that
happen amongst friends, are oftentimes justly accounted as certain
redintigrations of love.

And I do admire our enemies have not made this reflection, whilst fed with
vain hope, they have thought it in their power to sow and foment discords
between us, upon presumption of this t^ivial innovation.

The King my Master sends me to continue and preserve our common and ancient
peace, whereof I am to make a tender unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England in His Majesty's behalf, as proceeding from a perfect sincerity in his
Royal breast, and whereunto he is chiefly drawn by the Motive of his singular
esteem and love, he bears unto this English Nation.

And this, as the main point I shall recommend unto you, both in regard of your
greater good and ours, and as a thing of highest concernment, that we reflect
how little it can be pleasing to Almighty God, and how derogatory it must needs
be to our reputation on both sides, to give the least beginning of discord
between two Christian Nations, so well affected to one another as we are.

It is manifest unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and to all
Europe besides; in how wonderful a manner (such as was only possible to God,
the King my Master was restored to his Kingdoms, and how the Divine Majesty
(whose handiwork this was) does by his especial care and grace defend and
continue this Restoration.

Which as it does daily more appear by the victories we have over our enemies
at home, so again it is seen in our remotest and most distantial dominions in
the East Indies, where even at a huge distance (His Majesty possessing the
hearts of his people) enjoyes the greatest peace in the world, and is secure in
Africa relying therein upon his prosperous and happy powers.

To conclude, the King my Master, lest any thing should be wanting to render
him completely happy, has (according to the wish of an ancient Christian
Author, for securing the prosperity of the Roman Empire) a faithful Senate,
puissant Armies, and a most obedient people, Fortifications in the judgment of
wisest politicians, conducing and necessary both to defend and increase Empires
and Kingdoms.

Now in this good condition of not only gaining and conserving friends, but
also of vanquishing our enemies, the King my Master loves and embraces peace,
as the chiefest good amongst humane things, holding it forth to all Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, but especially to this of England, with that exceeding good
will which he has hitherto born, and shall ever bear unto the same, standing
thereunto obliged by such bonds of love and good offices, as shall never be
forgotten by His Majesty.

For the people of this Nation are the most worthy successors of those their
Heroic Ancestors, who by their just power and Arms came freely to vindicate
our Crowns from the Mahumetan oppressions. And are, if not the same persons, at
least their Children, who inflamed with a fervor and zeal of defending the
Crown of Portugal, justly did disdain to see it in the unjust possession of a
foreign Prince.

They are, I say, those who with so mature deliberation and resolution,
endeavored to snatch away this undue possession from the said Usurper, maugre
the concurrence of some ill-affected Portugals with our enemies; and that they
might atchieve this end glorious to themselves, and to us emolumental, they are
those who covered these as with their Squadrons and Fleets of Ships, ever
formidable to their most potent enemies by a new example of an unheard of
valor (had our unfortunate Stars then given us leave to be happy) come up to
the very walls of Lisbon.

And this having formerly been between us and them most powerful Englishmen,
and our most loving brethren, now that the Crown of Portugal (for which you
have fought so valiantly, when it was unlawfully detained, is happily restored
to the possession of the natural, and lawful King to whom of right it
appertains) who would not admire to see you bend your equal power, (upon no
occasion given) against the true and rightful King of Portugal by joining with,
and favoring the same Usurper (beaten by us) from whom your selves did
heretofore by force of your own Arms in our behalfs endeavor to snatch and
wrest away that Crown he had unjustly seized upon, and whom indeed you have
hitherto both in desire and effect opposed.

It would to all the world seem a thing much removed from the innate generosity
and gallantry of this your Nation, and very ill suiting with your Christian
justice and equality, as also it would be a very unworthy requital of us (who
have deserved better at your hands) and of that benevolence and affection
wherewith the whole Kingdom of Portugal is passionately carrying on toward
you, wishing unto you the same happiness that we our selves desire to enjoy.

Let therefore these imaginary Clouds of discord vanish, and be quite blown
over from our thoughts, as serving only to Eclipse with darkness, the clear
light of our ancient amity, which (with what intention God Almighty knows,) the
importune sagacity of our Common enemy would fain deprive us of.

Let all obstacles be removed, and thrown quite away, wherewith the true
serving politicians by their inbred ambition of an universal Monarchy do
conspire the ruin of us both, aiming at nothing more then to set us together
by the ears, that overthrowing each other with our own Wars, we may have
breasts open (when our powers are exhausted) to their swords and wounds, with
greater advantage against our selves, and less hazard unto them.

This new Republique is built upon strong and sure foundations, as also our
ancient and restored Kingdoms, let us therefore cast our eyes unto the common
interest of our cause, joining hands, and mutual benevolence to such effect, as
may render both parties security, the greater forbearing, and bewaring above
all things, all provocations, or irruptions of War, whereby (besides the
inconveniences, and losses which they ever draw after them,) all our own
affairs and safety may be hazarded extremely, while their councels and
endeavors will be promoted, who by hidden and wicked arts, strive to extend
their own power by the common waste they would make in ours.

The King of Portugal my Master, has sent me hither furnished with a firm
ample plenipotentiary power, that discussing, and screwing all the just and
convenient means, I may confer about the conservation of Peace, and (removing
all emergent obstacles and scruples) resolve, and establish with the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, whatsoever shall be necessary for composing of
our present affairs, and maturely to provide with the greatest security that
may be possible, for their future well-being.

I therefore beseech the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, that
weighing and considering these things which I have exhibited, they would please
to decree whatsoever shall seem to them most convenient and just.


To this large Speech of forced and known flattery, if we respect it in
relation to the persons it was spoke to, (though most true in those particulars
relating to the English Nation whilst monarchical) was answered by the Rebels,
with a large Harange of the injuries they supposed done them by the protection
of Prince Ruperts Fleet, and seizure of the English Merchants Ships and Goods,
concluding that they must have reparation made them for the public damage of
the Commonwealth, which they would be willing to accept of in any honorable
manner, and were willing to that purpose, if the Ambassador had sufficient
power to treat with him to that effect.

In sum, after some time the Count Del Sa Lord Chamberlain of the Kingdom of
Portugal arrived in England, in the quality of an Ambassador extraordinary, who
after many Conferences, Addresses, and large Offers made, obtained a Peace,
upon condition to repay great Sums of money toward the satisfaction of the
losses of the English Merchants.

During the stay of this Ambassador, his brother D. Pantaleon Sa, Knight of
Malta, led by I know not what frantic madness, made a great uproar upon the
New Exchange in London, where some English, were by him and his Followers,
murdered; for which several of his retinue were hanged, and himself,
notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his brother, afterward beheaded
on Tower Hill, when the government of England was changed from a strange kind
of Commonwealth, to a stranger kind of Monarchy, under a Protector.

But to return back again to the affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal. The Earl
of Castle Melhor who had been sent Viceroy into Brazil, had so good success,
that with the assistance of those Portuguesses before in the Kingdom, he
expulsed the Hollanders out of all their Garrisons there, except the strong
Fortress of Recif, which was built upon a Rock wholly environed by the Sea.
This animated the United States of the Netherlands, to endeavor a revenge and
recovery of that country, and to that end and purpose, a Potent Fleet was set
out, and notwithstanding the very earnest endeavors, and large offers of the
Portuguess Ambassador at the Hague, set sail to reconquer that Kingdom, but not
with that success which was expected, for the expedition proved wholly
fruitless, and after so great an expense, the States were so highly
discontented, that the Admiral Wittison was arrested at the Hague, to answer
such things as should be objected against him concerning that voyage.

It much concerns that King who has to deal with enemies too potent for him,
to strengthen himself with such Alliance, as may most advantage him, and
endamage his Foe; This consideration made King JOHN of Portugal, about the
year, One thousand six hundred and fifty two, send an Ambassador to the young
Duke of Savoy, (who by reason of the situation of his Country, had good and
frequent opportunities to annoy the Catholic King,) and divert him from
turning his whole Force upon this Kingdom) offering reciprocal Marriage between
that Duke and his Daughter, and the young Prince Theodosia and Savoys Sister.
But this his intention, was I suppose diverted, if not wholly hindered by the
great power of Cardinal Mazarine in France, who designed one of his Nieces as a
fit match for Eugenius young Duke of Savoy.

It Is not at all safe nor fit for a subject to grow too rich, at least not to
exceed his Sovereign in Treasure, for he thereby lays himself open to the
envy and suspicion of his Prince, nor is it possible that any who has managed
a public employment, can be so without faults, as that somewhat cannot be laid
to his charge to render him at a Kings mercy.

Sufficient example of this we have in D. Phillip de Mascarendas Viceroy of
Goa in the East Indies, who having for many years officiated in that high
employment, had gathered up an infinite Mass of Riches, and now being called
home, thought in peace and quiet to enjoy what with a penurious and industrious
hand he had been many years storing up: but the King being informed that he had
indeed such a vaste treasure in Gold, Diamonds, Pearls and other Jewels, as he
could not with his own honor or safety permit a Subject to enjoy, easily found
out them who were ready to form complaints against him, which were as readily
listened to by the Kings Council, who presently drawing up a charge against him,
for having used an arbitrary power, oppressed, and abused the Subjects, and
Merchants trading thither, etc. caused the Ship wherein he came, with all the
riches laden on it, to be seized on for the Kings use, and himself for some
time imprisoned, nor had it been a wonder if he had made a forfeiture of his
life, as well as of the greatest part of his estate.

The strength of the Hollanders at Sea, had been the greatest obstacle to the
Portuguese, not wholly regaining their ancient possession in Brazile, but the
Wars wherein the Hollanders had involved themselves with England, proving so
powerful a diversion, the Portuguese took the advantage to reduce Recif, which
with several Forts that encompassed it, and some few other, were the only
places that held out against them.

Against this therefore with a sufficient Land-force, came Don Francisco
Barreto, Governor of Pernambuco, (whilst the Portuguese Navy consisting of 65.
Sail, blocked it up by sea,) and first by storm took the Fort of Salines, and
thence coming before that of Burracco, found it already abandoned, and blown up
by the defendants: he next proceeded to the new Fortress, the next and
strongest Fort to that of Recif, and well manned and munitioned. Thus having
made a sturdy resistance, was at length forced by the Portugal, which so amazed
the Hollanders, that though they had fifteen hundred men, and six months
provisions in Recif, yet they agreed to yield it upon honorable terms on the 26
of January 1654. being twenty four years after they had taken it from the
Portugals.

THE Conditions upon which this strong Fortress was surrendered up, were to this
effect.

1. That D. Francisco Barreto should forget all Acts of Hostility made by the
Hollanders against the Portugals by Sea and Land.

2. That all persons whatsoever, even the Jews in Recif, and Maurice- town,
though Rebels against the King of Portugal, should be pardoned.

3. That all Hollanders should be free to carry away those Goods they actually
possessed.

4. That they should have sufficient number of ships able to pass the
Equinoctial Line, with Iron-guns for their Transportation.

5. That the Hollanders married with Portugal Women, or Natives there, should
be dealt so withal, as if they had married Dutch Women, and should with the
consent of the Women, have power to carry them away with them.

6. That those who would stay there under the Obedience of the Portugals,
should be used as well as if they were Native Portugals, and as to their
Religion, should live as other strangers do in Portugal.

7. That all Forts about Recif and Maurice town, viz. the Port of St. Bastions,
Boa, Vista, St. Austines, Convent, the Castle of Maurice- town, that of the
three Bastions, the Brum, with it is Redoubt, the Castle of St. George, and all
others should be surrendered to the aforesaid D. Francisco Barreto, Governor of
Pernambucco, with all the Ordnance and Ammunition presently after the signing
of these Articles.

8. That the Hollanders should be free to remain in Recif and Maurice- town for
Three Months, they surrendering their Arms, which should be restored to them
when they took shipping, and in the mean while they should have power to buy
them necessary provisions of the Portugals for the Voyage.

9. All Negotiations and Alienations should be made during the said Three
Months according to the present Articles.

10. That the Governor should quarter his Forces where he pleased, and that
the Hollanders should be protected during those Three Months, and having
Liberty to end their private Differences before their own Judges.

11. That they should carry away all their papers whatsoever.

12. That if they could not sell their Goods in the said Three Months time,
they should leave them with whom they pleased under the Obedience of the
Portugals, to be disposed of according to their own Order.

13. That they should have all the Victuals in the storehouses of Recif, and
the other Forts for their Voyage.

14. That as to their pretensions against the Portugals, they might sue them at
the King of Portugals Court.

15. That all their Vessels should be restored unto them, which they might fit
for their Voyage.

16. That they might have liberty to advise all their ships upon the Coast, to
come and lade their Goods at Recif: And in the last Article it was expressed,
That upon the demand of the Hollanders, that this might not prejudice any
former Treaty between the King of Portugal, and the States General, D.
Francisco Barreto would not assent thereunto.

There were other articles likewise granted to the Military Forces, the sum of
which were, that all offenses and hostages might be forgotten, that all
soldiers should go out of Recif with their Arms, Match lighted, Bullet in
mouth, Flying-colours; but coming near the Portugal Army, should put out the
Match, and lay their Arms in those Magazines appointed by the governor of
Pernambucco, to be restored to them at their departure, provided they went to
Nants, Rochel, or to some place in the United Provinces and not to any
belonging to the King of Portugal; for security whereof they should give three
hostages, and all Officers and Soldiers should be shipped together with General
Sigismond Schop, after the delivery of the Forts of Riogrando, Paraiba, and
Tamarica. That the General should have twenty pieces of brass ordnance; from
four Pound-Bullet to eighteen, with all their furnitures, besides all necessary
Iron-guns, for the defense of the Ships that should be afforded them for their
transportation, with convenient supplies of ammunition and provision, according
to the thirteenth Article before recited: That General Sigismond, and all his
Officers of War, should have liberty to carry away or sell all his or their
goods or slaves. That sick or wounded persons should have liberty to stay till
they recovered, but the Governor would not condescend to release those
Hollanders which were prisoners before this surrendry: A general pardon was
granted to all rebels, chiefly to Amboyna, Mendaz, and all other Indians and
Negroes, but they were not to have the honor to march out with their Arms. In
sum, the supreme Council at Recif, did oblige themselves for the surrendering of
these places, upon the signing of these Articles, and for the delivering up the
Island of Farnam, Viaca, Noroga, Riogrand, Paraiba, and Tamarica, upon the same
conditions for the inhabitants, as had been granted to those of Recif.

These articles were signed and delivered on both sides, at the Camp at
Taborda, on the 18. of January, One thousand six hundred and fifty three, and
Conditions on both sides punctually observed. Thus did the Hollanders lose all
their Acquists in Brazil, which so exasperated those high and mighty States,
that at the coming into Holland of mine Here Sigismond Schop, who had there been
General of their Militia, they caused him to be imprisoned, and tried for his
life by a Council of War, but notwithstanding endeavors of his enemies, he was
acquitted.

Nor were the Portugals at home less fortunate against their neighbor enemy
the Spaniards, for to omit many petty skirmishes, in-roads made by them with
all success desirable in the summer, One thousand six hundred and fity four, D.
Antonio D'Albuquerque General of the Portuguess horse, taking an advantage upon
a party of Castillians, which lay upon the Borders near Aronches, under the
command of Count D'Amaranthe, set upon them, slew their General Amaranthe, and
took six hundred horse; and farther animated with this success, and the
knowledge he had that a vigorous prosecution is the only mother of a true
victory, pursued them with an Army of 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, eight leagues
into their own Country, as far as the old and strong Castle of D'Oluce, while
encouraging his Soldiers, (made valorous by their former good fortune) he
resolved to attacque, and with continued batteries, and storms so wearied out
the enemy, that after four days siege they yielded upon composition, and
Albuquerque looking upon it as a place considerable, both for the countenancing
of incursions into the enemies country, and keeping in awe the town of Xeres,
which is hard by, having repaired it and placed in it a strong Garrison,
returned.

About the beginning of the year, One thousand six hundred and fifty five, D.
Francisco De Ferrara Rabella arrived in England, with Commission from the King
of Portugal as Agent, to Oliver Cromwell, who then swayed here under the title
of Protector, to make a more firm confirmation of the Peace with England, and
to advise, I suppose, about carrying on the War with Spain; which when Cromwell
had given some reasons to make the world believe he would commence against that
Catholic Monarch, and how much such a War was for the Interest of Portugal,
none will doubt who have read the foregoing story, which made King JOHN Court
that English Usurper with more Submissness and Complacency, by both harboring
his Fleets, and sending Presents to his Generals, than otherwise his Genius
would have permitted him to have done, any way in prejudice of Englands lawful
KING. In the mean time the death of Pope Innocentius the Tenth, made D.
Francisco de Souza, Ambassador at Rome for the King of Portugal, make new
Addresses to Alexander the Seventh his Successor, for Confirmation of the
Church Officers in that Kingdom; for he never had any full Grant from Innocent;
but now the Spanish Ambassadors opposed themselves more than ever, and by means
of the Queen of Sweden, who wholly employed her interest for the benefit of
that Nation, endeavored to frustrate even the Portuguesses Hopes; nay, so
desperate was the Spaniards Malice, That they laid several Designs to murder
the Portugal Ambassador, but all proved ineffectual. In sum, After D.
Francisco de Souza, had spent some years in the Court of Rome to very little
purpose, he was, upon the death of King JOHN the Fourth, called home to be
Governor of the young King Alphonso.

The proffered interchangeable Match with Savoy, not taking effect, father Du
Rozaire, a Dominican, and Archbishop of Goa, was sent Agent to France, to
treat about a Marriage between that King, and the Infanta Donna Catharina, with
Proposals of Three Millions of Gold for Her Portion, and that the King of
Portugal would for Seven Years maintain Eighteen Men of War at Sea, for the
defense and service of the French Crown.

Long was this Business in Negotiation, and by many thought would have taken
effect, the Agent being very highly carressed both by the King and Queen Mother
of France; but whether by reason of Cardinal Mazarine's dislike of it, or other
Reasons of State, it was prolonged by continual demurs, till after the King of
Portugal's Death, and then wholly broken off.

For King JOHN being now arrived to about Fifty years of Age, in the Sixteenth
year of his Reign, His Death. 1656.
and in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and fifty six, on the
Sixth of November, S. N. paid his last debt to Nature, having a long time been
troubled with an Obstruction in the Kidneys, occasioned by the Stone and
Gravel, which was so sharp all the time of his Sickness, that he seldom urined,
and when he did it, was in so little quantity, that it did scarce at all ease
him, this violent Pain put him into a Burning-feaver, which in Ten days
overpressed his Vitals.

Before his Death, he appointed Donna Lucia his Queen, to be Regent of the
Kingdom during the minority of D. Alphonso her Son, recommending to her for
Assistants in the management of so great burden as a Crown, the Reverend D.
Emanuel Archbishop of Lisbon, Don Runlio Marquess of Nisa, the Earl of
Canvandake, and some others, whose abilities, love and fidelity, he had
experience of.

His Marriage.
His Queen Donna Lucia was eldest Daughter of John-Emanuel-Perez de Guzman Duke
of Medina Sidonia, and of Jane de Sandoval, Daughter of the Duke of Lerme
John-Gomez de Sandoval and Royas, by Katherine de la Cerda.

He was a Person of a very comely presence, his Countenance pleasant, but
inclining to Swarthiness, his Body about a middle stature, yet comely and well
proportioned, nor were the lineaments of his mind less becoming, than those of
his Body, though if ye believe common fame, he was none of the wisest Kings
that ever Portugal could boast of: the reason that he left so much of the Reins
of the Government to his Wife, a Woman of a Masculine and Politic spirit, from
whence perhaps that jesting Spaniard might take occasion to say; That it was
not the Portugal force, but the Spanish policy, that kept that Kingdom from the
Catholic King, alluding to the Queens being a Spaniard.

He was buried in the great Church of St. Vincenza del Foro, under the High
Altar, (a Monastery of Canons Regular of the Order of St. Augustine) with all
accustomed and becoming Ceremonies, lamented by those Kings who had been his
Allies, especially by the King of France, who honored his memory with a most
magnificent Funeral Solemnity, himself (attended by most of the Nobles and
Parliament of France,) gracing it with his Presence at the Church of Nostre
Dame, where after the Singing of Mass, the Bishop of Vance pronounced a Funeral
Oration, suitable to so Royal a Subject and Occasion.

Children of JOHN IV. of the Name, King of PORTUGAL, and of Queen LUCIA his
Wife.
John IV. was born at Villa-viciosa, His Birth. 1634.
the Eighth day of February, in the Year of our Salvation, One thousand six
hundred and thirty four. After the Duke his Father came to the Crown, the
Ceremony of his Installation was performed, when the Nobles and Grandees took
an Oath to receive him for their Natural Prince, as Son, Heir and Successor to
their Lord the King; but he lived not to give Portugal a King of his Name,
deceasing in the lifetime of his Father, in the Month of June, His death. 1653.
Ao One thousand six hundred and fifty three, and was interred in the Monastery
of Bethleem.

18. ALPHONSO second Son of King John, was after the Death of his Brother
Theodosius, also Prince OF PORTUGAL; His Birth. August 21. 1643.
The City of Lisbonne gave him Birth, where he now wears the Royal Diadem of
his Father.

18. PETER Infant OF PORTUGAL, third Son, born at Lisbonne in the Year of
Christ, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, is now living, Anno 1662.

18. JANE Infanta OF PORTUGAL, came into this World at Villa-viciosa the
Eighteenth day of September, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
thirty and six: She dyed young, and was inhumed at Belleil.

18. KATHERINE Infanta OF PORTUGAL, Queen of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and IRELAND,
only Daughter (now living) of King John IV. took her first breath at
Villa-viciosa, upon the Five and twentieth day of November, being St.
Katharines day, in the year of our Redemption, One thousand six hundred thirty
and eight. The Treaties and Articles of this Marriage were concluded in England
with the Count Don Francisco de Melo Ambassador for the King of Portugal, who
departed hence with the Ratification of the said Treaty of Marriage: Upon his
Arrival, I need not acquaint you with what Joy this News affected the King,
Queen, Mother, and the whole Court; nor their most Solemn Demonstration
thereof, by discharging of their Cannon, making of Bonefires, and other
Entertainments; yet were the People unwilling to think of Parting with this
their Pious Princess, for whose sake (they were wont to say) God had given them
so Signal and Frequent Victories over their Enemies.

Not long after, by an Express from England from the King to Her, the Infanta
KATHERINE was Complemented with the style of Queen of GREAT BRITAIN; and then,
with what possible Speed could be made, was expected for England, all things
being prepared in a readiness for so great a Princess, and so long a Voyage:
Then upon the Thirteenth day of April, this present year, One thousand six
hundred threescore and two, She passed with the King Her Brother, the
Queen Mother, Don Pedro, and the whole Court, unto the side of the River Tagus,
through several Triumphal Arches, and a sumptuous Gallery built upon that
Occasion, where Her MAJESTY was received by the Earl of Sandwich, who
conducted Her on Board a stately Brigandine, whence amidst many Tire and
Vollies of Cannon, and many more farewell Acclamations in the same Princely
Company and Equipage, Her MAJESTY came aboard the ROYAL CHARLES, and was
welcomed with the Thunder of the whole Navy.

In the Evening, after a Princely Collation, and many passionate parting
Expressions, a Gun from the Admiral gave the Signal of Her MAJESTY'S Resolution
to depart, when all hands were set on work to weigh Anchor, and let fly their
Sails.

The King and Queen Mother, and their Train, took their Farewell with hearts
equally composed of Grief and Joy, and Re-imbarqued for Lisbon, returning with
the discharge of all the Ordnance; and so immediately with a fair leading Gale,
the whole Fleet began their Course, being, as they passed out of the River,
saluted by all the Block-houses, Forts and Castles. That Night, and part of the
next Day, the Wind stood very propitious; but afterward proved averse and
stormy, so that they were forced to labor to and fro with contrary Winds, it
being the Six and twentieth of April when they got into the middle of the Bay
of Biscay, Her MAJESTY, by the continual working and tossing of the Sea, having
been sick the most part of the Voyage. About the Fifth of May, with unwearied
labor and skill, the whole Fleet reached the Islands of Scilly. Her Arrival
had been every day expected a Fortnight before, which caused the King to send
down the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral, to attend Her upon the Coast, and to
Complement Her MAJESTY in His Name, whereupon His Highness hasted to
Portsmouth, and on the Tenth of May, attended by the Duke of Ormond, the Earls
of Suffolk and Chesterfield, the Lord Berkley, and other Persons of Quality,
went aboard the stately YAUGH, to Coast about to meet Her MAJESTY. On Sunday
morning about Ten of the Clock, they discovered the ROYAL JAMES; but there was
so great a Calm, they could not reach the ROYAL CHARLES till Six at Evening.
The Earl of Sandwich having discovered His Highness YAUGH, went out in his
Barge to meet Him, the Royal Banner being all the while veiled till He was
aboard, when His Highness came into the Ship, the Soldiers gave Three several
Shouts, and all the Guns in the ROYAL CHARLES (which from the Queens entrance
till that time had been silent) proclaimed His Welcome; after which, the
several Ships of the Fleet paid Him their Salutes. The Thirteenth of May at
night, the Royal Fleet came to St. Helens Point, the most Eastern Promontory of
the Isle of Wight; and on Wednesday the Fourteenth of May, the Queen landed at
Portsmouth about Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, where She was received by
the Nobility, Gentry, and multitudes of Londoners; as also by the Mayor and
Aldermen of that Corporation with all the Expressions of Joy.

His MAJESTY having received the Express of His Queens landing, prepared to be
gone forthwith to Salute Her upon Her Arrival: But His great Affairs of State,
and Bills by Him to be Ratified into Acts of Parliament, which were not fully
ready for His Royal Assent, delayed him till Monday the Nineteenth of May
(having sent before Him the Bishop of London, who departed the Seventeenth, in
order to the Solemnizing of the Marriage) when He took Coach from the House of
Lords at Nine of the Clock in the Evening with His ordinary Guards, and lodged
that night at Gilford; the next day His MAJESTY posted with the same speed to
Portsmouth, where He arrived about Noon.

The Queens indisposition which yet held Her in Her Chamber, caused the King to
satisfy Himself only with a Visit in private that day: Yet it pleased God to
restore Her Majesty to such a degree of health, that she was soon after able to
go abroad to consummate the Marriage-Rites, which were there performed upon
Wednesday the 21. of May, by Gilbert Lord Bishop of London; which being
concluded, His Majesty Bedded His most Princely Lady in His Town of Portsmouth.
The next Week their Majesty's removed to Winchester, thence to Farnham, and
then to Hampton Court, where They spent most part of this Summer; as well for
the Healthfulness, as Majesty of the Place.

Then on Saturday the 23. of August, (being the Eve of St. Bartholomew, a Day
Remarkable for its Beauty, being the Fairest of Ten that either came before, or
followed it,) after Dinner, the King and Queen took Barge in order to Their
entertainment by the City of London upon the River of Thames, and came to
Putney about Four of the Clock in the Evening, where They changed Their spare
Barge, and were by the Lord Chamberlain conducted on Board that Barge which was
prepared to bring Them to Whitehall, in which They were placed under a Canopy
of Cloth of Gold, adorned with Five Plumes of White and Yellow
Ostrich-Feathers; the Barge lined also with Cloth of Gold, and Cussions of the
same, the two Gondeloes went on either side, before, in which were His
Majesty's Trumpets which sounded continually. At Chelsey Their Majesty's were
met by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their Barge, afterward by all the
Companies in their Barges with loud Music, all adorned with their several
Banners and Pennons of Arms: I cannot spend time to particularize the several
Pageants and Representations of the Mercers, Drapers, Merchant-Taylors,
Goldsmiths, etc. being neither possible, nor proper for this place; therefore I
shall only say (which none but the absent will deny) That the oldest person
alive never saw the Thames more fully, nor more Nobly covered. Amid'st a Throng
of a Thousand Boats, and more than Ten thousand joyful Subjects, Their
Majesty's landed at Whitehall about 7. of the Clock in the Evening, where the
most Excellent Princess the Queen Mother, and the Duchess of York, gave Her
Majesty Her Welcome; which was seconded by a Tere of Artillary Planted at
Stangate-Wharf over against Whitehall for that purpose; the same Night,
afterward being made an Artificial Day, by the Number of Bone-fires and
Fireworks.

I omit to fix a Character upon the Goodness and Beauty of this our Royal
Queen, as deserving a larger Room, and an abler Pen, or to speak of that
Portion, store of Money and Jewels, as great as ever any Princess brought a
Husband, because I will not presume to meddle with those sublime particulars.
As also of those Advantages that the English Merchant receives by the Trade of
both the Indies where the Portuguesses overruled the Dutch; and by the
commodious situation of Tangier for the checking and curbing the Insolences of
the Pirates of Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli, if at any time they break their
League with England, it being a place situate upon the mouth of the Straight of
Gibraltar; so that no Ship can pass that Straight, without License first had
from the King of Great Britain, who upon this Account Commands the whole Trade
of the Levant.

May we long enjoy Their Majesty's with the Blessings we have received with
Them, and from Them a continued Line of Great Britains Kings, that we may not
want a Sovereign to Reign over us, who derives his Goodness, as well as
Greatness, from this our Sovereign Pair.

18. ALPHONSO VI. Of the Name, KING of PORTUGAL, Algarvia, Afric, Arabia,
Persia, India, and Brasil, etc. CHAP. XXII.
Portuguese Royal blazon or coat of arms PORTUGAL

KIng John the Fourth being thus deceased, his elder surviving Son ALPHONSO the
Sixth of that Name succeeded, being about the Age of Fourteen years, his Mother
during his minority administering the affairs of the Kingdom, and causing him to
be Crowned on the Fourteenth of November, Eight days after the death of his
Father.

The whole Kingdom of Portugal was in a kind of amaze at the so sudden death of
Kng John, especially considering the youth of their present King, fearing lest
their common Enemies should now take advantage of them: but the prudent
management of the most important business of State by the Queen Regent, soon
banished all those fancied fears.

The Queen being sensible, that upon this occasion of the Kings death, she
should have most occasion to use the Soldiery, by the Advice of her Council,
Ordered all the Infantry of the Kingdom should have Half a years pay, the
better to encourage them, who were of themselves ready enough to fight against
their common and inveterate Enemy, the Castillians.

And because she knew that the King of Spain would lose no opportunity to
oppress the Kingdom of Portugal, she thought it imprudence to let any slip
where an advantage might be gained upon him, and therefore all the Spanish
Forces being drawn out of Andaluzia to oppose the English, in case they should
attempt to land at Cadiz; (for they then blocked up that Port with a Potent
Fleet,) she commanded Four thousand Horse to make an in-road into that
Country, who plundered, and laid waste all before them, bringing away between
Forty and fifty thousand head of Cattle, and leaving the whole Soil in a manner
desolate.

This so exasperated the Spaniards, That draining most of the Garrisons of his
Kingdom, he raised a Potent Army, and with Ten thousand Foot, and Five thousand
Horse entered Portugal, and laid Siege to the strong City of Olivenza, which at
length they reduced to that necessity, that the Defendants were willing to
Capitulate, and sounded a Parlie, but when they came to treat, the Spaniards
would not admit the King of Portugal any other Title, than that of Duke of
Braganza, which made the Portugals renounce any farther treating.

But at length the Spaniards condescending to treat, the Town was delivered
upon Articles; but so much did the Queen-Regent and Council of Portugal resent
it, that they immediately gave Order to Arrest the Person of Don Mandiol de
Saldagna the Governor, who (with several of his chief Officers,) was by the
Count de St. Lorenze, General of the Portuguesse Forces in those parts, sent
Prisoners to Lisbon, there to answer their ill-defending of that Town, it
appearing, That at the surrendering of it, there marched out Two thousand two
hundred well Armed Foot, and One hundred Horse; nor were they reduced to that
necessity that was pretended, there remaining in the Stores of Ammunition and
Provision, sufficient to have defended the Town a great while longer.

The loss of this Place was a great blow to the Portuguesses, it being a strong
Frontier Town, and giving the Spaniard absolute Command a great way into the
Country; but this the King of Spain resolved should be but a beginning of his
Conquest (if possible) of this Kingdom, for he still made all preparations he
could to assault it with a greater force, and not only endeavored this with
might and main to oppress it himself, but by his Ambassadors solicited the
States General of the United Provinces to send their Vice Admiral Opdam, with
the Fleet he then had before Dantzick, into Portugal, to demand satisfaction
for the damage the Portugals had done to their West India Company in Brazil,
and in case the King of Portugal should deny to comply with their desires, to
force them to a Composition.

The High and Mighty States easily listened to this counsel, and Vice Admiral
Opdam with a Potent Fleet was sent to Lisbon, carrying with him some
Commissioners from the States to make their demands, which the Queen Regent and
Council thought so unreasonable, that they could not return any satisfactory
answer to them, whereupon the Commissioners departed: But Opdam still stayed
with his Fleet to wait an opportunity of catching the Brazil Fleet in their
return home, many of which notwithstanding the care and endeavors of the
Portuguesses to prevent it, he made prize of, and sent into Holland.

By this means was the War, which for many years had been maintained between
the Hollanders and Portugals on the other side the Line, transferred to this
side, which the King of France endeavored by all means possible, before its
eruption to prevent, and afterward to compose by his Ambassadors, Monsieur de
Thou in Holland, and the Sieur de Comings in Portugal, but to no Effect.

Thus assaulted by two potent Nations both by Sea and by Land were the
Portuguesses, which yet made them not at all falter in their Courage and
Resolution; the generous Queen-Regent causing all possible Levies to be made to
oppose the Castillian, sending into Barbary to buy Horses, and by Leagues
abroad endeavoring to strengthen the interest of the Kingdom, an Ambassador
was sent to that purpose into England, to renew and confirm the Amity before
concluded on, and many Conferences there were between the Archbishop of Goa,
who had before been Ambassador in France, and the Sieur de Comings; so that
many were in hopes that the Match between the King of France, and the Infanta,
would have gone forward, and an indissoluble League both defensive and
offensive, been concluded between the two Nations.

And to join Force to Policy, a gallant Army of about Sixteen thousand Foot,
and Three thousand Horse, all Portuguesses, took the Field, and in Revenge for
the loss of Olivenza, laid siege to Mouron, which in Three or four days they
took by storm, putting Fifteen hundred Spaniards to the Sword, and resolved to
proceed to the regaining of Badayox and Olivenza; and to that purpose marching
without opposition by Caya (which they left fortified) they came to the Fort of
St. Christopher, the strongest hold of the City of Badayox, which they several
days battered, and thrice stormed, but were beaten off; yet at the length they
took it, and so securely entrenched themselves about the whole City.

The Duke of Ossima, General of the Castillian Horse, having notice of this
strait siege of the City, endeavored with Sixteen hundred Horse to cut off
their Convoyes and Provisions; but the Count del Prado, Governor of Elvas,
receiving Advice of his Design, sallied out of the City with Three Companies of
Horse, and all the Foot he had to prevent him, by which means Ossima was
encompassed on both sides; for at the same time that he was on the other part
charged by Don Andrea D'Albuquerque, General of the Portuguesse Horse, and that
with so much Gallantry, that they presently discomfited their Enemies, slew
Four hundred upon the place, took Three hundred Prisoners, and forced the Duke
of Ossima to save himself by swimming.

This happy Success encouraged them to return with more Alacrity to the siege,
which they prosecuted with all vigor possible, and on the Three and twentieth
of June stormed, and took a Redoubt which was palisadosed; but at length when
they had spent much time, blood, and treasure, they were enforced by the
powerful Army of Don Lewis de Haro to raise their siege.

For the King of Spain exasperated with the loss of Mouron, and fearing
likewise to lose Badayox, had Rallied a great Army, which he committed to the
Care of his Favorite Don Lewis de Haro, who not only with it raised the siege
from before Badayox, but likewise so straightly besieged Elvas, one of the
Portuguesses strongest Frontier-towns, the taking of which, might have
endangered the whole Kingdom, and reduced it to such Necessity, that it was
even upon the point of yielding.

But the Portugals, who knew of how much importance it was to them, had ever
been anxious for its Relief, and therefore having at length bravely recruited
their Army, they advanced with full Resolution to drive the Spaniards out of
their Trenches, nor did they effect it less bravely than they had resolved it;
for they totally Routed their General, Don Lewis de Haro very hardly escaping;
but in this Battle the Portuguez lost the worthy Albuquerque General of the
Horse.

And to Counterpoise this Victory, the strong Fortress of Mounson upon the
Borders of Gallicia, was surrendered to the Spaniards, and a Party of the
Portugals not having Advice that it was already possessed by the Castillians,
going to relieve it, were surprised, and forced shamefully to retreat with the
loss of some hundreds, and this Success encouraged the Spaniards under the
Command of the Marquess of Viana, to besiege the only City the Portugals were
possessed of on the River Minho, but it was relieved by the Portugals. The
Spaniards likewise gained a signal Victory over a Party of Portugal Horse nigh
Alcantara; for Advice being brought to the Governor of that Town, That the
Portuguez with a Party of Four hundred Horse were entering upon the Frontiers in
two Bodies; he taking Five hundred Horse, and a select Party of Foot, went to
meet them, and so handsomely managed his Business, that he surprised one whole
Body, scarce a man escaping a Commissary General, five Captains, and several
other Officers being taken Prisoners.

But these things were inconsiderable Disadvantages to the interest of
Portugal, in respect of what it was like to feel by the Peace which was
treating of between those two mighty Monarchs of France and Spain, which the
Queen-Regent and Council were sensible of and therefore dispatch Don John
D'Acosta Ambassador Extraordinary to the French Court, to represent unto his
most Christian Majesty the state of the Kingdom of Portugal, and to insist that
there might be a due Consideration had of the Interest of his Master in the
concluding of the Peace with Spain, seeing he had formerly approved himself so
good an Ally to the Crown of France. But this Embassy could produce no other
Effect, than a promise to endeavor a Mediation for them with the King of Spain
and procure them good terms upon Submission, which by the Magnanimous
Portuguesses was rejected with Indignation.

Nor were they at all Daunted with the great Power of the Spaniard, which he
intended to employ against them, but Manfully resolved to endure all Hazards;
yet would they willingly have concluded a Peace with the Hollanders; and to
that purpose, Don Fernando Tellez de Faro, Duke of Aveiro, was sent Ambassador
to the States General; but he like a treacherous Villain, revolted from them to
the King of Spain, carrying along with him the papers of his Ambassie; for
which, according to his Desert, his Effigies was executed at Lisbon as a
Traitors, his Goods confiscated, his House razed to the ground, and his
Children banished, and degraded of Nobility, his Brother, Don Deigo De Sylva,
who had served the King of Portugal in the quality of General at Sea, was
likewise upon this Occasion commanded to retire to one of his Houses, and
deprived of all public Employment.

After him was sent Don Henry de Sousa Count of Miranda, to negotiate an
Accommodation with the Netherland States, yet he prevailed little; for the
pertinacious Hollanders were still resolute in their unreasonable demands,
computing their losses in Brazil (where they had no right to be) to amount to
no less than thirty millions.

The Spaniards in the mean time were forced to give the Portugals some respite
in the summer, One thousand six hundred and fifty nine, but preparations were
made to assault them; with the whole power of that Monarchy in the Spring, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, Don John D'Austria being called out of Flanders
to be Generalissimo of the Spanish Forces, and having Orders given him in
April, One thousand six hundred and sixty, to march directly to Merida, on the
Frontiers of Portugal, though he went not that Summer.

But the Portuguesses resolved not to be behind-hand with their Enemies, and
therefore made several in-roads into the Spanish Territories, depopulating all
before them, which made the Spaniards to be revenged, resolve to do the like to
them; Order was therefore given to fall into the Kingdom on all sides, the
Marquess of Viana Governor of Gallicia, marching in that way with Eight
thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, and the Governor of Camara invading
that part which was adjacent to his government.

In this condition was the Kingdom of Portugal, when His Majesty Charles the
Second, King of England, was restored to his Crowns and Kingdoms, welcomed by
his Subjects with all gratulatory and submissive Obedience; the News of which
was no sooner by advice from D. Francisco de Melo, Ambassador for the King of
Portugal in England, conveyed to the ears of his Master, but he caused all the
Guns of the Town, Castle, and Ships in the Road, to be fired, and for three
days and nights kept solemn and magnificent Rejoycings; the Portuguess Nation
as well as by this their joy at the Restoration of King Charles the Second, as
by their sorrow and general mourning at the Death of King Charles the First,
expressing their great affection for the English Nation.

But because their joy should be somewhat for their own, as well as our sakes,
there at the same time arrived News at Lisbon, that Don Alphonso Turtudo
General of the Horse, on the frontiers of Alentejo, meeting with a Brigade of
the Enemies Horse nigh to Bajadox, had fought and defeated them, killed and
took four hundred of them, amongst whom were four Captains of Horse prisoners.

The Spaniards still continued their Leavies against Portugal, being resolved
to employ an Army of four thousand Horse and twelve thousand Foot constantly
recruited, about the Frontiers of Estramadura, and another of three thousand
Horse, and ten thousand Foot about Gallicia, and a third of twelve thousand
men, to serve as a Reserve to the two former. In this manner were they resolved
to assault them by Land, while the Prince of Montesarchio with ten men of War,
was appointed to coast up and down before their Ports, and do them what
mischief he could by Sea.

Thus did this Kingdom struggle with Spain for her Liberty, by the prudent
management of Affairs, by that sage and industrious Queen-Regent, until this
present year, One thousand six hundred threescore and two; when upon the
Ninteenth of August the Castillian Army marched toward the Towns of Barbeisus
and Chosaes; whereupon the General of the said Province the Earl of Prado, and
the Earl of St. John General of the Horse, with all the Force they could make,
did set forth to oppose the Enemy, who being surprised by the Care of the said
General, did engage, with the Approbation of the chief Commander Don Balthazar
Pontaju, who immediately commanded them to fall on; but the Earl of Prado did
as well receive them, he desiring nothing else but to show the Castillians how
little they did value them. The Fight began with a great deal of Resolution on
the Enemies side, who for many hours hotly disputed the Quarrel, till wearied
by the unwearied Courage of the Portuguesses, their whole Army was forced to
fly in great Disorder. A considerable number of the Enemies were slain, and
many taken Prisoners, by which the said Province was freed from the Enemy with
great Satisfaction to the Crown, and great Honor to the Count of Prado, whose
Prudence and Valor in the management of this Business was much commended.

In the Province of Beira no less Success smiled upon the Portuguesses, by the
Count of Villaflor Governor thereof, and the General of the Horse Manuel
Treire D'Andrada, who having intelligence that the Duke of Ossana had made
himself Master of Escalas, and raised a considerable Fort upon it with several
Guns, and placed Four hundred men to defend it, went out, and giving Battle to
the Duke, put him to Flight, killing about Six hundred men, and taking the
greatest part of his Baggage, with all his Ordnance; and then falling upon the
said Fort, in few hours took it (at mercy) to the astonishment of the
Castillians, who fully perceived that they were not able to Act any thing
against the same Provinces, being so nobly defended by the same Governor, and
the People so unanimous to oppose them.

Nor had the Castillians gained those Advantages in Alentejo, had it not been
for the Civil Dissentions and Animosities among the Portugal Colonels, which
since have been sufficiently provided against by the Care of the Ministers of
State, and especially by the Prudence of Don Antonio De Sousa of Macedo, now
principal Secretary of State, heretofore Resident from the King of Portugal in
England.

If that the Portuguesses have thus long, and so valiantly defended themselves
by their own proper Valor, without a Foreign Assistance, against so potent a
Monarch as the King of Spain, then how much more now will they be able, since
they have renewed the old League with England, whose Forces being united, may
defy all those that shall oppose them, both Kingdoms being most formidable at
Sea, and Masters of a potent Army.

Nor was the King of Great Britain unmindful of returning the King of Portugal
an Acknowledgment for the Happiness His Majesty received from Him, in the
Person of His Sister, that Royal Lady the Princess KATHERINE, when He sent
Supplies into that Kingdom under the Command of that Valiant Lord the Earl of
Inchequeen, almost as soon as His Majesty had the Assurance of receiving His
Beautiful Queen into His own Arms, such was His MAJESTY'S Care of the Welfare
of that Monarchy, the Knot of a perpetual Alliance being now so firmly tied,
That maugre all the Opposition of the most malignant Opposers, They are
resolved to link their Concerns together ever hereafter.

Since the Arrival of the English Forces in Portugal, there has been little
Action, they having been disposed of into Three several Squadrons; so that now
in September last, the Generals all returned to Lisbon to refresh themselves,
there being no further Occasion for the Field. Don John's Army had Orders sent
them not to march, and the other Two, since the late Defeats given them, have
been in no Capacity of doing the least Injury, Portugal being now free from the
Noise of the Castillians both by Sea and Land. Don John was lately at Badayos,
(having for a while laid all thoughts of farther Action aside) where he
mustered all the Forces, and drew them into their Winter Quarters. In the mean
time, the King of Spain sent Orders to several Places to make great preparation
against the next Spring; so that marching in with more Force, they may give a
better Account than they have of this years Expedition.

King ALPHONSO VI. entering now upon the Twentieth year of His Age, lately took
the Reins of the Government into His own Hand, and has sat for the
Administration of Justice in Criminal Causes, where a Judge, and Secretary of
the Court of Orphans, were brought before Him, and Accused for having dealt
unjustly in the managery of their Trust. His MAJESTY was pleased with much
Patience to attend the whole Trial, where it being fully proved, That according
to the Charge exhibited against them, they had wronged several Orphans, and
dealt unjustly in the Disposal of their Goods; Sentence was pronounced upon
them both, the Judge to be beheaded, and the Secretary to be hanged. I mention
this, only to let the Reader know how much this Action of the Kings has
increased the Esteem and Affection which His MAJESTY'S Subjects had for Him;
That at His first sitting in the Administration of Justice, He should so far
encourage the Causes of His weaker People, as not to spare Offenders, though of
the greatest Quality; but to see Sentence of Condemnation passed against those
that injure them.

Thus have you an Account of the Lives and Issues of the KINGS of PORTUGAL,
from the Foundation of that Monarchy, to the Sixth year of the Reign of KING
ALPHONSO VI. being this present year, 1662. leaving that KINGDOM in an assured
Confidence, That ENGLAND will prove (as it has ever been) a better Bulwark to
them, than any other their Confederates.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, Containing the Principal NAMES in this HISTORY.
A.
ALPHONSO I. King of Portugal. Chap. II. ALPHONSO II. King of Portugal. Chap.
IV. ALPHONSO III. King of Portugal. Chap. VI. ALPHONSO IV. King of Portugal.
Chap. VIII. ALPHONSO V. King of Portugal. Chap. XIII. ANTHONY Prior of Crato,
proclaimed King of Portugal. Chap. XIX. ALPHONSO VI. King of Portugal. Chap.
XXII. Alphonso of Portugal, Knight of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem. Page
8 Alphonso of Portugal, Lord of Portalegre. Page 23 Alphonso of Portugal,
Seigneur of Leiria. ibid. Alphonso of Portugal. Page 30 Alphonso of Portugal
dyed young. Page 30 Aremburga Countess of Vrgel. Page 13 Adolphe of Cleves,
Seigneur of Ravenstein. Page 43 Alphonso Prince of Portugal. Page 59 Alphonso
Cardinal of Portugal. Page 66 Anthony of Portugal. Page 69 Alphonso Prince of
Portugal. Page 73 Anthony of Portugal. Page 74 Alphonso-Dionysio B. of Portugal
Page 24 Alphonso-Sanceo B. of Portugal, Count of Albuquerque. Page 28 Alphonso
B. of Portugal. Page 33 Alphonso de Cascaes, B. of Portugal. ibid. Alphonso B.
of Portugal, Duke of Braganza. Page 45 Alphonso B. of Portugal, Duke of Visco.
Page 49
B.
Blanch of Portugal, Lady of Guadaliara. page 14 Berengaria of Portugal. ibid.
Beatrice of Castillo, Queen of Portugal. Page 21 Beatrix of Castille, Queen of
Portugal. Page 30 Beatrix of Portugal, Queen of Castille. Page 31 Beatrice of
Portugal, Lady of Ravenstein. Page 43 Beatrice of Portugal, Duchess of Visco.
Page 44 Blanch of Portugal, died young. Page 45 Beatrice of Portugal, Duchess
of Visco. Page 47 Blanch of Portugal, Abbess of Loruano. Page 23 Beatrix of
Portugal, Duchess of Savoy. Page 69 Beatrix of Portugal. ibid. Beatrix B. of
Portugal. Page 34 Beatrice B. of Portugal, Countess of Arundel. Page 45
C.
COnstance of Portugal, Wife of Goncalo-Nunez De Lara. page 23 Constance of
Portugal. ibid. Constance of Portugal, Queen of Castille. page 27 Constance
Manuel, Queen of Portugal. page 32 Charlote of Cyprus, Duchess of Conimbra.
page 42 Charles of Portugal. page 70 Christopher of Portugal. page 89 Constance
B. of Portugal. page 15 Constance B. of Castille. page 33
D.
DIONYSIO King of Portugal. Chap VII. Doulce of Arragon, Queen of Portugal.
page 10 Dionysio of Portugal. page 30 Dionysio of Portugal. page 32 Dionysio of
Portugal. page 49 Diego-Alphonso of Portugal. page 24 Dionysio of Portugal.
page 73 Dionysio B. of Portugal. page 33
E.
EDWARD King of Portugal. Chap XII. EMANUEL King of Portugal. Chap. XV. Eleanor
of Arragon, Queen of Portugal. page 47 Edward of Portugal. page 49 Elizabeth,
or Isabel of Conimbra, Queen of Portugal. page 52 Edward Prince of Portugal.
page 67 Edward of Portugal, Duke of Vimerana. ibid. Emanuel of Portugal. page
73 Emanuel of Portugal. page 88 Emilia of Nassau. ibid. Edward B. of Portugal,
Archbishop of Bracara. page 74
F.
FERDINAND King of Portugal. Chap. X. Ferdinand of Portugal, Duke of Visco.
page 47 Ferdinand of Portugal, Count of Flanders. page 11 Ferdinand of
Portugal, Infant of S^erpe. page 17 Ferdinand of Portugal. page 23 Ferdinand of
Portugal, Seigneur of Ecae. page 33 Ferdinand of Portugal, Duke of Visco. page
48 Ferdinand of Portugal, Grand Master of the Order D'Avis. page 44 Ferdinand
of Portugal. page 66 Ferdinand-Alphonso B. of Portugal, Knight of the Order of
the Templars. page 24 Ferdinand B. of Portugal, Lord of Braganza. page 33
G.
GIlles-Sanceo B. of Portugal. page 15 Gilles-Alphonso B. of Portugal. page 24
George B. of Portugal, Duke of Conimbra. page 59
H.
HENRY of Bourgongne Count of Portugal. Chap. I. HENRY the Cardinal King of
Portugal. Chap. XVIII. Henry Prince of Portugal. page 8 Henry of Portugal. page
13 Henry of Portugal, Duke of Visco. page 43
I.
JOHN I. King of Portugal. Chap. XI. JOHN II. King of Portugal. Chap. XIV. JOHN
III. King of Portugal. Chap. XVI. JOHN IV. King of Portugal. Chap. XXI. Jane
Countess of Flanders. page 11 Isabel of Portugal, Lady of Biscay. page 23
Isabel of Portugal, Lady of Albuquerque. ibid. Isabel of Arragon, Queen of
Portugal. page 26 John of Portugal. page 30 Isabel of Arragon, Duchess of
Conimbra. page 41 John of Portugal, Duke of Conimbra. page 42 James of
Portugal, Cardinal and Archbishop of Lisbon. ibid. Isabel D'Avalos. page 33
Isabel of Conimbra, Queen of Portugal. page 42 John of Portugal, Grand Master
of the Order of St. James. page 44 Isabel of Braganza. ibid. James of Portugal.
ibid. Isabel of Portugal, Queen of Castille. ibid. Isabel of Portugal, Duchess
of Bourgongne. page 45 John of Portugal, Duke of Visco. page 48 James of
Portugal, Duke of Visco. ibid. Isabel of Visco, Duchess of Braganza. page 49
Jane of Portugal, Queen of Castille. page 50 John Prince of Portugal, died
young. page 55 Jane of Portugal, a Nun at Odivelles. ibid. Isabel of Castille,
Queen of Portugal. page 64 Isabel of Braganza, Princess of Portugal. page 67
John Prince of Portugal. page 73 Joane of Austria. ibid. Isabel of Portugal.
page 74 Jane Infanta of Portugal. page 133 John-Alphonso B. of Portugal. page
18 John B. of Portugal. page 33 Isabel B. of Portugal, Countess of Gigion. page
36 John-Emanuel B. of Portugal, Bishop of Septe. page 51
K.
KATHERINE Queen of GREAT Britain. page 133 Katherine of Portugal, died young.
page 49 Katherine of Portugal. page 59 Katherine of Portugal, Duchess of
Braganza. page 68
L.
LEonor of Portugal, Princess of Denmark. page 17. Leonor of Portugal, Queen of
Denmark. ibid. Leonora of Portugal, Queen of Arragon. page 30 Leonora Tellez,
Queen of Portugal. page 35 Leonora of Visco, Queen of Portugal. page 49 Leonora
of Portugal the Empress. page 50 Leonora of Visco, Queen of Portugal. page 58
Leonor of Austria, Queen of Portugal. page 65 Lewis of Portugal, Duke of Beia.
ibid. Lucia Queen of Portugal. page 132 Leonor B. of Portugal, Wife of Garsia
de Souza. page 24
M.
MAud of Savoy, Queen of Portugal. page 7 Mary of Flanders. page 12 Maud of
Portugal, Queen of Castille. page 14 Maud of Dam-Martin, Countess of Bolongne.
page 20 Mary of Portugal, Lady of Molina. page 23 Mary of Portugal, Queen of
Castille and Leon. page 30 Mary of Portugal, Lady Marquess of Tortosa. page 32
Mary Tellez. page 33 Martin Vasquez de Cunha. ibid. Mary of Castille, Queen of
Portugal. page 65 Michael Prince of Portugal. ibid. Mary of Portugal, Princess
of Parma. page 67 Mary of Portugal. page 70 Mary of Portugal. ibid. Mary of
Portugal, Princess of Spain. page 74 Martin B. of Portugal, Count of
Tristemare. page 15 Martin-Alphonso Chicorro B. of Portugal. page 24 Mary B. of
Portugal. page 33 Mary B. of Portugal, Wife of Peter Minho. ibid. Mary B. of
Portugal, Lady Marqu'ss of Villereal. page 49
P.
PETER King of Portugal. Chap. IX. PHILIP II, III, IV. Kings of Spain, 19, 20,
21. Kings of Portugal. Chap. XX. Peter of Portugal, King of Majorca. page 13
Philippa of Lancaster, Queen of Portugal. page 39 Peter of Portugal, Duke of
Conimbra. page 40 Peter of Portugal, elected King of Arragon. page 41 Philippa
of Portugal, a Nun at Odivelles. page 42 Philippa of Portugal, never married.
page 44 Philip Duke of Bourgongue. page 45 Peter De Norogna. page 36 Philip of
Portugal page 49 Philip of Portugal. page 73 Peter Infant of Portugal. page 133
Peter B. of Portugal. page 4 Peter B. of Portugal, Count of Barcellos. page 28
Peter B. of Portugal, Seigneur De Guerra. page 33
R.
ROderick of Portugal. page 15
S.
SANCEO I. King of Portugal. Chap. III. SANCEO II. King of Portugal. Chap. V.
SEBASTIAN King of Portugal. Chap. XVII. Sibille of Flanders, Lady of Beanjeu.
page 12 Sance of Portugal, Abbess of Loruano. page 14 Sance Fernandine De Lara,
Lady of Serpe. page 17 Sance-Mentie-Lopez De Haro, Queen of Portugal. page 19
Sanceo of Castille. page 34
T.
TEresa of Castille, Queen of Portugal. page 3 Teresa, otherwise called Sance
of Portugal. page 4 Teresa of Portugal, Countess of Flanders. page 8 Teresa of
Portugal, Wife of Sanceo-Nuniz. page 9 Teresa of Portugal, Queen of Leon. page
13 Theodosius Prince of Portugal. page 132 Teresa-Sancez B. of Portugal. page
15
U.
URacca of Portugal, Countess of Trastemare page 4. Vracca of Portugal, Queen
of Leon. page 8 Vracca of Castille, Queen of Portugal. page 17 Vincent of
Portugal. ibid. Valdemar II. of that Name, King of Denmark. ib. Vracca B. of
Portugal. page 15
Y.
YOland of Castille, Lady of Portalegre. page 23
FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ROYAL HOUSE OF PORTUGAL, CONTAINING THE GENEALOGIES OF
THE Dukes of BRAGANZA and BARCELLOS. Counts of LEMOS, and Dukes of TAVRISANO.
Marquesses of FERREIRA, and Counts of TFNTVGAL. Counts of GELVES, and Dukes of
VERAGVA. Counts of FARO, and of MIRA. Counts of VIMIOSO. Dukes of AVEIRO.
Counts of VILLAR.


IN DEFENSE

THE TABLE OF THE SECOND BOOK.
8. PETER King of Portugal. 9. JOHN first of the name, King of Portugal. 10.
EDWARD King of Portugal. 11. ALPHONSO V. of the name, King of Portugal. 12.
JOHN II. of the name, King of Portugal. 13. GEORGE B. of Portugal, Duke of
Conimbra. 14. JOHN D. of Aueiro. 15. GEORGE D. of Aueiro 16. JULIAN Duchess of
Aueiro.

ALPHONSO. ALVARO D. of Aveiro GEORGE D. de Tours neufues.





ALPHONSO B. of Portugal, Duke of Braganza. ALPHONSO C. of Ourem. ALPHONSO of
Portugal. FRANCIS B. of Portugal, Count of Vimioso. ALPHONSO I. of the name,
Count of Vimioso. FRANCIS II. C. de Vimioso. LEWIS C. de Vimioso. ALPHONSO II.
C. de Vimioso, and Marquess of Aguiar 17. LEWIS II. Count of Vimioso. MICHAEL
C. of Vimioso.





*FERDINAND I. of the name, D. of Braganza.

DENIS Bastard of Portugal, Lord of Cifuentes. FERDINAND of Portugal. DENIS
Lord of Torres. FERDINAND Lord of Villar. BERNARDIN Lord of Villar. FERDINAND
Count of Villar. BERNARDIN de Torres and de Port. JOHN de Torres, and de
Portugal, Count de Villar.







DVKES OF BRAGANZA. 11. * FERDINAND I. of the name, Duke of Braganza, Son of
Duke Alphonso. 12. FERDINAND II. Duke of Braganza. 13. JAMES Duke of Braganza
14. THEODOSIO I. D. of Braganza 15. JOHN Duke of Braganza. 16. THEODOSIO II. D.
of Braganza 17. JOHN IV. King of Portugal. 18. ALPHONSO VI. King of Portugal.




DENIS Count of Lemos. FERDINAND I. C. of Lemos. PETER Count of Lemos.
FERDINAND II. C. of Lemos. PETER II. C. of Lemos. FRANCIS D. of Taurisano.
FRANCIS Duke of Taurisano.





ALVARO Seigneur of Ferreira. RODERICK Marquess of Ferreira. FRANCIS I. Marq.
of Ferreira NUGNO ALVAREZ. FRANCIS II. Marquess of Ferreira. NUGNO II. Marquess
of Ferreira, and D. of Cadaval.



GEORGE I. of the name, C. of Gelues. ALVARO C. of Gelues GEORGE II. Count of
Gelues. LEONORA Countess of Gelues
NUGNO Duke of Veragua. ALVARO D. of Varagua. PEDRO NUGNO Columb. D. of Veragua.




ALPHONSO Count of Faro. SANCEO first C. of Odemira. ALPHONSO of Portug. SANCEO
II Count of Odemira. ALPHONSO C. of Odemira. SANCEO III. Count of Odemira.







DUKES OF BRAGANZA, and BARCELLOS.
10. ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, first Duke of BRAGANZA, and Count of BARCELLOS.
THE House of Braganza deriveth its Original from the Royal Family of Portugal,
PORTUGAL-BRAGANZA.
and enjoyed more fair and ample Privileges in this Kingdom, than any other.
For those of this House might justly have like Officers, D'argent au sautoir de
gueulles charge de cinq Escussons de Portugal; un au melieu les autres aux
quatre bouts du sautoir.
and wear the same Arms as the Kings do. They had their Lifeguard, and
likewise Heralds and Kings of Arms, and Power to confer Military Orders. They
also held the first place and degree of honor among the Illustrious Houses of
this Kingdom, as well because of their High Extraction, the Marriages they have
made with several Kings, and Princes of the Blood Royal, as also by reason of
the Rich Seigneuries they have possessed for this Two hundred years. From the
Chief or Source of the House, which was this ALPHONSO first Duke of Braganza,
and Natural Son of King John first of the name, are descended several Branches
of Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, and other Persons of Quality, which have spread
not only in Portugal, and Castille, but also in Italy, and more particularly in
the Kingdom of Naples; some of which have left the surname of Portugal, and
taken the names of those Illustrious Houses into which they have matched; which
we find often practiced in Spain.

ALPHONSO was first dignified with the title and quality of Count of Barcellos,
in the right of his first Wife BEATRICE PEREIRA, Nonius Leo.
she was daughter and heir of Nugno Alvarez Pereira, second Constable of
Portugal, Count of Arrayalos, Barcellos, and Ourem. Mariana.
As for the Duchy of Braganza, he was invested therein by the Infant Peter of
Portugal, Duke of Conimbra his Brother; at what time he was Regent of Portugal,
during the minority of King Alphonso V. their Nephew, in the Year, One Sometime
after the same King Alphonso gave him the Seigneury of Vimarana.

For his second Wife he espoused CONSTANCE OF NOROGNA, daughter of Alphonso of
Castille Count of Gijon, and of the Countess Isabel of Portugal. But from this
second Marriage there came no Children.

Mariana Lib. 21. Cap. 7.
ALPHONSO is charged (by Historians) with extreme ingratitude toward his
Brother and Benefactor the Duke of Conimbra, and to have been of the number of
those that incited King Alphonso to pursue him with Arms, unto the death, as
we have informed you before.

ALPHONSO dyed in the Year, His Death
One thousand four hundred threescore and one, and was inhumed in the great
Church at Chuues.

Children of ALPHONSO Duke of BRAGANZA, and of BEATRICE PEREIRA his first Wife.
Vimioso, whose Genealogy shall be deduced in its proper place.

Braganza after his Father, continued the Posterity.

Braganza, Espoused to JOHN OF PORTUGAL, a younger Son of King John the first
her Grandfather.

11. FERDINAND I. of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA, Count of ARRAYALOS, and
Marquess of VILLA-VICIOSA.
HE was second Son of Alphonso of Portugal first Duke of Braganza, and of
Beatrice Pereira his first Wife, and succeeded him in the Duchy. He was also
Count of Arrayalos, and Marquess of Valence, by the gift of Alphonso V. and
Governor of the City of Septe in Afric. His Wife JANE DE CASTRO, was
daughter and heir of John de Castro Seigneur of Cadaval, and of Leonor of
Acugna his Wife. He received the Honor of Burial in the Church of St. Augustine
at Villa-viciosa, an Abbey which he had founded in that Seigneury.

Children of FERDINAND I. of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA.
Braganza, whose Story follows in the next Page.

Mont-major, was Constable of the Kingdom of Portugal; but having a hand in the
Conspiracy against King John II. forged by the Duke of Braganza his elder
Brother, he fled into the Kingdom of Castille, where he dyed, without leaving
any issue by his Wife ISABEL OF NOROGNA, daughter of Peter de Norogna,
Archbishop of Lisbonne.





Marialva.

Ville-real.

Loulle.

12. FERDINAND II. of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA, and VIMARANA.
AMong the Children of Ferdinand first of the name Duke of Braganza, and of
Jane de Castro his Wife, this was the eldest. PORTUGAL-BRAGANCE.
In the lifetime of his Father he was established Count of Vimarana by the gift
of King Alphonso V. And upon the point of his Marriage to his second Wife
ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, daughter of the Infant Ferdinand of Portugal, he was
created Duke of the same place of Vimarana.

The rigorous usage of this Prince, and of other Grandees of the Kingdom, by
the Officers of King John II. gave ground to his unhappy Conspiracies against
the State, which Treason was thus discovered. For when FERDINAND caused search
to be made in his Evidences for certain Charters and Privileges, to get them
confirmed, his Secretary found the Letters of Intelligence and Conspiracy,
betwixt the Duke his Master, and the Kings of Castille, to the prejudice of the
King his Sovereign; into whose hands the Secretary delivered them, in the Hope
of a Recompense, For some time the King dissembled the discovery, and
favorably received the Duke into his Court; but one day, having called him
aside, he charged him with his fault, which the Duke would not confess, but on
the contrary protested his right intention and fidelity to his service; But not
ceasing to continue his Treasons, the King resolved to bring him to a Trial;
where being convicted, and condemned to lose his life, Mariana Lib. 24. Cap. 23.
he was beheaded at Evora, His Death.
the One and twentieth day of June, in the Year, One thousand four and his
Goods were Confiscated. The Duchess ISABEL his Widow the Queens Sister, sent
her three Children into Castille, where they were favorably received by the
Queen their Aunt. The Body of the Duke was inhumed in the Church of St.
Dominique of the same City of Evora, and afterward removed to the Convent of
St. Augustine at Villa-viciosa.

The first Wife of this Duke Ferdinand was LEONOR DE MENESES, daughter of Peter
de Meneses first Count of Ville-real, others say of Urana, and of Margaret of
Miranda his Wife; by her he had no Children; but he left issue by his second
Wife before mentioned.

Children of FERDINAND II. Duke of BRAGANZA, and of ISABEL OF PORTUGAL, his
second Wife.


Castille by his Mother, when that fatal stroke fell upon his Father, and there
dyed without issue. Some believe him to be the eldest Son.

Lemos, and in her right was Earl thereof, as we shall inform you in the
Deduction of his branch.



13. JAMES OF PORTUGAL, Duke of BRAGANZA, and Count of BARCELLOS.
PORTUGAL-BRAGANCE.
HE was eldest Son of Ferdinand II, Duke of Braganza, and of Isabel of Portugal
his second Wife, and was restored to all his Estates, Emanuel his Uncle by the
Mothers side, immediately after he came to the Crown of Portugal. Mariana.
He made him General of a Fleet, which he sent for Africa, Ao, One thousand
five hundred and Vasconcellius.
where he reduced the City of Azamor, which having been tributary to the King
of Portugal, had thrown off their Yoke; It was sacqued and pillaged by the
Portuguesses, which stroke so great a terror into the Infidels, that they
abandoned to the Christians the Towns of Tite, Almedina, and other neighboring
places.

This Duke JAMES espoused two Wives; His first Marriage.
his first was LEONOR DE MENDOZA, daughter of John de Gusman Duke of
Medina-Sidonia, and of Isabel de Velasco his Wife.

Secondly, He married JANE DE MENDOZA, His second Marriage.
daughter of Diego de Mendoza Grand Alcaide of the City of Mouron, and of
Beatrice Suarez his Wife.

Children of JAMES Duke of BRAGANZA, by LEONOR MENDOZA his first Wife.
Braganza, had issue.

Emanuel, who, among other Children, had Edward of Portugal Duke of Vimarana,
that dyed without issue.

Children of JAMES Duke of BRAGANZA, and of JANE DE MENDOZA his second Wife.


John. III. And by him sent Ambassador into France, A' where he stood as his
Proxy at the Baptizing of Lewis of France Duke of Orleans, second Son of King
Henry II. His Marriage.
He was also honored with the Dignity of Viceroy of the Indies, and espoused
MARY DE MENESES, daughter of Roderick de Mello first Marquess of Ferreira, and
of Beatrice de Meneses his second Wife, by whom he had no Children. He dyed in
the City of Estremos, and was interred in the Church de las Hagas at
Villa-viciosa.

Vimarana, had issue these Natural Children.

15. FRANCIS OF BRAGANZA, Canon at Evora, Commissary of the Croissade of
Portugal; and of the Council of Portugal, residing in the Court of the
Catholic King at Madrid.

15. ANGELLICA, Abbess of Villa-viciosa.

Evora, was a Prelate of great Virtue. He dyed at Validolit, in the Year, One
thousand six hundred and two, and his body was interred in the Monastery of St.
Anthony at Evora.

Elche.

Ferreira, her Cousin.

Villa-viciosa.

14. THEODOSIUS OF PORTUGAL, first of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA, and BARCELLOS.
PORTUGAL-BRAGANCE.
JAmes Duke of Braganza, and Leonor de Mendoza, were father and mother of this
Duke THEODOSIUS. The King of Portugal, John III. created him the first Duke of
Barcellos, a Title which has ever since been affixed to the eldest Sons of
this Royal House of Braganza.

His first Wife ISABEL DE CASTRO his Cousin, was daughter of Dionysius of
Braganza Count of Lemos, and of Beatrice de Castro his Wife.

His second was BEATRICE DE LANCASTRO, another of his Cosins, daughter of Lewis
de Lancastro, and of Magdalene de Granada his Wife.

Children of THEODOSIUS Duke of BRAGANZA, by ISABEL DE CASTRO his first Wife.
Braganza, succeeded his father in the Duchy.

Children of THEODOSIUS I. Duke of BRAGANZA, and of BEATRICE DE LANCASTRO his
second Wife.
Sebastian King of Portugal at the second Voyage of Africa against the Moors,
was at the fatal Battle of Alcacer, where they were both slain, the Fourth day
of August, in the Year, One thousand five hundred threescore and eighteen,
without

Camigna, and Marquess of Villa-real.

15. JOHN OF PORTUGAL, first of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA and BARCELLOS,
Constable of PORTVGAL, and Knight of the GOLDEN FLEECE.
THis Duke was eldest Son of Theodosius first of the name, PORTUGAL-BRAGANCE.
Duke of Braganza, by Isabel de Castro his first Wife. At the time of the
Ceremony (performed in Portugal in the Month of August, One thousand) of the
Recognition, D'argent au sautoir de gueulles charge de cinq Escussons de
Portugal, un au melieu, and les autres au quatre bouts du sautoir.

Chargee sur le tout d'un Escu de PORTUGAL


and Oath of Allegiance, taken by the Portuguesses to Cardinal Henry in the
Quality of King, this same Duke of Braganza held the first place, going before
him, and carrying the Sword as Constable.

During the life of this King, who was much in years, JOHN Duke of Braganza,
His Marriage.
was one of those Princes which were Competitors for the Crown of Portugal in
the right of KATHERINE OF PORTUGAL his Wife, daughter of the Infant Edward, Son
of Emanuel King of Portugal; In her lay the only right of Succession ( page
68.) warranted by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom ( page 6.) so that from
henceforward the Dukes of Braganza did justly wear the Royal Arms of Portugal
without distinction, the direct Male line being extinguished, and the Kingdom
falling to the Collateral of the Dukes of Braganza in the right of this
Katherine.

And because that this Duke JOHN was the prime Grandee of the Kingdom, and his
Tenants the most Warlike; and moreover confiding in the good will which King
Henry did bear him, he thought himself half in possession of the Estate: But in
Fine, he was forced to give place to King Philip II. whose best Title lay in
the strength of a formidable Army with which he subdued Portugal, as you have
heard before; who being come to the Crown, continued him in his Estates, gave
him the Demonstrations of a high favor, and associated him into the Order of
the Knights of the Golden in the Year, One thousand five hundred fourscore and
one.

He lived not long after, for he left this World in the Year, One thousand five
hundred fourscore and two, His Death.
and was inhumed in the Church of St. Augustine Villa-viciosa, with his
Predecessors.

Children of JOHN I. Duke of BRAGANZA, and of KATHERINE OF PORTUGAL, his Wife.
Braganza, mentioned in the Chapter following.

Flechilla, whose Pedigree is deduced next after this of Braganza.

Evora, and Inquisitor General of the Faith in Portugal.





Ascalona, and Marquess of Villena.

PORTUGAL.
16. THEODOSIUS OF PORTUGAL, PORTUGAL
II. of the name, Duke of BRAGANZA and Barcellos, D'argent a cinq Escussons
d'Azure peris en Croix chacun charge de cinq besans aussi d'argent posez en
sautoir, a la bordure de gueulles charge de sept chasteaux d'or.
and Constable of Portugal.
THis Prince, eldest Son of Duke John by the Duchess Katherine of Portugal his
Wife, was not past Nine or Ten years old, when, having the Title of Duke of
Barcellos, he accompanied King Sebastian his Cousin, in the second Voyage he
undertook into Africa against the Moors, Alcacer. The Cherif Muley-Hamet King
of Morocco, Party de VELASCO.
kept him in durance until that Philip II. King of Spain, obtained his liberty;
who having passed the Straits to return into Portugal, Conestaggio.
was detained at St. Lucar by the Duke of Medina-Sidonia, upon the news of the
Death of Henry King of Portugal, conceiving it would be a matter of importance
to the Catholic King his Master, to keep this Prince in durance, as being Son
of the principal Pretendants to the Kingdom: whereupon the Duke of Barcellos
wrote a Letter to his Father the Duke of Braganza, that he must not then expect
him, and that his detention should not any way prejudice the rights of the
Realm, preferring Justice before his own life. This Letter being come into
Portugal, was by the Duke his Father sent unto the Assembly of Estates at
Almerin, showing on the one side the grief for the detainment of this his dear
Son; and on the other side, the contentment he received, that in so tender
years he was so great a Lover of the good of his Country, that he offered, if
there were occasion, to sacrifice his Life for the Service of the State. But
immediately this fear of the Duke of Braganza his Father ceased, for the King
of Spain commanded that he should have free liberty to depart; which he did as
well to avoid the indignation of the Portuguesses, as to make a friend of the
Duke of Braganza.

Not long after THEODOSIUS succeeded the Duke his Father, and still continued
the demonstration of his Magnanimity; for when that the Catholic King Philip
III. and second of the name King of Portugal, made his solemn Entry into the
City of Lisbonne: who willing to show how much he affected him above all the
other Grandees of this Kingdom, Vasconcellius.
and desirous to make him a participant of his Royal Favors, promised that he
would grant him whatsoever he would ask; To which the Duke answered, That the
Kings of Portugal his Predecessors, which were also his Majesty's; had so
often, and so freely conferred their Benefits upon his House, that there was
not any thing remained that he could demand; and if there were, acknowledged to
have received a signal Favor from his Majesty if he would vouchsafe to honor
and embrace his Subjects of Portugal with a fatherly affection, but more
especially the Grandees of the Kingdom.

This Duke THEODOSIUS, who was seventh Duke of Braganza, and twelfth Constable
of Portugal, espoused ANNE DE VELASCO, daughter of the Constable of Castille
John-Fernandez de Velasco, and of the Duchess of Frias, Mary de Giron his
first Wife.

Children of THEODOSIUS II. Duke of BRAGANZA, by ANNE DE VELASCO his Wife.
Portugal by the name of John IV. and had issue Alphonso VI. King of Portugal,
now Reigning, 1662. of whose Histories and Issue, you may read in the First
Book.

March, in the Year of our Salvation, One thousand six hundred and five; who
coming unto Man's estate, had served the Emperor in his Wa^s with much
gallantry, and no less success, long before his Brother Duke John had any
thoughts of a Crown; nor did he show any endeavors to desert the Emperors
service, after the news arrived of the Revolt of Portugal, but seemed resolved
to continue there, till he was betrayed by Francisco de Mello a Portugal, at
that time Ambassador to the Catholic King in the Emperial Court.

This Mello notwithstanding he was bound by many strong Obligations to the
House of Braganza, yet like an ungrateful Villain, having opportunity offered,
now resolved to build his fortunes upon their ruin, or at least displeasure,
he therefore earnestly solicited the Emperor to seize upon the person of Don
Duarte, and deliver him up to the King of Spain, alleging of what great
concernment the securing of his person would be to the Catholic King; that it
much behoved his Imperial Majesty to show his affection to his brother the
Catholic King in this particular, which would not only prove of Interest to
Spain, but the whole house of Austria: That this Prince was the only Prop of
the House of Braganza; and this was the only means which God had left in the
hands of the House of Austria to recover the Kingdom of Portugal; that it would
be a great error both in prudence and policy to let slip so fair an occasion,
for that if he should escape out of their hands, and get to the assistance of
his brother, both his personal valor and experience in Warlike affairs, would
very much infest the Catholic King.

The Emperor was not only not persuaded by this Discourse of Mello's, but
extremely offended at it, returning him in answer, That he did abhor and
detest so great a breach of public faith, and violation of all Laws of
Hospitality; that it would be both against the liberty of the Empire, and
against his own Honor, to imprison a Prince who had committed no fault to the
Empire, but rather had laid innumerable Obligations both upon it, and himself.

Nor was the detestation of the Archduke Leopold to an act so soul and
shameful, less than that of his brothers the Emperor; notwithstanding all
which, Mello was not at all discouraged, but still prosecuted his villainous
design, by corrupting with great sums of money the Count of Tratsmandorf, and
several other Pensioners of the Crown of Spain; but they were soon weary of so
base and shameful an employment; which made Mello think of a more cunning
Artifice, which was to persuade the Emperor to hearken to the allurements of
one Diego di Quiroga, who of a Soldier was turned Monk, and was now Confessor
to the Empress: This Father who had often been called to give his judgment in
Affairs of State, endeavored by all means possible to persuade the Emperor
that he might not only with a good conscience secure the Infant, but that
according to the best Rules of Interest of State, he ought to do it.

His Imperial Majesty notwithstanding all these persuasions, was very much
unsatisfied in the action, and once fully resolved not to do it; but at length
overcome by Mello's importunities, and the Ghostly persuasions of Quiroga, he
was as it were constrained to alter his resolution, and to give order to Don
Lewis Gonzaga, to go to the Princes quarters at Leipen, and summon him to
Ratisbone.

In the mean time to endeavor to prevent all ill impressions, which an action
so hainously wicked, might strike into all bosoms that had either honor or
honesty; it was given out abroad, that the Infant Don Edward was secretly fled
for some misdemeanor from Leipen, (when he confident of his own innocence, was
in his journey to Ratisbone, according to the summons) and thereupon proposal
made of Sixteen thousand Crowns, as a reward to any man could bring him either
dead or alive; so that the Prince being ignorant of any such thing, very hardly
escaped their hands, Don Edward cast into the Common Goal at Ratisbone.
who out of hopes of the money, had gone in search of him; but missing them, he
came to Ratisbone; where he was no sooner received, but without any reason
given, he was cast into a Common Goal, and all his Servants imprisoned.

Don Francisco de Mello having thus far brought his desires to effect, stopped
not here, but afresh solicited the Emperor, that the Prince might be
delivered into the Spaniards hands, and sent prisoner to Millain: but instead
of assenting to this, he sends a Messenger to the Infant, assuring him upon
his word, that he would not deliver him into the hands of the Spaniards, but
would speedily procure his liberty and infranchisement.

Yet notwithstanding these fair promises of the Emperors, Don Edward's ill
usage in prison daily and hourly increased, nor could he by any means possible
get audience of the Emperor, not without reason, for, No face is more terrible
to the offender, than the face offended; which made the Prince make his
protestation, calling God and man to witness of the injury done him by the
Emperor, to whom he was neither subject by Obligation, nor Birth; that when
his brother was made King of Portugal, he was in the Emperors service, and
wholly ignorant of any design of his brothers; that if the King of Spain were
offended, he should revenge himself upon the person offending; that that
business no way concerned the Emperor, etc.

All these Allegations the Emperor confessed to be true, by a Messenger sent
to the Infant in prison, again assuring him that he would not deliver him up
to his enemies, but that he could not release him for some reason of State:
which made Don Francisco de Sosa Contigno, Ambassador extraordinary from
Portugal to the King of Sweden, in the name of the King his Master, represent
at large to the Diet at Ratisbone, the whole proceedings, requiring Justice and
Liberty for the Infant: But it is in vain to plead against Interest, all the
Manifesto's, Protestations, Petitions, and Intercessions made, produced no
other effect than the removal of the Infant from place to place, that still as
he was the farther off, he might have the harder usage.

But hitherto the Emperor seemed immovable in his resolution of not
delivering up the Infant into the hands of the Spaniards, till tempted with
what made Judas betray his Master, and our blessed Savior to death, Money; he
consented to the breach of his resolve, for upon the promise of Forty thousand
Crowns (contrary to the immunities of the Empire, to the Privileges of Free
Princes, to the Law of Nations, and to his Word and Promise so often
reiterated) he consented that that Noble and Innocent Prince should be sent
whither the Catholic King should think fit; so away he was hurried toward
the Castle of Millain, there to remain a prisoner.

By the way as he entered into the Spanish Territories, he was received by the
Count de Sirnela Governor of that Dukedom, where the Emperors Commissary took
leave to return, to whom D. Edward openly said, Tell thy Master, that I am more
sorry I have served so unworthy a Prince, than to see my self sold a Prisoner
into the hands of my enemies; but the just Judge of the world will one day
suffer the like dealing toward his children, who are no more privileged for
being of the house of Austria, than my self that am of the Blood Royal of
Portugal, and Posterity will judge of him and me.

The Emperor had given instruction to those that Convoyed the Infant, that in
case their prisoner made an attempt to escape, they should kill him upon the
place: being arrived in Millain he was clapped in the Common gate with all the
Rogues and Banditty, having a Guard lodged with him in his Chamber, so rude,
that they would scarce admit him to take his rest; in which Prison he most
miserably dyed, His Death.
upon the Third day of September, in One thousand six hundred forty and nine.

Thus was this generous, but unfortunate Prince rewarded, for having left his
Country, Kindred, Friends, Interest; for having at his own proper cost and
charges, served the Empire Eight years, for having always, and upon all
occasions ventured his life with the most daring, and yet expecting no other
pay but thanks, nor other recompense but Honor.

King John was extremely perplexed at this inhumane barbarism used to his
Brother, which he vowed fully to revenge with Arms; but he could for the
present do it no otherwise, than defensively, by reason of the continual
inroads the Castillians made into Portugal.

Theodosius II. Duke of Braganza, born the Sixth of April, in the Year, One
thousand six hundred and seven, and left this World the One and thirtieth of
May, Ao One thousand six hundred thirty and seven.

Theodosius II. Duke of Braganza, came into this World, in the Year, One
thousand six hundred and six. She dyed an Infant.

MARQUESSES of FLECHILLA, And of XARANDILLA.
16. EDWARD OF PORTUGAL, Marquess of FLECHILLA.
PORTUGAL-FLECHILLA.
HE was a younger son of John I. of the name, Duke of Braganza, and of the
Princess Katherine of Portugal his wife, and obtained the honor to be a
Grandee of Spain. His first wife BEATRICE DE TOLEDO and DE MONROY Lady
Marchioness of Xarandilla, was daughter and heir of John Alvarez de Toledo,
Count of Oropesa and Leitosa, and of the Countess Lovise Pimentel.

In second marriage EDWARD espoused GUIOMAR PARDO Marchioness of Magalon,
daughter of Ares Pardo Lord of Magalon, and of Lovise de la Cerda, but had no
issue by his last marriage.

Children of EDWARD of Portugal Marquess of FLECHILLA, and of BEATRIX DE
TOLEDO his first wife.






17. FERDINAND ALVAREZ DE TOLEDO, Monroy and Ayala, Marquess of Xarandilla,
and Count of Oropesa.
HE was second son of Edward of Portugal, Marquess of Flechilla, and of
Beatrice de Toledo his first wife. He espoused MENCIA PIMENTEL, the daughter of
John-Alphonso Pimentel Count of Benevent, by the Countess Mencia de Cuniga and
Requesens. He deceased in the flower of his age, leaving by her two sons and
a daughter. In the year, One thousand six his Grandmother by the Mothers side,
in his favor gave up her right and title to the County of Oropesa.

Children of FERDINAND ALVAREZ DE TOLEDO, Count of Oropesa, and of MENCIA
PIMENTEL his wife.


Oropesa, and Viceroy of Navarre, married ANNE daughter of Modica de Cordova
Count of Alcaudere.

de les Veles, and Molina.

COUNTS OF LEMOS, AND MARQUESSES OF SARRIA.
13. DIONYSIUS OF PORTUGAL, Count of LEMOS.
Braganza Ferdinand II. of that name, PORTUGAL-LEMOS.
his Father had been beheaded, the Duchess Isabel his Widow, sent this Prince
DIONYSIUS OF PORTUGAL, their third Son into Castille, where he established his
Fortune. For the Queen of Castille Isabel his Aunt, about the Year, One
thousand five hundred, procured his Marriage with a rich Heir, His Marriage.
whose name was BEATRICE DE CASTRO Countess of LEMOS, daughter of Roderick de
Castro, and of Teresa Osorio his Castro, and Ottero, which had been given by
the Kings. Lib. 27. Cap. 10.
Mariana mistakes in making this DIONYSIUS Son of James of Braganza, contrary
to the Evidences and Records of this House, which exactly prove their descent.
Their Children took the name of CASTRO, upon the account of their Mother, as is
observed often in Spain.

Children of DIONYSIUS OF PORTUGAL, Count of LEMOS.


Christ, had also issue, mentioned in his place.

Cuenca.

Ribadauia.



Portugal.

Savoye, who had issue Elizabeth de Chalant Wife of Frederick Madruce Count of
Aue, and Arbe, and Lord of Beaufremont.



Lisbonne.

14. FERDINAND DE CASTRO, Count of LEMOS, and Marquess of SARRIA.
PORTUGAL-LEMOS.
TO Dionysius Count of Lemos, and the Countess Beatrix de Castro his Wife,
succeeded this FERDINAND their eldest Son, who was sent Ambassador to Rome
during the Pontificalty of Paul III. by the Emperor Charles V. who created him
Marquess of SARRIA, and the King of Spain Philip II. also sent him Ambassador
to the Court of Rome, where he resided in the time of the Popes Julius III. and
Paul IV. The Princess Jane of Portugal, Mother of King Sebastian, honored him
with the Office of Steward of her Household.

He espoused TERESA d'ANDRADA, daughter and heir of Ferdinand d'Andrada Count
of Vilalua and Andrada, and of Frances de Ulloa and Zuniga his Wife.

Children of FERDINAND DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS, and of TERESA d'ANDRADA his
Wife.


Altamira.

15. PETER FERDINAND DE CASTRO I. of the name, Count of LEMOS, Andrada, and
Vilalua, and Marquess of Sarria.
HE was Son of Ferdinand de Castro Count of Lemos, PORTUGAL-LEMOS.
and of Teresa and served the King of Spain Philip II. at the Conquest of the
Kingdom of Portugal.

He was twice Married, first to LEONOR DE LA CUEUA daughter of Bertrand de la
Cueua Duke of Albequerque, and of Isabel Giron his Wife.

Secondly, To TERESA DE BOBADILLA and de LA CERDA, daughter of Peter de
Bobadilla Count of Chinchon, and of Menecia de la Cerda.

Children of PETER-FERDINAND DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS, and of LEONOR DE LA
CUEUA his first Wife.


Spain in Italy, the Indies, and Spain.

17. JOHN DE CASTRO dyed at Naples.

17. FRANCIS DE CASTRO.

17. BERTRAND DE CASTRO.

Cagneta.



Children of PETER-FERDINAND DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS, and of TERESA DE
BOBADILLA his second Wife.
Philip III. married HIERONIMA DE CORDOUA, Lady of Honor to Queen Margaret of
Austria, and daughter of Roderick de Cordoua Lord of Palma, and of Menecia de
Mendoza his Wife, from which Marriage came no Children.

Toledo, Archdeacon of Alcaraz, and Inquisitor, left three Natural Children;
Viz.

17. FELIX DE CASTRO.

17. TERESA DE CASTRO.

17. ANGELA DE CASTRO.



17. RODERICK DE CASTRO.



Bastard-Children of PETER-FERDINAND DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS.
Benedict, Abbot of St. Benet at Madrid, and General of his Order.

Otrante, dyed, being elected Bishop of Cordoua.

16. FERDINAND-RODERICK DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS, and Viceroy of Naples.
PORTUGAL-LEMOS.
AMong the Children of Peter-Ferdinand de Castro Count of Lemos, and of Leonor
de la Cueua his first Wife, he was the eldest. After that King Philip III. was
come to the Crown of Spain, he sent this Count his Ambassador to Rome to Pope
Clement VIII. for to make tender of his obedience, and to have a new
investiture in the Kingdom of Naples, where this same Earl was also sent
Viceroy, and where he deceased in the Year, One thousand six hundred and one.

He had to Wife KATHERINE DE ZUNIGA DE SANDOVAL, who was daughter of Francis
Royas de Sandoval Marquess of Denia, and of Isabel Borgia his Wife, which
Katherine Countess of Lemos was one of the principal Ladies of Honor to the
Catholic Queen Margaret, Wife of King Philip III.

Children of FERDINAND-RODERICK DE CASTRO Count of LEMOS.


Taurisana, of whom we shall speak after his Elder Brother, continued the
Posterity.

Gelves, Daughter and Heir of George of Portugal Count of Gelves, and of
Bernardine de Vincentelo his Wife, in whose right he was Count of Gelves. They
had issue one only Child.

18. KATHERINE OF PORTUGAL, Countess of Gelves.

17. PETER-FERDINAND DE CASTRO, second of the name, Count of LEMOS and Andrada,
Marquess of Sarria, and Viceroy of Naples.
THE King of Spain, Philip III. bestowed several Charges and Dignities upon
him; for he not only honored him with the Quality of Gentleman of his
Bedchamber, but also made him President of the Councel-Royal for the Indies,
and Viceroy of Naples, in the Year, One thousand six hundred and ten: As also
established him President of the Council of Italy.

His Wife, was KATHERINE DE SANDOVAL, his Cosin-Germane, Daughter of Francis de
Sandoval and Royas, Duke of Lerme, by the Duchess Katherine de la Cerda his
Wife, by whom he had not any Children.

17. FRANCIS DE CASTRO Duke of TAVRISANO, Count of Castro, and Viceroy of
Naples and Sicilie.
HE was second Son of Ferdinand-Roderick de Castro Count of Lemos, by Katherine
de Zuniga and Sandoval his Wife; and as his elder Brother, was for his great
Experience, employed in important Affairs by the Catholic King: For he not
only established him his Viceroy of Naples, after the death of his elder
Brother, but also of Sicily. Afterward the same King sent him Ambassador to
the State of Venice, to endeavor a Reconciliation betwixt that Republic, and
Pope Paul V. to whom FRANCIS DE CASTRO was also sent Ambassador in Ordinary.

He espoused LUCRECE GATINARA LEGNANA, Countess de Castro in the Kingdom of
Naples, only Daughter of Alexander Gatinara, Fifth Count of Castro, and of
Victoria Caracciol his Wife.

Children of FRANCIS DE CASTRO, Duke of TAVRISANO, etc.
Taurisano, etc. continued the descent.











18. FERDINAND DE CASTRO Duke of TAVRISANO, Count of Castro and Lemos.
HE was eldest Son of Francis de Castro Duke of Taurisano, and of Lucrece
Gatinara Legnana his Wife.

His Wife was ANTONIA DE GIRON, the daughter of Peter Giron Duke of Ossuna, and
Marquess of Pegnafiel.

Children of FERDINAND DE CASTRO Duke of TAVRISANO, Count of Castro and Lemos.
Antrada.

14. ALPHONSO DE LANCASTRO.
Dionysius of Braganza, or of Portugal, PORTUGAL-LANCASTRO.
and Beatrix de Castro Countess of Lemos, had several Children, among whom,
this ALPHONSO was the second, honored with the Dignity of great Master of the
Military Order of Christ in Portugal, and grand Alcaide of Ovidos. King John
III. sent him Ambassador to Rome unto the Popes Julius III. and Paul IV.
Afterward he was also sent into France to King Charles IX. during the Minority
of King Sebastian in the beginning of his Reign. The same ALPHONSO was interred
in the Monastery of the Carmelites of Lisbon. His Wife, HIERONIMA DE NOROGNA,
was Daughter of James de Norogna, great Master of the Order of Christ, and of
Philippa Attaida his Wife; he had by her one Son and a Daughter, which were



Villa-real.

15. DIONYSIVS DE LANCASTRO.
HE was, as his father Alphonso, grand Master of the Order of Christ, and by
the King of Portugal, Sebastian, also sent into France to King Charles IX.
about the Year, One thousand five hundred threescore and twelve; then into
Spain to King Philip II. He was also nominated by the same King Sebastian, his
Ambassador for Rome, to be sent to Pope Gregory XIII. But upon the death of
this King in Africa, his Embassade ceased, and he Lisbon, His Death.
Ao. One thousand five hundred fourscore and eighteen, being very much in
years: He lies inhumed in the Monastery of St. Augustine.

By his Wife, ISABEL ENRIQUEZ, Daughter of Francis Coutinho second Count of
Redondo, and of Mary de Guzman his Wife, he had these Six Children following.

Christ, and grand Alcaide of Ovidos. He espoused MARY DE TAUORA, daughter of
Alvaro Perez de Tauora, and of Isabel de Melo his Wife.

Philip III. and IV.

Lamego, and Chief Chaplain to the King of Spain Philip III.





Redondo her Cousin.

MARQUESSES of FERREIRA, AND COUNTS of TENTUGAL.
12. ALVARO DE PORTVGAL, Lord of FERREIRA.
PORTUGAL-FERREIRA.
AMong the Children of Ferdinand first of the name, Duke of Braganza, and of
Jane de Castro his Wife, this ALVARO was the third. He was President of the
Council Royal in Castille, and grand Alcaide of Seville, and in Portugal also
Lord Chief Justice and Chancellor. He espoused PHILIPPA DE MELO Countess of
Olivenca, daughter and heir of Roderick de Melo Count of Olivenca, by Isabel de
Meneses.

Children of ALVARO DE PORTVGAL, Lord of FERREIRA.
Portugal, first Marquess of FERREIRA, continued the Line.

Gelves, hereafter mentioned.

Alphonso de SOTO-MAJOR Count of Belalcacar.

Tentugal, Duchess of CONIMBRA, Wife of GEORGE Bastard OF PORTUGAL, Duke of
CONIMBRA, and Lord of Aveiro.



Portalegre.

13. RODERICK DE MELO, and Portugal, Marquess of FERREIRA, and Count of
Tentugal.
HE was eldest Son of Alvaro of Portugal Lord of Ferreira, and of Philippa de
Melo his Wife, and for his Memorable Services deserved well the Title of
Marquess of Ferreira, and Count of Tentugal, into which Honors he was Created
by the great Emanuel King of Portugal, his Cousin. He married two Wives.

His first Wife was LEONOR d'ALMEIDA, Daughter of Francis d'Almeida Viceroy of
the Indies, by Jane Pereira his Wife.

His second Wife was BEATRIX DE MENESES, Daughter of Anthony d'Almada Major
General of Lisbonne, and of Mary de Meneses his Wife. He had issue by both
Wives.

Children of RODERICK DE MELO Marquess of FERREIRA, by his first wife.
John de Silva, second Count of Portalegre, and of Mary Manuel. He had one Son
bearing his name, which follows.

15. ALVARO DE MELO, had no Children by his Wife MARY d'ALCACOUA, daughter of
Peter Count of Ignana, and of Katherine de Sousa. This Alvaro was slain at the
Battle of Alcacer.

Ferreira, continued the Posterity.

Partalegre.



Children of RODERICK DE MELO, and of his second Wife.




14. FRANCIS DE MELO, first of the name, Marquess of FERREIRA, and Count of
Tentugal.
TO the Marquess of Ferreira Roderick de Melo, succeeded this his second Son
(the eldest dying before his Father.) He married EUGENIA OF BRAGANZA or
PORTUGAL, daughter of James Duke of Braganza, and of Jane de Mendoza his Wife.

Children of FRANCIS DE MELO, Marquess of Ferreira.
Alcacer in Afric with King Sebastian, in the Year, One thousand and left no
Children by his Wife KATHERINE DEC'A, daughter of Alphonso de Norogna.

Tentugal, continued the descent.

Visco.

Ferdinand de Meneses, by Philippa de Mendoza his Wife. They had these Children
following.

16. FRANCIS DE MELO, Servant to the Catholic King, Marquess de la Tour de
Laguna, and Count of Alcumer, married ANTONIA DE VILLENA, daughter of Henry de
Sousa Count of Miranda; by whom he had issue N. DE MELO, BEATRIX, and MENTIA.

16. JOHN DE MELO a Carmelite Friar.

16. ALVARO DE MELO, Knight of the Order of St. John.

16. FERDINAND DE MELO.

Villa-viciosa.

Francis Marquess of Ferreira, was Archbishop of Evora.



15. NUGNO ALVAREZ DE MELO, Count of TENTUGAL.
FRancis de Melo Marquess of Ferreira, and Count of Tentugal, and Eugenia of
Braganza or Portugal his Wife, were Father and Mother of this Count, who
married with MARIANA DE CASTRO daughter of Roderick de Moscoso Earl of
Altamira, and of the Countess Isabel de Castro his Wife.

Children of NUGNO ALVAREZ DE MELO.
Ferreira, continued the Posterity.

Evora.

Castelrodrigo, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to the Catholic King, and great
Master of Alcantara.

Portalegre, also Gentleman of the Bedchamber to the King of Spain, and his
grand Master of the Household in Portugal.

16. FRANCIS DE MELO II. of the name, Marquess of FERREIRA, and Count of
Tentugal. General of the Melitia to King John IV.
HE was eldest Son of Nugno Alvarez de Melo Count of Tentugal, by the Countess
Mariana de Castro. His Death.
He dyed in the Year, One thousand And left no issue by his first Wife MARY DE
SANDOVAL his Cousin German, daughter of Lopez Osorio de Moscoso, Count of
Altamira, and of the Countess Leonor de Sandoval his Wife.

His second Wife was JANE PIMENTEL daughter of Anthony Pimentel Marquess of
Tabara, by her he had these Children.

Cadaval, Marquess of Ferreira, and Count of Tentugal, now living, 1662.



COUNTS OF GELVES, AND DUKES OF VERAGUA.
13. GEORGE OF PORTUGAL, I. of the name, first Count of GELVES, and Alcaide of
Alcacer and Seville.
PORTUGAL-GELVES.
OF the two Sons of Alvaro of Portugal, who was President of the Council Royal
of Castille, and of his Wife Philippa de Melo Countess of Olivenca, Roderick of
Portugal first Marquess of Ferreira, and Count of Tentugal, D'argent au sautoir
de gueulles charge de cinq Escussons de Portugal, dount l'un est au melicu du
sautoir and les autres aux quatre bouts d'iceluy.
was the elder, and this GEORGE the younger, who performed so many good and
faithful Services for the Emperor Charles V. that he honored him with the
Title of Count of GELVES.

The first Wife he espoused was GUIMARE d'ATAIDA and SILVA, daughter of John de
Vasconcellos second Count of Penela, and of the Countess Mary de Sousa; by her
he had no Children.

His second Wife was ISABEL DE TOLEDO COLOMBO, daughter of James Colombo first
Duke of Veragua, and second Admiral of the Indies, and of the Duchess Mary de
Toledo his Wife: which James was issued from that famous Christopher Colombus
the Genevis, which made discovery of the West Indies under the Reigns of the
King and Queen of Castille and Arragon, Ferdinand and Isabel.

Children of GEORGE OF PORTUGAL, Count of GELVES, and of ISABEL DE TOLEDO
COLOMBO, his second Wife.


Dominique.

Seville, whose descent shall be mentioned hereafter.

Seville, and had to his Wife ISABEL BOTTI daughter of James Botti a
Florentine, by Anne-Frances Fonti his Wife, and by her had these Children
following;

15. JAMES OF PORTUGAL.

15. ISABEL OF PORTUGAL Wife of JOHN GUTIERREZ TELLO DE SANDOVAL, Knight of the
Order of St. James.

15. ANNE-FRANCES OF PORTUGAL, conjoined in Marriage with FRANCIS TELLO DE
GUZMAN.

George Count of Gelves, dyed, not having been married.





14. ALVARO OF PORTUGAL, Second Count of GELVES.
AMong the Children of George of Portugal First of the Name, and First Count of
Gelves, and of Isabel de Toledo his Wife, this was the Eldest, who had two Sons
by his Wife LEONOR DE CORDOUA and ARRAGON, Daughter of Alvaro de Cordova, grand
Chevalier to the Catholic King Philip II. which Alvaro espoused Mary of
Arragon.

Children of ALVARO OF PORTUGAL, Count of GELVES.




15. GEORGE OF PORTUGAL, II. of the Name, and Third Count of GELVES.
HE was eldest Son of Alvaro of Portugal, Second Count of Gelves, and of the
Countess Leonor of Cordova, and Arragon his Wife, and espoused BERNARDINE
VINCENTELO: She was Daughter of John-Anthony Corso Vincentelo by Bridget Corso
his Wife, from which Marriage came only one Daughter following:

Ferdinand-Roderick de Castro Count of Lemos, by whom she had her Daughter
Katherine of Portugal also Countess of Gelves.

For her Second Husband, LEONOR OF PORTUGAL, espoused JAMES PIMENTEL Viceroy of
Arragon, Son of the Marquess of Tauara; from this last Marriage there came no
Children.

15. NVGNO OF PORTVGAL COLOMBO, Duke of VERAGVA, and Admiral of the Indies.
ALvaro of Portugal Count of Gelves, and Leonor de Cordova and Arragon his
Wife, were Father and Mother of this Duke of Veragua, who was Heir to his great
Grandfather James Colombo first Duke of Veragua; he married with ALDONCE
PORTOCARRERO, Daughter of James de la Bastide, and had by her Two Sons, and
Three Daughters.

Children of NVGNO COLOMBO Duke of VERAGVA.




Isabel of France.





16. ALVARO OF PORTVGAL COLOMBO, Third Duke of VERAGVA, Marquess of Jamaica,
And Admiral of the Indies.
HE was the eldest Son of Nugno of Portugal Colombo, Duke of Veragua, by
Aldonce Portocarero his wife, and espoused KATHERINE DE CASTRO; by her he had
Issue,

Ao 1662.

14. GEORGE OF PORTVGAL, One of the Four and twenty Magistrates of Sevile.
HE was Third Son of George of Portugal first of the name, and first Count of
Gelves, and of his Wife the Countess Isabel de Toledo Colombo. He was one of
the Four and twenty of Sevile. By his Wife GENIEURE BOTTI, daughter of John
Botti, he left Four Sons and a Daughter, viz.







Hierosme.

Seville.

14. JAMES OF PORTVGAL, first of the Name.
HE was second Son of George of Portugal one of the Four and twenty of Seville,
and had to Wife GUIOMAR-COLOMBO DE TOLEDO, daughter of Licentio-Hierosme
Ortegon, and of Frances Colombo his Wife, in whose Right he pretended to the
Duchy of Veragua, against Nugno of Portugal his Cousin, to whom by sentence it
was adjudged. The Children of JAMES OF PORTUGAL, were











COUNTS OF FARO, AND OF ODEMIRA.
12. ALPHONSO OF PORTVGAL, first of the name, Count of FARO and ODEMIRA.
PORTUGAL-ODEMIRA.
AFter having heretofore written of the Posterity of Ferdinand II. of the name,
third Duke of Braganza, and Alvaro of Portugal his Brother, from whom are
issued the Marquesses of Ferreira, and Counts of Gelves; it rests now to deduce
the Descent of ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, who was also their Brother, all Three Sons
of the Duke of Braganza Ferdinand I. of the name, and of the Duchess Jane de
Castro his Wife.

The same ALPHONSO who was Lord of Faro in his own right, was created first
Count thereof by Alphonso V. King of Portugal, and at what time the Duke of
Braganza his Brother, of whom we have written, was punished for having
conspired against King John II. he fled into Castille, where he departed this
World, after he had espoused MARY DE NOROGNA Countess of Odemira, Daughter and
Heir of Sanceo de Norogna first Earl of Odemira, Lord of Aveiro and Vimieiro,
grand Alcaide of Estremos, and of the Countess Mencia de Sousa his Wife.

Children of ALPHONSO OF PORTVGAL, Count of FARO and Odemira.


James Manuel and Villena, Lord of Cheles, and of Major de Silva his Wife, by
whom he had one daughter here mentioned, viz.

14. MARY MANUEL Wife of JAMES DE MELO DE FIGUEIREDO, by him she had issue
several children.

Calaotra and Ciguenca, Archbishop of Sarragoca, and Viceroy of Catalonia.



Vimiero, has given original to the other Lords and Earls of VIMIERO and FARO,
as you may read hereafter.

Child of Fortune, who was Son of Henry of Arragon, great Master of the Order
of Knights of St. James, by Beatrix Pimentel his second Wife; which Grand
Master was one of the younger Sons of Ferdinand of Castille, King of Arragon,
and of Elianor d'Albuquerque.

Medina Celi.

Semide.

13. SANCEO OF NOROGNA, first of the name, Count of Odemira, and Lord of
Mortagoa.
TO the Count of Faro Alphonso of Portugal first of the name, and to the
Countess of Odemira Mary de Norogna his Wife, succeeded the Earl SANCEO first
of the name their eldest Son, who was twice married.

First, He married FRANCES DE SILVA daughter of James Gil Muniz, and of Leonor
de Silva his Wife: By her he had issue Two Sons and a Daughter.

The second Wife of the same Count SANCEO, was ANGELA FABRA daughter of Gaspar
Fabra; by whom he had also Two Sons and a Daughter.

Children of SANCEO I. of the Name, Count of ODEMIRA, by FRANCES DE SILVA his
first Wife.




Savoy.

Children of SANCEO I. Count of ODEMIRA, and of ANGELA FABRA his second Wife.


Castille) MARGARET DE BORGIA, Daughter of John De Borgia third Duke of Gandie,
by the Duchess Anne De Castro his Wife, and had this only Daughter following,
viz.

15. ANNE OF PORTUGAL Wife of RODERICK DE SILVA Duke of Prastrana.

Cogolludo, and Fourth Duke of Medina Celi.

Medina Celi.

Sanceo I. was a Nun in the Monastery of Odivelles.

14. ALPHONSO OF NOROGNA.
IN the lifetime of the Count of Odemira, Sanceo the first his Father, he was
slain by the Moors; having before been married to Mary D'Attaide, Daughter and
Heir of Nugno-Ferdinand D'Attaide Lord of Pena Cova, Captain of Cafin, and of
Jane De Faria his Wife; from which Marriage came their only Son, which was
Count Sanceo II. mentioned next following.

16. SANCEO DE NOROGNA II. of the Name, Count of ODEMIRA.
HE succeeded his Grandfather Sanceo De Norogna first of the Name, and was
Fourth Count of ODEMIRA, and grand Alcaide of Estremos Katherine of Austria
Queen of Portugal, Wife of King John III. honored him with the Office of
Steward of her Household.

He espoused MARGARET DE SILVA Daughter of John De Silva second Count of
Portalegre; from this marriage there came two Sons and a Daughter.



Visco, and De La Guarde.

Atouguia.

16. ALPHONSO DE NOROGNO III. of the Name, and second Count of ODEMIRA of that
Name; Lord of Mortaga, and grand Alcaide of Estremos.
ALPHONSO eldest Son of Count Sanceo II. was of the Number of those Lords of
Portugal that accompanied King Sebastian in his second Voyage for Africa, and
was slain with him at the fatal Battle of Alcacer; in which, besides the King,
there dyed Eight or Ten Princes and Lords of the Blood Royal.

The same ALPHONSO had three Wives; the first was JANE DE VILENA Daughter of
Manuel Tells Lord of Ugnon, by Margaret De Vilena his Wife; by whom he had no
Children.

His second was JANE DE GUZMAN Daughter of Peter De Meneses Captain of Septe,
and of Constance De Guzman his Wife, neither had he Issue by her.

But by YOLAND DE CASTRO his third Wife, Daughter of Alvaro De Castro, and of
Anne D'Attaide his Wife, he had one Son following.

Mortagoa, who was also grand Alcaide of Estremos, and espoused JULIANA DE
LARA, Daughter of Manuel De Meneses Duke of Ville-real, and of Mary De Silva
his Wife; by her he had a Daughter, which dyed young.

The same SANCEO deceased in Ao One thousand six hundred forty and two.

14. JOHN DE FARO.
HE was eldest Son descended from the marriage of Sanceo De Norogna first of
that Name, Count of Odemira, and Lord of Mortagoa, and of the Countess Angela
Fabra his second Wife, and took to Wife ISABEL FREIRE Daughter of Emanuel
Freire, by Grimanesa de Melo his Wife, by her he had his only Son, viz.

John D'Almeida by Lucia D'Ornelas, by her he had one only Daughter, named,

16. LUCIA DE FARO married to HIEROSME COUTINHO of the Council of State to the
Catholic King Philip III. in the Kingdom of Portugal. They had Issue, PHILIPPA
DE COUTINHO married to LEWIS D'ATTAIDA Count of Attougia, and Viceroy of the
Indies.

LORDS AND COUNTS OF VIMIERO, AND OF FARO.
13. FERDINAND DE FARO Lord of VIMIERO.
PORTUGAL-VIMIERO.
OF the Children of Alphonso of Portugal first of the Name, Count of Faro, and
of Mary De Norogna Countess of Odemira his Wife, he was the fifth; Catherine of
Austria Queen of Portugal, Wife of King John the Third, honored him with the
Office of Steward of her Household. He left several Children by his Wife ISABEL
DE MELO, Daughter of Gomez De Figueiredo, by Leonor De Melo, viz.





Leiria.

Sebastian King of Portugal.

Tangier.



14. FRANCIS DE FARO Lord of VIMIERO.
HE was eldest Son of Ferdinand De Faro, by Isabel de Melo his Wife, and was
President of the Council of Affairs to the King of Portugal Sebastian.

The first of his Wives MENCIA D'ALBUQUERQUE was Daughter of George
D'Albuquerque, and of Anne Enriquez.

The second, GUIOMARE DE CASTRO was Daughter of Matthew D'Acugna Lord of
Pombeiro, by Leonor Coutigna.

The third, was MARY DE MENDOZA the Daughter of Manuel Cort-real, and of
Beatrix De Mendoza his Wife, by her he had no Children.

Children of FRANCIS DE FARO, and of MENCIA D'ALBUQUERQUE his first Wife.


Alcacer, in the year, One thousand five hundred threescore and eighteen.

Indies, and the Algarves.

Children of FRANCIS DE FARO, by GUIOMAR DE CASTRO his second Wife.


Spain, Philip IV.

15. FERDINAND HENRIQUEZ.
AMong the Children of Francis de Faro Lord of Vimiero, and of Mencia
d'Albuquerque his first Wife, he was the eldest, and dyed in the lifetime of
his Father, having married JANE DE GUZMAN, Daughter of Alvaro Caraallo by Mary
de Guzman his Wife; by her he had these Children following;





Portugal resident in his Court.

Mazagan.

15. FRANCIS DE FARO Count of VIMIERO.
FRom the marriage of Francis de Faro Lord of Vimiero, and of Guiomar De Castro
his second Wife descended this Count, who was raised to this Dignity by the
King of Spain, Philip III.

He had to Wife MARIANA DE LA GUERRA Daughter of Peter Lopez De Sousa, by Anne
De La Guerra his Wife, by whom he had Issue Three Sons and a Daughter, viz.

Vimiero.

Augustine.



Michael.

14. DIONYSIUS DE FARO.
HE was second Son of Ferdinand de Faro Lord of Vimiero, and of Isabel de Melo
his Wife. And was conjoined in Marriage with LORISE CABRAL Daughter of
John-Alvarez Camnigna; by whom he had these two Sons following.



Lewis, mentioned in the next place.

15. STEPHEN Count of FARO, and of St. Lewis.
WAS second Son of Dionysius de Faro, by Lorisa Cabral his Wife. He was of the
Council of Estate to the Catholic King, and also President of the Council of
Affairs. Vasconcellos writes that the King of Spain, Philip III. Created him
Count of St. Lewis. He espoused GUIOMAR DE CASTRO, Daughter of John Lobo Baron
of Alvito, by Leonor Mascaregnas his Wife.

Children of STEPHEN Count of FARO, and of LORISA CABRAL his Wife.
Alvaro de Lancastro Duke of Aveiro and Tourneuf, by her he had issue one
Daughter, viz.

17. JULIANA DE FARO, was Wife of MICHAEL DE MENESES, Marquess of Villa-real,
and Duke of Camigne.



Tarouca.



COUNTS OF VIMIOSO.
11. ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, Count of OUREM, Marquess of Valence, and Lord of
Porto de-Mos.
ALphonso of Portugal, first Duke of Braganza, PORTUGAL-VIMIOSO.
Son of King John I. and Beatrix de Pereira Countess of Barcellos and Ourem his
Wife, had two Sons, of which this was the elder; But deceasing before his
father, he succeeded not to the Dutchee; The King of Portugal, Edward, his
Uncle, sent him Ambassador to the Senate of Florence.

The same Count ALPHONSO having been chosen to Conduct the Princess Leonor of
Portugal to the Emperor Frederick III. her Husband, was Created Count of
OUREM, and Marquess of Valence, by Alphonso V. in the Year, One thousand four
hundred and fifty; and Tomar; having had by his Love-Mistress BEATRIX DE SOUSA,
daughter of Martin-Alphonso de Sousa, and of Yoland Lopez de Tauora, this his
only Son, viz.

Evora; and before he followed the Profession of a Churchman, had also by a
Lady called DE MACEDON, others say DE MELO, these two Sons following;

13. FRANCIS OF PORTUGAL, first Count of VIMIOSO, mentioned in the next place.

Fonchal, afterward Bishop of Algarvie, and Patriarch of the Indies. King John
III. sent him Ambassador to Pope Clement VII. who made him his Nuncio to the
Kingdom of Portugal. He had two Bastard-Children by KATHERINE DE SOUSA, a
Bastard-daughter of Roderick de Sousa, viz.

14. ELISHA OF PORTUGAL, was of the Privy-Chamber to the Popes Pius IV. and
Gregory XIII.

14. MARY OF PORTUGAL, second Wife to JAMES DE CASTRO.

13. FRANCIS OF PORTUGAL, first of the name, Count of VIMIOSO, and Lord of
Aguiar.
THE King of Portugal, Emanuel, honored him with the Dignity of Count of
VIMIOSO, and furthermore instituted him Super-intendant of his Affairs, as did
likewise King John III. afterward the Prince Portugal his Son, made him his
High Chamberlain.

He espoused for his first Wife BEATRIX DE VILLENA, daughter of Roderick Tellez
de Meneses Lord of Ugnon, Steward of the Household to the Empress Isabel of
Portugal, Wife to the Emperor Charles V.

His second Wife was JANE DE VILLENA, daughter of Alvaro of Portugal of the
House of Tentugal, and of Philippa de Melo Countess of Olivenza.

A Daughter of FRANCIS OF PORTUGAL, Count of Vimioso, by his former Wife.
Indies.

Children of FRANCIS OF PORTUGAL, Count of Vimioso, by his later Wife.




Guarda.

14. ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, first of the name, Count of VIMIOSO.
HE was eldest Son of Francis of Portugal first Earl of Vimioso, by Jane de
Villena his 2d Wife, and was, as his father before him, Super-intendant of the
Affairs of the Kings of Portugal, John III. and Sebastian, with whom he
undertook the Expedition of Afric. The History notes thus much of him; That
having been this Kings Chamberlain, and having Command in his first Voyage, he
deported himself so ill, that those which emulated his Greatness, took occasion
to exclude him the Kings Favor. He behaved himself no better in the second
Expedition; For being ambitious, and desirous to regain that Reputation with
the King which he had lost, he seconded his will, notwithstanding he knew it to
be rash and prejudicial. For the Army being landed in Afric, he persuaded
them to make their passage by Land, instead of that by Sea, void of danger,
which he did principally out of complacency with the King, whom he observed to
be grounded in this opinion, notwithstanding urged and dissuaded by many more
substantial reasons, from several others: So that he dyed with his Prince at
the unfortunate Battle of Alcacer.

He was conjoined by Marriage with LUCIA DE GUZMAN, daughter of Francis de
Guzman Great Steward of the Household to the Infanta Mary of Portugal, youngest
daughter of King Emanuel.

Children of ALPHONSO OF PORTUGAL, first of the name, Count of Vimioso.


Dominick, a Learned man, was of the Council general of the Inquisition.



Sicilie.

Lisbonne, and had been One of the Three Governors of Portugal. By his Wife
and Cousin JANE OF PORTUGAL, daughter of Manuel of Portugal, and of Margaret de
Mendoza his second Wife, he had, besides some Children that dyed young, Four
Sons, and Two Daughters.

16. LEWIS OF PORTUGAL.

16. JOHN. ALPHONSO. ANTHONY.

16. MARY and MARGARET.

Lisbonne.



Holy Sacrament at Lisbonne.

d'Esperanza at Lisbonne, and of St. Catherine at Evora.

15. FRANCIS OF PORTUGAL, second of the name, Count of VIMIOSO, and Constable
of Portugal.
THis Count accompanied King Sebastian of Portugal, to the Battle of Alcacer,
and was there made a Prisoner, but afterward finding means to recover his
Liberty, and being upon his return into Portugal, he there followed the Fortune
of Prince Anthony, who being declared King, honored Constable of Portugal: He
followed this Prince in his Voyage for France.

Afterward being at the Naval fight, in Ao One thousand five hundred near unto
the Azores, betwixt the French Army Commanded by the Colonel Philip Strozzi,
and the Spanish, Conducted by the Marquess of St. Croix, Lieutenant General to
the King of Spain, Philip II. This Count of Vimioso was so grievously hurt,
that he lived but two days after the Fight. The Marquess for all he was his
Enemy, did much lament and deplore his Fortune, as being his Kinsman. His end
was more honorable, than that of any of the other Lords that had followed
Anthony. He was young, adorned with good parts both of body and mind, and was
one that joined Learning to the Military profession.

15. LEWIS OF PORTUGAL, Count of VIMIOSO.
HIs eldest Brother the Count Francis II. not having been married, and leaving
no Children, this Count succeeded him, and espoused JANE DE MENDOZA daughter of
Ferdinand de Castro first Count of Basto, by the Countess Philippa de Mendoza
his Wife.

This Count and Countess being touched with a singular Piety, took a holy
resolution to forsake the World, and with mutual consent took upon them the
Habit of Religious. He entered himself into the Order of St. Dominick; and the
Countess JANE his Wife Cloystered her self in the Monastery of the Holy
Sacrament at Lisbonne, with the Barefoot Sisters, an Abbey which she and her
Husband had founded.

Children of LEWIS OF PORTVGAL, Count of Vimioso.


Lamego, Archbishop of Lisbonne, Ambassador from the King of Portugal, John
IV. to Pope Urban VIII. Anno 1641. He departed this world in the Year, 1644.

Flanders, where he dyed.



Holy Sacrament at Lisbon.

16. ALPHONSO OF PORTVGAL, second of the name, Count of VIMIOSO.
HE was eldest Son of Lewis Count of Vimioso, and of Jane de Mendoza his Wife:
And espoused MARY DE MENDOZA daughter of Christopher de Mora first Marquess of
Castle-Rodrigo, and of the Marchioness Margaret Corte-real, by whom he had
these Children following:

Aguiar by the King of Portugal, John IV. He dyed without lawful issue.







14. MANVEL OF PORTVGAL.
HE was second Son of Francis of Portugal first Count of Vimioso, by Jane de
Villena his second Wife. King John III. of the name, sent him to the Emperor
Charles V. to Congratulate with him for his success in the Enterprise of
Algier; and afterward King Henry sent him also to the King of Spain, Philip
II. to Condole with him for the deplorable Death of King Sebastian his Nephews
Son. Some time after this MANUEL OF PORTUGAL (as did Francis second of the
name, Count of Vimioso his Nephew) followed the Designs and Party of King
Anthony of Portugal, against the same King, Philip II.

He married two Wives, first MARY DE VILLENA daughter of Henry de Meneses, by
Beatrix de Villena his Wife.

In second Marriage he took to Wife MARGARET DE MENDOZA daughter of Manuel
Corte-real, and of Beatrix de Mendoza his Wife.

Children of MANVEL OF PORTVGAL, and of MARY DE VILLENA his first Wife.


Alcacer, after he had married MAGDALENE DE VILLENA daughter of Francis de
Sousa Tavares, Captain of Diu, and of Mary de Silva his Wife; by her he had a
Son, and two Daughters following.

16. LEWIS OF PORTUGAL, dyed at Septe with a fall from his Horse.

16. MARY OF PORTUGAL, Wife of PETER DE MENESES, Grand Alcaide of Visco.

16. JANE OF PORTUGAL, Wife of LOPEZ d'ALMEIDA, Grand Alcaide of Alcobace.

Alcantara in the service of Anthony King of Portugal.

A Daughter of MANVEL OF PORTVGAL, by MARGARET DE MENDOZA his second Wife.


15. HENRY OF PORTVGAL.
HE was eldest Son of Manuel of Portugal, by Mary de Villena his first Wife;
and espoused ANNE ATAIDE daughter of Anthony Ataide Count of Chastaigneraye, by
Mary de Villena his Wife, by whom he had issue Four Sons, and Two Daughters.
The King of Portugal, Sebastian, sent him to visit the Emperor Rodolph II. to
Condole with him for the Death of his father Maximilian II. His Children were,

Manuel de Castro by his Wife Beatrix de Villena; by her he had two Sons; the
elder of which, called by his Grandfathers name, dyed young; the other was,

17. ALVARO OF PORTUGAL.



Anthony Corea Batareno.



Castaigneraye her Uncle.

DUKES OF CONIMBRA, AVEIRO, AND TOURSNEUUES.
13. GEORGE Bastard of PORTVGAL, Duke of CONIMBRA, Lord of Toursneuues, Aveiro,
and Mont-Major le Vieil, Grand Master of the Order of Christus and d'Avis.
His Birth.
THE King of Portugal, John II. of the name, PORTUGAL-AVEIRO.
had by his Beatrix of Portugal the Prince Alphonso their only Son, who dyed
before them in the flower of his age. The same King also begat by Anne de
Mendoza his Paramore, this Prince GEORGE, who was born about the Year, One
thousand four hundred fourscore and one. Mariana Lib. 26. Cap. 2. and 33.
He was affectionately beloved by the King his father, insomuch, that having no
lawful issue, he intended after his death to leave him the Crown, which the
Grandees of the Kingdom did vigorously oppose, Vasconcellos.
as also the Queen his wife (as we have informed you before.) The Princess (who
was transported with a natural Love toward her Friend) would not permit that
the Duke of Beia, Nonius Leo.
Emanuel of Portugal her Brother (who was Heir apparent to the Crown by the
right of Blood and Proximity,) should be deprived of his Succession by a
Bastard-Son. Nevertheless King John having appointed the Prince Emanuel for his
Successor, recommended this GEORGE to his care, whom he caused to be carefully
educated.

After the Death of his father, and that Emanuel had taken in hand the Scepter,
the young Prince being but Fourteen years old, came and offered him his
obedience, where he received a favorable Entertain from this of his Love,
Confirmed to him the Titles and Seigneuries with which the late King had
honored him.

This Duke of Conimbra was conjoined in Marriage with BEATRIX DE MELO AND
PORTUGAL; who was Daughter of the great Alvaro of Portugal branched from the
House of Braganza, and of Philippa de Melo Countess of Olivenza his Wife; by
her he had several Children, which took the Surname of Lancastro.

Children of GEORGE OF PORTVGAL, Duke of Conimbra.


James, had also issue.

d'Avis, had likewise Children.

Septe.

James.

John of Setuval.

John of Setuval.

John of Setuval.

Natural Children of GEORGE Duke of Conimbra.
d'Avis.

Hierosme.

Augustine, and Bishop of Leiria.

14. JOHN DE LANCASTRO, Duke of AVEIRO, Marquess of Toursneuues, and Lord of
Montmor.
HE was eldest Son of George Duke of Conimbra, and of Beatrix de Melo his Wife.
The Title of Duke of Conimbra was not continued in his Person; But the King of
Portugal, Emanuel, showed his affection toward this illustrious Family, which
was so near to him, that he Created him Marquess of Toursneuues; and King John
III. raised him to the Dignity of Duke of Aveiro. By the Command of the same
King, he was to visit the Emperor Charles V. to Condole with him upon the
Death of his Empress Isabel the Infanta of Portugal.

He took to Wife JULIANA DE MENESES daughter of Peter de Meneses, third
Marquess of Ville-real, and of the Marchioness Beatrix de Lara his Wife.

Children of JOHN Duke of Aveiro.
Aveiro.

John de Silva, heiress of the House of Portalegre, and of Margaret de Silva
his Wife; from which Marriage descended their only daughter JULIANA, who dyed
young.

Dominick.

15. GEORGE DE LANCASTRO, second of the name, and second Duke of AVEIRO, and
Marquess of Toursneuues.
OF the two Children of John de Lancastro Duke of Aveiro, by his Wife Juliana
de Meneses, he was the elder; He accompanied King Sebastian in the Voyage of
Africa, His Death.
and was slain at the Battle of Alcacer, Portugal.

His Wife MAGDALENE GIRON, was daughter of John Tellez Giron Count of Urena,
and of Mary de la Cueua his Wife.

An only Daughter of GEORGE second Duke of Aveiro.
Aveiro, was married to her Cousin ALVARO DE LANCASTRO, as we shall show you
more at large hereafter.

14. ALPHONSO DE LANCASTRO, Great Commander of St. James.
HE was second Son of George Bastard of Portugal Duke of Conimbra, and of
Beatrix de Melo his Wife. He espoused YOLAND HENRIQUEZ daughter of John
Coutinho Earl of Redondo, and of the Countess Isabel Henriquez his Wife; by her
he had four Sons, and six daughters.

Children of ALPHONSO DE LANCASTRO.


Alcacer in Afric, in the Year, One thousand five hundred threescore and



James, and Governor of the Algarvies, had a Natural Son, which was,

16. JOHN DE LANCASTRO, a Monk of the Order of St. Augustine.







Toursneuues, and had issue CONSTANTINE, ALVARO, and other Natural Children.

15. ALVARO DE LANCASTRO, Duke of AVEIRO.
THis Duke was fourth Son of Alphonso de Lancastro Great Master of St. James,
and of Yoland Henriquez his Wife. He took to Wife JULIANA Duchess of AVEIRO,
only daughter, and sole heir of Duke George II. by Magdalene Giron his Wife: So
that the Duchy went not out of the Family. From this Marriage did descend
several Children.

Children of ALVARO DE LANCASTRO, and of the Duchess JVLIANA d'AVIERO his Wife.
Andrew Doria Prince of Melphi, and of Jane Colomna his Wife. But this Duchess
ANNE dyed without issue.

James.

Dominick.

Francis, in the Monastery of our Lady at Lisbonne.

Dominick, in the Abbey of St. John at Setubal.

14. LEWIS DE LANCASTRO, first of the name, Great Master of the Order d'Avis.
OF the four Sons of George Bastard of Portugal Duke of Conimbra, by the
Duchess Beatrix de Melo his Wife, he was the third. He was Sebastian, to the
King of Spain, Philip II. for to Condole with him upon the death of Prince
Charles his eldest Son, and also for the decease of his third Wife, Queen
Isabel of France.

He married MAGDALENE OF GRANADA daughter of the Infant John de Granada, by
Beatrix de Sandoval his Wife; which Infant was issued from the Blood of the
ancient Kings of Granada.

Children of LEWIS DE LANCASTRO, first of the name.




Braganza.

Sanctus, of the Order of St. James.



Callera.

15. LEWIS DE LANCASTRO, II. of the name, Great Master d'Avis.
HE was the eldest Son of Lewis de Lancastro first of the name, by the Infanta
Magdalene de Granada his Wife; and was of the Council of Estate to the Kings of
Spain, Philip II. and III. and Super-intendant of their Affairs. He dyed in the
Year, One thousand six hundred and thirteen; and was interred in the great
Chapel of the Monastery of Nuns of St. John at Setubal.

PHILIPPA DE MENESES his Wife, was daughter of James de Silveira second Count
of Sortella, by Mary de Meneses his Wife.

Children of LEWIS DE LANCASTRO, second of the name.


Alvito.

16. FRANCIS-LEWIS DE LANCASTRO.
HE succeeded his father and Grandfather Lewis II. and Lewis I. in the Dignity
of Grand Master d'Avis; and married PHILIPPA DE MENDOZA daughter of Manuel de
Vasconcellos, by Lucia de Mendoza his Wife.

Children of FRANCIS-LEWIS DE LANCASTRO.




15. JOHN DE LANCASTRO.
AMong the Children of Lewis de Lancastro first of the name, great Master
d'Avis, and of Magdelene de Grenada his Wife, he was the second; and had two
Wives.

His first Wife was PAULA DE TAUORA daughter of Lawrence Perez de Tauora, by
Katherine de Tauora his Wife.

His second Wife was PHILIPPA DE CASTRO, daughter of Alphonso de Castelblanco
Merino, Major of Portugal, and of Isabel de Castro; by her he had no issue; and
dyed in the Year, One thousand six hundred and fourteen. He lies buried in the
Monastery of St. Anthony, of the Order of St. Francis in the Province of Rabida.

Children of JOHN DE LANCASTRO by his first Wife.
DE MENESES, daughter of Roderick Tellez de Meneses, Lord of Ugnon: By her he
had issue

17. JOHN DE LANCASTRO.

Infidels at Mosambique.

Mont-Major the new.

LORDS AND COUNTS OF VILLAR.
9. DIONYSIUS OF PORTUGAL, Lord of CIFUENTES, Ascalona, and Alva de Tormes.
AMong the natural Children of Peter King of Portugal, one, PORTUGAL-VILLAR.
which was King John the First, came to an Absolute Fortune, being chosen King
of Portugal, after the Death of King Ferdinand; and another, which was this
DENIS, whom he begat by Agnes de Castro, made his Fortunes in Castille, where
he was Lord of CIFUENTES, and the other Seigneuries here abovementioned.

He took to Wife JANE OF CASTILLE, natural daughter of Henry II. King of
Castille and Leon.

Children of DIONYSIO OF PORTUGAL, Lord of Cifuentes, and of JANE OF CASTILLE
his Wife.
James, Commander of Oreia, continued the Posterity.

Colmeneraio, had also Children.

Tordesillas.

10. FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, Knight of St. James, and Commander of Oreia.
HE was eldest Son of Denis of Portugal Lord of Cifuentes, and lived in
Castille during the Reign of King John the second. He was twice married; his
first Wife being MARY DE TORRES, daughter of Ferdinand Roderick de Torres, Lord
of Villar and Escagnella, by Agnes Sollier his Wife.

For his second Wife FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL espoused ALDARA OSORIO.

A Son of FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, and of MARY DE TORRES his first Wife.
Torres, continued the Posterity.

Children of FERDINAND OF PORTUGAL, and of ALDARA OSORIO his second Wife.


12. FERDINAND, RAMIRO, and JOHN, dyed all without issue.

12. ALDARA OF PORTUGAL, Wife of LEWIS DE CALA-TAIUD, Lord of Prouencio.

12. JANE OF PORTUGAL, espoused to ALPHONSO-SANCHEZ DE CARUAIAL, Lord of Jodar
and Touarnela.

11. DENIS, or DIONYSIO OF PORTUGAL, Lord of TORRES.
HE succeeded not in the Lordship of Villar, for he dyed in the lifetime of
Theresa de Torres his Cousin German, she was daughter of Charles Lord of Villar
brother to Mary, Mother of this DENIS OF PORTUGAL, who espoused ISABEL FAXARDO
MANUEL, daughter of John Manuel, and of Mencia Faxardo; from which Marriage
came one only Son mentioned in the next place.

12. FERDINAND DE TORRES, and PORTUGAL, Lord of VILLAR, Donpardo, and Ecamella.
HE was only Son of Denis of Portugal Lord of Torres, and of Isabel Faxardo
Manuel his Wife, and was twice married.

His first Wife was MAGDALENE VILLEGAS, by her he had one daughter, named

Mexico.

The second Wife of FERDINAND DE TORRES, was BEATRIX DE LUXAN, by her he had
these Children following:





13. BERNARDINE DE TORRES and PORTUGAL, first of the name, Lord of VILLAR and
Donpardo.
AMong the Children of Ferdinand de Torres, and Beatrix de Luxan his second
Wife, this BERNARDINE was the eldest. He espoused MARY DE MEXIA daughter of
Roderick Mexia Lord de la Guarde and St. Fimia, by Mary de Ponce Lean his Wife.

Children of BERNARDINE DE TORRES, Lord of Villar.


15. BEATRIX DE TORRES, espoused to LEWIS DE CARUAIAL, Lord de las Velas, Jodar
and Touarnela.

14. FERDINAND DE TORRES and PORTVGAL, third of the name, first Count of VILLAR
and Donpardo, and Viceroy of Peru.
HE was Successor of Bernardine de Torres Lord of Villar his father, and was
employed by the King of Spain, Philip II. who created him first Count of Villar
Donpardo. He was Viceroy of Peru, and was twice married.

He espoused for his first Wife FRANCES DE CARUAIAL, daughter of Diego de
Caruaial, by Isabel Osorio.

His second Marriage was with MARY DE CARILLO DE CORDOUA, daughter of Fernandez
de Cordoua, by Isabel Cabeca his Wife.

Children of FERDINAND DE TORRES Count of Villar, and of FRANCES DE CARVAIAL
his first Wife.


James.







Children of FERDINAND DE TORRES, Count of Villar, by MARY CARILLO his second
Wife.
James.

Jaen.





15. BERNARDIN DE TORRES and PORTVGAL.
FErdinand de Torres and Portugal, first Count of Villar, and Frances de
Caruaial his first Wife, had for their eldest Son this BERNARDIN, who dyed in
the lifetime of his father, having married AGNES MANRIQUE, daughter of Goncalo
Mexia Marquess de la Guarde, and of Anne Manrique his Wife; and from their
Marriage came these Children following, viz.







Three Daughters Veiled Nuns.

16. JOHN DE TORRES and PORTVGAL, Count of VILLAR DON PARDO.
HE succeeded his Grandfather Count Ferdinand in the Earldom of Villar, being
eldest Son of Bernardin de Torres, by Agnes Manriques his Wife, and was made
Knight of the Order of Calatraua.

Of the two Wives he espoused, the first was ISABEL CARUAIAL daughter of
Alphonso Caruaial, and of Catharine Mexia Lady of Jodar and Touarnela his Wife.

His second Wife was MARY DE MENDOZA, daughter of Bernardin Suarez de Mendoza,
fifth Count of Corugua, and of his Wife Mariana de Bacan.

Children of JOHN DE TORRES and PORTVGAL, Count of Villar, by ISABEL CARVAIAL
his first Wife.


Real.

Children of JOHN DE TORRES and PORTVGAL, Count of Villar, by MARY DE MENDOZA
his second Wife.






15. FERDINAND DE TORRES and PORTVGAL.
OF the Five Children of Ferdinand de Torres and Portugal, first Count of
Villar, and of the Countess Frances de Caruaial his first Wife, this FERDINAND,
which was the fifth, was made a Knight of the Order of St. James, and married
GUIOMAR DE TORRES and CONTRERAS, daughter of Ruy Dias Torres, by Aldonce de
Gontreras his Wife; from which Marriage came two Sons and a daughter.

James.

Jaen.



10. PETER OF PORTVGAL, Lord of COLMENERAIO.
DEnis, Bastard-Son of Peter King of Portugal, left two Sons by his Wife Jane
of Castille, the elder of which was Ferdinand of Portugal, from whom the Lords
and Earls of Villar are descended; and the younger, this PETER OF PORTUGAL,
which some nevertheless suppose to be born before his brother: But however it
was, he espoused ISABEL HENRIQUEZ, by whom had a Son and a daughter, Viz.



de la Puebla and Orcaiada.

11. JOHN OF PORTVGAL, Lord of COLMENERAIO.
HE was the only Son of Peter of Portugal, also Lord of Colmeneraio, by Isabel
Henriquez his Wife, and took to Wife BEATRIX DE LAURENCANA; she was descended
from the Kingdom of Leon. They had issue three Sons and a daughter, Viz.



13. TERESA HENRIQUEZ OF PORTUGAL, espoused to PETER GONCALES DE MENDOZA.
John Lord of Colmeneraio, was an Ecclesiastic.

Priego, and had no issue by her.

Alphonso Lopez de Haro in his Book of the Nobility of Spain, Chap. IV.

FINIS.

