A SHORT ACCOUNT OF Dr BENTLEY'S Humanity and Justice, To those Authors who
have written before him: WITH AN HONEST VINDICATION OF THO. STANLEY, Esquire,
and his NOTES on Callimachus. To which are Added, Some other OBSERVATIONS on
that Poet.

In a LETTER to the Honorable CHARLES BOIL, Esquire. With a POSTSCRIPT, in
Relation to Dr. Bentley's late Book against him.

To which is added an Appendix, by the Bookseller; wherein the Doctor's
Mis-Representations of all the Matters of Fact wherein he is concerned, in his
late Book about Phalaris's Epistles, are modestly considered; with a Letter
from the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire, on that Subject.

-- quum repetitum venerit una
Grex avium plumas, risum Cornicla movebit,
Furtivis nudata Coloribus --
When all the Birds shall claim their own,
And every borrowed Feather's flown,
How mean the Jackdaw looks, for all is gone!
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
CVstom having made it necessary to give an Account to the Reader, of the
Design of a Book, when it is Printed, I profess, for my own part, That I had
some Struggles, and labored under some Doubts, whether I should publish these
Papers, because the Controversy seemed to me not to be of that Moment, to
create a Quarrel: But when I reflected, that Modesty and Good Nature were once
thought necessary Attendants of Learning, that Justice, and fair Distribution
of meum and tuum were indispensible Duties even of Natural Religion; and saw
those Rules so openly violated, I then thought my self bound to do right to
Truth.

Good Education was formerly believed a rational and sure Method to soften Men's
Tempers, and to take off the edge from their Passions; and he who had not
sacrificed to the Graces, was hardly allowed any Pretensions to Acquaintance
with the Muses: But of late a Set of Men are started up, wiser than their
Forefathers, who scorn to tread in the Old Paths, who covet By-ways never walked
in before; whose Notices are all New, their Methods of managing any Subject
they handle, all New; and yet talk as if what they affirmed were the Sense of
all Mankind; both of the former, as well as the present Age.

The Gift of Assuming may be reckoned a Virtue by the hasty and inconsiderate,
but unnecessary Censuring, and indecent Language, will always be accounted
Defects, if not Vices, by all the Men of good Thinking and good Breeding;
especially when the Ill-bred fall upon Persons of Condition and Figure, of good
Quality, and as good Learning: But above all, when the Aggressor is not content
to insult the Illustrious of these latter Ages, but presumes to violate the
Tombs, and disturb the Ashes of the Primitive Heroes, and among them, of an
Apostle, (to whom the Western World stands particularly obliged for his
Preaching and his Writings, and to whom this Island, if we are not wrongly
informed, stands more especially bound for a Visit) in despite of his Learning,
both Sacred and Profane, his great Labors, and his greater Sanctity.

It is requisite to affirm, since I understand Dr. Bentley lies under the Fate
of disputing Records, That the Manuscript Notes of Mr. Stanley, to be left for
some time in the Book-seller's hand, are the very individual Copy, some Years
since, put into Dr. Bentley's hand, which he used for some Weeks, before he
returned it (and it is credible, that the Marginal Asterisks are Dr. Bentley's
own) and may be easily compared with the Printed Copy. And if any Man's
Curiosity prompts him to make a further Search, it is not improbable, but among
the Bishop of Norwich's Manuscripts he may find more Notes of the same kind.

A short Dissertation is always most acceptable to the Generality of Readers,
and I admire that Excellent Fragment of the beloved Callimachus, That a great
Book is a great Evil; and therefore I trouble not the Reader any further.

Farewell.
TO THE HONORABLE Charles Boil, Esquire.
SIR,
1. WHen Dr. Bentley's Censure of the Epistles of Phalaris, and the Fables of
Aesop, came first into the World, I was somewhat surprised, to find a severe
Critic sowr'd into a Fit of unmannerly Rage, against an innocent Gentleman;
and handling a Controversy, in which the Safety of the Commonwealth of Letters
is scarce at all concerned, with so much Heat and Haughtiness, and so little
Regard to Truth and Justice. But when I considered the Man, and reflected
seriously upon the Style and Managery of his former Writings, my Wonder ceased;
and I began to despise an impotent Indignation, that evaporated into Smoke and
Noise. And in this Humor I should have continued, had not you thought the
Author worthy your Examination, both as to his Ueracity, his Manners, and his
Learning. The Learned Part of the Controversy you have managed with so great
variety of good Reading and Argument, and so much Genteel Wit, that I believe
your Antagonist will bethink himself seriously, before he replies. His want of
Veracity you have exposed and chastised, upon many undeniable Proofs, (to which
I shall add some others of Moment;) but his Singular Humanity, which was your
first Charge against him, you have but slightly touched, confining your Censure
chiefly to your own particular Case. This gave the Rise to these Observations;
for being a sincere Lover of Truth and good Nature, and in some measure, of
good Literature, I could not forbear expressing my Abhorrence, when I met with
an Author who was resolved to run a muck at all who had written before him; and
who under the covert of some Philological Knowledge, was bent to trample upon
all the Laws of Decency and good Behavior; and such I think Dr. Bentley to be;
in all whose Writings a common Observer cannot but Remark an Air of Pride and
Contempt, of scornful Censure and supercilious Correction: But this is not a
Subject fit to raise Admiration; for most Men generally pursue the first false
Methods they have engaged in. I confess, I have known a Beau leave off
dressing, when his Necessities deplumed him, and a Bully grow peaceable, when
he had been soundly beaten; but a Paedagogue is an irreclaimable Usurper; the
older he grows, the more Resty and Phlegmatic he is: His Looks are haughty,
his Mien imperious, his Behavior insolent, his Conversation surly and
contemptuous, his Dictates magisterial, and his Style affected and Bombast; and
you shall never convince him, that his Ferula is not a Scepter, and his Habit
the Imperial Purple, till Death seizes the incorrigible, imaginary Monarch. He
inverts the Story of the Sicilian Prince: He begins his Reign over the Boys at
Corinth, and transfers the Seat of his Empire to Syracuse; but every where he
plays the Sophist, and every where the Tyrant.

2. To fall upon a young Gentleman, who had adorned the Nobility of his Birth,
with a Nobler Stock of Knowledge; to rob him of his just Glory, the Reward of
his Studies, (only for affirming a strict Truth, unquestionably attested, and
expressing his Sense of the Affront put upon himself, and all other the
Well-wishers to Ancient Learning, in a much softer Style than the Rudeness and
Injustice deserved) to transfer the Title of his Labors to the Governor of
the College; and then to treat a Person of his Dignity, Worth, and Station in
the Church, the Head of one of the best Colleges in Europe, and to whose
Instruction and Care a great part of the Nobility of the Kingdom owe their
Education, as if he had been upon his own Level; and in truth, under that
Pretext, to depreciate a most Illustrious University, where himself, whilst he
resided there, was treated with most eminent Humanity, are Instances of such
singular Inhumanity, that none but Dr. B. who will not permit any Man to meddle
in the Affairs of the Commonwealth of Letters, except himself, and two or three
others, pretending Hyper-Criticks of his own Tribe, durst defend it.

3. And that I may not seem to commit the Crime, which I so justly censure, I
shall produce other undeniable Instances of his Rude Behavior to several Great
Men, who have been the Ornaments of their respective Professions, and reputed
the Blessings of Heaven to Mankind. The first Book, as far as I know, that ever
he published to the World, was his Epistle at the End of John Malela's
Chronological History; and in that Epistle, page 51.
his soft Temper and smooth Language are very conspicuous; though he publicly
declares, That he scorns hard Language, page 4.
because this mighty Conqueror is not used to trample on those that lie
prostrate at his Feet. He calls Aemilius Portus (who must be acknowledged to
have made many Mistakes; an Unhappiness, which all Men are subject to, and from
which few Learned Men are free) the greatest of Triflers. Nor can Gerhard
Vossius, and Johnsius (whom he elsewhere sprinkles with a few Drops of his
Favor) escape being treated with the like Language, who suffered themselves to
be deceived by Portus, and to be led into an Error through their Ignorance, of
which they ought to be ashamed. page 83.
The same most Learned Vossius he severely arraigns in another place, not only
of a great Mistake, but of leading others into it without Consideration and
Judgment. In the same Page he speaks of the most Learned Man of the latter
Greeks, Leo Allatius (to whom the World is so much obliged for many excellent
Writings of the Ancients, both Sacred and Profane, which he has published) as
if he were a Brute, not so much a Man, page 21.
as a Composition of ill Nature and Envy. He endeavors to prove Erasmus,
Scaliger, and Grotius, the most Famous Men of their several Generations, Men of
no Palate in Matters of Learning, or Fools, and accuses them of a most foul
Error, because they adhered to the Copies of Plutarch and Stobaeus, and
retained Jul. Pollux,. 3. c. 3. (...).
(...), as this new Aristarchus, wondering at the Stupidity of former Ages,
corrects the Reading; whereas, if we render it as Grotius does, by Artem
Carminum, or in Terence's Phrase, Artem Musicam, the Sense is plain, That Love
teaches a Man to be a Poet, who formerly had no Genius, nor Inclinations to
Verse or Music. What a mighty Tempest has he raised about a trifling
Criticism, of which a Volume as big as the Lexicographers he intends to
publish, will not be worth one Sicilian Talent, as he reckons them? page 26.
But though the World may have a mean Opinion of his Achievements, he is
resolved to go on, and extend his Conquests, not allowing either Florus
Christianus, Scaliger, Grotius, or any others, who have translated the Greek
Tragoedians, to have a true Understanding of the kind of Verse in which those
Ancient Authors wrote; averring moreover, that should they have published their
Fables in those times, when the Greek and Roman Learning were at their Height,
they would have been hissed off the Stage.

4. He speaks very coursely of Lilius Giraldus and Monsieur Menage, page 30,
40, 50, 53, 56, etc.
and takes occasion frequently to quarrel with, and correct Isaac Causabon, to
censure the Commentators on Pliny, and condemns Meursius of Ignorance. page 4.
Nay so fond is he of a little shrivelled Observation, about the adding or
taking* away of the Letter ( S) from the Name Hermagoras, that although
Quintilian, as he is printed, calls him Hermagora (which I thought a Creditable
Authority) and cites Cicero for it; He positively averrs, That he would not
give Credit to Tully himself, should he affirm, he had written so: Not to Tully
himself, the Master of Eloquence, and the Standard of good Language! This is an
Observation of a peculiar Complexion; and since he handles that great Orator so
Magisterially, it cannot be a Wonder if he calls Malela a Mule, and not a Man;
page 17.
a Word he might have spared, had it been only for his own sake, and his sweet
Friend to whom he writes; because it is observed of those Animals, that they
bestow their Civilities on their own Species, exclusive of all other; that they
Nabb none but those whose Shape and Noise are like their own; and could they
write, I am sure the Style would be Sublime, because suited to such an Exalted
Genius.

5. But to censure the Great Masters of Human Learning, is not a sufficient
Gratification to his Spleen; with equal Assurance he falls on the Eminent
Writers in Sacred Literature, and to convince the World that he despises
Numbers, in one breath he explodes whatever has been said by the Learned, page
97.
upon the Text of the Apostle to the Galatians, (not omitting the Venerable
Sages of the Primitive Church) and averrs, That all their Attempts have been so
far from explaining the Text, that they have left it more obscure; till he, by
an Extemporary Conjecture, (such is his Modesty) set the Paragraph in a clear
Light. But of this more hereafter. And in one short Bill he indites and
arraigns Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Theodoret, and in part,
Athenagoras, of Forgery; because the place of Sophocles, which they cite to
prove, that he believed there was but One God, is not in this Age to be found
in the Writings of Plutarch, Porphyry, or Stobaeus; as if We were Owners of all
the Works of Plutarch, or the greatest part of the Books of Porphyry were not
lost, (I fear irrecoverably, having been soon after their Author's Death
proscribed by Imperial Edicts, burnt and destroyed, a loss sooner talked of
than repaired) or that it were impossible, That Porphyry could have treated of
that Subject in any other of his Works, except that of Abstaining from things
that have Life. Or it were not well known, That the best Printed Edition of
Stobaeus is not so complete as the Vossian and other MSS. and that both Photius
and Suidas mention four Books of Collections made by him, of which we have not
three complete; or else, that it were impossible those most Learned Fathers
should have read any Books of the Ancients, which neither Plutarch, Porphyry,
or Stobaeus had seen. These are the Reasonings of this invincible Critic, and
upon such Demonstrations the Fate of the Primitive Church depends, whose
Worthies are summoned before a severe Tribunal, in which himself and his Friend
sit, despising and censuring the rest of Mankind; who are in their Esteem mere
Beccelenists, page 14.
Lunaticks, Men of no Judgment, or Skill in Critic; and we are obliged to his
unwonted Compassion for this extraordinary Observation, that now we know the
Duumviri who are destined to Govern the Commonwealth of Letters.

It is past all Disputes, that there have been a Set of Vain and Prodigal Men,
of some Learning, and greater Confidence, who out of an extraordinary, and
unaccountable Liberality, have sought to oblige Mankind with several Works
under other Men's Names, which the Authors never dreamed of. The Earliest Ages
of Literature were scarce exempt from such Impostors; and in the latter Times,
Annius of Viterbo, with his Antique Historians; Inghiramius, with his Etruscan
Antiquities; not to mention the finer Achievements of Sigonius and Muretus, in
that kind, are unquestionable Instances. But it is also as true, that in all
Ages there have been a Set of snarling Critics, who have found fault with
whatever has not suited their Palates; and decry'd many a Genuine Work as
spurious, because they did not understand it. Whereas, if such ill-natured
Observations be allowed to supersede the Authority of the Ancients, the Church
must be robbed of many of her Venerable Testimonies: One writes against the
Epistles, that passed between our Blessed Lord, and Agbarus, Prince of Edessa,
though preserved in the Archives of that City to the Days of Eusebius, who
published them; and by a few trifling Conjectures, fastens the Lie upon all the
old Church-Historians. A Second, fights against the Statue set up at Rome in
Honor of Simon Magus, and thereby endeavors to make the Reverend Justin
Martyr, either a Fool or a Falsifier. A Third, all at once runs down all the
Sibylline Oracles; which, though some of those we have are interpolated (no Man
questions,) and others Counterfeit, yet the Earliest Writers of Christianity
appeal to them: and Origin against Celsus, challenges the Heathens, to search
their own Books for them. Others will not allow the Story of the Legio
Fulminatrix, and studiously expose the Apologists for our Holy Religion, to the
Scorn of its Enemies; as if they had been Men of as soft Judgments, and as hard
Foreheads as the Modern Critics, and durst appeal to the Learned World, to
wise Emperors and Senates, and to most acute, as well as most imbittered
Adversaries; while their Citations are Forgery, and such as were of their own
Age.

But the Fathers are not his Noblest Quarry: He flies higher* and brings the
Learned and Rational Apostle, St. Paul, under his Pounces; for having
confessed, page 96:
That from almost the very Infancy of Christianity, the Text of the Epistle to
the Galatians, Chapter 4. Ver. 22. has exercised the Judgments of the most Learned
Men, who with Modesty and Deference to the Sacred Writings, tried how they
could make the Sense of the Apostle (whose Language is not always strictly
Grammatical) intelligible* Behold, the Dreaded Aristarchus, or rather, the
Mighty Alexander, (if any Prince may pretend to be greater than he, who spares
no one that comes under his Ferula) he cuts the Knot which he cannot untye, and
hectors the World into Belief, That those Words, ( Agar is Mount Sinai in
Arabia) were at first set as a Scholion in the Margin, and afterward crept
into the Text; and that so universally, that no one MS. in the whole World,
that he knew of, contradicts it; and could I allow my self to be Comical upon
the most serious of Subjects, it might be wished, That this Animadverter had
gone through the whole Sacred Code; for, at the rate he begins, he may easily
make that Accomplished Book (one of whose greatest Excellencies is, That it
contains a Complete System of Faith and Manners, in a small Volume) the least
of Manuals: But it is common to most Assumers, to make their own Imaginations
the Standard: Not only of Secular Truths, but also of Revelation.

How much better Advice did the Greek Synod give, as Allatius cites it, De
Cons. p. 897.
(I beg leave of Dr. Bentley to use an Author whom he decries) That as the
least Hair falling into the Eyes, does great mischief, and much impairs the
Sight; so the least Diminution or Addition to the Holy Scriptures, which are
the Light of our Feet, and the Guide of our Paths, cannot but be the occasion
of great mischief to the Church of God. But I cannot let this famous Criticism
pass, without presuming to give my own Opinion of the Text, which seems to me,
as the Old Copies read it, most accurate Sense, notwithstanding his, and his
sweet Brother-Critick's Determination, That the Mountain Sinai, and the Law
given from thence cannot be the same, (though why Sinai may not signify the
whole Body of Jewish Laws given on the Mountain, in the Phrase of St. Paul, as
well as the Words, Circumcision, Works, etc. elsewhere, include the whole
Jewish Polity, I profess I know not;) and I shall transcribe the Interpretation
of St. Cyril of Alexandria, who thus reads the Text; Homil. V. Paschal. p. 43.
(...) -- It is thus written, That Abraham had two Sons, the one by a
Bond-maid, but the other by a Freewoman; but the Son of the Bond-maid was born
after the Flesh, and the Son of the Freewoman was born by Promise, (or, as the
Word (...), may well be rendered, was a Child of Prophecy) (...), which two
Women are to be farther concerned in the Allegory; for these two Women are (or
represent) the two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, gendring unto Bondage,
which is Agar, (...), now this Sinai is a Mountain in Arabia, and bears Analogy
to the present Jerusalem, which is in Bondage with her Children; but the
Jerusalem, which is from above, is free. Now why it should not be allowed in
the Apostle, having begun his Parallel, to make a further Transition to the
Allegory; and as he expresses himself, first to compare Agar to Mount Sinai,
and then that Mount to Jerusalem, which was the Metropolis of that People to
whom the Law was given on the Mount; and then to compare Sarah to the New
Jerusalem, or Heaven, which is the Church and Mother of all Christians, I know
not. And the same Father has given this Imperious Censurer good Advice in the
same Homily, had he thought fit to read or follow it; page 45.
for he declares, That he admires, and with great Reason, the Force of the
Allegory; and professes, that it is madness to pretend to give a better, or more
accurate Account of it, than the Holy Apostle has done; that no Man ought to
think himself severely dealt with, if he cannot adapt all the Parts of the
History to the Allegory, since it is enough if Allegories agree in the main with
the things represented under them. In loc*
And St. Chrysostom says, That the Word Allegory, is used Catachrestically, to
signify a Type or Similitude, and subjoins, that Agar in Arabic is of the
same Signification with Sinai: And it is granted amongst the Philosophers, that
Arguments from Similitudes may be made use of, though they do not run on all
four.

By this time I thought I had done with this part of my Design, but I find my
self mistaken; for after the Magisterial Man has chastised the Moderns, the
Fathers, and St. Paul, he is pleased not to spare his most beloved Friend, Dr.
Hodey, page 4.
his Brother-Chaplain, and Brother-Critick, exposing his Exposition of the
Orphic Ericapaeus out of the Trifling Cabalists, with an Air peculiar to
himself, despising the Author as well as his Criticism, with an it is not my
Province to trample on what lies prostrate at my Feet; (and yet after all this,
himself gives no other, much less a better Etymology of the Word in
Controversy) and ridiculing his calling John the Historian of Antioch, by the
Name of Malela, page 84.
(as do also the very Learned Gerhard Vossius, the most Acute Critic
Archbishop Usher, as well as Constantine Porphyrogenneta the Emperor, and St.
John Damascene) whilst himself at the same time confesses, That this Dispute is
of no Value, nor worth a Wise Man's Time and Pains to part such Antagonists;
and how he has behaved himself with respect to Plato, Stobaeus, and Suidas; to
Mr. Seldom, Sir William Temple, and other modern Writers, in his Censure of the
Epistles of Phalaris, I need not mention, since you have done it so fully in
your Answer.

Thus it was remarked of Aretine, that he rallied all the World, and spared the
Almighty, only because he did not know him.

In Answer to this Charge, Dr. Bentley accounts for his extraordinary Humanity
to the Foreign Professors: Perhaps he means those now alive, and they are at
liberty to vouch for themselves: I Am sure I have proved, That those who are
already dead have little Reason to thank him; though by the Consent of Nations
the Grave has been allowed a Sanctuary, and common Humanity obliged Mankind not
to say any thing but what is good of such as cannot answer for themselves: it
being an Argument of the most Impotent Malice to insult over an Adversary, who
can no longer defend his Right; especially whilst, by the general Consent of
the Learned, such Eminent Persons as he despises, have been ranked amongst the
Illustrious of their several Ages.

These are a few Instances of Dr. Bentley's singular Humanity, and soft Temper;
and when I reflected that he had been in Holy Orders for some time before he
appeared in Print, I looked upon the Crime with the greater Detestation, since
all the Precepts of that Gospel, which he is concerned to vindicate, oblige
indispensably to the Practice of Meekness and Gentleness, to forgive injuries,
to bless them who curse us, not to bring railing for railing, but to do all
manner of Good, even then when we suffer all manner of Evil. And how suitable
to those Excellent Rules Dr. Bentley has managed his Province, who, unprovoked,
has challenged so many Worthy Men, I leave himself to be the Judge; but if he
either declines the Province, or resolves to declare for himself, Am. Marcel.
l. 22. c. 11.
let the Heathen Historian determine it; who, having remarked the Ill Nature of
George the Arian, Patriarch of Alexandria, and his accusing his Brethren to the
Emperor Constantius, professes an Abhorrence of his Procedure, because it was
contrary to his Christian Profession, which obliges Men to nothing, but what is
just and merciful.

The Mercifulness of his Inclinations the World has seen, and I shall now
account for his Justice; without which all the most extensive Charity, is
Extortion and Hypocrisy. You have undeniably demonstrated, that Vizzani and
Nevelet are Authors, whom he has rifled, and prided himself in their Spoils,
without owning his Obligation to the One, or the Other; Erecting Trophies to
his own Fame, as if what he had plundered, had been his own just Acquisition.
You have also taxed him with Falsifying his Promise to Sir Edward Sherburn,
whose Age, Quality, and Learning, challenge the Respect that is due to him; and
who could not without doing an Injury to himself, forbear reflecting upon the
ill Usage, in this Note, which himself wrote on the first Leaf of the Life of
Theodorus Manlius. Librum hunc MS. doctissimo D. D. Bentleyo commodavi sub hac
condition, ut MS. Domino Graevio mitteret typis mandandum; cum rogatu, ut de
me (tanquam Praestitore) mentionem faceret honorificam, quod Graevius omisit.

Edw. Sherburn.
May 8. 1694.

That he put the MS. into Dr. Bentley 's Hands, upon this Express Condition,
That an Honorable Mention might be made of the Gentleman, who first
communicated it to him. Graevius omitted doing this Justice to Sir Edw.
Sherburn, and as I am informed, takes the blame to himself; but how happened it,
That when the Book was published, Dr. Bentley neither in Person, nor by Letter,
purged himself from this Sin of Omission to Sir Edw. Sherburn; but was content
to have it pass uncensur'd, unobserved, had he not been publicly charged with
it.

It is a great Happiness to enjoy a Friend, who thinks himself a Sharer in the
Misfortunes of him he loves; and the Learned Graevius will, I doubt not, give
the World a Specimen of his tender Affection to Dr. Bentley; but some Accidents
may happen, which as they were not foreseen, so cannot be guarded against, and
wherein the Assistance of a Brother will prove useless. And such is the Charge
now to be exhibited; Mr. Edw. Sherburn makes a second Complaint, That having
generously lent Sir Thomas Stanley's Notes on Callimachus, to Dr. Bentley, the
Dr. has made great use of them, without ever so much as naming his Benefactor,
or the Author of those Acute Observations: The Learned Mr. Stanley's Name will
always be Venerable amongst the Lovers of Modesty and good Literature. His
Beautiful and Accurate Edition of Aeschylus has made him Immortal; and yet what
is Printed is but a small Portion of what he had written upon that Tragoedian,
V. Tom. 2. Cat. MSS. Oxon. p. 378.
his MSS. Notes on that, and other Authors, being still extant in VIII.
Volumes. For his Province was not confined only to that one Poet; he has left
behind Adversaria now in being, upon Sophocles, Euripides, Hesychius, and many
other Authors, and amongst them, Callimachus, whose Fragments Dr. Bentley
pretends to have digested, having published them in his own Name, in the late
Accurate Edition of that Poet by the Famous Graevius; and I doubt not but
hitherto the greatest Part of the Learned World believe, That all those
Collections are the Genuine Offspring of Dr. Bentley's own Brain; whereas, it
will be demonstrated, That they are of Mr. Stanley's Family; and himself cannot
be angry, if he be treated as he deserves, having publicly declared, Ep. ad
calc. Mal. p. 20. Non enim placet eorum ratio, qui cum merae Corniculae sunt,
emendicatis hinc inde plumis germanos pavones, se pollicentur.
That he hates those Jack-daws, who, having borrowed their Feathers, strut like
Peacocks.

It may seem a bold Undertaking, to call so absolute a Monarch to an Account;
but he who draws his Sword in this Cause, throws away the Scabbard; and the
World is to be convinced, though the Usurper will not, That he has a Broken
Title, and that all his Forces cannot defend him. It must be confessed, That
the Dr. has had such a peculiar Fondness for this his Issue, (his Fragments,
and Animadversions) that in common Conversation himself calls that Edition his
Callimachus; and requires all others to do so, treating the Dissenters with
insolent Scorn, and even the Book-binder fell under his Indignation, for only
Lettering some Books otherwise: Whereas, what he has published makes up but a
little more than the tenth part of the Book: And it is to be hoped, that he will
condescend to allow, That, to omit what had been formerly Printed, the
Illustrious Spanheim has done that Author some Service, both in his Collection
of Fragments, and in an entire Volume of Learned Annotations on that Poet.

But to return to Mr. Stanley: I shall prove, That his Locks were picked, and
his Trunks rifled; and that both Dr. Bentley's Method, in marshalling his
Fragments, a great part of his Notes on several Heads, and some of his
Animadversions, are taken from that very Learned Gentleman, and let the World
pass a Just Censure upon the Matter of Fact: The very individual Manuscript
will be left in Mr. Bennet the Bookseller's hands, for some time after the
Publication of this Treatise, that every Man of Learning and Candor, may, if
he please, compare the Copies.

It ought to be acknowledged, That Dr. Bentley, has made some Additions to Mr.
Stanley's Collections; and it must have been a Prodigy, if a Man who has sifted
the old Lexicographers, and Scholiasts, both Printed and in MS, should not have
found out some Passages which had escaped the Diligence of that Learned
Gentleman; of whose Notes it must observed, That they are an Imperfect Draught
of a more Complete Work: And I have been informed, that he left a much better
Copy behind him, which whether preserved or not, I cannot learn. But it is very
Remarkable, That, to manage the Affair dexterously, Dr. Bentley has in some
places (it may be believed wilfully, and to conceal the Fraud) inverted the
Order of the MS. but this will be remembered in due Time and Place; in the mean
while I shall transcribe Mr. Stanley's Method, and add some few Observations of
my own, leaving the Judicious Reader to give his Verdict upon the whole.

CALLIMACHI OPERA.
PEPI AGONON.
Harpocrat. Suidas.
(...) -- as in Dr. Bentley, p. 305.

This Citation of Suidas the Dr. has transcribed, (which Mr. Stanley only
hinted at) and given in words at length.

AITIA.
The two Epigrams out of the Anthology, are omitted by Mr. Stanley, with which
the Dr. makes a flourish; but the Epigram out of Martial is in Mr. Stanley's
Collections, MS. p. 3, 5.
and long before his time in the Collection of Janus Parrhasius, as are those
of Clemens Alexandrinus, from Parrhasius, to whom he is referred in the MS.
Notes he had his Information, that the Scholiast of Homer often cited that
Book: But probably he is angry with Parrhasius, for having given him good
Advice in the same Paragraph: Improbe profecto faciunt, qui tanquam fuci
alienis laboribus insidiantur, and quaecunque praeripere possunt, pro suis
ostentant; That he is heinously wicked, who steals from another, and boasts of
the ill-gotten Goods, as if they were his own. His two Quotations out of
Servius upon Virgil are transcribed from Mr. Stanley, verbatim: And his
Correction of Fulgentius Planciades, N. x. was needless; for why should he cite
a faulty Edition? As he does also in his Epistle at the End of Malela, p. 72.
when in that of Paris 1586. with the Notes of Gothofred, p. 559. the right
Reading is put in the Text, Jentaculum cibi degustatio, Callimachus. (...).
Jentaculum proferto (not proferre, as Dr. Bentley) Jovi, a Quotation from an
old Latin Version of that Poet, as I conjecture; for about (and perhaps long
before) that time, there were Translations of some of the old Poets,
particulary of Homer, whom Lactantius, or Lutatius Placidus cites in his
Commentary upon Statius; or perhaps Fulgentius himself made the Translation.

AITION A'.
The Citation out of Stobaeus, Mr. Stanley has given under the Head (...), and
12.13.14. are taken from Mr. Stanley, as is also the 17 th. the 18 th. from
Parrhasius.

'.
The 19. from Mr. Stanley, 20. from Parrhasius, to whom he was directed; 21.
from Mr. Stanley.

G'.
The 27, 28, 29. from Mr. Stanley.

D'.
32. from Mr. Stanley.

PEPI ANEON. APGOYS OIKISOI. APKDIA.
These two last are omitted by Dr. B. for what Reason I know not, but reckoned
amongst the Works of Callimachus by Suidas.

AKOS.
The 37. from Mr. Stanley, only miscited as to the Name, as the Dr. well
observes; but there was no need to have appealed to the MSS. for in the
Florentine Edition of Hephaestion, 1526.8 vo.
printed with Theodore Gaza's Grammar, the true Reading is given. (...). (for
so the word is read both in that old Edition, and in Mr. Stanley's Notes,) not
(...), as the last Edition reads the word. Nor is it but necessarily just to
mind the Dr. (who is presumed to have read all Authors in Critic,) That his
Quotation out of Terentianus Maurus was long since cited by Lactantius in his
Notes on Statius his Thebais, Lib. 3. Verse. 479.
and much more correctly, and to better purpose, thus: Branchi meminit
Terentianus de metris. Hymnum Branchiadae Phoebo cantasse Jovique
Pastorem Branchum, cum captus amore pudico
Fatidicas sorts docuit depromere Paean.
For as the Verses are now read, I cannot excuse them; Chronology it self will
not defend them, for Branchus could not sing a Hymn of Callimachus, (generally
called Battiades) who lived many Years before him; nor was he of that Country,
not an African, as Battus and Callimachus were, but a Thessalian, as says the
same Commentator, Branchus Thessalus fuit, dilectus Apollini, quem acriter
interfectum dolens templo and sepulchro consecravit, illinc Branchiades Apollo
dicitur. I question not therefore but Branchiades is the better Reading, it
carries its own Credentials with it. Nor is there any need of playing the
Corrector, and changing quum into quem, if this Reading be true; and to this
Head I question not but Number. 337. in the Doctor's Collection, ought to be
referred.

APAPIKA NOINA.
So Suidas gives the Title agreeable to Mr. Stanley's MS. but Dr. Bentley
having made the Citation his own, p. 349. has inverted the Order of the Words,
for what Reason, himself best knows. The Book was written, I question not,
after the Example of Aristotle (whose Treatise, under that Title) is cited by
Varro and Tully, and his Scholar Theophrastus.

GALATEIA.
N. 37. The Quotation out of Athenaeus is from Mr. Stanley's Notes.

GAAYKOS.
This Book of Callimachus is mentioned by Suidas, but omitted by Dr. Bentley.

ETHNIKAI ONOASIAI.
N. 38. from Mr. Stanley; but the Additional Criticism, That the Treatise
(...), was part of his (...), is an Observation of Dr. Bentley, for which I
profess my Obligations to him.

EKAL.
The Quotations out of Suidas, vv. (...) and (...), ( Frr. Bent. p. 315.431.)
are taken from Mr. Stanley's v. (...); as is that from the Etymologicon, from
Petronius Arbiter, Number. 40, 41. and the Scholiast of Callimachus, Number. 65. From
Olympiodorus, Number. 52. (with the Emendation of (...) into (...)) from Suidas,
Number. 42, 43, 44, 46. (with the Emendation of (...)) 49. (with the Correction of
(...) for (...), and the Reference to the Scholiast upon Apollonius) N. 50, 51.
(52. is accounted for) 53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60. as is also that Passage out
of Suidas, n. 66. ( cons. Stanl. MSS. p. 35.) It ought to be confessed, That
Dr. Bentley has made some Additions of his own, to what was collected to his
Hands so readily: But withal, he ought to be put in mind, That notwithstanding
his Accuracy, his great Diligence in searching after the Fragments of
Callimachus, and Strictness in Correcting the Failures of others, Mr. Stanley's
MS. directed him to two other Fragments of that Admired Poet, in Suidas, which
he has omitted, and therefore I shall insert them in this their proper Place.
The first is V. (...).

(...) (...). The Second is, V. (...). -- (...)
(...). --
To which may be added a Third, reckoned by Dr. Bentley among the Fragments,
not to be reduced to their proper Classes, and imperfectly cited from the
Author of the Etymologicon Magnum (Nicas some call him, particularly Politian,
and Isaac Vossius, who had a Noble Manuscript of that Lexicographer, much
larger than that which is printed: This Opinion M. Menage in his Anti-Baillet
expressly opposes; Goldastus says his Name was Megalus, and confirms his
Assertion, by the Authority of two Valuable Manuscripts, in which the Title
runs thus; (...), Megalus being a proper Name well known among the Greeks; but
let who will be the Author, it is undoubtedly Ancient, being often cited by
Eustathius upon Homer, under the Title of the Great Etymologicon, (...); L. 3.
c. 4.
) whereas Natalis Comes, from whom Mr. Stanley transcribed it, ( p. 7.29.)
heartily acknowledging to whom he was obliged had published a larger Fragment,
and affixed it to the Poem to which it belongs.

Is autem nummulus (naulus) Danace a Graecis dicebatur, sicuti testatur
Callimachus his carminibus in Hecate; (Mr. Stanley reads it Hecale, as it
ought; Hi versus a Natali Comite rectius citantur, and ad Hecalen pertinent.)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Idcirco nulli naulum portare feruntur, etc.
as Natalis Comes translates 'em; from what MSS. he had the Original, I know
not; but, it is well known, he had read many which few others ever saw. The
Verses relate to the Inhabitants of the City Hermione, who pretended an
Exemption from paying Charon his Naulus, when they were wafted into another
World. Some other Fragments of the same Author, not mentioned by Dr. Bentley,
will be inserted hereafter.

ELEGEIA.
The Quotation out of the Etymologicon, number. 67. is in Mr. Stanley, who also
adds the Fragment in Hephaestion, (mentioned by Dr. B. n. 192.) which probably
is to be reduced to that Head.

ELEGIA DE COMA BERENICES.
Under which Head having remarked, That Catullus translated it, Mr. Stanley
subjoins, Ad hoc carmen pertinere videtur Fragmentum a Scholiaste Apollonii
laudatum,

(...) --

which Dr. Bentley, without naming his Benefactor, has confidently made his
own, p. 434.

EPINIKION ELEGIAKON EIS SOSIION.
Athen. p. 144. E. which Dr. B. has transcribed, number. 69.

ELPIDES.
From Suidas after Mr. Stanley, Dr. Bentley inserts it, number. 68.

EP.
Mr. Stanley from Stobaeus, p. 585. cites the first Book, which Quotation Dr.
Bentley has made his own, number. 11. and for (...) reads (...), (not improbably)
although Suidas assures us, V. (...).
That there was an Epic Poet, called Callimachus, the Nephew of the Famous
Callimachus by his Sister Megatima, who wrote (...), which perhaps was the
Work, which is ascribed to his Uncle, under a like Title, and from thence
probably came the Mistake; for I should be very unwilling to lay any great
stress upon the Marginal Citations of the Names of the Authors from whom
Stobaeus made his Eclogae, because in the old Edition of that Author, (...).
set out by Johannes Franciscus Trincavellus, in 4 to. Ann. 1535. (which Victor
Trincavellus dedicates to the Learned Cardinal Bembo.) This very Tristich is
fathered upon Euripides.

EPIGPAATA.
When Dr. Bentley treats of the Epigrams of Callimachus, he has, I doubt not,
studiously omitted those entire ones, which had been collected by others, and
printed with his other Poems, and consequently balk'd several Quotations of Mr.
Stanley; but withal, I know no Reason, Why he should have neglected the
Authors, who gave their Opinion of these Epigrams, to whom the MSS. directed
him; As, for instance, that of Atilius Fortunatus, de Priapeio metro. Nam
proprio commate Callimachus in Epigrammatibus usus est, and Bacchylides in
carminibus, and alii. And that of Martial, Lib. IV. Epigr. 23. Dum tu lenta
nimis, diuque quaeris, etc. As likewise that Epigram, published by Mr. Juret,
Paris. 1690. p. 2.
among the Epigrammata Veterum, with this Title, CALLIMACHI.
Imagini inscriptum Jovis.
Quaenam haec forma Dei? cur versa est? fulgura lucis
Divinae non fert debilis haec acies, etc.
which, if I am not mistaken, the late Editors of Callimachus have not
mentioned; especially Dr. Bentley, who has, among others, given us an Account
out of an old Author, attacked to Censorinus, concerning Callimachus, while
himself confesses, That the true Name of the Poet is Callinus. A Critic so
curious in what did not belong to his Poet, might have been so careful, as to
have acquainted the Learned World with what was genuine, and presumed to be
truly his Author's.

I will not undertake to prove, That another Epigram, cited by Natalis Comes,
L. 7. c. 15.
belongs to Callimachus, which gives an Account of the Muses, and their several
Inventions in Music and Poetry. I shall only mention it, and leave the Learned
to judge, Whether that Italian Author was Critic sufficient to determine the
Controversy. It begins, (...)
(...), etc.
But I will return to my Province. Mr. Stanley having taken care to transmit to
Posterity, N. 72. of Dr. B. out of Athenaeus, and N. 142. which he reckons
among the Fragments of the Epigrams, and which seems very likely, and that the
Title of the last was, as Suidas averrs, (...), as his despised Aemilius Portus
had corrected his Author, though Dr. B. who takes it from him, takes no notice
of it (not to mention his changing (...) into (...); whereas, both words are
genuine) and under the same Head adds the Quotation in Plutarch. Sympos. Lib.
5. c. 3.
(...), etc. which Dr. Bentley, Number. 103. reckons among those Fragments, of
which we are uncertain to what Book they appertain; but Mr. Stanley has left a
probable Conjecture; Cogitandum annon ad (...) haec pertineant, an ad librum
(...), as is most likely? And that the Reader may judge, whether the
Corrections ((...)) be Dr. Bentley's, I will transcribe the Fr. from the MSS.
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
Then follows the Quotation out of Stephanus, de Vrbibus, which Dr. B. has
omitted, but inserted in his Notes on the entire Epigrams. (...). with that of
a more ancient Author out of Suidas; which he thus corrects, and the Reader is
left to compare it with Number. 71. -- (...)
(...).
--.....
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
and to pass his Judgment upon the Doctor's Assertion, p. 326.
Quae antea corruptissima foeliciter nunc restituimus. While Mr. Stanley with
much Modesty subjoins, For these Verses of Callimachus, I conceive them thus;
So far as they are different from the Words of the Author, whom Suidas
transcribes, who perhaps was Aelian de Providentia, most of which Book, I
believe, is in Suidas.. 1526.8 vo.
Steph. (...), as it is, Number. 75. (...). contra Meurs. in Antig. c. CXLIV.
(...). --

(...).

which Dr. Bentley well observes to be a part of the forementioned Treatise,
to which Head also the (...), cited by Antigonus, is to be referred, (which Mr.
Stanley believed a distinct Work) upon the Fragments of which Dr. Bentley has
bestowed very commendable Pains; but I cannot acquit him either of being
vainglorious, p. 328.
or a Plagiary, when he averrs, That himself was the first who restored those
Noble Fragments to their true Author, (de Callimacho, opinor, haud male meritus
sum, qui primus tam luculenta (...) illi restituo) whereas Mr. Stanley, with
less Assurance, had affirmed the same thing. Antig. c. CXLIV. (...), MSS. p. 15.
etc. quibus ex verbis omnia quae sequuntur usque ad finem libri (viz. a cap.
144. ad cap. 189. inclusive) ex Callimacho deprompta esse conjicere licet. And
with Mr. Stanley agrees the Learned Johnsius, who deserved a much better Fate
than that of a Paedagogue: In his second Book of the Writers of Philosophic
History, chap. 12. p. 176. he advises his Reader to consult Antigonus, in his
144, and the following Chapters, Stephanus, Pliny, and Suidas; and it is plain
by the Comparison, That Dr. B. followed his Advice, although he will not own the
Kindness, and has neglected to insert in its due place the passage in Phlegon
Trallianus, c. 4. de Mirab. concerning the Fate of Tiresias, to which he was
directed.

IAOI ET XOLIAOI.
The Quotation out of Clem. Al. is in Mr. Stanley, and so is that from Strabo,
with the third out of Plutarch, with the Correction (...), (Number. 86.) and
another from Clemens, Number. 87.) with those of the Scholiast on Pindar, Number. 77.
and 80. of Zenobius, Number. 79. of Suidas, Number. 82, 84, 92. of the Etymolog. Number.
96. of Ammonius, N. 93. with the Corrections which the Dr. calls his own. And
under this Head Mr. Stanley ranks Number. 299. in Dr. Bentley's Collection, with
this Note, Ad Choliambos isthaec refero. In N. 86. the Correction of (...), was
long since made to his Hands; and whether (...) be not a genuine Reading, and
(...) be not as likely as (...), I refer him to Sam. Petit's Miscellan.
Observat. L. 1. c. 2. p. 9, 10. --

IIS
(...).

Ovid.

(...).

Here Dr. Bentley inserts (...). with the Fragment, Number. 101. out of the
Learned Scholiast on Aristophanes. But that also was brought to his Hand, by
the Editor of the Epistles of Aristaenetus, (Epist. 10. p. 219, 220.) who gives
his Opinion, That whatever is of Excellency in that Epistle, is borrowed from
Callimachus, whose Poem, de Acontio, so he calls it, is lost to us, though
extant in the Times of Aristaenetus.

(...). (...). (...) (...), vel (...). The Citations out of the Etymologicon
magnum, the Scholiast upon Apollonius Rhodius, Athenaeus and Aelian are
collected by Mr. Stanley, who subjoins with great Judgment, the Fragment in
Antigonus de mirabilibus, which very likely belongs to the Book de Avibus,
although Dr. Bentley has placed it among the uncertain Fragments, N. 321.
ascribing it to Callimachus of Cyrene, while Mr. Stanley modestly makes a doubt
of it; because Antigonus calls him an Egyptian. Qu. Annon hic Callimachus
Aegyptius? Antigon. Hist. mirabil. c. LI. (...). -- (...). Why so plain a
Passage should be transported, let the Reader judge.

PINAKES
Etymolog. in (...), p. 408. F. which Fr. Dr. Bentley reckons under the Title
of (...). (...). Athen. p. 585. B. which Dr. Bentley has also made his own.
(...). Athen. p. 643. E. Schol. Pind. p. 201. huc refer, quae Harpocration. V.
(...). To these Dr. Bentley has added some others of his own, but omitted the
Observation of Harpocration in V. (...), mentioned by Mr. Stanley, which, I
doubt not, belongs to this (...), and inserted it elsewhere. (...).

(...).

(...).

These Books, I question not but Mr. Stanley reserved for his second Thoughts;
but what cannot at present be found of his Notes, has been largely supplied by
the abovenamed Johnsius; l. 2. c. 5.
who with true Judgment and Accuracy has treated of these Catalogues, Indices,
or Tables of Callimachus, and collected the greatest and best part of those
numerous Quotations, which adorn Dr. Bentley's Edition. The Order, which that
very Learned Critic (a Title which no Man will deny to Johnsius) observes, is
very Regular and Beautiful: He affirms, in the first place, That Callimachus in
those Books has most excellently illustrated the History of Letters, of
Learned Men and their Works (of all sorts; for as Athenaeus informs, he
accounted for the Writings of Chaerephon and Corybion about Suppers; and of
Aegimius, and Egesippus, Metrobius and Phoetus about the Ways of making Cakes;)
giving an Account, First of their Names (which Work was of great use to
Demetrius Magnes, when he wrote his Book (...);) Then of their Lives (to which
part of the Work he ascribes the Life of Homer, which Tatianus says he wrote:
Cont. gent.. 48.
) In the next place of their Books (particularly of the Orators or
Rhetoricians) and their true Titles, and the beginning of each Treatise (an
Undertaking of extraordinary Advantage to future Ages) with Animadversions upon
the doubtful Books; to what Author they truly belong, and the Number of the
several Verses, or (...), of each Book; and Indices of those Authors, who have
written upon one and the same Subject; all which Particulars Johnsius affirms
to have appertained to Callimachus, (...), etc.

Then he proceeds to consider the second Pinax, or Catalogue of those who wrote
Fables, according to the Series of Time: In which, First, He treated of the
Poets; Secondly, He fixed the several Ages in which they lived; Thirdly, He
gave a Catalogue of their Fables or Plays; with the true Title of each Play, a
short History of the Plot and Management, and the Year in which it was Acted;
with a further Relation of the other Plays of the same Poet which were never
brought upon the Stage; Which were Genuine, which Spurious; and to what Author
the Anonymous Verses, that occurred in Books, did belong.

The third Pinax, which Johnsius considers, is his Account of the Works of
Democritus, and the unusual Words that occur in them; upon which the Reader may
find many Curious Observations (though Dr. Bentley says nothing) if he will
consult the Book: p. 14.
And for this Digression I shall beg pardon (though to me it seemed not
unnecessary) when I have anticipated an Objection, that might be raised in the
Doctor's Defense, that perhaps he had not seen that Accurate Treatise of the
Writers of the Philosophic History, number. 390. p. 433.
for himself mentions the Author, under the Title which he merited from all
Lovers of Polite Literature, of the most learned Johnsius; but to conceal his
transferring the Correction of Antimachus for Callimachus into his own Store,
he Cites the Passage out of Eusebius, whereas in the Edition of Tatianus from
whom Eusebius had it, the Names are, as they ought to be read. (...). vel ut
Strabo, p. 397. (...), whence Dr. Bentley has his Fragment. (...).

(...),

out of the Scholiast upon Apollonius, to whom Hardvin had referred him in his
Notes on Pliny. (...). Athenaeus, p. 669. E. (for it is Athenaeus, whom Mr.
Stanley so often quotes without a Name, referring only to the Passage) whom Dr.
B. refers to, p. 353.

Huc spectare videntur, quae Harpocration habet in (...), for which consult Dr.
Bentley, page eadem.

SATYPIKA DPAATA, TPAGODIAI.
f. (...), perhaps one of those Tragedies was called by the Name of Daedalus,
from whence Stephanus de Vrbibus cites this Passage, (...). but Dr. Bentley
will not allow this to be the true Reading, because the MSS. read the Word
(...). But this I can aver, That the old Edition of Aldus, Ann. 1502. that of
Xylander, and the others of a later Impression, own the World (...). Nor is
there any Cause of Wonder, That Callimachus, a most Voluminous Author, who
wrote more than 600 Treatises, and among them Tragedies, should publish a Play
under the Name of Daedalus, whereas Sophocles and Aristophanes both expressly
treated of the same Subject, as Julius Pollux and Hesychius would have informed
him.

KOODIAI. YNOI.
Six of which Hymns are extant, as Dr. Bentley confesses, and yet, Number. 391.
cites out of Athenagoras (he might have added Clemens Alexandrinus, v. 8.9.
and others) the known Passage out of the Hymn in Praise of Jupiter, as if it
were not known, to what Tractate of Callimachus it did appertain.

(...), etc.

It must be confessed Mr. Stanley mentions it, but it must withal be affirmed,
That he had upon second Thoughts expunged it, as he did another out of Suidas,
v. 3.9
v. (...) concerning (...), which was taken out of the same Hymn.

(...).

The Passages out of Athenaeus and Harpocration, are transcribed from Mr.
Stanley; the other two out of the Scholiast upon Apollonius, and Eustathius
upon Homer, are the Product of Dr. Bentley's own Observation in Reading the
Ancients.

Thus I have passed through many of those Fragments, that are capable of being
placed in their several Classes; and it would be infinite, as well as
unnecessary Labor, to examine, compare, and fix the Straglers; some of which
have been already censured; and for the rest the Reader may, as his
Inclinations lead him, collate the MS. Copy; in which great Variety offers it
self out of Athenaeus, the Lexicographers, and Scholiasts, with what has been
lately published; while I shall only mention a few of the Corrections that
occur in Dr. Bentley's Annotations, which are also taken from Mr. Stanley's
Notes.

Dr. Bentley in his first Note on the Hymn in the Praise of Jupiter, ( v. 3.)
has corrected the common Reading, and for (...) with truth reads (...), from
the Etymologicon magnum, but with equal Truth he ought to have confessed, That
Mr. Stanley had accommodated him with the Emendation, with the Citations out of
the Etymologicon, and Hesychius, and referred his Reader, for further
Satisfaction, to his Notes on the Prometheus of Aeschylus.

In his second Animadversion (on v. 13.) where he changes (...) into (...),
upon the Authorities of the old Scholiast, and the Edition of Aldus, with the
like Examples from Callimachus himself, in his Hymns in Honor of Diana, and
Delus, all is transcribed from Mr. Stanley's Excellent Notes.

His third Note on the same Hymn, is much of the Complexion with that of Mr.
Stanley, as are others, that follow; but I shall only mention the Correction on
v. 18. in Lavacrum Palladis, of (...) into (...), taken from p. 97. of the MSS.
the Quotations out of the Author of the Etymologicon, and Lactantius (...),
borrowed from the same Person, p. 101. and conclude, That the Animadversion on
v. 135. hymni in Cererem, from the Lexicographers, the Etymologicon, and
Hesychius, concerning (...), are taken from Mr. Stanley, who adds, That in the
oldest Edition of Callimachus in great Letters, the words are thus read, (...);
so that there was no need of Conjectural Correction, when the Reading was
supported with so good an Authority, as the Ancient Copy.

The Fragment, Number. 209. int. Bentleian. will be better understood by the
Commentary of Natalis Comes Lib. 11. chap. 23. Apud antiquos fuit etiam in more
positum, ut jurantes massam ferri igniti manibus sustinerent rogarentque Deos,
ac precarentur, ut illud juramentum stabile, firmumque esset, donec illa in
aquis supernataret, quam mox in profundum dejiciebant, which he transcribes
from the Commentator of Sophocles, whom Dr. B. had consulted, but quotes
abruptly, without giving the account of the Custom, and so will the Fragment N.
223. If the observations of Salmasius in Inscript. Herod. of Isaac Vossius upon
his excellent Mannuscript of Julius Pollux be reflected upon, and particularly
the Critic of Mr. Stanley, upon that verse page 26. Who declares the passage
in Pol-Pollux to have been corrupted, and restores it by the help of the
Etymologicon Magnum, and Hesychius; nor was the old Translator wanting to the
true rendering of (...) Pluto Aristophanes, which Dr. Bentley calls his own.

The Critic upon N. 85. is taken from Salmasius de usuris, p. 494. to whom Mr.
S. had referred him p. 24. only he Reads (...) for (...) which might have been
spared. And the reading (...), N. 148. is from the same Author, p. 27. (...)
for (...) N. 242. which Dr. B. assumes, is taken from the MSS. of Ammonius. To
which I shall add a probable Correction or two of some other Fragments. Number.
128. Suppose it were read thus, -- (...), and silentes sedere. Hesych. (...),
and the Pythagorean silence is too well known to be disputed, though I do not
dislike Henry Stephens's Reading, (...). I am sure (...) in Dr. Bentley's sense
is a pure Anglicism, and I cannot think Callimachus pretended to our Language.
Number. 200. Dr. Bentley reads it (...), etc. and solus adolescentum comedebat
tutorem (one of the worst of Crimes, and worthy the Doctor's considering); but
suppose we read (...), i. e. as Julius Firmicus seems to render it. Saturnus
regno timens devorat filios. The Story is well known; and (...) accurately
agrees to an immortal Race, as they were supposed to be.

I have not introduced this Detayl of Particulars out of any disrespect to Dr.
B's. Person, or performances in learning, much less from a disregard to true
Criticism, who heartily wish, that all the Faults in the eminent Authors of the
best Ages of Literature were corrected: But to do justice first to the Manes of
the learned Mr. Stanley, and to restore him to that Honor, which he has
merited, in hopes that in the next Impression of the Works of Callimachus, the
World may be informed, to whom they stand obliged for so many accurate, and
useful observations; then to that worthy Gentleman Sir Edward Sherburn, to
whom the Dr. owes his grateful acknowledgments though he is content to stifle,
and suppress them, for many Favors (for so I call all the assistances given to
any Man's Studies, as in truth they are, greater than Money or Titles, for
those generally make a man Proud, and Impertinent, whereas these make him truly
Wise) particularly his Loan of Mr. Stanley's Notes on Callimachus; and in the
last place to do Justice to Dr. B. himself, who professes himself very tender
in this Point, and to abhor the name of a Plagiary; for in his Appendix to John
Malela, p. 4.
he stands upon his guard, and Solemly declares, that whereas he could Amasse a
greater heap of collections concerning (...), etc. that he forbore lest he
should be accused of citing, what Paulus Leopardus had beforehand observed upon
the Subject. But the Emendations of that accurate Flanderkin were well known to
learned Men, and well read, and would easily have been distinguished by their
Marks if alienated. Nay so nice is he in his management, that in the same Book,
p. 45.
he accuses even his best benefactor, Mr. Stanley for quoting an old Scholiast
in his Life of Aeschylus, which he borrowed from Julius Caesar Bulengerus the
Jesuit, without nameing him. Now can any man it his Wits think an Author sound
in his Mind, who after he had made such bold challenges, and so freely past his
censures on the worthy part of Mankind should by undeniable Proofs be convicted
a Notorious Plagiary; it is an affliction, that he was not taken in the Fact,
but it is not too late to convict him; who professes, to have observed such
things, as have escaped the Observation of others, that it is impossible for
the best Wits to hit not only upon the same sense but the same Words; Dissert.
p. 36.
and that the Province of a true Critic obliges him to adjust every Book, and
every Paragraph to its right Author. And it were to be wished he had kept up to
his Protestations.

This undertaking therefore I call doing justice to Dr. B. both because I know
as a Divine he is satisfied, that it is a standing Rule of Christian Justice, to
do to others, as we would they should do to us, that this is the Law and the
Prophets. (That it is both Ingenuous as well as equitable to be grateful, and to
Confess, by whom a man Profits) and perhaps it may be also an act of true
Charity to him, to bring him to know himself, which was the best Maxim of the
Heathen Philosophers; to incline him to a love of good Breeding, as well as
good Learning (which generally accompany and support one the other) for it is a
prodigy, and Monstrous to see a young Man and a new writer, at his first
appearing into the world, and who professes his dread of the Teeth of the
Critics, and their dogged eloquence (while it appears, page 57.
he only intended to reserve the privilege to himself, and therefore
discommended it as a sharp-set Stomach at a scanty Table dispraises a good dish
of Meat, that he may have the pleasure of enjoying it alone; nor do I envy him
his Voluptuousness) to throw down his Gantlet, and challenge all mankind, and
to insult every one, who comes in his Way, particularly in his two discourses
about Malela's History, and Phalaris's-Epistles, wherein he endeavors to fix
himself upon more than one Pedestal, which belonged to the Illustrious Persons,
whose Statues he has thrown down, and where the Reader will be entertained
according to the Rules of true Method, as well as true Breeding.

His Epistle at the end of Malela is a confused Rhapsody, the Order of his
discourse about Phalaris's Epistles you have well considered, and judiciously
selected and sorted the materials; the regular digestion of the Works of
Callimachus Mr. S. had made, but when the Dr. is solely under his own
Government, he naturally, or through inadvertency, transgresses the Rules of
Method; few Men would have thought, but that such an exact observer of times of
the Original of rites and customs; of the rise, flourishing, and and Deaths of
Great Men (that upon that Foundation he Builds most of his Arguments against
the Epistles of Palaris, and the Tables of Aesop,) should, when he undertook to
give a Catalogue of the Authors, p. 403.
who have given their Testimonies to Callimachus, have demonstrated his
Accuracy in the several Ages of Learned Men, and not placed Lucian, Proclus,
and the unknown Writer in Suidas (who, I question not, is Damascius, in his
Life of Isidorus, out of whom we have large Fragments in Photius and Suidas)
before Strabo; so in his celebrated Sermons, in the third and last Part, he
treats of the Structure before he treats of the Origin of Humane Bodies.

In those Lectures, I do profess, there appears much good Learning and some
good Argument; but every sort of Proof does not immediately commence
Demonstration; and I shall never be easily persuaded to believe, that it is
necessary to confute the Atheist to affirm as a Theological Truth, That every
Star is a World, and every one of those Worlds inhabited; which, though I
think, may be true, yet I do not think infallibly so; nor are those Ancient
Sages to be despised, who asserted much different Hypotheses of the State of
the Heavens, especially the Fathers, who defended Christianity from other
Topics, and thought themselves able to prove the World not to have been
Eternal, without affirming the Sun to be immovable, and the World that we live
in, a Planet.

I am sensible I have digress'd too far; and return to Callimachus, to fulfill
my Promise. I expected, when I looked on the last beautiful Edition of that
Poet, to have found every little Passage of the Ancient Writers, wherein but
his Name was mentioned, gathered to my hands by Dr. Bentley, but I have met
with a few, which, I presume, he either had not seen, or forgotten; and because
I am persuaded, it will not disserve the Learned World, I shall insert them.

I.
Suid. v. (...), etc. formerly cited at length, page 42.43.

II.
Id. v. (...), etc. at large in the same Page. And these two Quotations from so
known a Lexicographer incline me to believe, that the Remark is very true, p.
245. of your Learned Examination of his Dissertation, that he is got no further
than the Letter (...) in Suidas.

III.
Natal. Comes's Citation out of Callimachus Hecale, accounted for already, page
44.

IV.
Lactant. Placidus, in Statii Thebaid. lib. IV. verse. 46. Neris montis nomen
Argivi, ut ait Callimachus; which Passage, I believe, is taken from his Book of
the Foundation of Cities, Islands, and the Change of their Names. (...), to
which Treatise I would also refer all those Passages in Pliny, cited by Dr.
Bentley, N. 392, 393, 394, 395, 397, and 398; in which there is an express
mention of the Change of the Names of those Places. But I am of Opinion, That
the Fragment, Number. 399. may belong to Callimachus the Statuary, whom Pliny
mentions, lib. 5. though Hardvin, whose Indices directed Dr. Bentley to those
Quotations, be of his Mind.

V.
Diomedes Grammat. lib. III. p. 382. Edit. Putschii; Quod genus carminis
(Elegiacum) praecipue scripserunt apud Romanos Propertius and Tibullus, and
Gallus, imitati Graecos Callimachum and Euphorionem.

VI.
Atil. Fortunatianus, de Priapeio metro, apud eund. p. 2676. Proprio commate
Callimachus Epigrammatibus usus est, and Bacchylides, and alii; This Fragment
ought to be placed under the Title (...), as I have formerly observed under
that Head.

VII.
Id. p. 2680. de Saturnio Versu. Nostri existimaverunt, proprium esse Italicae
regionis, sed falluntur -- apud Euripidem, and Callimachum, inveni tale genus,
Turdis edacibus dolos comparas, Amice.

VIII.
Vid. Rodig. antiq. lect. l. 13. c. 1.
Caecil. Minutianus Apuleius ait, Corvinum ab Ovidio appellatum fuisse Ibin,
and avis foeditate, cui ventrem rostro purgare insitum sit, and hoc ex
Callimachi imitatione. The same Reason is given by the Anonymous Scholiast, on
that dark Poem of Ovid, set out by Salvagnius Boessius, who in his Prolegomena
to that Book, has inserted the Epigram out of the Anthology (which Dr. Bentley
has transcribed, Number. 2.) with the Emendation of (...) for (...), (claimed as
his own by the Doctor) while he confesses, That the admirable Critic
Eustathius reads it (...). In those Prolegomena also is to be found the Epigram
of Martial upon the (...), and in those, and the Notes of the abovementioned
Salvagnius, are many other good Observations; which Dr. B. has read.

I know not whether it be worth the while to add, That the Fragment, N. 27. Ed.
Bent. is in three several places quoted by Priscian, though the Doctor mentions
but one.

IX.
Lactant. Placid. in Statii Thebaid. lib. 11. verse. 258. Arcados Euhippi
spolium.] Euhippus, Rex Argivorum, mirae foelicitatis fuit, cujus clypeum, qui
apud Argos nobiliter rem gessisset, accipiebat, ut illo per urbem incedens
honestaretur; unde Proverbium apud illos, cum alicujus ignaviam irriderent, ut
Callimachus ait (...), which I adventure to amend, (...); for the Meaning of
the Proverb I refer the Reader to Zenobius, and the other Paraemiographers. If
I were allowed to play the bold Critic, I would for Arcados read Argivi, (for
Tydeus, the Father of Diomedes, having left Aetolia, lived at Argos, where
Diomedes his Son reigned; to confirm which I need not mention, That the Horses
of Diomedes were famous, and that Argos is called (...) by Homer) and apply the
Passage to Diomedes; of whose Shield Callimachus treats at large, Hymn. in
Lavacr. Pallad. v. 35. (...),
(...), etc.
but without the assistance of a good Manuscript, I dare not adventure to
correct the Text.

X.
Photius Patr. C.P. Epist. 166. p. 240. (...). I suppose, no Man doubts, but by
the Lybian Poet Callimachus is meant, (by which Name he is also called by
Damascius in Suidas) who was of Cyrene, in which City Eratosthenes also had his
Birth, to whom Isaac Casaubon rightly attributes the Fragment in Procl. in
Platon. polit. Number. 391. -- (...)
(...) (MS. (...)) (...).
Cited under the Name of (...), which had been ascribed unto Callimachus.

XIX.XX.
The Epigrams formerly cited; the one out of Natalis Comes, and the other out
of the Collection of Ancient Poems, by Pithaeus.

XI.
I will close this Collection with a Citation out of Malela, (an Author whom
Dr. Bentley had read thoroughly) lib. VII. page 220/1. (...) -- (...). The
Learned Editor of that Historian, for Etesiis reads Aetiis, perhaps it should
be (...), for the Passage seems to relate to the Certamina; while it is not
improbable, that the true Reading is in the Text, and should be translated de
Etesiis; for no Man questions, that Callimachus wrote of Winds, of which the
Etesiae are a Kind; and it is not altogether improbable, That Suidas might
mention his (...), if a small Correction be allowed, and instead of (...), we
read, (...), etc. but this Opinion wants the countenance of a Manuscript.

These are sufficient for the present; but it is very likely, that a more
diligent and better-read Inquirer may have observed many more; to whose
Industry the Completing the Collection is deferred. A true Critic is a Title,
which every Pretender should be prohibited to assume, for the same Reason, as
an Upstart ought to be punished if he write Gentleman: It is more easily talked
of, than deserved; and though Dr. Bentley is pleased to averr, That Styles may be
exactly imitated, and no Judgment can be made from thence of a Writer, and his
Books; and for that purpose gives two or three Instances, how some Great Men of
the last Age had been imposed upon; yet the Ancients (to whom the Learned
Languages were natural, and consequently were better Judges of Style) were of
another Opinion; and we must cancel History if they were mistaken.

In those days the Eminent Grammarians (I distinguish between a Grammarian and
a Paedagogue) spent much of their Time and Pains, in Numbering the several
(...), or Verses of a Book, adjusted a Book to its right Author by its
Language, censured its Defects, gave a Character of its Excellencies, and put
together all the scattered Members of a Poem, or Oration, History, or Epistle,
or any other Writing; and as much as in them lay, restored a mangled Treatise
to its pristine Soundness and Integrity. To act this Part well requires an
exalted Genius, and unwearied Application; Demetrius Phalareus, Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, and Longinus, are unexceptionable Instances, how far Philology
may be improved to good and useful Purposes; Aristarchus, Crates, with some
others of the same Form, could determine at view, what Word or Fragment was
Homer's, and which had Relation to any other Poet's Family; and among those
Judges Callimachus made a Noble Figure; they pretended, and their Claim was
just, to distinguish the several Styles of Authors, as well as they could
distinguish several Countenances; the exact Character of the one, as well as
the Air and Features of the other, nor was this Excellency peculiar to the
Greeks, the acuter Romans had an equal Title; Julius Caesar could distinguish
genuine Tully from any fictitious Writings; and the Plays of Plautus were
discerned in like manner, by Varro, and others.

These were Men of Knowledge, Wisdom, and Temper; but in those early days there
was a Zoilus, a good Grammarian, but a Snarler, who snapt at whatever came in
his way, and could not be persuaded to spare Homer himself; and after him a
Zoticus, who did the same with the Poems of Antimachus; nor is the Family yet
extinct, the Race is numerous, and planted in seveal Kingdoms, and they are to
be known by their haughty Aspect, their proud Gate, and their unmannerly
Language; they make Pedigrees for Authors, and reprobate whatever they dislike.
And this is not one of the meanest Particularities belonging to Dr. Bentley, he
has a peculiar Faculty in bold Strokes of the Pencil; he can give a holy Angel
the Color and Shapes of a Fiend, and make Lucifer himself a Son of Light,
paint the Illustrious Men, who have lived before him, under the Figures of
Fools and Sots, and Madmen; and at the same time give Aesop the Shapes and Mien
of a perfect Masculine Beauty; and can defend his Achievement by the best, and
most demonstrative of Arguments, because his Fellow-slave was fair beyond
Exception. A Topic, which may be of great use to all Public Societies,
because it makes all the Members of them alike wise and pretty.

In the first Essay the Dr. assured the World, That he had retired from the
Vanities of the Heathen Learning, that his Diet was different after he became a
Learned Bishop's Chaplain, and his Course of Life more Reserved; and yet after
that solemn Protestation, he is relapsed to his old beloved Studies (nor do I
think it blameable, had he not publicly renounced 'em) and has printed the
Fragments of Callimachus; and would he pursue and continue his Design, I should
own my Obligations to him, though his future Observations should be larded with
as much Sowreness and Pride, as those already published.

But I beg your Pardon for this Digression; my Province was to to show the
Injustice and Rudeness of the Doctor, and I have done it in a plain unaffected
Style, having called a Spade by its right Name, while your Treatment is much
softer: And if this will not convince, and amend him, I resign him to better
Management, and am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
January 1. School/9.
POSTSCRIPT.
JUst now, I met with Dr. Bentley's Answer and Defense of himself; in the
Preface to which, p. CVI. he speaks with respect of His Notes on Callimachus,
and tells Mr B. That Mr. Graevius will thank him, if in six years time, he will
send him the like upon any other Author; and page CXI. adds, That he will never
be guilty of that mean Disingenuity to maintain a Fault, that he is convinced
of: And as he is pleased to speak well of his own Performance on that Poet, so
it is expected, that he will sincerely do justice to the dead, and ingenuously
acknowledge to whom he has been beholden; the neglect of which himself owns,
p. XLIII. to be the meanest and basest of Actions. This Candor, to accost him
in his own Words, is required from him; and if he does not perform it, whatever
he replies will not be reckoned an Answer; for if he has not either Judgment
enough to know when he is confuted, (when he is justly condemned) or Sincerity
enough to confess it, it will be to no purpose at all to continue the
Controversy. I am neither afraid nor ashamed to declare, I have a great Esteem
for Dr. Bentley's Learning and Industry, I am only concerned, that his good
Temper, and Sincerity are not as Eminent.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
I AM willing to lay hold of the first Opportunity I can, to justify my self
against Dr Bentley's Mis-representations: And have therefore begged leave of
the Gentleman, who has obliged the World with these Papers, to add this
following Appendix to them.

The Account which I gave the Honorable Mr Boil under my Hand, and he
Printed, was in these Words.

Whereas the Reverend Dr Bentley has thought fit, in the Appendix to Mr
Wotton's Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, (pp. 66, 67.) to insert
the following Words, as Matter of Fact, [viz. A Bookseller came to me in the
Name of the Editors, to beg the use of the Manuscript. It was not then in my
Custody; but as soon as I had the Power of it, I went voluntarily and offered it
to him, bidding him tell the Collator, not to lose any time; for I was shortly
to go out of Town for Two Months. 'Twas delivered, used, and returned: Not a
Word said by the Bearer, nor the least Suspicion in me, that They had not
finished the Collation.] I think my self obliged to give the World the
following Account; wherein I have faithfully related what passed upon that
Occasion.

I was employed by the Honorable Mr Boil, (and by Him Only) to borrow the MS
of Phalaris from Dr Bentley. After about Nine Months Solicitation, it was
delivered into my Custody, without any time limited for the Return of it.
Within few Days after, Dr Bentley called upon me, to have it restored, and then
told me, that he was to go into the Country. He staid, till I sent to the
Collator; and word was brought by the Messenger, That it was not Collated. I
then begged of him to let me have it but till Sunday Morning (it was Saturday
Noon when he came) and I engaged to oblige the Collator to sit up all Saturday
Night to get it finished. But he utterly refused to leave it with me any
longer; demanding to have it sent That Day to Westminster (which was done
accordingly); and not giving me any the least Hopes, That if I applied to him
upon his Return out of the Country, I should have leave to get the Collation
perfected. These Circumstances I am thus particular in, because I had occasion
to recollect 'em not long afterward, when Mr Boyle's Book came out, and
Letters passed between Him and Dr Bentley, concerning the Passage in his
Preface.

It may not be proper, considering my Employment, for Me to add an Account of
the Reflections Dr Bentley was pleased to make from time to time, when I spoke
to him from Mr Boil, for the use of the MS. He has represented Me, as having
said too much on that Subject. But, by good Fortune, Dr King was present at one
of the Meetings, and heard all that passed there. I hope he will do Justice on
this Occasion.


This Account Dr Bentley pretends to Elude several ways. As to that part of it,
wherein I say, that I solicited Him about 9 months for the MS; He brings Mr
Postlethwayt's, Mr Wright's, and other Testimonies to prove, That from his very
first Admission to the Office of Library Keeper to the time, that I not only
had, p. xiv.
but returned the MS, there was but one single Month. Which may be True, for
ought I know, and yet all I have said be true too; As I am sure it is to a
Tittle: for there is not a single Word, in my Relation, that does in the least
imply me, to have thought the Dr Library Keeper, the Whole time I asked him for
the MS. I applied to him, as a Friend very Conversant in these Things, who
lived not far from the Royal Library, had an Interest there, and could procure
the MS for me; But whether or no I had so Early heard the Rumor of the Dr's
standing fair for that Office (though it is probable I had) yet I cannot be
positive in it: sure I am, that upon my Application to Him, he promised readily
(and, as near as I can remember, in these very Words) that He would help me to
it; without intimating in the least, that I asked him a Thing which was out of
his Power. This gave me sufficient ground to write Mr Boil word (as I did
presently afterward) That he might depend upon having the MS collated. And
that I was not out, in fixing the Date of my Application thus Early, appears
from several Letters of Mr Boyle's, on that Subject; Five of which I have
luckily preserved on my File, written between October. 8. 1693. and May 25. 1694.
the Time, about which Dr Bentley is supposed to have left the Town, and called
in the MS. Between these Dates, a Space of Seven Months and Seventeen Days is
included; and I do verily believe, that I had Letters from the same Honorable
Person on this Subject, antecedent to all these, though I cannot yet find them;
as I am certain I had several others from Him concerning it, during this Space,
which are now lost, or mislaid. And I very well remember, that I had a Verbal
Order to this Purpose, from Mr Boil himself, in the latter End of July, or
Beginning of August, 1693. when I waited upon him at Oxford, where I then was
upon my own Occasions. Any Gentleman that pleases to be at the Trouble of
over-looking these Letters, shall command a sight of them; and by them he will
be perfectly satisfied that the Business of the MS was thus long, at least, in
Agitation; and from thence will be inclined to believe me, when I assure him,
that it was somewhat longer, though I cannot at this distance produce the same
punctual Evidence for it.

Mr Boil has done me the Favor, after Reviewing those Letters of His, to
write to me in the following manner.

Mr Bennet,
I AM glad you had the good Fortune to preserve any of my Letters relating to
the Manuscript-Phalaris in St James's Library; Those which you showed me
sufficiently justify your Account of that Matter to the World: Though, for my
Own part, from Circumstances I easily recollected, even of so inconsiderable a
Thing, and at so great a distance of Time; I was before as fully satisfied of
the Truth of what You have said upon that Occasion, as I am of the Falsehood of
what Dr. Bentley has said upon that, and several others: I am

Your humble Servant, C. BOIL.
I send you with this Dr King's Letter to me; and I suppose you may have his
Liberty to print it.




All the Exception that I can imagine it possible for Dr Bentley to make to
this Proof is, that I gave Mr Boil all along false accounts of things, and
pretended to have asked him for the MS, when I had not. But to any man that
allows me to be employed thus Early in the matter, This will be incredible: for
I could not want an Opportunity of speaking to the Dr about it, He passing by
my Door very frequently, and calling in there every Now and Then, as he went:
for we were at that time in good Terms together, and he was pleased to consult
me sometimes about Matters in My Way, wherein He was concerned; so that nothing
could be more natural and easy, than my making such a Request to Him; and it
is inconceivable, in these Circumstances, that I should send Mr Boil word, I
had done it, when I really had not.

I must desire the Reader to take Notice of those frequent opportunities I had
of speaking to Dr Bentley, without stirring out of my House for it; because it
utterly takes off his Pretense about my Inventing this story to Mr Boil, on
purpose to cover my own Negligence: He would willingly have Insinuated, p.
xxxvii.
as if I declined the trouble of Soliciting Him for the MS, because he lived at
a distance from me, and Journeys were to be taken for it: Whereas there was
really no more Trouble in it, than just to make the Request to Him, and renew
it sometimes, as He either stopped at my Shop, or passed by it. He was mistaken
therefore, when he said, Diss. p. 66. Edit. I.
That a Bookseller CAME to him to beg the use of the MS; for in Truth, and as
He Himself upon second Thoughts begins to Own, I never came to him on that
Account; but only asked him for it at my own Shop occasionally: Pref. p. xx.
though I asked him so often ( twenty times at least) that I might well say, I
solicited for it.

Mr Boil Indeed, finding Him roundly affirm that I CAME to him for the MS,
might suppose what he said to be true, and speak after him: but I, who know it
to be otherwise, think my self obliged to declare it; p. xx.
notwithstanding what Dr Bentley has Artificially offered to prevent me in it.

Indeed the Dr is all over mistaken, upon this Head. I had formerly declared,
that I applied to him in Mr Boyle's Name; whereas He assured the Reader, that I
came to him in the Name of the Editors. He would now Qualify that expression:
for by Editors He pretends that he meant Mr Boil only; p. xxxix, xl.
which They who can believe, may believe all the rest of his Story. p. xvi.


Again, in one part of his late Preface, he says, that in May he delivered the
MS to the Bookseller; which in the next words he further Affirms: For, says the
Dr, as I said before, as soon as I had it in my Power, I went Voluntarily, and
offered it to him. He would be understood here to have come to me, of his own
accord, as soon as he had the Key; and to have offered me the MS, before I had
renewed my Application to Him: Nay, he would be thought to have brought it
himself to me; for That I think his Words plainly Imply: But that none of these
Circumstances are True, He himself is my Witness; who in his Letter to Mr Boil
(writ a while after the Edition of Phalaris, and since, by great Accident,
retrieved, and communicated to me,) has these Words: When I got the Key, Mr
Bennet, meeting me again, renewed the former Request; and I very readily
granted it. And in the Preface to his last Book the Dr says, That I sent my
Apprentice to the Library for the MS, p. xx.
by his appointment, and received it. How he could come, as soon as he had it
in his Power and voluntarily offer it to me; and yet not grant it me, after he
got the Key, till, meeting me again, I renewed my Request: How he could bring
it himself to me; which the Words I mentioned were evidently designed to Imply;
and yet my Servant come to the Library by his Appointment, and receive it from
Him: These are Inconsistencies which Dr Bentley may perhaps reconcile, but, I
dare say, no body else can.

Nay, He was so far from Offering, and Delivering it to me, as soon as it was
in his Power, that even from his own Account it will appear, that he kept it
three Weeks (and probably longer) after it was in his Power; and gave it out
but five or six days at the farthest, before He intended to take His Journey.
For the Key of the Library was delivered back to the Vice-Chamberlain by Mr
Postlethwayt and Mr Wright, some Weeks after Easter which, fell that Year on
April 8. We will suppose, p. xvi.
it was delivered in by them, a fortnight after that: for why should they keep
it longer in their Custody, when they had now finished the Catalogue, and Dr
Bentley was actually possessed of his Pattent? as he was, he tells us, April
the 18. We may be sure, p. xx.
that the Key rested but a Little while after this in the Vice-Chamberlain's
hands; and may fairly suppose, that the Dr had it in his keeping, for a whole
Week in April: And if so, then I had not the MS, till above three Weeks after
he had the Key; allowing him to have set out for Worcester, Monday, May 21. but
there being no Evidence of his arrival at Worcester till June the 1st, we may
as well suppose that he did not set out, till Monday May the 28th: and then it
will follow, that he had the Key a month before He delivered out the MS. And
yet the Dr says, that he gave it me as soon as he had it in his Power.

But this only by the bye: My Intention was, to show that I cannot, with the
least probability, be suspected to have pretended an application to Dr Bentley,
without making it, when it was in my Power to do it so often, and so easily;
and when there can be no Imaginable Reason given why I should not do it: For,
what end could I propose to my self in thus abusing both Mr Boil, and Dr
Bentley? What Visible Interest could I have in promoting a misunderstanding
between them? It had been probably more to my Advantage, in the way of my
business, to have preserved the good will of Both, and prevented this Breach;
which I sincerely endeavored, as much, and as long as I was able: for I all
a-long concealed from Mr Boil the odd Manner in which Dr Bentley delayed me,
though I could not conceal the Delay it self, and let him know nothing of the
many slight and Injurious things Dr Bentley threw out, now and then both of Him
and the Work he was about: And this I did, till the very last Push, when (as
the Matter appeared to me) there was an absolute Necessity for me, either to
send the Collation of the MS, or a positive Answer that I could not. And for
the Truth of my willingness to do these good Offices those Letters of Mr
Boyle's I mentioned, are my Vouchers: In each of which, from Oct. 8. 1693
onward, though the expediting the Business of the MS with Dr Bentley, be always
pressed, yet is there no appearance of his knowing any thing of the Dr's Rude
usage of him, till that of May 1st. 1694, which begins in these Words.

I am almost ashamed to trouble you any more, Mr Bennet, about the MS; I wish,
I had it* but, if at all, I must have it very quickly; and though I can do
pretty well without it, yet Mr Bentley's rudeness is not the less, etc.

A Little before this, it seems, I had given Mr Boil an Account of Dr
Bentley's disobliging Delays and Expressions: This was probably in the very
latter end of April, when the Dr, being now in full possession of his Office,
spoke ('it is to be thought) a little bigger to me then ordinary, about the MS;
and (for what end he best knows) began to give me less hopes of it then ever.
And this I suppose, was the Conference Dr King was witness to, and has given
some Account of. 'Twas high time for me now to let Mr Boil know, that I found
fresh difficulties in getting the Collation; and Dr Bentley having been so open
and so unwary in his Reflections (the meaning of which word he pretends not to
understand but I hope by this time it is pretty plain to him) it was to no
purpose for me to think of Concealing them.

This I Solemnly declare to be a faithful and punctual account of that
Transaction, as far as my Memory at this distance can reach the Circumstances
of it. It Is therefore Amazing to me, how Dr Bentley could express himself on
this occasion with that Assurance he has done. I shall give the Reader his
Words, and then, after observing a few things upon them, leave my self to any
body's Judgment on this Article.

I suppose it is sufficiently Manifest (says the Dr) from his Majesty's Patent,
Mr Postlethwayt's, and Mr Wrights Testimonies, and the Residence-Rolls of the
Church of Worcester, that the MS, was delivered, used and Returned within the
space of ONE MONTH, after I had the Custody of the Library (he should have
said, in the space of five Weeks: Further than which, I have showed, that his
Evidence will not go, should we allow every Syllable of it) so that (continues
the Dr) the deposition of the Bookseller, that he could not obtain the MS till
after about 9 Months Solicitation is demonstrated to be a notorious falsehood:
p. xviii.
And since he has further declared, that it was in his Intention a perjury; He
has Pillouried himself in Print, as long as that Book shall last.

These are Gross Words, and might tempt me to forget the Respect that is owing
to his Character; he having first forgot it, when he stoop't to such Rude
Expressions: Especially after the care I had taken to express my self in my
Relation as inoffensively as was possible: but let him allow himself the use of
what Language he thinks fit; I shall endeavor to keep within my Bounds. I only
ask therefore, how it follows, that because the MS was delivered, used, and
returned in one Month (or rather five Weeks) after it was in his Custody;
therefore my deposition, which says, I could not obtain it till after about 9
months solicitation is demonstrated to be a falsehood: For might not I apply
to him, and he receive my Application (as he most certainly did) for 7 or 8
months before the forms of his admittance were fully completed? Ay, but his
Warrant was but taken out of the Secretarys Office, p. xix.
Dec. XXIII. 1693; and there were therefore but five months in all, from the
first RUMOR of his being Library Keeper, to the time that I had the MS. But
why must the first RUMOR of his being Library Keeper needs be dated from the
time of his taking out his Warrant? Mr Justel dyed several months before this;
and was there no RUMOR of Dr Bentley's coming into the Library, till the very
time that he Actually took out his Warrant for it? Particularly, when Mr
Postlethwayt, and Mr Wright were taking a Catalogue of the Books from Oct.
1693, to April 1694. will Dr Bentley pretend, that, during that whole six
Months time, he had no acquaintance with the Library, nor Interest enough to
procure any thing out of it? will he say, he did not accompany these Gentlemen
often to the Place, and assist them in their Work? I have some Reason to
believe He did both: But upon good Grounds I can assure the Reader, that he
often did the first: And if Dr Bentley thinks fit to deny it, I will produce my
Authority. What signifies it then to say, that Mr Postlethwayt, and Mr Wright
had the Key Constantly in their keeping, p. xix.
from Oct. till May? for did their keeping the Key shut out Dr Bentley? Or had
he a less freedom of Resort on that Account, than if the Key had all the while
been in his own Custody? to what purpose is it to ask, How could I DEMAND the
Key of the Library before I had a RIGHT to it? ibid.
as if there was no other way of Procuring the MS for Mr Boil, but by
demanding the Key of the Library, as of Right due to him. I desire no more, but
that these Worthy Gentlemen, whose Account as far as it goes, I do not
distrust, will be pleased to give us the Rest of it: And then I question not
but it will appear, that Dr Bentley both before and at the time of their taking
the Catalogue, had Interest enough in the Royal Library, to get a MS of much
greater Value than this was, out of it; and that it was no ways unreasonable
either for Me to ask it of Him, or for him to undertake to help me to it.

But my Account he says, carrys this Accusation in it, that he could much
sooner have lent me the Book, if he pleased: and I say, p. xx.
it does not, but only that He could, if he pleased, have GOT the Book TO BE
LENT me: or at least, that so he pretended: And that he did so, I most
sincerely affirm. Why after these pretenses he delayed so long to do what he
had promised, and why he at last ordered me the MS, just at that particular
Nick of time when he was leaving the Town, without any Intimation how soon it
was to be restored (which is a Circumstance that I am very positive in) it
becomes not Me to conjecture; only I may, I hope, without offense, repeat his
own Words, without the least Variation. It appears (says the Dr) upon Record,
p. xxi.
that I took a Journey soon after the Lending, which was not a sudden and
unexpected one, for the time of my Residence had been fixed Six Months before.
I must needs know then of my intended Journey, when I lent the MS to the
Bookseller: and it is very unlikely that I should omit to give him notice of it;
UNLESS it be supposed, that I had then a private Design to disappoint him of
the use of the MS. Whether he really had any such Private Design as this, or
for what Reasons he took it up; Whether out of a particular pique to any
Learned Person, or Body, out of the abundance of good Humor which is natural
to him on such occasions; or out of a Resolution of being uncivil to me,
because I had not been Civil to him in some Way that he expected; I leave to
his Conscience, and the Opinion of the Reader.

He is pleased himself to own, that he told me, after the various Lections were
once taken and Printed, p. xxx.
the MS would be like a squeezed Orange, and little worth for the future: And
if my not taking this Hint as readily, and in the manner I should have done,
was the occasion of all this Troublesome Work that has happened since; I
heartily beg Mr Boyles and his Pardon for it. For whatever his meaning was, I
had rather have complied with it, than have brought my self into this
Controversy; which I assure him, does not please me in the least, though it has
turned to so good an Account.

However, I can never allow the Account which the Dr himself has given us of
the Occasion and Rise of this Passage about the Squeezed Orange; because it
contradicts another Account, which I have much more reason to rely on. After I
was Nominated (says he) to the Library-keepers Office, p. xxx.
before my Patent was finished, (that is, some time between December. 23. (93.)
and April 18. (94.) I was informed, that one Copy of every Book Printed in
England, which was due to the Royal Library by Act of Parliament, had not of
late been brought into the Library, according to the said Act. Upon this I made
application to the Master of the Stationers Company, to whom the Act directed
me, and demanded the Copies. The effect whereof was, that I procured near a
Thousand Volumes of one sort or other, which are now Lodged in the Library.
While this was Transacting, I chanced to call on Mr Bennet (whom I had several
times obliged) and acquainted him with it, not questioning but he would be very
Ready to comply as far as his share went; which was then but very little: But
to my surprise, he answered me very Pertly, that he knew not what Right the
Parliament had to give away any Man's Property; and he hoped the Company of
Stationers would refuse, and try it out at Law. They were a Body and had a
Common Purse, and more to this purpose. Some little time after calling there
again, upon a fresh Discourse about the MS Phalaris, which I had formerly
promised to lend him, as soon as I had power; I asked him upon what Account he
could refuse to give the Royal Library its due, settled on it by Act of
Parliament; and at the same time expected a favor out of it, that would make
his own Book more vendible, and the MS less valuable: For after the various
Lections were once taken and Printed, the MS would be like a squeezed Orange,
and little worth for the future. Since therefore he was resolved to try the Law
against the Library, he ought in Justice to present to it some Books of
competent value, to make amends for the damage it would sustain by his using
the MS.

In this Account the Dr labors at three Things; he would be thought to have
first set a-foot this Collection of one Book of a sort due to the Royal
Library; for he represents the Books (Mine in particular) as at that time
actually uncollected.

He would raise an ill opinion of Me, as if I was tardy in sending in my share;
and talked pertly and foolishly about the Power of the Parliament.

And He would persuade the Reader, that it was at such a Discourse, and on such
an Occasion as this, that the famous passage about a Squeezed Orange dropped from
him.

But now, if I can prove beyond exception, that these Books due to the Royal
Library were collected from the several Booksellers, and particularly from Me,
some Months before the Dr was nominated to his Office (in his sense of the
words;) and that I complied readily with the Demand that was made of my share,
without any dispute whatsoever: If I can show the Dr's memory to have misled
him evidently in these Two particulars, his Third point must necessarily be a
mistake. For if no such Discourse could happen between him and me, after he was
nominated to his Office; then the passage about the Orange must needs have been
said upon some other Occasion, and with some other Design than what he mentions.

For a true Account of the two first of these points, I refer my self to the
following Certificate.

BEing ordered and appointed by the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Stationers, to Collect from the Booksellers, Three Books of each sort Printed,
which were due to the two Universities, and the Kings Library: I received of Mr
Tho. Bennet a Great many Books upon that Account, without any Dispute
whatsoever.

I find likewise by my Accounts that His Books, and those from most of the
other Booksellers, were delivered in, before the 13th Day of July 1693. and on
that Day part of them were sent to the Universities.

Nicholas Hooper Beadle.


Dr Bently says he set about this project of getting the Books due to the Kings
Library collected, (for so he would have us understand him) after he was
nominated to the Library-keepers Office, and before his Patent was finished,
that is, some time between December. 23. 1693. and April 18. 94. and that while
this was transacting, (we will suppose in Jan. 1693/4.) He called upon me, and
had the discourse he pretends with me. Now from the Officers Certificate, it
appears that both my Books, and those of most other Booksellers, were actually
delivered in before the 13th of July 1693; that is 6 Months earlier than the
Date of this pretended Discourse of mine: I leave the Reader in this case to
believe which he pleases, the Dr, or the Beadle.

I remember nothing of any such Discourse ever happening between Dr B, and me;
but if it ever happened, it must be before the thirteenth of July 1693. And if
so, then this will be a Clear Proof that the Dr Interested Himself Publicly in
the affairs of the Library, for above ten Months before he took his Journey to
Worcester (for so long it is between the beginning of July. 1693. and the end of
May. 1694.) and this will establish the Testimony I gave about my nine Months
Solicitation beyond dispute: for surely I might Solicit the Dr as
Library Keeper about nine months before he went to Worcester; if he himself, as
Library Keeper, publicly solicited others above ten Months, before the same
time. I thank the Dr for supplying me with a more direct and positive Proof of
my whole nine months Solicitation of Him, than, I must confess, I at this
distance had, without his help, been able to produce.

Whether the Dr and I might not have some General talk together about the
Arrears due to the King's Library (though not at the time the Dr says we had) I
will neither affirm, nor deny; because I Remember nothing of it, and do not
love to talk at Random: but the discourse he puts in my Mouth on this occasion,
is all over so absurd and senseless, that no body that knows either Me, or the
World, will think me Capable of it; or if they do, I shall not much care, what
such Persons think of me. I was ready, from the first moment the thing was
started, to deliver in my share, according to my Duty: if he had such a dispute
with any body else in this matter, and now Fathers it upon me, God forgive him
for the Calumny.

Upon the whole it appears, that this saying of the Dr's, about a Squeezed
Orange, and a Collated MS being worth nothing, could not be uttered with
relation to the Affair, to which Dr Bentley tacks it: with what View it was
really spoken, I take not upon me to say; the world will Guess, but cannot
certainly Know, until He, in a Relenting hour, shall think fit to inform them.

I am bound also to Justify my self upon another particular wherein Dr Bentley
has laid himself more open, if it be possible, than the former, he remembers a
second Discourse between him and me concerning Phalaris then in the Press. I
asked his opinion (he says) about the Edition, whether it would be a Vendible
Book (a word I dare say I never used in my Life) and told him that I had a
Concern in the Impression, and hoped that it would sell well. I utterly deny
that ever I spoke a Syllable to him tending this way; and it is improbable to
the highest degree, that ever I should. For the Dr's manner of telling the
Story shows, that I should hardly have said what he represents me to have done,
out of the Vanity of being thought concerned in the Edition of Phalaris; and
that I had no way any Interest in the Impression, the following Certificate
will plainly prove.

THis is to Certify, That Phalaris's Epistles, in Greek and Latin, put out by
the Honorable CHARLES BOIL, Esquire, were Printed by Me, at my own Costs and
Charges; and neither Mr Bennet, nor any other Bookseller, was any way concerned
in it; as soon as the Book was Printed, I sold near the whole Impression to Mr
Crossley, Bookseller in Oxon. Witness my Hand.

John Crook.
March 1. School/9.

The Book, it appears, was altogether Printed at another Man's Costs and
Charges (and it was designed from the beginning so to be; Mr Boil giving the
Profits of it to Mr Crook:) when the Impression was finished, the greatest
part of it was sold to Mr Crosley Bookseller in Oxford; and from Him I had 50
Books at first, and a few more, some years after, from another hand: which is
the whole number that I was any ways concerned in the Sale of, and is far less
than I commonly use of any Oxford Impression. If the Reader can believe after
this, that I told Dr Bently I had a concern in the Impression, he must believe
me to be out of my Wits; and that I love to tell Lies to no manner of purpose,
and where it is in every Body's power to trace me.

This misrepresentation of the Dr's then is easily set right: If the Dr could
Justify himself as well, upon another part of the Story he has told of this
Edition, it would be much for his Credit. The particular I mean, relates to the
time of the Publication of Phalaris; and that being a thing which my business
may be supposed to give me some light into, it may not be thought improper for
me here to consider it.

The Dr lays great stress upon the opportunity he gave Mr Boil of having the
Story of the MS cleared up, before his Book was published. The very Day (he
says) that he saw Mr Boil 's new Phalaris in the hands of a Person of Honor,
to whom it had been presented, while the rest of the Impression was not yet
Published, he wrote to Mr Boil at Oxford to give him a true Information of the
whole matter: expecting (says he) that upon the Receipt of my Letter, he would
put a stop to the Publication of his Book, till he had altered that Passage,
and Printed the Page anew; which he might have done in one Day, and at the
Charge of Five Shillings. I did not expressly desire him to take out that
passage, and Reprint the whole Leaf; That I thought was too low a Submission.
But I said enough to make any Person of Common Justice and Ingenuity have owned
me thanks for PREVENTING him from doing a very ill Action.

This he every where After a delay of 2 Posts, on purpose, as one may justly
suspect, that the Book might be vended (as it was, and spread abroad in the
mean time, p. vii.

-- Let the Book be Published when it was in his Power to Stop it, p. viii.

Not the least hint that he had or would stop the Publication of his Book till
the matter was further examined, p. viii.

If he had writ me word the very next Post that he had stopped the Books in the
Printing House, p. ix.

After a delay of two Posts, when the Books were spread abroad, I had an
Answer, p. xxxviii.

I had done all that became me in writing him a Timely Account p. xxxix.


bears upon, through out his Preface, and one would imagine it impossible
almost, but that a Matter of Fact, which he is so full of, should really be as
he has represented it. But it so happens that the very Letter he wrote to Mr
Boil being still preserved, manifestly destroys all the Dr has said on this
occasion. It is dated from the Bishop of Worcesters in Park-Street, Jan. 26.
1694/5. a good while before which Mr Boyles Book was certainly published, and
sold publicly in Oxford, London, and other Places. On the first of that Month
above one Hundred of them were dispersed in Christ-Church, according to a
Custom, which Dr. Bentley appears to be no Stranger to; and in the 25 Days
between this and the date of the Doctors Letter, they were distributed into all
the Booksellers Hands who deal that way: And yet Dr Bentley would have the
World believe, that he writ so early, that Mr Boil, upon the Receipt of his
Letter, might if he pleased, have stopped the Books in the Printing House. p.
ix. p. xviii.
This in his own Expression, is now demonstrated to be a Notorious Falsehood, by
one of those Notes of Time which he talks of, p. xiii.
and which he well observes, to be the truest and surest Helps toward
detecting Impostures. p. xiv.


Indeed not only the Date, but the whole Course of the Letter is an evident
Proof, that Dr Bently when he writ it, could have no such Aim in his Eye as he
pretends, for it all runs upon a Supposal, that the Affront had been publicly
given, and was past Recall; nor is there from the beginning to the end of it, a
single Word that hints otherwise: And yet Dr Bentley is not afraid to tell the
World, that he sent this Letter on purpose to prevent Mr Boyle's inserting the
Passage into his Preface; in the same sense, I suppose, that Mr Boil inserted
it, to prevent Dr Bentley's denying him the MS.

We that know nothing of the Learned part of the Controversy, must judge of
the Dr's Performance there, by his Exactness in the other Branches of it, that
lie within our Reach: And I am sure then (nor will it be improper for me to
say,) That if the Dr's Old Accounts of Time, be adjusted with no more Sincerity
and Skill than his New ones are, he is not likely long to keep up his
Reputation in Chronology.

The Reader will be pleased to take my Word awhile for this Account of Dr.
Bentley's Letter: If it be false, the Letter it self, when it appears, will
quickly disprove it.

As to the Collator's Testimony, which he says, to what purpose it was
produced, p. xxiv.
is hard to conjecture; I will endeavor to show him, that it was produced to
very good purpose. Dr Bentley had affirmed, that upon the Return of the MS, he
had not the least suspicion that the Collation was not finished. To prove that
he had more than a Suspicion, Diss. p. 67
even a certain Knowledge of this matter, I affirmed, That when he came to
demand the MS, He staid (in my Shop) till I sent to the Collator, and word was
brought by the Messenger, That it was not Collated: This Account is, I think,
material; and so then is the Collator's Testimony, which expressly Confirms it.

I Very well remember, that Mr Bennet sent his Man to me, for Phalaris's
Epistles, whilst I was Collating 'em; and being unwilling to part with 'em,
before I had gone through 'em, I sent his Man back without them; but he
presently returned, and told me, That the Gentleman that owned them, staid at
their Shop for them, and could not spare them any longer: This is the true
Reason, why I could Collate no more of the abovesaid Epistles.

Witness my Hand, GEO. GIBSON.
July 15. 1697.

It appears, That Messages went to and fro between Me and the Collator; and
that the MS was taken out of his Hands, and returned to me, while Dr Bentley
staid at my Shop; for by his saying, that my Man came back without it the first
time, he plainly implies, that he came back with it the next; as he certainly
did: And this second Demand was made presently after the first, while the
Gentleman that owned the Book, and could spare it no longer, staid at his Shop
for it. Can any Body believe now, that the MS was not actually returned, while
Dr Bentley was in my House; Especially, if it be considered, that the Collator
lived hard by me, and the Messenger could not well be above 5 or 6 Minutes
going backwards and forwards between us? But whether the Dr staid, or not, till
he saw it actually returned to me; it is as clear as the Sun, that he was by,
when my Apprentice was sent the second time, with Orders to bring it back
immediately: And with what Conscience then can he pretend, that when the MS was
carried down to him at Westminster a little afterward, he had no suspicions
that the Collation was not finished; unless he means, that he did not suspect
it, because he most certainly knew it. God forgive him this Untruth; which,
with several others, I hope, before he goes out of the World, he will be so Just,
both to Himself, and Me, as to retract publicly.

But, I begged of Him, (I had urged) to let me have the MS till Sunday. Morning,
(it was Saturday Noon when he came) and engaged to oblige the Collator to sit
up all Saturday Night to get it finished. This, he says, is False and Silly: p.
xxvi.
For the whole Collation is but the Work of four Hours; as he proves by an
Experiment of his own Collating the first 40 Epistles in an Hour, and 18
Minutes; and yet he made no very great haste neither.

Now all this Experiment proves (I think) is, That I perhaps was not so well
skilled as to know, what time exactly such a sort of Collation would take up;
which I might be Silly enough to think a Work of more Labor than it really was,
and yet might Honestly say, what I pretended to say upon that Occasion: For, I
hope, silly People may tell Truth.

But indeed, I was not quite so Silly, as the Dr would represent me to be: For
when I engaged on Saturday at Noon, to get the Collator to sit up Saturday
Night to finish; I knew the Collator, who was Corrector of a Press, could allow
no part of his Days from that Laborious Service; and, which is more, Dr Bentley
knew it too: For it was what I then urged to Him, to excuse the Collator's
Delay, and to procure a further Term; and it was so much insisted upon by Me,
at that time, that I cannot think it possible for the Dr to have forgotten it.
But he refused to allow me the use of the MS any longer, and ordered it to be
sent to his Lodgings out of Hand, as it was immediately after Dinner: Though
the Dr by another slip of his Memory says, that it was not returned, or
required to be returned, till Evening.

This is the true Reason of Mr. Gibson's being so much behind-hand in the
Collation; the Press employed Him, and left Him no Hours to Himself, but in the
Evening; and He was not careful to make the very best use of Those, because I
had not, when I delivered Him the MS, limited Him in His Time, having not been
my self in that matter limited by Dr Bentley; as I protest I was not, not so
much as in general, or by an Intimation that I should make what Dispatch I
could: so far was the Dr from having tied me to Days, or Hours, or from giving
me any Notice of the Time fixed for his Worcester Journey.

The Dr Labors to have it thought very Unlikely and Improbable, p. xxv.
that He should leave me thus at large. How Improbable it is cannot well be
determined, without knowing the Ends the Dr might have in his Eye, and the
Reasons He might Act upon in it. Had He fairly indeed designed that Mr Boil
should have the full use of the MS, it is not probable that he would have
delivered it to me, without any Notice at what time He intended to Demand it:
But if He designed only to make a show of lending it, and to avoid the Scandal
of Refusing it; if He designed to manage things so that He might seemingly
oblige Mr Boil, and yet certainly defeat Him; then it is not Improbable that
Dr Bentley might Act just in the manner I affirm him to have done. I do not
directly charge Him with having such Intentions as these; but the Reader, who
has observed me to have proved, That he kept the MS from me 3 Weeks, or a
Month, at least; even after He had his Patent, (though I had been many Months
before that soliciting Him for it) and that He put it into my Hands, but 5 or
6 Days at the most, before He was to leave the Town, p. xxi.
upon a Journey fixed 6 Months before: The Reader, I say, that has observed
these things, may perhaps venture to be somewhat freer in his Opinion of Him,
then it becomes me to be. However, since the Dr is arguing from Probabilities
and Conjectures, on this Head, he must give me leave to offer mine in my turn:
And to what I have urged already therefore I add this Remark; That, had the Dr
set me so short a time, when he put the MS into my hands, it is utterly
improbable, that I should not have given notice of it to Mr Gibson; especially
apprehending the Collation to be a Work of more Trouble, than, it seems, it
was; and knowing Mr Gibson's hands to be so full of other business. But that Mr
Gibson had no such notice from me, this second Certificate from him will show.

I Do declare, That when Mr Bennet delivered me the MS of Phalaris's Epistles,
there was no Time set me for the Return of it.

GEO. GIBSON.


If these Probabilities of mine be put into the Scale against Dr Bentley's, I
believe they will outweigh 'em.

As to his Experiment about Collating the first forty Epistles, which, he says,
p. xxv.
he did in One Hour and Eighteen Minutes: I should have thought that the Dr had
known Himself better, than to measure another Man's Abilities by his Own: The
Dr, who is a great Master of these things, might dispatch the Matter as fast as
He pretends; and yet, my Collator's Eyes and Fingers (without any Reflection
upon 'em) not be near so nimble. However, I must beg his Pardon, if I do not
believe him, when he says, He made no very great Haste, in the doing it; for
it is not conceivable, why he should keep such an exact Register of his Minutes,
while he was at the Work, without an Intention of disparaging Me, and the
Person I employed: And if he had That in his Eye, I dare say, He made as much
haste as possibly he could; because the sooner He could say, he had finished
it, the greater Disparagement it would be.

Allowing then the Doctor's Calculation of Four Hours for the whole, to be
just, as it relates to Himself, who is under the Happiness of a particular
Genius this way, and was quickened perhaps in his Work, by a Prospect of
Gratifying his Spleen; yet an Ordinary Man, who had none of his Advantages, or
Views, might very well require double or treble the time, to do it in. And if
so, then it was not very silly in me to say, The Collator should (after he had
done his Saturday's Work) sit up all Night to finish the Collation. But were
the Saying never so silly, yet it was not false, I am sure, that I said so: And
this sufficiently satisfies me; who am an Hundred times more concerned to
Vindicate my Honesty, than my Understanding.

I had said, that Dr Bentley gave me not the least hopes, That if I applied to
Him upon his Return out of the Country, I should have leave to get the
Collation Perfected; To which he Replies, that I gave him not any hopes of it
by an Express Promise, I verily believe. But what he saw in me, p. xxvii.
that FORBAD him to hope it, if there should be Occasion, I cannot Imagine.
It Is not for me to help out his Imagination in this Case; but I am sure I both
Saw and Heard such Things, at That, and several other Times, that I thought
very Forbidding: His Peremptory manner of withdrawing the MS, the Slight with
which He spoke of the Edition of Phalaris, and the Editor himself, made me
apprehend, That the way toward his favor in this Matter, would not lie very
open, should I again at his Return have attempted it. Besides, I had given Mr
Boil an account of the Dr 's parting Civilities; and it would then have been
too great a Freedom in me to have made a fresh Application to the Dr, without a
new Order from Mr Boil; which he has told the World, that, after such a
Repulse, He thought it beneath himself to give. The Dr thinks to evade all
this, by Appealing to any that ever was acquainted with him, if they think him
Capable of doing such a thing: And with the very same Persons I Lodge my Appeal
also; for I desire only that those that do not know Him, would judge of him by
those that do.

He has given me an Opportunity of softning the Testimony I gave about the
Reflections he made from time to time: But I cannot with a good Conscience make
use of it. He says, p. xxviii.
he does not understand what I mean by Reflections, and thinks there is no Harm
in making them: For a Great Person has made an whole Book of Reflections. I
have let him know a little of my Mind in this matter already; but for fear he
should mistake me, will 'ere we part give him an enlightening instance, of what
I mean by it. I remember I once heard it said of a Person of Great Rank in the
Church, and too Considerable even to be named in this Controversy, That He was
a BLOCKHEAD, for setting People at work upon, etc. And, p. xxxv.
I remember (also), that when I told this Story once to a very Great Man, p.
xxxv.
his Answer was, That none but an Errant Blockhead, could have applied that
Word to that Eminent Person. But great Men may make as free with one anothor as
they please: It becomes me to consider my Station, and so I will; for I shall
make no Reflections my self; but if Dr Bentley think fit once again to Pillory
me in Print, p. xxviii.
and to represent me as the Disgrace of my Profession; I shall go on to take
the Liberty of telling Him what some other great Men say of Him.

He reproaches me with several Obligations formerly laid upon me, p. xxxi.
which I am not in the least Conscious of; one only I acknowledge my self to
have received from him very lately, that when resolved to use me so very Ill,
he was pleased to join me with such very good Company: It Is a favor, and I now
publicly thank him for it.

Thus have I Justified my self (I hope effectually) from Dr Bentley's
undeserved and Groundless Aspersions: I have Considered all the Exceptions he
has taken to the Testimony I formerly gave, and have confirmed every part of
It, with further Circumstances and Proofs: which will (I persuade my self) to
every Man that Stands Neuter in the Cause, and desires fairly to know the
Truth, be satisfactory and Convincing.

I do once again assure the Reader, That the Account I have given him of these
things, has been written by me with the same Sincerity and Care, as if I had
been upon my Oath; that I have not to my knowledge used a false Color any
where, or willingly misled him in any the least trifling Circumstance of this
Tedious Story.

And now I have done with the Dr, who is much Mistaken however if he thinks,
that this is all that will be said to him: For I am allowed to tell the Reader
that his last Book will be thoroughly Considered, both as to the Matters of
Fact, and the Criticisms; notwithstanding the Endeavors he has used, to escape
an Answer, by making the Controversy so Voluminous.

What his Talent at Criticism is, will appear, after the Learned part of his
Book has undergone a second Examination: But whether he be a Good Critic or
not, I am sure, that if he persists in his former Assertions, about Matter of
Fact, he can be no Good Christian. And to that I set my Hand,

T. BENNET.


Since the writing of this I have seen a Letter under Sir Edward Sherburn's own
hand, where he gives a short Account of that part of Dr Bentley's Preface, in
which He is concerned, after this manner; WHat Dr Bentley alleges for his
Excuse, is in the first Place Partial, in the next Place False, and in the
whole Ungrateful. And I positively deny that ever the Dr came to me, to excuse
Mr Graevius, or Himself, for the Omission.

Feb. 27.



I have Sir Edward's Allowance, for communicating this immediately to the
World; as I have Dr King's also for publishing the following Letter.

To the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire;
GIve me leave, Sir, to tell you a Secret, that I have spent an whole Day upon
Dr Bentley's late Volume of Scandal and Criticism; for every one may not judge
it for his Credit to be so employed. He thinks meanly, I find, of my Reading;
as meanly as I think of his Sense, his Modesty, or his Manners. And yet for all
that, I dare say, I have Read more than any Man in England besides Him and Me;
for I have Read his Book all over.

If you have looked into it, Sir, you have found, that a Person under the
pretense of Criticism, may take what Freedom he pleases with the Reputation and
Credit of any Gentleman; and that He need not have any regard to Another Man's
Character, who has once resolved to expose his Own.

It was my misfortune once in my Life to be in the same Place with Dr Bentley,
and a Witness to a great deal of his Rude and Scurrilous Language: which he was
so Liberal of, as to throw out at Random in a Public Shop; and is so silly
now as to call it Eves-dropping in Me, because He was so Noisy, and I was so
Near, that I could not help hearing it.

You desired me at some Years distance to Recollect what passed at that
Meeting, and I obeyed your Commands. Shall I Reckon it an Advantage, that Dr
Bentley, who disputes the other Testimonies, falls in entirely with mine? I
would, if I were not apprehensive, that on That very Account it might be one
step further from being Credited.

However, such is his Spite to me, that he confirms the Truth of all I told
you. For the only particular I could call to Mind, he Grants, with some slight
difference in the Expression: And as to the general Account I gave of his
Rudeness and Insolence, He denies it indeed; but in so Rude and Insolent a
Manner, that there is no Occasion for me to Justify my self on that Head.

I had declared, it seems, that He said, The MS of Phalaris would be worth
nothing, if it were Collated. He sets me right, and averrs, the Expression was,
That after the Various Lections were once taken, and printed, the MS would be
like a squeezed Orange, and little worth for the future. The Similitude of a
Squeezed Orange is indeed a Considerable Circumstance, which I had forgot; as I
doubtless did several others: But, for all that, I remember the general Drift
and Manner of his Discourse, as well as if all the particular Expressions were
present to me. Just as I know his last Book to be a Disingenuous, Vain,
Confused, Unmannerly Performance; though, to my Happiness, hardly any of His
awkward Jests, or impertinent Quotations stick by me.

I had owned it to be my Opinion, that a MS was worth nothing unless it were
Collated. The Dr Cunningly distinguishes upon me, and says, It Is worth nothing
indeed to the rest of the World, but it is better for the Owner, if a Price
were to be set upon it. I beg his Pardon for my mistake, I thought we were
talking of Books in the way of Scholars, whereas He Answers me like a
Bookseller; and as if He dealt in MSS, instead of Reading them. For my part, I
measure the Value of these kind of Things, from the Advantage the Public may
receive from them, and not from the Profit they are likely to bring in to a
private Owner. And therefore I have the same Opinion of the Alexandrian MS
(which, He says, He keeps in his Lodgings) now* as I should have had before the
Editors of the English Polyglot published the Collation of it; though it may
not perhaps bear up to the same Price in St Paul's Churchyard, or an Auction.
But I hope, if it be safely kept, it need never come to the Experiment.

As to the particular Reflections he has cast on me, it is no more than I
expected. I could neither hope, nor wish for better Treatment from one that had
used You so ill. It Is reputable both to Men and Books to be ill spoken of by
him; and a favorable Presumption on their side, that there is something in
Both, which may chance to recommend them to the rest of the World. It Is in the
Power of every little Creature, to throw Dirty Language; but a Man must have
some Credit Himself in the World, before any thing he says can lessen the
Reputation of another. And if Dr Bentley must be Thus Qualified in order to
mischief me, I am safe from all the Harm that His malice can do me. I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged Humble Servant, W. KING.
I hope, Sir, this Answer of Dr Bentley will divert you as much as His former
Dissertation, his Own few Notes on Callimachus, or his extraordinary Collection
of Pills to Purge Melancholy. (London, 8 vo. School. Printed for Playford) which
He may have more use of, than when it was Published.




I have still a Page or two to spare, and shall take this opportunity to
acquaint the Reader with Dr Bentley's handsome Conduct in Relation to Sir W.
Temple. In the first Edition of his Dissertation he had, unprovoked, treated
Sir William with the utmost Contempt; had said, He was not able to discover the
True Time or True Value of his Authors, p. vi.
and that His Criticisms were of a Peculiar Complexion and must proceed from a
Singularity of Palate and Judgment. These, and several other as decent
Expressions, p. vii.
the Dr has dropped in his late Edition: For while his Dissertation, and the
Defense of it were Printing, Sir William Temple was alive: But he was dead, I
suppose, by that time the Dr got to Page the xcth of his Preface; For there he
falls upon Him for his absurd Use of the Word DELPHOS, for several Pages
together. And that the World may be sure to know at whom his Civilities are
meant, he informs them, by a scornful Flirt, at Men of business and
Ambassadors. This is honorable Dealing, and will doubtless recommend Him to
His Reader, as a fair and Generous Adversary.

I have that Respect for the Character and Memory of Sir William (whose
Commands I once received to Print something for him) that I could not forbear
stepping a little beyond my Line, to give the Reader this Notice. Were he
alive, I am sure, He would be very easy to hear of any new Instance of ill
Usage, from One whom he thought so Ill of, as he did of Dr Bentley. I speak not
this at a Venture, but from a Knowledge of what He has said in his Private
Conversation, and Letters: One of which, written to a Gentleman of his
Acquaintance, I have seen, and have his Leave to transcribe so much of it, as
belongs any ways to this Debate.

I beg Mr Boyle's Pardon, for publishing any Passages from thence, that relate
to Him, or his Book, without his Express Knowledge. Some other People will
excuse me, if I am not so nice with them.

Moor-Park, March 30. 98.
I Think there can be no Exception to any thing in it; [Mr Boyle's Book]
besides His Partiality to me; which perhaps will be less forgiven him by the
Dr, than any other Fault. For the rest, the Compass and Application of so much
Learning, the Strength and Pertinence of Arguments, the Candor of his
Relations, in Return to such Foul-mouthed Railing, the pleasant Turns of Wit,
and the Easiness of Style, are, in my Opinion, as extraordinary* as the
contrary of these all appear to be, in what the Dr and his Friend have written.
So that I have as much reason to be pleased with finding my self in Mr Boyle's
good Opinion, as I should be sorry to be in Theirs.

You needed no Excuse for any thing in your former Letter, nor Mr -- for giving
you the Occasion for it. What he saw, was written to a Friend -- who had
undertaken -- without my Knowledge: Which I afterward diverted, having no mind
to Enter the List, with such a Mean, Dull, Unmannerly PEDANT.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Title Page, Read Cornicla. p. 8. line 1. r. as guilty of. l. 21. for (...)
read (...). p. 9. l. 16. Florens. p. 14. Becceselenists. p. 18. l. 2. who. p.
21. l. 8. through. p. 29. l. 10. Sir Edw. l. 12. him Mr. Th. p. 30. l. 6.
behind him. p. 40. put) after Tully. p. 43. l. 1. (...). p. 48. l 19. by
Himself and others. p. 54. l. 3. e. p. 57. l. 2. (...) p. 72. l. 6. in Pluto.
p. 84. l. 14. ex Avis. p. 88. r. xi.xii.xiii.

