A SHORT DIRECTORY For the Great Necessary and Advantageous Duty of
Self-Examination, Whereby a Serious Believer may every Evening Examine himself.
1. Questions relating to Religious Exercises.
HAve I had any sensible Communion with God in the Exercise?

2. Have I not neglected my private, nor my Family Duties?

3. Have I not Omitted reading the Word of God?

4. Have I not omitted holy Meditations concerning, 1st, the Word preached:
2dly, concerning God: 3dly, concerning Christ: 4thly, concerning Sin: 5thly
concerning Scriptures, the Word of God: 6thly, Providence, the Works of God:
7thly, about my Duties: 8thly, about Death: 9thly, about the last Judgment:
10thly, about Hell: 11thly, about Heaven, etc?

5. Have I not been careless and formal in Prayer, either private in the
Closet, or in Family Prayers, and performed the same out of Custom, and not out
of love and affection to the Duty?

6. Have I not been careless and superficial in reading the Word, but serious
and zealous to pray for a Blessing, for increase of Life ana Light by that Duty?

7. Have I not for haste in worldly business cut my Prayers short off, or laid
upon my Bed for idleness, when I should have been upon my Knees?

8. Have I after Duty gone upon my Watchtower, to look out and watch for a
Blessing, and the Fruits of my Duties?

II. Questions relating to Sins and Temptations.
1. HAve I guarded against, and feared Temptations? or have I heedlesly rushed
among them?

2. What Temptations have I this day striven against and conquered?

3. Have I this day done nothing against or contrary to my Knowledge, etc? or
have I not sined with full purpose and resolution?

4. Do I not knowingly live in a course of Sin, whether of Omission or
Commission?

5. mave I carefully kept my self from my Iniquity? or have I again relapsed
into it?

6. Have I given any man an occasion of Offense, or been offended unjustly by
any this day?

7. Does not Sin lie light upon my heart, so that die Gospel and Grace, Christ
and the Promises are less sweet and precious to me?

8. When I fell into any Sin, did I seriously without delay, rise again by
Repentance, and neither paliated or extenuated my Sin?

III. Questions relating to the Thoughts of the Heart.
1. HAve I kept my Heart in a serious spiritual and holy Frame, so to be ready
at all times for the exercise of holy Duties, and so have gone from one Duty to
another?

2. Have I had the Lord always before my Eyes? and especialy, have my Thoughts
been of him when I awaked?

3. Has Eternity made any Impressions on my Heart? and have I set Death and
Judgment, with the Consequences thereof, before my Eyes?

4. Have I made Conscience of vain, idle and wandering Thoughts and guarded
against them?

5. Have I been serious and frequent in holy and heavenly Ejaculations all the
day, and so walked with God in all my Affairs?

6. Have I endeavored when private and solatary to order and govern my
Thoughts holily?

IV. Questions relating to Silence, and the Use of the Tongue.
1. HAve I bridled my Tongue from vain unnecessary Angery and perverse words?

2. Have I not spoken Evil of any man behind his back? Or did the Lord call me
by discovering of the Wickedness of another, to advance and further my
Neighbors Interest?

3. Have I with reverence used the Name and Word of God, and spoken thereof to
the Edification of others, and my self at home and abroad, at my rising up and
lying down?

4. Have I always spoken the Truth, and not sometimes made Lies or half Lies?

5. Have I been silent when the Lord called me to speak for his Glory, and the
Edification of others?

6. Have I spoken when I should have been silent?

V. Questions relating to Eating and Drinking.
1. HAve I seriously and zealously before Meat craved a Blessing, and after
Meat (with the same Devotion) returned Thanks? Or have I done it out of Custom
and Fashion only?

2. Have I eat and drunk with fear, and to the Glory of God? Or did I sit down
to Table with no better design than the Beast of the Field have, to satisfy
Hunger and Thirst.

3. Have I not been immoderate in my eating and drinking, even to Surfeiting,
Overcharging my Stomach?

4. Have I not risen from Table without speaking of the Name of God, or of his
Word; yea, without once thinking thereon with delight?

VI. Questions relating to our Callings.
1. HAve I this day in the Duties of my Calling, had respect to the Lord, and
served him?

2. Have I been dilligent in it, or idle and lazy?

3. Have I dealt justly and honestly in my Calling? Have I Cheated no man no
manner of way, but done to every one as I would they should do to me?

4. Have I not broken my Promises in my Calling, but been as good as my word?

5. Have I not overloaden and overcharged my self with worldly Affairs, and
been immoderately Anxious, Solicitous and Careful about them, to the
disadvantage and neglect of my Soul?

VII. Questions relating to our Carriage among others.
1. HAve I carried and behaved my self as as Christian ought to do, in
referrence to Superiors and Inferiors, Juniors and Seniors, and my Equals?

2. Have I not neglected some Duties to them, to whom I have particular
Relation? or have I done nothing contrary to my Duty to such, but duly and
truly discharged them?

3. Have I (being a Father or Mother) taken care first for the Souls, and then
for the Bodies of my Children, and wrought for them?

4. Have I (being a Child) honored my Father and Mother? have I loved, been
obedient and thankful to them?

5. Have I (being a Husband) been careful for the Soul and Body of my Wife, and
loved her?

6. Have I (being a Wife) loved, honored and obeyed my Husband, and heartily
cared for his and the Families good, etc?

7. Have I (been a Master or Mistress) been careful for the Souls and Bodies of
my Servants, and given them good Exhortations, Reproofs and Examples?

8. Have I (being a Servant) honored and obeyed, been true and diligent in my
Masters concerns, as a Christian ought to do?

9. Have I (being a Ruler either in Church or State) been Conscientious to do
the Duties of my place?

10. Have I (being a Subject in the State, and a Member in the Church) carried
my self as becomes a Christian toward the Magistrate, the Minister, highly
respecting them, being subject and obedient to them, and praying for them?

VIII. Questions relating to our Time and Opportunities.
1. HAve I this day redeemed Time for the good of my Soul, as esteeming it
precious.

2. Have I not slept too long, and more then was necessary, so that my
Exercises in private or in the Family must be shortened, or some necessary or
profitable Work omitted?

3. Have I not misspent my time with idle unnecessary and fruitless Discourse,
or with unnecessary and unreasonable Reflections?

4. Have I not fed many idle and vain Immaginations and Thoughts, which time
might have been improved to the advantage of my Soul?

5. Have I redeemed time from all those long and unnecessary visits, or from
long and tedious Meals?

6. Have I not lost time with too much and long Discourse about worldly Things,
or by doing men about them, than was necessary?

7. Have I diligently improved my time this day for God, and for eternal
Salvation, striving to take Heaven by violence?

8. Have I not this day omitted some incumbent Opportunity, whereby I might
have improved my Talent, and done good to the Souls or Bodies of others, either
by Words or Works of Civility or Mercy?

9. Have I constantly observed every opportunity to the good of my Soul, either
to its Instruction or Reproof, or to excite to more diligence?

IX. Questions relating to Good Company.
1. HAve I chosen Good and Holy people for my Companions, and that because they
are such, and for a good end?

2. Have I endeavored to excite such by my Example, and in Spiritual
Conferences, to Love and Good Works?

3. Have I carried my self toward them, as loving them with a Hearty and
Brotherly affection, and peaceably?

4. Have I delighted in their Company, and rejoyeed over their Prosperity?

5. Have I born their Infirmities and covered them, or done the contrary?

6. Have I been advantageous to them with Admonitions, Consolations, Reproofs,
Counsel and other Service? and have I sought the like advantage from them, and
found it?

X. Questions relating to Bad Company.
1. HAve I carried my self prudently and wisely among the Ungodly, so that they
have not been a snare to me, nor have they done me any damage?

2. Have I carried my self so Holily, that I have not been a Stone of stumbling
to any of them, but a good Example and Conviction?

3. Have I been serious, courteous and compassionate toward them, endeavoring
to do them good by Reproofs, Instruction and Admonition?

4. Have I not been ashamed of the Word, Ways and Children of Christ, when
among those that hate and persecute them?

XI. Questions relating to our Carriage under various Providence.
1. HAve I observed the particular Providence of God concerning my self and
others?

2. Have I endeavored to discern the dealings of God with my Soul and Body
from my Prayers?

3. Have I been thankful for my daily Blessings and Benefits received from God?

4. Have I born my Cross this day willingly and cheerfully, and in Adversity
submitted to the hand and will of God?

XII. Questions relating to the Exercise of the Principal Gifts and Graces.
1. HAve I lived by Faith, depending constantly upon the Promises, and on
Christ for help, strength, success and acceptance with God?

2. Have I with all diligence endeavored to express my Love to God, to men,
and to my Enemies themselves this day?

3. Have I denied my self this day, and curbed my Passions and Affections in
all accurrences, so behaving my self as one that denies himself?

4. Have I walked the whole day in the fear of the Lord, whether in company or
alone, in divine Worship and Service, or in worldly affairs, always guarding
against Sin?

5. Have I been Humble, and in all things eschewed and, strived against Pride
and High-mindedness?

6. Have I eschewed or shunned Sinful Anger, and carried my self meekly before
God and men?

7. Have I been content with my State and Condition, in which the Lord by his
providence has set me?

8. Have I been Patient, not murmuring or repineing when I met with
Difficulties and Oppression from God or men?

9. Have I in all things expressed and declared my Uprightness and Honesty, and
shunned and striven against all Deceit and Hypocrisy?

10. Have I been Heavenly-minded and delighted my self in God, and striven
against Earthly-mindedness, and satisfaction in the Vanities thereof?

XIII. An Epitome of the former Questions, when in the Evenings we have little
time or pleasure to the Duty of Self-Examination.
1. HAve I been Serious and Zealous in my secret and private Family Religious
Exercises this day, and have had any sensible Communion with God.

2. Have I striven against my Temptations and guarded against my inclination
since?

3. Have I been careful to keep my Heart from duty to duty in a Spiritual frame?

4. Have I not conceived Vain Thoughts, nor presented Vain and idle discourse?

5. Have I had thorough the day many Ejaculatory Prayers and Sighs?

6. Have I thought and spoken much of the Word of God?

7. Have I carried my self Moderatly, Self-denyingly and Spiritually in the use
of the Creatures?

8. Have I injured no man this day, neither in Words nor Works?

9. Have I been all the day diligent and careful upon my Watch and Guard?

10. Have I not neglected my Duty to those I have particular relation to? or
have I not done in this contrary to it?

11. Have I not misspent my time, nor omitted any good opportunity to do Good,
or to receive Good?

12. Have I this day been Serious in working for the Glory of God and my Souls
Salvation?

13. Have I not been immoderately poring and meditating on Earthly things?

14. Have I not given way to Pride, sinful Anger, Discontentedness and
Impatience?

15. Have I lived by Faith, and fetched all my strength from Christ?

16. Have I let my Light shine among men and been profitable both to good and
bad?

17. Have I had a right aim and end in all my doings?

18. Have I watched in Love, both toward God and my Neighbor?

Translated out of Hollands (or Low Dutch) for the Benefit of the English.
London, Printed for John Bringhurst, Stationer, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, near Cornhill, 1681.


