A Short and Strange RELATION Of some part of the LIFE OF TAFILETTA, The Great
CONQVEROR and EMPEROR OF BARBARY.

By one that has lately been in His Majesty's Service in that Country.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes, over against Exeter-House in the
Strand. 1669.

A short and strange RELATION Of some part of the Life of TAFILETTA.
TAfiletta is a great Kingdom of Africa, far advanced into the Land: It is
part of the ancient Numidia, now called Biledulgerid by some; It is South-East
of the City of Fez. The Inhabitants are a mixed People, of several Nations; the
greatest part are Blacks, who are said to be the Sons of the Cursed Cham. The
Noblest are Saracens, otherwise called Larbes: These are the Lords of the
Country, the rest are the vanquished Posterity of the Warlike Nations of the
North, the Goths and Vandals; that seem to have chosen that Confinement, as a
safe retreat, far from the acquaintance of the European Swords: with which
their over-aged Bodies were not so able to deal, as with the effeminate
courage of the Inland Inhabitants.

They quietly enjoyed their Conquests many years; and had established there a
famous Empire that reached South as far as the Sands and Mountains would
permit, and North to the Mediterranean Sea.

One of the Emperors was Genzerichus, the most terrible Prince of his time.
About the Year of our Lord 452, he was invited by the Empress Eudoxia, after
the Massacre of her Husband Valentinianus, into Italy; where he became a
troublesome Guest: He killed the Tyrant Maximus; he sacked Rome, and carried away
the amorous Princess, with several of the Nobility, and great Riches, into
Captivity.

The Famous General of that time, Belissarius, checked the Pride and Insolency
of his Successors, and put a stop to the Victories and Conquests of the
Vandals: But they were never totally subdued out of Africa until the Saracens,
otherwise called Agarens or Ishmaelites, forced both them and the Romans to
yield unto them the Authority of the Country.

Hucba, a famous General, was sent by Osmen, the first Caliph of the Saracens,
to begin the Conquest of this part of the World.

Since their first entrance into those barren habitations, which they watered
with the Christian Blood; they have remained in a peaceable possession, free
from Foreign Invasion, unless it be by some unhappy Princes, who have vast
Armies at Land, and Fleets at Sea, only to recover some Seaport-Towns.

The In-land-People, accustomed to Idleness and Theft, know not the benefits of
Trade: Yet sometimes Commodities are conveyed unto them, by those that hazard,
rather then design brings amongst them; unless it be some French Peddler, or
some miserable Jew, that drives a few Camels laden with Warlike Provisions,
and other necessaries, with which their Country does not abound.

They suffer not Strangers to Travel, because they are ashamed that their
miserable Life should be known to People that live in ease and plenty; or
because they are jealous, least the strength of their Country, which consists
in the situation, should be discovered by a Forreiner, and by that, the means
of bringing of them under subjection.

The Affairs of the Maritime Countries of Africa have been Recorded by several
Writers: but of this Kingdom of Tafilet we know nothing, since the last
Conquest, until this famous Prince, that is come out of that Province, that
Nature has confind among the Deserts. His Father was the King of this place;
his Mother was a Black-more, whose handsome features only had recommended her
to the Xeriffes Acquaintance, and advanced her to the honor of one of his
Concubines: her mean descent did cause her Son at first to be looked upon by the
Mores as incapable of any Advancement; For that reason I conceive he was
branded with the Title of Bastard amongst his Enemies: His first and right Name
is not known unto us; that which he now bears, I know not whether he has
chosen it, or whether it is only imposed by Christians; It is certain that it
is borrowed from that Kingdom where he was born. At his first entrance into the
World he had an Attendance and Education suitable to his Fathers Estate.

The Learning of our Northern Climats is despised, and unlawful amongst the
Mahometans, who love not to burst their brains with others inventions;
therefore Tafiletta, for that shall be his Name in the following Discourse,
spent not his Youth in Contemplation, but rather in Action, in such Exercises,
that might prepare him for great Matters. He delighted to handle a Lance, to
manage a Horse, and to learn the other Arts that become a Soldier; Nature had
furnished him with a sharp Wit, a strong Body, and a sound Judgment; Which
Perfections by degrees did raise him in the esteem of the People.

He continued thus in his Fathers Court, until death deprived him of that
support, and advanced his elder brother to the Crown. At first he had his
favor and protection, but jealousy soon began to disturb their familiarity
and good intelligence. And since it has proceeded so far that it has caused
the untimely death of that unhappy Prince who harbored it in his breast. But
as this extravagant passion brought the Xeriffe to his grave, it has raised
our Tafiletta upon an Imperial Throne. He had never crept out of his home, nor
appeared upon so glorious a Theater, had not his brothers hatred forced him to
fly.

Soon after his fathers decease Tafiletta gave proofs of his Valor and great
Courage, which being accompanied with a bodily strength and a natural wit, did
render him able to bear command.

It is reported of him, that he is able with his hands, without any instrument,
by plain force to break a strong Horse-shooe; and that when he leads his army
he performs many times the office of a common Soldier as well as of a General
with wonderful success, And that in the Engagement, he holds his Cimeter with
such a tenacious fist that his hand cleaves to the handle, and that it cannot
be loosed without the assistance of lukewarm water.

It is certain that he won the esteem and favor of the common People by such
seeming Declarations of his strength and valor as are not usual to the rest of
men.

And although he is a Mouletta, and by consequence of a Countenance more
swarthy than the natural Saracens, he has an insinuating Presence where those
Characters of a noble Soul do appear, that seem to command both Love and
Respect. This being accompanied with a popular spirit, that knew as well how to
dissemble as to command, rendered him odious to his brother, but honored of
the People. His Credit and Interest in the Country did give no suspicion,
until he had the disposal of the Army, and that he was made General. In that
high Employment, his carriage was in its Element, he behaved himself like a
Hero.

In several encounters with the Neighbor Provinces his Valor and Conduct
always carried away the Victory, and forced them to a submission.

In one of the Battles the King his brother shared with him in the danger, and
in the honor of the day, but more in the one then in the other: for as he was
engaged in one of the wings against a strong Party of the Enemy, his men were
forced to draw back with the loss of a Captain and Colors; and he himself was
either taken Prisoner, or in peril of present death; When Tafiletta in person
comes with vengeance and fury to rescue the distressed King, whom he recovers
out of the Enemies hand, with the death and captivity of many of those that
flattered themselves with an apparent victory. I know not whether this
increased his displeasure to be so much engaged to One whom his passion
persuaded to hate.

It is certain that soon after this success he labored to requite Tafiletta's
good Offices with the effusion of his blood; and sought to destroy him whom he
could not sufficiently reward. There wanted not some Assistants to his bloody
design, nor favorers of Tafiletta; from hence rose a great division, and a
civil War, which was entertained as in such like occasions by false friends,
who are never more active then in sounding alarms when no cause appears, and
never better pleased then in the fatal discord of those great Families, from
whose ruin they may have hopes to raise their own.

The King first by treachery sought to take him out of his sight: And when he
perceived himself disappointed by Tafiletta's good fortune, and by his
diligence, his prudence, and valor: He then proclaims his bloody design at the
head of a party, with which he was resolved to find him out in the midst of
those that had taken arms in his defense.

Tafiletta with his followers was forced to seek his refuge in a speedy flight.
The Kings jealousy pursues him, and at a place of disadvantage overtakes him;
a bloody fight begins that sends many of the inferior sort into another world,
to carry the sad news of this miserable division.

Tafiletta encouraged his men by word and Example, but when he saw himself
overpowered by the great number of his enemies, and no way to escape his
brothers displeasure, but by shedding Royal blood: he clapped his spurs to his
Horse, and perceiving the King not far, he made toward him, and
notwithstanding the resistance of his Guards, he struck him dead to the ground.
This unhappy death was followed with the flight of the Kings party, and the
victory of Tafiletta, who might have made other use of it, to secure himself
from future designs. But when he saw his Nephew advanced in his Fathers Throne,
desirous of Revenge, and not judging himself able with his small Retinue to
encounter with the strength of the Country, he then thought a retreat to be
the safest policy for himself and followers.

At some distance from the Kingdom of Tafiletta there is a fruitful Province
fenced with a high Ridge of Hills that are not to be ascended without wings.
There is but one Avenue to this natural Fort, and that is called the Pass,
which as in other Countries is usually guarded for fear of a surprisal. Within
these Territories governed a Prince of a Nation and of a Religion that we could
never imagine, and which in all other places renders men incapable of authority.

From father to son many years one of the same superstition had always
succeeded. He was a Jew who had made use of his time and command rather to
gather Treasure than to increase his Dominions. The largeness of his Country
the author could not learn. The Inhabitants do call it by a name which
signifies the Mountain, here Tafiletta fled with his small Party, the Jew
received him with all honor and civility, and allowed him and his Followers a
Corner in his Metropolis to remain with a Pension for his expenses: Because he
was of the Blood Royal of Tafiletta, and that the Mahumetans, that were the
greatest number of his Subjects, had for his valor and virtues a considerable
esteem. The design of the Jew was to oblige the Moors and indear them unto
him and his interest by this favorable reception of this fugitive Prince. He
thought thereby to establish his Dominion and secure it from the envy and
enterprises of the professors of the contrary Religion. Besides, as he knew
Tafiletta to be a renowned General and a Generous Person, he thought his valor
would protect him from all invasion.

But it fell out otherwise than had imagined, Tafiletta in stead of a friend
proved at last his enemy. What occasion was given by the Jew is not known to
us. But it is certain that this Politic head was not long there before he had
contrived the mischief and death of the charitable Jew: who perceived not the
danger until he felt the Cimeter in his bosom. To bring to pass this
Assassinat the Moors that accompanied our fugitive were Instrumental. They saw
that the Jews good nature had won the hearts of his Subjects, that they would
not suffer him to be killed without a Revenge. And that it was but a folly to
play the Masters in a place where they were far the lesser number. Therefore
they contrived a way to engage the Proselytes of Mahomet in this design.

A Pretense of Religion, a common Engine of State, was employed to overcome
this difficulty, and oblige them to give their consent. They whispered amongst
the People, That it was not usual that a Jew of a strange superstition, and of
a miserable dispersed Nation should bear command; That it was a disgrace unto
them to be vassals of such a One; That it was not lawsul by that Religion that
they were obliged to maintain, and by which they expect future happiness, that
a Jew, worse than a Christian, should be Sovereign over Musulmans true
believers; And that they could never hope for their Prophets f^vor, if they
suffered long this infamy to their Profession, that did give-laws to all the
Nations of the world.

They represented also the advantages of being under a Mahumetan Prince, of a
noble spirit, that would endeavor to enrich them with the spoils of their
Neighbor Provinces.

These and such like suggestions being spread amongst the unconstant Multitude
made a great alteration in their minds. Insomuch that the Prince that yesterday
they cherished, to day they condemn to the sword. The Rebellion and the
Conspiracy seems not to have been discovered, but only to Tafiletta and his
Party, who were soon informed of the support and assistance of the Mahumetans,
in case they should undertake any thing to free them from the shame of the
Jewish Dominion. The Jew in the mean whiles, ignorant of the Plot, continued
unto him his wonted kindness, and often invited him to eat with him. At last
Tafiletta was attended to Supper by his Followers, armed with Cimeter and other
weapons. They both sat to their meat upon Carpets, according to the Custom of
that Country; and were never more familiar and loving, when one of those that
were present strikes his ungrateful Weapon in the bosom of the Jew.
Immediately the tumult rises, the Mohometans approve the Fact, and are ready
with their Weapons to defend the Murderers; A Council is called of the most
considerable of them, where thanks were given to Tafiletta, because that by his
means they had been delivered from the unlawful Authority of the Jew: And with
the consent of all he was Saluted Prince of the Mountain.

Religion, that had been so favorable unto him in this beginning, he employes
in his further designs; It has proved so benificial, that of a Fugitive it
made him first a little Prince, and since it has raised him to the glory of
one of the greatest Emperors of the World; in a Country, where he had neither
Relations nor Acquaintance, within the space of a few Years.

The Arms of Alexander, and the good Fortune of Caesar, were never more
successful unto them, then this Politic Weapon has proved to him.

His first care therefore, after his Inauguration, was to persuade his People,
That he intended to Govern by Religion: that himself was thereby ruled.

He labored to secure the Interest of that upon which depended his security
and happiness; for that reason, according to the exactest Precepts of the
Alcoran, he began to reform his little State.

This good Policy made him first to be esteemed, and then to be obeyed: and
since it has given him a vainglorious Title, to this purpose, Successor, or
near Kinsman to the Prophet Mahomet. It may be that Religion that is so much
professed by him, is least intended; however, he can never meet with much
dufficulty in an Obedience to his Law, that is fitted to please the brutish and
Animal dispositions of Men.

An inward instinct of Piety does not always accompany Men of his Place and
Valor, in this Age, where Atheism is the greatest expression of Gallantry, and
of a noble Spirit: A few outward Grimaces, and an open Severity, against the
Enemies of Mahumetisme, are sufficient to make him pass for a most Religious
Prince.

This esteem he has amongst the Mores; they are infatuated with an Opinion of
his Holiness: It was first occasioned by the strange Accidents that happened
unto him, and by outward expressions of extraordinary Valor and Strength;
which, having drawn upon him the Eyes of all Men, it was not difficult to give
them a favorable conceit of his Person, by some Apish performances. This
Opinion has wonderfully increast the number of his Subjects, and has so
prevailed upon the credulous Spirits of the Mores, that scarce any but those,
whose Judgments, some powerful Interest has healed of Superstition, dares
venture to oppose his Designs; or, if they do, it is with an inward fear of the
Great Prophets Displeasure.

Having therefore so happily obtained the esteem and Favor of the Inhabitants,
with the Jews Principality and Treasures, he resolved not to neglect this
opportunity of raising himself. The narrow limits of the Jews Dominions could
not contain his Ambition, that aimed at the Conquest of the divided Empire of
Morocco.

Since the Massacre of the last lawful Prince, several petty Governors, and
Heads of Families were become little Sovereigns over their Jurisdictions, and
had transmitted their Usurped Authority to their Successors.

Bembouqua and Gayland are the best known unto our Nation; the first was the
Sultan of Fez, the last of that part of the Country that some call by the name
of Suz.

These and the other Partners of the Empire could not be content with their
Possessions, but were in continual Dispute about the Confines. From hence rose
frequent Encounters, bloody Battles, and such irreconcilable hate, that it
could not hear of any Mediation.

These Divisions administered a fit occasion to our Tafiletta to further his
great Design; He therefore first raises such an Army as his Territories would
give him leave, and orders it according to a New Form and manner, because he
could not prosecute his Purpose with an Army Modelled and Governed according to
the Custom of that Country: Where, in a General Allarum, Orders are dispatched
to the several Mouhadems or Colonels of the Provinces, to appear with their Men
under their Command at the Rendesvouz* These send their Commissions to the
Cornets or Captains of the Quarters, to bring all that are able to Fight; and
every one is to be furnished with Provision for Life, as well as Arms for
Defense: for there are no Purveyors and Conveniences amongst them, to supply
their Wants; for that reason they are so numerous in their Armies. And that is
also the cause wherefore they cannot make any long stay in the Field, unless it
be in such fruitful places where they may furnish themselves by Plunder and
Theft.

To meet with these Inconveniences, Tafiletta made choice of a standing Army,
which increased by degrees, with his good Fortune; for its Maintenance he
appointed all things necessary, and gave a sufficient salary to his Horse and
Foot: At present it is reported, that he allows to every Horseman 16 Dollers a
Month, and to every Footman 8, so that his Men are not chargeable to the
Country.

In this order he Marched first against the little Princes that did live
peaceably under the Skirts of the Mountain, and made every Village, as far as
the Principality of Bousema acknowledge his Sovereignty, and pay Tribute. The
particulars of his Successes, until his enterprises against that Prince, the
Author could not learn.

Now Bousema is a City that lies upon the Mouth of a small River, that
discharges it self into the Mediterranean, very Commodious for Traffic. The
Prince had long enjoyed the advantages of Peace, and was grown very rich, for
that reason Tafiletta thought it his Interest to begin next with him, that he
might as well supply his wants, and recruit himself with his Treasures, as take
in a Seaport Town, that would be convenient to receive the Christian
Commodities, as Powder and Shot, and other necessaries that he should want in
the prosecution of his great Design: Into this Country he Marched with near
20000 Horse and Foot.

The Prince having notice of his coming, sent his Son with a Flying Party to
meet him upon the Borders, and to hinder him in some inconvenient passage,
whiles he with the rest of his Subjects, and the Succors that were expected
should join in a Body.

The young Prince was not acquainted with the Stratagems of Tafiletta, who knew
how to surprise him and his Men unprovided, and with the loss of a few Men took
him Prisoner.

With the News of this Success he sends a Messenger to Bousema, to inform the
old Prince; That his Design was not to remove him from his Principality, but to
make a League with him.

The Prince of Bousema had a Daughter very handsome amongst the Moors,
Tafiletta had heard of her Beauty, Her therefore he desires in Marriage from
her Father; And Promised at his first sight of her, to release his eldest Son,
and to leave him in a peaceable possession of his Dominion. But threatened, in
case of a refusal, to Sacrifice his Son to his resentment; and further, to
proceed as far as his good Fortune would give him leave.

The Prince thought it no Policy to anger such a Powerful Enemy. Therefore he
speedily obeyed, and sent his fair Daughter that was Married to the Conqueror;
who kept not his Word punctually with his Father-in-law: For since, it is not
known upon what Pretense, he has surprised the Town of Bousema, when the
Prince had Disbanded his Forces. He then seized upon the place almost empty of
Inhabitants, enriched his Soldiers, and filled his own Purse with the Princes
Gold: And because of the Relation he restored him to his former Command, upon
Condition, to pay homage unto him and his Successors.

At that time the Prince of Bousema had sent an Ambassador to my Lord Bellasys,
then Governor of His Majesty's Garrison and City of Tangiers, to desire his
Excellency, That there might be a fair Correspondency between those two
Sea-port-Towns. My Lord, whose chief care all the time of his Government was to
advance the Honor of His Majesty, the Interest of the Nation, and of that
City, willingly accepted of the Princes Proposals, and sent the Moore back in a
Catch that waited upon the Garrison, with several of our Men in another Boat to
attend him.

At their Arrival at Bousema they found the Prince distressed, with the
unexpected coming of Tafiletta's Army, and the Moors hasting out of the Town
to some stronger Retreat.

Tafiletta having performed this Expedition with wonderful success, he Marched
next with 30 thousand Men against Gayland and Bembouqua, otherwise called the
Santo: The latter is a Man that pretended to the strictest Sect of the
Mahumetans, he was King of Fez; hearing of his Enemies approaches, he put
himself in a posture of defense, and raised a considerable Army, which in the
first encounter was routed, and he himself hardly escaped with life. The City
of Fez is situate in the middle of the Kingdom. It has the report of being
strong, and able to bear a Siege: It is adorned with many stately Monuments of
Antiquity. Before this City the Conqueror sits down with his Army, surrounds
the Walls with his Tents with Horse and Foot, and sends to Command them to give
up the Keys.

The Besieged at first did appear Resolved to resist his Power, and defend
their City; but when the Multitude began to complain of want, the Grandees
called for a Parley, and yielded themselves to Tafiletta's good Fortune, with
their City. The whole Kingdom followed the example of the Metropolis, only
some few Mountains near the Sea, and the Town of Saley, remained under the
Government of the former Prince, until Tafiletta had leisure to mind them.

Gayland, seeing his Neighbors Country in a Flame, took the Alarm; he had
called together about 3000 of his choice Horsemen, and was then lying near
Alcazar, in those unhappy Fields, that did once swim in Christian Blood; and
that are so renowned for the Slaughter of Don Sebastians Army, and the Death of
the 3 Kings that there ended their Quarrel with their Lives together; in the
same place Gayland has left the Carcasses of his best Soldiers.

To bring to pass this Defeat, Tafiletta came with all speed with a small party
of his Army to Gayland's Country, that is almost an Isthmus. A small neck of
Land; A continued Mountain joins it to the Continent.

There is one narrow Passage through which the Conqueror was to enter into Suz,
before he could deal with his Enemy: This was guarded with a strong party of
Musketeers, commanded by One whom Gayland thought faithful to his interest.

Tafiletta presents himself before the Pass, and with some Spanish Pistoles in
his hand opens a way without the loss of a man. The Passage he secures with a
strong body of horse and foot, that it might favor his retreat in case he
should lose the day. And then proceeds on his Journey to seek Gayland, that lay
in a wonderful security, and dreamt not of the danger that threatened him.

There was one difficulty more to overcome which was not the least that
Tafiletta had met withal, Gayland was then attended by a body of Horse esteemed
invincible by the Moors, to hazard a Battle upon equal terms with such Artists
in war, in an Enemies Country, and with a small party was open madness:
Therefore when the Lions Paw could not prevail he employes the Foxes Pate. He
labors to conceal his sudden Arrival from Gayland, and to take the advantage of
his negligence, that so he might come by the victory without the hazard of his
men.

Amongst Tafiletta's Followers there was an old Friend of Gayland*s, whose
dwelling was in the Kingdom of Fez; this man the Conqueror thinks fit for his
purpose, he instructs him with his design, and furnishes him with a few Camels
laden with the Commodities of the Country. This man journeys toward Tituan or
some other place of note, and in his way passes by Gayland's Camp, who was
desirous to hear what passed beyond the Mountains, and what was become of
Tafiletta. The stranger told him that he was about forty Leagues off with his
whole Army, marching against a little Prince near the Kingdom of Fez.

Upon this false news he thought to disband his Army until another time, and
left them without Discipline or Guard wrapped in their Alhags, the men lying upon
the ground without order that night, and their horses feeding in the pastures.
He little thought of the mischief that was prepared for him.

Tafiletta having thus stolen into the Country followed Gayland's apostate
Friend by secret ways: and came almost at the same time undiscovered near
Alcazar.

In the Evening he observed the countenance of Gayland's Army from some high
Wood, in the which he expected the time of the night fit for his purpose.

Their wandering condition without order encouraged him in the execution of his
design, which he performed in the dead time of the night. Gayland's m^n were
almost all dead before he could perceive the execution. Some were awakened with
the groans of their fellows: These labored to recover their horses, and being
lead on by the great and famous Moukadem of that Country, the second son of
the Shack of Angiers, they made some resistance and disputed with Tafiletta for
the victory.

Gayland seeing himself betrayed, and his men either killed, or ready to fly
away for the safety of their own lives: After he had received two slight
wounds, the one in his cheek, the other in his side, and lost a horse that was
killed under him, mounted speedily upon one that waited for him, passed by
Alcazar where he took his last farewell of two of his Wives, and then saved
himself into Arzilla, having left the strength of his Country dead upon the
ground with their great Captain, who had three horses killed under him before
he was overcome.

Not long before this defeat Gayland foreseeing the design of Tafiletta, and
being jealous of his misfortune, resolved to strengthen himself with the
friendship of a Christian Garrison, from whence he might supply Arzilla his last
refuge with warlike provisions fit for its defense. The English in Tangiers did
command the Sea with a man of War, unto them therefore the Politic Prince
sends a Flag of Truce with Articles of Peace, when my Lord Belasys was upon his
return for England.

It was at last concluded very much to the advantage of the Garrison, by my
Lord's wisdom and care; The chief conditions were that Gayland should assist
His Maj sties Subjects against all Christian enemies, and that they should
succor him against the Mahumetans. The English did not long enjoy the benefits
of this peace, Tafiletta soon seized upon the Country, and forced them again
within their Lines, Colonel Henry Norwood, a Gentleman noted for his zeal to
His Majesty's Service, did then command in chief. Without delay he dispatches a
Gentleman by Sea to offer unto Gayland the assistance of the Garrison, according
to the Agreement.

At the same time Tafiletta sends also Ambassadors to offer unto him his
Country, if he would acknowledge him for his Lord; and to carry the dead body
of the son of Shack of Angiers, which was received with much State, lamented
with pitiful howlings, and buried with strange Ceremonies, which are related in
other Travels.

Gayland would not accept of his Enemies courtesy, but sent back the
Ambassadors without Answer: The One was the Cadir of Arzilla, the great Judge
of the Law of Mahomet, that had revolted to Tafiletta, with one of the
Secretaries of State. Gayland received him with civility, and suffered him to
transport out of the Castle his Wives and substance, that yet did remain in his
possession.

The Conqueror after the ruin of the Army found none to resist his power but
the old Shack of Angiers, a man only fit for his grave, and the City of
Tituan, that did seem to be sorry after the victory, but when they saw no safety
but in a speedy flight, or an humble submission* they then sought to make their
Peace.

Tafiletta having so happily brought all the Country under his Command,
established there a Lieutenant with a flying Party to suppress all sudden
Motions that should tend to a Rebellion. And before his depart he endeavored
in vain to draw the English from Gayland's friendship with great Promises of
Rewards and Privileges: and gave a furious assault to Arzilla to as little
purpose, with the loss of many of his men, killed with the great Ordnance, that
was managed by some few English. The great injuries received they have since
rewarded at several times with notable Courtesies. They have labored to
protect him who had been a bloody Enemy to their Garrison. But as their
undeserved faithfulness did wonderfully encourage his favorers in his defense,
it has purchased no little esteem to the English Nation amongst the Mahumetan
Princes of Barbary, who will be more willing to enter into their Alliance upon
whose promises they may safely rely.

At that time Gayland was attended and guarded with near 2000 Soldiers and
Inhabitants of Arzilla. With these he made several inroads into the Country,
as soon as he had notice of Tafiletta's Retreat. He returned with the spoils of
his revolted Subjects. But by such mean Conquests he lost the hopes of
conquering and recovering the Hearts of the people, who afterward did so
watchfully observe the motions of his men, that they cut off 400 of these
Commissioned Robbers with One of Gayland*s Brothers. After this unseasonable
defeat, Gayland seeing his affairs in a desperate case he dispatched a
Messenger to the Port to resign unto the Grand Segnior his interest to Suz,
hoping that the Protection of so great a Prince might draw Tafiletta to some
conditions of Peace, or at least oblige the Turk to send him by the City of
Argiers some succors, but this Policy has proved prejudicial to him, for it
has so much alienated from him the Moors, who are no friends to the
encroaching power of the Great Sultan, that those that yet did favor and
desire his re-establishment are at present his professed enemies: and his own
servants endeavored to purchase Tafiletta's favor by the delivery of his
person, but were disappointed by his flight to Argiers, where he now leads a
private life free from the fears of his former estate.

Tafiletta has since enlarged his Dominions as far as Morocco, and conquered
several Kingdoms. He has lately got six Dutch men skilled in the casting of
great Guns: Their assistance he makes use of in the battering down of Towns
that resist his Power.

The first part of this Relation, so far as concerns Tafiletta, was delivered
into the Authors hands by a Merchant of Provence resident in Arzilla,
acquainted with the affairs of the Country, by reason of his long abode
amongst the Moors, and his Journeys that he had made in the Land.

FINIS.

