A SHORT RELATION Concerning the Life and Death OF That man of God, and
faithful Minister Of JESUS CHRIST, WILLIAM SIMPSON Who laid down his Body in
the Island of Barbados, the eighth Day of the twelfth Month, M DC LXX.

My Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen th^^^of, 2
Kings 2. 12. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed
are (...) dead, which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow th^^ Rev. 14. 13.
Printed in the Year 1671.

A SHORT Relation, etc.
MErciful has the Lord been to us of this Island, beyond expression, in
sending his faithful Servants amongst us time after time, early, yea, and now
of late, preaching deliverance to us who were Captives, and under the region
and shadow of Death, turning us from darkness to the light, and from Satan's
power to the power of God; being as lights set on a Hill, publishing the
acceptable year of the Lord, to the penitent, and the day of vengeance of our
God on the rebellious, both within and without; which is now fulfilled and
fulfilling in this day of his power, wherein his people are a willing people,
let his will be what pleases him* here on Earth as it is in Heaven; though
there be them that do murmur at it as in the days of old, saying to the Lord,
DEpart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: still imagining that
the Lord delays his coming, according to his promise, which is, without sin
unto Salvation; and are still pleading for the Devils work, which is sin;
although that is it which separateth from the Lord, and hinders the will of
the Lord to be done on Earth (or whilst they are in this world) which is, that
they should be sanctified; but let such know, that after this Life, his Will
will be justly done on them whether they will or no, though now they may resist
the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers did of old; and they which are not obedient to
his call and voice (which his sheep do hear and follow) whilst here, denying
him before men, he also will deny them before his Father, and the holy Angels.

I do not question but that it will be granted, that the Call of the Lord is to
depart from sin, and not to join to that which separates from God. Then if we
hold sin the term of Life, we shall find that its wages will be death. We
cannot serve two Masters: If we serve Sin, we are free from Righteousness,
neither is there fellowship between light and darkness, or Christ and Belial;
for they are contrary and opposite in all things, insomuch that the fruits of
either are clearly descerned by the children of Light, who are not of this
world, neither of darkness, though they once were, but are now of the Day, and
are Light in the Lord, being turned thereto by his faithful Servants, speaking
by the same spirit that of old said, Come ye, Oh house of Israel! and let us
walk in the Light of the Lord. This as my Testimony, I write to those that have
been convinced of the Truth, declared largely by that Man of God, William
Simpson, who has bestowed much labor on us, that this may stand as a Witness
against my self, or any that have received the Truth declared by him, if we
depart from it: which that we may not do, let us all watch, knowing assuredly,
that it is only they that continue to the end that shall be saved; as this
faithful Warrior (yea, and more than a Conqueror) has done, who is entered
into his rest, having received an immortal Crown of an eternal weight of glory;
The Spirit of the Lord bears true witness in me to the truth of the same this
moment. And for the farther confirmation of the same, I shall instance
something concerning his End (which was miraculous) I being with him the time
that he kept House in his sickness, and to his Grave.

On the third day of this instant (being the sixth day of the week, he
powerfully preached the Word of the Lord, and made effectual supplication to
him by Prayer) at the House of Katherine Norton) it being the fifth Meeting
that he had been at that week, and last publication of the Gospel of Peace,
except nigh the hour of his death, which was so powerfully done, that it is
beyond my utterance, especially considering the low estate of his outward man;
which confirms his last Declaration to be no less than a miraculous voice
immediately from Heaven (as indeed it was) that we might then have said, (and
now do) That he being dead, yet speaks the wonderful things of God: From
which Meeting (as aforesaid at K. N s.) he with his yoke fellow, John Burneyat,
went to the house where Richard Clarke now lives, who kindly received them; and
that night our dear Friend, William Simpson was taken very ill with a Fever,
so that the outward man grew weaker and fainter every day more than other, and
the inward man was renewed with might (to our great rejoicing) as appeared by
his often making melody to the Lord with rich rejoycings; so that though we
sorrow for him, yet we sorrow not as those which have no hope: being Witnesses
of the Glory of the Lord which did surround him to the last.

And, his care was much over the Flock of which the Lord by the Holy Ghost had
made him an Overseer, as appeared by his words to his (and our) beloved John
Burneyat, that morning, who signified to him, That he had freedom to stay with
him if he desired it; but dear William answered him, saying, All will not be
well except thou be there (meaning men's meeting that day, and the general
meeting on the morrow) with other words to that effect.

Now for the service of Truth, these two faithful Stewards had separated
themselves (outwardly) but having bemoaned each other, like Turtle Doves that
miss their Mates, they resolved in the Will of the Lord to enjoy each others
company so much as they could, yet with Williams consent John went to Town that
day.

And on the eighth day of this Month he grew very weak and faint in Body, and
with being removed (according to his desire) he fainted away, not speaking nor
knowing us, as he afterward said: And seeing us to be sad, he asked, If he had
given us any words in the time of his fainting, that might offend us? but we
satisfied him that he did not, neither did he, for indeed he was harmless in
all things, and was become as a little Child, for not one froward or hasty word
proceeded from him, neither was he any thing less than a perfect man, who
feared God and eschewed evil; yea, he walked before the Lord and was perfect,
insomuch that the Lord hid not from him that which he has accomplished on him,
for in the forenoon the Lord showed him in a Vision that he would take him
away; and giving a start, he gave us to understand the same, saying, It lies
very hard upon me, it is fixed in me, relating the thing that he had seen; and
I observed, that the pangs of Death seized on him at that instant, which might
be about the eleventh hour: and being desired to keep his bed (because moving
of him caused him to faint) he gave us an innocent look, like a Babe (as he
was) lying still submitting to what we said, whose innocent looks and behavior
caused tears from some, which he beholding was trobled, speaking to us
tenderly, that we should not be grieved, etc.

And toward evening he grew so weak, that he spoke very inwardly, so that we
could scarcely hear him; and after that manner he spoke much of, and to the
Lord, praising him wonderfully, but with a very low voice. And after a while we
perceived that he did not know us, saying, Friends, be noble, and do not hinder
me in my Passage, for I am an innocent man. And being asked whither he would
go? he said, I must pass away. And by what else he spoke at that time, we
surely know That his heart was wholly fixed upon the Lord: For had any evil
been in him, something of it would have showed it self at such a time, yet this
holy Man of God did not, neither spoke he at any time any word unbecoming the
Truth, which he once more powerfully preached.

Between the sixth and seventh hour he lay very still and silent, and one came
there (who has been invited to Meetings but never came) and taking him by the
hand, asked him how he did? who answered, I am a very sick man. And looking
toward the man, William Simpson was on a sudden endewed with the Power and
Spirit of the Lord, by which he marvelously preached the glorious Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ about a quarter of an hour, sweetly praising and magnifying
the Lord; which was so contrary to our expectations, that it caused great
amazement, with trembling and tears; who held forth powerfully the Doctrine of
Perfection and freedom from sin on this side the Grave, and that Friends should
be valiant for the Truth upon Earth, and that they should not again be
entangled with the Yoke of Bondage (which brings Imperfections) but to stand
fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ had made us free; that every Bond and Yoke
may be broken, that that which is pure of the Lord God might go free in all;
that God might be glorified and honored, and we preserved in the day of trial
which must come upon all flesh; and so to grow from grace to grace, and from
strength to strength, and from one degree of holiness unto another, that a
daily growth may be witnessed in all; (further saying) Oh Friends! It is the
Life that the Lord looks at; for, he that has the Son has Life, and he that
has not the Son has not Life. Examine your selves; no Son, no Life; without
the Son, without Life, etc.

And thus he Declared wonderfully and often, glorifying and praising the Lord
after this manner; Oh all that is within me, praise and magnify the Lord God,
who is worthy for ever and ever of all Glory; and everlasting Praises to the
God of my Life, who is only worthy, and lives over all, is above all, God
blessed for ever. Amen.

And after this sort did he often ascribe living praises to the God of his
Life, etc.

And in his Declaration he said, That what he had spoken, was laid upon his
Spirit by the Lord so to do, etc.

When he had spoke a word not plain, he repeated it again, and so went forward
until he had finished his Last Testimony with supplication: Continuing sensible
unto the last. Richard Clarke asked him, If he knew him; and William answered,
That he could not tell. But when he told him his Name was Richard Clarke, the
Candle being brought near, William wrung him hard by the hand and spoke no
more. And about the tenth hour of the Night he departed this Life like a Lamb,
and the next Day his Body was carried to the Bridge-Town (it being General
Meeting day) nigh which he was buried in a Garden belonging to Richard Forstal,
being honorably accompanied thither with several hundreds of Friends.

This Relation, I hope, will give content to his Son (who I have heard him
speak off) and all Friends who may enquire after him, for as he lived, so he
died, Preaching the Word of the Lord in the Demonstration of the Spirit and
Power; and many Seals are in this Island, confirming the Gospel that has been
ministered by him and his Fellow Laborer.

And as for the Sufferings of this Just Man William Simpson, his being often in
Perils by his own Countrymen (who honor not their Prophets) Whipped, Stockt,
Stoned and Imprisoned: Such Bonds and Tribulations have attended him, yea, as
much as any man; most Towns and Cities bear record for him in England and
Scotland. He has been a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and was
made perfect through Sufferings; who is ceased from his Labors, and is entered
into his Rest.

Written in Barbados, the 10th, of the 12th, Month, 1670. By one of the least
of the Flock of Christ; whose Name is, William Fortescue.

Here are a few Lines more concerning our dear Friend and Brother WILLIAM
SIMPSON.
The Righteous perish and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken
away, and none consider that the Righteous are taken away from the evil to
come, Isa. 57. 1.
THE glorious day of God everlasting is dawned, and the light of his excellency
has shined by the glory of his heavenly virtue, through the thick clouds of
darkness, which has long been as a Vail over the hearts of the people of the
Nations; during which time the world was as a Wilderness that was untilled, and
brought forth Thistles, Thorns and Briars, in stead of Corn, Wine and Oil; but
since it has been the good pleasure of the Lord of the whole earth, to
manifest the glory of his Spirit of burning by the operation of Life, which
appears through the Light to burn up the Briars and Thorns, and to sow his
good Seed. He has sent forth painful Laborers to gather the Harvest of the
Earth; for his Seed has long been sown in the heart of Man; and how can he
expect any thing now but fruits; and he has sent his Servants into many
Nations, Kingdoms and Countries, some whereof have been raised from Death to
Life by the Ministration of the glorious Gospel, and have brought fruits to the
praise and glory of God Almighty.

Now those whom the Lord has been pleased so to send forth he has not sent
them empty, nor without the enjoyment of his heavenly presence, but has endued
them with the operation of the power of his Divine Spirit, even the Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, of Righteousness and true judgment.

And among the many Regions, Kingdoms and Countries, the Lord has been pleased
to visit this Island of Barbados, whereunto he has sent his Servants time
after time, endued with the Power of his Spirit, to convince its inhabitants of
the evil of their ways, and many thereby are gathered into the way of Gods
Covenant, of Life and peace. Everlastingly blessed be the Name of the Lord who
has remembered us in these remote parts of the Earth; and amongst the many that
he has sent, he has sent two of his faithful Servants, with the Ministry of
his Everlasting Gospel, whose Integrity and Innocence has appeared in the
likeness and Image of God Almighty, to the convincing of many of the way of
Gods Truth, whereby the most High has been pleased to enlarge the Assemblies
of his People, by drawing nearer unto himself those that were afar off; for the
gathering of whom, the Lord of Heaven and Earth has made the two aforesaid,
his fathful Servants (viz.) William Sympson, and John Burneyat, very
instrumental in his hand, to declare the light of the eternal Day in the
demonstration of the Spirit of Love and tendrness; who faithfully have dealt
plainly with all People, without respect of Persons, as the Lord commanded
them; and they have not been as Idle-labourers in the Vineyard, but they have
been willing to spend and to be spent, for the advancing and exalting of the
Power and Truth of the most High God in the hearts of men.

Now that which caused me more particularly to write this unto you (to whose
hands soever it may come) is somewhat to signify something concerning that
Renouned Servant of the Lord, and Faithful Follower of the Lamb, William
Simpson, who has walked in faithfulness unto God, and followed the Lamb
through many Tribulations, and washed his Robes, and made them white in his
blood, and has not loved his Life unto Death, but has fought the good fight,
and by Faith has overcome; and has run the race that was set before him, and
has finished his course, and has obtained a Crown of Life and Glory, and is
set down in the Kingdom of Heaven, in the place of Everlasting Rest, with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and with the Saints of the most High for ever.

And truly Friends, I cannot but give Testimony that he was an Innocent Man (as
himself also said, when he was near his last breath.) I have sometimes known
him in our native Country, and then did his Life sound forth his Innocence: and
having been here more than four Months, the same state of Innocence was found
in him, even unto the day that it pleased the Lord to take him from amongst us,
to reign with him in Eternity.

And as the Lord alone had made him a Preacher of his Word, in the way of
Righteousness, in the time of his Life, (as men of a right understanding can
sufficiently evidence) so likewise in the same hour of his Death, he did
wonde^fully declare of the great work of the Lord, and of his compassion to all
People, and having concluded said, That what he had said, was laid upon him
from the Lord.

And he said unto those that were with him, That he was an Innocent Man, and
desired them not to be troubled, but to let him go. And now he is entered into
everlasting Rest, in a Heavenly habitation, having laid down his Head in
Everlasting Peace in the glorious State of Eternity, where he does rest from
his Labors and his Works do follow him, beyond the reach of all the Tyrants of
the Earth, who can never come there except they repent: But their day will
assuredly have an end, and they must come to Judgment before the Lord; and then
let the stout-hearted amongst them stand up in the might of his strength, and
gird up his Loins like a Man, and contend with the Almighty if he be able to
answer him, when he calls to an account for the deeds done in the Body: And
where is he that knows his latter-end? or whether this may be his last day here
or nay, as the two aforesaid faithful Servants of the Lord have many times
reminded all People here, to remember their latter end, and to strive to make
their Calling and Election sure with the Lord, and not to grieve the good
Spirit of the Lord, by following vanity and excess of Riot, or whatsoever would
hinder their passage to the Kingdom of Heaven, where Life and Salvation is
attained: where the Soul of our d^ar Brother aforesaid, does rest in Peace and
Glory for ever, as I do assuredly know by c^rtain and infallible Testimonies. I
was with him sometimes in the time of his being sick and weak; and the night
before his departure was with him all night, when his Spirit rejoiced in the
Lord, and his Soul did behold the Salvation of God; then could he not forbear
to sing praises to his Maker, as did evidently appear at sundry times; and his
faithful Companion and Fellow Laborer in the Ministry of the Gospel of
Salvation, (viz. John Burneyat) was also with him almost all the time of his
being sick, and although he could not but mourn with us at the parting with so
dear and faithful a Friend and Companion; yet we could not but also rejoice
with him, to behold the Excellency of the Glory which he, (to wit) the Soul of
our dear Brother, entered into, when the Mortal was put off, to enter with
Immortality into the joyful place of Felicity and Heavenly Consolation, with
the Spirits of Just men and Angels in the Heavenly Jerusalem, there to reign
with the highest for ever.

Where now thy Soul does rest in quiet peace,
Since that thy Labors here on Earth did cease.
By Faith in Christ thou have obtaind a Crown
Transcending glory of the Worlds renown;
For thee in Heaven is prepared a Throne,
To live for ever with our King alone.
In Life thou wast obedient unto him,
And have obtaind a Royal Diadem.
The Cross thou did embrace, despise the shame,
And preach'st the the Gospel in his Holy Name.
When in thy Native Country, wast a Sign,
To preach Red^mption unto Jacobs Line.
For all the proud and lofty Ones shall say,
That a true Prophet warned them that day.
And happy they, if they in peace had known,
Gods Word, through thee proclaimd, from him alon;
For that in Life thou did the Truth maintain,
Through Death a Crown of Life thou do obtain.
Thou dearly love'st the way of Life's infusion,
And lived'st therein unto thy last conclusion.
Th^n to the Throne of Life thou did ascend,
Where Life Eternal never shall have end.
W^itten in Barbados the 16th. of the 12th. Month, 1670, by Oliver Hooton.

This William Simpson, who was a faithful Servant and Prophet of the Lord to
the Nations, in which he went through great Tribulations and Sufferings; who
went into many Steple-Houses, and declared against their false Worships; and
was often Imprisoned for the Truth, and under-went cruel and hard Sufferings by
the Goalers. He went three years Naked and in Sackcloth, in the days of Oliver
and his Parliament, as a Sign to them, and to the Priests, showing how God
would Strip them of their Power, and that they should be as Naked as he was,
and should be stripped of their Benifices. All which came to pass after King
Charles the Second came in. And moreover he was made oftentimes to color his
face black, and so black they should be and appear so to people, for all their
great profession; and so it came to pass. And then when it came to pass he was
made to put on his clothes again, who was made before many times to go through
Markets, to preists-houses, and to great Mens-houses, and Magistrates-houses,
and to Cambridge, stark naked. And the Mayor of Cambridge put his Gown about
him, being sensible there was something in the thing. And he was made to go
through London naked; and this was all before the king came in. And he was
obedient unto the heavenly command, and often ventured his Life and it was
given up: Who many times did receive many stripes upon his naked body with
Thorn Bushes, so that when his service was done, Friends were forced to pluck
the Thorns out of his flesh: But he was carried over all by the mighty power of
God, I say over all his Persecutors: And the Lord brought the things upon them,
for which he went as a Sign, who was moved by the Lord to go to Barbados, where
he finished his days.

He was bred and born in Lancashire, and there first received the Truth.

G. F.

And this is my Testimony for our dear B^oth^r William Simpson, who went naked
for a sign against the Professors and their unjust dealings before the King
came in. And many sore Blows he bore on his naked Back, with Staves, Wands, and
Hedg-bindings; he bore a Testimony against their Profession and standing; and
through the most part of England he went, and now has he laid down his Body in
Barbados, where God made him serviceable in his Truth there to preach the
everlasting Gospel; so them that sat in darkness, he brought to the Light; and
them that sat in Death, he brought to Life. This is my Testimony for him.

Elizabeth Hooton.

Going Naked A SIGN.
OH Church of England! This is unto thee, who live in oppression and cruelty,
pride and covetousness; a day of misery is coming upon thee, thy nakedness and
shame is coming upon thee as an armed man, from which no man can hide thee,
neither Hills nor Mountains shall be able to hide thee in this the Day of the
Lord, neither shall the Clefts of the Rocks preserve thee from the Day of the
Lords Controversy with thee; Thy nakedness and thy shame is near to come upon
thee, from it thou shall not fly: Oppression and cruelty has been as a staff
for thee, but the Lord is arisen to break thy Staff of Oppression, and thou
shall be left naked, though thou have seemed to be the glory of the Nations
with thy deceitful covers, but now thou shall be left Naked, and Nations shall
be ashamed of thee. Howl and weep ye Teachers, for the Lord is gathering his
people from you, and ye shall devour his flock no more. The Day is coming upon
you, that none shall buy your wares any more, ye Merchants of Babylon: All your
Scarlet color the Lord our God is coming to take off: Then your Nakedness
shall appear to many Nations, and you shall sit as a Widow, and there shall be
none to comfort you; Distress and anguish shall take hold upon you, and pain as
a woman in travel, and is not able to bring forth, so shall your misery come
upon you: The Decree of the Lord is gone out against all unrighteousness, he
will surely reward every one according to their works, for as a troop of
Robbers lie in wait for a Man, so a company of Priests by consent lie in wait
to murder the Innocent Lambs of God, and for their sakes the Lord is risen in
his mighty power to break the bonds of wickedness, and to set the oppressed
free, for the Lord has heard the groaning of his Seed, and he is risen to
deliver, to bring it out of Captivity, and from under the taskmasters, where
his Seed has been long oppressed by unreasonable M^n: But the Lord will spare
no longer, but he will reward the oppressors double into their bosoms, and his
seed he will deliver.

Oh howl and weep! your day is far spent, Night is coming upon you that you
shall not have a Vision, nothing shall be left to cover you: As naked shall you
be spiritually, as my body has been temporally naked in many places in
England, as a sign of the nakedness and shame that is coming upon the Church of
England, who lives in oppression and cruelty, and all who lift up a weapon for
her shall fall in the shame with her, which will assuredly come to pass; So all
sober people consider your ways, and turn to the light which comes from Jesus,
that with it you may be gathered unto the Lord from the false Teachers to the
teachings of the Lord, from the false Worships to the worship of the Lord in
spirit and in truth; for a necessity was laid upon me from the Lord God of Life
and Power to be a Sign: But before I was given up to the thing, it was as death
to me, and I had rather, if it had been the Lords will, have died than gone on
in this service; But when the Word of the Lord came unto me saying, Go on and
prosper; It was sweet unto me as the honey and the honey Comb. And blessed,
says Christ, are they that are hearers of my Word, and keep it.

William Simpson.

THE END.

