A Philosophical Essay: DECLARING The probable Causes, whence Stones are
produced in the Greater World. From which occasion is taken to search into the
Origin of all Bodies, discovering them to proceed from Water, and Seeds. Being
a Prodromus to a Medicinal Tract concerning the Causes, and Cure of the Stone
in the Kidneys, and Bladders of Men. WRITTEN By Dr. Thomas Sherley, Physician
in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head, in the Lower Walk of
the New-Exchange. 1672.

To the Illustrious, GEORGE, Duke, Marquis, and Earl of Buckingham; Earl of
Coventry, Viscount Villiers, Baron Whaddon of Whaddon, Lord Ross of Hamlock,
Belvoir, and Trusbut, etc. Master of the Horse, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
It Is not the sublime condition in which you are, nor the eminent, and great
Honors with which you deservedly shine, (as a bright Star, of the first
Magnitude, in our little World,) that has induced me to address this ensuing
Discourse to you; but the great, and excellent knowledge of Natural Beings your
Grace has acquired by a constant, and curious Anatomizing of all sort of
Concrets in your Laboratory; a way certainly the most likely to give you a
faithful and solid account of the Nature of things, by discovering to you the
real principles of which they are constituted. This it is, which made me
conclude, I should have done a great injustice, had I put this Tract under any
other Protection than yours. And indeed, at whose feet can a Subject of this
Nature be so fitly placed as at your Grace's, you being so great an
Experimental Philosopher?

But lest I prove tedious, I will conclude this Epistle, with assuring you,
that not only this Book, but the Author of it, are both Dedicated to your
Graces Service, by him that in all Humility subscribes himself,

My Lord, Your Graces most Obedient, and Faithful Servant, THO. SHERLEY.

TO THE READER.
READER,
Custom, which has the power to make, and establish Laws, has obliged me to
comply in this particular of writing to thee. Otherwise I was resolved to
suffer this ensuing Discourse to appear naked, and without an Advocate, [as
Philosophical Subjects ought to do:] that so the minds of the studious, being
free from preposession, might be the better able to judge of the truth of the
Matter in hand, and of the validity of the Arguments I produce to evince it.

This, I say, I would have done, could I have been assured, that this Book
should have fallen under the censure of none but Philosophical, and knowing
Men, to whom I should have thought my self happy to have submitted my labors
in this kind* To which sort of inquisitive, and industrious Men, I pretend not
to have done any further service in these Lucubrations; then by having laid
together those Arguments, and Experiments, which did readily occurr to my mind*
and which I thought might conduce to prove the Matter in hand, a Subject ^it to
be seriously looked into; and though I seem in some places to be determinate,
yet I declare* [once for all] I have not the vanity to think I have put such a
Ne plus ultra to the inquiries into this Subject, that ^o further discoveries
are to be made; nothing less. For though the Subject be rough, and hard, yet it
is far from being unfruitful. And if by my endeavors I shall prove
Instrumental, [by giving of hints, etc.] to put other industrious Philosophers,
who are fitted with better parts, and more time, to digg deeper in these
Quarries, I shall think it glory sufficient, to have been thus far serviceable
to the Commonwealth of Learning: and if by the endeavors of such W^rthy Men,
I shall find my self confirmed in my Opinion, I shall rely upon it with the
greater security. But if by their inquirius, other, and truer causes shall
appear; I shall not scruple to a knowledge, that I will willingly become a
Proselyte to Truth, though at the same time it is discovered it convince me of
having been erroneous in my Opinion.

But at present, thinking I defend a verity, I shall not easily recede from my
Opinion, without my Judgment be convinced, by the same means I make use of, to
Proselyte others: that is, both by reason, and Experiments. And likewise let me
add this, that I shall expect the same Candid, and civil dealing from such who
intend to confute me, which I have showed to those whose Opinions I reject. For
otherwise I shall conclude a railing Adversary fitter for my slight, than
reply; I knowing a better use of my time, then to spend it so unfruitfully.

As I court not applause, which is a vanity anbefitting a Philosopher; So,
having [as I suppose] appeared in a good Cause, that is, the defense of a
philosophical truth, [viz. that the Matter of Stones, and all other Bodies, is
Water, and their Efficient Seed] I shall not fear Censure, though I must be
exposed to that of any Man, which shall take the pains to peruse my Book; I am
not ignorant of the Proverb, So many Men, so many Minds: Nor of that other,
Haben^^sua fata Likelli: And therefore cannot expect that impossibility of
pleasing every body; but that I may be as useful as I can to those Readers,
which though they may have large Souls, have yet been little Conversant with
things of this Nature; I say, that I may be as Instructive as I can, and that
my meaning may not be mistaken, I shall therefore inform them of these things
following.

First, that there are many Men, of great Natural parts, which yet want the
advantage of understanding the Greek, and Latin^ ^ong^^s; for whose sakes, I
have [that I might be the more useful] Translated into the English, all those
quotations which I make use of, from Authors which have writ in those Learned*
Languages, and that [for the most part] Verbatim, [though sometimes I only
deliver their sense.] And to satisfy the scrupulous, yet Learned sort of
Readers] of my integrity, I have almost constantly given them the very words,
and in the same Language they are delivered by those I qu^te* together with the
Book, and for the most part, Page, where the Original words may be found,
[marked in the Margin.]

Secondly, If it shall be objected, that I am very frequent in quotations, [a
thing much out of fashion;] and that therefore it may be supposed, I have said
little but what will be found expressed by others; I shall acknowledge I have
wilfully done so, because I had a desire to get my self strongly Seconded in my
Opinion by the determinations of Learned Men; [And of the Testimony of such
only have I made use] For I verily believes that if an Angel himself should
avouch any thing singly, and as his own Opinion, he would not be believed by
some Men. But however the Reader will have these Advantages by it, First, those
things are here contracted, and brought under their proper heads, which are
dispersed in many Voluminous* Authors; which will save him time in searching
many Books. Secondly, He may find the Pith, and Substance of what others have
written in their Languages, delivered in his own. And thirdly, here are,
besides, many Experiments, and Observations of my own, very conducible [I
suppose,] to clear, and explicate those Philosophical Principles I have
undertook to defend in this Discourse.

Thirdly, If any Man shall be so much a Mo^us, as to repine at the j^st
commendations I often give to Van Helmont, and Mr. Boil; I must needs say, that
I think his ill Nature proceeds from his want of thoroughly knowing these
Authors: for if he had taken the pains to search the depth of these two, as I
have done, I doubt not but he would acknowledge, I have fallen short of giving
them their deserved praise, [they having merited so much from all inquisitive,
and Learned Men.]

Lastly, I think it necessary to tell thee, how I would have to be understood
those two words of Seed, and Water, the Principles upon which I have built this
Discourse.

First then, by Seed I understand a fine, subtle Substance, [imperciptible by
our gros^ Organs of S^os^tion;] in which God has impressed a Character of that
thing he will have it produce from the Matter it is to work upon: which it does
perform by putting the parts of Matter into such a peculiar motion as is
requisite to produce the intended Effect. And this we may illustrate thus.

A Woman with Child, by a strong desire, forms in her Spirits an Idea of some
Fruit she longs for; and by the powerful motion of that Idea working on the
Child, she forms a real E^^igies of the said Fruit upon that Member of the
Child which corresponds to that of her own Body she touched with her hand;
which, as Experience teaches us, will Vegetate, grow Ripe, and Wither,
according to the several mutations the Fruit it resembles undergoes. And we are
told by Esdras, that God, before he made the World, did consider the things he
intended to make; and then produced them. By which Expression, I think may well
be understood, the Creation of all those Spiritual, and Seminal Beings,
containing in them, not only an Idea of the thing to be made; but also a power
to move the Matter after a peculiar manner, by which means it reduces it to a
form like it self. And as a Painter does first conceive in his mind a
Spiritual Idea of the Picture he intends to draw; and afterward by pecultar
Motions of his hand, which are guided by the said Idea, he produces a perfect
Picture Corresponding with that in his mind: So likewise, by putting Matter
into peculiar Motions, the Seminal Idea makes it self visible.

By Water, the Material Principle of all Concrets, I understand, a fluid Body,
consisting of very minute parts, and variously figured Atoms, or Corpuscules,
the Mass of it being full of pores, and therefore subject to be contracted into
less room: and upon the same account it does easily, and readily submit to
those motions it is put into by Seminal Beings: from which moving of Matter all
the visible, and Tangible Bodies of the World, have their result. And therefore
I have, all along this ensuing Discourse, took care to explicate the (...) of
the Origin of Bodies, by the Mechanical Principles: That is, by the Motion,
Shape, Size, Situation, and Connection of the parts of Matter.

But though this be a way commonly used, in explicating things, by the
Philosophers of our Age, yet most of them leave out the first principle of
Natural Motion; viz. the Seminal principle, which I have taken in, to complete
my Hypothesis.

And now (...) said they (...) I shall say this further, [and let it not be
counted a vanity] that I think, and hope, I have in some considerable measure
made out the truth of those principles I have assumed to defend.

It has cost me some pains to Collect, and draw into proper Sections, the Body
of this Discourse: which I have also strengthened by the Authority of the best
Philosophers, and Learned of Men, both Ancient, and Modern. All which I here
present thee with: heartily wishing all ingenious M^n may see the usefulness
of, and receive as much satisfaction in this Doctrine; as I do, who am a Friend
to all that industriously search after the Truth, and Nature of Things.

THO, SHERLEY.
From my House, in Newton-street, over against New South-hampton Building, in
High Holborn. Ian. 27th. 1672.
The Reader is desired to Correct as he Reads, these Errors of the Press, as
likewise any other he shall find.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. in the Margin, leg. Consensus. p. 13. lin. 2. read Concurrere. page
15. lin. ult. leg. (...). p. 33. dele these words [or entire.] p. 34. lin. 5.
leg. a priori. ib. lin. 8. leg. Springy. p. 35. Lin. 11. dele whilst, and they.
p. 16. dele [. p. 38. in the Margin, leg. Elementis. p. 40. lin. 23. leg.
faeces. p. 103. lin. 25. leg. seminal. p. 126. lin. 26. leg. apposition. p.
124. lin. 24. leg. (...). p. 110. lin. 28. leg. those. p. 137. lin. 1. leg.
least. p. 129. lin. 1. leg. etherel. p. 114. lin. 1. leg. [(...).] p. 119. lin.
9. leg. OVTOV.

THE FIRST ESSAY: Being a Discourse intended to demonstrate, that not only
Stones, but all other Bodies, owe their Original to Seeds, and Water.
Section the First.
the Stone, both in the Kidneyes, and Bladder (...) the greater World] in
general: and I was encouraged the more to do so, by a Passage* I met with in
the Works of that Noble Philosopher, Mr* Boil whose words are there. Since we
know very little a Prior^* the observation of many effects manifesting, that
Nature does actually produced them so, Boil, Useful, of experiment.
Philosephy, p. 31.
and so, suggests to us several ways of explicating the same Phenomenon, some
of which we should, perhaps, never have else dreamed of; which ought to be
esteemed no small advantage to the Physician: And again; He that has not had
the curiosity to inquire out, and consider the several ways whereby Stones may
be generated out of the Body, not only must be unable, satisfactorily to
explicate, how they come to be pro^uced in the Kidneys, and Bladder; ^ut will
perhaps, scarce keep himself from embracing such errors, (because Authorized by
the suffrage of eminent Physicians) as the knowledge I am recommending, would
easily protect him from.



Gabriel Falopius mentions a River, History 1.
called Else, which receives into it self the Torrent of the River Sena; into
which, Falopius de Metal* and fallilibus.
Wood, Herbs, or any other thing being ^ast, it converts it into stone.

Albertus Magnus relates, that in the Danish Sea, near Lubeck, in his time, 2.
there was found an Arm of a Tree, with a Nest, and Young Birds in it, the
Wood, Nest, and Birds being all converted into Stone.

Domitius Brusonius tells us (not upon hearsay, 3.
but upon his own knowledge) that the branches of Trees, with their Leaves,
being cast into the River of Sylar, do turn into stone.

Marbodius acquaints us, 4.
that there is a Gothia [or Guthland] that changes whatsoever is put into it
into stone; D* Lapid, ex Alberto. Lib. 1. Mineral. Cap. 7.
and that the Emperor Frederick being incredulous of the thing, did send his
Glove thither, sealed with his Ring; and that that part of the Glove, with the
seal, which was immersed in the Water, was in a few days converted into stone;
the other part remaining Leather.

Johannes Kentmannus, concerning Fossils, 5.
writes, De fossilibus.
that Arms of Trees, with the Leaves, Bark, Wood; also Gloves, and diverse other
things, being cast into a certain Fish Pond, near the Castle of Schellenlerge,
in Misnia, are turned into stone.

Bartholomaeus a Clivola affirms, th^re Caesarea, 6.
and Tuana, In Lib. de Baluis.
two Cities of Capadocia, into which part of a Reed, or Stick being put, it by
degrees is changed into stone, that part which is out of the Water remaining
what it was before.

Anselmus Boethius declares, that in England, 7.
near the River Dee, Lib. 2. de Lapid. and Gem. Cap. 300.
by West-Chester, there is a great Cave, into which whatsoever water flows, is
turned into stone.

Thomas Moresinus relates, 8.
that in Moravia there is a dark Water, in which there does not at all appear
any viscous matter; which water, nevertheless, coagulates into stone.

gives us a wonderful account of a Spring in the Suburbs of Claremont, in the
County of Avernia. History 9.
It flows [sayes he] out of a Rock, In Lib. Hydrogr. Spagyr Cap. 14.
and in its very coming forth it produces Rocks, and white stones; and the
Inhabitants of this City, when they would make a Bridge to go over any of the
small Rivulets, which are made by this Fountain, that so they may visit their
Fields and Gardens, do thus: They cause the Water of this Fountain to glide
over certain planks, made Archlike, and within twenty four hours they have a
solid stone Bridge; by the help of which they can pass dry-foot over the
Rivers. The water of this Fountain is visibly changed into stone, yet
nevertheless it always flows as other Springs do: This water is exceeding
clear, nor does it differ in color, or clearness from other Springs; Beasts
will drink of it if they be not hindered; but if they do, it coagulates in
their stomachs into stone, from whence Death follows, by reason of a Colic
caused from thence, which kills with cruel torments all the Beasts that have
drunk this water. Wherefore the Inhabitants take care to drive their Cattle far
enough from this Fountain; for it is a present poison to all sorts of living
Creatures that drink of it. When it is taken from the Spring, it is quickly
turned into stone; the truth of which the Inhabitants do make manifest [to all
that doubt thereof] by many experiments; they fill a glass with this water, and
presently it is converted into stone, which retains the shape of the glass:
so likewise if Earthen Vessels be filled with this water, it is suddenly
congealed into stone, which keeps the form and figure of the Vessel that
contained it. This wonder of Nature [sayes he] every body admires, but I
believe hardly any body will be found, that shall be able to render the Natural
reason of this thing. Thus far he.

Gassendus tells us, 10.
that Peireskius [according Rhosne, In vita Peireskli. Lib. 1.
to wash himself; he observed once the ground to be hard under his feet, and
uneven, [which had at all times before been soft, and smooth] being full of
knobs, and Balls; about the bigness, and likeness of Eggs boiled hard, and the
shells pilled off; which he looking upon as somewhat strange, took some of them
up, and cartied them home; but a few days after he was surprised with a
greater Admiration: for, going again into the same place of the River, he found
those soft, and yielding lumps, he had left there, turned into perfect pebble
stones; and also viewing those he had laid up at home, he found them likewise
turned into true Pebbles.

Helmont likewise affirms, that [contrary to the Proverb, 11.
Gutta Cavat Lapidem, De Lithiasi. Cap. 1.
A drop by often falling does hollow a stone] there is a Spring in the
Monastery of Zonia, near Brussels, that breeds stones so fast, that the Monks
are daily forced to break them off with Crooks and Hatchets.

Wrixham, in North Wales, 12.
that in a short space of time would convert Sticks, Straws, Leaves, Leather,
or any other subject, put into it, into stone. And of this Nature are diverse
other Springs to be found, both in Ireland, and England.

13.
Gerard, assures us, he knew several Springs of this Nature, History of Plants.
both in England, Lib. 3. p. 1586.
and Wales: As in Bedford-shire, in warwickshire, near Newnam Regis; and
another near Knasborrow, in Yorkshire; he likewise tells us, he knew diverse
pieces of Ground, into which astake being struck, that part in the ground would
be changed into stone, the other part remaining Wood.

Libavius relates, 14.
That a certain In apend. Synt^g. Arcan. Chym. Cap. 32.
being struck with a Gorgonick Spirit, was transformed into stone, with her
Eggs likewise.

Crollius relates, 15.
that in a certain place Moravia there is a stupendous Den, In Praefat. Lib.
de signat. Rerum.
in which are to be found diverse, and admirable sportive works of Nature: for
the drops distilling from the upper part of the Cave, into the hollow of it, do
there form many intricate Labyrinths in the Mountain, and do presently [of
their own accord] convert into stone, by the help [as he thinks] of the Spirit
of Salt; and in their falling from on high, they form various Figures, and
Statues of stone.

Aristotle says, 16.
that in the Metalline Lydia, about the City Pergamos, certain Workmen, in the
time of War, having fled into them to hide themselves, and the mouth of the
Cave being stopped; they perished there; but afterward being found, not only
their Bones, but their Veins, with the humors contained in them, were found to
be turned into stone.

Aventinus also writes thus: In the Year 1348. 17.
by an Earthquake, In Hist^r* Bavar. Lib. 7. id* est* in Anal. Bavar.
more than fifty Country men, with their Milch Cows, and Calves, being killed
and stifled by an Earthy saline Spirit [as he supposeth] they were reduced into
saline Statues, [such as Lots Wife:] And this happened amongst the Carini [a
People of Germany;] which similitudes or Images of Men, and Beasts, were seen
both by him, and the Chancellor of Austria.

18.
Helmont tells us of a whole Army, De Lithiasi Cap. 1.
consisting of Men, Women, Camels, Horses, Dogs, with their Armor, Weapons,
and Wagons, which were all transmuted into stone, and remain so to this day,
[a horrible spectacle;] And this, says he, happened in the Year 1320. betwixt
Russia and Tartary, in the Latitude of 64. degrees, not far from a Fen of
Kataya, a Village, or Horde, of the Biscardians; which he very rationally
concludes to have happened from a strong hory petrifying breath or Ferment,
making an eruption through some clefts of the Earth, the Land being stony
underneath; and the Winds having been silent for many days.

He that desires more Examples de ungaricis. Godfrid. Smoll* in lib* Princip.
Philosoph. Et Medic. antiquitatis. Cap. 10. F. Leander Albertus in descript.
Italiae. Andreas Laurentius, lib. 2. de strumis. Cap. 2. Georgius Agricola,
lib. 7. de Natura fossil. Cap. 22. Johannas Wigandus, in libell^ de Succino:
Lobelius, in fine Observat. Caelius, etc, But I suppose what I have here
related sufficient; and therefore I think it now time to inquire into the
Causes of Petrification, and the Efficients of these Transmutations. SECT.

Section the Second.
Aristotle, and has since prevailed with most Men even to this Age of ours,]
has been the cause, why we have hitherto received but an unsatisfactory
account, not only of the Origin of all concretes, but more particularly
concerning stones; and that not only in Relation to the Material Cause, but
also to the Efficient, of Petrifications in general.

and Stones, to be chiefly Earth; and without any further Controversy, or
search after the matter, they are content to believe, and would have us do so
too, that all sorts of stones are nothing but Earth, from which the other three
Elements are forced by heat; by which means it becomes baked into a stone. And
this they [viz. the Aristotelians] think they prove by alleging the Example
of Potters Earth, which being burnt gains a stone-like hardness. And because
neither Stones nor Earth do commonly melt in the fire, they therefore conclude
stones are made of Earth. But there being on such heat in the Superficies of
the Globe, much less in the bottom of the Water [where commonly stones are
bred,] I must confess I can receive but little satisfaction from this account.

And I find the Learned Sennertus is as unsatisfied with this Doctrine as my
self: Sennertus, in Lib. concens. Cbymis. Cum Ga^enist. Cap. 2.
Licet vulgo multi e qualitatibus primis Calculorum Concretionum and
Coagulationum causas deducere conantur; tamen frustrae laborant. Nam neque
exsiccati^, nec calor, nec frigus, hic locum habere possunt, ut primariae
causae, [nam, ut causam sine qua non, concur posse, non negamus; dum scilicet
aquam, quae concretioni obstat, absumit;] neque a quoquam hactenus commonstrari
potuit, quomodo calor nudus talem Concrescendi dispositionem generare, and
succum Lapidescentem producere possit. Imo fit hoc etiam, ubi omnis Calor
abest, and in frigidis etiam membraneisque locis, item and in Infantibus,
ubinullus concedatur Caloris excessus, sed manifesta potius cruditatis indicia
deprehendantur, in vesi^a generantur Calculi; and quomodo, quaeso, in fontibus
frigidis, in quibus ligna immersa in lapides transformantur, succus lapidescens
a Calore producitur? Deinde, frigus quod attinet, non semper in loco frigido,
vel minus calido, Calculi concrescant, cum and in capite, and in pulmonibus,
circa basin Arteriae magnae, in Cordis arteriis, imo in Cord reperti sint: uti
Legimus in Observation. Cornel. Gemmae, lib. 1. Cosmocritic. Cap. 6. Anton.
Beniven. de abdit. Morb. and Sanat. Causs. Cap. 24. Fernel. 5. P^tholog. Cap.
12. Hollerii, 1. de Morb. internis, in schol. Cap. 29. and 50. Et in balneis
etiam Calidissimis Trophos at stirias saxeas concrescere, ubi frigus nullo modo
admitti potest, experientia compertum habetur: in English, thus;

Though it has been much endeavored by many to deduce the causes of the
concretion, and coagulation of stones, from the first, or primary qualities,
yet has their labor been in vain: for neither can drought, heat, or cold, be
here allowed as a primary cause, [but we do not deny, that they may concur as a
cause, sine qua non, so that it may, for Example, waste the water, which
hinders concretion;] neither could it hitherto be demonstrated by any body, how
heat of it self could be able to generate such a disposition of compaction; and
that it could produce a Lapidescent juice: Nay, this is performed where all
heat is wanting, and that in cold and Membranous places; as also in Infants,
who are not allowed to have any excess of heat, but are rather found to have
manifest crudity, the stone is generated in the Biadder: and how, I pray, is
the stonisying juice produced in cold Fountains, into which wood being cast is
changed into stone? Then, as to cold, stones do grow in the Head, in the lungs,
about the basis of the great artery, in the Arteries of the Heart; nay, they
are in the Heart it self. Also there grows in hot Baths, as experience shows,
sandy stones, and stony Isicles, where cold can by no means be admitted. Thus
far he: by which you see he is clearly of opinion, that neither heat, nor cold
can be the primary, or chief cause of Petrification; contrary to the Axiom
which Aristotle lays down, to this effect;

In Meteorologicar. Lib. 4. Cap. 8.
and are hard, they are wont to be thus affected; some by the fervor of heat;
some by cold; that drying up the moisture, this pressing it forth.

Solidity: which they that deny [say they] are obliged to show some other
cause; from which Salts have that aptitude to coagulate themselves, and become
solid bodies.

For, it is manifest, that the Salts of

The Learned Kircherus is also of the Kircherus in Mund. Subter.
[viz. that Salt is the cause of stonifying] and gives us this experiment to
confirm it. Si saxum [inquit] quodcunque in tenuissimum p^llinem resolveris,
and aqua perfect commixtum, per Manicam Hippocratis Colaveris, illa nil
prorsus saxeum, sed preter arenaceum solummodo sedimentum nil relinquet; si
vero Nitrum, vel Tartarum, aqua perfect commixtum addideris, illa quacunque
tetigerint intra subjectam concham posita sive frondes, similiaque, post
exiguum temporis curriculum aeri exposita, vel in saxum ejusdem generis
conversum si non totum, saltem cortice Saxco vestient. If [saith he] you reduce
any sort of stone into a most subtle powder, and mixing it thoroughly with
water, you strain it through Hippocrates's bagg, therewill nothing of it remain
that is stony; nor will it leave any thing of it behind, but a certain sandy
sediment; but if you shall add to this, Nitre, or Tartar, perfectly dissolved
in water, whatsoever body they shall touch, being placed in the same Dish,
whether it be the twiggs of a Vine, or the like, after a little while being
exposed to the Air, it will be turned into stone; or at least it will be
covered with a stony Crust. And though this opinion be held by Crollius, and
Sennertus, [who are but Neoterick, or late Writers] yet is it no new opinion,
but has been asserted by the venerable Ancients, as long ago as the time of
Hermes Tresmegistus, [who is said to have lived in the Age of Ioshua] who in
his Smaragdine Tables [as they are called] has left us these words. Salis est,
ut corporibus in Mundum prodituris, soliditatem coagulando praestet; Sal enim
corpus est, Mercurius Spiritus, Sulphur anima, that is; It Is from Salt that
Bodies are produced in the World; it causes Coagulation, and Solidity: for
Salt is the Body, Mercury the Spirit, and Sulphur the Soul.

This Doctrine, though much more per deliquium. But, to let this pass; what
Salt can be supposed to be communicated to Quicksilver, when it is coagulated
by the fumes of melted Lead, by which it becomes so solid, that it may be cast
into Moulds, and Images formed of it; and when cold, is not only hard, but
somewhat brittle, like Regulus of Antimony?. What access of Salt can be fancied
is added to the white of an Egg, [from whence the whole Chick is formed] which
is a Liquor so near water, that by beating it with a whisk it is reduced into
so fluid a substance, that it will easily mix with water, and is hardly
distinguishable from it? And yet this white of the Egg, by the assistance of a
gentle heat, to stir up its seminal Principle, and enable it to turn, and new
shuffle the parts of that liquid substance, [by the means of which motion
diverse of its parts are broken into shapes and sizes fit to adhere one to
another] is all of it turned into solid bodies, some of them very tough, as the
Membranes, and Nerves; and some of them hard and brittle, as the Beak, Bones,
Claws, etc. [of the Chick;] and all this without any new addition of salt.

It Is likewise remarkable, that very credible witnesses assure us, Gassendus,
Lib. 4.
that Corral [though it grow in salt water, Anno Dom. 1624.
at the bottom of the Sea] is yet, Mr. Boil. Essay of fermness.
whilst it remains there, soft, like other Plants; [and juicy also:] neither
will the example of Kircherus, alleged above, avail much; sinceit is commonly
known, that the powder of Plaster of Paris, or burnt Alabaster, if it be mixed
with water, without any sort of salt, will coagulate into an entire stony lump,
or Mass.

I do not deny but that salt may very

I say, salts do this to some bodies

Now, for that Argument, that salts do brittle Crystals, if I should say they
do so upon the account of a seminal Principle, I should not, perhaps, be
thought to have much mistaken the cause, by those that have well considered the
curious and regular Figures [yet constantly distinct from each other,] which
their Crystals shoot into: which certainly cannot proceed from chance; for they
do as constantly keep their own figure [as for Example, that of Nitre always
appears in a Sexangular form, that of Seasalt in a Cubical:] As Wheat produces
Wheat, and the seed of a Man, a Man.

viz. the Helping, or Assistant] we will not deny but that salt may be one, as
being such a praevious disposition of the parts of Matter, as renders them more
apt to be wrought upon by the first kind of Agent, viz. the Seed. So that in
some sense we may [for the reasons above alloadg'd] allow the Chemist to think
salt is [though Nec prima materia, nec efficiens. Yet] Proxima ma^eria, and
(...) Soliditatis. The Proximate matter, and Adjuvant cause of Solidity.

But since not only salt, but the whole Tria prima, or Three first Principles
of the Chemists, as also the Quaternary, or four Elements of the Peripateticks,
are justly enough denied to be the first Elements, or constitutive Principles
of all Bodies, [they themselves being further resolvable into more simple
parts, as we shall prove by and by,] I say, since it is so, I must be excused,
if denying my suffrage to both their Doctrines, [in that large sense they
propose it in:] I offer to render other causes, by which not only solidity, but
Petrification also may be introduced into Matter.

Section the Third.
Plato, Timaeus Locrus, Parmenides, Pythagoras, etc. Philosophers of the
Academick, and Italick Sect; but also by Orpheus, Thales the Milesian, and also
by Mochos, and Sanchoniathon, the great, and Ancient Phoenitian Philosophers;
nay, by that Divinely illuminated Man, Moses.

Aristotle's time; but to please such, let them consider, that the Hypothesis
we intend to make use of in this ensuing Discourse, bears an equal Date with
the World, and was at first delivered to Man by the Ancient of Days himself.

This Doctrine then [which has of late years been revived, and assumed by the
Noble Helmont, and other great wits,] I now am come to lay down, and explain;
and in the next place shall endeavor to prove, and confirm it; first, by
reason, then by experiment, and lastly, by Authority.

The Hypothesis is this, viz. That

That is, that the matter of all Bodies

But to make this the better to be understood, and then descend to particular
proofs of what I assert.





vis Plastica, or Efficient; [and this indeed is the real seed, or geniture,
though it be invisible] which contains in it self the Image, or Type of the
thing to be made; which it performs by a Fermental Odor, or Aura, and by
breathing upon those proper juices it finds in a Female Womb; it first
coagulates them, and then by degrees explicates it self, working this Female
Matter into a Body exactly corresponding with its own pre-conceived Figure: the
gross body of the Male-seed all this while being but a vehicle, to convey with
safety this subtle fermentative breath to its proper place of action; which
being done, the body of the sperm is ejected from the Womb, as useless to
Generation.

That this is so, has been proved by foetus; and yet no Vestigiae, or
footsteps of the Male-sperm could be found in the womb. This is asserted by
that incomparable Man, Dr. Harvy. de generat. ex Ov^.
Dr. Harvy; to whom I refer him that desires further satisfaction in this
point.

The sperm of Man, if but for a moment of the spermatick ferment, [it being
very apt to desert the body of the seed.] This is a truth so generally known,
that the Virtue of that Lady is justly suspected by all rational Men, who
pretended to have Conceived with Child, by attracting the seed of a Man which
floated in a Bath, wherein she Bathed her self.

viz. a fermentative Odor, [or Aura] which also contains the Idea of the Plant
to be produced.

The body of the Seed, or Grain [which is the Casket that contains this
invisible Workman] being committed to the Earth [its proper Womb] is softened
by the Nitrosulphurous juice of the soil; that the Vis Plastica [which is the
Efficient of the Plant] may, being loosened from its body, be at Liberty to
act. Which being done, the body of the seed, or Grain, is destroyed; according
to the sacred Writ: [ Except Seed, committed to the ground, dye, it produces
no fruit:] But the Architectonick Spirit being now at Liberty, ferments, by its
Odor, the Liquors it finds in the Earth, converting them into a juice, fit to
work the Plant out of it, which it by degrees performs. [This Liquor in the
Earth, is by Paracelsus, and Helmont, by a Barbarous name, called Leffas
Terrae; and is the proximate matter of all Vegetables.] For proof of what I
seem to have with some boldness asserted in this place; Let any sort of Grain
be put for a small time in an Oven, [or any analogous hea^,] that the external
warmth may suscitate and excite this ferment of the Seed to take wing, and
desert its body; This Grain, though entire to sight, if it be committed to the
Earth, shall never by any Art be brought to produce its like.

As Vegetables, and Animals have their

To this purpose Dr. Jordan tells us, Dr. Jordan of Natural Bathes. Cap. 2. p.
58, 59.
which meeting with convenient Matter, [what that is, we shall show in its
place] and Adjuvant Causes, is not idle, but does proceed to produce Minerals,
according to the Nature of it, and the Matter which it meets withal; which
matter it works upon as a Ferment, and by its motion procures an actual heat,
as an Instrument to further its work; which actual heat is increased by the
fermentation of the Matter.



Agricola, and Thurniser do affirm, and is proved by common experience. The
like is generally observed in Mines, as Agricola, Erastus, Libavius, etc. do
avouch out of the daily experience of Mineral Men; who affirm, that in most
places they find their Mines so hot, as they can hardly touch them; although it
is likely, that where they work for perfect Minerals, the heat, which was in
fermentation whilst they were yet in breeding, is now much abated, the Minerals
being now grown to their perfection. And for this heat we need not call for the
help of the Sun, which a little Cloud will take away from us; much more the
body of the Earth, and Rocks; nor for subterranean fires. This imbred heat is
sufficient, as may appear: also by the Mines of Tinglass, which being dug,
and laid in the moist Air, will become very hot; so Antimony and Sublimate
being mixed together, will grow so hot as that they are not to be touched. If
this be so in little quantities, it is likely to be much more in great
quantities, and huge Rocks. Heat of it self differs not in kind, but only in
degree, and therefore is inclined no more to one Species, than to another; but
as it does attend, and serve a more worthy Superior, such as this Generative
Spirit is. Thus far he.

Moreover, that Minerals, and Metals have their proper Seeds, hear further
Cosmopolita says, Semen Minerale, Nov. Lum. Chym. Tract. 6. p. 319.
vel Metallorum, creat natura in visceribus terrae; propterea non creditur tale
semen esse in rerum natura, quia invisible est. Nature does Create the Mineral,
or Metalline Seed, in the B^wels of the Earth; therefore it is not believed,
that there is such a Seed in Nature, because it is invisible. And the same
Author again, thus: Et quam praerogativam vegetabilia prae Metallis habent, ut
Deus illis semen inderet, and haec immerito excluderet? Nonne ejusdem
dignitatis Metalla apud Deum, cujus and arbores? Hoc pro certo statuatur, nihil
sine semine crescere; ubi enim nullum est semen, res est Mortua; that is, And
what prerogative have Vegetables above Metals, that God should put Seed into
them, and undeservedly exclude these? Are not Metals of the same dignity with
God that Trees are? This may be held for certain, that nothing does increase
without Seed: for where there is no Seed, that thing is Dead.

So that it is plain, you see, by the afore-cited Authorities, that Minerals,
and Metals have Seed, and that this Seed is invisible; and that it works by the
help of its ferment, or as a ferment. That stones grow, common experience
teaches us; as also the tenth History alleged, in the first Section of this
present Essay; and consequently must be endowed with seed, and ferment; so that
here is, at least, an analogous way of production to that of Animals, and
Vegetables (which we have declared above) and was the thing we intended here to
prove.

But before I proceed, that I may be Fermentum, which signifies Leaven, is by
^ some esteemed to be quasi fervimentum, or a thing made hot; and generally is
used to denote, not only a turgescence, and dilatation of the parts of Matter,
(as in Leavened Bread, etc.) but also signifies the working of any sort of
Liquor, till it become Maturated, and exalted into a generous, and sprightly
Drink. Fermentation is thus defined by the Learnned Dr. Willis: Fermentatio est
motus intestinus particularum, seu principiorum cujusvis corporis, cum
tendentia ad perfectionem ejusdem Corporis, vel propter mutationem in aliud;
Fermentation is an intestine [or intire] motion of the Principles, or
particles, of which day Body consists, with an intent to perfect the said Body,
or change it into another. Ferments then are subtle, tenuous Bodies, [which we
generally call Spirits; for as to Leaven, Yeast, etc. they are but the
cloathings of these Spiritual, and finer Substances; as we before showed the
Grains of Vegetables, and the Sperm of Animals were:] which fine subtle breath
(the Ferment) has an expansive power; by which, being immersed in any Matter,
or Substance, it desiring to dilate it self, variously agitates the small
particles of that matter it is joined to, and making Excursions through all
parts of the Subject it is resident in, it adhering intimately to every small
part of the Matter, does first by the peculiar motion it has put them into,
alter and break the particles into new shapes, and sizes; and then by
conveneing together with them, constitute a new texture of that Matter; and
thus a new Concrete is made by the power of the Ferment.

So that, in truth, the Ferment of a Seed, [I mean Natural Ferment] is not any
Substance distinct, or separable from the Seed it self; since it is connatural
a priore, as well as the Seed, and may be thus defined.

A Ferment is an Expansive, Elastick,

We have likewise declared often, that much abated: [as, not to instance in
artificial things, making of Malt, the fermenting of Beer, and Wine, in the
Barrel, and the leavening of Dough, etc.] for it is observable, that the Grains
of Wheat, or other Vegetables, sown in the ground, when their invisible seed
begins to ferment, do send forth Odors; so also the Eggs of Birds, on which the
Hen has sat. And that Minerals, and Metals, whilst in their making they do
send forth such plenty of stinking Odors, that many times the workmen in Mines
are suffocated therewith, no body can be ignorant. Now these Odors are fine and
subtle Effluviums, [or small particles of the Matter now put into motion by
the power of the seed, Ferment: which having extricated themselves from their
Companions, and roving in the Air, do at last strike against those parts of our
Noses that are fitted by Nature to be sensible of the touch of such very small
Bodies.

seeds, and their Ferments, from whence they proceed.

Having before declared, that all Bodies viz. Quaesunt prima in Compositione,
sunt ultima in resolutione: Et quae sunt ultima in resolutione, sunt prima in
Compositione. That which is first in the Composition, is last in the
resolution: And those things which are last in the resolution, the same are
first in the Composition. The second Argument is grounded upon another axiom
commonly received. That is, Nutrimur iisdem quibus constamus. We are Nourished
by those things of which we are constituted, or made. The third argument shall
be to show, and prove a necessity of all Bodies being formed out of water;
because neither the four Elements of the Peripateticks, nor the Tria Prima, or
three Principles of the Chemists, can possibly concur to the constituting of
Bodies, as either the Efficient, or Primary Matter; they being themselves but
great disguised Schemes of one and the same Catholic Matter, Water, from
whence they were made, and into which they are ultimately to be resolved, and
uniformly to be reduced, either by Art, or Nature. All which assertions I hope
to prove, both by Experiment, and Reason, and shall likewise endeavor to
strengthen by good and sufficient Authorities.

Section the Fourth.
All Bodies are made of that Matter into which they are ultimately resolved,
and e Contra; This Maxim is agreed upon of all hands, both by the
Aristotelians, the Old Chemists, and the New ones; and that almost upon the
same ground. For the first supposed all Bodies reducible at last into Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth; and therefore held the Quaternary of Elements, [ which,
by the way, they could never yet sufficiently prove.] And the Second believed
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury to be the first Principles of all Bodies. And the
last sort, the modern Chemists, hold Spirit, Oil, Salt, Water, and Earth, to be
the true Primary Principles of Bodies, for the same reason; viz. because many
Concrets are resolvable by fire into the first three, if not into the last
five, distinct Substances before named.

But that all Bodies are by Art to be Helmont, says. Nostra namque operatio
Mechanica mihi patefecit, Helm^nt in Tract. de Elementa. ss. 11, 12. p. 43. and
DeTerra. p. 45. ss. 15.
omne Corpus [pu^a saxum] Lapidem, Gemmam, Silicem, Arenam, Marcasitam,
argillam, terram, Lapides coctos, vitrum, Calces, Sulphur, etc. Transmutari in
Salem actualem, aequiponderantem suo Co pori, unde factus est: Et quod iste s^l
aliquoties c^hobatus, cum sale circulato Paracelsi, suam omnino fixitatem
amittat, tandem transmutetur in Liquorem, qui etiam tandem in aquam insipidam
transit: Et quod ista aqua aequiponderet sali suo, unde manavit. -- Plantam
vero, carnes, ossa, Pisces, etc. quicquid similium est, novi redigere in mera
sua Tria, unde post modum aquam insipidam Confeci; Metallum autem, propter sui
seminis anaticam commistionem, and arena [quellem] difficilime in salem
reducuntur. Cum igitur arena, sive terra Originalis, tam Arti, quam Naturae
resistat, nec queat ullis [unico duntaxat Gehennae artificialis igni excepto]
Naturae vel artis, a primaeva sui constantia recedere; sub quo igne
artificiali, arena sal ^it, ac tandem aqua; quia vim habet agendi super
sublunaria quaevis absque reactione, etc. For our handy-craft Operation [that
is, his Liquor, Alkahest] has manifested to me, that all Bodies [to wit, the
Rocky Stones] the Pebble, the Precious stone, the Flint, Sand, Marcasits, Clay,
Earth, Brick, Metal, Glass, Lime, and Brimstone, etc. may be reduced into a
real Salt, equal in weight to its own Body from whence it proceeded: And hat
Salt being often cohobated with the circulated Salt of Paracelsus, does
altogether lose its fixedness, and is transmuted into a Liquor, which also at
length becomes insipid water; and that water is of equal weight to the Salt of
which it was made. -- But Plants, Flesh, Bones, Fish, etc. and every such thing
[saith he] I know how to reduce into its three first Principles, from whence
afterward I have made an insipid water: but Metal, by reason of its strict,
and exact commixture with its Seed, and the Sand [quellem] are most difficul^ly
reduced into Salt: for Sand, or the Original Earth* does resist as well Art, as
Nature, neither will by any means [the only artificial ^ire of Gehenna
excepted; that is, the Alkahest] be made to recede from its firstborn
constancy, etc. [under which artificial fire the Sand is made Salt; and at last
water] because it has a power to work upon any sublunary Body, without its
re-acting upon it again.

He likewise tells us, in his Tract, entitled, Helm^nt. Complex. atque
Mistion, Figment. p. 88. ss. 27.
Novi enim aquam [quam manifestare non Libet, etc. For I know a Water [which it
is not sit to discover, meaning the Alkahest,] by whose help all Vegetables are
changed into a distillable j^ice, which leaves no feces in the bottom of the
glass: which distilled juice, if it be mixed with Alkalies, [or fixed Salts] is
reduced totally into insipid and Elementary Water.

And a little further in the same Tract, That he took an Oak-Charcoal, and
mixing it with an equal weight of the Liquor Alkahest, he put it in a glass,
Hermetically Sealed, which being kept in a Balneo for three days, it was in
that time turned into a couple of Diaphanous Liquors, of different colors,
which swam upon each other; which being distilled together [in Sand] by a heat
of the second degree, it left the bottom of the glass as clear, as if it had
never been used. The two Liquors of the Coal might be distilled with the heat
of a Bath, but the dissolving Liquor, [or Menstruum] in that degree of heat
would remain at the bottom of the Glass, not impaired in its weight, or Virtue.
And that the aforesaid two Liquors of the Coal, being mixed with a little
Chalk, at thrice distilling, did ascend of the same weight as before; but
having lost all their distinguishing qualities, it became undiscernable from
Rainwater.

viz. that all Bodies were Originally Water. But after all this stress I lay
upon these Experiments of He^mont'S, it may be objected by some, That they not
being possessors of this Liquor, may be allowed to doubt of the truth of what
he has delivered concerning it. To which I answer, first, that I think it no
cogent Argument, to conclude there is no such thing, because many men are not
possessors of it; and if this should be admitted, all other Arts and things,
that are possessed by any Man [and not known to the common people] would be
liable to the same exception; and every Cobbler, or Ploughman would conclude the
impossibility of the effects produced by most Mathematical Auromatons, or
Engines, because he either knows not, or has not seen the con^rivance of the
thing, or else is not able to conceive the reason of its Operation: And if
every Man [that knows more than the Vulgar] would make it his own case, they
would, I suppose, think it an unreasonable and hard way of judging of things.

Secondly, the Man is so consentaneous whatsoever he has delivered us as his
own Experience [though possibly many of those things do not at first sight seem
over-probable.] But lest I may seem over-partial, I will give you a Testimony
of him [that may be instar omnium] and that shall be from a Man, of whom the
World is fully satisfied, not only as to his candid Temper, but also of his
ability to judge, both of Men, and things; and the unwillingness of his Nature
to encourage falsehood: and that is the Inquisitive, and Honorable Mr. Boil,
who says thus both of him, and the Alkahest.

[speaking of Helmont] who cannot but be acknowledged for one of the greatest
Spagirists they can boast of, Scept. Chemist. Carmades Dialogus p.
they must not deny that there is to be found in Nature another Agent, able to
analyze compound Bodies less violently, and both more genuinely, and more
universally than Fire: And for my own part, I have found Helmont so faithful a
Writer, even in diverse of his improbable Experiments, that I think it somewhat
harsh to give him the lie, especially to what he delivers upon his own proper
Trial. And I have heard from very credible Eyewitnesses some things, and seen
some others my self, which argue so strongly, that a Circulated salt [or a
menstruum, such as it may be] may by being abstracted from compound Bodies,
whether Minerals, Animals, or Vegetables, leave them more unlocked than a wary
Naturalist would easily believe; that I dare not confidently measure the power
of Nature, and Art, by that of the Menstruums, and other Instruments, that even
eminent Chemists themselves are as yet wont to employ about the Analyzing of
Bodies. Thus far he.

Besides, he that had labored more Geber, and many of the Arabian Philosophers
had it before him; as also Basil Valentine, Raymund Lully, and Paracelsus. Nor
can I believe so grave and great a man, would in his Old Age, near his Death,
impose falsehoods and lies upon the World.

But without the assistance of this Liquor,

The same worthy man, Helmont, says, [and I have found it true by experience]
Olea and pinguedines, per ignem separata; adjecto pauco sale Alkali, saponis
Naturam assumunt, atque in aquam Elementalem abeant. Complex. and Mistion.
Elem. sig^. p 86 ss 12.
[And again, thus:] Omne Alkali, addita pinguedine, in aqueum Liquorem, qui
tandem mera and simplex aqua fit, reducitur [ut videre est in sapone, etc.]
quoties per adjuncta fixa, semen pinguedinis deponit; That is, That fats, and
Oils distilled by fire, a little of an Alkaly, [or fixed salt] being added, do
become soap, and at last, may be turned into Elemental Water. -- All Alkalies,
fats being added, are converted into watery Liquors, which at last is made and
reduced into mere simple water [as it is to be seen in soap, etc.] as often as
by a fixed adjunct, [such as Chalk] it shall be made to lay aside its seed, and
fatness.

Omne Oleum distillatum, in salem est mutabile, and in aquam per adjuncta. All
distilled Oil is to be changed into Salt, and by adjuncts into Water. Also, the
best spirit of Wine, which is totally inflamable, if it be joined with salt of
Tartar, will be transmuted into mere water: which salt of Tartar it self, by
the help of Oils [as is above declared] will at last be reduced into water.

All Vegetables are reducible by distillation Volatile Menstruum, which being
put to act upon Bodies, as a dissolvent, it loses its saline acrimony, and by
repeated operations it is totally converted into insipid water.

All Animals upon the face of the hearts out of their Bodies some hours, [not
to say, days;] I say one would little suspect by their outside, these
Creatures should abound with moisture as they do. For, if any of them be put to
distillation, you shall perceive them to boil in their own juice, and to afford
an incredible quantity of Phlegmatic Liquor, which being cohobated upon dry
Bodies, as is directed in the reduction of Vegetables, returns to water; also
their Oils, and fatty substances, being joined with an Alkaly, and made into a
soap, then distilled, they yield a stinking water, which cohobated, as the
other, does likewise return into water.





be fluxed with Alkalies, they are thereby robbed of their Sulphurs; to which if
you add Oil, it is made soap, and then to be dealt with as is above directed,
by the Example of both Vegetables, and Animals: or else the Sulphurs of
Minerals, separated from the Alkalizate Salt, may be burnt, and the Fume caught
by a Glass-Bell, [as is usual in making Oil of Sulphur per Campanam] it will be
turned into a corrosive Spirit, which will be reduced into water; as I have
showed above, other corrosive Spirits may be by acting upon Bodies.

Metalline Mercury, or Quicksilver, Raymund Lully does witness, and Experience
with him.

Nay, Nature her self does in time Salts, Ashes, Stones burnt to Lime, etc.
witness the dunging of Land by these things. Nay, Metals themselves in time,
having past their (...) or prime, degenerate into middle-Minerals, and Salts;
and then return to water. So that you see, all Bodies have water for their
first Matter; and are by Art and Nature reducible into it again at last.

[a Person hardly inferior to any Man in the knowledge of Metals, Paracel.
Liber de Miner. Tract. 1. p. 342.
and Minerals] gives us his Opinion of the production of Metals, and Stones,
from water, in these words. Sic ergo Mirabili Consilio Deus constituit, ut
prima Materia Naturae esset aqua, mollis, levis, potabilis; Et tamen foetus seu
fructus ipsius est durus; ut Metalla, Lapides, etc. quibus nihil durius est. So
therofore God has ordered, by a wonderful Counsel, that the first Matter of
Nature should be water, soft, gentle, potable; and nevertheless the offspring,
or fruit of it, is hard; as Metals, and Stones, etc. than which nothing is
harder.

Plato also is of the same judgment with him; Plato Timae. p. Graec. 488.
Latin. p. 718.
for he tells us. Aquae genera duo sunt praecipua, unum humidum (...), alterum
fusile (...): There are two sorts of Waters, one moist, the other fusil, or to
be melted. And presently after, he explaineth what he means by fusil waters.
Ex his vero quas aquas fusiles appellavimus, quod ex ten^issimis,
levissimisque, fit densissimum, uniforme, splendidum, flavumque, and
praetiosissima res est, aurum florescens per petram compactum est: But of
these, which we call fusil waters, [or to be melted] Gold flowering through the
Rock is compacted; for it is, of a most soft, fine, and tender thing, made most
hard, uniform, splendid, and yellow, and is a most precious thing.

The Seeds of Minerals, and Metals Bur, or Gur* from whence by degrees it
forms Metals. To which purpose I shall give you a testimony, or two. The
first we borrow from that Book, Entitled, Arcae Arcani artificiosissimi
apertae, beginning thus: Igitur No^ andum^ est, etc. Which because the passage
is long, we will only give you in English, Theatrum Chym. vol. 6. p. 305.
thus: Therefore it is to be Noted, that Nature has her passages and Veins in
the Earth, which does distill waters, either Salt and Clear, or else turbid.
For it is always observable by sight, that in the Pitts, or Groves of Metals,
sharp, and salt Waters distill down; therefore while these waters do fall
downwards, [for all heavy things are carried downwards] there does ascend from
the Center of the Earth, Sulphurous Vapors, which do meet them. Wherefore if
so be, the waters be saltish, pure, and clear, and the Sulphurous Vapors pure
also, and both of them do strictly embrace each other in their meeting, then a
pure Metal is produced; but in defect of such purity, [that is, of the Water,
and Vapour] then an impure Metal is generated: in Elaborating of which Nature
spends near a thousand years before she is able to bring it to perfection;
and this happens either by reason of the impurity of the Salt, Mercurial
Waters, or the impure Sulphurous Vapors. When these two do embrace each other,
shut up close in Rocky places; then by the Operation of Natural heat there does
arise from them a moist, thick, fat Vapor, which seateth it self where the Air
cannot come, [for else it would fly away:] of this Vapor a Mucil^ginous, and
unctuous Matter is made, which is white like Butter; Mathesius calls* it Gur:
it will spread like Butter, which I also can show in my hand, above, and out of
the Earth. And the same Author again, thus. The Matter of Metals before it be
Coagulated into a Metalline form, Arcae Arcan. p. 318.
is like Butter made of the Cream of Milk, which may be clam'd, or spread as
Butter, which he [he means Mathesius] calls Gur, which I also [saith the
Author] have found in the Mines, M^tallograph. p. 50.
where Nature has produced Lead. And that Industrious Metallurgist, Webster,
[who has likewise noted the same passages out of this Author] assures us,
that he has in his possession some pounds weight of this Metalline Liquor,
called Gur.

To which I will also add my own Testimony; Derby-shire; and who had at that
time newly discovered a Lead-Mine in his Ground: I remember, that being at the
said Mine I saw upon the Work-man's breaking a stone of Lead-Ore, a bright
shineing Liquor spurt forth; which in a little while did coagulate, and become
solid.

Helmont, confirms what we have related of this Metalline juice, in these words:

Non raro nempe contingit, quod Metallarius, Helmont in Mogn. Oport. p. 127.
in fodinis, saxa diffringens, dehiscat paries, and rimam det, unde tantillum
aquae, subalbidae, virescentis, manavit, quod mox concrevit instar saponis
liquidi [Bur voco] mutatoque deincepa pallore subvirtdi, flavescit, vel
albescit, vel saturatius viridescit. Sic enim visum est, quod alias intus,
absque saxi vulnere, fit; Quia succus ille interno Efficiente perficitur. Est
ergo prima seminis Metallici vita in Condo, sive Promptuario loci, homini plane
incognita: at ubi semen in lucem, Liquore vestitum, prodit, Et gas incaepit
Sulphur aquae inquinare, vita est seminis media; ultima vero, cum jam
indurescit: that is, It many times happeneeh, that a Mine-Man, in the Pits,
breaking stones, the Wall is opened, and a Chink is made; from whence a little
water has flowed, of a whitish greeness, which presently has thickened like
soft soap. [I call it Bur, says he, but I suppose it should be written Gur]
and by and by the somewhat greenish paleness being changed, it grows
yellowish, or whitish, or more fully greenish: So that that is brought to
sight, which nevertheless was made within, if the ^tone had not been broken;
because that juice [or Liquor] is brought to perfection by an internal
Efficient; therefore the first life of the Metallic seed is hid in the little
storehouse, [or Cellar] of the place, altogether unknown unto Man: but when
the seed is brought to light, invested with a Liquor, and the Gas has begun to
defile the Sulphur of the water, it is then the middle life of the seed; but
the last life is, when it is now grown hard, [that is, become a true Metal.]

And again, that this Metalline juice, Bur, [and other Authors Gur, which is
the true proximate Matter of all Metals] was Originally nothing but water,
coagulated by the power of Metalline Seeds; Hear what the same Author says:
Helmont, in Element. p. 43.
In terra nimirum fracescens aqua, semen locale vel insitam acquirit, ideoque
vel in Liquorem, [Leffas] ad omnem Flantam, vel insuccum[Bur] Mineralem
transit, juxta species, per directionem seminum Electas:

Indeed the water, by continuing in the Earth, growing putrid, does obtain a
local, or implanted Seed; and by that means it is changed either into the
Liquor [Leffas,] for all Plants [to be made out of it] or else into the Mineral
juice [Bur] according to the particular kinds, chosen by the direction of the
Seeds.

Metal. p. 44.
Erastus, as I find him quoted by Webster, says, I have two stones of Iron,
one of them of an Ironish color, the other of the color of the shell of a
ripe Chestnut; altogether soft, and fatty, that may like Butter be wrought with
the fingers; from which, notwithstanding, hard, and good Iron was extracted by
the fire.

Concerning the generating Silver from such a Mineral-Liquor, that Honorable
Person, Mr. Boil, tells us [from Gerrhardus] thus. Scept. Chym. p. 360.
Item aqua (aerulea inventa est Annebergae, aubi Argentum adhuc erat in primo
Ente, quae coagulata, reducta in Calcem fixi and boni argenti: Also that at
Anneberge a blew water was found, where Silver was yet in its first Being, or
Ens, which coagulated, was reduced into the powder, or Calx of fixed and good
Silver.

As for Gold, and Antimony, Paracelsus says, Paracelsus, in lib. de Ren. and
Restor. p. 43, 44, 45 and Chyrurg. Mag. p. 117 143, ^44. De Renov. p. 45. Rer.
Nature. Lib. 8. p. 104.
it is to be found in its Ens primum, or first Being, Liquid, and in the form
of a Red Liquor, or Water, which afterward is coagulated and exalted into Gold.

Again, he says of the primum Ens lege that it is a fugacious Spirit, as yet
consisting in volatility, as an Infant in the Womb of a Woman, and is sometimes
like a Liquor, and sometimes it is found like an Alcool, or subtle powder.

It Is a common known thing, that Gur will do; but in the Air will soon become
so hard, that it will not cut with a Knife.

I might here take notice of what Rulandus Medulla Lapidis, which the Germans
call Steinmarck; some of which is white, some red, and some of other colors;
and most of it in substance like the forementioned Gur: but to avoid being
tedious, I forbear. And of this sort of coagulated water were those Pebbles
made, which Peireskius found soft under his feet in the River Rosne; as is
related in the tenth History of Petrification, in the first Section of this
Discourse.



And I do not find that very ingenious man, Mr. Boil, Scept. Chym p. 218.
to be against this Opinion: for he says thus; Yet thus much I shall tell you
at present, that you need not fear my rejecting this Opinion; since however the
Helmontians may in Complement to their Master, pretend it to be a new
discovery, yet though the Arguments be for the most part his, the Opinion it
self is very Ancient.

of those things into which they are at last to be resolved, and that I have
proved to be water.

I now proceed to the second Argument, viz. that all Bodies are Nourished by
that of which they are Constituted.

Section the Fifth.
THat Vegetables are nourished by

And it is commonly known, that the sufficient Nourishment to become large
Plants.

Boil; the other from that Learned Naturalist, Helmont.

Boil tells us, that he caused a certain quantity of Earth to be dug up,
Scept. Chemist. p.
baked in an Oven, and weighed; and then put into an Earthen Pot, in the which
he set the seed of a Squash, which grew very fast, [though planted too late,
viz. in the Month of May] it being watered only with Spring, or Rainwater: in
October [by reason of the approaching Winter] he caused it to be taken up, and
the weight of it, with its stalk, and leaves, was found to be two pounds,
twelve Ounces; and the Earth [in which it grew] being baked as before, it was
found to be exactly the same weight.

Helmont's Relation is this: He took, Complex. and Mist. fig. p. 88. ss. 30.
he says, two hundred pounds weight of Earth, which was dried in an Oven, and
putting it into an Earthen Pot, he moystened it with Rainwater, and in it he
Planted the trunck of a Willow-Tree, which weighed five pounds, [covering the
Pot with an Iron cover, which had a hole for the Tree to grow out at,] and at
the end of five years, he took up the Tree, and found it to weigh one hundred
sixty nine pound, three Ounces; and the Earth being dried, was of the same
weight as at first.

Now if this be thoroughly considered, Plant, according to the Idea wrapped up in
the bosom of the seed. Animals also are nourished by water; some immediately,
others mediately.

100
from mere water, as Salmon, Sturgeon, and several other sorts of Fish, in
whose stomachs no food, that I know of, was ever yet found. And to confirm
this; Rondeletius [an Author of good credit] affirms, that his Wife kept a Fish
in a large glass, and fed it with nothing but water [so long] till it grew so
big, that it could no longer be contained in the glass; which they were forced
to break to get it out.



Now these Creatures, and their parts

Nay, the sperm of Man [by which

Upon this Subject there is much good Simpson, in his Hydrologia.

It now remains, that we prove the the better do, I think it necessary, in the
first place, to discover, whether they do really grow, and increase or no; for
some men believe, that God Created them at first, when he formed the world; but
that since they do neither grow, nor increase: which error we shall endeavor
to confute by several good Observations, taken from approved Authors.



Cornwall, that after all the Tin, that could be found in a Mine, has been
taken out, and the Mine filled up with Earth; yet within thirty years they have
opened them again, Not. Bath. Cap. 11. p. 51, and 52.
and found more Tin generated: of which Dr. Jordan does take notice also, and
in the above cited place he says thus: The like has been observed in Iron, as
Gandentius Merula Reports of Ilna, an Island in the Adriatic Sea, under the
Venetians, where Iron is bred continually, as fast as they can work it; which
is confirmed also by Agricola, and Baccius. ^he like we read of at Saga in
Lygiis, where they dig over their Mines every ten years.

And of Ilna it is remembered by Virgil, who says, Ilnaque inexhaustis Chalybum
generosa metallis. John Mathesius gives us Examples of almost all sorts of
Minerals, and Metals, which he had observed to grow, and regenerate. The like
Examples you may find in Leonardus Thurnisserus; In Sarept. Conc. 3. p. II,
etc. Alchym. Mag. De Metallis. p. 17, and 19
Erastus affirms, that he did see in St. Joachim's Dale, Silver grow upon a
Beam of wood, which was placed in the Pit to support the work; and when it was
rotten, the Workmen coming to set new Timber in the place, found the Silver
sticking to the Old Beam. Also he reports, that in Germany there has been
unripe, and unconcocted silver found in Mines, which the best Workmen affirmed
would become Silver in less than thirty years. The like Modestinus, Fucchius,
and Mathesius, affirm, of unripe, and liquid Silver; which when the Workmen
find, they use to say, we are come too soon. Lex. Alchym. p. 56.


And Rulandus says [speaking of Silver in the Mine;] Sed hoc axgentum pu^um
tenuissimis bracteis amplectitur Lapidem; interdum etiam prae se fert speciem
Capillorum, interdum virgularum, interdum globi fert speciem, quasi filis
convoluti candidis, aut rubris; interdum prae se fert speciem arboris,
Instrumenti, Montium, Herbarum, and aliarum re^um. And this pure Silver does
embrace the Stone with most ^ine Plates; it sometimes also does bear the shope
of hair, sometimes of little twiggs, sometimes of a Globe, as though wrapped
about with thread, white, or red; sometimes it appears in the shape of a Tree,
Mountain, Instrument, Herbs, and of other things.

Boil tells us from Gerrhardus, thus. In Valle Ioachimacae etc. [saith he] In
the Vale of Joachim, Dr. Shreter is a witness, that Silver, in the manner of
Grass, had grown out of the stones of the Mine, as from a Root, the length of a
finger; who has showed these veins, very pleasant to behold, and admirable, at
his own House, and given of them to others.

And to show you, that Metals do webster, out of 'Peter Martyr, Counselor to
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, Peter Martyr. D^cad. 3. C^p. 8. p. 139. (...),
p. 48.
in these words: They have found by Experience, that the Vein of Gold is a
Living Tree, and that the same by all ways spreads, and springs from the
Root, by the soft pores and passages of the Earth, puts forth branches even
to the uppermost part of the Earth; and ceas^th not till it discover it self to
the open Air; at which time it shows forth certain be^utiful colors in the
stead of flowers: round stones of Golden Earth, instead of fruit, and thin
Plates in stead of leaves: Th^se are they which are dispersed through the whole
Island [he is speaking of Hispaniola] by the course of the Rivers, Eruptions of
the Springs out of the Mountains, and other falls of the Floods: for they
think, such grains are not ingendered where they are gathered, ^specially on
the dry Land, but otherwise in the Rivers. They say, than the root of the
Golden Tree extends to the Center of the Earth, and there takes nourishment
of increase; for the de^per that they digg, they find the trunck the bigger, as
far as they may follow it for abundance of water, springing in the Mountains:
of the branches of this Tree, they find some as small as a thread, and others
as big as a man's ^inger, according to the largeness, or stre^ghtness of the
Rifis, and Cl^fts; they have sometimes lighted upon whole Caves, sustained, and
born up, as it were, by Golden Pillars, and this in the way by which the
branches ascend: the which being filled with the substance of the Trunck,
creeping from bene^th the branch, makes it self way, by which it may pass out.
It is oftentimes divided by incountring with some kind of hard stone; yet is it
in other Clef^s nourished by the exhalations and Virtue of the Root.

To which I might add what Fallopius says of Sulphur, [viz.] Sunt enim loca, e
quibus si hoc Anno Sulphur effossum fuerit, intermissa fessione per
quadriennium, redeunt fossores, and omnia Sulphur, ut antea, rursus inveniunt
plena: For there are places, from whence if this Year the Sulphur be dug
out, and forbearing to dig, by the space of four years, the Mine-men return,
and find them all full of Sulphur, as before.

And that Saltpeter grows, and

And concerning Table-Salt, Matthias produces many Testimonies from credible
Authors, (...) de Sale. Cap. 7. p. 33, 34, and 35.
that besides that which is made of Salt-Springs, there are in Spain, the
Indies, and diverse other parts of the World, large Mountains of Salt, which as
fast as they can be dug, grow again, and are quickly filled with Salt.

And for Lead, [besides what Galen ^occatius Certaldus, as he is cited by Mr.
Boil, says thus of its growth: Fesularum Mons, etc. Of the Mountain of Fesula,
a Village near Florence, that it has Lead-stones; which if they be dug up,
yet in a short space of time they will be supplied afresh, and generated anew.
I might instance in many more particulars, but I think these sufficient.



Paracelsus, I remember [somewhere] gives us this Experiment, to prove that
stones do grow, and are nourished by water; viz. that if a Flint, or P^bble be
put in a glass Vessel, and Rain, or Spring Water put upon it, and distilled
from it, if this be oft^n repeated, it will cause the stones to grow so bigg,
that at last it will fill up the Glass that contained it.

That Metals, and Minerals are nourished

And there is an Experiment, written De Rochas [a considerable French Author,
and Transcribed from him by the Honorable, Mr. Boyl] which I shall here
insert. Having [saith he] discerned such great wonders by the Natural Operation
of water, I would know what might be done with it by Art, imitating Nature;
wherefore I took water which I well knew not to be compounded with any other
thing than the Spirit of Life; and with a heat artificial, continual, and
proportionate, I prepared it, and disposed it, by graduations of Coagulation,
Congelation, and Fixation, until it was turned into Earth; which Earth
produced Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals: ^he Animals did eat, move of
themselves, etc. and by the true Anatomy I made of them, I found they were
composed of much Su^phur, little Mercury, and less Salt: the Minerals began to
grow, and increase, by converting into their own Nature one part of the Earth;
they were solid, and heavy; and by this truly demonstrative Science, namely,
Chemistry, I ^ound they were composed of much Salt, little Sulphur, and less
Mercury.

According to this Experiment, Minerals were Generated out of, and nourished by
water.

Gur, [or Bur] Soap-coal, and the Medulla Lapidis, etc. I think it will appear,
that both Metals, and Stones, are made, do grow, and are nourished, daily, and
at this time; and that from water, of which they were at first made, by the
power of their Seeds: And this is the reason, that Metals, and Mines are now
usually found in those places where for many Years before there were; Nov. L^m.
^hym. Tract 4. p. 314.
as both Sandivogius, and Helmont assure us. Inde fit, quod hodie reperiantur
Minerae in locis ubi ante mill annos nullae fuerunt: From hence it is come to
pass, that Minerals may be found in plac^s, where before a thousand years
since, there have been none. And Helmont, thus: Loca enim quae fodinis Caruere
olim, suo quandoque die, Helm^n, In Mag. Oport. p. 127. ^s. 39.
Maturato semine, foenora reddent, ditioribus non imparia; quia radices, sive
fermen^a Mineralium, sedent in loco immediat^, ac in dierum plenitudinem fine
fastidio anhelant: quam ubi semen complevit, tum Gas obsidens quam ibidem,
semen a lo^o suscipit, quod aquae sulphur dein impregnat, aquam condensat,
atque sensim aquam Mineralem transplantat: For places which have wanted [or had
no] Mines in times past, will in their own time, their Seed being ripened,
restore Usury, equal to the richer sort [of Mines] because the Roots, or
Mineral Ferments, are seated immediately in the place; and their full time
being come, they [pant] or breathe without [weariness] or loathing: and when it
has gained a complete Seed, then the Gas which is seated in the water of that
place, receives that seed of the place, which afterward begets the Sulphur of
the water with Child; condenseth the water, and by degrees turns, or
transplants it into a Mineral water.

Helmont, by way of confirmation; because I find him exactly to correspond with
all that I have hitherto delivered.

Imago Fermenti; Helment, Imag. Ferment. p. 94. ss. 29, 30, 31.
which because they are long, I will only give you their sense in English. And
indeed because the Schools have been unacquainted with Ferments, they have also
been ignorant, that solid Bodies are framed only of water, and Ferment: for I
have taught, that Vegetables, and Grain, and whatsoever Bodies are nourished by
them, do proceed only from water: for the Fisherman never found any food in
the stomach of a Salmon; if therefore the Salmon be made of water only, [even
that of Rivers.] he is also nourished by it. So the Sturgeon wants a mouth, and
appears only with a little hole below in his Throat, whereby the whole fish
draws nothing besides water. Therefore every Fish is nourished, and made of
water, if not immediately, yet at least by Seeds, and Ferments, if the water be
impregnat therewith. From the Salt Sea every fresh Fish is drawn; therefore the
Ferment [of the Fish] turns Salt into. Lastly, Shellfish do form to
themselves stony shells of water, in stead of Bones; even as also all kind of
snails do; and SeaSalt, which scarce yields to the force of a very strong
fire, grows sweet by the Ferment in Fishes; and their flesh becomes
volatile: for, at the time of distributing the nourishment, it is wholly
dissipated, without a residence, or dreg. So also Salt passes over into its
Original Element of water; and the Sea, though it receive salt Streams, yet is
not every day increased in saltness. So the most unmixed, and most purest
water, under the Equinoctial Line becomes hory, and stinketh: strait-way it
gets the color of a half burnt brick, then it is greenish, then red, and
quakesh very remarkably, which afterward of its own accord returns to it self
again: truly this comes to pass by reason of the conceived Ferment of that
place, which being consumed, all these appearances cease. So the most pure
Fountain Water grows filthy, through the musty Ferment of the Vessel; it
conceives worms, breeds Gnats, and is covered with a skin. Fenns putrify
from the bottom, and hence arise Frogs, Shellfish, Snails, Horse-Ieaches,
Herbs, etc. also swiming Herbs do cover the water, being contented with
drinking only of this putrid water. And even as stones are from Fountains
wherein a stony Seed exists; So the Earth stinking with Metallic Ferments,
does make out of water, a Metalline, or Mineral Bu^; but the water being in
other places shut up in the Earth, if it be nigh the Air, and stirred up with a
little heat, it putrifieth by continuance, and is no longer water, but the
juice Leffas of Plants; by the force of which hory Ferment, a Four is
conferred on the Earth of budding forth Herbs. For that putrefying juice by the
prick of a little heat does ascend in smoke, becomes spungy, and is compassed
with a skin, because the ferments therein hid require it. Therefore that
putrefaction has the office of a Ferment, and the Virtue of a Seed, and by
degrees it obtains some measure of Life, and hasteneth by the Virtue of its
Seeds into the Nature of Archeuss. Therefore this putrid juice of the Earth, is
Leffas: from whence springs every Plant not having visible seed, which
nevertheless bring forth seeds, according to their destinations. Therefore
there are as many rank, putrid, musty smells, as there are proper savours of
things. For Odors are not only the Messengers of Savours, but also their
promiscuous Parents. The smoke Leffas being now comprest together, does first
grow pale, then somewhat yellowish, and presently after is of a whitish green
color, and at last fully green. And the power of the several species being
unfolded, it gains diverse marks, and different colors: in which course it
imitates the Example of the water under the Equinoctial Line. Yet in this it
differs, that those waters have borrowed too Spiritual and volatile a Ferment
from the Stars, and place, without a Corporal hory putrefaction; and therefore
through their too frail Seed they presently return into themselves. But Leffas
is constrained to finish the Act, [and obey the Power] of the Conceived Seed.
Therefore Rain Conceiving a hory Ferment, is made Leffas, and is s^cked in by
the lustful Roots: It Is experienced also, that within this Kitchen [of the
Root] there is a new h^ry putrefaction produced by the Ferment which is Tenant
there; by and by it is brought from thence to the Bark [which is as it were the
Liver of the Plant,] where it is enriched with a new Ferment of that part, and
is made a Herby, or Woody juice; and at length it being come to Maturity, it is
made Wood, an Herb, or becomes Fruit. If the Arm, or Stem of a Tree shall be
putrefied under the Earth, then the Bark or Rind becomes d^y, and cleaves
assunder, and sends forth a smoke by its own Ferment, which in the beginning
is spungy, byt at length hardens into a true Root: and so Planted Branches
become Trees by the abridgment of Art.

Therefore it is now evident, there Leffas, and at last into simple water. For
Stones, and B^icks, do of their own accord decline into Saltpetre. Lastly,
Glass which is unconqu^red by the fire, and uncorrupted by the Air, in a few
years putrifieth by continuance [in the Earth] and undergoes the Laws of
Nature, etc.

viz.] Those things which are the last in the resolving, [or retexing] of a
Body, the same are found to be the first in its composition. Secondly, we are
nourished by those things of which we are made, [or consist.] And having, I
hope, sufficiently proved by both of them, that Water is the Original Matter,
and Seeds the Efficients of all Bodies; I am now come to the third, and last
Argument, which was to show, and prove a necesssity of all Bodies being formed
out of water; because neither the four Elements of the Aristotelians, nor the
three Principles of the Old Chemists, no, not yet the ^ive of the Modern
Chemists, can possibly concur to the constituting of Bodies, as either their
Primary Matter, or Efficient; they being themselves but great disguised Schemes
of one and the same Catholic Matter, Water, from whence they themselves were
made; and into which they are ultimately to be resolved, and uniformly to be
reduced.

Section the Sixth.
ANd First for the Chimical Principles; I have showed [in the Fourth Section of
this Discourse,] That the Oils of Vagetables, and their Fermented Spirits,
which are their Sulphurs; that the Fats, and Oils of Animals, which are their
Sulphurs, and also the Sulphurs of Minerals, and Metals, are all of them
reducible into Water: As are also both Mineral, Animal, and Vegetable Salts.
And as to the Mercury of Animals, and Vegetables (improperly enough so called,)
they being but of a loose Contexture, are easily made to remigrate into water,
(as I have taught in the same place:) As also is [though with somewhat more
reluctance, because of its strong Compression by its Seed,) true Mettallin
Mercury, or Quicksilver, as my own experience has assured me: Which is also
confirmed by Raymundus Lullyus, the ingenious Mr. Boil, and diverse others.

Alkahest: The manner of whose operating upon Bodies, I have described from the
r^lation of that worthy man Helmont [in the fourth Section.]

Chemists; the one of them, viz. Earth, does properly belong to the School of
the Stagyr^t; and therefore I speak to that, when I come to discou^se of the
four supposed Elements of Bodies.

viz. Spirits; they are all of them of one of these two Classes; either Vinous,
and made by Fermentation; or Saline, and made without.

Sulphurs; and may be reduced to water, as I have showed you above: Other
Sulphurs, and Spirit of Wine it self may.

viz. Saline, are nothing but Volatlle Salts, diluted with Phlegm or water;
and therefore by repeated distillations, and careful rectifications, will be
brought to constitute a Lump or Mass of dry Salt: Wherefore it is not an other
Principle, distinct from the former three of the Old Chemists; and by the same
handycraft-means may at last be reduced to water, as I have before showed the
three Principles of the Chemists may be.

viz. into Water; they therefore cannot [whilst such] deserve the Name of
Principles.

Helmont, and Boil, whether the Fire indeed be an adequate and fit instrument
to Anatomise Bodies? And whether or no those distinct Schemes, into which the
common Chemists resolve the matter of Bodies by Fire, [and which they call
their three Principles] were indeed really existing, in those Bodies, from
which they were Educed* [that they were matterially there, no man will deny,
they being themselves composed of water?] But whether they were resident in the
Concr^te that yielded them, in the same f^^gures, and Shapes, that the Fire
Exhibites them to our Sendes, is very disputable? And it may easily be
imagined, that the Fire acting upon a Body that it can master, [for some it
cannot] does not only put the small parts, of which that Body consisted, and
which were before [in some measure] at rest amongst themselves, into a
tumultuous motion; by means of which, they are sent hastily off into the
Receiver; but does also break by forcing them asunder, those small particles of
that body into other Shades, Figures, and Sizes: upon which account they do
conyene together after new manners; and so the Fire may present us with new
Bodies, which were not prae-existent in the Concrete, when first exposed to its
Action.

But because this point is thoroughly, and Learnedly handled both by Helmont,
and my excellent Friend Mr. Boil, in his Sc^ptical Chemist, I shall spare my
self the pains of expatiating upon it; and refer the Inquisitive to those two
Authors, for full satisfaction in this point.



by the Fire. His sense is this: Dr. Willis de se^m. cap 20. p. 10.
For the first, [viz. Salt] it is commonly known, that if the Salt be once
washed out of the Ashes of any vegetable, if they be again calcined, they will
yield no more Salt. Moreover, if any concrete being distilled, shall yield a
very sharp, and acid Liquor, their Calces [or Ashes] do remain less Salt; and e
contra, that is, where the salt is vblat^zed, and become a Liquor, and does
ascend by the Alimbec, you shall in vain seek for it in the caput mortuum: That
which vindicates the Existence of the Principle of Sulphurs in Vegetables, is
this; Take Gua^acum, or any other sort of heavy wood, in pieces or shavings,
and putting it into a Glass-Retort, distill it by degrees; and it will give
you, together with a sowet Liquor [which is the Saline Latex] a blackish oil
[which is its sulphury part] in a great quantity. That this was at first in the
distilled Body, and not all produced by this (...), appears from hence,
because if you do proceed another way, by which the Sulphur may be taken from
the concrete, before it be distilled, the Liquor which comes forth, will be
almost totally deprived of its Oylyness: Wherefore, if you shall pour spirit of
Wine upon the Shavings of this wood, this menstruum will extract a great
quantity of pure Rozin from it, which is the same Sulphury parts; and if
afterward you take these Shavings that are left, and wash them with common
water, and being dry, put them in a Retort, and distill them [as at first] you
shall have but a little Oil. But that which is more to be wondered at, and which
does more fully confirm this truth, is, that several Bodies which have little
of Spirit, or Sulphu^ in them [they being for the most part found amongst
Volatils] and which chiefly consist of Salt, Earth, and Water, and are
separated into these Elements by distillation, which being again mixed
together, does restore us the same sort of mixts, marked with the same sort of
qualities as before; V. G. if you distill Vitriol in a reverberating Furnace,
you shall have a Phlegm, almost insipid, which is its watery part: Then a very
sower Liquor, or rather a ^luid Salt, and in the bottom remains a Red Earth of
a pleasant purple Color: These being rightly performed, if the two distilled
Liquors be poured back upon the Caput Mo^tuum, we shall have the same Vitriol
as before, revived of the same color, taste, and almost of the same weight.
The like may be done with Nitre, Sea Salt, Salt of Tar^ler, and perhaps, with
Alome, and other Mineral bodies, which you may proceed withal with the same
success* so that those concrets that consist of fixed and stable Elements, may,
like Mechanical Engines be taken to pieces, and put together again, without any
prejudice. Thus far he.



rest? From which action of the Fire, the new body of the Cole resulted: From
which Cole, if it be fluxed with an Alkalizat-Salt, may be obtained a perfect,
true, and totally inflamable Sulphur, no way distinguishable from common
Brimstone, [as I have often proved:] Which Brimstone is a body very different
from that of Salt, which the same Cole, if burnt to Ashes, will yield us in the
room of this Brimstone. And if it shall be objected, that this Brimstone is the
Oil of the Wood or* Plant, which this Learned man is pleased to call the
Sulphury Principle, and which he afterward tells us may be obtained [together
with an acid Saline Liquor, upon which it swimmeth] by distillation from
Guajacum; if this be objected, I desire it may be considered, First, that the
Oil of the wood was before sent off into the Receiver; and that a much greater
Stress of Fire is required to burn the wood into a Cole, then is needful to
separate all its Oil from it. And Secondly, that after it has afforded all the
Oil which the Fire can make of it, yet then at last this Brimstone may be made
out of it. And thirdly, that it be taken notice of, that it is not a sufficient
ground [nay, that it is a liberty not to be allowed] to give different bodies
the same denomination, because they agree in some one quality: as this Oil, and
the Sulphur do in that of Inflammability, when they differ in so many others,
as is obvious to every man.

viz. that these Concrets, which yield in distilling a sower Spirit, which is
[saith he] their Salt volatised, and brought into the form of a Liquor; and
therefore, as he ^aith, in vain to be sought for in their Ashes, in which very
little will be sound: It proves no more but this, that according as Bodies are
differently made up, so the Fire acts diversely upon their Matter: As is to be
seen in Wax and Clay, the former of which the fire melts, and the last it
hardens. Nor does it appear, that this Saline Liquor was such, whilst it
recided in the Concrete, and before the action of the Fire upon it; any more
than it does, that there is really, and actually residing in the body of Wheat,
or Barley, before they be made into Malt, and afterward Brewed and Fermented,
a vinous, and inebriating Spirit: Which when they are so managed we find there
is. But if otherwise these grains of Barley, or Wheat, shall be ground into
Flower, and made into Bread, they then become wholesome Food; of which a great
quantity may be eat without procuring drunkenness, which their fermented
liquors will cause. And yet from this very substance of the Grain, which
affords two such bodies, as Drink, and Bread; by a different managing of it,
may be made a liquor which is so far a Corrosive, that it will draw Tinctures,
[which are solutions of the small parts of bodies] from diverse Minerals,
Metals, and Stones, and that many times without the help of External heat. Nor
can it with more Justice be affirmed, that these Salts [whether fixed, or
volatile] were really and in that form, existing in the wood, or other
Concrete; then it may be said, and believed, that there is actually in
Breadcorn, the Flesh, Blood, Bones, Sinews, Hair, Nails, etc. of a man;
because we see, that by the action of a humane stomach, these things are made
out of Bread.

And as to what is alleged concerning the Oil of Guajacum, it yields if it
be distilled per se, but if it be in^used in Spirit of Wine, it will impregnate
it with a certain Rozin, or Gum. And the wood after this Extraction, if it be
committed to distillation, will not then afford the same quantity of Oil as
before it would have done: That I easily grant, but then it will quite destroy
the inference for which this Learned man brings it; viz. That Oil was in that
form a constituant Principle of the mixed. For there is a vast difference
betwixt Rozin, and Oil, the one being a firm body that will admit of
pulverisation, the other a fluid, and unctious body. And besides many other
specifical differences, [which, not to be tedious, I purposely omit,] The Rozin
is a product of Nature, the Oil, of the Fire. For the Rozin or Gum, is to be
seen in the wood before distillation; and is only taken up, and dissolyed in
the Spirit of Wine, which being evaporated, it appears again in its own form.
But the Oil is, I grant, substantially, and materially the same with the Rozin;
and therefore, that being for the greatest part, or totally taken away, the
Fire produces either less, or no Oil: Because if the Rozin be left in the
wood, when it is committed to the Fire, the Fire does spread abroad, break, and
new alter the texture of the Rozin, and elevating, and making a new combination
of its parts; it constitutes that Body which we call Oil; which is in this case
a real and new product of the Fire, and was not before formally Existing in
that Body.

that every man knows, is very different both from an Oil, and a vinous Spirit:
For this Salt is not only brittle, but also absolutely uninflamable.

Caput Mortuums, do redent^grate; and return to the same bodies as they were
before. The matter of Fact I allow to be true; but withal, must be allowed to
say, that it proves not what he brings it for; nor does evince, that Salt* and
Sulphur, are principles in all bodies* for it is the effect of their seeds, that
forms these bodies out of water: For Salts sometimes are the products of s^eds;
as I have proved from the regular figures, into which these Concrete juices do
constantly shoot; as in Section the Second of this Discourse. So that it is not
strange, that the smaller parts of these Saline juices, being by Fire divorced
from the grosser, upon their being put together, do hastily run into, and lodge
themselves in the cavities of their own bodies, from whence they were forced by
the Fire. And to conclude, there are many bodies which the Fire cannot force to
confess they are constituted so much as of two of the five modern Chemical
Principles; as to instance in Gold, Talk, Silver, etc. and yet by the operation
of the Alkahest, even these are at last reducible to water, of which they were
made by the power of seed; and the aforesaid Oils, Salts, and Concrete juices,
are to be all of them returned to water by the means prescribed in the Fourth
Section of this Discourse.

and at last Glass: which three last, no man I suppose will imagine, were really
existing, in those bodies of which they are made; and yet are they made by the
same Agent, and from the same Subject, of which the Fire produced Salts, Oils,
Ashes, etc. and therefore upon the same ground, may as justly plead for the
prerogative of being the constituent principles of bodies.

viz. Salts, Oil, Ashes, Spirits, all of them are yet so compound, that they
may be yet ^urther returned and divided into more simple parts; viz. into
water, which is indeed the only, and true material Principle [deservedly so
called,] for it is a primary, and simple body, into which at last, all
Concrets, [and even the other Four supposed principles of this Learned mans]
are reduced both by Art, and Nature; and of which they were made. So that we
may truly affirm with the Ancient Philosophers, (...) (...); Pl^to. Hipp^, and
An^x^g.
One is many, and many One.

So that though this Learned Doctor, showed much wit in building so fair and
specious a Philosophical Structure, from these five supposed principles, yet
can it be no safe dwelling in it; because the Foundation is unsound.



And Secondly, I would be very loath to have it thought, I would e^deavour
inconsiderately or upon slight grounds, to diminish the ^ame this ingenious man
has already gained in the World by his Writings.

And now having examined not only the Tria Prima [or three first Principles of
the Old Chymists] but also the five Principles of our Modern Chemical
Philosophers; and not being able to allow them the Title of Principles, for the
reasons above alleged; I will likewise examine the Quaternary, or four
Elements of the Aristotelians, and see, whether they can plead any better Title
to be allowed, and established, the Principles, or Elements, of which all
Bodies are made.

Section the Seventh.
Quadriga, or four Elements of the Peripateticks, has for a long time gained
the privilege, of being esteemed the constituent Principles of all Concretes:
[which therefore are usually stilled compound - Bodies] for they say of Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth, all sublunary Bodies are made, and from the diverse
mixtures of these, do arise all generations, corruptions, alterations, and
changes, that happen to all sorts of Bodies.

Aristotle under the Globe of the Moon, but never yet seen by any man,]
certainly it is nothing else but Heat; and that we know is caused by the
violent and nimble agitation of the very minute-parts of Matter: And though
there be Heat, [and consequently a kind of Fire] in the Bodies of Animals, yet
this is no radical Principle but a product of vital Fermentation. The like of
which we see is produced by the sermentation of Wines in the Barrel, to whose
Bung, if the flame of a Candle be held, the subtle vapors of the Wine take
flame and burn; which vapors, if they be otherwise debarred of all vent, they
by their brisk motion, cause an intense heat; and sometimes burst the Vessels
that contain them. And this happens not only to Wines, but even to water it
self; for it has been observed in long Voyages [which somewhere is also taken
notice of by Mr. Boyl] that our Thames water, being kept close stopped, assisted
by the motion of the Ship, and its own secret fermentation, a Candle being
brought near the vent, upon the opening of it, has set all the Cavity of the
Vessel into a flame. There is the like reason for the bursting forth of flame
from wett and closely compressed Hay; as also from the Action of dissolvents
upon Mettallin Bodies, etc. in which action, if the Glasses be stopped, they
break with great violence: From the incoercible nature of which, we may
conclude, that Fire [if there were such an Element] can never enter, as a
constituant Principle, into the Composition of Bodies; but it is rather, as
Helmont styles it, destructor seminum, the destroyer of Seeds, and is a fitter
Instrument to Analize, and take Bodies in pieces, by not suffering their parts
to be at rest amongst themselves, [to which purpose it is generally employed]
than to constitute any. And therefore in this particular, Paracelsus was grossly
mistaken, where he unde^takes to teach us a way to separate the Element of Fire
from Bodies, and afterward pretends to make a new separation of Elements from
them again. For, if we will suppose an Element of Fire, yet if that be further
reducible, it must of necessity lose both the name and nature of an Element.

some other Body, to which it may adhere, and upon which it may Act: Which
Bodies are either of a Vinous nature, as the sermented Spirits of Vegetables;
or their Rozinous, and Brimstony parts; or else of an unctuous, and fatty
nature, as the Grease, and Fatts of Animals; or else of a Bituminous substance,
as the Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals are. And that all this is but disguised
Water, which has got new textures by the operati^n of Seeds, and Ferments, I
hope I have sufficiently evinced before. So that without we will much injure
Truth, we must degrade Fire from being an Element or Principle, in the
constituting of Bodies.

Air enter Bodies, as an Element of which they are composed; though it be not
only useful, but absolutely necessary both to Animals, and Vegetables; without
which, neither of them live, or grow, and by the means of which, the
Circulation and Volatization of the blood in Animals is p^omoted: By the help
of which, also the motion of every part is performed. It also does not only
afford a convenient help to the Vegetation of Plants, by its compressing the
surface of the water, and so forcing it to ascend into the stringy Roots and
Fibers of Trees and Herbs; but also by acting the part of a Separator, [for it
is, contrary to the received opinion of the Aristotelians, a very dry and
tenious Body,] it, in its passage over the surface of the water, inbibes and
takes into its Cavities, store of water, which it Transports to distant places
[where Springs and Rivers are wanting;] and then being no longer able to
suspend it, by reason of its plenitude, and weight, it returns it to the Earth,
where it proves a fit nourishment for Plants, and a proper matter for all sort
of Seeds to form themselves Bodies out of.

from water, is forced to desert the Body of the vapor; and so at last it
returns to the Earth, in the form of the Catholic and universal matter, water.

Zoreastes means by his Prestor.

Expansum, or Firmament, or Etherical Air for, but that Air we live in, and
enjoy, is very far estranged from the nature of pure Either, it being filled and
defiled, with the Subtle steames and effluviums of all sorts of Bodies, which
are there in a constant Flux, by which means particles of matter differently
figured, [and as yet retaining some slight touch, as I may say, of their
seminate natures,] meeting together by their action and reaction upon each
other, generate Metors; which having spent themselves, return to the bosom of
the catholic matter, water.

Aristotelians; who affirm, that Air may be Transmuted into water; which change
was never yet performed, either by Nature or Art. For, if it be to be done, by
their own confession it must be performed by the means of compression, or
condensation. But compression will not do the feat, as is manifest by
winde-Guns; in which the Air is forcibly compressed [into, sometimes the
Twentyeth part of the space it possessed before;] yet for all that, it is so
far from being Transmuted into water, that by the help of this Compression, it
has its Elastick or Springy faculty so far advanced, that it will with as much
impetuosity and vigor throw forth a Bullet, as Gunpowder set on fire would do.

by the cold of those places, becoms drops too bigg, and heavy for the Air to
keep up; and so falling down, they settle in their pristin shape of water.

Gas, it does yet constantly at last return, in its own Shape, to its own
fountainwater, from whence it sprang.



Earth have any right to be counted an Element or Principle, of which Bodies
are constituted, For although the Aristotelians [as well as the Chymists]
pretend to resolve all concretes into their first Principles by Fire; which
they think they evince, by the example of burning wood. For, say they, That
which supplies the flame, is Fire. That which sweats forth of the ends of the
wood, is water; and that which ascends in smoke, is Air; but that which
remains fixed [ viz. the Ashes] after the Fire has disbanded the other parts,
is Earth. Yet if we examine this experiment of theirs, it will be found too
Gloss, to make out what they endeavor to Illustrate by it.





Neither is the smoke, which is seen to arise in the conflagration^ Air. For it
will affix it self to the funnel of the Chimny in the form of Soot; after which
it may be divided into Water, Oil, Salt, and Earth, [as they call it.]



Analisis, or proper way of taking Bodies to pieces; and therefore is no
Genuine reduction of them; but a forcing of their parts asunder by the Fire, by
which new combinations of the parts of Matter are made; and consequently the
products of the Fire, are not to be looked upon as Principles, which were
existing in Bodies under that form, in which the Fire presents them us.

Helmont, all these Bodies, by the operation of his Alkahest, are to be reduced
into simple water, equal to their own weight. So that this soluent, must [from
the uniformity of its operation] be allowed to be a much more fit instrument to
discover what Bodies are composed of, then Fire alone can be supposed to be.
And if we strictly examine the business, we shall find, that Earth does not
enter any natural Body, as a constitutive Principal thereof; but indeed Earth,
or Ashes, may help to compose Artificial Bodies, such as Pots, and Glasses.

Helmont assures us, are reducible to water, by his great Solvent, [the
Alkahest] which possibly I have somewhat more reason to affirm, than I am
willing to declare.

Earth I confess, to me appears to be the first product of the water, and is
designed by nature as a firm foundation, [or Pedestal] to support the weight of
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, and to afford proper Wombs for the water to
deposite its seeds in. For the Earth produces nothing of its self; but all
things by the assistance of water, impregnated with Seeds; which it depositeth
in its bosom.

Moses, in the first Chapter of Genesis, at the 9th. verse; where describing
the Creation of the Earth, he says no more but this: God commanded the water
together into one place, and the dry Land appeared.

Tria Prima of the old Chemists,. nor the five Principles of the Chemists of
our Age, no nor yet the four Elements of the Aristotelians, can rationally be
allowed to be the Principles, or Elements of Bodies. So that as Helmont says,
ruit totum quaternarium Elementorum praetor aquam: The whole Doctrine of the
four Elements falls to the ground: Excepting water only.

it remains, that according to my promise, I strengthen these assertions by
Authority. And show this is no Noval opinion; but that it was held, and
believed by the Antientest Philosophers: Such as Moses, Sanchoniathon, Mochus,
Orpheus, Thales, Pithagoras, Timaeus, Locrius, Plato, etc. After which I shall
make some short examination of the Histories of Petrification, alleged in the
first Section of this Discourse, and so put an End to this Essay.

Section the Eighth.
Moses held water to be the First and universal Matter, will appear from what
he tells us in the First chapter of his Book of the Creation, called Genesis,
verse the Second, where he acquaints us, that the first material substance out
of which God made this Beautiful and Orderly frame of the World, which from its
Beauty the Greeks call (...), was water. His words are these; And the Spirit of
God moved upon the Face of the Waters. Where it is to be observed, that the
word which our Translation renders moved, is in the Original Hebrew (...),
Moracephet; which properly signifies not a bare motion, but such a motion as
we call Hovering, or Incubation, as Birds use to do over their Eggs to hatch
them. By which expression we have not only an account of the first matter out
of which the World was afterward made; but also of the Efficient, by which
this matter was wrought into so great a variety of Bodies. For in all
probability, the sense of the Expression is, that at that time, [ viz. in the
beginning] God infused into the bosom of the waters, the seeds of all those
things, which were afterward to be made out of the waters, setting them their
constant Laws, and Rules of acting [and thus was Nature Created, that is, the
Order, and Rule of those things were established, which God designed to make:]
and by the power of the words, increase and multiply, they had a faculty given
them, to continue themselves in the same Order, till the world shall be
destroyed by Fire, [the great destroyer of Seeds;] at which time all Seminal
beings shall desert their gross Bodies, and return to their first Fountain, and
great exemplar God, on whom they have at this time a constant dependence. For
according to the Apostle, In him and to him, and through him, are all things;
and in him we live, move, and have our being.

Sanchoniathan, the great Phenician- Philosopher, [whom some Chronologers make
contemporary with Gideon] some part of whose Works are yet to be met with in
Philo-Biblius, and (...) sebius; and a good account of whose Works we may also
find in the writings of that Learned, and Ingenious man, Mr. Gale. This
Sanchoniathan I say, exactly corresponds with Moses. For he says, In the
beginning there was (...), which in the Phenitian Tongue, Court of the Genti^s.
part (...). p. 55
is (...), Chauth Ereb; that is, Night or Evening Darkness. Then he further
says to this purpose; From the commixtion of the Spirit with the Chaos, was
produceds Mot, which some call [(...)] that is matter, or watery moisture: Out
of this was produced the whole Seed of the Creation, and the Generation of the
whole.

Mochus, an other Pheni^ian- Philosopher, who continued the Philosophic
History, begun by Sanchoniathon, [and who is said to have written long before
the Tr^jan War,] was also of the same opinion, as Bochard affirms.

Thales of Miletus, [who is held the first Philosopher that writ in Greek]
taught that the world was made out of water, no body can be ignorant. And that,
which Sanch^niathan calls Mot, fluid Matter, he calls (...)* water. Tully de
Nature. Deorum. lib. 1. cap. 2d.
And Tully affirms, that Thales held water to be the beginning of things: And
that God out of water framed all things.

Orpheus also is of the same judgment, and tells us, (...); of water, Slime was
made. And Apollonius says, (...). Earth, of Slime was make. And the Scholiasts
give a good explication of these words; for they affirm, that the Chaos, of
which all things were made, was water, which coagulated it self, and became
Slime; and that Slime condensed, became solid Earth.

Thales's (...), or water; and the (...), and (...), i. e. watery moisture, of
Sanchoniathon, and M^chus, was believed and held by them to be the first
Principle of all things: From which the (...) of Pythagoras, and Plato, differs
not; as I will show by and by.

Pherecides [an ancient Greek- Philosopher] who was Pythagoras his Master, and
who we are told, was one of the first Greeks that held the Immortality of the
Soul; though he seem to differ from Thales, and Orpheus in some things, yet
agreed with them in the main, or the thing taken for granted by them all, viz.
That water was the first Matter of all things.

Pythagoras, the Founder of the Italick Sect of Philosophers, corresponds
exactly in Opinion with Moses, concerning the Origin of the World, and its
first Matter. For he positively held, that the World was made by God; and by
him adorned with an excellent Order, Harmony, and Beauty in all its parts; and
therefore he was the first that called it (...). from (...)* to Adorn or
Beautisy: Secondly, his (...), or first Matter, was the same with
Sanchoniathons (...), or (...); and Thales and Orpheus their (...), viz. water:
Agreeable all of them to Moses, Genesis the first.

Thirdly, Pythagoras, and all the Ancient Philosophers before him, held, that
the Divine Providence, which they style (...), did inspire and influence the
whole Creation, governing, and directing all things to their proper and
peculiar Offices, Functions, and Ends. And this Providence was by them sometimes
styled (...), the Soul of the World; by which, says Seranus, they understood
nothing else but the Fire, Spirit, or Efficacy, which is universally diffused
in the Symmetry of the Universe* for the Forming, Nourishing, and Fomenting all
things according to their respective natures: Which Vivifick Principle Plato
calls (...), effective Fire; but this they never understood, or meant to be a
material part of any Body; but is the same which Moses calls. the Spirit of God.

Plato, and his ^onformity with Moses; His judgment has always been
so^esteemed, that men, to express the Reverence they had of him, did usually
call him the Divine Plato: And in delivering his opinion, I shall also at the
same time give you that of Timaeus Locrius, that great Philosopher, and
Disciple of Pythagoras; from whom Plato borrowed much.

Plato tells us that the World was made: For he puts the question whether the
World had a beginning, or was made? To which he answers, (...), it was made.
Then as to the first matter, of which the World, and all the Bodies in it were
made, he says thus, [in his Timaeus] it is (...)* the Genus or Species out of
which every thing is composed; and He calls it (...), or first Matter, and is
indeed the same with Sanchoniathans (...), Mot, etc. and Thales, and Orpheus's
(...); and all of them the same with Moses his Chaos and Water, as will appear
by comparing their descriptions together. Thus first, Moses calls his first
matter (...) ^ohu, without from; which Rabby Kinchi calls (...) [as Fabius
tells us] which is the same word that Plato uses to express his first matter
by; and differs little, in sound, but less in the sense from the (...) of
Sanchoni^thon, which Philo Biblius styles Mot, from the Hebrew, and Phenitian
(...) Mod, which signifies Matter: Yea, Plato expressly calls his first Matter
(...), somewhat without form; just like Moses his Bohu.

Timaus he tells us, that God out of this first matter [ w^ter] commonly called
Cha^s [because disordered, and irregular] (...) Beautified, Ordered, and
Figured, or Formed the Universe; and as Moses says, the Spirit of God moved
upon the Face of the waters: So Plato affirms, that God made the World,
(...), that is, by an importunate m^tion, fluctuating, and not quiescing upon
the matter. And as for Plato's (...), or Soul of the World, we are assured by
Ludovieus Vives, Lud. Vi^^s in com super
he mean^ by it the same Spirit of God which Moses says moved upon the waters
in the Beginning; and which the Psalmist calls the breath of his mouth: (Psalm
33. verse 6.) For, according to Platoes Philosophy, [as well as that of Moses]
God is the Executive cause, and productive Efficient of all things, and
therefore he usually styles God, (...), the Supreme Fabricator, Perfector, and
Essentialisor of all things. And as to the manner, how all things were made, he
says, (...)* Every thing was essentialised by certain Prolifick, or efformative
words, which the Stoics call (...), a Spermatick, or Seedy word: Which agrees
exactly both with Moses his Fiat, and with that of St. Paul; Epistle to the
Heb. cap. 11. verse 3.
The Worlds were framed by the word of God; that is, Gods Fiat was the Creator
of all the Seminal and Prolifick Principles of all things; and those created
Seeds were (...)* the Efficients; and (...), or (...), water, was the Matter of
which they were all made.

certain Pictures or Images of those things which they are to make out of the
matter, [ viz. water.] To which purpose let us here what Plato says of his
Ideas, Plato Timaeus. fol. 49.
which is to this effect; There are two sorts of Worlds; one, that has the
form of a Paradigm, or Exemplar, which is an intelligible Subject, and always
the same in being: but the second, is the Image of the Exemplar, which had a
beginning, and is visible. By his Intelligible World, Plato means the Divine
Decrees; which are inherent in the Mind and wisdom of God: and these Original
Idea's, he says, do produce a Secondary sort of Idea's [that is, the Seeds of
things;] and these he makes to be the more immediate Delineation, or Image of
the whole work; sometimes calling them (...) an Exemplar; sometimes (...), an
Image: His words run thus; (...): making use of this Exemplar, he frames the
Idea, and Powers; that is, the Seeds of things. So that he makes the first, and
Original Idea, [which is resident in the Divine Wisdom or Mind of God, and
which Divines call the Decrees of God] to be much more Noble than the latter,
or secondary Idea, or Seed, and to be the cause of it. And this last Idea and
Seed, contains the Picture of the thing to be made; and depends upon the
Primary, or Original Idea, and Exemplar, which is seated in God himself.

Idea's, viz. the Seeds of things do proceed so regularly, constantly and
unerringly in the producing their likes. For, if we consider, that the Seeds of
things do depend upon their Paradigmes, and that they are inherent in the Mind
of God himself, who is a God of Order; this will appear not so abstruse, as it
has hitherto done.

even those that we count inanimate, do enjoy, upon the account of their
Seminal Principles, not only Life, but even reason in some measure: Which,
wanting the use of Languages, they do nevertheless plainly declare [to heedful
and inquisitive men] not only by their regular, [and consequently designed]
working the parts of matter, till they have produced such a distinct sort of
Body; but also by those affections which we call Sympathy and Antipathy; and,
for want of this knowledge, have hitherto referred to occult or hidden causes,
the usual Sanctuary of Ignorance; by which Sympathy, and Antipathy of theirs,
it is very manifest, they have hatred and love; and have a knowledge of those
things, which are either pleasing or agreeable too, or else unpleasant or
hurtful to their natures. And this is not only to be observed in Beasts, and
visible moving Creatures, but also in all other sorts of Creatures, which we
very injuriously call Dead, or Inanimate.

(...), or manner how the Ideas and Seeds do work upon Matter, and form
themselves Bodies; which they perform on this manner: First, by their
Fermentative faculty, [or Springy power] they put the Body of the water into a
peculiar sort of motion, by which they congregate those particles, which are
most agreeable to their design, and consequently fittest to adhere, and stick
to each other. Secondly, they break the rest into convenient shapes, and Sizes:
And Thirdly, by this motion they also put these particles into commodious
Postures, and Scituations amongst themselves, and by these means frame
themselves Bodies, exactly corresponden^ to their own praeconceived Figures.

Phenomenon of Nature, used by the Atomical, Cartesian, or Corpuscularian
Philosophers; for certainly, they do give us not only an very ingenious, but
also a very true account of the (...), or manner how, matter is, or may be
modified; to which, if they would please to add, as some do, the powerful
efficacy of Seeds upon Matter, by which indeed all the several (...)* or
various shapes of Matter is produced, we might then hope to receive some
satisfactory account of that hither to perplexed Subject, the Generation of
Natural Bodies: Which Principle if it were received, and taken into the
Philosophy of our Age, I am apt to believe it would silence many Litigations,
now daily commenced by men of Parts against each other; and oblige them to love
truth more then the desire of being accounted witty Disputants; Truth being so
desirous a thing, that Porphyry in the Life of Pythagor as [though a Heathen]
tells us; (...) that is, Truth only can make men near to God.

as we see the springy motion of the Air, or some more subtle Body does form
of the Water, of Rain, and Dew, round Drops, by equally Compressing it; yet
because this general kind of motion does something, we are not from thence to
conclude it does all things. For, this were a Sophisme, fitter to impose upon
Fools or Children, then upon Men of mature reason. Nor can such kind of motion
be ever able to form such bodies, as imply a wise Council, and curious
contrivance; as, for Example [to say nothing of Living Creatures] the strong
and useful bodies of Metals, Minerals, and Stones, and the beautiful Branches,
Flowers, and Fruits of Blants, are. Wherefore we must in all reason acknowledge
and confess, that there is an internal Mind, virtue, and Idea, contained in the
Seeds of things, which works rationally, [that is, to a Designed end;] by
which Principle, the matter is put into a peculiar motion, and usefully guided,
till it be changed, and formed into a body, such as the Idea was designed by
God to make, who still governes these Seedy Principals: And therefore in
Scripture, we are told, He Gives is Every Seed, its own Body.





with a stony Coat or Bark, and so they become increased both in Bulk, and
Weight, by continual addition. But if this were so, then indeed the Leaves,
Wood, etc. cast into these Waters, would not be really transchanged into
perfect Stony Nature; but only seemingly so.

and without; so that by these kind of Waters, bodies are not only Crusted over
with stone, but the Wood, Leaves, etc. are really and truly changed into Stone.
I do not deny, but that there may be an affixing of some stony Corpuscles
Latent in these Waters, which may increase both the bulk and weight of those
things Changed by them; but that this is all, that I deny.

per minima, and in their smallest parts, internally, as Experience shows they
are; and though the Expl^cating, how this Change is Wrought, is somewhat
difficult, yet in all probability it is thus.

it Extruds the Globuli Aetherai [as the Cartesians Phrase it] or the Airy
Particles Lodged in their pores: Secondly, it puts the Particles of those
Bodies into a new and different motion, from that they were in before; by which
means they become broken into Figures, and Sizes, and obtain new and
convenient Situations. Thirdly it intangleth and Lodges it self intimately
amongst the smallest parts of those Bodies; by which means their parts being
drawn closer together, they obtain a greater Weight and Solidity: And lastly,
it Acts as a Ferment, and by reason of its Contiguity, and Touch with every
small part of the matter it does, as Leaven uses to do, [though mixed with a
much greater quantity of Dough, then it self] Convert the whole into its own
Nature. So also this Stonifying Seed, by its operating Ferment, does
transchange every particle of the matter it is joined unto, into perfect Stone;
according to its Idea or Image, Connatural with it self.

Section of this Essay; they also are wrought by the same powerful Operations
of a petressent Seed or vapor; and by the same Circumstances, and
Contrivances: which shows, that the strength and Power of a Petrifying Seed
is above, and beyond all other: For, other sorts of Seeds do require, that the
subject matter be reduced into a sequatious juice, or obedient Liquor, and
Consequently does require, that the Figure, and Shape of the precedent Concrete
be destroyed, or else they cannot Act. But the Petrifying Seed, the Human, or
other Living Cretures Figure being still entire, without any intervening
putrefaction, or dissolution of the matter, does transchange [ Totum per Totum]
the whole, throughout the whole; that is, as well the Bones, as the Blood, and
Skin: So that here is not an incrustation of the Stony matter upon the External
parts, [only] but a real change, intrinsically, and throughout, of the Bony,
Fleshy, and Sinnewy parts of the Animal into a stony Substance.

viz. by, the power of Petrifying Seeds] as we may see by the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, and Fourteenth History of the first Section: As also does appear by the
Relation of those that have seen those Famous Grots in France, called, Les
Caves Goutieres, where the Drops falling from the top of the Cave, does [even
in its falling] coagulate before your eyes into little Stones. Now this
Transmutation of Water into Stone, by a Petrescent Seed, is not only much more
usual, than the change of other Substances is, but also much Easier: For Water
is a Primary, simple, liquid, tremulous Body, consisting of very minute parts,
already in Motion, and therefore readily obeying the Command of all sorts of
Seeds.

Principiis Solutis, that is, their matter was in a loose, open, and fluid
Form: And, as I have showed, the Spiritual Seeds of Vigetables, do
assimilate, and change Water, into Mint, Rosemary, etc. According to the
diverse Ideas, and characters of their peculiar Kinds; so also the Stony
Seeds, do form themselves Bodies out of Water; and these of very different
Figures, Compaction, and Colors; and this is done sometimes suddenly,
sometimes slowly, and by length of time: Now, the difference of compaction, and
hardness, that we find in Stones, as also their sudden or slow Coagulation,
depends chiefly upon the plenty, or paucity of the stony Seed, or Spirit, in
respect to the quantity of the matter to be wrought upon, and changed by it.
But the difference of the Figure, is chiefly to be referred to the peculiar
Nature of the Seed, and its Idea; [as we see in Christals, and other Stones,
which have a determinate Figure:] and sometimes it is to be referred to the
vessel, or place, containing the Water, or other Liquor, before its conversion
into Stone, And for the Color, that is also chiefly caused by the operation
of the peculiar sort of stony Seed; which in its working upon the Water, has
given it a determinate Texture, and superficies; by which it reflects and
modifies the Light, after a peculiar manner. But sometimes it is to be referred
also to the Waters being impregnated with the Tinctures of some Mineral or
Mettallin Bodies, before its coagulation. As Granets contain the Tincture of
Iron in them; and therefore are drawn by the Loadstone.

But to put it out of all doubt, that Stones were at first Water; [or at least,
some Liquid Matter] I will Cite a passage or two out of the Works of my often
mentioned, Honorable Friend, Mr. Boil. Boil in his Essay of Ferm. p. 281.
His words are these: And here I will Confess further, that I have oftentimes
doubted, whether or no not only Consistent Bodies, but some of the most Solid
Ones in the World, may not have been Fluid in the form, either of Steemes, or
Liquors, before their Coalition and their Concretion either into Stones, or
other Mineral Bodies. And then speaking of the Opinion of some Men, who will
have it, that Stones, and Metals, [were indeed Created at the beginning of the
World by God, but that since they] are neither Made, nor do Grow, and increase:
He further says [viz. that they were once in a fluid forme] thus: Of this,
besides what we elsewhere deliver Concerning it, we shall anon have Occasion to
mention some Proofs; and therefore we shall now only mention two or three
instances: the first whereof shall be, that we saw, among the rarities of a
Person, exceedingly Curious of them, a Stone flat on the outside, on one of
whose internal surfaces was most Lively Engraven, the Figure of a small Fish,
with all the Finns, Scales, etc. which was affirmed to have been enclosed in
the Body of of that Stone, and to have been accidentally discovered, when the
Stone chancing to receive a rude Knock upon its Edge, split a sunder. I
Remember also that a while since a Housekeeper of mine in the Country
informed me, that whilst a little before, he Caused in my absence one of my
Walls to be repaired; the Masou, I was wont to employ, Casually breaking a
Stone, to make use of it about the Building, found in it [to his Wonder] a
piece of Wood, that seemed part of the branch of some Tree, and Consequently
was afterward enclosed with that solid Case wherein he found it. This Example
seems to me a more cogent Proof of the increase of Stones, then some others,
that Eminent Naturalists much rely on, for reasons discoursed of in an other
place.



And now I have showed you, how agreeable I am with this Learned Person in this
Doctrine concerning the matter, and growth of Stones; I will also show you his
Opinion, as to their Efficient: for he says; Essay of Ferm. P. 275.
I know that not only professed Chemists, but other persons who are deservedly
ranked amongst the Modern Philosophers, do with much Confidence entirely
aforibe the induration, and especially the Lapidescence of Bodies, to a
certain secret internal principal, by some of them called a Form, and by
others a Petrifying Seed, lurking for the most part in some Liquid Vehicle: And
for my part, having had the opportunity to be in a place, where I could in a
dry Mould, and a very elevated piece of Ground, cause to be dug out several
Christalline Bodies, whose smooth sides, and Angles, were as Exquisitly
figured, as if they had bin wrought by a skillful Artist a cutting of precious
Stones; and having also had the opportunity to consider diverse exactly or
regularly shaped Stones, and other Minerals, some dug out of the Earth by my
Friends, and some yet growing upon Stones, newly Torn from the Rocks, I am very
forward to grant that [as I elsewhere intimate] it is a Plastic Principal
implanted by the most wise Creator, in certain parcels of matter, that does
produce in such Concretions, as well the hard Consistance, as the determinate
Figure. Thus far He; Then which, what more consonant to the Doctrine I have
asserted in this Discourse?

at last upon probable Grounds] since we have not only the before cited
Authorities, both of the best Ancient, and Modern Philosophers; and also are
taught by the experiments, and Manual Operations laid down in this Discourse,
which show us the reduction of all bodies ultimately into Water; and their
Nourishment from thence; as also from the inaptitude of at least two of the
four Aristotalian Elements [ viz. Fire, and Aire] to concur to the Constituting
of Bodies; and likewise from the Compound Nature, of two of the Old Chemical
Principles, viz. Sulphur and Salt: and from the same compound Nature of four of
our modern Chemists Principles, viz. Oil, Salt, Spirit, Earth, which all of
them are further reducible into Water, and therefore not to be allowed for
Principles; as I have before demonstrated: Let us then, I say, conclude in, and
acknowledge the truth of the Moysaick, Platonic, and Helmontian Doctrine.

from this Matter, [by the help of Fermentation] alter, break, and new compose
the Particles of which it Consists, till they have formed a Body, Exactly
Corresponding to the Images, or Idea's contained in themselves: Also that the
true Seeds, of all things, are of a very subtle Nature, and Invisible, and are
secundary Idea's and Images; and that they are Connexed to, and depend upon
their Primary Idea's, and Exemplars; which are Inherent and resident in God
himself: And that for that reason they Act with Design, and to a purposed End,
which they constantly, and regularly Accomplish; and this is somewhat Analogous
to reason in them. Lastly, that Nature, or the Law of Kind, is uniforme in its
productions thus far, that it makes all Bodies out of Water, by the power of
invisible Seeds; so that the Matter of all Bodies is Identically the same. And
that they are all of them reducible into the same Matter at Last: But that
their Seeds are various, and therefore produce different Effects upon the same
Matter: yet do they all agree in this, viz. That they are all invisible Beings,
and all of them have a dependence upon their Exemplars, which are the Decrees
of God, and are constantly inherent in him.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THere is lately Printed, a Book, in which is showed the necessity that lies
upon all Honest, Discreet, and Conscientious Physicians, to resume that
Ancient, and Laudable Custom of making, and Dispencing their own Medicines;
with the Advantages thereby accrewing to the Patient: Both as to saving of
Charges; and the speedy cure of their Distempers. In which the New way of
prescribing Bills, [or making Medicines with the Pen] is showed to be
destructive to the Interest, both of the Patient, and Physician: It exposing
them to the Fraudulent dealing of Practicing Apothecaries, in which you will
find the Marrow of what has been writ upon this Subject, by Dr. Cox, Dr.
Merit, Dr. Goderd, and others; together with certain new, and cogent Arguments
not formerly made use of. The Subject I conceive, of such general concern, that
I thought it is very fit to give notice of it here.

The Title of it is Praxis Medicorum Antiqua, and Nova, or the Ancient, and
Modern Practice of Physic examined, Stated, and Compared, etc. It was written
by the Industrious, and Ingenious Dr. Everrard Manewring. And is to be sold by
William Cademan Bookseller, at the Sign of the Popes Head, at the little Door
of the New Exchange, next Durham Yard.

Clarks Examples in two Volumes in Fol. Bacons Natural History in Fol. Reynolds
of Murder in Fol. Cozens's Devotions in 12.
Plays.
Cambyses King of Persia in 4. Island Princess in 4. Town Shifts in 4. Juliana
in 4. Cataline in 4. Rivals in 4. Flora's Vagaries in 4. Marcelia in 4.
Imperial in 4. Fortune by Land and Sea in 4. Unfortunate Mother in 4. Hamlet in
4.
Cum multis Aliis.

To be Sold by William Cademan, at the Sign of the Popes Head in the New
Exchange.


