PEPI PSYPOPOSIAS, OF DRINKING WATER, Against our Novelists, that prescribed it
in England:

BY RICHARD SHORT of Bury, Doctor of Physic.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, PEPI THEPOPOSIAS OF WARM DRINK, And is an answer to a
Treatise of Warm Drink, printed at CAMBRIDGE.

Galen 2. de temp. c. 7. (...).

Many that seem excellent Physicians, are deceived.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN CROOK, at the Sign of the Ship, in St. Paul's Church
yard. 1656.

THE PREFACE, To the READER.
GENTLE READER,
I Will not trouble you with a long discourse, about the pedigree of Physic
fetched from Aesculapius and Apollo, as the Graecians did, or from Mercury,
Isis, Osyris, as the Egyptians. But I will tell you in brief, that the method
of curing was written in the Columns of Aesculapius his Temple; and that in
Egypt the wife sayings, and rules of Physicians were written in the same, or
such Columns [(...).] But afterward Physic lay in darkness five hundred
years, until Hippocrates restored it unto its former luster, who in writing was
the first Founder of it. With whose writings no Philosopher ever found fault,
as Galen affirms. And his writings stand as firm at this day, as if it were
written in Columns of brass, few innovations were ever taken notice of. Galen
in his comments makes Hippocrates our Great Master, and applaudes him (as I may
say) to the Stars. But now we find many to forsake their own and old Master. We
see too many new opinions in this later age are crept into the world, but by
what right or warrant I will not determine at present. It Is more then enough
that we see so many kickshaws in all sciences, as new forged conclusions in
Philosophy, and new Paradoxes in Physic, piping out of the Novellists Brains.

As new hatched Chickens from grand Caire,
Or some strange new castles in the Air.
The whole world runs a madding in novelties, and our English men will not be
left behind, such is the changeable condition of our nation, we cannot be
constant, or continue long in our opinions. And although we be divided from the
whole world, toto divisi ab orb Britanni, yet we agree and join with it in
novelties. Gregory Oxoniensis, the late library keeper in Oxford, says the
Astrologers, put our nation under the domination of Mercury, and quotes Roger
Bacon for it. [Inde intricatioribus and profundis maxim momentis laborat
propter impeditos motus.] From hence it is much perplexed, by reason of the
uncertain motion, in intricate, and deep matters. Eswide quotes an old
Astrologer, that affirms, [Angli sunt vagi and instabiles, nunc ad summum,
nunc ad imum delati.] English men are inconstant, and uncertain, now they are
elevated to the height, now again are carried to the bottom. Thus our
Physicians, that had wont to be carried to the top of Parnassus, with admirable
Galenical method, now they are carried to the bottom of emperical new
experiments. Nothing passes for current now, but new devises. And if they
cannot frame themselves to introduce a new opinion, they will create a new
paradox of an old one, and furbush it over with a new aereall smooth Language:
Thus [error foecundus est, et quaelibet aetas de veteribus quasi novos gignit,
atque producit.] Error is fruitful. Every age, of old errors begets, and
produces new, which does not only the Authors mischief, but others. Seneca
[versat nos, et praecipitat traditus per manus error, nemo sibi tantum errat,
sed aliis erroris causa, et Author est.] A traditional error winds us every
way, and casts us headlong down, we perish by others examples, no man erres
alone, but is the cause and Author of others errors. This our age thinks
nothing supereminent, unless it has fancy the Father, noveltie the Mother, and
folly the Nurse. To find out some new devise, or to bring into the world a new
mode. [(...)] is more then to win Troy, or to discover some unknown part of
America. Here I would not have any mistake me. I commend any ingenious man,
that can find out new medicaments, or conclusions in any part of Physic. But I
would not have them put out their Forefathers light, or eyes, that they may
see the better, or that they may be esteemed [coelo delapsi] and [(...)] and
their Forefathers [(...).] My intention is against such, as bring innovations
against Hippoerates and Galen, which is not only a great temerity, and
undiscretness; But lays a blasphemous imputation upon all antiquity, it is
impudency for boys to bring in innovations against men, or children against
parents. And Physicians were called [(...)] boys, not, because they came from
the same lineage, as some ignorantly interpret, but because they were
posteriores, so the Egyptians called the Graecians boys as Plato relates in
his Timaeo, [(...)] Posteriour ages were but children, and boys in respect of
their predecessors, such was their reverence to antiquity. But let this later
age flatter themselves, and admire their new born fancies, hammerd at the anvil
of their own working brains, yet it is not possible to obscure, or obliterate
the old dogmatical foundations (which so many ages past have crowned with
eternity) from the glory of their heredity. Shall we dream to see more then our
Forefathers did? have we any new oriental light breaking through the Chaos,
or darkness of their ignorance? No no! these are but pleasing dreams of their
own idle Romansies. And if later ages have found any thing new, that
Hippocrates and Galen were ignorant of; They knew more that we are ignorant of:
what Novelist can tell me what was (...) Hippocratis, or melca Galeni. It Is not
necessary, not to the purpose, that we should know all things past, and to
come. [Cardo rei] the maine point is, that Galen left us an absolute and
perfect Method, in all parts of Physic, and has left nothing for posteriour
ages to write, unless they will illustrate the Sun, or discourse of trifles, or
[(...)] that is, do that worse, which was admirably performed before. Now we
find out such toys which former ages have, and posteriour shall esteem vain
bubbles, and vapors, sprung from ambition, and ignorance, as having a more
sublime estimation of our own fancies, then of antique, and solid literature.
Thus our Novelists make themselves the great Donn's of Physic, at whose
tribunal we must expect the sentence of life, or death, as from the Laws of
Medes, and Persians that cannot be revoked. These are the ridiculous
trepidations of this age. And I for my part, cannot obtain of my rational
part, to subscribe these new fancies, no not so much as incline to mine own
opinion, but shall ever refer my self to the judgment of antiquity, and there
rest as content, as [Tityrus sub tegmine fagi.] I mean in Hippocrates and
Galen, whom the ignorant contemn, because (I think) they have Majesty in them,
or because they understand them not, few will be troubled with their heathen
Greek Language, obscure Phrases, intricate sentences, and scrupulous Method as
they suppose. Yet all Physicians will pretend to draw from these Fountains.
All Rivers come from the Ocean, and to the Ocean return again. All Physic is
from Galen and Hippocrates, and to them owe tribute as to the Founders, [(...)]
as Bassus the Epigrammatist. I confess reason teaches me to make use of
antiquity, as from whence is all Canonical literature, and so much the more,
because it is adverse to novelty. I know all literature [ tota (...)] is immured
in the Ancients. The later Graecians, Arabians, Latins, are but so many
rivelets from these Oceans. And that which the Novelists object, is frivolous,
and absurd, that a dwarf standing upon a Giants shoulder, sees more then the
Giant, but stay a little, it is easier for a dwarf to get upon a Giants
shoulders, then for a pygmie, or an ignorant Novellist, to understand
Hippocrates and Galen, then how can they stand upon their shoulders? The
comparison cannot hold, dwarfes can scarsly come so near, as to salute these
Giants Pettitoes. Therefore how shall they rely upon their foundations. And if
they do, they cannot see half so well as they. He that can go cheek by jowle
with these Giants in parallele is a brave fellow, and he may as well span the
circumference of the Heavens, as go beyond them, or see more then they, twenty
years is nothing to read, and understand them, and hardly sufficient to learn
the Language, without which they can not obtain this difficult faculty. Crato,
called Caesar's Physician, although he was a very good Grecian [cum essem
(inquit) juvenis, satis mihi erat si in quadam aviditateres prompte possem
cognoscere, ideoque versiones amabam, nec putabam me plus visurum in Graecis
quam vidissent doctiss. interpretes. Nunc saepe haereo in vocabulis, saepe
deploro quod in Gr. minus studiose versatus sum.] See how he deplores his
unhappiness, that he was no better instructed in the Greek tongue.

There is another objection as idle as the former, they say Hippocrates and
Galen are no competent judges. It may be they expect new lights come from Sir
Thomas Moors [(...)] Or from the Man in the Moon, or what? have we new
Ranters, and Quakers in Physic too? for these are the newest lights I know of,
new natural reasons are as old as the world. Philosophy and Physic is as old
as nature her self, but first written by Hippocrates, nothing is new under the
Sun, says the wise man. There are no general notions, canons, axioms new
coined. Yet every Farrier, or any Mechanic may perchance find out some petty
particular experiment. Others object that there be new diseases unknown to
Hippocrates and Galen, as the scurvy and the French disease. But I utterly deny
it, and so does Julius Pacius, and Langius and others of the Learned. Again
they object an ague [ex spermate] which is not in Galen. Secondly, that there
be many symptoms which are not found in him. These are tidiculous imaginations
of novelty. To the first I answer with Galens words. [(...)] and that some
which contain them selves, have their head heavy, forsake their meat and have
agues. To the second I answer, that Galen would not have you deceived [(...)]
and all the interpreters confirm, that Galen did not omit any symptom. Nay, I
will be a little bolder, peradventure the opinion of the circulation of the
blood so highly cried up, is not new, though it be made more manifest by Doctor
Harvie. For Plato in his Timaeo seems to make mention of the circular motion of
the blood. [(...)] Where we see that the blood is carried circularly in these
words [(...).] And thus much for novelties.

Now (Reader) I will give an account of my intention in this Book, and the
subject of it, why I cite the Greek text, of my Method, and translating the
Greek and Latin.

I write against the Novelists, by which I understand those that deny, or
decline the ancient authorities, and have new opinions contrary to them,
without solid reasons.

The subject of this Book is water, which is the best of things according to
Pindar, [(...)] And Plato quotes Pindar for it.

Hence comes (when the Deity please)
Fountains, Rivers, and sourging sease.
[(...).]
But in this large extent I do not treat, my business is Physical. [(...)] or
[(...)] that is of drinking cold water, which I think is hurtful in our
Country of England. And although many have endangered themselves, many have
lost their lives by drinking of water, yet because they find no present hurt,
they will venture what ever come on it, though it be for nothing else but to
follow the new mode of drinking it. But I shall prove it hurtful by diverse
reasons, and authorities fetched from Hippocrates and Galen, and the best
Physicians. And if our Novelists give not other materials of Physic more
judiciously, they must kill more, and play with as ill luck as Th^mison did,
and kill a multitude.

[Quot Themison aegros Autumno occiderit uno.] Some will object, that I
interlace my Book with Greek texts more for oftentation then for any necessity:
I answer; I regard not what folly may invent. The quotations are very
necessary; for transiations do not only vary from the Greek Copies, but many
times are false. Therefore it is necessary to produce the original, word for
word, especially against Novelists, and such this curious age expect, which
show not only the verity, but [ majorem (...)] more efficacy, more antiquity,
more Majesty, and shows the dignity of the Author. A testimony is not only
measured by its own validity, but by the Authors worth. Thus the famous Orator
Cicero did mix Greek with Latin, lib. 1. de officiis. [Ipse de meam utibitatem
semper cum Graecis Latina conjunxi, neque id in Philosophia solum, sed etiam in
dicendi exercitatione.] For mine own profit, I always joined together the
Greek with the Latin, not only in Philosophy; but also in the exercise of
speaking. Thus I imitate the great Critics, Scaliger, Casaubon, Schottus
Mercurialis, Julius Alexandrinus, Langius, and the Learned Duretus. That I may
say nothing of our own Country men, who daily quote Greek in their writings.
Lastly, although I cite the Greek, original Language, yet, if any man read but
the English alone by it self, he shall find the sense of the Greek, and so of
the Latin in most places.

Now for the Method, I know it may be amended, yet I fear not the juditious
Critical censure, and as for Petty-Johns, or dwarf Critics, I regard not. I
know some Critics long ago, have been so bold as to find fault with the frame,
and order of the great Fabric of the world, and called it blasphemously
[(...), and (...)] a confusion, or confused mixture: what mercy then shall I
expect to find at their unmerciful censures. Let them slight my Method to
atoms, or annihilate it. I shall esteem as little of their censures.

And for my translation of the Greek, or Latin, although there may be faults,
yet not considerable. I confess, I turn most texts not [(...)] word for word,
but Purposely, keep the plain sense, and mind of the Author. And so Plato
understood Homer (not as poor verbal Critics do in these days) [ non (...),
sed (...)] not according to the words, but according to the mind of the Author.
And if any mislike the translation, let them translate it better, if they can,
so long as men be of several tempers, and fancies, and words have diverse
interpretations, it is impossible to please all men in translations. Lastly, it is
a hard matter, so long as we be men, not to err in many things, some we are
altogether ignorant of, some we judge sinisterly, some we write negligently. As
Galen says, whose words, (to close all) are these, ((...)] Therefore (courteous
Reader) humane errors judge charitably.

THE DEDICATION TO THE Right worthy, and his much honored Friends, MAURICE
BARROW, AND JAMES COLTHORPE, Esquires.
GEntlemen, the noble expressions of courtesy, which I have received from your
hands, beyond all merit, and expectation of mine, have engaged me to be so bold
as to prefix your names, in the frontispice of this little Book. And although
truth need no Patron, and falsitie deserves none, for an Army cannot defend
falsity, when truth of it self is murus aheneus, a brazen Wall. Yet I humbly
crave, that you will be pleased to give it protection. Gentlemen, I assure you
upon my credit, that I maintain ne treason against Philosophy, or any heretical
opinion against Physic, but the ancient verity which Hippocrates, and Galen
have delivered unto us. Therefore in this your protection you may deserve the
henour of patronizing those antique worthies whom the universal world, for many
centuries of years have had in sublime estimation: And if you expect any of
Demosthenes his Rhetorique, or Ciceronian Eloquence, I crave pardon, and make
this apology for my self, That truth may be apparelled in plain garments, and
need not curiosity. Philosophy, and Physic are as civil matrons, which neglict
rich attire, and splendid ornaments. Sophistry is many times in rich vestments.
It has bin observed many years ago, that the greatest Heretics were the
Eloquentest men. And garments that are perfumed with must, civet, and amber,
many times hreed a suspicion. Non been olet, qui been semper olet. And as
Scaliger says, non in foro versamur, aut Romano comitio, sed in communi
Theatro sapientum, sub oculis veritatis cujus supellectilem, atque apparatum
non tam nitidum quam opulentum esse decet. (...). Learning has a plain coat
without welt or guard as they say. Accept therefore I pray you, these plain
lines dressed in a homspun English suit. And if this Tractate cannot deserve your
worthy acceptance. Yet may it be as a monument, and Testimony of my affection.
Thus wishing you both, not only a perpetual health (that you need no Physician)
but also eternal happiness. I subscribe.

Your humble Servant, R. SHORT.

Doctor VENNERS OPINION OF DRINKING of WATER.
REader, since I wrote this following Treatise, I found my opinion seconded,
and confirmed by Thomas Venner, Doctor of Physic, in his Book entitled,
Viarecta, ad vitam longam, which I will here transcribe, to give you, my
Reader, more satisfaction then my self.

His question is, whether it be not wholesome for Northern people, that inhabit
cold Countries to drink water at their meals, instead of beer.

His answer is: That although water be the most ancient drink, and to those
that inhabit hot Countries, profitable and familiar, by reason of the parching
heat of the ambient air, which does exceedingly heat and inflame, and dry the
body. Yet to such as inhabit cold Countries, and especially not accustomed
thereunto, nor the constitution intensively hot requiring, and forcing the
same, it is by the contrary in no wise agreeable, for it very greatly dejects
the appetite, destroys the natural heat, and overthrows the strength of the
stomach, and consequently confounding the concoction, is the cause of
Crudities, fluctuations, and windiness in the body.

This is the Doctors opinion, and is the same with others in cold Countries,
where they drink strongest wines, and beers, by the advice of their Physicians,
and this is not without Hippocratical authority, whose counsel is, to drink
(...) in winter, and there is the same proportion with winter, and cold
Countries. And to conclude, this Doctors opinions are almost the words of Galen
1. ad Glauconem. (...). And thus much for Doctor Venners his opinion.

Authors cited in this BOOK.
A.
ADrianus Junius. Aetius. Alexander Trallian. Alexander Aphrodis. Alexander
Massaria. Andernacus. Antonius Fumanellus. Apollonius. Apulcjus. Argenterius.
Aristoteles. Arnoldus de Villa. Arethas Episcopus. Athenaeus. Avicenna.
B.
Beroaldus. Bodin.
D.
Dioscorides. Dodonaeus.
E.
Erasistratus. Eswide. Etymologicum Magnum.
F.
Fonseca. Fuchsius.
G.
Galen. Garzias a Horto. Gentilis. Glossarium. Gr. Oxoniensis. Graeca Epigram.
Guastivinius.
H.
Herodotus. Hen. Stephanus. Hieronymus Mer-curialis. Hippocrates. Hollerius.
Homerus. Horatius. Horatius Augenius. Hugo Senensis.
I.
Isidorus. Joubert. Joannis Colle. Juvenal. Julius Pollux. Julius Alexandrinus.
Julius Pacius.
L.
Lambinus. Latinus Tancredus. Langius. Lobel.
M.
Macrobius. Manardus. Mathiolus. Mercatus.
N.
Nonnus. Nunnius.
O.
Oppianus. Oribasius. Ovidius.
P.
Paparella. Paulus Aegineta. Paulus Iurisconsult. Petrus Abanus. Petrus
Monavius. Petrus Bellonius. Persiu^. Pindar. Plautus. Plinius. Plutarch.
Q.
Quintus Serenus.
R.
Riverius. Rhasis. Roger Bacon. Rondelet.
S.
Sanctorius. Scaliger. Scholiast. Aristophanis. Seneca. Simon Simonius.
Simonides. Stephanus de Urbibus. Strabo.
V.
Vallesius. Valleriola. Varro. Virgilius. Ulpianus Iurisconsultus.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS Following.
I. THe four considerations of water. II. Good nourishment, and good Medicines
may be employed sinisterly, or to a bad use. III. Of indication. IV. The nature
of our bodies. V. What is not good in cold Countries, etc. VI. England is a
cold Country, etc. VII. We may use stupefying things as opium, and poppy as
well as water. VIII. Whether we may not eat acornes as well as drink water. IX.
There is no necessity or convenience of drinking of water in cold Countries. X.
Whether we may drink water after dinner. XI. Old age and children may not drink
water. XII. Of custom, that it has a principal power in diet. XIII. This
argument is powerful, We have no custom to drinkwater. XIV. That wine is
absolutely better then water. XV. That our English beer is better then water.
XVI. The virtues of our English beer XVII. Of experience that beer is
healthful. XVIII. Of the ill qualities of water. XIX. Two gross errors in our
new lights, about the exhibition of water. XX. Whether water be a convenient
Medicine in fevers, and whether we may drink it against custom. XXI. Who may
change custom, that sick men may not change, nor veletudinary men. XXII. Diverse
Cautions to be considered for the Drinking of Water. XXIII. A recapitulation of
the former Chapter out of Riverius. XXIV. Whether water be good in the
palpitation of the heart, gout and dropsy. XXV. Three objections Answered.
XXVI. The Epilogue.
Of drinking Water.
CHAP. I. The four considerations of water.
THere be four principal considerations of water. First, as an Element,
Secondly, as an Aliment, or nourishment, Thirdly, as a Vehicle of nourishment.
Fourthly, as a medicine, or medicament.

First, as an Element, water is the mother, as heat is the father of all
generation. Hence the Ancient Poet Homer.

[(...).]
Which verse I thus turn.
From water as from an Ocean springs,
The great generation of all things.
Water also is called [(...)] all-sperme, or all-spawn, as if all sublunary
things had their original from water. And when the divine Scripture says, that
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the water; This spirit is fire (as
Valesius expounds) or, as others, heat, which is celestial: Aristotle call its
[(...)] more divine, attributing a divine efficacy to this heat which moves
upon the water, and nessles as a Hen upon egg; to produce all living creatures;
but this consideration appertains rather to the Philosopher then to the
Physician: therefore I pass to the second consideration.

Secondly, Water is considered as an Aliment, or nourishment: and although
according to Scaliger, and Valesius, water does not nourish, yet the better
part of the learned hold the contrary. And that water nourishes, is evident by
these following arguments.

First, Water turns to choler according to Hippocrates 3. acut. 40. [(...)]
water is choleric to choleric natures; why may it not turn to other humors,
as well as to choler? and consequently nourish?

Secondly, Air nourishes the spirits, as Galen intimates: 12. Meth. cap. 5.
[(...)] And why may not water as well nourish the more humid parts, as the
air, aeriall parts?

Thirdly, Water nourishes fish, and why not men?

Fourthly, Costaeus reports of a Maid in Germany that lived some years by only
water, by the command of Ferdinand the Emperor.

Fifthly, The express testimony of Plato, who was numbered among Physicians
that were [(...)] that is elegant and were opposed [(...)] to vulgar
Physicians: Plato's words are these [(...)] that is; drynourishment nourishes
the dry parts of the body, so does moist and waterish nourishment, the moist.

Sixthly, The authority of great Hippocrates the prince of all Physicians: lib,
de diata [(...)] that is, fire moves all things, water nourishes all things.

Seventhly, Water makes some men fat. [Ego (inquit Hieronymus Mercurialis)
novi duos magnos principes aquae frigidae usu ping ue factos:] I knew (says
Hieronymus Mercurialis) two great Princes made fat with drinking of water.

Thirdly, Water is considered as a Vehicle of nourishment, or as I may say, a
Wagon to carry nourishment into all parts of the body; and Hippocrases calls
it [(...)] that is, a Vehicle or Wagon of nourishment. Valesius upon these
words of Hippo. [potus, aut est tantum potus, ut sola aqua, non nutrit: aut est
alimentum in potut] drink as only drink, as water alone does not nourish, but
serves to temper the inward parts, helps concoction (for concoction is a
boiling or elixation) and distribution. But as I proved before, water does not
only carry down nourishment, as a flood carries sticks, stones, rubbish etc.
but nourishes.

The fourth and last consideration is, that water is not only an aliment, or
nourishment, but also a medicine, or medicament, and not only [(...)
medicamentum] a bare medicine, but in some cases, the greatest meditine or
remedy that can be, and so it is called of Galen. 9. Meth. 5. [(...).] Certainly
in Agues nothing better, for thenatures of agues are hot, and dry, and
therefore require cooling, and moystening. This is Galens discourse 9. Meth,
14. In burning fevers which are called [(...)] nothing is better, or a more
present remedy then cold water, as Tangius, and Alexander Massaria confirm. In
thirst nothing is comparable to cold water. Thirst is hot, and dry, as all the
learned confess: but water is actually, and potentially cold, and moist: ergo,
water is the best remedy; for it is a rule eternally true in Physic: contraries
are cured by contraries. Beside, water is not only profitable in sickness, but
in health, Gal. 8. Meth. 3. [ Ego vero calidas naturas, (...)] that hot natures
that are in health find great profit by drinking of water, so that it be
moderately taken. For 2. de temperament: Gal. says [(...).] Moderate drinking
of water is profitable. Last of all, water is convenient in all ages, [(...).]
In very children that are hot, and moist, Galen does not forbid water, [(...);]
Besides many experiencies may be produced of the novelists to prove water to be
very healthful. Therefore we see that water is not only healthful in
sickness, but convenient in health, and in all ages: wherefore the novelists
of this age seem with much reason to exhibit water very familiarly in our
Country.

CHAP. II. Good nourishment, and good medicines may be employed sinisterly.
BUt all these Authorittes, Reasons, and experiencies will not serve their
turns: there is no venomous medicine, but may be so prepared that it may be
healthful in the highest degree [(...)] and there is nothing so good a
nourishment, or medicament, but may be employed to a mischief, if not exhibited
with method, which is guided by indications. Medicines well used are [(...)]
the hands of the Gods; but ill used, or misapplied are like swords in mad-mens
hands, as Erasistratus speaks in Galen: Galen also quotes the same Erasistratus
in these words following, [(...)] 3. Acut. 41. that is the strongest faculties
of meats, and drinks taken importunely, bring great hurt, but taken
opportunely, bring great profit. All this is confirmed by Hippocrates, in his
book of Aliments. Milk (says he) is a nourishment to some, to others not. Wine
is a nourishment to some, to others not: [(...).] What is convenie^^ to one
man's nature, is not convenient for another: What is profitable for one
Country, is not profitable for another. What is idoneus for one age, is not
idoneus, and fit for another. What is customarie to one Country, is not
customary to another. Wherefore it is an happy use [(...)] makes them good, a
sinister use makes them bad, although they be good of themselves, Galen. 11.
Meth. 11. says [(...)] it is very hard to find a remedy very profitable, and to
have no hurt at all. And although water be excellently good it it self [(...)]
as Pindar asserts. Yet it may be sinisterly, and ill used. How shall we then
know, or distinguish, whether water be convenient drink in England?

In which ambiguous, and dubious proposal, it shall be in vain to distinguish
curiously of the several sorts, or species of water: for our discourse is of
that which is simple, and without any strange, or aliene quality, (such as the
Ancients mingled with Wine, such as they commonly call [(...)] Sweet water.)
And this is the water we doubt of, for which we need Ariadne's clue of thread to
get out of our Labyrinth, or some cynosure to guide us, lest we dash against a
Rock: and for my part, I know no other way to give us more light, or guide us
better, then the consideration of the Indications which are not only the basis,
and foundation, but [lapis lydius the touchstone of all logical
investigation. What sidoneus, or convenient, What not, either in general to
all, or specifically to some, or individually to this or that man's nature. This
is the true Galenicall way, this is [canon Policleti,] the rule of Policletus.
Therefore it is requisite we should have a touch of Indication to know what it
is, and whether water be good to drink in England.

CHAP. III. Of Indication.
ALl natural light is a spark, or participation of the divine light, without
this natural light we are in darkness, and ignorance: reason is the light of
the soul [(...)] such as is the sight, or light in the eye, such is reason in
the soul; for reason is an internal light, as the light of the Sun is
external. All the light that we have is a borrowed light, such almost as the
Moon borrows of the Sun: Scaliger in his exercitations says [Adempta
potioris authoritatis luce, incorti rerum, non solum dubitare, sed etiam
contradicere audemus] the better lights being taken away we are uncertain of
things, and not only doubt, but dare contradict them. The same Author in his
comment upon Theophrast, calls Galen and Aristotle [duo maxima lumina] the two
great lights: each of them have their rational demonstrations, as beams, and
^^aies of these great lights. Galen has his logical indication, that is,
manisestation, declaration, or demonstration; for indication [(...): 3. prag.
39.] is a rational consequence, which must have of necessity some precedence.
And Gal. 2. Meth. cap. [(...).] Indication is a light of consequence: few there
be that understand what is [(...) [and what is [(...).] The first is a word of
the Lawmakers as well as of Physicians. Hence Vlpian says [(...).] Indication
is a word of the law. The second word is used of Rhetoritians, and Physicians,
and Lawmakers, [(...)] says Vlpian. Harry Stephens in his huge voluminous
work, handles those words, (as for the most part all Physicalll words) very
poorly: Indication says Galen is emphasis. And what this emphasis is,
Alexander Aphrodisaus in his Comment upon Aristotle de sensu and sensibili,
tells us [(...)] Emphasis is the visible species in the pupil of the eye.
Plutarch calls the Rainbow the emphasis of the Sun, but these manifest
appearances, are rather external, then internal, but Galen, his [(...)]
emphasis is altogether internal, for as we see in a mirror forms, shapes or
species, so in the intellect we see clearly results, and deductions out of
presedent conclusions, [(...)] says Aphrodisaeus. Indication is a reflection
of the light of reason, Crato, Physician to three Emperors calls emphasin an
illustrious declaration, or light of the mind; this light is clear, and
manifest reason, or a rational declaration, or illustration: this indication
therefore is the clue of thread, the cynosure, the lydius lapis, the cannon
Polycleti. Galen uses no other way then this, for the finding out of any diet,
or medicine, so far as is useful. He that finds a medicine by indication, finds
it by art, but he that finds it by experiment only, finds it by casuality, and
chance, and is an Emperick, and no dogmatical Physician. Therefore Galen 2.
Meth. 6. professes himself not to handle of an imperial finding out, but of a
logical in^estigation. His words are these, [ (...) non (...)] and 4. Meth. 3.
[(...)] that is ^n a word, he treats only of a logical ^nvestigation, for
seeing there may be error in an experimental way, [(...)] says Hippocrates.
Therefore the genuine, and sublime way is by a logical manifestation, or clear
illustration, which is nothing else but Galens indication. Therefore according
to Galen we will consider these indications.

CHAP. IV. The nature of our Bodles.
FIrst [(...)] the nature of our bodies is to be considered which is either
found, and hail, or sick, or of a neuter condition, or disposition. Our
constitutions that are hail, are not so firm, and strong as our forefathers.
And in generall^ men [(...)] as they are now, as Homer often repeats, are no^
so strong as in time past. Great Aja^ threw a stone [(...)] at Hector which was
so great, that men of this Age could hardly move. Which Agathius the greek
Epigrammatis^ expresses thus, elegantly the stone speaks, (...).

That is,

That now men with all their great endeavors,
Can scarcely move me from the ground with Leavers.
Beside we dare not purge with white Hellebore, elaterium, and peplium, as the
Ancients did, we dare not bleed their quantity, that is libras 6. which is 72.
ounces as Heurnius affirms. We cannot draw our old English Archers Bows. For
who can shoot (as the proverb says) in Robin Hoods Bow? Few can handle our old
English Swords, which are to be seen at this day. Besides that luxury, and
distempers have weakened our bodies, Gal, 6. Aphoris. says [(...) (male Graeci.
codices habent (...)] that luxury, and pleasures are so increased to that
height in these our days, that scarce any thing can be added to them: for men's
bodies of old were stronger, but now they be corrupt with excess, and
riotousnesse, and are grown more dainty, as Andernacus says [Corpora olim
humana robustiora erant, hodie luxu corrupta, delicatioraque evaserunt.]
Therefore Luduvicus Mercalus, Physician to Philip the second, and third, Kings
of Spain, (I say) his opinion is discreet, and worth consideration. [Humana
vero fragilitas (inquit) eo jam devenit, ut pauci adhucexstent qut aquam
innoxie bibere possunt, ob eum que^ a principiis, aut improbo bidendi modo
contrahunt languorem] that is, the frailty of man's nature is such, or come to
that pass, that few there be living that may drink water without hurt, by
reason of the weakness, and languishing condition they got from their first
principles, or all ill course of drinking, for he that drinks water must have
(...), such strength as men had in the infancy of the world. Otherwise cold
water [(...). 7. Meth.] that it works a secret cold to weak bodies. And we
cannot determine in our country (because we are not accustomed) whether our
inward parts [(...)] 9. Meth. 5. [may bear the familiarity of water, for
[(...)] the indication of parts (that I may add this to the former Indication)
requires most accustomed things, as Galen 4. Meth. 7. his words are these,
[(...)] but of custom we shall speak afterward. Hence I conclude that our
bodies especially in England, where luxury, and distempers are not esse, but
rather more then in Galens time, are much effeminated, and weakened, and
consequently cannot bear water. And if our bodies could endure, and were able
enough to drink it, yet our Country would not admit it, as is proved in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Water is not good in cold Countries.
BY the way I must give my Reader notice, that I handle of water as
dieteticall, or as it belongs to diet, and afterward shall speak of it
pharmaceutically, that is belonging to physic; therefore to go forward. There
is another Indication taken from the Country wherein we live. Hippocrates in
his Aphorisms. [(...)] we must consider, and regard our Country: for several
Countries require several diets. A hot region claims a cool diet. Therefore
it is better to drink water in Africa and Lybia, then in Northern Countries.
Wherefore Avicenna, the Prince of the Arabian Physicians affirm [regio frigida
tolerat vinum, calida non tolerat,] that a cold region may tolerate Wine, a hot
region will not allow of it. But it is Galens letter that kills. 8. Meth. 9.
(...)] an intemperate time of the year, the inclemency of the air, and
Country do demonstrate the Contrary diet: Valesius, and Paparella confirm
this saying, that the diet of septentrionall, and cold Countries must be like
the diet of winter. There may be two solid reasons given: The first is because
cold and phlegmatique humors are most frequently generated in cold and
septentrionall Countries: but water increases such plegmatique humors, as
[Galen lib. de humoribus. [somnus, (inquit) and (...) inducunt pituitam] sleep,
and drinking of water, beget phlegm. Therefore we must not drink cold water in
cold Countries, for as I said before, the reason, or indication demonstrate
quite contrary, which rely upon this great, and the maynest foundation of our
faculty, Contraries are cured by contra^ies.
[(...).] which is the most general scope of all distempered constitutions.
The second reason is, because waters are not well concocted in cold Countries;
for waters rising toward the North, and averse to the Sun, are of ill
consequence. So Cardan, [Aquae Pluviae, fontanae, and fluminum solae optima in
regionibus validis, siccis, and Orientalibus, pessimae in conirarils locis,]
that is, waters are best in hot, dry, and oriental Countries: but worst in
contrary Countries, and harder to be concocted. Let us therefore conclude with
the ever admirable Gal. 11. Method. ubi [(...)] non est aqua danda] where the
air is cold, there water is not to be given. And there is the same reason of
the consti^ution or slate of the heavens, the time of the year, and region, for
all these are comprehended under the notion of air: which Galen. and Aristotle
call, [(...)] in a hundred places. And if any object, that water in Summer time
(although I have seen Gentlemen drink cold water in Winter: let them look to
it) is better, and may be drank in our cold Country. I answer with Plutarch in
his natural questions. Water in Summer is more malicious, the heat drawing, or
discussing the sweetest, and lightest part of it, for so sound these words.
[(...).] Secondly, If any more curious critic shall object, that in cold
Countries, or Regions, men are hotter and stronger inwardly; therefore they may
concoct water better in cold Countries, and in Winter. For the heat is
concentrated by an antiperistasis. But if this be true, then the colder the
Country, the hotter, and stronger the men for concoction: therefore in the
coldest Countries we may drink water, and in the hottest we may drink wine.
Secondly, if men be hotter and concoct better in cold Countries, and Winter,
how then comes it to pass, that we are subject to Rhewmes, and fluxes; and
generally to all phlegmatique diseases in such Countries, and it Winter time?
Therefore to give a full answer to this doubt, we must understand, that in
these cases, the natural heat is increased in quantity, but diminished in
quality, and this is the reason that phlegrne is begotten in such Countries,
and in winter. For the remission of heat is a kind of cooling, which great
hunger, and little thirst do demonstrate. Wherefore Hippocrates in his book of
diet, text 2. says, [(...).] we eat much in Winter, and drink little, but our
drink must be [meracissimum] strong wine. And Galen gives the reason, because
winter is cold, and moist, (...).] therefore we must heat, and dry the body by
reason of the excess of coldness, and moystnesse of the temper of the time,
the very heart is colder, the pulse is less, slower, and seldomer, the brain
abounds eatarches, the liver generates phlegmatique blood, by which discourse
we seethat water is not convenient in winter. The samereaso^ is of cold
Countries, in which water is hurtful. Wine not mixed with water, but pure wine,
and strong beer, are more beneficial to our natures. Therefore by providence
nature has afforded us beer of necessity, as Cardane says very well. [At vero
necessario qui Boream inhabitant zythum ex hordeo, and siligine, and tritico
faciunt, lib. de. subtilitate.]

CHAP. VI. England is a cold Countrcy, etc.
THat England is situated in the North part of the world: I think no man will
deny, for not only Bodin, and Cardan, and other Neotericks affirm it, but the
old Geographers. France is cold, as the proverb witnesses, [Gallica heyme
frigidius] in Euphormio, colder then the French cold. But England is more
septentrionall, or Northern then France. As Stephanus de urbibus [(...).]
Britain is an Island imitating the continent after, or beyond France, so this
preposition [(...)] must be expounded, which I could show by diverse
authorities, but this is to trifle away the time. For Strabe in his Geographie
speaks plain. [(...)] I think the Britains to be more septentrionall then the
French. Plutarch out of Asclepiades reports the Egyptians grow old at thirty
years, because they are burnt with the Sun. But the Britains live 120.
[(...)] for the coldness of the place which conserves the natural heat. The
Ethiopian bodies are more spungious, and rare, but English men which are
[(...)] under the North, (for so Galen, who has the same story, expounds it,
[(...)] have bodies more compact, and thick, and therefore live longer.

Scaliger in his exercitations calls English men gluttons, or great eaters
[Anglos voroces] which Epithere proves England to be cold, for cold Countries
eat more then other Nations. We may read in the Aphorisms: 1.15. and 17. that
in winter we eat most. This much eating, or gluttony comes from the coldness
of the Country. Wherefore Argenterius does not relish in my palate, when he
asserts voracity to proceed from a hot distemper of the liver: Qui per nives
incedn^t multn^ commedunt. Plut. 6. Sympos. 8.
for cold both external, and internal provoke the appetite.

Plutarch informs us that the air at Delphis, a City in Boetia is sharp, and
biting, which argue the concoction of meat, his words are [(...).] so does
water inwardly cause hunger, therefore great Hippocrates, Sexto Epidem, as the
oracle of Apollo, [(...).] water is ravenous, and very hungry because it makes
men [(...)] voratores, (for I think the latin has his original from the
greek) gredy-g^ts, because it is cold, for cold water, and cold meat contract the
tunicles of the stomach, and in them the blood which increase the appetite, as
Galen does signify 1o. de Symp. cause. in these words, [(...).] In the same
place he shows that heat asswages, and blunts hunger. Therefore Argenterius
his ratiocination is not well biassed in this matter. Valesius also says, that
water is [(...)] hungry hungry, because it does not nourish, and cool the
stomach: But I will not [(...)] cut to the quick othermens errors. At the
present it is enough that external cold causes much eating, If English eat
much, they must drink b^^r or wine to help co^^^ction.
therefore English men have a good stomach, therefore the Country is cold.
Cardan in his book of subtilities, says, England has no Serpents [ob frigus
immensum] by reason of the extreme cold. And says further, that sheep in
England do not drink water. [rore caeli sitim sedant ab omni alio potu
arcentur quiaib^aquae sunt exitiales] flocks of sheep quench their thirst with
the dew of Heaven, But sheep drink water in a hot and dry Summer.
because water in England is very evil and dangerous. In other Countries,
Shepherds drive their Sheep to the water, for it is their only drink, as
Aristotle, Varro, Plutarch, etc. and Virgil to boot.

Ad puteos, aut alta greges ad stagna jubeto.

[ Nostra regio (says Cardan) aquas bonas ob frigiditatem non admittit, neque
in Thaseo, neque in Abderi, nec Larissa, quae omnes sunt urbes partim in
Thessalia, partimin Thracia, aut Arcadia, bonae erant aquae quoniam loca
montosa haec.] Our Country affords us no good water, because of the coldness:
and a all there Countries that are mountanous have no good water, because they
are cold: so is England cold, both by reason that it is septentrioual, and
northern, and by reason of mountains, as Ludovicus Mercatus, saying, [omnes
regiones ad septentrionem vergentes, and montotosae, sunt frigidae,] as
England; therefore called Albian [ab altis and alb is rupibus quas mare pluit.]
from high and white Rocks, which the sea washes. Now if some upstart Critic
object Scaliger in his exercitations that [Angliae coelum is temperatum,] that
England's air is temperate, [(...),] I answer, that this opion of Scaliger
does not favor the Novelists of this age, for if England be temperate, then it
requires a temperate diet: as Galen lib. de. Meth. and libro de dieta, text 2.
[(...).] that if the Country be temperate as the spring, Hippocrates commends
a temperate diet, and gives a sufficient reason following, [(...).] that it
behooves to keep a temperate temper, and to change a distemperate temper, but
water is not temperate in our Country, but it is cold of its own nature, and
colder in cold Countries.

Secondly, I answer that England is temperate in respect of Grontland, an
Island which comes nearer the pole, and such as inhabit [extremas Oceani
glacialis terras,] the furthest parts near the frozen sea. But it is cold in
respect of South Countries.

Now out of this chapter I deduce these following conclusions.

First, if England be cold, it is not good drinking of water in it, because cold
distempered Countries require hot drink.

Secondly, The water in England is not well concocted, and will be hardly
concocted of us, for it is [(...)]

Thirdly, If water be (...) hungry which make men [(...),] which are all one,
that is devourers, and eatalls, especially in winter, we may become
hungerstarved on the contrary good ale, or strong beer is meat drink and cloth,
as the old saying, and soon satisfy hunger, so does wine, which is more proper
in cold Countries then water, and an excellent remedy against hunger, which
water increases, for so the son of Aesculapius, great Hippocrates, [(...) 2.
Aph. 21.] it is wine that cures hunger, although it were from a doglike appetite.

Fifthly, if Shepherds will not let their sheep drink in our Country, because
the water is pernicious. I conclude that Shephards in England are more careful
of their sheep, then the Novelists of their patients in this behalf, for surely
they intend to make them [Arcadicum pecus] beasts of Arcadia, whose dullness
Aesculapius, and Apollo shall never cure.

CHAP. VII. We may use stupifiing things to eat, as well as drink water.
I See no reason but that we may as well give Narcoticks, that is, stupefying
things, as ppopy, and opium as well as water in our Country, many Countries
drink water without harm. So the Mauritanians, and Persians are so accustomed
to eat opium, that when they abstain, they are in fear of their lives. As
Garcius ab Horto and Christophorus a Costa testify. The Turks eat opium daily.
Petrus Bellonius saw a Janisary eat a dram without hurt. Rondeletius a prime
Physician saw a Spaniard eat half an ounce without any prejudice of his
health. Beside, opium in strong and hot bodies cannot hurt unless it be
immoderately taken, and out of season. The same I say of water: It cannot hurt
strong, and hot bodies, in hot Countries where they be accustomed. Opium in
children, and women, in cold Countries where they be not accustomed is
dangerous, so is water. And if we may not exhibit opium becase it is
stupefying, or narcotick, by the same reason, we must not give water, because
it is narcoticall, or stupefying, as appears 5. Aphoris. 25. cold water cures the
the Gout, and takes away the pain, because [(...)] moderate stupidnesse or
stupefying dissoves pain. (...) is benumming, (...) is to benum.
Galen upon this Aphorism notes, that cold water benums and stupefies the
parts. So Christophorus a Vega, so Fonseca [Aqua frigida stuporem iuducit]
cold water brings stupidnesse, and generally all cold medicines be^^m, and
stupefie the senses. Galen 3. de temperament. c. 4. [(...) (sunt) (...)] cold
things cool, and stupefie. And water is cold, as well as poppy, Galen 3. de
temp. 3. speaking of those things which are cold, as juice of poppy [(...)] the
nature of poppy is cold, as also is water.

But our Novelists object that opium is an narcoticall, and narcoticks be hot:
If this proposition be true, then it may be given in cold Countries better then
water. And if there be any accurate Critics that can make it out, that opium,
and narcoticks be hot, then I promise upon my fidelity to eat as much opium, as
any Janisary, or Spaniard: and if they cannot prove it, their punishment shall
be to eat 10, or 5. grains. But for the present; Galens authority is greater
then any Pigmie, or Colos-critick can contradict, (although some of these
Novelists report that Galen was not a competent judge, which is as indiscrete
as the former proposition:) Galen says that the juice of poppy, (that is
opium) is cold in the forth degree, for Galen esteems opium among poisons: and
nominates castorium which is hot, to be its correcter. Neither is the
bitterness any any certain [(...)] or note of heat, as the novelists imagine,
for then Endive, Succory, and Roses are hot, for all these are bitter.

But suppose for granted, opium or juice of poppy to be hot, then I would feign
learn how it came to be a narcotick. Here I expect [(...)] some strange
arguments, that is more then humane, for no hot medicine can stupefie, as a hot
medicine.

Give me leave good Reader to make a digression. I had an occasion given me to
be with a Gentleman, that was taken with a melancholy madness, and because he
could not sleep for many nights together, but raved; I would have administered
syrup of poppies, or a decoction of a poppy head: but presently I was run
down by a Doctor of divinity, that had a smattering in Physic, who by noe
means would admit of my judgment, but affirmed confidently (see how new
lights can prevail in this age) those things which I advised were narcoticall,
or stupesying, and would fix the humor, or vapor in the brain, causing the
disease to be incurable. Good God! to see the ratiocination of this new light!
for it narcoticks, or stupefying medicines be hot (as he, and others have
strongly defended against me) how can they fix the vapor, or humor? The
Philosopher can easily consute this unheard paradox. Aristotle 5. de
generatione. 3. [(...)] heat makes thinner, and subtiler. And Galen is very
frequent in this d^scourse, 20. de simp. Med. 20. [(...).] so in his book de
tremore, and palpit. cap. 5. [(...).] That is, in a word, heat makes thin,
dilates, and rarifies, nor only thick and gross spirits, but bodies, but on
the contrary, it is cold that fix, congeale's and makes Ice, as every mechanic
that is rational, know; although he has but a twilight of reason.

Secondly, If opium be hot, it cannot cause sleep, for all sleep comes of a
cold cause, 20. de locis affect. 3. [(...).] Cold causes sleep not only
natural, but praeternaturall.

Thirdly, A hot na^cotick is as great nonsense as can be imagined: it is a black
Swan, a cold fire, or hot Ice.

Fourthly, If all narcoticks be hot, then water is hot, for water stupefies, as
I proved before out of Hippocrates, and Galen. Now if out Neoterick be so wise,
and cautelous to forbid us the use of stupefying medicines. Why will they have
us drink water, unless it be to stupefie our understandings, and make us like
beasts? But to return to our Divine-Doctor in Physic, was he not well read in
Galens Method? or did he ever read one jot of his Theory? I imagine he never
sounded that depth, yet he dare Catechize us, and give us Laws, and Maxims,
nay, he dare undertake to fathom the vast limits of two great faculties in the
narrow compass of his own understanding. Let not Divines intermedle with
Physic, lest they prove bad divines, and worse Physicians [quod medicorum est
promittant medici.] Let Physicians handle physic. And that we may give
stupifying, and sleepy medicines which be narcoticall, all practitioners
approve of, in phrensies, madness, and generaly in all diseases, where the
patient cannot sleep: besides, Galen is worth a thousand testimonies 13. Meth;
21. speaking of those that cannot sleep, [(...)] we must make the principal
part stupefied, and sleepy. In another place he says that opium cures
phreneticall madness, [(...),] and of those that cannot sleep. [(...),] that
opium causes sleep marvelously: and further, if it be well corrected, it is a
sovereign, and healthful remedy. Now see what a learned age we have, that
contradict so great a light, to whom the world for above a thousand years
together have subscribed, but now without reading of Galen it is enough to sleep
on Parnassus top one night, and early in the morning rise new dubd, Physicians
(by Oeron King of Faries) like upstart mushrums, guided, and directed by the
light of a glowworm.

CHAP. VIII. Whether we may not eat Acorns as well as drink water.
I Marvel that some new light of this doting age, do not bring upon the
stage the eating of Acorns, as well as drinking of water: for in the infancy of
the world, men and beasts had their meat and drink in common. They both eat
acorns, and both drank water. Cardan de san. tuend: water (says he) is the
natural drink of all living Creatures. Lucretius. [Ac sedare sitim fluvios,
fontesque vocabant:] for without doubt all the world drank water in the
beginning of the world; and that they cat acorns, it is no less manifest:
Plutarch [(...)] tasting and eating of acornes, they danced for joy about the
oak and beech: Galen de aliment. facult. 2.34. [(...)] and in old time men
lived of acorns alone: and the Arcadians a long time after. Hence the Ancient
Oracles in Herodotus.

[(...).]
Men in Arcadia eat
Acornes, for that is their meat.
But if men did eat acornes in the infancy of the world, why may they not cat
them again in the old doting age of it, as well as drink water again? [senes
bis pueri:] old men are twice children. And if this decrepite age will eat
acornes, and drink water, they may be as fat as bruit swine, we know hoggs are
fatted with acornes, and water, all Country blades know this: but I will tell
you as much out of Homer.

[(...).

Hoggs eat sweet acornos, drink water, that
Abundantly nourishes their florid fat.
And if they nourish hoggs (without question) they will nourish men; for men
have a similitudinary or proportionable temper to hoggs, as Galen have left to
posterity. Therefore they will nourish men as well as hoggs. But are not
acornes hard of concoction, and hard to pass thorough the stomach? Let not
that trouble your conscience, for as acorns are [(...)] so water have the same
attributes in Galen, as shall appear aterward. But they that forsake, Wheat, rye
Barley, etc. for acornes; and leave Wine, Ale, Beer for water, I think they
stand in their own natural light, and if they had [vulcanum in cornu] a candle
in their sconce, they might peradventure see if they could find the way to
Goteham. But most men are the older the wiser, and will not change their old
custom in diet, but make use of the old proverbiall saying. [(...)]
When that the best we find,
We leave the worst behind.


Otherwise they must be branded with weakness of some chimericall notions in
their [(...)] or principal part, that will change a fair and delicate English
Lady, for a simple and course wench of Toboso, or Mambrino's golden helmet for
a Barbers basin.

CHAP. IX. There is no necessity of drinking of water in our Country, for hot
men.
THere is no solid argument to evince, that we should drink water, although in
heat of years.

First, there is no necessity, for God be thanked, we have plenty of rich Wine,
gallant Beer, and nappy Ale, perry, cidar, etc, and if these be too hot, we may
drink small-beer, such as is water scared out of its wits, small-ale,
small-wine [(...)]. and nec est conveniens [(...), vel (...), vel (...): nec
(...).] nostratibus, neither is it convenient or profitable or according to our
natures, but (...) contrary to nature, because against custom. Therefore it is
a fancy which no excellent Physician ever dreamt of in our Kingdom. And
although Galen 8. Meth. 3. says that hot natures [(...)] that be hail are
much helped thereby, for young men are hot, therefore require water necessarily
to quench their heat: nothing quenches a hot and dry distemper more then water,
and therefore in all such distempers, as also in agues, water is a perpetual
remedy. 11. Meth. 9. Hippocrates confirms this sentence 6. Epidem. 1. [(...)]
hot tempers, or natures require cooling, drinking of water, and quietness.
These and such authorities are somewhat urging to abecedary critics, and in
hail bodies nothing seems to speak more, and nothing speaks less to the
purpose concerning the drinking of water. For Galen or Hippocrates speak not of
our English water or England, but is to be understood of hot countries, where
the custom of water is familiar, and the water good, and they cannot be
understood otherwise.

And this is an answer to both Galon and Hippocrates: but Galen gives
Hippocrates words another answer; for reciting Hippocrates words. 8. Meth. 3.
[(...)] peradventure Hippocrates gave more water than wine: and in the very
comment where Hippocrates has the words. 6. Epidem. [(...)] he commands to
drink water, or waterish wine. So Hippocrates gave in agues, and acute, and
fierce sicknesses, water with wine, or dilute wine [(...), or vinum (...)] for
wine does not exclude water.

The custom of those days so prevailing that they mixed water more, or less
with wine, as Julius Pacius notes very well. Thus all the authorities for
water-drinkers that are deduced out of Hippocrates or Galen, or their ancient
authors are to be understood of water mingled with wine, in hot countries, and
where the custom is. And if Galen had known our beer, he would have prescribed
our small beer. So Simon Simonius Physician to the Prince Elector of Saxony,
gives beer in fevers. [Nostris hominibus qui assneti cerevisiae sunt, concedi
largius illa poterit] our men that are accustomed to beer, may drink liberally
of it. So Andernacus and others. And they that will not drink beer may take
water and wine mingled, which is called dilutum, and it is far beter then
water. Johannes Colle admires the present age in which Physicians dare not give
wine, and yet they are so bold to give water, which both Authors condemn.

But here our Novice Critics may object, that we may drink water in the heat
of Summer.

I answer that men that are drowning in water lay hold of every twig. In summer
Hippocrates gave the smallest wine, not water. And so Galen expounds
Hippocrates in the book of Diet. [(...)] Hippocrates for the most part bids us
drink the smallest wine in summer.

CHAP. X Whether we may drink water after dinner.
THat we may drink water after dinner seems to have great probability. And it
is grown much in use now a days. This opinion appears to be taken from
Cornelius Celsus lib. 1. c. 2. [Vbi expletus est aliquis, facilius concoquit,
si quicquid assump sit, potione aquae frigidae includit, tum paulisper
invigilat, deinde been dormit] that is, when any man is full, he concocts his
meat better if he shut up his body with cold water, then to watch a little, and
after to sleep well. This authority of Cornelius Celsus is pretended that we
may drink water after dinner. But this authority if righly considered, or
understood, is nothing at all to our novelists purpose. For the meaning is that
he that drinks wine at dinner may shut the orifice of his stomach with a cup of
cold water; And this we may do with small beer as well and better. And had
Celsus known our small-beer without question he would have advised us to it.
But for them that drink wine as many of the Romans did, it was very convenient
to drink a cup or two of water after dinner. For thus the fierce quality of
wine is repressed, and made gentle, and the custom of drinking of water may be
introduced. This is that which Plutarch confirms in his book called the
Precepts of health. These be his words. [(...).] So Oribasius that excellent
Physician, ad Eunapium lib. 1. cap. 14. and ad Julianum Imperatorem [qui
vehementer calidi sunt frigidam post cibum bibant, non tamen affatim, nec sine
vino] Those that are hot, let them drink water after meat, but not very much
nor without wine. This is no more then to drink small wine, or dilute wine
called [(...).] And so Galen in the comment.
Hippocrates our great master teaches us that after wine a man may drink
water. [(...). 3. Acut.] And this is all that Cornelius Celsus meant. For he
did not intend that English men or Septentrionall countries should drink water
at dinner after beer, for that were madness, and would derogate from the worth
of Celsus. Beside he speaks not of dinner in the place quoted, but rather of
supper, as in the Text may easily be gathered.

CHAP. XI. Old age, and Children may not drink water.
NOw if young, and hot men may not of necessity drink water in our country
for several reasons alleged. What shall we think of old men whom a perpetual
winter, that is, cold temper, Phlegm, Rheums, Coughs, Gout, Palsy, dog at
the heels? And therefore water cannot be a convenient diet, or medicine in this
age.

An old man of above sixty years told me (I can name the person) that he was
earnestly persuaded to drink water by a Doctor of Physic, against his custom
and his age, but would not be persuaded to drink it, he was fearful that it
might do him hurt. And good reason, for old age is cold, and moist. Old men
want natural heat, and have plenty of excrementitious moisture. [senes si
humidis rebus paveris efficies hydropicos, si similibus duplo celerius
senescunt] says Cardan. If you feed old men with moist things, you will make
them hydropicall, if you feed them with the like to their temper, they will be
old twice as soon. And therefore Galen commends wine to old men to correct
their coldness contracted by years, and to bring them to a moderate heat. lib.
quod animi mores. cap. 10. Secondly to change custom in old age is to labor
in vain, and as it were to wash a blackamore, and as much as if an old man
should begin to learn a new art, as Galen speaks word for word.

Thridly old men, if they ^e not accounted among sick men, though Terence say
[ipsa senectus morbus.] yet to speak accurately [(...).] They are valethdinary
bodies, and therefore must not change their custom of old, which is drinking
of Beer, or Wine, especially in a cold Country: lastly they have imbecill
Spirits, a poor concoction, and have not strength to bear water, which is hard
of concoction. For as Galen says, old men have not [(...).] 11. Meth. 9.
Therefore they must not drink water.

The same conclusion may hold in children, in a cold region, where there is no
custom for it, by reason of their natural infirmities from their parents,
from their weakness, and effeminatenesse of their nerves as Alexander Massaria
proves out of Galen 9. Met. 5. water hurts all nerves. [(...).]

And if the curious Critic shall object Galen: that water is agreeable to all
ages.

I answer, it is true in warm countries, firm constitutions, where they be
accustomed, and where the water is [(...)] very light, which is not in England.

CHAP. XII. Of custom that it has a principal power in diet.
I Have given some hints of custom, but now will handle it more fully. Some
Physicians despise custom as a poor inconsiderable thing [vide quoddam
theorema] 6. Epidem. 2.26. thinking no indication, or manifestation to be taken
from custom to change diet, or cure of sickness. So Thessalus that vaporing
bragadocio made poor, and slight account of custom. Galen 5. Meth. 10.
Thessalus may contemn custom, but we must not, says Galen. This was that
Thessalus that bragged he could teach the art of Physic in six months, and
would have wrote upon his monument [(...)] the conqueror of Physicians, but
let that pass. Hippocrates 1. Aphor. 17. seems to speak but meanly of custom
[(...)] we must attribute something (that is some small thing) to the season of
the year, country, age, and custom. But he that is conversant in Hippocrates
and Galen cannot lay such an aspersion upon the great Hippocrates, of whom I
may say without offense [quot ejus verba, tot mysteria:] so many words, so many
mysteries. Scaliger calls him [naturam loquentem] nature speaking. Galen says,
that no Philosopher ever found fault with Hippocrates.

Therefore I think Hippocrates does not derogate any thing from custom, and
that [(...)] or something which Hippocrates attributes to custom is [(...)]
some great thing. So Galen 3. acut. 33. (...), that is custom can do wonders.

This truth Aristotle in his problemes confesses [(...).] custom is a great
matter. For it is another nature, that is custom is so like nature that it
seems the same with nature. For Aristotle speaking more accurately and more
proper: 1. Rhetoricor. 11. and elsewere [(...).] custom is like to nature. So
Plutarch [(...).] custom after a certain manner is nature. But whether custom
be nature, or like nature, or how they differ. I will not at present determine,
only I say that custom is the great Diana in diet, in health, and diseases.
Galen 9. Meth. 16. [(...).] affirms custom to be no small, and poor
Indication for the finding out of remedies for the preservation of health, and
in the same chapter [(...)] custom has no small but the greatest, and most
principal power. The poet asserts the same. [nihil assuetudine majus.]

If all this will not serve the turn but the impertinent Critic will desire
as much as can be said, then I will quote Galen in these words [(...).] 11 Meth.
3. that custom is the greatest indicat on, or clear reason in the world.
Therefore good reader, give me leave to dwell a little longer on this subject.
For it is a maine, and greatest argument for my purpose.

CHAP. V. The argument of custom is powerful: we have no custom of drinking
water.
TO write all that I could of custom, would seem very large, and prolix,
therefore I will select some choice observations of custom. Herodotus relates
the Persians to have thin sculs, and as a man may say paper-sculs: but the
Egyptians so hard that a man can hardly break them with a stone. [(...).] the
thinness of the Persians, and the hardness of the Egyptians came of custom,
because the Persians wore hats, or cappes, but the Egyptians went bare-headed.
You may see by this the dominion of custom. Further what is more contrary to
nature then poison which is] (...)] corrupting, and deadly, yet custom turns
or metamorphizes poison into nourishment. Scaliger in his exercitations reports
that a kings son in Cambaia was educated with poison, and that being a young
man, he was so venomous that flies which sucked his skin fell off dead. Avicenna
Prince of the Arabian Physicians tells us of a young maid that was nourished
with poison. Galen relates a story of an old Athenian woman, that was nourished
with hen-bane. She began with a little quantity at first which nature overcame
by degrees, at length she came to a great dose, and concocted that also. For
custom, as Galen asserts had made it natural. Hippocrates de aere, aqua, and
locis; proves that custom changes into nature, for [macrocephali] or or
long-heads are made by custom of the midwife or nurses stroaking and from
them natural long-heads are begotten, although the first were made by custom.
[Notandum quod de hominibus accidit (ut Cardanus) idem de mundo, ut consuetudo
omnia meliora essiciat, nam quae singulis annis contingunt meliora sunt quam
quae raro. Nam Mundus consuetudine tenetur, ut ipsi mortales.] it is to be
noted, that which happens to men the same falls out of the world, that custom
makes all things better.

Those things which happen every year are better then those which happen
seldom. For the whole world holds custom as well men, and to prove further the
power of custom,

Every thing in the world as much as is possible produces his species. Man
begets man. The Sun produces his species in a cloud which makes the rainbow.

Thus the species, and forms of bodies are represented in a glass. meats, and
drinks continually accustomed beget a character, image, or similitude of it
self, in the stomach, liver, and other parts, which similitudes being
imprinted in those parts, they receive them readier because [consueta sunt
similia, and amica] that is [(...)] as Hippocrates 3. Acut. 3.33. They
entertain one another (like brethren) familiarly, and consequently,
familiarity causes sooner concoction. And to draw to a conclusion; thus our
English beer or ale etc. is received readier, and concocted quicker then water,
because it is accustomed in our country, water is not, and therefore is not so
easily received, nor so familiarly concocted.

Nothing hinders so much the action of receiving and concocting as resistancy,
which consists in a dissimilitude, or contrariety, but things not accustomed
have a contrariety and dissimilitude.

Such is water in our country; beer is according to nature because accustomed
Hippocrates [(...)] water in our country is [(...)] against nature, because not
accustomed: upon which place of Hippocrates Galen has these words [(...)] that
which is accustomed is good, that which is not accustomed is naught. Therefore
beer is good, water is naught, wherefore it is [Herculeum argumentum] an
argument as strong as Hercules. That no nation must drink water against
custom. Galen uses this strong argument and has it from the ancient and
admirable Poet Homer, who speaking of old men that they should after supper go
to bed, etc says.

[(...)] for this is the custom of old men. S. Paul (ut prophanis sacra
misceam) uses the very same argument 1. Cor. 11.17. we have no such custom in
the Church. And [(...)] an old and inveterate custom is of grand authority in
the church of God. For so the great council of Nice cried out [(...)] let the
old custom of the Church take place. Ancient customs are laws: not onlyin
physic, and Philosophy but in civil and Ecclesiastical matters. If then
custom be so great an argument in natural, civil, and ecclesiastical
affairs, Why may we not use this argument negatively as St. Paul, and
affirmatively as Galen? It is as great an argument in the negative against
water as can be possible.

[(...).] we have no such custom in England to drink water, therefore we may
not drink it. And it is no less argument in the affirmative for beer.

[(...).] It is the custom of English to drink beer. (Cerevisiam) therefore we
must drink beer, and consequently no water.

CHAP. XIIII. That wine is absolutely better than water.
THe divine and inaccessible light changes always for the best, and man that is
a glimpse, (divinae partiula aurae [(...).) of that light changes for the best
as far as human wisdom reaches. God out of darkness, and Chaos made light
and order which is [(...)] the world. Our blessed Savior that Oriental light,
turned water into wine miraculously, but our new lights the novelists
ignorantly turn wine, and beer into water, which is as foolish a change as
that of Diomedes, and Glaucus, which Homer describes thus (...).

(...). which thus I turn very briefly. (...).

Jove, Saturns son had Glaucus made an Ass.

And chan'gd his armor, that was gold, for brass.

Now we see these new lights are in the same condition with Glaucus, they
change wine, and beer to water, [(...)] there is as much difference between
wine and water, as is between gold and brass. Wine not only as [(...)] a
matter of diet, or aliment, but as a medicament, is better then water. This
conclusion is not of mine own invention, but is the ancient opinion of our
Antique lights. Johannes Coll^ called Cosmitor, [wine says he according to the
authorities of the ancient writers is better then water] But I prove it
invincibly out of Galen, for it is his authority that strikes dead all
novelists. He therefore in 6. Epidem, [(...) (non solum) (...) (sed) (...).]
wine (says he) is better then water for concoction, distribution, to make good
blood, to nourish; to make water, to breath better. But our nove^ists may well
grant all this, but it is not better,

First to quench thirst.'

Secondly it is not better to repress vapors.

To the first I answer with Antonius Fumanellus, that [aqua cum vino exhibit a
citius sitim extinguit] water mixed with wine does quench the ^hirst sooner.
And Galen himself has the same sentence expressly, ^rimo de simp. med.
facult. [(...)] wine if it be mixed with water quenches the thirst sooner then
water alone: for wine adds wings to the penetration, and distribution of water
in all parts.

To the second I answer that wine mixed with water or waterish wine tools and
represses vapors: Hippocrates where the brain is touched, gives water, or
waterish wine [(...)] Ac^t. 4. gives water or waterish wine. For although wine
be ho^ and therefore is quicly carried up t^ the brain, and carries up hot
humors which it yet waterish win^ such as has the nature, or temper (...)
water [(...)] 8. Meth. 3. in color, and virtue li^^ water, is cold, and
represses vapors For if it has the nature of water, must have the same
effects that water has, and cannot raise humors or vapors up to the brain. It
man be given to children, and never touch the brain [potest dart pueris, nec
tent^ caput] Cardan. lib. 1. Tractat, 2. co^tradict. 9. further to stop all
novelist^ mouths, for the present I produce a sufficient testimony out of
Galen, a killing authority that Oedipus cannon answer, to prove that wine is
absolutely better then water. Galen therefore expressly 8. Meth. [(...)] wine
is better the water in every respect. Galen sait^ [(...)] that is [(...)] in
a^^ respects, he means without question waterish wine, such as Hippocrate^ gave
in hot tempers, acute, and fierce ^^cknesses: this wine is either dilute, or
^ixt called [(...)] or else it is [(...)] the one is natural, the ^ther is
artificial, according to the ^^me and constitution of the year, puntrey,
custom. But to conclude, (...) wine be better then water abso^^tely: then it is
far better in our coun^ry, because it is septentrionall.

CHAP. XV. Our English beer is better then water.
ALthough we have neither shadow, nor liniament among the ^ncient writers of
our English beer, ^et we may have sufficient authority of the nature of it out
of later wri^ers, therefore we must be content with these, but to the matter.
If small wine, or such as I mentioned in the former chapter be better then
water, then of necessary consequence, our small beer, or water skared out of
its wits is better the^ water in our country, because it is familiar to our
natures and therefore better agrees with us. Beside been [vinum ex cerevisia]
that is, imitate wine and has the same effects wi^ wine.

Ludovicus Mercatus testifiet^ that [Cerevisia easdem obtinet vire^ quas vina
habent] beer has the sam^ strength and virtue that wine has [Cerevisia
simplex or aquosa cosdemeffectus parit, quos vinum quito sum] small beer has
the same effects that small or waterish wine has.

That it quenches thirst we know by experience in the heat of summer, and
Andernacus witnesses the sam^ thing. [quod si (inquit) calida aeris
i^temperies, aut sitis nimium urget, pot^ ex frumento and aqua paratus est in
us^ qui vulgo cerevisia vocatur, clara, ten^is, non recens, nec vetusta nimium,
na^ haec acore stomachm offendit, illa dissculter per meatus urinarios transit]
that is, If there be a hot season of the year as summer, or very great thirst
that urge, the drink called beer is i^ use, that which is clear, thin, not
new nor too old, for this hurts the stomach with its vineger-quality, the other
passes hardly thorough the urinall vessels.

Secondly, beer represseth vapourst So Petrus Monavius an excellent Physician
in plain terms says, that our beer represseth vapors. For quoting this old
Proverbiall verse.

Potio finalis sit semper Cervisialis.

Let your last draught be beer, the reason is says he, least vapors should be
carried from the stomach to the brain and disturb it, [frigiditate enim
cerevisiae reprimuntur vapores] that is, vapors are repressed by the coldness
of beer.

You see that beer quenches the thirst, and represseth vapors: nay better
then water. For water performs its effects with danger. Water is hard of
concoction in cold countries ((...)) beer is easy of concoction; water is
hard to pass thorough ((...)) but beer makes a man make water ((...)) quickly
and pass sooner, and nourish more; there is a familiar acquaintance of beer
with us. We have no acquaintaince with water. There is no danger in beer. There
is danger in water, as shall be proved hereafter. What madness is it then for
English men to desert our customary drink of beer, which is in all respects
better then water, and to follow a new fancy or chimera brought into the world
not by a rational but a fantastical light or an Ignis fatuus?

Let it be therefore a perpetual and confessed verity, that which
Table-Players commonly utter, and as If it were (...) a common notion:

When they throuw Cinque and Cater.

They cry, Small beer is better then water.

CHAP. XVI. The virtues of our English beer.
THere was an Egyptian beer properly called Zythum, as Strabo the Geographer.
Lib. 17. reports [(...).] but Zythum was properly among the Egyptians,
although it is common to many, and with every one a several preparation. This
Zythum, or beer was not the same with ours. The Britains term it by an old
word Kwrw whereof it read amiss. in Dioscorides Curmi. Camdeit.
Nor Dioscorides his Curmi which he says the Britains used, was our beer, for
our English beer was not known unto the ancients, neither the way of
praeparation, nor the qualities. Neither was Malt ever so much as named among
them. [(...)] among the later Graecians is found, but whether praepared as our
English Malt I much question, but concerning the virtues of our English beer.

Our beer says Dodonaeus in sweet of it self, delicious, and of good juice
[Est bera per se suavis, dulcis, as boni succi.] Our beer says Lobel is sweet,
and healthful, and affords good nowrishment. [ber a est suavis, and salubris
potio, alimentum bonum praebet.] Our beer is compounded of water, malt, and
hops. Water is cold, and moist, malt and hops correct the coldness, and
moisture, and rawness, being well boiled. Ne there can there be any fault
attribu^ed to hops, if they be well proportioned [Lupul^ slores non nocent,
qualitate, sed quantitate] as Lobel, the flowers of hops hurt not in quality
but in quantity, as wine. There is much difference in beer, some have no hopps
which is called ale, and it is more flatulent then the other which have hops.
Aleis of Oela a Danish word somewhat wrested and not from Alica as Ruellius.
thus Camden.
Ale is obstructive, beer is aperient, and is wholsomer then ale. Although ale
be very pleasant in drinking. Cardan. [Est and hala quae fit in Anglia and
Scotia, admodum suavior, adeo ut meminerim bibisse in ingressu Scotiae, quae
dulci musto albo co^parari possit.] The ale which is made in England and
Scotland is very sweet, that I remember, when I went into Scotland, such sweet
ale that it might be compared to white new wine.

There be three sorts of beer: Strong, middle, and small beer. Strong beer is
hot, of this Cardan speaks [Cerevisia si recte conficiendi modum perpendamus
temperamenti calidi esse judicantus, inebriat quod non parvum est argumentum
caliditatis dum vapores caput ferientes replent.] beer if we consider the way
of making it, we may judge it to be of a hot temper, for it makes drunk, which
is no small argument of heat, whiles vapors striking the head fills. But small
beer is cold, and moist, the quality, and substance of water being predominant.
as Dodonaeus. [tenuissima cerevisia frigida, and humida sup^rante in ea aquae
qual^tate, ac substantia.] And this is the beer which is better then water in
every respect, in our Country, for this beer has no ill quality in it. But
some Capricious fellow may object that [Zythum facit Elephantiacos] as
Dioscorides seems to teach: That is, beer makes the skin, of a blackish rough,
of the color of an Elephant. Scaliger in his exercitations; Answears that
barley cannot do this mischief, nor hops. [Lupulum dant medici ad sanguinis
defaecationem.] Physicians give hops to purify, and cleanse the blood, for it
cannot be that beer should be so hurtful, and unhealthful, as the Ancients
imagine, as Valleriola. [Neque enim tam damnosa, insalubris haec hordeacea
potio, quam prisci authors faciunt.] Among al other beers, our English beer,
is as good as any if not outstrip al other beers. Why then should we (like so
many Don Quixotes) change our national drink for water? Now let us come to
experience.

CHAP. XVII. Of experience that beer is healthful.
I Have proved before that water is not convenient in our Country. And that
beer is better which we may prove by experience. I remember Hippocrates words
[(...).] experience of it self is slipery and ready to fall. Therefore we speak
of experience joined to reason. Vide Market. Tom. 2. p. 17.
[Experime^to sine ratione facto, non video our mihi subscribendum] I see no
reason why we should subscribe to experience without reason. There be two ways
of investigation [(...)] called the theory and [(...)] which is practice or
experience. Theory is the right-leg, experience the left: which [(...)] This
opinion of water in our Country is but of yesterday, Tutiss judicari ab
experientia 1, tuend san. 11.
then what experience can it have, but ale, wine, beer are of longer standing,
and confirmed by experience, for wine I will not treat how long it has been in
use in our Country. Beer, and ale (both are comprehended in this word
cerevisia) might be in Dioscorides his time, but not well known to him. Later
Authors have more experience of our ale, or beer. Manardus lib. Epist. 5.2.
[Experientia docet septentrionales homines qui nihil fere alind bibunt quam
cerevisiam, and pulcherrimos, and saluberrimos, and robustissimos.] Experience
teaches us, that septentrional men that drink almost nothing else but beer or
ale, to be the properest, strongest, and the healthfullest men. Fuchius
[Cerevisia iis populis qui Aquilonares regiones incolunt potus non est ineptus,
quod verum esse septentrionalium locorum incolae abunde testantur, quos
robustissimos and formo sissimos esse constat.] that beer is a convenient drink
to those that dwell in the North regions, those inhabitants abundantly testify
which to be the strongest, and the fairest it is manifest. Valleriola. [Nos
tamen sensuum fide experimur nullos aut corpore robustiores, aut valetudine
salubriores, meliusque habitos, quam qui cervisia Zytho, aut Curmi vocato, pro
vino utuntur.] We have experience by sense that none are stronger in body, or
more healthful, and better habituated then those that drink beer, or ale.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the ill qualities of Water.
It Is a good argument which is deduced from the matter of diet [(...).]
Therefore it is convenient that I treat of the nature, and qualities of water, as
well as of beer. And I told you before of the virtues of beer, so now I will
relate the vices of water, for it was not without great reason that the
ancients mingled water with wine. Homer makes mention of it in this verse.
(...) The fair Penelope's suitors sup
Both Bachus and Neptune in one great cup.
And Virgil imitates Homer for a hair [Poculaque inve^t is Achelcia miscuit
uvis] The reason is to correct the ill conditions, and vices of water, and to
mitigate and assuage the heat of wine, which Galen. 3. Acut. affirms in these
words [(...)] the vices of water are these, which Galen sets down Meth. 7. in
these words. [(...)] Water stays long in the belly especially under the short
ribs, and makes a floting, and wavering in the stomach, it is converted to
wind, it is corrupted. Lastly it dissolves the gallantrie and metle of the
stomach. And Galen further ads that water has all these ill qualities, or
vices [(...)] from the coldness of it. Therefore the colder water is, the
worse, but water is colder in northern regions. For waters which belong to the
North, and have the Sun adverse to them are hardly concocted, and
consequently have these forementioned vices. Galen also. 3. Acut. says water
is hard of concoction [(...)] and pass with difficulty [(...)] Although it be
the best water: His words are these [(...).] Galen here comments upon
Hippocrates who finds fault, and least any Curiosity should object, that
Hippocrates speaks of naughty, and water. He takes away that objection, saying
that Hippocrates spoke of the best water, for Hippocrates uses to speak of the
best, and so we must understand him at this present. [(...).] Hippocrates
refers all his sayings to the best, the purest water in that which is not mixed
with any alien, and strange quality. And this although it be the best, stays a
long time in the belly and makes fluctuations. Therefore all these vices in
water are to be understood of the best water, and it has all these faults from
its coldness. Water is cold of its own nature, therefore of necessary
consequence it must have the foresaid ill qualities, so Galen. 4. de rat. vict.
[Aqua est [(...)] It Is naturally cold, and staying in the belly. Therefore the
best water has these ill qualities naturally, and more especially in cold
Countries.

CHAP. XIX. Two gross errors in our new lights about the exhibition of Water.
IN muggy, and foggy weather candles burn not so clear, for then we see about
them [putres concrescere fungos] that is [(...)] a spongious concrescence about
the snuff. And our new lights burn dim, when a dampe, or obscure sum clouds
their brain, but such lights must be snuffed, debemus [(...)] They want a
payer of snuffers. I will be their servant, if I can to take away two gross
errors that be spungious. Our novelists are as bold as Lions to give water
against clear reason, against Country custom and the nature of our bodies,
etc. but beside all these they commit two gross errors in the exhibition of
water.

For first they give well, or pump water commonly as I have seen my self. Yet
this is a gross error, and condemned almost of all the Learned: Galen
condemns fountain water that runs [(...)] toward the North and have the
Sun adverse. For such waters are [(...).] And for the same reason, Lud.
Mercatus says that well-water is grosser, cruder, colder, because the rays,
or Sunbeames never come near them. Therefore it is [(...),] cannot be overcome.
Mathiolus. [Putealis gravis estaegreque concoquitur nec statui potest quod sit
putredinis expers.] Wellwater is heavy, and hardly to be concocted, neither can
we determine whether it be corrupt, or no: Heurnius. [Dura ac cruda est puteal
is utpote sole fraudata.] Well-water is hard, and crude, as wanting the
Sunbeames: so Cardan. Jul. Alexandrinus and others. And pump-water is so much
the worse, because closer, and sooner corrupts, and putrifies. Such water will
corrupt in us, as plants watered with unwholesome water degenerate. [Pomaque
degenerant succos oblita priores.]

The second error is, that they exhibit well-water, and that raw without
boiling. But Hippocrates and Galen (as Joannes Colle) [ aquam crudam damnarunt
quia manet in hypochondriis.] Condemn raw water, because it remains in the
Lower belly. [Aqua quamvis optima hyemis tempore decoquenda] Jouberl. [aquae
potabiles aestate maliciores ergo decoquendae.] Plutarch, the best water most
be boiled in wintertime, and sweet waters in sommer-time are the worse or more
malicious. Scaliger de Plantis. [Ex aestivis extractam puteis cum jumentis
potui damus, ne frigore suo noceat aut torminibus aut angana, vexatam prius
baculo exhibemus.] When we give water drawn out of summer wells to our cattle,
(least it should hurt by its coldness, or fretting of the belly, or squinsy) we
first move it with a stick, or staff before we give it. For (says he) al
water gets a heat by agitation, and stirring of it [haurit enim multum aeris]
for it sucks, or draws much air into it: Happocrates 6. Epidem. [(...)] and
advise us to boil water least it do hurt, and Galen calls it [(...)] a
harmless preparation to those that will drink cold water, and especially if it
be hard of concoction, Galen advise to boil it. de san. tuend. Besides ripe
fruit is better then raw, so is water decocted better then raw. [Aqua coctione
aerescit] says Scaliger water boiling grows atrie therefore the better: [
Etiam aquam coctam qui damnarent, medici nuper exorti sunt, sensibus obnoxii,
cum apud Aristophanis, and Herodiani Subsellia, nullam invenissent rationem,
nullam in Lyceo quae sivere. There are risen of late Physicians that condemn
boiled water, Slaves to their senses, when they could find no reason in
Aristophanes and Herodians Gramatical seats, they sought for none amongst the
Pe^^patetick Schools; but to wind up the bottom of this conclusion. Cardans
words are worth consideration. [Omnium ergo doctissimorum consensu,
praestantiss. atque nobiliss. aquarum remedium est decoctio, non solum
caenosarum sive turbidarum atque alieno sapore odoreve infectarum, verum etiam
liquidarum, atque splendidissimarum, nam pleraeque ipso blandiuntur aspectu
quae haustae magnas turbas in corpore concitant, ventriculum statibus
vehementer agitant, mordent ac vellicant, pariterque gravant and in ipsis
hypochondriis diutissime haerent] Therefore by the consent of all Learned men
the most excellent, and the most noble remedy of waters is decoction, or
boiling, not only of muddy, and obscure waters, and those that have a strange
taste, or smell, but of most clear, and dilucide waters, which although they
seem to flatter with their looks, yet they bring much trouble to the body,
they stir up much wind in the stomach, they bite, and pinch, and lie heavy in
the hypochondrials, or lower parts of the short ribs, and stick there a long
time.

Here in this Chapter may start an objection of well-water, which may be purer
and better for concoction with often drawing [sitularum verberatu] the bucket
beating the water, and moving the air. Resp. that this water is always hard
of concoction [(...)] the often going down of the bucker do not make the water
[(...)] or easy of digestion, but keep the air from corrupting there.

CHAP. XX. Whether water be convement in fevers, many things about custom.
THus far I have handled of water as diaiterical, that is as drink belonging to
diet. In the next place it is convenient to speak whether water as
Phatmaceutical, or as a medicine be good in Agues. I confess that Galen did
give water [in febribus ardentibus] in burning fevers, and in hecticks; but [
multa (...) usurpanda] much curiousness is to be used, and as Scaliger says
well [qui ad pauca recipient facile falluntur.] They that respect a few
circumstances are easily deceived, for many have exhibited cold water imitating
Galen; but none touched the mark, as Galen himself speaks 10. Meth. 5. It Is
true in fevers you may give water, if you distinguish [(...)] accurately, and
curiously, whether any hurt may follow or no, and if little, or no hurt follow,
you may administer pure cold water [(...)] and you may be the more bold, if he
that drinks water be [(...)] a drinker of water, that is accustomed to drink
water; but we are not accustomed to drink water in our Country. Aristotle in
his problems, says, Fish cannot well live in the air, nor men in water, so
sick men that change an inveterate custom, do it with difficulty [(...)] and
turning to custom again have their health, as if they turned to a natural
state, and condition. They that live with dainties, and excess must not leave
their custom unless they intend to fall into consumptions, for when they leave
an accustomed d^et they are afflicted as if they took no diet at all [(...).]
So Dionysius the Tyr a^t fell into a consumption for want of his accustomed
drinking, and returning to his drinking again recovered his health. Crato a
Learned man and Physician to three Emperors, and therefore called Medicus
Caesareus, Caesar's Physician in his Book styled Perioche in 8. Meth. 3. Galen
says he handles of drinking of water, that is tho whom it is convenient, to
whom not, and further shows manifestly that water is not to be drunk of those
that are not accustomed: it is true, hot natures are much releived thereby, if
they be accustomed to it. Galen 9. Meth. 5. In giving of water in continual
fevers we must especially consider custom, saying that in such fevers we may
give as much water as the patient please, and so much the more boldly, if he be
used to drink water plainly signifying says Nunnius that water is not to be
drunk of them that are not accustomed to such drink. Wherefore it is not to be
wondered that one Aristotle a Mitylenian, an archperipatetick, as Galen relates,
lost his life by the ill counsel of Physicians that prescribed him water
against his will and custom. For says this Aristotle, I never drank water
before. This History we may confirm with many others of this nature. We know
many not only have been in great danger, but lost their lives for the
unskilfulness of the Physician who against custom prescribed water, thus far
Nunnius. I could second Nunnius with many Examples, for water.

[(...)]
Water sent very many brave
And Gallant worthies to the grave.
Hippocrates gives a sufficient reason: 2. Aphoris 50. [(...).] Accustomed diet
or Medicine, although it be worse, do less hurt then not accustomed. Galen de
dissolut. continui has these words [non debemus mutare consuetudinem quando
est antiquata, and longa, etsi non bona, praesertim quando non adducit aliquid
necessitatis ad mutationem.] We ought not to change custom when it is ancient,
and long although it be not good, especially if there be no necessity of
change; but there is no necessity of changing our drink. Scal^ger upon
Theophrast: says that Galen in his Comments forbid us to change evil custom,
if it be not hurtful. The place which Scaliger aims at, is 5. de Sanitate
tuend. 11. and 5.10. but the custom of drinking our beer is not hurtful. And if
it be hurtful we must not change it suddenly, but [(...)] by little and little.
So they that eat poison must not leave it suddenly, but [(...)] by degrees and
as custom is got by degrees so it is lost by degrees. There is the same way
from Athens to Thebes, which is from Thebes to Athens, as Aristotle
exemplifies. For sudden changes are dangerous as Hippocrates 3. Aphor. 33. and
6. Epidem. Customs are to be kept and observed [(...)] but the greatest danger
is to change suddenly, and from one contrariety to another, as Galen in his
Comment upon this place before mentioned [(...).] In diet we must keep custom
and not leap from the drinking of water to the drinking of wine, nor from the
drinking of wine to the drinking of water. For this a leap contrary to nature,
to skip from one contrary to another, and to imitate the greatest vaulter that
ever was. When Sanca Panca, Don Quixotes man asks a Parson, who was the
greatest vaulter that ever was in the world. The Parson could not tell. Then
quoth Sanca, I will tell you. 'Twas the Devil that vaulted from Heaven to Hell:
but this by the way. I knew a Gentleman not by nature, but by the injury of the
times was so melancholy that he could not sleep without a good dose of wine.
But afterward was persuaded to drink water. I heard a Vintners wife curse the
Doctor for soosing so good a Customer; but what became of the Gentleman, [(...)]
Black death took him away,
And he to fate his debt did pay.
So did another a Great Sack drinker, who changed his custom of drinking of
wine to the drinking of water. But what shall we say of this; but conclude with
a piece of Homer: [(...)]
Great Patroclus the Grecian died
Far more then thou were dignified.


CHAP. XXI. Who may change custom? young men, and they that be in health may:
sick men may not, neither valetudinary men.
THere is no question to be made but young and healthful men may change
customs which hurt [(...)] although they have been accustomed from their
youth, because they can easily bear such a mutation, and hope for some benefit
in changing for a better custom. Therefore Aphoris. 2.50. [(...).] and Galen
gives a very good reason, because an uniforme custom is dangerous [(...)] for
many cases, and necessities may intervene, in which they may be compelled to
change custom with danger. Latin Hippocrates, Cornelius Celsus lib. 1. c. 1.
[homo sanus, and qui been valet, and suae stontis est, nullis obligare se
legibus Medicinae debet] etc. A hail, and a sound man that is at his own
command, ought not to oblige himself to any Laws, or rules of Physic, he need
neither Physician, nor an Apothecary. He may be sometimes in the Country,
sometimes in the City, sometimes go to Sea, then to hunt, then to rest, and be
quiet. After to exercise, and to refuse no kind of meat that the people use,
sometimes to be at a Feast, sometimes to be sparing. This is the Council of this
ancient Roman Physician, wherein we see who may change custom. And he excepts
those that are implicated in public affairs. Secondly those that are in
sickness. Lastly we may observe what meat, and drink we may use, such as the
people use. Therefore we must not drink water: the people drink none in
England, a National custom in diet is rational.

And for men that be sick, an inveterate custom is not to be changed so long as
men be sick. This is pure Galen, and Mephostophulus cannot answer it 8. Meth.
9. [(...)] teaching universally that no custom which is inveterate is to be
changed whiles men are sick. And there is the same reason of distempers which
are to be conserved with the like, and not to be changed into new customs,
because custom is [(...)] the greatest demonstration. Neither is the original
or primogenious temper so much to be considered as the present temper when a
man begins to be sick, or before sickness which is [(...)] the acquisititial
temper [(...)] the present constitution. 9. Meth. 14. and is called [(...)] the
present temper which any man have before sickness; he that is curious may see
more, 11. Meth. 3. and 8. Meth. 7. and 9. Meth. 13. this present disposition,
or temper is always to be conserved, and kept with the like: The reason is
because nature (that is) the temper ( Galen (...) vocat (...)) although it be
distempered must overcome the disease. So great Hippocrates 6. Epidem. 5.
[(...).] Observe Hippocrates his words they are ponderous, and worthy to be
written in Letters of gold: he says natures are the Physicians of diseases,
natures in the plural number, and not in the singular, nature, to show not only
a temperate nature, but all other intemperate natures are the curers of
diseases. For the peculiar, and particular nature of every one whether
temperate, or intemperate, that is in fault, must be conserved with the
customary, and like in sickness. And if the old Athenian woman (which Galen
speaks of) which was nourished with hemlock where to be found, and should fall
into a fever. I (says Sanctorius) could not imagine a better preservative or
Alexipharmacon for her health, then hemlock which by long custom was made so
like that it turned into nourishment. For every one is to be reduced to his
custom. Galen 7. Meth. 6. [(...).] Especially in sickness, When I (says
Sanctorius) practiced Physic, in Hungaria there was a famous Earl which had
been accustomed all his life time to drink [ vinum (...)] strong wine without
mixture of water, and being taken with a lassitude, or weariness, and pain in
his head, sent to me for counsel: I advised him (against the Laws of custom)
not to drink such strong wine, but to mix it with water, which they call
[(...)] weak wine. The Earl put my advise in Practice, and presently fell into
[(...)] a swounding condition. Which when I perceived, I changed my counsel,
and persuaded him to drink his accustomed strong wine without mixture of water,
and presently he came to himself, and got strength. But what had become of this
Earl if Sanctorius had prescribed him water? I say this had been ten times more
dangerous, and not only contrary to custom, but to leap from one extreme to
another, which nature abhorres. Therefore our Countrymen must not driuk water
contrary to their customs, especially in sickness. Galen himself dared not
give sick men water before they were recovered of their sickness. These be his
words: 8. Meth. 3. [(...)] for water inaccustomed is not only against nature,
but the disease also against nature; so that the Patient has two adversaries:
First the disease: Secondly the Physician, for he suffers from both. [at ne
Hercules contra duos.] Hercules cannot fight against two. Then how shall an
imbecil, and weak nature, behave it self against two potent Enemies?

Lastly, custom is not only diligently to be observed in sick men, but also in
valetudinary men, which are neither well, nor sick, but [(...)] or
valetudinary, such as are not well pleased, for so the Greek word signifies.
Galen 5. de San. tuend. 11. These valetudinary men are not in the Catalogue of
hail men. 7. Meth. and are rather in the rank of sick men, then hail men (as
Cardan affirms) Therefore must keep the rule of custom as well as sick men.
For such valetudinary bodies are [(...)] always complaining. Among these
valetudinary bodies old men are esteemed. They always complain, they cannot
do as they have done [fuimus Troes.] We have been brave fellows in our days:
but now they cannot hope for a better custo^, and in that respect they are
[(...)] not like to see better days. And of all these valetudinary bodies
Galen speaks 8. Meth. 8. [(...).] I think it better to change their diet when
men are well, and not when they be sick, or valetudinary. For nature rejoices,
and delights in customs, and 5. de San. tuend. 11. Customs though evil are to
be kept [(...)] of valetudinary bodies. The reason is because such bodies are
weak, and cannot suffer mutations. And for the same reason old men ought not to
change custom, although it be [(...)] something hurtful. Wherefore the proverb.
[we must break the eye of custom] is not to be understood of sick, old, and
valetudinary bodies. These therefore because they drink customaryly beer, ale,
wine, they must not drink water in our Country.

CHAP. XXII. Diverse cautions to be considered for the drinking of water in
sickness.
WE must not only [(...)] diligently consider custom, but many other
circumstances, for if water be drank [(...)] untimely and with excess, there
may be many dangers, and sometimes of death it self, follow. Scaliger in his
Exercitations [aqua epota frigida homini labor and sole aestuanti venenum est]
water is of a poisonous quality to laboring men that are very hot, and in
Summer so Consiliator, called Petrus Abanus, especially if it be taken in great
quantity. Hippocrates also, 6. Epidem. relates that one Sleneus wrastled with a
stronger then himself, fell down on his head, drank much cold water, the third
day Mortuus est. What do I talk of Hippocrates? When Don Quixote, although he
had wind-mills, and Chimeras in his brain, yet was he not so senseless, as to
let his man Sanca Panca drink water, when he was tossed in a blanket, or
coverlet.

Secondly, water is not to be exhibited in agues, where there is thick clammy,
or obstructive humors. For although it seem to alleviate a man for the present,
and as it were extingu^sh the ague, yet it increases the cause of the disease,
which the Eloquent Orater Cicero took good account of in one of his Orations
against Cataline. [Saepe homines aegri morbo gravi cum aestu febrique
jactantur, si aequam gelidam biberint, primo relevari videntur, deinde multo
gravius, vehementiusque afflictantur,] which are almost the very words of Galen
9. Meth. 5. [(...).] For the present they find ease as if the fever were
quenched; but the cause of the disease remaining, it is necessary that another
fever, or ague should be kindled. And if water be of ill consequence in agues,
that have their original of thick, and clammy humors. Certainly it cannot be
good, as for diet in our Country, where men eat Beef, Pork, Bacon, Pudden,
Cheese, etc. which cause such clammy humors, and consequently obstructions in
which water is condemned.

Thirdly, incrudities, water is forbidden for where pu^ried, and inconcoct
humors are, water is very hurtful. Therefore Galens advise. 9. Meth 5. is,
that when manifest signs of concoction appear you may give water, not
otherwise. The same doctrine he has. 11. Meth. 9. But how shall they know
these manifest signs of condoction, that will not vought-safe to look upon an
urine? but let that pass. As in Crudities we must not give cold water, so
neither must we bleed (that I may give a kint) but we must defer bleeding (as
well as water) until the meat, and drink be concocted, and the excrement
descend [(...)] 9. Meth. 5. How prudent then is this nimble age that bleed men
dead drunk, and in a snoring sleep, only to cure them dead-sure. Thus died a
Gentleman. Neither ever found I any antique president that any man was bled in
sleep, he snored and fetched his breath freely until he was bled, and if he were
in a dying sleep, or dying condition, then Galen gives this caution. [Non sunt
infamanda remedia quae multis fuere aux^lia.] 11. M. 9.
We must not slander those remedies which have helped many. To speak truth, the
ancient went very far when they bled [ad lipothymiam] to a swounding: but our
age go a bar, and half beyond them, [ad Syncopen, admortem usque] to the very
death.

Fourthly, water must not be given in cold distempers especially of the stomak,
neither is it commended in hot distempers where there is little flesh and
blood. Water in choleric bodies begets choler, and Galen [(...).] water is
more dangerous in such. Wherefore Hectic distempers do not require pure water,
nor much [(...).] because they have extenuated bodies, besides Hectic bodies
are weak: 2. Aphoris. 28. Therefore cannot bear cold water nor alter their
custom.

Fifthly, water is not to be exhibited where any principal part is weak, or have
any tumor, or swelling, as inflammation, oedema, Scirrhus; or any inward part
distempered as weazand, stomach, liver, the gut colon, lungs, midrife, reins,
bladder; for many by the unseasonable, and much drinking of water [(...)] are
presently taken with shortness of breath, convulsious, and tremblings: as Galen
notes. There be other inconveniences, conveniences, but these are enough to
make a man fearful [(...)] to give water.

CHAP. XXIII. A recapitulation of the former Chapter out of Riverius.
IN this Chapter I will add a recapitulation out of Riverius a later Author,
in his Book of Agues: For as much says he as belongs to cold water, Galen
commands to give so much as the patient may look pale, and be cold all over the
body, and by that means the fiery heat of an ague may be extinguished, the
solid parts corroborated, the unprofitable humors evacuated, by sweats, urin,
and stools; but concerning the exhibition of water, Galen gives many cautions,
that is to say, that in the vigor of an ague, the signs of concoction
appearing, the patient be accustomed, all the inward parts firm, the body full
of good juice, a temper quadrate, and have strength, there must be no gross,
and slimy humors, or any tumor in the internal parts, neither in the stomach,
weazon, nor the nerves weak. Other-wise if these conditions fail: they that
drink water are in danger to incur difficulty of breathing, the dropsy,
lethargy and some other grevous disease. But [obsolevit hoc remedit genus] this
kind of remedy in this our age to observe is difficult, and out of the
praeposterous use, much danger may ensue, therefore it is abolished. Thus far
Riverius, who although he does not cite Galens words punctually; Yet any that
have the eye of reason may plainly, and evidently understand that this old
course of drinking of water in agues is vanished into smoke, and grown out of
date as an old Almanac.

CHAP. XXIV. Whether water be good in the palpitation of the heart, gout, or
dropsy.
THe novelists are [(...)] they will do wonders with water, and cure many
diseases with it. I know at this present a worthy Gentle man having the
palpitation of the heart drinks water, I know others that drink water in the
gout, and some have drank it in dropsies. Therefore I will handle of these 3.
diseases in order as they be propounded.

First, Hierony nius Mercurialis monet ab aquae potu abstinendum esse in co^dis
paltatione.
water is not good in the palpitation or beating of the heart. For this disease
is cold, therefore requires rather hot then cold Medicines, contraries are
cured by contraries, a cold sickness requires hot Medicines: but the
palpitation of the heart is a cold sickness. Galen de tremore and cap. 5.
[(...).] The cause, of palpitation that is the substantial cause is a Spirit,
or wind, the quality of this substance is waterish, and thick. Therefore it is
cold: but water cannot cure could, and waterish, nor the substance, or essence
of this Spirit, which is cold. For Galen in the same place. [(...)] The cause
of the palpitation is a gross clowdy, dark and flatulent spirit. Therefore
colder ages are subject to this palpitation, a cold temper, cold region,
winter, an idle life, men given to repretion and much drinking, meats cold, and
flatulent, to conclude all in a word, whatsoever cooles the body. And Galen
adds presently after, that the ancient Physicians found out remedies for the
palpation, which do heat, and extenuate, and 4. de locis affectis: he teaches
the very same, handling of the palpitation of the heart. But water has not a
heating, and extenuating faculty. Therefore it cannot be a good Medicine for
this Symptom.

Secondly, water is no good Medicine for the gout. As for a cold gout, I think
no rational man will grant cold water a convenient remedy. Then for an hot
gout, which is a kind of inflammation, it is probable that water may do well;
but all is not gold that glisters, nor every argument that is apparently true,
is true: For as I said before, they that aim at a few circumstances are easily
deceined. There be many to be considered in the gout, as Cardan teaches, 1.
The weakness of the joints. 2. The latitude of the veins. 3. A crude matter.
4. An impulsive power. But if in all gouts there be crudities, water cannot be
a good remedy. Galen forbids water in crudities, least it cause more crudities.
Wherefore Galen commends [(...)] treacle which co^sumes the superfluous
moisture, and cruditie [(...).] Et statim [(...).] Besides although it be an
hot gout, the joints are of a cold temper, which are much damnified by water.
Last of all the gout happens for the most part to them that have a cold
stomach, and to men in years, to both these water is no small adversary.

Thirdly, in dropsies water is worst of all, for all dropsies are of a cold
distemper of the liver, whence spring phlegm, water, wind, which are the brats
of a distempered liver. Alexander Massar: [aquae potio si quid aliud, aqua
inter cutem laborantibus est adversissima, adeo ut Avicenna illius quoqu;
visionem prohibeat.] The drinking of water is most contrary to dropsies, in so
much that Avicen forbad to look upon water. Massari had this from Galen, as all
rivolets have from the Ocean, for he says [(...).] Water is most adverse to
hydropical men, both as drink and bath.

CHAP. XXV. Three objections Answered.
NOw I will answer to two or three objections, and so make an end. The first
is, that custom is not necessary in the exhibition of water in sickness, and
Alexander Massaria, a famous Physician of Padua is of opinion, that custom is
not to be esteemed among necessary conditions, and if other conditions agree,
we may give cold water to those that are not accustomed. This assertion is
proved out of Galen 9. Meth. 5. [(...).] (...) scribendum.
where some, that were not accustomed, were compelled to drink cold water in a
burning fever, they received no hurt at all. I will add another text 9. Meth.
16. [(...).] We have often seen many that were in burning fevers, when the
humors are indifferently concoct, freed from their fever with drinking of cold
water, although they were not accustomed to drink it. But to end this
controversy, and answer Massaria. I distinguish, that hot distempers, are
either moderate as Hecticks, diaries, and indifferent agues; or they are such
distempers as Hippocrates and Galen call fire absolutely [(...)] not (...), and
such are [(...)] burning fevers. Nothing quench fire better then water.
In these and such like, we may give water to those that are not accustomed,
for as Galen says [(...)] and if the greatness, 11. M. 9.
or vehemence of the fever praeponderate, then custom is not a necessary
condition, the magnitude of a sickness Ecclips, and shaddows custom, and other
inferior indications. This is also to be understood where water is drank, in
hot Countries; but where the distempers are not so great, custom has a
necessary condition. Galen 9. Meth. 3. [(...).] but to one that is not
accustomed, I will not begin to give cold water, until his former health be
recovered. We see that Galen dare not give cold water to one that is not
accustomed: So 10. Meth. 5. speaking of Hecticks. [(...).] The only cure is to
give cold water moderately, and timely, and if was a custom in the time of his
health. Therefore we see that custom bears a necessary power in these
distempers, and especially in cold Countries.

The second objection is that water quenches thirst better then wine: this is
the argument. That which actually, and potentially does most cool, and
moysten, quenches thirst best; but water does both actually and potentially
most cool, and moysten, therefore quench thirst better then wine: for small
wine (...) although it moystens actually, and potentially, yet heats
potentially. I Answer that this objectio^ has been answered before in part,
Chapter 14. where in I proved that wine quenches thirst better, because it
adds wings to the penitration of water, by reason of the thinness, and tenuity
of parts. So sal Prunellae, and sal tartari, although they be hot, cool more
being mixed with cold water, therefore the minor proposition is denied, for it is
false. And although Hippocrates 6. Epidem. commends water in hot natures,
[(...).] nevertheless in another place: for water, he gives wine in hot
natures, and in extreme thirst he gives wine and that very cold. Galens words
are [(...).] Galen de dieta sanorum. Hippocrates in this place seems better to
praescribe waterish wine, that is cold, and yet obtaines the commodities of
water. Secondly, to speak accurately, [(...)] or dilute wine is one thing; but
waterish wine [(...)] is another, this is not hot but cold. Galen 2. Acut. 32.
[(...)] sitim tollit [(...).] waterish wine asswageth thirst by coldness, and
moisture. Again wine dilute is of two sorts, thick, and thin, that which is
thin, cools; and therefore all dilute wine (that is wine mixed with water) or
[(...)] do not heat.

The third objection is, that water is good for poor blind eyes or such as see
obscurely, and for this they quote Alexander Trallian: But Hollerius cites
Aristotle in his Problemes, that [hydropotae acutius vident] that water
drinkers see more acutely, the reason pretended is, [quia vapores mag is
supprimit.] This authority I cannot yet find, neither in Trallian, nor in
Aristotle. And the reason, if true, may be applied as well to beer, and
waterish wine: but I could never find in antiquity that water repress vapors,
but rather contrary, that in choleric bodies it increases choler; but wine is
[(...)] 1. San. tuend. tempereth choleric humo^s: Besides it helps forward
all Evacuations 11. Meth. 9. therefore it helps to repel vapors.

Secondly, water is no auxiliary to quickness of sight [(...),] neither
inwardly, or outwardly as an efficient cause: but by accident, it is not
excrementitious [(...)] Hippocrates and Rondeletius in this case gives
nowrishment, that is easy and not excrementitious, such is dilute wine, if it
be thin and do not vapor up to the head. Hieronymus Mercurialis in the
distillation of the eyes, where flies, moats seem to be. Aquam hoc casu a Raze
and ab Avicenna [damnatam invenio] I find water to be condemned. Thirdly,
suppose it to be true, that water drinkers, have Argos, or Linceus his eyes.
Surely the eyes of their understanding are not so quick, for in cold Countries
especially, water begets phlegm. Besides elevated conceits or divine raptures
come not from water drinkers. The Poet can make out that.

[Nulla placere, diu, neque vivere carmina possunt,
Quae scribuntur aquae potoribus.]
Thus if that be true which Horacerehearses,
Small beer drinkers never make good verse.
It Is wine that gives {alas ingenio] wings to wit [(...).] wine is the flying
horse Pegasus. As the Epigrammatist.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Epilogue.
I Could (Gentle Reader) dwell upon this subject a year, and not be satisfied
in any of these Chapters, but would refine them every one, and lick them over,
and over, as they say, bears do there whelps, and be critical too. But I fear
they are difficult enough to vulgar capacities although but rudely polisht.
Therefore I desist and expect these new lights may show more light. Every man
is [(...)] a light, that has but the light of reason. I confess there is a
great difference, for some have a great light of reason, others have as little,
and apter to be lighted, then to give light. Solid bodies give the greatest
light. Solid reasons are the best lights. Hippocrates for humane light among
Physicians, was the greatest, [(...)] says Nicomedes. His very words are the
voice of God. [(...)] says Galen, that is Apollinis, which was the Author of
Physic, and therefore styled [(...)] and [(...)] the cause of health. Apollo
was also called absolutely [(...)] God. These are Galens words.
But this by the way weak eyes, cannot look against the Sun, by reason of their
own weakness, and the incomparable light of the Sun. Ignorant men, that have
not [(...)] a general literature, cannot look upon Hippocrates writings, by
reason of their own ignorance, and the admirable light that is in Hippocrates:
And Galen next to him is the greatest light, his Dialect is as clear as the
Sun; his reasons are [(...)] as liquid, and bright as fire: His indications, or
demonstrations are such as dazzle the understanding of the best Physicians.

And these are the lights whereby we have proved our opinion. Now if there be
any new light among the novellists, that can show me clearer reason, and
authority for the drinking of water in England, I will subscribe.

Et erit mihi Magnus Apollo,
Et nos cantemus quod clara voce camaenae,
Bistonia cecinere Lyra [(...).]
He unto me, Apollo shall be.
And we will sing that which the Muses played.
On there Biston Harps when they called for aid.

O Apollo, O Apollo.
THE SECOND BOOK, PEPI THEPOPOSIAS.

The the READER.
IN my former Book I have discoursed (...), of drinking cold water, and have
given many reasons, that cold water is not convenient in cold Countries; for
water keeps a proportion with winter, winter with old age, old age with
phlegm, and all these conspire with a cold Country. And therefore in some
northern Countries, as Swedeland, Holland, men drink the strongest wines and
beers that may be got. And that by the advice of their Physicians, and not
without good reason, for this is the advice of their master Hippocrater, whose
consel is, that in winter we drink (...) the strongest wine. Now in this second
Book I handle (...), of hot drink actually, and determine against it. But
because I write against cold drink, and warm drink, some weak understanding, or
some prickeard critic will imagine, or suppose that I am like the Satyr that
did blow hot and cold. Therefore I thought good, to give, the courteous Reader
an account of the difference of these two Books. For there is no jarring in
these discourses but may stand both, without contradiction or any opposition.
The first Book is against the Novellists: This against an unknown Author
Anonymus, who may be was shamed of his name. The first Book is of water only:
this is of any drink. The first is limited to our Country. This has no
limitation or bounds, but is as I may say an ubiquitary, the first is against
water potentially cold: This against drink actually warm. And that the Reader
may know what these terms mean, I will set down briefly, what is actually and
potentially hot or cold, if I can hit on it. Actually hot is, that which is hot
to the sense of feeling or touching, so if a man drink broth, that it does
amburere gusturem, as Plautus says, this broth is actually hot. For gustus
est quidam tactus. Actually cold is, that which is cold to the touch; so snow
and ye are actually cold. Potentially hot is that which is hot in operation in
virtue (...), or hot in effect; so wine in winter time is cold in Act, but
potentially hot, vinum debet esse frigidum, Arnoldus vill. nov. 1896.
quoad actum non quoad effectum. Potentially cold is that which cools (...)
in virtue, effect, or operation, so water made hot by fire is cold in
operation. Now I have told the Reader plainly what is actually, and
potentially hot or cold. I will determine and conclude that to quench thirst
(which is one of the chiefest ends of drinking) which is actually hot and dry,
it is necessary that our drink be cold, and moist actually. Besides all nations
drink actually cold drink, ubique gentium (says Cardan Aphoris. sect. 3.)
vinum and aquam bibere licet frigidissimam. And it is better to follow the
general consent of all nations, and all Physicians, then with an upstart Idiote
drink warm drink; And although a vain conciept or a flie-net at the first
conceit, or first blush may please as Lycus his new opinion, which Galen
relates to be (...) was well esteemed for the present newness; but worst of all;
and novelty is but a new itch of an old disease; but at this day in hac scabie
tenemus vungues, we have a finger in the pie. In new errors volutamour, we
wallow as a beetles in borsdung (...). We are in the dregs of time, sumus in
faece and amurca mundi: and as Seneca says, Meliora praetervolant, deteriora
succedunt; and quemadmodum ex amphora, primum quod sincerissimum effluit,
gravissimum quodque turbidum subfidit, sic in aetate nostra quod optimum est
primum. Out of antiquity run the purest streams of literature. In antiquity
dwells the character of Gravity and Majesty, as we may see not only in
aedifices, statues, pictures; but also in Learned tenets, which get sure
footing to the way of eternity. For when centuries of years have given their
general approbations, and past their solid censures, all rational men pass
their v^tes, and subscribe, Miramurque nihil nisi quod Libitina sacravit. And
if our age were well versed in antiquity, there would be none cheated with
novelties: And if we had but the solid light of reason, we would not be hurried
away with the vain illunation of new lights. New fancies are nothing else but
posterioris aevi pejores aves, ill birds of this later age, that cannot live
long, but are as (...) die as soon they are born. And if they last a little
longer, time will discover their weakness and lightness. (...). And although
our age fortify their imaginations, with strong supposed arguments as
bulworks, and our new trepidations of late borrow their new molded Religion
from divine inspiration, (...), so does our Author support his aereal fancy,
with Peripatetical gravity, and Galenicals solidity, yet at last he must sing
with Plautus, Quasi solstitialis herba paulisper fui,
Repent exortus sum, repentino occidi.


A Confutation of the treatise of VVarm drink: PEPI THEPOPOSIAS.
I Know many trouble themselves with this question: whether warm drink be
better then cold. Our Novelists, though they administer cold water, are wholly
for warm drink. This opinion they drew not from any ancient Fountain, but from
a new discovered spring, tanquam ex font Caballino, or a new Hippocrene. That
is an English Book entitled: A treatise of warm drink, printed at Cambridge.
And this Book our countrymen follow, as if the Author had been brought up (as a
man may say) at the foot of Gamaliel, or taught by the Oracle of Apollo. It may
be the whole University is totally converted to the drinking of warm drink, by
this our Author, who like another Thessalus, Method. 6. (...) setting in the
Doctors or Professors chayer, dictates canons and rules of Physic, (...), as
if they were edicts of Kings and Princes, without giving a reason, and to speak
truth, our Author has not so much as one positive reason; but two or three
poor objections out of Aristotle and Galen, in which for want of judgment and
literature, he is m^serably mistaken, as shall appear hereafter to any rational
man.

But before I come to the maine battalia, I will give you a character of our
Authors grand Learning, by which you may know him as Hercules by his foot, ex
pede Herculem. For in his first page he says, that Homer with great dexterity
of wit calls a Method of writing (...), a golden chain. He dreamt of Gold, but
tells us nonsense: for where did Homer call Method a golden chain. Homer never
wrote of Method, his work it self is but a Rapsodie, as the Critics relate,
and of old they that sang Homer's (...), were called (...), and rapsodoi,
because they sang patcht verses. What madness is this? I could not imagine any
face could have so much brass, as to tell so bold a lie to the University. For
Homer speaks no more of Method, then he does de facie in orb lunae, or of the
man in the Moon. And if we believe the divine Plato, this golden chain is the
Sun. Plato h^s words declaring the golden chain, are these in his Theaeteto,
(...), and by the light of this Sun we may see the (...): or sparks of our
Authors understanding. Who (I easily believe) did understand Greek no more then
a Beast, yet forsooth he must quote Homer's Greek words, to no purpose at all.

Now I will come to his discourse, which I think is as brutish and illiterate,
as the former of Method, and will have as bad success, for where as it is a
manifest and firm conclusion, never contradicted for these thousand years
together, by the Learn'dest all ages. That cold drink is better to quench
thirst then warm, because thirst is a disposition hot and dry, and therefore
requires a cold and moist remedy to give it satisfaction, so Aristoteles 2. de
anima, (...). Thirst is an appetite of moisture and coldness. Therefore it must
have drink cold and moist. This is an invincible argument. I shall not need to
put this argument into a Syllogistical form. Every proposition in Arist.
virtually is a syllogism. The Learned may know that the argument is grownded
upon the great whoele of Physic, which is, that contraries are cured by
contraries, and that the conclusion must follow (...) of necessity.

Yet our incomparable Author brings this argument with great dexterity of wit,
(as he said before of Homer) to prove warm drink better to quench thirst then
cold. Thus he brings the greatest ratiocination against himself, that can be
possible, as he himself in a manner confesses, so that he is urged to prove
one of these results.

Either that drink actually hot, does better, cool and moysten the body then
cold drink.

Or else Aristotle his meaning is not directly as his words seem literally to
pretend.

The first result is such an evident contradict on in it self, that it is madness
to confute, and our Author passes it over in silence as ridiculous.

The second result is so opposite to Aristotle, that he says, it is no small
impudence, to oppose so great a Philosopher. Therefore at last he begins to
slubber over the matter, and would make a nose of wax of Aristotle his text,
that his meaning is not directly as his words seem, bringing neither reason or
authority for his opinion; but rather an objection or two to prove, that thirst
is only an appetite of moistness, which he proves out of the tenth section of
the problems, where the Philosopher inquiring (says he) what the cause should
be, why other Creatures do sooner prey of, and eat dry meat, then moist; but
man more often takes moist things then dry, which causes him to desire to be
cooled, whereby it is to be noted, that he only makes mention of moisture to
cool.

But to answer this frivolous objection, and clear the Philosopher, we will
lay down his own words, which are these, (...). That is why other living
Creatures take dry nowrishment, but man takes drink or moist nowrishment, Is it
because man by nature is hottest, and desire more cooling. By this discourse of
Aristotle, you may see, if you have any poreblind eye of the understanding,
that the Philosopher teaches, how man, because he is hot, drinks more then he
eats. And indeed man is hotter calido innato, with an imbred heat, then other
Creatures, therefore he must defire more cooling from drink, (...), moist
nonrishment is nothing else but drink (...), says Plato, and as Aristotle
says in his problemes, man requires moisture (...). So Galen in 5. Aphoris.
(...), and so 2. Aphoris. 11. And because our Author did not understand
Aristotle's (...), he built the whole fabric of his opinion upon his own
ignorance, therefore I must tell him, that (...) and (...) drink and moisture
is all one. Besides Aristotle in this very place, cited by our Author seems to
understand moisture to to cool (...), which can be nothing else but drink that
is actually, and potentially cold, and so G^^stavinius upon this problem
interprets; and if our Author had been in his wits, he could not have
understood this place of Aristotle otherways, but I fear he has too moist,
and Phlegmatique a brain to understand the Philosopher. Anima sicca, anima
sapiens, sed est in udo Maenas and Attin, as says Persius.

Again drink is simple and merely drink, as water, which is only our natural
drink, or as wine and ale are meat and drink, so run our old English verses.

Ale was his meat, his drink, his cloth: ale did the old man revive,
And if he could have drank his ale still, he had been still alive.
So is wine meat, as Galen de cause. morb. Vinum modice sumptum, (...). he
reckons wine for the best, and the most nowrishing meat, if it be moderately
taken; but properly drink which is water, nourish little or very weakly, and
all weak nowrishment is cooling. Hippocrates 6. Epidem. 4. (...). So that drink
(...) which is water cools, because it is of little and weak nourishment.
Therefore Aristotle in the forementioned place of the problemes, by moisture
understands drink (by (...)) and primarily water, secundarily other drinks,
which are cold and moist: for simply water [(...)] is drink [(...)] and drink
simply is water. This is especially the moisture which Aristotle speaks of, to
quency thirst, because man is hot and thirsty, therefore he naturally requires
such drink to cool.

Thirdly, (...) moisture is twofold, either aereal moisture or waterish
moisture: humidum aqueum est quod actu and potestate frigidum: a waterish
moisture is actually and potentially cold, and so says Scaliger lib. 2. de
Plautis. Humidisatis aqueae nature a est frigida: The very nature of waterish
moisture is cold, and so also Horatius Augenius disputes, and such: moisture is
required in thirst, for drink and moisture is all one, for whereas Aristotle 3.
sect. problem. (...). The loving of drink is a desire of some moisture, there
Plato makes mention of drink: (...). Thirst is an appetite, or desire of drink,
wherefore potus est (...) est potus, drink is moisture, and moisture is drink.
For seeing there is a perpetual flux of our bodies, the dryer solider part is
refreshed with meat, the moyster part with drink. And this is the chief use of
drink, to make good that which is exhausted, 1. San. tuend 3. but when the
moist part is exhausted, then comes dryness, and consequently the necessity of
drinking, for as we grow dryer, so we grow hotter, which are the causes of
thirst, Galen 1. de Symptom. cause. c. 7. (...), that heat and dryness is the
cause of thirst, for which drink is the best remedy, and among drinks that
which is cold and moist, for thirst being a disposition (as I said before) hot
and dry, or a natural disease (for so Galen calls it) hot and dry, it must of
necessity challenge cold, and moist drink, which is contrary, for contraries
are cured by contraries. Therefore Galen says, that water is the remedy of
thirst, 1. Simp. med. fac. c. 7. (...). And if thirst comes of heat as all
Philosophers and Physicians consent, the^ cold quenches thirst best, so Plato
(...). So also Hippocrates de diat: (...). Whosoever are thirsty very much,
they must drink waterish wine, and that very cold or extreme cold, what now
will our (...) or Warm-drinker say to Hippocrates, that affronts so plainly and
manifestly? Besides if Aristotle should understand only moisture (excluding
cold) to be the remedy of thirst, he should be laughed at, and exploded in his
own Peripatetick Schools. For cold cannot be separated in our natural drink,
which is as cold as it is moist. Therefore Aristotle according to Philosophers
and Physicians, that is according to the dictates of reason says admirably
well, and without contradiction and literally. 2. de anim. (...), thirst is an
appetite of that which is moist and cold. And although in some places he
mentions only moisture, yet coldness is necessary included, as it is also in
Hippocrates Aphor. 1.16. (...). That moist diet profitable in agues? who will
find fault or cavil at Hippocrates for this? certain none but some phlegmatike
temperature. And Hugo Senensis says, that Hippocrates made mention in this
aphoris. only of moisture, not of cold, quoniam de frigido dubitaver at nemo,
atque frigidi alimenti, in febribus, indicatio clarissima est: for no man ever
doubted of cold, for the indication is clear; that a hot sickness requires cold
nourishment. Thus Galen Method. 8. c. 9. Where he quotes this very Aphorism
says, that an ague is hot and dry, and therefore, requires [(...)] cold and
moist diet, that is water in hot Countries or warerish wine; such as have the
virtue and weakness of water, and that very cold, for nothing can be more
ridiculous, then to give warm drink in hot dispositions, such as thirst and
agues are, for thirst requires the same proportionably that an ague does. Yet
our Author will have all men in all conditions, for he never so much as
distinguishes, or excludes any from his warm drink. This is his Panacea that
cures all men in all diseases or dispositions, this is his calopodium, a
Cobblers last that fits every man's foot, and so much for the first objection.

The second objection is out of Galon, in his Book of inequal tempers, where he
does prove the occasion of thirst, to be drought or dryness, which is remedied
per humidum, not per frigidum, that is by moisture, not by cold; for althoug it
cannot be, but that heat does procure thirst, yet look into the reason, and you
shall find it is propter inopiam humiditatis, because it has not his just
proportion of moisture.] I reply first, that this Author has shown his
ignorance in Aristotle sufficiently, but now he will show as much in Galen. Let
us therefore take a view of this objection, although it be the same with the
former; next set down Galens words, and see whether they bear the same sense,
which our Author would have them. The text which our Author cites out of Galen
is this, (...), that is: In hunger the solid and dry substance is deficient; in
thirst, the moist substance is wanting; upon which place Vallesius thus
comments Galen (says he) signifies nothing else, per (...) by a moist
substance then drink, for he calls moystness, drink, which is water. And in
his Method lib. 1. c. 10. he affirms, that vere potus ac nihil aliud
quampotus est sola aqua. That which is truly drink, and nothing else but
drink, is water. Thus Vallesius, therefore Galen in this place, does not
exclude cold, but rather include it: for drink properly and naturally (which is
understood by moisture) is water, and nothing that is simple, cools and
quenches thirst better then water, therefore this is the natural drink of all
Creatures, and satisfies every living Creatures thirst. At this aims Oppian,
when he says (...).

And Vallesius further says, that gelidus potus magis attemperat, proinde siti
and excrementorum acrimoniae melius occurrit. That is, water as cold as ice,
tempers the heat, quenches thirst better, and blunts sharpness of excrements;
where we may note that cold drink quench thirst better then hot: but to go and
follow our Author.

But says he, to enter into further consideration of the matter. Let us
examine the reasons, why cold should be necessary in allaying of thirst. It
appears to me, that it is either to extinguish or to mitigate it, but
extinguish, it cannot, for let any man that is exceeding dry, eat any that is
never so cold, not having any thing moisture joined with it, and he shall find
by experience, that it may well choke him, but in no sort allay his drought]
Thus far our Author, who if he had purged his brains with Hellebore, as
Carneades did, when he was to dispute with Zeno, he could not discourse so
madly, for entering into further consideration of the matter, he never comes
near it. The controversy being of drinking beer, wine, water, and whether it is
best to drink them hot or cold, his mind is of gut-timber, for he talks of
eating, saying [if any man eat any thing never so cold, it will not allay
thirst, not having any moisture joined with it.] This is true; but heavenly
wide from the matter, (...). And although cold meat cannot allay thirst, yet
cold drink cannot only allay it, but extinguish it. Cold and dry cannot cure
thirst, but cold and moist can. The true cure of thirst naturally is cold
water. As I said before out of Galen, (...). Therefore how sweet and pleasant
is cold water, to those that are thirsty, the Poet expresses in these verses.

Tale tuum carmen nobis divine Poeta,
Quale sopor fessis in gramine, quale per aestum,
Dulcis aquae Saliente sitim restinguere rivo.
And Theocritus, whom the Poet imiated thus: (...),
(...).
Oppian also commends water to the thirsty. (...),
(...).
Thus the Philosophers, Physicians, and Poets, and if these testimonies will
not satisfy our Author, I will quote him andeniable authority, out of the
Sacred Scripture. Proverb. 25. (...). As cold water is pleasant to a thirsty
soul, so is a good message from a far Country. And if the Old Testament will
not serve the turn, we will produce the now, for Joan 4. Our Blessed Savior
when he was thirsty, what did he ask of the Samaritan? nothing else but cold
water to drink, which admirable Nonnus express thus: (...). For this he did to
cool, as also Theophylact says: (...), because it was the heat of the day,
and let not our Author be so absurd, to think of cold meat to quench thirst.
The Apostle will otherwise teach and better manners, Romans 12. (...). If your
Enemy be hungry feed him, if he be thirsty give him drink.

Lastly (says our Author) if it be alleged, that drought having heat joined
with it requires cold, in respect of his heat, as dryness does moisture, and
so cold joined with moisture does best remedy both, because, contraria
contrariis curantur, contraries are cured by their contraries. Yet it seems
to me a matter far unfit, for two causes: The one, although that be Galen's
ground, yet it is not so to be taken literally, but it stands with that ground
likewise which is that, Omne repentinum natura inimicissimum: All sudden
altera^ions are contrary to nature] It Is ^rue that thirst having heat requires
drink, that is cooling, and is grounded upon this maxim: Contraries are tured
by contraries, which is not only Galen's ground, but Hippocrates also, and all
rational men, and may appear to common sense. But let us go to the great
tribunal of Physic, whose edict is this: (...). 6. Epidem. And again, (...).
Again (...). And yet again: (...). Every one of these texts prove that
contraries are cured by contraries, and three of them prove that cold water
cures not natures, and hot dispositions; neither is there any rule or canon,
that can possibly contradict them, yet our Author like a true critic of this
later age of new lights, averreth that Galen's ground is not to be understood
literally. It seems when any authority cross our Author, then this not to be
understood literally: sure enough all authorities are to be understood
literally or mystically. The mystical sense is either allegorical, or
anagogical, ormoral. And if Galen be not understood literally, then he must be
understood mystically. But how ridiculous it is to run to a mystical sense in
Physicians, and Philosophers, who are as clear as the Sun beams to the
Learned, let any man that has but a dragme of reason judge, such is that text.
2. de anima, (...). Thirst is a desire of cold and moist. I say this text is
clear to the light of reason, and yet our Author will not have it understood
literally, but mystically. But it may be, he may find some apocalyptical
mysteries in Philosophy, and Physic, which a world of Learned men never so
much as dreamt on before. And for this rule contraries cure contraries, may
very well stand with that ground, sudden mutations or changes are contrary to
nature. Hippocrates 2. Aphoris. 51. (...), and too much and suddenly to
evacuate, to fill, to heat, to cool and is dangerous. This Authority is as
much against warm drink, as cold. But indeed, touch neither of them in a direct
line, we see Beasts drink water with ice in it, and so have men done. S^n^ca.
Necnive quidem contenti sunt, sed glaciem, velut certior illi ex solido rigor
sit, exquirunt, ac saepe repetitis aquis diluunt. Neither are they content with
snow, but they find out ice, and dissolve it often in renewed water to cool
the more. But est modus in rebus: there is a mean in all things.

The second reason is, because (says our Author) it is not possible that every
man, woman, and child who being hot, and desire drink, can upon every motion so
proportion the cold, that it shall just fit the degree of heat. And then if it
be too small, by its anteperistasis, it hurts where it should help: if greater
then the heat require instead of allaying the heat, it utterly kills it] What
an admirable ridiculous objection is this, and nothing to the purpose, to
imagine that every man, woman, and child should give a due proportion of cold?
and who can give a due of warm drink? Neither is it requisite for every one to
apply contrariis contraria aequalia; but he may apply contraries either
greater, or less, or aequal, as Vallesius witness in his controversies. But
(says our Author) if it be too small, by his antiperistasis it hurts where
it should help.] To see how men are bewitched to error, and as I may say
bedevild in their ratiocination, when they forsake antiquity, and follow their
own own interpretation, for then error begets error to the end of the
Chapter, for if he had read Theophrastus, he would have told me another tale,
for he says quite contrary: (...). Of potable waters, cold is the best, for it
helps concoction best of all by an antiperistasis. And if the cold (says our
Author) be greater then the heat requires, instead of allaying the heat it
utterly kills it] Here is no consequence, for we may take drink very cold in
summer, in hot Countries, and where custom is predominant without any hurt;
besides we need not take our drink too cold, nor very little cold, for there is
degree between these two colds. Again I may confess his consequence true. That
it should quench the heat, that is kill it, and so Hippocrates punctually
speaks, 6. Epidem. (...). Cold kills those things which are of heat, for
nothing is more contrary to fire then water, because fire is hot and dry: water
is cold and moist. The very same reason is of thirst, which is hot and dry, and
is quenched or killed by water, which is cold and moist.

These are our Authors foundations upon which he has builded his new fabric,
which being taken away all falls to the ground. In ruinam prona sunt quae sine
fundamentis crevere. Seneca. Now let us come to his authorities, which are in
his last Chapter, for I handle only but two Chapters: The first, wherein he
lays the foundation: and the last, where are his authorities.

Authorities out of the ancients, for to prove the use of warm drink.
OUr Author in his last Chapter proves, that the Gretians and the Romans did
use warm drink. And first among the Grecians, Phylostinus, that excellent
Physician wrote unto his Contrymen, and Counseled them in the spring, and
all Winter to drink their liquor calidissimum most hot, and in Summer time
sukewarm, so that at all times he shows, that cold drink was not to be used.

1. I answer, that I am persuaded, that this is the Authors own invention, for
he neither quotes Book nor Chapter, nor Author right, for there never was any
such Physician that ever I could learn. 2. No Physician ever gave calidissimum,
most hot drink at any time of the year, and much less in the spring. 3. No
Physician ever gave absolutely lukewarm drink in Summer, or at any time of the
year in hail constitutions. 4. If Philostinus gave drink as hot in the Spring
as in Winter, he was in an error, for middle constitutions require middle
temperatures of drink, as Hippocrates de diet.

3. His next authority is Athanaeus in his 8. Book, speaking of Strationicus
the Harper, who called Rhodios delitiis exolutos, and calidum bibentes albos
Cyrenaeos Rhodiumque oppidum, civitatem porcorum: That is, Strationicus the
Fiddler, (for so H. Stephen and other expound Citharaedum, although it signify
also a Harper, but the word is more generally taken) call them of Rhodes (...)
and (...), luxurious and warm drinkers comparing them to Hogs: This considered,
the place is nothing to the purpose. Luxurious men have drank warm drink; but
the question is not de facto, but, de Jure, as the Lawyers speak, whether or no
hail men may drink it in the Regiment of health. Luxurious men have drank and
eat, that which was not justifiable to reason. Some have drank poison, but who
will warrant it upon good grounds. In this answer we may note, that our Author
is mistaken when he compares the City of Rhodes to Hogs, for in Athanaeus there
is no such thing, the Greek words are (...) vocat a City of suitors, he mistakes
procos pro porcis.

Thirdly, Julius Pollux in his Onomasticon propounds this question, whether the
ancient drank their water hot, and concludes they did. I answer: That Pollux
brings authority out of Homer and Hippocrates, but confesses them to be
invalid, and weak, but at last he brings out of Philemon, that calda solida
est vendita (...), that hot water was sold for a forthin, which saying (as
Pollux affirms) does manifestly argue the drinking of warm water. I answer,
that this argument is not evident for two reasons. First, is not probable, (as
also H. Mercurialis assert.) that boiled water was sold for so poor a price.
Secondly calda, is potable water, they called caldam, therefore Philemon
understands aquam potabilem. Seneca: Ab hac defatigatione mag is quam
exercitatione in frigidam descendi. Hoc apud me vocatur parum Calda. But of
this more in the tenth authority.

Fourthly, Apulejus lib. 2. de aureo asino, Fotis arripit poculum ac desuper
aqua calida injecta porrigit ut biberem: Fotis takes the Cup, and from above
pouring in warm water, offers it me to drink. I answer, that calida aqua is
not water hot actually, but cold, yet it was made hot purposely to receive the
more coldness, for the ancients drank their drink very cold. So Beroaldus upon
this place, out of Pl^nie, Neronis Principis inventum est decoquere aquam
vitroque demissam in nives refrigerare. Ita voluptas frigoris contingit sine vi
iis nivis. Item calefactam magis refrigerari, subtilissimo invento. It Is the
invention of Nere the Prince, to boil water, and in a glass let it down into
snow, to cool it, so the pleasure of the coldness is tasted, without the
offense of the snow, for all water decocted or boiled is more profitable, and
that water made warm, is made more cold by a very subtle invention. You see
they did not drink hot water but very cold, putting the boiling water into
snow. And of this custom Galen speaks 7. Meth. (...), and I gave not only
Fountain water, but such as was cooled with snow, as they had wont to prepare
it, at Rome, first heating the water, which they call decoction.

But for further proof (says our Author) I will prove it both by the ancient
writers of prose, and also Poets, that the Romans used it. And first Varro
defining this word calix, says, it comes of the Latin word ealidus, because
in it calidus apponebatur potus, hot drink was served. I answer, that thus we
read in Varro: Calix a caldo quod in ea calidus potus apponebatur and caldum in
eo bibebant. Caldum is not here to be understood water hot actually, but such
as Neroes decoction was in the last answer.

Secondly, calix is not a calda as Varro, but rather a (...) Macrobius, or as
Isidore, because calices were made of wood; for the Grecians call all kind of
wood (...). 3. I ask why our Author amongst the Romans, begins first with
Varro, when before this, he had proved it out of Apuleius. Surely he takes
Apuleius to be a Grecian, not a Roman.

The sixth is Paulus the Lawyer, speaking of the difference between the
Vessels, that they heated in, says there is no great difference between
Cacabus and Ahenum, for in the first they bo^le their meat, and in the other
their water to drink. I answer, that the ancient boiled their meat not only,
in cacabis, but in abenis. Virgil.

Pars in frusta secant virubusque trementia figunt,
Littore ahena locant alii flammasque ministrant.
Secondly, they did not drink in ahenis, but rather boiled their water in them,
for ahenus is a Vessel to prepare hot water, and so is miliarium, which word is
expressed in the glossary very well (...), a Vessel to heat water in. Athenaeus
calls it (...). But all this is nothing to the purpose: we confess the ancients
had Vessels to heat water in, but that they drank actual hot drink, we deny,
especially in the Regiment of health.

The next is Plautus in his Comedy of the Vaunting Soldier, in these very
words: Quia enim absorbui,
Nam nimis calebat, amburebat gutturem.
I supped it, for it was so hot, it burnt my throat.
Again the same Author in another Comedy, brings forth Labrax speaking to
Neptune, in these words: Edipol, Neptune, es balneator frigidus,
Cum vestimentis posteaquam abs te abis, algeo,
Nec Thermopolium quident ullum ille instruit,
Ita salsam praebet potionem and frigidam.
Truly Neptune thou art a cold bath-keeper,
Since I came from thee I freeze in my Clothes,
Neither does he keep any hot water shop,
He gives us so salt and cold a potion.
I answer, that Plautus does not in any of these places handle of hot or warm
water to drink, or quench thirst, but of warm potions which were sweet. And
Lambinus upon the words of Plautus affirms, that the ancients delighted in warm
potions, which were mellitae, and were to be sold in Thermopoliis. Neither is
Thermopolium a hot water shop, as our Learned Author unfornately imagines, but
a place where dulces potiones vendebantur, quas calidas bibere solent, where
sweet potions were sold, which they had wont to drink hot, as Lambinus upon
Plautus and Adrtanus Junius witness, and Plautus himself makes manifest, where
he reckons Murrhinam passum defrutum mellinam.

Horatius also when he writes to Telephus, in his third Book of Odes, has
this, saying, Quo Chium pretio cadum
Mercemur? quis aquam temperet ignibus?
For Chian wine what men exact,
Who Will our water to warmth redact?
I answer, that this place of Horace is nothing to the purpose: for the Poet
speaks of bathing, so Bond upon this place, quis balneum calefaciat? nam
veteres non nisi loti and uncti discumbebant. He speaks of heating of water for
a bath, for the ancients never sat down to meat unless bathed and oynted.

Lastly, Juvenal, in his fisth Satyr has this saying, Quando vecatus adest
calidae gelidae minister? When will the drawer come to give us hot and cold
water. And Martial in his verses made to Sextilianus the great dtinker, says
thus, Iam defecisset portantes calda ministros,
Si non potares Sextiliane merum.
They had lake hot water by this time,
Had not Sextilian drunk wine.
And in many other places, especially Martial speaks, of Calda. But I answer
with Latinus Tancredus, potus bifaria^ intelligitur, aut onim viribus ignis aut
solis incaluit, aut potus calidus est illa qua vel vinum quae nulla art
refrigerantur; sed qualia contingit esse bibituris, bibenda offeruntur. Hinc
Caldam Martilis appellat aquam nullo in^enio redditam-frigidam. Drink is taken
two ways, either that which is hot by fire or the Sun, or warm drink is that
water or wine, which is are not cooled by art. And so Martial calls water hot
(caldam) that which by cunning or invention is not cooled. Hieronymus
Mercurialis, Scribit, Caldam fuisse aquam illam quae nulla art refregeratur,
sed quae, qualis suapte natura potituris porrigebatur. Sic etiam Seneca, in
frigidam descendi, hoc apud me vocatur parum calda. Wherefore I conclude, that
water, or wine, or beer, that is hot by fire or Sun, is never to be given in
hail and sound bodies, because they be for no use, but to cause nauscousness
and vomiting, for actual hot drink is contrary to nature, which in thirst
requires cold and moist drink, which the nature of Beasts do make manifest, for
they by a natural instinct follow cold drink; besides, neither Galen, or any
other Physician ever praescribed warm drink in the Regiment of health. And if
it can be proved among the ancients, that they ever drank warm drink, it was
more for their pleasure and wantoness, then for health: and so L. Mercatus
says, non sanitatis sed libidinis gratia potabant Calidam. These are I think
answers sufficient against our Author. There be other Testimonies which are by
these things, that have been said already answered, and I will not chew my cud,
Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros.

But I had almost past over the Chinenses, which seems to be a matter of great
moment. That warm drink (says our Author) is used at this day amongst whole
nations, I will prove by Giovani Petro Maffei the Jesuit, who in his sixth
Book of Histories writes, that they of China do for the most part, drink the
strained liquor of an herb, called Chia. And Persino the I^alian writes, that
he saw himself 3. Principes Grapponenses, which came to kiss Pope Gregory the
13. foot, who drank nothing but water, affirming it to be the custom of their
Country.

I answer, that custom has a plenipotentionary power, in diet especialy, and
those of China and Japonenses drink warm water from their infancy, therefore
natural, because custom is another nature. But to answer the Traveller with a
Traveller, and pay him in his own kind. Audivi (inquit Tancredus) de nobiliss.
equite Vincentio Bune qui ea loca peragravit, cos populos distillationibus
obnoxios, cui malo ut occurrant praesens inveniunt remedium calidam potionem.
So those of China and Japan are vexed with distillations, and therefore drink
warm drink, as a remedy for their distillations: So may any man that pleases,
if he be troubled with fluxes, catarrhes, and distillations, and accustomed
from their infancy may drink their drink warm. And to wind up the bottom of all
my discourse, I will only insert a few verses out of Martial.

Setinum dominaeque nives densique trientes,
Quando ego vos, medico non prohibente, bibam?
Stultus and ingratus, nec tanto munere dignus,
Qui mavult haeres divitis esse Mydae,
Possideat Libycas messes Hermumque Tagumque,
Et potet calidam qui mihi laudat aquam.
When shall we drink rich wine with snow made cold,
Which with his glittring sparkles burns in gold?
He is a fool ungrateful and not worth
So great a blessing that is Midas ins birth,
Let him have Iamaica gold, nay much more
Then Hermus, Tagus, and Liby an shore.
Let him drink cold, that is discrete and waighes it,
And let only fools drink warm that praise it.
Thus I end, wishing not any of my Friends to drink warm drink.

-- (...)
(...).
PEPI THEPOPOSIAS.
I Am tandem coronidis vice conclusiones quasdam tanqua^ tot bases dog^ maticae
and veteris doctrinae contr^ Medicinae navatores, consti^uere and ob oculo
sponere decrevi; in quibus no proletarios and inferioris classis criticos, sed
eruditos and (...) provocare audeo, neque enin is sum quirigidas (...)
censuras, ut decumanum fluctum, aut (...) formido. Conclusiones autem sunt hae
sequentes,

Prima est. Calidus potus aut tepidus nulli sano homini convenit. Haec
conclusio est Christoph. a Vega, and omnium dogmaticorum, cujus ratio est, quod
calida and tepida debilitant stomachum relaxando, causant vomitum, ut recte
Petrus Abanus. Aqua calida (ut etiam Gentilis super Avicennam) corrumpit
digestionem (intelligit concoctionem) nam digestio fit in fundo, aqua autem
calida dilatat cibum, frigiditas constringit. Idem docet and Avicenna, Galen 1.
ad Glauconem, (...). Sic and tepidaventriculi firmitatem dissolvunt 8. Method.
5. (...); and 6. tuend. San. 9. (...). Cornel. Cells. lib. 1. c. 3. qui vomere
post cibum volet, si ex facili faciet aquam tanquam tepidam ante debet
assum^re. Et quia Praesbyteriani hunc potum calidum aut tepidum solent
propmare, adferam pro illis Caput tertium Apocalypseos verse. 16. in quem locum
Arethas Caesariae Cappadociae Episcopus sic commentat. (...). Quare omnes (quod
sciam) calidam and tepidam po^ionem damnarunt, and sane neque Galenus neque
ullus alius Medicus calidae potonis unqua^ nisi in aegrotis mentionem fecre.
Unde recte Hieronymus Mercurialis, Ego sane ita semper existimavi, nunquam
inter convivia veteres aquam talefactam bibisse, quod ea potius concite
vomitum, quam ut voluptatem aut comnodum afferat. Ludovicus etiam Mercatus,
Soli (inquit) hominos inter aninalia calidos sequuti sunt potus, non sanitatis
sed libidinis gratia.

Non negamus veteres aquam olim calefecisse and decoctam fuisse vetustiss,
temporibus cognitam, quod dipnosophista probat apud Athenaeum, ubi haec
leguntur, (...), aqus decoctae cyathus, sed quod aquam caldam actu aut potum
actu calidum, est inter (...) Callimachi, probare. Nam nemo (inquit Horatius
Augenius) exstitit qui pro sanitate conservanda consuluerit hujusmodi potum
Plinius etiam testatur, nullum ani^al aliud praeter hominem calidos potus
sequi, ideoque non esse natural. Nam tatura sanorum potum abhorret calidun.
Eodem Augenio test.

Secunda est, Pous excellenter frigidus non competit sanis. Haec etiam est
conclusio omnum dogmaticorum. Cardanus, De San. tuend.
valde frigida actu vel potentia evitari debent. Sed relictis rivulis mare
Pegasea navi secemus. Hippocrates de dietalibro 2. (...) Et 6. Epidem. (...).
Hujus ratio fundatur in illo Aphorismo, omne nimium est naturae inimicum (...),
omne nimium vertitur in vitium, sic 5. Aphoris. (...), hoc est, (...), Hoc est;
quod Galen quandoque (...) quandoque (...). Paulus Aegineta (...) ut ipsemet
exponit Paulus (...). Hunc potum veteres, and recentiores appetiere ultra
sanitatis limits, and circinos vagantes. Cardanus Aphoris. 3.17. Vbique
gentium vinum and aquam bibere liceat frigidiss. Germani (ut observat Fuchsius
in 6. Epidem.) prae caeteris nationibus frigido vino impensius delectantur, nam
hyeme multa glacie and nive collecta in specu subterraneo, ne liquescat
conservata, illa in magnis aestibus ad refrigeranda vina magna multorum
admiratione utuntur. Hoc olim memoriae olim mandavit Martialis. Non potare
nivem sed aquam potare rigentem,
De nive commenta est ingeniosa sitis.
Sic and Juvenalis, Satyra quinta.
Cum stomachus Domini fervet potuque ciboque,
Frigidior geticis petitur decocta pruinis.
Nec solum potum nive refrigeratum, sed ipsam nive^ bibebant. Seneca, non
sorbere solum nivem sed etiam frusta ejus in seyphos dejicere. quaest. not.
lib. 4. Nec nive quidem contenti sunt sed glaciem veluti certior illi ex solido
rigor sit exquirunt ac saepe repetitis aquis diluunt. Seneca ibidem. Exstat
etiam Simonidis elegantiss. epigramma quo nivem injici suo poculo a pincerna
postulat, ubi nivem terra obrutam vivam vocat. Hi autem sunt versus.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Porro ut frigidissima fiat aqua calefacienda priusquant in specum demittatur
aut in puteum; ratio est quia aqua calefacta habet raritatem ac tenuitatem
substantiae and deinde facile patitur ab ambienti frigido, quae si frigida
foret, Galen. 6. Epidem. 4.8.
cum frigus condensat and compingit, non ita facile externi frigoris actionem
susciperet, quam rationem ex Alexandro colligere licet eo problemate cujus
initium, (...). Sed pessime (ut ait Pacius) sibi consulere videntur ditissimi
ac potentiss. qui aut nive aut glacie, aut locis subterranels ac puteorum
voraginibus aut aquis praegelidis vinum aut aliam quamlibet potulentam materiam
refrigerare contendunt, quam maxim possunt, and quamvis Galen 7. Meth. 4.
exhibuit aquam nive refrigeratam (...). Non tamen id fecisse videtur Galenus
nisi in intemp^rie calida morbosa. Sic 1. ad Glauc. 4.
Neronis autem principis videtur inventum aquam decoquere vitroque demissam in
nives refrigerare. Et Casaubonus in Athanaeum, Decoctam Neronianam
antiquioribus temporibus Graecis fuisse incognitam non dubitat. Sed hoc nunquam
a me impetrabit. Nam ego facile persuasus sum Decoctam hanc fuisse notam
Hippocrati, tum quia admodum Philosophico fuit ingenio, tum quia lib. de acre,
aquis and locis, scribit, (...), tum denique quia 6. Epidem. meminit decoctae
ad refrigerandum, (...), and alibi in magna siti dat (...). Sed (...) ex nive
est. Galen (...) 6. 6. Epidem. 4.8.
Epidem. 4. quibus rite consideratis, hanc decoctam Neronianam Hippocrates
fuisse notam probabile est and quia forsan redivivam postliminio hanc intulit
Nero, dicebatur Neronis decocta, qua scilicet frequentissime utebatur.

Sed non praetereundus magnus Julii Pollucis lapsus, and quidemrara avis est si
quando Grammaticus Philosophum intelligat. Pollux citans verba Hippocrates 5,
Aphoris. 18. (...) and manifest deducit quod Calida dentibus idonea sunt (...)
(inquit) (...). Sea inepta and frigida est haec Pollucis consequentia.
Hippocrates enim per (...) non intelligit quodcunque frigidum, sed (...) cum
articulo qui intendit, aut est, (...). Deinde falsum est quod omne frigidum
noceat dentibus, sed solummodo excellenter frigidum. Hinc Quintus Serenus.

Saepe etiam gelida gingivas collue limpha,
Dentibus ut possis firmum servare vigorem.
Plures (inquit Cardanus) testimonio Hippocratis decepti calidis cibis and
potibus utentes, primum dolores, deinde cariem excitarunt, ob quae mala dentes
cecidere ante tempus vel eruere coacti sunt, atque id jure. Nam calida
fluxiones movent ac robur dissolvunt and certum est canes and equos, ob id
dentibus usque ad senectutem firmis uti solere, quamvis duriss. cibos edant,
quod a calidis abstineant, frigida ergo magis convenient dentibus nisi sint
(...) frigida, quae ut dixi in principio, non convenient sanis corporibus. Sed
cum neque calidae nec extreme frigidae potiones convenient sanis, inter scyllam
and charybdim labi videmur, necessario vero ferimur in tepidas quae omnium
potuum pessimae sunt.

Sit ergo Tertia conclusio. Potus actu frigidus sanis est exhibendus, pro qua
conclusione probanda non egemus apocalyp seos illum natium novellist arum, nam
naturali lumine clara est, cujus ratio ultra sese offert, cum enim homo sit
natura calidissimus frigidum actu poscit potum, sic discurrit Philos. (...) 10.
Problem. Calor innatus est tanquam flamma quae humida substantianutritur. Neque
solummodo honarest calidus sed and humidus, quare ejus substantia facile
dissipatur. Substantia lapidum, aeris, ferri, aut auri, stabilis est propter
frigid tatem and siccitatem, Galen. 9. Meth. ult. and 6. Epidem. 4.21.
(...). Si vere consumatur calidum and siccum instauranda est frigido and
humido, nec moderate frigidus potus ullam potest adferre noxam, and ut calor
vitae minister, omnis moderatus; ita frigus mediocre ad nimium calorem
temperandum aptum, ut ait Scaliger, sic etiam moderate frigidus aer calorem
nativum maxim fovet and nutrit, neque enim mediocre frigus calori nostro
contrarium, sed ut amicum servat and auget. Stomachus noster moderate frigida
amat; Diphilus apud Athanaeum, cerasa (inquit) cum ex frigida sumantur
ventriculo placent, (...). and admiranda est variet as fructuum (...) ad
contemperandum calorem nostrum a natura destinata. Sed nutrimentum, quod ejus
naturae convenit, humorem esse potissimum convenit. Plutarchus 6. Sympos.
(...). Et Arist. sect 2. problem. 39. in aestate plus potus appetimus (...).
Sic Galen de inaequal. intemper. in sui dat (...), ratio est quia aqueae
humiditatis natura frigida est. Nam per (...) intelligitur potus, vel aqua quae
est (...) potus. Philosophi enim and Medici Aquam vel potum quandoque exprimunt
per (...) quandoque per (...) Aqua enim est (...) sicut and (...). Nam (...)
primum olim dictum de aqua, ut observat Scaliger and (...) mag is videtur esse
de essentia aquae quam (...) Nam aquae frigiditas tolli potest, humiditas non
potest, hinc (...) saepe ponitur pro aqua. Aristot. Hist. (...) pro mari dixere
Oppian. and Hom.
animal. pisces vivunt (...) 1. aqua. Athenaeus lib. 7. (...), anguillam and
mur aenam multo temporc extra aquam vivere, (...) ergo est aqua primario, (...)
quasi (...) ut Etymologicum magnum, secundario, omnis potus frigidus qui
infrigidat and humectat. Quare Galen de diet. consulit nos sumere potum actu
frigidum, (...), and eod. libro. (...). and primo simp. Med. facult. ostendit
gradum frigidi potus, quem sumere debemus, (...). quasi sit ex sole tepens.
Scholiastes Aristophanis (...). Et Galen in gloss. Hippocratis (...) exponit
(...) and alibi (...), ex sole tepidum. Sed ut videtur jam volentes nolentes
delati sumus ad potu^ tepidum, qui est omnium pessimus, imo vero ad potu^
calidum que^ antea damnavimus.

Verum qui ita sentiunt vix sese ab Heluco defensare poterunt, and citius
clavam ab Hercule extorquebit aliquis quam id a me impetrabit. Ad hujus autem
rei illustrationem primo dicam de tepido, 2. agam de calido, and quidem primo
tepidum seu (...) multiplicem habet significatum, sed duobus praecipue modis
sumitur, quandoque enim tendit ad calorem lactei teporis, qui (...) appellatur,
unde Galenus 7. Meth. (...). Quandoque etiam (...) significat mediam quandam
naturam inter calidum and frigidum. Vt docet Galen. 1. Meth 7. nam loquens de
calido and frigido, ait, (...). Plutarch. (...), quod habet Medium quoddam
temper amentum. Hippocrates de aere aquis et locis, (...). De hoc tepido
videtur loqui Catullus. Iam ver egelidos resert tepores, and Columella,
Nunc ver egelidum nunc formosissimus annus.
Nec praetereundum est decantatum illud Ovidii,
Et gelidum boream egelidumque notum.
In quo versu (ut hoc obiter dicam) (...) boream, legendum (...), sic omnis
tollitur difficult as and frustra in futurum sudabunt Grammatici in isto, porro
tepidum hoc de quo loquimur vocatur a Galen. (...). Sic 1. de sanitat. tuend.
consulit. nos uti (...). and 7. Meth. (...), exhibeantur. Sic Galenus in calida
and sicca intemperie quae est (...) febri exhibuit (...). 7. Meth. and ratio
est, quia media hyeme aquae fontium calidiores, media aestate frigidiores, sed
vere medio temperatiores, sed tamen ad frigiditatem tendentes, sic Galenus
vocat (...), qualis est aqua (...). and hoc est quod antea vocavit (...) quod
long a tepido (...), and est in potu pessimum. Praesertim in aestate, in
calidae intemperie, in siti etiam, cujus causa est calida and sicca. (unde
definitio Aristotelica, sit is est appetitus frigidi and humidi.) omnia
offerenda frigida, quandoquidem animalia ratione earentidubi aestu vexantur
frigida sese lavant. Similiter Hippocrates vult nos (...). 6. Epidem. Nec solum
veteres potabant (...), sed edebant (...), quod est Galeno and Aetio, edulium
(...) atque temperie egelido ac refrigerato, vel frigido instar aequae
fontanae: Sed comedebant Plutarchi (...), neque vero haec doctrina nova est aut
^^sterna, sed ut loquitur Galen. 3. Meth. (...). Nunquant autem veteres
utebantur tepido (...). and haec de tepido.

Sic (...) long differt a potu excalefacto hodie usurpato praesertim a
Presbyteris de quo egregie hallucinatur infrumit us (...) anonymus. Nam (...),
nihil est aliud quam (...). Hippocrates quidom, de aere aquis and locis,
comendat aquam fontanam, quae (...). Nam compertum est (inquit Macrobius) aquas
quae vel de altis puteis, vel de fontibus hauriuntur fumare hyeme, in aestate
frigescere. At vero ista caliditas, quae ex fontibus apparet hyeme est fontana
tepiditas, Quae dicitur (...).
Calida tepiditas (inquit Julius Alexandrinus) paulo recedit a temperamento
aequali in frigidum, and Galenus (...). de simp. med. fac. Nam it a frigidum
(ut Julius Pacius) bibimus ut non sit frigidissimum: and ita calidum ut tamen
non excedat frigidi limits, quare qui min us frigidum bibunt, dicuntur bibere
calidum, and sicut Galenus, In puero Epileptico. dat exymel (...). Sic
Cornelius Celsus lib. 4. cap. 20. vinum austerum meracum per aestatem frigidum,
per hyemem egelidum, quare ubi Hippocrates and Galenus (...) Celsus
interpetatur egelidum hoc est (...), and sic sine dubio est accipiendum. Nam
hoc est v re (...), non autem calidus potus. Nam natura abhorret potus calidos
and quasi naturali quodam instinctu omnes feruntur ad frigidum.

Qui aliter opinantur, si sunt e plebe contemnendi si sunt vulgares Medici, an
magis deplorandi an ridendi, sane nescio. Si denique docti and vere Aesculapii
filii qui solidas ex veterum monumentis adferre rations valiant producant suam
eruditam sententiam, musis and Apolline faventibus and (...) tanqvam alteram
Lucinam suae doctrinae (...) facilem precor.

Sit Laus, honor and gloria semper illiqui dat,

(...).

FINIS.

