SAINT PAUL'S POTION, PRESCRIBED BY Doctor Commons, Being very sick of a
dangerous FULLNESS. WITH The great effects it wrought.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Doctors Commons Potion prescribed to Paul's Quire.
Doctors Commons. HOW do you Paul's Quire? methinks that your countenance is
much changed? Why look you so wan?


Paul's Quire. Truly there is cause, since the sweat has so issued from both
our sides, to the so great fouling of our Surplices, that the sent thereof has
so much offended our curious Laundresses, they will not come near to wash them
clean: no marvel then though we look wan?


Doct. But I know you are not well, you have some dangerous disease, therefore
be advised, and look to it in time.


Paul's. I pray you will you look upon my water* see there it is, tell me your
opinion by that.


Doct. Truly Sir, let me tell you, your water is very high and dangerous, you
have a great distemper, you are very ill I see.


Paul's. Indeed I have been much troubled of late; but I pray what do you
conceive to be the cause of my distemper?


Doct. You are troubled with a disease called Plenitude: the disease lies much
in the head, the Archbishops, Bishops* etc.


Paul. But can you tell me what has bred and nourished this disease in me?


Doct It has been caused by fullness of blood, ab^unding al^ne over the other
humors, as it did when three m^ns blood surcharged their stomachs, dropping
from their ears in one day, as also by the increase of the four humors
altogether in their proportion, which in your head were sored to mighty
violence.


Paul's. What caused this disorder in the humors so to b^und?


Doct. The cause arises from pride and fullness of bread, neglect, and
omitting of exercises of the Ministerial function, and closing with Popery and
Popish rites: which disease has increased by those natural and artificial
vacuations which the said Archbishops, Bishops etc. have fomented and
established.


Paul. What signs do you see in me of any such disease?


Doct. Your face and your eyes be ruddy; that is to say, your Pictures, Altar.
Cop^s, Candles, Bowings, etc. look not like, he eyes or face of a protestant
Church: for even such practices are this d^y at Rome.


Paul. What other signs do you see?


Doct. Your veins, that is to say, your Org^n pipes, are swollen, the smallest
vein whereof does not become a Protestant Church, but rather the Jews
Synagogues.


Paul. What say you to my Pulse? I pray you Doctor feel.


Doct. Your pulse is great and vehement, whilst all the life of your Religion
consists in dumb shows and ceremonies.


Paul. I pray you tell me what signs you find in my water of this disease.


Doct. The disease is easily discerned by your urine, which is reddish and
thick, an infallible sign, proceeding from your well fed body, daily full
gorged with wi^e both French and Spanish.


Paul. Oh! Master Doctor, I am very full of pain* of a sudden, the veins in
my temples do beat extremely.


Doct. That arises from the nature of the dis^a^^, especially since your head
is possessed with such a giddiness, Lambeth pillow lies now very uneasily.


Paul. I am very heavy, good Mr. Doctor prescribe some^hing to comfort me.


Doct. In the first place, you must remove away all Popery and Popish
innovations from about you, that so you may freely and fully receive the
Protestant air* for that is very wholesome. 2. Remove away all infected
idolatrous persons, and offices from about you. 3. Remove the stinking sent of
all scandalous members out of their places. 4. Avoid all such nourishing diet
as may strengthen Popery in you. 5. Use. Ptisan, mixed with nothing but what is
gathered out of Gods word. 6. Use Repentance, made up of cooling herbs. 7.
Avoid wine and women and drink only the clear water of the well of life. 8.
Lastly, exercise the word of God truly and constantly.



Paul. But what will you prescribe for the cure?


Doct. The cure must be begun with blood letting as loon^ as may be; thou
must have an experienced Chyrurgian to open the uttermost vein within the
Arm, called Humeralis, on the High Commission and spiritual Court side, for
there the grief is most vehement, this vein is so annexed to the head, the
Bishops, etc. that by it you shall not only pull back blood, into a contrary
part, but you shall also empty out that by it, as s^ith, Hippocrates, Galen,
Rhases, etc.


Paul. But alast^, I am old, and weak, such bleeding may be dangerous to me.


Doct. Then you must have boxing glasses, which the Chyrurgion must use, not to
your head it self only, but to the parts adjoining, as the shoulders, and
breast, all upholders and maintainers of Popery, and Popish innovations.


Paul. But what physic will you prescribe me? was I not best to take a potion
first?


Doct. Let me see pen and ink and paper, and I will prescribe a potion, and
let it be sent for to the Apothecaries speedily, that you may take it this
morning before I go from you.


A Copy of the Receipt.
Take of Gods threats against Idolatry, two dragms, and pick off as many
flowers of the promises of the gospel as you can find, of each an handful,
with 12. dragmes of the splinters of the Bishops last Canons, and half an
ounce of their last articles, and and t^ it 3. scruples of the sweat of a
furious Proctors grease, and an ounce of the Pastors fees: Add more 20. drops
of the tears of oppressed Clyents, and3. scruples of a Lambs tongue, with 2.
Ducks feathers chopped very small, and the fragments of an old Record; put all
these together into an Organe pipe, and sees them in a sufficient quantity of
the water of repentance, until the greatest part be consumed; then strain it
all through a Bishops lawne sleeves, and press it hard; add to the decoction
as much of a Lent License, as will serve to sweeten it, then purify it with
the white of a Ducke egg, and make a potion.

Paul. I have taken the potion M^ D^ctor, but it makes me monstrous sick.


Doct. Walk upon it, it will work by and by.


Paul. Oh, M. Doctor hold my head, something comes up; what is it?


Doct. A great wax-candle, it is well, hold your head still it may be something
else will follow.


Paul. Oh! something comes that will kill me I doubt; it sticks by my ribbs, I
think, and will not come away; oh, it is almost up now, hold my head hard I
pray you; so now it is up, I am glad of it; what is it?


Doct. A great Altar pend about with Railes, the strangest vomit that ever I
saw before.


Paul Oh! hold me, hold me, help good M. Doctor; something sticks in my
throat, oh that it weere pulled away; pull oh pull hard, I am almost d^ad with
it; so, now it is almost up, one pull more does it; so, I am glad it is up, it
has eased me well, what was it M. Doctor?


Doct. See here what it is, a great bundle of golden Copes rapt up in linen
Surplices, no marvel though they were so troublesome to you to bring them up.


Paul. There is something yet that rumbles in my st^mack^, I would it were up;
it stirs as if it were alive.


Doct. Strive with it do what you can, it will not stay, I see the Potion
works well, and will trouble you, fear not; so well done, see what it is, a
Musician wi^h an organe pipe, it is well it is up; how do you now?


Paul. A great deal b^tter methinks then I was, but very soar and weary with
straining, may I not now lie down, and sl^^pe a while?


Doct. Yes by and by, but I wou^d advise you to s^^y a little; I must crave
leave of you to dep^r^ a while, I will be with you again presently, in the
me^n^^^^ I pray you have a care of your self, and (...) other be always by
you to look well to y^^


Paul. I thank you M. Doctor; I pray be no^ long from me.


Doct. I will not, Sir, God willing; fare you well.


FINIS.

