emblem of female virtue My reward is above Crescit sub pondere virtus. Behold
Bright Virtues Glorious Emblem placed
Beneath a Crown with beaming Stars Enchas't.
Virtue like Palms dos under pressure rise,
And Phoenix like true Virtue never dies.


London printed for John Harris at ye Harrow in ye poultrey.

I. (...)
The Illustrious HISTORY OF WOMEN, OR, A COMPENDIUM of the many Virtues that
Adorn the Fair Sex.

Represented not only in Lively and Pathetical Discourses grounded upon Reason,
but in Sundry rare Examples of Virtuous Love, Piety, Prudence, Modesty,
Chastity, Patience, Humility, Temperance, Conduct, Constancy and Firmness of
Mind; with what else in the like Nature is necessary for the Accomplishment of
the most Celebrated Beauties. With other Examples of Women, Skilled in the most
Curious Arts and Sciences.

To which are Added, the Examples of Warlike Women, their Noble Exploits and
Victories: With the Prophesies and Predictions of the Sybils, in relation to
the Incarnation, continuance upon Earth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
our Blessed Savior: And as an Apendix, the Character of a Virtuous Woman in
all her Capacities.

The whole Work enriched and intermixed with Curious Poetry and Delicate
Fancy, suitable to so Charming a Subject.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, 1686.

Price Bound One Shilling.

This may be Printed

November 21 1685. R. L. S.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO some it may seem strange, that in so small a Bark, I have adventured into
an Ocean rarely Navigated; made an Essay on what has been seldom undertaken,
and never Exposed in it is proper Lusture. The Virtues and Excellencies of the
softer Sex; a Subject, worthy a more resined Pen; but since the Ni^slings of
Appollo, the Wits of the Age, have for the most part not only declined it, but
rather studied to Eclips the brightest Candor of Female perfection, than give
it a valuable proportion of the praise it has merited. I thought it not amiss
to remove the Veil that obscured it from the Eyes of the Ignor anter part of
the Masculine World, and let them see how they have been imposed upon by the
haters and contemners of the Beatious Sex, and consequently induced to harbor
a mean Esteem of Female virtue, or the perfections of Women-kind, who in Piety,
Constancy, Entirest Love, Amazing Beauty, Arts and Arms, have in all Ages been
the boast of Nations, and Exemplary, even to a Miracle wadeing with undaunted
resolves through the greatest of difficulties and dangers, to such Eminence as
has rendered them accomplished, and stilled the hissing Snakes of Envy, whilst
those that sought to cross their Noble actions, and Clip the Wings of flying
Fame, have been obliged to own themselves overcome, and tune the strings that
were Discordant to their praises; with which renowned stories and examples of
Female Worthies, drawn from Authentic Histories, etc. I have mostly filled
the following Pages; a Work that may prove grateful, unless the Age proves
otherwise; however, I dare not doubt the approbation of those for whose sakes
it was compiled, to whose virtues it ows it is Birth, and of such it is, I
chiefly wish it may find acceptance; which if it does, I have my end, and shall
remain as heretofore, the admirer of Female virtue. And. Ladies,

Your Devoted Servant, JOHN SHIRLEY.

To the LADIES the Authors APOLOGY.
LADIES, beneath your Virtues Patronage,
This little Book would shelter from the rage
Of Carping Zolists, who seldom spare
The Candor of the Chaste, the Wise and Fair,
Like Boreas blasts, or like a Lapland storm:
By Mild degrees compelled is to reform:
The Task was bold, but Love and your sweet Charms,
Made me forget the Girds of Envies Arms,
To your Fair Sex, this Book's a Votarie,
What pity is it then to let it dye,
Or Languish long? which it alas must do,
Unless it is kindly Entertained by you:
Come take it in your Hands, give it a Smile,
And make it live, though but a little while;
I Am shure to you'ts no Foe, for see it wears
Your Virtues Badge enchac'd with those bright Stars,
That in the Female Firmament do shine,
There rendering you so Lovely and Divine.
Ladies, once more Protection it bespeaks,
If not for it is, yet for your omn dear sakes
Give shelter to it, e're the storm awakes.
THE INTRODUCTION.
WHEN the Wise Creator had furnished the Glorious Universe in every part with
wondrous Variety, he formed Man, and brought him into it as into a stately
Palace, stored with what might please each Sense, and render him Delight a
Thousand ways; which great Munificence might have overcharged the largest
Thought, and put a Limit to the vastness of desire; yet the Divine goodness
thought not this sufficient for his Darling Favorit, in favor of whom the
visible World was made, and decked in all it is glitering Glories, but opening
wider yet his giving Hand; to make his Happiness the more complete, he Added a
Blessing worthier than the rest, formed of Elements, rarefied by cordial Life
and soft Contexture, giving it at once a Shape and Soul Angelical; the last
Created, but admired beyond the first: A Work, that put a period to the great
Work-masters undertaking, as made to Crown the rest of the Creation; and that
it might be the more Ennobled, gave it a name, signifying life, and bowed the
lofty Soul of Man to cherish and admire it, to place in it next Heaven his
chief felicity, by centring in this lovely Creature Woman, adding attractive
charms and winning graces, such as might captivate the stubornest heart, and
melt the rockie Orb of strict reservedness, ease the laboring of the mind,
and smooth the rumpled waves of a disordered passion, which made the Enemy of
Mankind swell with Envy, and contract a deadly hatred, nourished with a mortal
Bane to behold in any one creature an adornment of so many Excellencies, such
an Epitome of Celestial Innocence clad in unvaluable Robes of native Beauty,
and as it were regreting, that the Favors of the highest were so largly
dispensed to any Creature of a lower rank than Angels, and that corporeal
beings should nearly vie in excellency with incorporial; he laid the gilded
Bait of Aspiring greatness in her way, and with a subtle Guile under disguise,
prevailed to be believed, and by being credited to affront his Maker, and heap
up a vengeance terrible, in seducing her on whom the Image of the Deity was
livelyly portrayed, nor was the fraud imposed as some have fancied without
regret; even Hellish malice being touched with Remorse, to injure such a lovely
frame of Innocence: And thus imagine him at the first view of our Grand
Parents, to have pondered with himself.

Of a^^lwhat do my Eyes with grief behold,
Earth Born Creatures of a different mould,
Advanced into the happy Realms of Light?
Not Spirits, yet near to Heavenly Spirits Bright;
Whom my great Thoughts with wonder do pursue,
And in them a Divine resemblance view:
And could a Love in my hot Breast remain
Of ought, but Mischief's dire and deadly Bain,
AConquest here perhaps I would not gain.
Ah lovely Pair! you little think how nigh
Sad ambushments of certain Death do lie,
When all the Bland delights that Charm you now,
Will leave you over-cast with Clouds of woe,
A Foe is Entered your great seat of Bliss,
Whose self unpittied pity must Express,
For you who wronged me not, did not a Rage
Against him who placed you here, my spleen engage;
A hope of Conquest does compel me now
To do what else, though damned I would not do.
But to wave Fancy in so profound a mystery, certain it is, that this unhappy
yielding of the fairest of Creatures to the subtle Alurements of the fallen
Angel (whose strength and wisdom, though much debased, is not to be coped with
by mortal Might, nor his powerful Temptations, to be overcome without the
immediate Divine assistance) became a means of the Almighties further
expressing his boundless Love to Mankind, in that great mystery of Godliness,
the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior; a Mystery so, stupendous and amazing,
that all the Host of Heaven, all the blessed Hierarchies of Seraphims and
Cherubims, Arch Angels and Angels contemplate and admire it, so that not
without reason was the first Created Woman called Eve; a Name signifying life,
since from her decended that Glorious Virgin, from whose spotless Womb
proceeded the Fountain of life and immortality, who wonderfully repaired our
first deformity, by condecending to take our Nature upon him, and revenged our
cause in breaking the Serpents head, restoring us to an undoubted possibility
of obtaining a more glorious Paradise than that from whence our first Parents
fell.

Woman's blessed Seed to life prepared the way,
The glorious Path that leads to endless day,
To dazzling Mansions, to a place of Bliss,
That Eye never saw, nor Tongue could e're express:
Then why should man her praises due decline,
Who is a Sphere wherein all Virtues shine;
Once the Recess of him, that is all Divine.
Nor does woman yet desist to retain an Air of Paradise, (the place wherein
she was formed) in her Modesty and seemly Behavior, Innocence, Piety, and
extradinary Love of sacred things, as in sundry Examples are manifested; nor
does the transcendent Beauty existent in many, signify less, then that woman
is the most refined of all Creatures, who deservedly pay respect of her as the
Queen of all sublunary things, and perfection of the Universe: that perfection
being properly termed the Divine Light shining on created Essence, and beaming
thence its luster by reflex to captivate the Heart, to command a profound Awe
and Reverence, as if the perfections scattered in all other creatures were
collected in her, who is a draught of the Creation in miniature: for this cause
the Lion nobly bold stands in Awe of her; the Unicorn for love of her becomes a
wilful captive; nor has the unwieldie Elephant been less enamoured with the
charming Sex: nay, Spirits infernal have been passionate, as appears by the often
Espoused Maid, who at last was freed from her Daemonick lover Asmodeus, and
became the Lot of Tobits Son. Abigals Beauty and Humility prevented David's
shedding Blood. Queen Hester's Piety and matchless Beauty wrought deliverance
to her People, and turned the bloody decree upon the Man and his House that had
promoted and procured it. Judiths Beauty charmed the Pagan General, into that
security that wrought his ruin, and the great delivery of her Country from the
rage of the oppressing Sword, restoring peace to Jacobs Heritage; and after
Jobs reiterated Tribulations (miseries that Mortal man could never have
undergone, if not supported by a hand Divine) the greatest Earthly recompense
for his unparalleled patience, was that God blessed him with Daughters exceeding
all other Women in Beauty, which makes Solomon set a value on them above the
price of Rubies, and afirm, He that finds a good Wife, finds a good thing,
etc. And the Author of the Ecclesiastes affirms that Husband blessed, that is
Husband of a good Wife; So great has been the esteem of Female Virtue amongst
the wisest of men in all Ages, Holy writ stiling the Woman a Crown, the glory
of the Man, etc. Therefore she being the compleatment, felicity and glory of
Man, it is highly reasonable she should be loved and esteemed as she truly
deserves: nay, such was the esteem of this Sex, that those who gave Names to
the three principal parts of the World, as Asia, Europe and Africa seem to have
derived them from the names of women, thereby affording them a lasting memory,
not capable of end till time shall be no more.

Should we take a particular survey of the many Virtues of this Sex, what
Volume can contain them in their proper luster, or set them forth at large?
what Rhetoric can Paint them to the life, and not be found therein deficient.

If Chastity we prize, it was a woman first vowed Virginity to her Maker. If
Prophecy, the Sybils were strangely inspired, but more immediately Mirriam the
Sister of Moses, etc. If constancy and steadfast Love, Ruth is a pattern to a
Miracle: If a firm grounded Faith, the Widow of Sarepta may justly take place,
who believed the Prophet in a thing to Humane Sense impossible: If in a strong
Belief, Elizabeth the Wife of Zacharias and the Blessed Virgin. If constancy in
a Righteous cause, and the contempt of Death, rather than disobey the God that
made us and the World, be a Heroic virtue, behold the Woman who encouraged her
seven Sons to dye by the most exquisit Tortures, and after ward with joy and
patience submitted to the like her self: If for those we have esteem, whose
sacred Charity extends to Souls, let us consider the Lumbards, next to that
Saving Grace, that put in with her pious and unwearied endeavors, chiefly owe
their conversion to the Christian Religion, to Theodilina Daughter to a King of
Bavaria; the like do the Hungarians to Greisil Sister to the Emperor Henry the
first; and the same acknowledgment the Franks must make to Clotildis Daughter
to a King of Burgundy. Nor was the Virtuous Helena Daughter to King Colus, and
Wife to the Emperor Constantine, careless not only to protect and succor the
Christians, but as far as in her lay, to cause that growing Religion to take
deep Root, in all or most of the Provinces of the Empire. In learning deep
Sciences and Mysteries of the profoundest degree, if attainable by Humane
Capacity, Women have been found expert. Nay in such rare Inventions as perhaps
had yet remained in the dark Embrio of obscurity, had not Female Wisdom
snatched them thence and nursed them to maturity. The Gracchi's Tongues by the
industry of their Mother Cornelia, were made fit Instruments of Eloquence, not
only to command the Listening Ears of Plebeans, but those of Aged Senators,
through which Organs they stole the hearts of wavering Rome, and bowed them to
their intrest. Nor was Istrinia Queen of Scythia less Industrious in
Accomplishing her Son in that degree of Learning, that he Eclipsed the Fame of
his great Ancestors: nor in Physic, Philosophy, Divine Mysteries, etc. have
they less Excelled, as will appear when I come to more particular Examples; and
if from Schools we pass to Courts and Camps, there we shallfind the Trump of
Fame more loud. Ophis for her noble Actions was Reverenced by the Egyptians as
a Deity. Debora Plotinathe, Wife of Trajan. Semirames, and Candaces, were no
less Famous for Prudence and Conduct, than for Power and Magnificence: Thomiris
Queen of the Massagetae, Subdued the mighty Cyrus Emperor of the Meeds and
Persians, and having taken him in Battle, caused his Head to be stricken off,
in revenge of having slain her Son, and cast it into a Cauldron of Blood,
saying that since he had thirsted so much after Blood, and shed it causlessly,
be should not want his fill. The brave Athemesia Encountering the Navy of the
Rhodians, who were on their way to destroy her Country, Overthrew them in a
dreadful Sea fight, and prosecuting her Victory, seized upon the Isle of
Rhodes, erecting a Trophy in Memory thereof in their Capital City; and yet
these are but trifles to what has been performed by Noble Viragoes whose
Courage and Conduct has been manifested to Admiration; as for Instance, the
Renowned Joan of Arch when France had stooped to English Valor, and all its
courage drooped to a degree even of despair, this Warlike Maid by her courage
and conduct put such Spirit and Life into the Feeble hearted French, that fatal
to the English, soon after they stripped them out of almost all the Towns they
held in that flourishing Kingdom. Nor can the World continue without this Sex,
were not these Virtues found in them, but soon would droop in to a solitary
Desert; of this, Rome's Founders were not Ignorant, when at the hazard of a
doubtful War, they seized on the Sabean Maids who came to view their Sports,
nor were they though Ravished at such a rate, contrary doubtless to their
Inclinations, when they found themselves united in Conjugal bands, regardless
of their Ravishers, but out of good Nature forgetting the injury: Although
their Fathers intending a rescue, and had taken the Capitol, maintaining a
bloody Fight, even in Romes Marketplace, they with dissheveld hair and cries,
rushed between the dreadful fronts of War, exposing themselves to a Thousand
dangers; nor would retire till they had put an end to that disastrous conflict
between their Husbands, and their Fathers, which so far moved the hearts of the
Latter to relent, that without more ado Concord and firm Peace ensued. Those
Arms that Erst were bathed in each others Blood, with all reciprocal Love
embrace and mortal hatred is dslodged from eithers breast, which noble Act of
these Heroic and adventrous Females, made Romulus Romes Founder, cause their
names to be Enroled. Enacting by a Joint consent, that Women should be exempted
from all Servile Employments, and that there should be no such thing as
Property between Husband and Wife, but that all things should be common.

When Brutus heading the Romans, upon the Ravishment of Luc retia, had expelled
Tarquin and his Race, the Volsci taking the opportunity of such a rupture.
Advanced with an Army toward Rome which for a time filled the City with Fear
and amazement, that had not the Noble Matrons by their Conrage and Conduct,
Inspired as it were the hearts of the drooping Soldiers, that afterward
Mistress of the World, had become a prey to the Enemy; whose retreat when
within five miles of the Walls, was solely attributed to the courage of a
Female Worthy. Whereupon a famous Temple was dedicated to Female Fortune, and
many notable Marks conferred upon them by the Senate: as taking the upper hand
of the Men, wearing of Purple, Gold, Fringe, Jewels, etc. and by the Laws of
latter Emperors, Weomen were enabled to Succeed in the right of Inheritance.
And that Sacred right of Ecomiastick Orations at their Funerals: and it was
Provided in an Act Prohibiting the Sumpteousness of Apparel, that the Women
should be exempted and left at their Liberty.

When Cammillius had made a Vow to Appollo and all the Roman Treasures could
not furnish him with the Sum, the generous Matrons of Rome for the Honor of
their Country, brought in their Rings, Bracelets, and other Ornaments of Gold.

Cyrus Warring with Astiages, his Grandfather being overthrown in a great
Battle, had that Battle restored him by a reinforcement of Persian Ladies, nor
is it unusual for those Heroic Dames to go with their Husbands to the Wars,
and often sighting coragiously by their sides, for which noble Act, Cyrus as a
token of his Gratitude left it is a Law, that when any King of Persia entered
the Regal City they should bestow on each Woman a Medall as a remembrance of
that Noble Action.

Justinian the Renowned Emperor finding the pregnant Wit and generous Spirit
of his Empress to excel, consulted her in the compilement of those excellent
Institutes, which all succeeding Generations have held in admiration, and many
Kingdoms taken their Mold from them; nor did the famous Lawgiver Licurgus,
less esteem the Wisdom of the Female Sex, ordering them an equal share in all
honest Pastimes and Recreations. The Divine Plato was no less sedulous in
promoting the esteem of Women, as having studied their Worth and Excellency;
nor were our Country women less Valiant in withstanding the Comquest of the
Romans, nor less Serviceable to the Bleeding Land in being a means to Extirpate
or Expel the Danes, which occasioned this Comment.

When England bleeding lay to gasp her last:
When powerful Foes had grasped her Scepter fast:
When Men stood mute with Grief and Fear struck Dumb,
The Bloody Foe by Women was overcome:
Who each in Darkness with a Fata^ Blade,
An Expiation to lost Honor made;
So rashly Ravished and dispising Charms
Earch gave her Ravisher a Death lock'^ in her Arms;
And by those strokes, which some wou'^ cruel call,
They saved their Country ready then to fall.
And let the World perceive it was no^ they
Who gave their honor, but 'twas forc'^ away:
So fall each Ravisher, who dare profane
This noble Sex, with such a Lawles^ stain.
These things considered, who that proceeded from a Woman, can but admire and
esteem the Sex, whose tender care to their offspring is such, that no wakeful
vigilance, no care, pain or danger is thought too much; may, even Death it self
has not in such a case been shunned, but rather courted in it is dreadful shape,
in ventering on Swords, and rushing through the flames to save their Darlings
from untimely Fate, or perish with them: nor for their Husbands have their care
been less, as many examples of such boundless Love and dear Affection can
testify; wherefore seeing Man owes half his Life to Woman, what less returns
for such a Care and tender Affection can he make then all his Love that Heaven
permits him to place upon Earthly things? And those that do otherwise where it
is lawful degenerate from the Nobleness of the first created Rational, and
therein disobey their Maker, whose Absolute Command it is. And with the
entirest Integrity having carried my discourse on this worthy Subject thus far
in General. I shall now proceed to what is more Particular and Exempler in the
Praise of Women-kind, though as I have said, all their Virtues in this nature
to describe, will prove too large a Theme.

For who but one with Eagles Eyes can Gaze,
Against the Sun in it is Meridian Blaze.
Or without Solomon's large Heart can know,
All from the Ceder to the Shrub below.
Or name each fair Enamel, that does spread,
Earth's lovely bosom, when the winters fled.
What Mariner can count the waves that rise?
Or Artist tell the wanderers of the Skies,
Who is the Man can count the flying Clouds,
Or tell she Fry the swelling Ocian Shrowds?
Who in Arithmatick a Number can,
Find for the Moments past since time began?
Or in an age count out by swift Degrees,
The countless Sands forsaken by the Seas?
Hard tasks these are for mortal Man to do.
Yet full as easy as at once to view.
Each glorious Cabinet where Virtue rests.
To look into each worthy Female Breast.
To count the Sacred Treasure horded there.
And tell the World of each peculiar share.
Laid up to Purchase an Imortal Name.
Recorded in the deathless Book of Fame.
To Purchase Robes of White to pass the Gate.
Where for them Virtues, true Reward does wait.
Though it on Earth should hiss it is great desert.
Yet there it will be sure to find it is part.
For in that Region is it is proper Seat,
There Virtue and not Riches makes us great.
Crowns us with Life, and an Immortal State.
The Illustrious HISTORY OF WOMEN, etc.
Of Chast-Love.
TO come nearer to my purpose, for the bester ease and understanding of the
Reader, I shall proceed in a Regular way on Method, placing together as near as
is convenient, the memorable Examples of one kind, as I find them in diverse
Histories highly approved by the Learned of the present and past Ages. And in
this Case Chast-Love being the Center and Basis of all other Virtues, I shall
begin with that perfection of Womankind.

Eurialus Count of Augusta being at Sienna with the Emperor Sigismond Lucretia
a Beautiful Virgin, called by some the second Venus, upon his Modest Address
conceived such Entire Affection for him, that at his necessitated leaving her
to attend his Lord, the Emperor to Rome, his Absence wrought so much upon her
tender Spirits, that having strugled a while with the flame of a constant
passion; she no longer able to endure the Absence of one on whom she had
bestowed her Heart, yielded up her self into the Icey Aims of Death, calling on
her Lover, and with dying murmurs, begged a Blessing might ever remain upon him:
of which sad misfortune Eurialus having notice, took it so much to heart, that
in his Lifetime he never was observed to Laugh or Smile. Marcel. Donat. Hist.
Med. Mirab.

Theodora a Christian Virgin, for that Sacred Profession being Condemned to the
Stews, where her chastity was to be exposed to the violation of the worst of
Villains: Dydimus who Entirely loved her; whilst the Debauchees were striving
to enter, there pressed in in a Soldiers habit, a Person pretending to have
the first knowledge of that Beauteous Maid, but being Retired, he changed Habit
with her, by which means she was enabled to escape; but he, upon others
pressing in, being found a man, was halled before the Judge, who had shamelessly
Condemned Theodora to loose her Virginity, who immediately Sentanc'd him to
Death; of which she having notice, came from her Retirement, and offered her
life a Ransom for his; but such Transcendent-love nothing moved the Inexorable
Judge, who instead of accepting the offer, commanded they should both be
immediately put to Death; which command being obeyed, their Souls took flight
to the bright Mansion of Eternal Love. Lonicer. Theatri.

The Story related of the wonderful love of Piramus and Thisbe is memorable;
nor is it held in the general Fabulous, though Ovid has glozed upon it; the
substance being this: The Beauteous Pair living as Neighbors in B^bylon, when
grown to maturity, found themselves surpised with a generous flame, love had
made a mighty conquest over their hearts; their M^tu^^ affections could not be
so closely hid, but Parents of a different mind, in whom Age had quenched the
fire of passion, came to know the case wherein they stood, and cru^^ly
proceeded to divorce their Joys by separation; but mighty love, that like the
Victorious ^alm, laden with ponderous Weights, under restraint ancreases, found
an unsuspected way to Whisper through a Cranny, and by that means to set a time
for slight, when the Moon had thrown her Silver Mantle over the Shadie Night.
The place being appointed, Thisbe ravished with eager Joys, to have her Lover
in her Arms, first made Escape; but there, instead of Pyranats she found a
Lyoness besmeer'd with blood, which made her hasten to a Neighboring Cave,
whilst in her slight she dropped her Veil, which the Lyoness finding, rumpled
it with her Bloody Jaws, and went her way; Pyramus soon after coming, and
finding the Veil he knew to be hers all smeer'd with Blood, and the Footsteps
of a wild Beast, supposed her devoured, and after many doleful lamentations,
Exclaiming against himself, for exposing to such hazard, a thing he prized so
dear, resolving not to live without her, he sell upon his Sword; when Thisbe
dispensing with her fear, came to the place and found him Breathing out his
last, having no more Sense than at her Name to open his dying Eyes and see his
dear mistake, which was not long e're closing again he was left in the black
Mist of Death; when having expressed her self with the disordered passion of a
distracted lover, scorning a tedious life, when he for whom she lived was gone,
she bared her Snowey Breast, and with undaunted Courage fell upon the selfsame
Sword. O^ids Met, etc.

Less Famous than this is not, the admirable love of the Beauteous Hero to the
Greecian Youth Leander, whose memorable loves famed the threatening Towers of
Sestos and Abidos, in the former the Noble Virgin dwelt, and from the latter,
parted by the Hellespont, the adventerous Youth often Swam to visit her, she
being his Load-Star to stear his Course in the darkest Night, by placing a
light in the highest Turret; but after often adventring with success, Fate
crossing Love, in raising a Tempest whilst he was laboring in the Ocean, the
undistinguishing Waves put a period to his life, and then unkindly, cast his
lifeless Corpse upon the shore, where he with such Eagerness wished to come
alive; at sight of which, the Lady being overcome with Grief, leaped headlong
from the Tower, and plunging into the Remorsless Deep, became partaker of her
Lovers Fate.

The Beauteous Daughter of the Emperor Charlemain, falling in love with
Eginardus, Secretary to that Emperor, nor was the flame he felt less violent:
he one Night coming in private to her Chamber, it happened to Snow; which
accident, by reason it was somewhat late, did not a little trouble the Lovers,
least upon his return, the prints of his Feet should be observed the next
Morning, which coming from the Ladies appartment, might create a suspicion; to
prevent which, love which takes the Diadem of Majesty from Queens, made this
lovely Princess, do an Act for a Lover, very unbeseeming and unusual for the
Daughter of so great a Potentate, viz. She took the Secretary upon her
Shoulders and carried him all the length of the Court to his Chamber, he not
setting Foot to the Ground, and there delivering her burden returned: yet so
it happened, that during this piece of Portrage, the Emperor being late in his
Study, chanced to look out and behold it, yet at that time kept silence: when
the next day, in a great Assembly of his Lords, his Daughter and Eginardus
being present, he demanded what Punishment he deserved, who made use of a Kings
Daughter; as of a Mule, and caused himself to be carried on her Shoulders in
the midst of Winter through the Snow; upon this every one gave his opinion,
that he was worthy of Death; which started the Lovers and made them change
their color, expecting some dreadful punishment; but contrary to their
expectation, the Emperor, looking upon his Secretary with a smooth
Countenance, Eginardus (says he) hadest thou loved the Princess, my Daughter,
thou ought to have come to her Father, the disposer of her liberty; thou art
worthy of Death, yet I give thee two lives; Tale thy sair Portress in Marriage;
fear God, and love one another. The Joy these lovers conceived, at so
unexpected a happiness, I leave to the Imagination of the Reader. Cause. (...)
Court. Tom. 2.

The Moorish Princess Xexin Daughter of Muley Moluck, King of Fes and Moro^o,
upon the Fame of Don Sebastian King of Portugal though an (...), who came to
Invade her Fathers Country conceived so great a love for him, that when his
Army was overthrown on the plains of Tamista near. Alcazar and himself slain
She came e're the day dawned accompanied with one slave named Laura; to seek
him amongst the heaps of the dead, when entering that miserable Scene of
Slaughter She Inquired of some wounded men that were yet breathing, where the
King Fought, and with many abrupt stammerings being informed by those dying
wretches, She hasted thither resolving to Sacrifice her Life, and fall upon
him, when coming to the heap of ^lain She espied one extremely resembling her
Lover, for She had seen the King of Portugal often, and thereupon with great
cries She embraced and moved him, but being about to offer violence to her
self; She found the supposed dead Man to breath, and after some rubbing and
chafeing he came to himself. So that binding up his wounds, She and her Slave
with the help of a Matriner conveyed him into a little ^^land in the River
Mu^azen, and ^ere provided all things for him, verily supposing him the King of
Portugal, for indeed Nature had made this Subject (for so he proved, and not
the King of Portugal) so like his Prince that the Portugals themselves were
deceived, as will appear. This Man thus snatched from death, being continually
attended by the Princes, who infinitely doated on him, and used him like a
vallued Lover, began to wonder from whence the cause of such mighty Kindness
should spring, when one day after a Sigh She said, Heaven will not deprive
Portugal of it is King, but has made your Xerine Happy in saving her dear Don
Saebastians Life, by this Speech he found the Princes Error yet thought it not
convenient to undeceive her but rather to promote it, and so by insinuation he
came to understand who She was, as likewise her Love to the King of Portugal,
and so far he prvailed upon that Princes; that She thought nothing too dear for
him, but used her Interest with Muley Boabdelin a Moorish Prince and her
Conzen, to Entertain him in his Palace at Hoscore till such time as She could
furnish him with a train suitable for a King (as She supposed him to be) to
return to his own Country.

This old Moorish Prince, verily believed him to be as his Conzen had reported
and Imagining if he got into Portugal he would not regard the Vows he had made
to Marry her; caused them to be Married out of hand, she in consideration
thereof promising to become a Christian which She afterward performed; being a
Lady exceeding beautiful as Born of a Greek Mother, and consequently much
whiter than the Affricans, and soon after provided him an Equipage to go for
Portugal, to which Crown Henry who succeeded Saebastian being dead many said
claym, but at length it was grasped by the King of Spain, who proved the
stronger, wherefore he first arrived in Italy, and was received by the Duchess
of Parma who as the former verily believed him to be the true Saebastian; as
likewise did some Ministers sent from the Estates of Portugal which made him in
the end ^magine himself to be no less, for being denied possession of that
Kingdom ^^e drew a great power after him, but being defeated on the Frontiers
of Portugal, and taken Prisoner, after which being brought to Lisbon, and
Imprisoned as an Imposter; at what time Xerine was come out of Afric^ to assist
him, in the recovery (as She thought of his right) She having by this time had
a Son by him, but thi^ Misfortune did not at all alter the Love of the
Princess; who earnestly labored for his deliverance: often visiting him in
Prison where falling sick and at the point of Death, he declared how he had
deceived her, an^ that he was (...) the King of Portugal^ yet for all that her
Love abated not but She in the best wise comforted him. Afflict not your self
(said the Generous Princess) with too late and unuseful Repentance I loved the
Person of Don Sebastian, more then the splendour of his condition; I thought I
had me^ that Person in you. Those Charms which first touched me, have lost none
of their privilege, because they were not place^ (...) Monarch, though I
confess I should never have observed them in an Ordinar^ Mam, Neither my Spirit
nor my Birth (...) would have permitted me to consider whom (...) had not
thought a Prince, but my error became dear to me, and is so still,
notwithstanding it proves fatal to my peace. The name of Husband is so Sacred
to a Woman truly Virtuous, that it obli^erates any shame which accompanyes it:
Therefore try to overcome your Ilness my dear Prince* (pardon the name)
For^^ne, (said She lifting up her Eyes ^o Heaven), might have given it (...)
She gave you me. Rescue your self ^f it be possible, from the arms of (...), ^t
may be we may find you a happyness, more calm and happy than that which is
^enyed you in Portugal. With this ex^oss of Female Generosity the counter^eit
Sebastian was so moved that he ^ould no longer suffer the Transports ^f it, but
in the Arms of the Passio^ate Xerine expired whose Soul with ^uch difficulty
staved behind, loving ^im even as her Life, who had injured ^er with so great a
deceit: Sir, J. B. (...) Rocoles of Impostors.

Ho^^ Wife of Be^xamut, a Vali^nt Captain of the Alarbes had so ^reat affection
for her Husband, that whilst he lived She never disobeyed or disobliged him,
and when he dyed, She almost drowned in Tears, caused his Funeral Obsequies to
be performed on the solemnest manner, with infinite cost; nor would be Induced
to forsake his Tomb: where after Nine days Fasting she dyed, breathing out her
last Breath by his Side.

He first Deceased, She for a few days tried,
To live without him, liked it not and dy'ds.
Camer. Oper. Subcisiv. The Emperor Conrade the Third, besieging Guelphus Duke
of Bavaria in the City of Wensberg in Germany; the Women made a request to that
Emperor, that they might pass out with so much as they could carry upon their
backs, which was granted, he supposed they would lade themselves with their
Furniture; but on the contrary, these loving Dames preferring the safety of
their Husbands before all Earthly Riches, took each of them their Husbands and
carried them as Packs; which Act of Love so moved the Emperor that he wept;
and not only received the Duke into his favor, but gave all the men their
lives, extolling the Women's Transcednent Love with deserved Praise. Lonicer.
Theatr.

Prince Edward, afterward Edward the First, King of England, whilst he Warred
in the Holy Land, having reduced the City of Accone, being stabbed with an
Impoison'd Knife, by one Auzazim a Sarazin, who had the opportunity of
aproaching him, under the Pretense of a Message from one of the Pagan
Governors, when all hopes of ^ure failed, his Virtuous Wife Elenor at the
hazard of her Life, daly sucked the Wounds, till the Venom of the poison was
extracted, for which amazing Love, when he came to be King, he caused her Arms,
as Memorials of Conjugal affection, to be fixed on diverse public places.
Bakers Cron.

Sulpitia the Wife of Lentulus, after the proscribing, of her Husband, by the
Influence of the Triumvire, and his ^ight to Pompy's Son in Sicily;
notwithstanding the strict (...) set upon her, found means to escape in
disguise, not weighing the danger o^ being proscribed her self, equal to the
Fidelity, to her Husband.

Eumonus burying the dead, fallen in the Battle of Sabin, where the Indians
Warred with Amigonus, amongst the slain was found the body of Cereas an Indian,
who commanded those Troops^ which man according to the Custom of that Country,
had at sundrey times Married two Wives, both which Loved him entirely; for,
whereas there was a (...) and is yet in some places observed, that the live
Wife shall be bunrt with the dead Husband; these Women were so far from
declineing it, that they strove which of them should make her Bed with him in
the Flames, as if they had contended for some Glorious Prize, the last Married
of these pleaded before the Judges, that were to decide the Controversy that
the former was with Child, and therefore ought to be exempted, to which the
other aledg'd, it was fit she should bell before her in Honor, as the elder
Married, (...) it (...) customary (...) things, and after a long (...) between
them, the Judges being informed by the Midwives, that the Elder Married was
with Child, adjudged the Younger should have her desire, which done the other
departed rending her Diadem, Hair, and Garments, with many loud Laments, as if
some grievous calimity had befaln her. The other overjoyed at her Victory, in
the most Magnificient attire, as if she had been going to her Wedding, was led
by her friends to the Pile whereon her Husband lay, Singing all the way, being
there arrived, taking off all her Ornaments, she delivered them to her Friends
and Servants, in (...) of remembrance; they consisting of a multitude of Rings,
with variety of Precious Stones, Chains, and Stars of Gold, etc. This done she
was by her Brother Placed upon the Pile, by her Husband, which Pile, after the
Army had thrice compassed, it was Fired, and she without so much as a groan,
finished her life in the flame, an Instance of Invincible Love and Female
Courage; and might justly, were it not some what Eclipsed by the name of a
Self-violence, stand the glory of the Sex. Didor. Sicul.

Such Phaenixes the World does rarely yield,
No Nation boasts them but the Indian Field.
Pondoerus a Persian Captain, being in Arms against Jacobus King of Persia, and
Son to Vsan Cassants; his Wife a Beautiful Lady, not exceeding fifteen years,
besought him by all the Ties of love to lay down his Arms and submit; but
notwithstanding he loved her entirely, yet would not yield to her request. Then
she desired him, and adjur'd him by all that was Sacred, that he would kill her
before he gave Battle, that it might not be said she outlived him; but he
regarding more his headstrong Ambition than her Tears, whom Grief made lovely,
sounded the Charge, and was slain in Fight: his Lady was likewise taken
Prisoner, and by the King bestowed upon one of his Captains, who entreating her
to receive him as her Husband, with many proffers of kindness and great
presents. She wonderfully opposed, but perceiving he would have that by force,
which by fair means he could not obtain, she required time to consider the
point, and thereupon retiring, sent him a Note, wherein was written, That none
should say the Wife of Pondoerus did long survive him, and with that she fell
upon a Sword and died. Fulgos. l. 4.

Since he was gone, to whom her love inclined,
She liked not life, and would not stay behind.
Cedrenus in his History tells us, that Constantine the ninth, caused the Roman
Argyrapalis to be brought before him, together with his Wife, a Beauteous young
Lady, threatening him with all the Torments imaginable, if he did not put her
away, and in her stead take his Daughter; which if he did he promised to make
him his He^r and raise him by other promotions in the Empire. The man at this,
stood confounded with in himself, not knowing what to Answer; when the Lady
perceiving what danger he was likely to fall into, if he refused to comply with
the Emperors demand, Ah S^ (said she to her Husband) I see you ar^ much
hindered in a brave way, if it on^^ rest in your wife, that you be not great and
happy; I freely deprive my self of all yea of your Company, which is more
precious to me than all the Empires of t^^ World, rather then prejudice your
Fo^tane, for know I love you better tha^ my life. And so saying, out of a
tender compassion, to the preservatio^ of him she loved so dear, she c^^ off
her Hair; and entered into a Monastery, spending the rest of her day in Piety
and Divotion. Cause. H. C^ in treat of passions.

Turning the Torrent of her Earth^ love,
To a mere lasting Sense of Joys abov^
Arria, the Wife of Cecinna Poetus, having notice that her Husband was
Condemned to dye, yet liberty given him to choose his death, she went to him,
and exhorted him to Breath his last with Constancy and Courage, and after
having taken a dear farewell, she stabbed her self with a Knife she had hid
under her Garments, and drawing it out only said, e're she fell dead at his
Feet, The wound I have made Paetus smarts not, but that only which thou art
about to give thy self. Camer. Oper. Subsic.

Upon this Extravegant effect of passionate love, Martial made this Epigram.

When Arria to her Husband gave the Knife,
Which made the wound whereby she lost her life,
This wound dear Poetus, grieves me not, said she,
But that which thou must give thy self grieves me.
In the Reign of Vespasian, the Gauls Rebelled, under the leading of Julius
Sabinus, But being reduced, their Captain was sought for, but having hid
himself in the Monument of his Grandfather, to which none but two of his freed
men were privy; it was given out that he had poisoned himself, and the better
to color it, he caused his House to be set on fire, that his Body might be
supposed therein to be burnt; his Wife Eponiva, not knowing the contrary, made
great Sorrow, incessantly Weeping, and refusing either Food, or to be
Comforted; of which, those that were private to his hiding, told their Lord,
desiring him to take pity on their Lady who was determined to die, and in
order thereto, had abstained from all manner of Food, for the space of three
days, by undeceiving her, to save the Woman that loved him so well; which was
granted, and she brought to the place, where finding him alive, she flew into
his Arm^ with all the eager Joys of a tender Wife, and in that dolesome place
lived with him nine years, bringing forth Children: But in the end, the place
of their Abode was discovered, and they brought to Rome, where this Virtious
Lady showing her Children to Vespasian. Behold, O Coesar (says she) such as I
have brought forth, and Nourished in a Monument, that thou might have more
supplyants for^ our lives. But that Emperor banishing Compassion, commanded
them both to be slain. The Lady joyfully dying with her Husband, with whom she
had been, as it were, Buried so many years. Lips. Monit.

Clara Cervenda was one of the most Beautiful Virgins in all Bruges, she
Married one Bernard Valdaura, a Man Aged and wonderfully Infirm, by reason of
the foul Disease he had contracted in his Youth, and in the end growing so
Ulcerous and so Naucious, that the Chyrurgion fled the Scent of him; yet this
Tender Lady for the space of Twenty years continually watched and tended him,
not imagining any thing too dear for him; and when their Money by that large
Expense failed, she sold her Jewels and wearing Apparel, Disrobing, and in a
manner starving her self to support him. So sacred to this virtuous Lady was
the name of Husband, and even of such a one as had brought her to Ruin and
Misery; nay, when he was rotted away, that his shattered Body could no longer
retain his fleeting Soul, she made great Lamentation; and when some instead of
comforting of her, told her that God had done much in taking him away, and for
that reason they came to congratulate her She turned aside and would not hear
them, but with a mournful Voice, wished for her Husband again, and that she
would give any thing in the world could she Retrieve him. Being sought by many
in Marriage, her Answer was, That she could (...) meet with any whom she could
love, or like so well as her deceased Husband. Camerar Oper Subsic.

So truly loving was this constant Dame,
That she deserves a place in the Book of Fame.
Nor is Womankind only found such an admirable pattern to Man (...) but the
Sex has proved as faithful Woman to Woman, as appears by the following
Relation: Bona a noble Virgin living in a Nunery, contracted so great a
Friendship with a Beautiful Maid, not exceeding her in years, that they
appeared to those that observed their actions, to have but one Soul, their
affections were so united and met so exactly in every thing. But so it happened
to the unspeakable grief of Bona, that Death, in process of time, with his Icey
hand, seized upon her dear Companion, the partner of her thoughts, and only
sharer of her best affections, sealing her Eyes in Gloomy Night, which caused a
flood of pious grief to flow from the surviving Lady: In the excess of which,
she earnestly begged she might not stay behind, but that their Bodies might
possess one Grave. Although this was a rash wish, yet it was answered: For she,
e're the other was Buried dyed, Insomuch, that one Funeral Solemnity served
them both. Marul. Lib. 3. C. 3.

Thus Love and Chastity together died,
Ravished by Death, they in one Grave abide.
How great likewise has the love of Mothers been toward their Children, which
for Brevities say I shall instance, but in two Examples.

Monica, the Mother of Agustine, whilst her Son in his Youth followed lewd
Courses, ceased not to Pray day and night for his Conversion; and doubtless her
Prayers were heard, which may be gathered by the strangeness of his being made
sensible of the dangerous condition he was in; which occasioned St. Ambrose to
comfort her in this wise: It Is impossible (says he) that a Son of so many
Prayers and Tears can miscarry. Clarks. Mir.

For love to Souls, all other love excells,
It must be Heaven where such an Angel dwells.
The Women of Carthage, in the third Punick War, when they understood the
Senate had agreed to send the noble Youths of that City into Sicily as a
Hostage, in consideration of a peace with the Romans; so outrageous was the
sorrow of those Mothers, whose Sons were so to be snatc'd from them, that
nothing was heard but Cries, Sighs and sad Laments; and when they were going to
Embarque, they followed them in the like manner, huging them in their strict
Embraces, with Countenances full of Care and Sadness, to hinder their going, as
loath to take their sad farewell; but finding they were snatched from them by
the Officers who were to see them safe delivered and thrust on Board, as soon as
the Ships put off, many of those woeful Mothers leaped into the Sea after them,
and were overwhelmed by the Relentless Waves. Sebel. l. 3. c. 4.

This sad Disaster occasioned the following Lines.

When as the two Renowned Republiques Jar'd,
When Mighty Rome and Carthage long had War'd.
To try by dint of Sword, which Fate designed,
Mistress ot'h World, and Ruler of Mankind.
Tired with the tedious bloodshed that Imbrew'd
Europe and Africa, a Peace insu'd.
But Carthage often breaking 'twas thought fit,
They should with speed their noble Touths commit
For more security to Roman bands,
As Hostages, but when to Foraign Lands
The Woeful Mothers knew their Sons must go,
What Scenes of sorrow, did great Carthage show?
Nothing but Cries, but Sighs, and Groans were heard;
But when for their Embarquement they prepared
The Storm grew loud, each tender Mother run,
And in her arms, Infolds her weeping Son.
Bathing his Cheecks, in tears to add a Store,
To those that trick^'d from his Eyes before.
But finding that the hard Decree was past,
And that this fare well seemed to be their last.
When from their arms their Darling^ dears were forced,
And they from them by swelling waves Divorst.
Impatient to outlive so great a loss,
Such a heart breaking, such a wounding Cross.
They plunged themselves into the rolling deep.
And vainly strove to reach the flying Ship.
In which their Treasure was but that forbid,
By Neptune was, and they In's waves were hid.
Of Chastity.
And thus much for extraordinary Passion from which I shall proceed to Examples
of wonderful Chastity, the brightest Jewel that Adorns the Noble Sex.

As Bards of old Enobl'd for their Verse,
Victorious actions did alowd rehearse,
The conquest of great Nations, and the praise
Of those, whose Valor truly claimed the Bays.
So tell we now of Triumphs greater far,
Than e're atchived were by the God of War,
Or could be boasted by that Thunderer.
A glorious conquest over Lawless love
Triumphs, that all the Chaster World approve,
So in their Spher's, the Blessed Angels move,
Vnvalu'd Chastity, Woman's chief grace.
Next Lawful Passion we think fit to place.
And in this kind the Female Sex excel, many of them prefering their Honor to
life, or all the glittering Glories of the Universe; no prospect of Earthly
happiness has been sufficient to Charm it from them, as will appear.

Celdrana, a Maid of Alexandria, being Endowed with admirable Beauty, which
occasioned a Troop of Lovers, as it were to Beseige her; each desirous of
enjoying so fair a Treasure, offering what might content a large Ambition, but
in vain; for such were the Chaste resolves of the renowned Virgin, that the
largest proffers could make no impression on her mind; but perceiving her self
continually pressed by her importunate admirers, to shun their importunity, she
privately withdrew, and leaving them confounded in their loves for want of the
bright Idea they adored, she hid her self in a solitary Cell surrounded with a
multitude of Graves, where after a tedious search being sound, to the exceeding
Joy of those that sought her; when asked the meaning why she chose a place so
doleful, her reply was, Thesaurum Chastitatis Servo Inter Arentes Calvarias
Vnde Nula Flamma Eurumpit.

Amongst the Dead my Chastiti's secure,
There I preserve it in it is self most pure,
No sparks of lust the drowsy Graves immure.
Cause. H. C. part 1. l. 3. Brasola of Diracchium, an Illustrious Maid, seized
by a Soldier, who was about to commit violence on that Jewel that she mostly
prized, told him that if he would spare her in that case, she in recompense
would reveal to him a Secret more valuable than Gold, such a one, as would
render him Victorious and Safe on all occasions, by making him Invulnerable:
the Soldier believes, flattering himself, that after he had obtained this
Benifit, she would be as much at his mercy as before; when leading him into a
most delightful Garden, and after a tedious search; tasting a Herb, that
perhaps he had never seen before, she with a cheerful Voice told him it was the
mighty Charm that would oppose the force of Steel, and that he might be assured
she did not flatter, bared her Beauteous Neck and offered the experiment at the
hazard of her life; the Soldier by this being more confirmed, resolutely gave
the blow that gave her rest in the wished Arms of Death.

Preserving by that means her spotless Fame,
Whilst her rash Foe, who found himself to blame,
Confunded stood, with horror, grief and shame.
Lodov. Vives. Christ. Femin. Istit. Nor is the Story related of the virtuous
Euphrasia, a Virgin of noble Extraction in Nicephor, Eclez. Hist. unlike to
this.

Where that Heroic Maid prefering, Death,
Before the loss of Honor, lost her Breath.
Lucia a lovely Virgin, who for the Excellency of her Beauty was sought by
diverse, but out of an Extraordinary love of Chastity, would not show the least
inclination thereto; which, notwithstanding, so Inflamed a powerful Lord, who
had great Command in the City where she lived, that after many Essays, finding
she could not be won by Entreaty, he resolved to take her by Force, and in
order thereto, sent diverse Armed men to surprise her in her Fathers House; who
coming to the Gate and finding it shut, threatened to make a general Slaughter,
and set all on Fire if she were not delivered; she to prevent the danger that
might befall others, knowing the cruel Nature of him that had sent for her,
came forth and demanded who it was they sought, desiring to know if any thing
was in her power that would satisfy their Lord; Yess (said they in a flouting
manner) your Eyes have Captivated him, he never can hove rest till he has
gained them; at which fetching a deep Sigh, she desired to retire, saying, she
would satisfy him in that particular; which being ranted, she went to her
Chamber, and seeing her self in a strait, that she either must use some
extraordinary way, or her unspotted Chastity would be Sacrificed to the Lust of
a Man she hated, thus addressing her self to her Glass; she began to utter her
sorrow: Ah! my Eyes (said she) are you then guilty, I know the reservedness and
simplicity of your Glances, nor have I in that kind any Remorse of Conscience;
but howsoever be you, appear to me not Innocent enough, since you have kindled
fire in the heart of a Man, whose hatred I ever esteemed more than his love;
Quench, Quench, then with your Blood the flame you have raised; whereupon with
a hand piously cruel, she forced her Eye Balls from their bleeding Orbs, and
sent them to those who waited for her, to bear them as a cruel pre^ent to their
Master; upon notice of which, astonished and confounded within himself, he fled
to a Monastery, and there spent the remainder of his days. Rad in Viridoria
Cause. H. C. part 1.

Thus she deformed her self to Gloom confined,
To save the lovely Beauty of the Mind.
Acciolin of Padua, in the year 1253, surprising the City of Bassian; in which
City Blanch Ruba fighting for the defense of her People, her Husband being
before slain, she was taken Disarmed, and violently dragged before the
Conqueror; who Eyeing her admirable Perfections, with Presents, Entreaties and
Threats, for a time endeavored to alure her to Lascivious Embraces; but the
noble Matron being rather resolved t^ die, than to yield up her honor to the
Murderer of her Lord, sound means whilst those were careless who had her in
charge, to cast her self headlong out of the Gallery wherein she was; by which
fall, although she greatly Bruised her self, yet by the Care of the Physicians
and Chyrurgeons she recovered, and then was caused to be bound Na^ed, in a
posture, that the Lustful Acciolin not regarding her Cries and Entreaties,
forced her helpless Chastity. She ^esiring not to outlive the loss of her
^^onour, though her Friends comforted ^^er in the best manner; saying, she ^^as
Guiltless, seeing it was done by Violence, contrary to her Consent. When ^^e
better to Accomplish her design, ^^s well as she could, dissembled her ^^rrow,
appearing by degrees to dry ^^p the Extraordinary flood of Grief ^^at slow'd
from her Beauteous Eyes: ^^e desired them one day to go with ^^er to the
Monument of her Husband (...) the often Visitation of which is ordi^ary in many
Countries) being come neither, she Entreated them to list up ^e stone, that she
might see how ^eath and his short continuance there ^ad altered him; which
stone o^ a vast ^eight, being raised on one side and rop'd up, she under
pretense of seriously viewing those Relics of ^ortality, Leaped into the Tomb
^here her dead Husband lay, pulling way at the same time the stay, which
offered the stone to fall with such ^rce, that her Head being mortally ^rus'd,
she soon died and was buried with her Lord. Lon. Thatre.

The latter loss, beyond the First employed,
Her sadded Soul, though Fate before had Tried,
In her dear Lord's mishap, a Death to give,
But Chastity once gone, she scorned to live.
Novellus Caronceus. Lord of Paria, falling in Love with a beautiful Virgin, a
Citizens Daughter of Vincentia; and her Chistity not yiedling by fair
entreaties to his lacivious designs, he caused her to be taken out of her
Fathers house, and forcibly Ravished her, after which he not having found the
Pl^^sure he expected, by reason of her unwillingness, he Barbarously added a
greater Cruelty, by cutting her in pieces, and sending her Mangled Limbs to her
Parents: Who astonished at so great a wickedness, made their adress to the
Senate of Venice, in whom the horror of the Fact, moved at once such
detestation and Compassion, that warring on the murdering Ravisher, they ^ook
him, and his two Sons, whom ^hey delivered into the hands of the ^xecutioner.
Beard Theater.

So loud to Heaven for Vengance was the cry,
Of Virgin blood, and Injured Chastity.
O^bright, Deputy or Sub-governour (...) a King of the West Saxans, going ^s
Progress, happened in the absence (...) one Beorn, a noble Saxon, to call (...)
his house; whereas became a person (...) such esteem with the King; he (...) as
splendidly entertained, but all (...) delicates were nothing pleasing, (...)
consideration of the beautiful Lady, ^ith whom he found (dinner ended) (...)
oppertunity (under pretense of ^mmunicating some Secrets, he had (...) charge
to her Lord,) to retire (...) to a private place, out of the hear^^g of the
Servants, where he re^^al'd his wicked purpose, using many ^^treaties, to
oblige her to a com^^acency, but finding she had rather die than violate her
Chastity, he threw her by force on a Couch and Ravished her, after which,
leaving her overwhelmed in Tears, he with his retinue hasted thence. The
afflicted Lady concealing as much as in her lay the shame that was done her,
till her Lord came home, fell at his Feet with great Cries, declaring the
Mischief that had befallen her, saying, she was altogether unworthy to name him
her Husband, since she had been so shamelessly abused, entreating him by all
the former Ties of Love to revenge himself and her; which he not long after too
sadly effected, by being instrumental in bringing in the Danes, who made
miserable Havoc of the Kingdom, slaying the Ravisher and most of the Forces he
lead. Speeds Chron.

Wonderful were the Examples of the Chaste Ladies in the Abbey of Glassenbury,
who by the Advice and Example of their Abess least their Incomparable Beauties
should be the occasion of loosing their honors, cut^ off their Lips and Noses,
at the time when the Danes made progress through the Land with Fire and Sword,
and by that means saving their Chastity, lost their Lives; for the Barbarous
Enemy finding it was done to cross their purpose, cruelly put them to the
Sword; doubtless not unhappy for them, who found thereby a speedy way to the
reward of their Piety. Speeds. Cron.

Stand back Diana, in whom Fables tell,
The Sacred love of Chastity did dwell,
Yet cruel still they Paint thee, for thine Eyes
They say, were pleased with Humain Sacrifice;
Give place to these, whose Virtues shine more bright,
Than all the flames that on thy Alters blazed,
Whose Chaster Souls above the Stars took flight,
And for Deliverance their great Maker praised.
Of Piety.
In Piety and Love of sacred things, this Sex is no ways wanting, as not to
mention the Examples of those (...) Holy Writ, many Histories havi^^ the lively
Monuments of unwear^^ Divotion, can furnish us: nor ha^^ they refused in most
Ages, to lay do^^ their lives with cheerfulness for t^^ sake of their Redeemer,
Triumphi^^ with a Holy Joy in the Circling flam^^ bearing with a constancy and
patien^^ almost Inexpressible, all the Torme^^ Witty Horror could invent; nay
so^^ have grieved to be deprived of such^ Glory, and longed with eager Zeal^
pass through Tribulation, to the pla^^ where Crowns and Diadems a^ laid up for
the perseverer, in faithfu^ness till Death.

Eulalia, a noble Virgin of Portug^^ dispising all the proffered Glories th^^
consist in Transcient things, spent h^^ time and care in heaping up a Treasu^^
for her Soul; Sobriety and Mode^^ were her Attendants, and Discreti^^ Crowned
her Actions; a Zeal and F^^vent Love to her Redeemer made h^^ fearless of
danger, knowing his support is all-sufficient; and so continu^^ she, increasing
in Grace and Virt^^ when Hell stirred up it is wicked Engines to oppose the
flourishing Gospel, when the Heathens ^^harras' (...) Church, than was it she
appeared most constant and devout, resolving to suffer any affliction for him
that had redeemed her with his precious Blood; and when the Christians were
commanded to offer Sacrifice to Devils, this Courageous Virgin by her Prayers
and Exhortations, encouraged them to be steadfast in the Faith, and not to give
the Tempter ground, Praying daily in the presence of the Heathen; which her
Parents, who loved her entirely, perceiving and fearing she might fall under
the punishment of the Rigorous decree, sent her to their Country House,
distant from the City, and watched her there, least she should escape; but she
desirous to possess a Crown of life, brooked not that Solitude, but found means
to leave it; and being sometime after presented to the Roman Prefect, a man
that Thirsted after Christian Blood, she boldly owned her Faith, aledging she
was ready to lay down her life for his sake, from whom she had received it^
which resolute persistance in that rig^teous (...) made him rage to the Excess,
that without regard to b^ Birth, Years or Tender Beauty, (...) commanded the
Executioner to dis^^cate her Joints, and then with Wi^^ Beasts Claws tore off
her Flesh, whi^^ she regardless of her pain, was prais^^ God for counting her
worthy, (...) After this she was tortured with (...) Iron Grate, and had her
Virgin Brea^^ Seer'd with flaming Torches, wh^^ fired her Hair that had till
that (...) cove^ed her Modesty; when find^^^ her laboring Soul upon the Wi^^^
she Breathed it forth in praise to (...) Maker. Acts and Mon.

Go Pious Maid, may your Exam^^^ be,
Praised and admired to all posterity!
The Palm is hers, nor can she mi^^^ Crown,
Who for the sake of Christ her life (...) down;
No Mixture, Crown of Pearl, of Gold and Cares,
Such as below an Earthly Monarch wares,
But a bright Diadem of Beaming Stars.
Agnes, an Honorable young Virgin, being accused of professing the Christian
Religion, and not denying it, when Interogated by the Judge, he threatened her
with most Exquisit Torments, unless she would Worship the Gods of the Heathens;
but Armed with a Christian Faith, she told him, she feared no Tortures, as
being willing to suffer all manner of Torments, even Death it self, for the
sake of him that was able to raise her at the last day: Well said the Judge,
though you value not the Pain, yet I doubt not, but you have a great esteem for
your Virginity and Chastity, and it is my intent to thrust you into the Stews,
if you refuse to Sacrifice to our Gods; notwithstanding, she persisted to
inveigh against their pretended Deities, using many Arguments to convince the
Heathen of his Error, which made several wicked Fellows urge him to put the
Beautiful Virgin into their possession, that they might use her at their
discretion, which occasioned her to tell them, that Christ was not forgetful of
those that are his, neither would he leave her destitute of his help and
assistance, but would be always ready to protect and defend Modest and Chaste
Virgins; and thereupon turning to the Judge, she told him, He might freely bath
his Sword in her Blood, but should no: defile her Body. She had no sooner
uttered these words, but shameless as he was, he commanded she should be bound
stark Naked to a Post at a Corner of a street; whereat the greatest part of the
People being sorry and ashamed, to behold an Innocent Virgin in the tender
Bloom of her Age exposed to such Ignominy: Some turned away their Heads, and
others hid their Faces as they passed by; but one impudent Fellow Scoffing at
the helpless Maid and Gazing on her Nakedness in derision, was blasted with a
flash of Lightning, and thereby lost his sight; upon which signal Judgment she
Sung praise to god for remembering her in her distress: of which the Judge
having notice, ordered the Executioner to dispatch her; who coming toward her
with his drawn Sword, she was nothing daunted, but on the contrary greatly
rejoiced, saying, O this is he that I love and fain would meet, and not longer
to protract my desire, I will willingly receive his Sword in my Bosom. O
Eternal God, vouchsafe to open the Gates of Heaven to a Soul that seeks thee,
and then Kneeling down as well as her confinement would permit, she had her
Head stricken off; her Soul through that wide Wound ^inding a passage to
Eternal Rest. Celebrate her praises, O ye Virtuous amongst the Nations, and let
not such Christian Examples enter into the Gloomy Region of Obliveon. Nor less
deserves the Memory of the Virtuous Eugena, Daughter to Philippus, President of
Alexandria, who died under the Heathen Persecution, for the Sacred Profession,
by most Exquisit Torments, but with a Courage out-facing the Terror of Death.
Acts and Mon, etc. A hundred more than these I could name, but having promised
Brevity, I shall go on to other Embellishments of the Sex.

And since Fame's Ensigne's thus far born, unfurled
Those Virtues, tell that must oblige the World,
Your worthy Names shall next in order stand,
Who from Oblivion with a Giving hand,
Brought Charity the Glory of the Land.
Of Liberality.
In this case I shall Instance but two Examples of Female Liberality, which
stand as Monuments of that Sexes Generosity.

The most virtuous Lady, the Lady Mary Ramsey, once Wise to Sr. Thomas Ramsey,
joining with him after his Death, Asured in Land 243 pound p. Annum to
Christs-Hospital (that object of Charity and seminary of good Education, to the
uses following, viz. To the Schoolmaster of Hempstead Annually twenty pounds,
to the Master and Usher of Christs-Church Annually twenty pounds, to ten poor
Widows, besides Apparel and Houses Annually twenty pounds, to two Poor, viz. a
Man a Woman during life, to each fifty-three Shillings and four Pence, to two
Fellows in Peter House in Cambridg, and four Scholars yearly forty pounds, to
St. Bartholomews Hospital ten pounds, to St. Peter's, the Poor in London, St.
Andrews Undershaft, St. Mary Wolnoth ten pounds, to Newga^e, Ludghte, the
Compters, ten pounds, to Christ's Hospital, after the Expiration of certain
Leases there will come p. Annum, one hundred and twenty pounds, to six Scholars
in Oxford twenty pounds, to six Scholars in Cambridge twenty pounds, to ten
Maimed Soldiers twenty pounds, for two Sermons two pounds, to the Poor of
Christ-Church Parish fifty Shillings, to the Poor of the Company of Drapers
yearly ten pounds, ten Poor Women's Gouns, ten Poor Soldiers Coats, Shoos and
Caps. All these to continue Annually. Willets Synops. Papis. p. 1229.

Mrs. Alice Owen founded an Hospital and Free School at Islington, gave to the
University Library at Oxford two hundred pounds, Founded one Fellow-Ship and
Scholar-Ship in Emanuel Coledg, to Christ's Hospital sixty pounds, to give
twelve Pence Weekly to the Poor of Islington sixty pounds, thirteen Shillings
and four Pence she gave to Beautify the Cloisters in Christ's Hospital, to a
School-house at Edmonton twenty pounds, to the Parish of Condover in
Shrop-shire fifty pounds to buy a great Bell, the Building of Almshouses for
ten poor Women, and the purchasing the Lands laid to it, cost her one thousand
four hundred and fifteen pounds, and the Building the Schools there three
hundred sixty one pounds; she gave likewise certain Annual Sums of Moneys to
Preachers not Benificed, and to the Prisons in her life time, by her last Will
twenty pounds yearly to Islington School, to Preachers thirty five pounds, to
the Parish of Basishaw twenty pounds, to the Prisons eight pound, to the
Company of Brewers in Linen, Plate and Money one hundred pounds, the Sum Total
of the Money, not reconing the Annuity of twenty two pounds, Amounts to about
two thousand three hundred and twenty pounds; a Charity Extraordinary in a
private Gentlewoman; yet this she did out of Christian Zeal, to promote
Learning and relieve the Poor, though at her Death she had twenty two Children,
and Childrens Children, for all which she plentifully provided. Willet's
Synops. Papisme P. 1240.

These great Examples who'd but imitate,
Treasures laid up in Heaven's a vast Estate;
A Mine that no profuseness can Exhaust,
And will repay ten thousand times the cost.
Of Humility.
Nor does Humility shine less bright even to a wonder in the Softer Sex.

Humility the Basts, on which rest
Those Blooming actions that must make us blessed;
Great pattern of true worth, which does subdue
The sternest Foe, and make his love renew.
In this case we find Famous Instances in Holy Writ; as Sarah, Rachel, Leah,
Ruth and many more, who thereby not only had immediate Blessings conferred upon
them, but rendered themselves worthy Examples to all Posterity. How many
Virtuous Ladies might I number in Histories of diverse Nations, would the
intended Brevity admit a further Enrolement of their Names, who have wholly
addicted themselves to Humility, the true ground of Generosity and Nobleness,
even such, as in an Ocean of Worldly Prosperity have rather considered they
were Dust, and that Earthly Riches, and the Fond Aplause of flattring
Parasites, notwithstanding their enforced Eloquence could render them no other,
as for Instance,

Elizabeth, Daughter to a King of Hungary, and Wife to Lewis the Lantgrave of
Tharengia, amidst the Royalties wherewith her Court abounded, was so
wonderfully affected with the Sense of Humility, that often remaining at home
with her Maids. she put on her meanest Apparel, saying, she would never use any
other Ornaments, when it should come to pass that the good and merciful Lord
should put her into a condition wherein she might more freely dispose of her
self. When she went to her Divotion in public, not regarding her Greatness,
she would rather choose to Kneel amongst the Poor Women than the Ladies of the
Court, as imagining it most acceptable to her Maker. After the Death of her
Husband whom she loved, she retired from places populous, with few attendants,
and in the end went on Pilgramage, giving to the Poor what came to her hands,
and Built for their Relief an Hospital, wherein she Ministered to the Sick, and
took extraordinary care they should want for nothing; being sent for to Return
to her Fathers Court, she made such Excuses, and used so many Entreaties, that
she kept her station, prefering Humility before the Enjoyments of a Kingdom.

Farewell thou great in mind, who do outvie
In this thy State, of true Humility,
Those that Ambition tosses to the Sky.
So safe upon the Beach, the Gentle Swain
Beholds the trouble of the swelling Main,
And by contentment does dose dangers shun,
Into whose Arms the greedy Sailors run.
Of Patience.
Nor is Patience, though some detracters have aledg'd the contrary, less
admirable in Womankind: what wonderful Trials has the Sex undergone, even to
admiration, not only in the loss of Substance and a reduction to Poverty, loss
of dearest Relations, and the like (but with an admirable constancy and
strmness of Mind) the most unjust and undeserved Punishments not moved nor
disordered by the almost Unconquerable effects of Fea^ and Anger.

But stood their Ground against the storms of Fate,
Nothing their brave Resolves could dissipate,
Gaining a second place to his great worth,
Whom Uz to admiration did bring forth.
Nor is it amiss to mention one singular Example, by which the Reader may guess
at the rest. In the Reign of Charles the Ninth French King, diverse Licentius
villains getting together to shead Innocent Blood, Plunder Houses, and commit
many other outrages, amongst the rest, one whose Name was Dure, a very proper
Name for such an Inexorable Ruffain, Entering with many Curses and Imprecation,
the House of one Agnes a virtuous Widow, and casting a Cord about her Neck,
dragged her about till she was almost strangled (she not in the least
complaining) and then letting her come a little to her self, demanded where her
Money was; to which with a composed Countenance she replied, she had no more
than a French Penny, which made him Rage exceedingly, and again repeat his
cruelty in draging her about; but perceiving she was unconcerned at this, he
put hot Eggs under her Armpits till they were Scorched and Blister'd extremely;
yet she not so much as complained, but was more concerned at the Impious
Blasphemies he uttered than at her own pain. After that finding her Armed with
Patience to a Miracle, he threatened to throw her from the highes^ Steeple in
the Town; yet fearless of that Danger, she Replied, If you throw my Body never
so low, you cannot hinder my Soul from ascending into Heaven. The Wretch by
this wonderful Constancy of Mind not yet being overcome, stopped Lime and Urine
into her Mouth, which she endured as the rest; when finding he could no ways
prevail he left her. Clarks Mart.

Of Steadfastness.
To this may be Added, the Gallantry and unshaken Steadfastness, wherewith some
women have received Death, and for Instance, two of our own Nation were most
Admirable.

Queen Ann, one of the Wives of Henry the Eight, and Mother to the Renowned
Queen Elizabeth, upon the supposed false Accusations of some Envious Persons,
who looked upon her Greatness with eyes Ascance, being sentenced to Death, as
she was lead to be Beheaded in the Tower, espying one of the Kings Privy
Chamber, she called him to her; and Commend me (said she) to the King, and tell
him, He is constant in his course of Advancing me, for from a private
Gentlewoman he made me a Marchioness from a Marchioness a Queen, and now that
he has left no higher degree of Worldly Honor for me, he has made me a
Martyr. Bak. Chron. P. 408.

Less admirable was not the Courage and Patience of the Learned, Wise and Pious
Jane Gray, a Lady of Royal Extraction; who for the guilty greatness of others,
who against her Will advanced her to the Seat that was not her right, was in
the Reign of Queen Mary, together with her Husband the Lord Guildford Condemned
to die, during the respite. Doctor Fecknam was sent to tell her she must
prepare her self to die the next day; which Message so little displeased her,
that she seemed rather to rejoice at it. The Doctor being earnest with her to
Embrace the old Religion and leave the new. She Answered, She had no time to
think of any thing, but preparing her self for God by Prayer. The Doctor
supposing she had spoken this, that she might have some longer time of life,
obtained of the Queen a further respite of three days, and gave her to
understand as much. Whereat she with a Smilling Countenance replied, You are
much deceived, if you think I had any desire of longer life: I asure you, since
the time you went from me, my life has been so tedious to me, that I long for
nothing so much as Death; and since it is the Queens pleasure, I most willingly
uudergo it. Bak. Chron. P. 458. Nor was the Countenances of these Ladies
altered on the Scaffold, till Death had turned their Lovely Faces to a deadly
Paleness. Neither was the latter at all discomposed, when she saw her Husband,
whom she Entirely loved, brought into her apartment Headless, as having the
same morning been Executed a little before. Holingsheads Chron, etc.

Such is the strength of Mind some Women bear,
That Death's Pale Terror cannot infuse a Fear.
To these we might join the Beauteous African Queen, though in a different
Method. The Relation thus,

Sophonisba Queen of Numidia, and Wife to King Syphax, upon the overthrow of
her Husband, by Scipio the Roman Consul, yielded her self up to Massinissa an
African Prince and Confederate of the Romans, Entreating him that she might not
be put into the power of the Roman Senate; he promised to be her Protecter, and
in consideration fo her amazing Beauty, Married her, having been contracted to
her before her Marriage with Syphax; but it coming to the Ears of Scipio, he
let him understand that the Romans had a Title to her Head, and that she was a
mischievous Enemy to the People of Rome, and therefore required him not to
commit a great offense upon little reason. The King confounded within himself
at this news, Blushed and Wept for a time; but in sine, promised to be Governed
by Scipio, he went to his Royal Pavillion, where having given his sorrow vent,
he called a trusty Servant, and by his hand sent a Cup of Poison to his Beloved
Sophonisba, with these Expressions, viz. That gladly he would have had her to
live with him as his Wife, but since they who had power to hinder him of his
desire, would not yield thereto, he had sent her a Cup that should prevent her
falling into their hands alive, willing her to remember her Birth and high
Estate, which would direct her to take Orders for her self. At the Receipt of
the Message and Potion of Death, the Courageous Queen nothing daunted, replied,
That if her Husband had no better Present for his new Wife, she must accept of
this, Adding, she might have died more honorable if she had not Wedded so late
before her Funeral, and thereupon drunk off the deadly Potion that bereaved her
of her life. Reighs Hist. World.

Great thoughts long strugl'd in her Royal Breast,
Till fear of Bondage, fear of Death surprest,
And that her Birth and Nobleness might be
An argument, she scorned Captivity,
That she could die, she let the Romans see.
And to say somewhat further much to the same purpose, a Christian Matron
falling in Travel in Prison, where she was confined by the Persecutors, upon
the Account of her Religion, Expressed some sense of Sorrow; which being
over-hear'd by her Enemies, they demanded if in that case she was so sensible,
what would she be when she came to the flames? Ah! (said she) I suffer this as
a miserable woman, under those sorrows that are laid upon me for my sins; but
then I shall suffer a^ a Christian for the sake of Christ. Camer. Oper.
Subsisiv. etc.

So different is the cause of Pain os^ found,
That what some think the most, the least does wound.
Of Modesty.
Nor is the Wondrous, though becoming and seemly Modesty, wherewith some are
possessed, a less Adornment than what has been premised.

A Virtuous Modesty does Beauty grace
And make the Charms more lovely i^ each Face;
It makes the Roses with the Lillies join,
The sweet Carnation with the Gessamine:
Nay further yet, it does a Factor prove,
To barter hearts and trade in chastest love:
Nothing more winns, there is nothing sooner can
Than Female Modesty, alure Fond Man.
And this Sex exceeds not only in Action, but in Speech and Guesture: ^ome
having chosen rather to under^oe severe Punishments, than to do, ^r be Concious
of any Immodest Acti^n.

Martia Daughter of Varo, one of ^e bravest Female Wits of her time ^eing
skilled in diverse Arts, but more ^urious in that Excellent one of Limn^^g to
the life; yet no entreaty or re^ard could prevail with her to por^^ay or paint
the Counterfeit of a Man ^r Woman Naked, least thereby she should offend
against the Rules of Mo^^sty; so concious was she, though (...) a thing most
Innocent in its self, ^ast in should meet with a wrong con^^ruction, or she
therein give a bad Example to others. Cause. Treat (...) Passion.

Nor only in Life, but as we man say, in Death it self has this R^^ been
observed, as appears by the M^ther of Alexander the great, nam^ Olimpias: For
Cassander having commanded her to be slain, as soon as t^^ Executioner sent to
dispatch her h^^ informed her of his Message, she to^^ especial care so to wrap
up her self (...) her Robes, that when she should fa^ no part of her Body
should be dis^^ver'd, but what might beseem a M^dest Matron. And in the like
man^died the Wife of Pantheus, wh^ doomed to Death by Ptolomeus King Egypt.
Fulgos. l. 4.

Mand^slo in his Travels tells us (...) a Young Gentlewoman in Japan, w^^ by
accident breaking Wind as she a^ tended at the Table, was posses^ with such a
sense of Shame, that i^mediately hiding her Face, she depa^^ed, and so far
resented that Indecen^^ she as altogether undesirous to surv^^ it, in a Rage
bit off one of her Nip^^ which inflaming her Breast, stru^^ her to the heart
with a mortal Pain, and so ended she her days. Mandelo's Travels, L. 2. P. 190.

And yet stranger are the effects of Modesty, as it appears in the story of ^he
Milesian Virgins, who out of some ^d humor, were many of them pos^ess'd with a
desire of laying violent ^ands on themseves by strangling; and although they
were narrowly ^atch'd by their Friends, yet some ^f them found opportunity to
effect (...); which made their Parents attri^ute it to the Divine displeasure,
and ^ere at a loss which way to appease ^he offended Deity: When one of ^he
Sages proposed a Remedy, which ^t first was supposed Indesicient, but ^rov'd an
Expedient to prevent that ^isorder; which was, That every Ma^d who so Violated
her life, should (...) a spectakle of Derision, be carried Na^^d through the
Principal City; which ^eing confirmed by a Decree, the ^ear of the shame after
Death wrought (...) effectually, that for the future they ^esisted from that
unadvised and un^mely Expulsion of Life, Modesty in that case having a greater
sway with them than the fear of Death. Cause. H. C. Tom. 1. L. 2.

Aluilda, the Beautiful Daughter of Suiardus a King of the Goths, was possessed
with such Bashfulness, that for the most part she Veild her Face as not being
willing to expose her Modest Blushes, which commonly flulsh'd in her fair
Cheeks, at the sight of Man. Olaus. Mag. L. 5. C. 18.

So much the sense of Modesty ha^ wrought,
That it has Wonders to Perfection brought;
A spark it is of Native Innocence,
Dwelt with our Parents e're they gav^ offense,
E're shameless sin in Eden did commence.
Of Temperance.
For Temperance this Sex has been wonderfully Esteemed in all Nations as the
Enemy of Luxury, which is one main reason why they are generally more Healthful
than Men; and exceed them in the Prologation of their lives, affecting in all
things a Modest Neatness and Decency, Order and Comeliness being their proper
Attribute.

Nature in this Expresses them refined,
In choicest Molds she casts fair Womankind.
As for the powerful effests of their Charming Beauty, they are so Universally
known, especially to Lovers, that in vain it would be to Endeavor a fuller
satisfaction; than each Idea of hose Angelick Creatures forms in the Fancy of
him by whom she is admired; but seeing Fame has been Lavish in spreading over
the Universe, the Amazing perfections of her, whose Rape Troy Mourned in Tears
of Blood, and in whose hard recovery the Flower of Greece was lost. Nor less is
my intent to tell of Aegypts far famed Queen, whose matchless Beauty Captivated
him, to whom great Rome and all the World bended low.

The first of the above named Beauties was Daughter to Ledea, snatched from her
Mothers Arms almost in her Infancy, by the Warlike Theseus, then the Glory of
the Grecian Provinces, but afterward restored a spotless Virgin, and Married to
the renowned Menelaus, King of Sparta, who leaving after the first delights, so
great a Treasure under slender Gaurds, she was sorpriz'd by Paris Son of Priam,
and in an unhappy hour covey'd to Troy, a Famous City in the Lesse^ Asia, but
for that Rape razed by the enraged Grecians.

This Lady was of Complexion fair her Skin soft as the down of Swan^ Enriched
with charming whitness, the Round of her Face, inclining to a perfect Oval, her
Eyes black, and not the largest size, possessed all that could b^ desired in
Loveliness, quick they were with Mildness, and so full of Love, tha^ with a
single Glance they darted into the coldest breast all the flame tha^ sparkled
in themselves. Her Mouth no^ way inferior to her Eyes, was small and shut with
Lips that bore the pur^ Virmillion; in it is natural frame i^ presented an
Object not to be paralel'd for Beauty, and when it open either in speech or
seemly laughter, it not only exposed rows of Ivory, outvieing Orient Pearls,
but afforded thosands of new Charms, her Hair like curling Amber dangled on her
Snowy Shoulders, her Hands and Arms were long and final, white as polished
Ivory, or the curious Alablaster, yet more taking by the Azar streams that
wantonly Meandr'd through their tempting softness, in her fair Cheeks, Roses
and Lillies strove for Mastery, and in sine, Fame will have her such a lovely
Frame, so perfect in each part, that it is no wonder if Love, to which no Law at
all times can set bounds, conquering the reason of the Trojan Prince, made him
at any hazard covet such a Treasure.

A Treasure, had it been a lawful Prize,
Which might have made his Towering fancy rise,
Above the Soar of other Earthly Joys.
As for the Beauteous Cleopatra, she was Daughter of Ptolomeus Auletes, King of
Egypt, and after the death of her Father, and Brother Ptolomeus, Cajus Julius
Caesar, for the Love he bore her, made her Queen of Egypt; her Magnificence
and Excellent Beauty, being thus described by T. May, in his Second Book of
Continuation, Anexed to Lucan's Pharsalia, where relating the entertainment she
made to Caesar, he thus begins.

Great Cleopatra, Mistress of the State,
To give the Conquering Author of her Fate,
High Entertainment, to his Eye display's.
The Egyptian Wealth, in such Luxurious ways,
As might Excuse even Rome and make the Riot
Of her degenerate Senate seem the Diet.
Which the Ancient Curii and Camillus used,
Not what her Asian Vistories Infused.
The Gorgeous Palace with such Luster shown
As wealthy Kingdoms near their ruin grown.
Used to express, which show the present crimes,
And speak the Fortune of precedent times.
But Caesar's Eyes in all that wealthy store,
Which he so lately had beheld before
No pleasure find, nor with delight viewes he
The Golden Roofs, nor precious Imag'rie.
Rich Eben Pillars, Boards of Citron-Wood,
Which on their carved Ivory Tressels stood.
Nor curious Hangings do his Eyes admire,
For Cleopatra's Beauty and Attire,
Did quite Eclipse those Objects, and out shone,
All other splendors, on her looks alone
His Eyes are ffx'd, which though beheld before,
The more he views, do Ravish him the more.
All other Objects loose at second sight.
But Woman's Beuaty breeds the more delight
The ofter seen; he views that Snowy neck,
Those Golden tressels, which no Gems can deck.
The Wealth she wore about her seemed to hide,
Not to adorn her native Beauties Pride.
Though their bright Pearls from the Erithrnean Shores,
From all the Assirian Lakes, the wealthy Stores
Of Silver, Ganges, and Hydaspes shone,
From Aegypt's Eastern Isles, the Gold green stone,
And cheerful Emralds gathered from the Green
Arabian Rocks, were in full splendour seen.
Pale Onyx, Jasper, of a Various die,
And Diemonds darkened by her brighter Eye.
The Saphires blew, by her more Azure Veins,
Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains.
And blushing Rubies seemed to loose their Dye,
When her more Rubie Lips were moveing by.
It seemed (so well became her what she wore)
She had not robbed at all the Creatures Store.
But had been Natur's self there to have showed,
What she on Creatures could or had bestowed.
Of Learning.
But not to proceed further, in a perfection that is so Perspicuous; I shall
pass from it, to relate that internal Beauty, which more compleats the
adornment of the Mind, and centering in the Soul, delates it self not only to
the praise of the possessor, but the benefit of others; and in the first place,
insist upon the admirable perfections Women have attained to in Learning.

Tabiola a Roman Matron, wonderfully desirous to Improve herself in the
Knowledge of Sacred things, adicted her self to Learning; and so profited
therein, as to gain that esteem amongst the Learned which caused St. Jerome to
dedicate a Book to her Entitled De V^ste Sacerdotali Mercela Romana, and was
mentioned in diverse of his Epistles.

Constantia, the Wife of Alexander Sforza, had improved her self in Learning by
her Indefatigable Industry, that upon the sudden, and without any
Premeditation she was capable sufficiently to discourse upon any subject,
either Theological or Philosophical and was moreover singularly read in the
works of St. Jerome, Ambross, Gregory, Lactantius and Cicero. In Poetry she
was admirable, and so fluent that with her Extempory Conceits she attracted the
Ears of the Learned, and this Facility of hers is reported to be Innate, as
proceeding freely without force or affection. Heywood of W. Nor has the
Ingenious Sex been less seen in Philosophy.

In deep Philosophy were women Verst,
Through those dark secrets woman's Withas (...).
As will appear in the Example of Zenobia Queen of the Palmirians, who after
the death of Onedatus Governed that Kingdom of Syria, Her the Romans took
Captive and brought to Rome, but there for her admirable skill in, and
knowledge of that Divine Science, she was not only Pardoned, but alow'd a
Palace upon the Banks of the River Tiber, and was there Respected with the
same Regard as the Sophies of Persia were wont. Being at any time Invited to
hear Public Orations, she would never appear, but Armed with her Shining
Helmet on her Head, a purple Mantle flowing on her Shoulders, Buttoned with
precious Gems. But above all, she was wonderfully skilled in the Greek and
Arabian Tongues; and in the like Learning she instructed Hermolaus and Timolaus
her Sons, and is mentioned by Volaterran as a most accomplished Woman.

One in whose Wise, in whose Heroic Breast,
Greatness and Learning did together rest.
In Oratory women have been found skilful Proficients, as appears in many
Examples.

Amasia a virtuous Roman Lady, being accused of a Crime, and ready to undergo
the Sentance of the Praetor, she in the midest of a great confluence of People,
stepped up and pleaded her own cause so effectually, and with such Eloquence,
that by the public suffrage, she was Aquitted of the Aspersion Laid to her
charge, and in that great Affair, used such Decency and Modesty, that she got
to her self thereby the Surname Androgyne. Val. Max. L. 8.

Hortensia, the Daughter of Queen Hortensius, when the Roman Matrons had a
large Fine imposed on them by the Tribuns, and the Lawyers fearful to undertake
her cause, she as the Advocate of her Sex, boldly pleaded it before the
Triumuirate, with such cheerfulness and success, that the greatest part of that
Imposition was remitted.

So that it is plain, the greatest use oth' Tongue
Which to the fair Enchanting Sex bebelong,
Is no to Schold, as Black Detractors sung.
Not unaptly are the Muses placed in the Feminine Gender, appropriateing to
themselves the names of Women, since the Sex has been in past Ages, but more
immediately in the present Inspired, with raptures of Fancy, to a degree of
charming the Senses; but before I proceed to particulars, it will not be amiss
to speak a word on the behalf of Poetry, nor can they be better delivered, than
in the Language of the Muses.

How e're inspired the Soul with Rapture frought,
Has dark confusion into order brought,
Bough Nations strangers to Civility,
Have been reclaimed by sacred Poetry^
Morality has sprung, when it has Til'd
In The breast before with Barbarism filled
A power it has to Charm the Testi^ bold,
Clam restless Thoughts and ruged Nature Mold.
Though some may say in Fables it is profuse,
Take off the Veil, we Golden Truth produce.
As Diamonds e're they are Poplish'd loc not bright,
And unlight Tapors dart no Beams (...) light,
Into the devious Darkness of the Night
So Poetry to those, who from it is sphe^
Are distant far, does not it is self appear
It Is quest by those, as Rusticks guest Star.
But to the purpose, Poets are reported to be the first Revivers of Civility
and Morality amongst Men rather than the Philosophers, who attribute it to
themselves: And further, that Apollo found out the Muses, and brought Mercury
acquainted with them; for which good turn Mercury invented the Harp and gave it
to Apollo, which in the Moral sense is, that Poetry and Rhetoric go hand in
hand, and that a Poet cannot be Excellent unless he be a good Rhetorician, nor
a Rhetorician accomplished without he be a Poet; though of late the younger
Brother has gotten the advantage of the Elder as to temporal preferment.

Great Orators delight on Earth to shine,
Whilst Poets only aim at things Divine.
And in the latter as well as the former, Women were famous, as will appear by
the following Example.

Minerua, seigned to be the Daughter of Jupiter, for her excellent Fancy in
Poetry, was esteemed by the Ancients a Goddess; but most likely, beause she was
inspired as we call it, with Excellent Fancy, and was held in high esteem
amongst the Athenians. Famed next to her are the Corinna's, of which there are
recon'd three, viz. Corinna-Thebana, Daughter to Archelodorus, and Procratia
Scholar to Myrtis: She in five several Contentions bore away the Palm from
Pindaru^, Esteemed the Price of Lyrick Poets, and published five Books of
Epigrams, and is mentioned by Propertius. Corinna Thespia greatly admired for
her Works, but more especially taken notice of by Statius. The third lived in
the Regn of Augustus, and is much taken notice of by Ovid.

Sappho for her Poetry was Famous, and was as Elianus affirms, the Daughter
of Scamandronius, as Plato of Aristan, Suidas, and other Greek Writers say
there were two of that name, the one called P. Erixa, a much Celebrated
Poetess, who flourish' in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, and by many is
Imagined to be the Inventer of Lyrick Verses. The other was called Sappho
Mitelaena, who published many Poems amongst the Greeks, though somewhat
Extravagant, yet for her Ingenuity had the honor to be styled the Tenth Muse:
and of her Antipater Sidonus thus writes.

When Sappo's Verse she did admiring Rerad,
Demanded whence the Tenth Muse did proceed.
Telesilla had a wonderful Fancy in this kind, whereby she obtained the
Surname Poetria, and was no less admirable for Wisdom, Beauty and Valor,
being Born of Noble Parents: she in her Youth was adicted to much Indisposition
of Body, and therefore Inquired of the Oracle concerning Health: Answer was
returned her, that she should apply her self to Study. Nor long was it e're she
complying with the advice of the Oracle, but had her Health restored, and
attained to a wonderful perfection in Learning; but especially improved to
admiration in the Divine Fancy of Poesy, and thereby gained such an Esteem,
that when Cleomines King of Sparta sel^ upon the Argives in a Hostil manner,
she inspired the Argive Women with such Courage, that after their Husbands fled
and were many of them slain, they renewed the Battle, her self Leading the Van,
Routed the Spartans, and returned Victorious into the City.

To these I may add that Phoenix of Virtue, the Lady Jane Gray, Daughter to the
Duke of Suffolk, of whom I have made mention before, though in a different
nature. This Lady no^ exceeding Eighteen years at her death had never the less
improved her studies to a degree that she was skilful in the Languages, in
Philosophy and Divinity; but above all, Excellent i^ Divine Poetry, and may be
said to be the Epitomie of Perfection.

To these I many more might add, whose worth
Their works (than I) twice livelyer can set forth?
Our age abounds with Female wits, who find
The sacred Muses to their Fancies kind.
With rich conceits their larger hearts are filled,
Which rising thence, and in the Brain distilled,
To all the World Harmonious numbers yield,
In all the taking strains of Poetry,
Cadence or Rapture of the first degree.
A lively Lantskip drawn of Humble Swains,
Feeding their Flocks upon the Flowery Plains;
Through which Meandring Rivers smoothly run,
By shades Imbowring, sheltered from the Sun;
In whose warm Beams the frisking Lambs do play,
And then to full stretched Vdders take their way,
Whilst Rural Music Charms the flying day.
To these they add the Myrtle Crowned Hills,
Where Golden Ceres all the Valey fills,
Or 'midst the Pride of Gaudy Flora sing,
A joyful Welcome to the Blooming Spring;
When struggling long, she breaks from Winters arms,
And smilling courts the Sun with Virgin Charms:
How when he falls in Thetis watery Bed,
She on a Bank of Violets lays her head,
And sighing over the world, her Tears does shead
In silver drops, until Aurora fair
Opens her Gates, and does restore her Dear:
Tell how she is lost in Summer, who does Twine
The Blushing Roses with the Gessamine,
To make those pleasing Bowers where Lovers play,
Not penetrated by the Eye of day.
In such a one, if we may Credit fame,
Archise dally'd with the starey Dame:
Or tell of Autums Burden Rhind with Gold,
Flusht with Vermillion, or in Purple fold;
Whilst 'neath their weight the burdened Branches bend,
And they their Fragrance to Pomania send.
Thus they can Tune their Harps, but slightly strung,
As when Great Maro to Maecenas sung;
But if to higher strains they Tune their Lyre,
Such as are fit for Great Augustus Ear.
A sceen of war and Hero's mighty deeds,
Whilst to the Trumpet dance the bounding steeds;
There lively they present the threatening Vann,
Of either Host, before the Fight began
The horrid shock, when wars gri^ Ridg is stormed,
And how the Battle in all parts (...) formed.
Till when the fury rises to it is hight,
Who well deserves, who saves himself flight;
Who in a Rank unbroken, fiercest flin^
His Leaden Thunderbolts on lightnin^ wings;
Whilst Tiphons flame does vault (...) field with fire,
And drowns the Cries of those the there expire;
Who ranges furious through the dire (...) taque,
Whose Courage brings the flying S^diers back,
Who Brandishing aloft his glitteri^ Blade,
Wide wasting scatters those that (...) Invade,
Who ranges loosly, who makes good (...) stand,
Who disobeys, who fights as by comman^
Who bravest dies, who with his dying breath
Threatens the Foe, and smiles upon Grim Death,
Whilst Clouds of smoke bright Phoebus redness hide,
Who (...) to see the field with slaughter died.
Tell who gave way, who first 'twas left the field,
Who in the fight, who in pursuit were killed,
What spoils were taken in the doubtful war,
Who is overcome, and who the conqueror,
What glorious Trophies are affixed on high,
As a memorial of the Victory;
These they oblige their Muses to relate,
Or lively Paint a drooping Nations fate.
Then why in this should woman loose her praise,
Why should she want deserved wreaths of Bays.
Further in this case I may Instanc^ the Famous Sybils, who are not onl^
counted Poets, but Prophetesses, where^ fore it will not be amiss in this plac^
to give a brief account of them, as (...) has been handed down by past Ages to
the present, and translated, etc.

Isdorus says, the word Sybil is (...) name of place and office, derived (...)
Syos, which signifies a Deity and Bee^ thoughts of the number of these Sybils
Ancients Write different. Aeli^nus will have but four, viz. E^^thraea, Samia,
Egyptia and Sardim^ Arctina agrees with Isdore in the E^^mology of the Word,
and likewi^^ Numbers ten, and ascribes them the following places and names, vi^
Persia, Libia, Delphica as Born (...) Delphos, Omeria of Italy, Erithraea (...)
Babylon, Samia, Cumae, Hellesponti^ Phrygia and Alburnea. Cumae was (...) that
brought Books to Tarquinius Pri^cus, which spoke of the Roman Sucession; and
how strangely soe^ these were inspired, they told stra^ Truths; and as the
Ancients affir^ exposed their Prophesies in Vers^ but for Brevities sake I
shall only mention those that were fulfilled in the Conception and Birth of our
Blessed Savior, etc.

Sybilia Persica Born in Persia, and ^eld more Ancient than the rest; who
^aving Expressed the most Material things, relating to the several Ages of the
World, till the Year of our Bles^ed Saviors Incarnation: Thus speaks, In which
Year, of a Virgin shall be Born,
The Prince of Peace, Crowned with a wreath of Thorn;
Him the seventh age shall follow and Extend
Till the worlds frame disolve, and time see end.


Sybilia Libia, by some called Phoe^roe, was held to be the Daughter of ^ollo,
Sir-nam'd Prima, and is im^ted by some the first Inventer of ^eroick Verse, and
of our Blessed ^viour thus held to Prophecy.

A King, a Priest, a prophet, all these three
Shall meet in one Sacred Divinity,
Shall be to Flesh Espoused, O who can scan
This Mystery, Uniting God with Man.
When this rare Birth into the world shall come,
He the great God of Oracles strikes Dumb.
Nor may it be amiss, to set down how exactly the two last lines were
fullfil'd: For the very day wherein our Blessed Savior was born, one asking a
Response of the Oracle had this Answer.

Me Purus Habreus Superum Rex Linquere Tecta
Hac jubet, et cacas Noctis remeare Sub umbras;
Ergo silus Aris tu nunc discendit^ nostris.
And may be thus Englished.

A Hebrew Child King of the heavens high,
To leave these Alters, has Commanded me
To Nights dark shaddows and to final Woe.
Thou therefore silent from our Alters go.
And since that time it is observed ^ey remained mute.

Sybilia Delphica, was by some called ^aphne, and said by some to be Daughter
to Tyresias, she having fo^etold ^^e Wars of Troy, proceeds to speak ^^us of
our Blessed Savior.

An Angel shall Descend, and say, Thou blessed Mary, Hail;
Thou shall conceive, bring forth, yet be A Virgin Without fail.
Three gifts, the Chaldeans to thy Son, Shall tender with much Piety,
Myrrh to a Man, Gold to a King, And Insence to a Deity.
Sybila Cumaea, also called Cimmonia, is held to have been one of the
Priestesses to Apollo, born in Cuma a City of Aetolia, and spoke thus, in
relation to our Blessed Savior.

The Ancient of days shall then submit to time,
The meeker yield him self to new Creation;
The Deity and Godhead most Sublime
Take shape of Man, to ransom every Nation.
Die to make others live, and ever^ Crime
Committed, from the round World^ first Foundation.
Take on himself, as low as hell descending
To win Man, Heaven upon his Gra^ depending.
Sybila Samia, otherwise called E^rophile, took the name of Sama from the ^lsle
of Samos, the place of he^ birth, her Predictions were these.

The World shall to six thousand years expire,
By water once, but then Destroyed by Fire.
The first two thousand Void, the next the Law,
The last two under the Mesias Aw, And as repose by Sabath is expressed
Sun, Moon, and Stars, all things shall then have rest.
Sybila Cumana, by some called A^nalthaea having Prophesied of the great
Revolutions, and Successions of the Monarchies of the World, speaking ^f the
Glories of Rome, She comes ^o her Predictions of our Blessed Sa^iour.

-- Great Rome shall then look high,
Whose proud Towers, from their hills shall brave the sky,
And overlook the world, in those blessed days,
Shall come a King of Kings, and he shall raise
A New Plantation, and though greater far,
In Majesty and power, yet in the day,
So meek and humble he shall daign (...) pay
Tribute to Caesar, yet thence happy he,
Who shall his servant, or his subje^^ be.
Sybila Hellespontica, was otherwis^^ called Marrinensis, and as some asi^^
derived her self from Troy, her Pr^dictions being these.

When Atlas shoulders shall support Star,
Whose Pondrous weight he never (...) before;
The Splendour of it shall direct fr^^ Far,
Kings, and the Wisest Men, a (...) Light to adore,
Peace in those days shall flourish, (...) stern War
Be banished Earth, Mankind to rest^^
Then shall the Eastern Monarchs, Presents bring,
To one, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King.
Sybila Phrigia, as most are of Opinion, was no other than Cassandria, Daughter
to Pryam King of Troy, and (...) his Queen, She foretold the destruction of
Troy, but was never credited, but speaking nothing of our Blessed Savior, I
shall pass by her Predictions, though they axactly came ^o pass.

Sybila Tiburnia, so called of the Ri^er Tiber, was otherwise called Al^urnia
or Albania, from the City Al^a, the place of her Birth. It is re^orted of her,
that the Romans go^^g about to Deifie August Caesar, de^anded her advice, who
after three ^ays fasting, before the Alter where ^^e Emperor was present, after
many ^ysterious words, Miraculously spoke ^^ncerning our Blessed Savior, upon
^e sudden the Heavens seemed to o^en; and Caesar saw a Beautiful Virgin
standing before the Alter, holding an^ Infant in her Arms, whereat affrighted,
he fell on his Face, and heard a Voice, saying, This is the Alter of the Son of
God, in which place a Temple was after built and Dedicated to the Virgin Mary,
and called the Alter o^ Heaven. This Polichronicon Asserts and quots St.
Augustine for his Autho^ lib. 8, cap. 24. Her Predictions ^^ our Savior were
these, after she ha^ recited diverse wonders of the World^ which I willingly
omit.

What at these Tri^^es stands the World amazed,
And has on them with Admir ati^ Gazed.
Then Wonder when the Troubled (...) apease
He shall descend, who made them, the made these.
Sybila Europica was so called, (...) that her particular Region or place (...)
Birth was not known, nor is she a^ counted amongst the Ten, but adde^ and her
predictions were these.

When the great King of all the world shall have
No place on Earth, by which he can be known.
When he that comes all Mortal men to save,
Shall find his own life by the world overthrown.
When the most Just, Injustice shall deprive,
And the great Judge be Judged by his own.
Death when to Death, a Death by Death has given,
Then shall be op't the long shut Gates of Heaven.
Sybila Aegypta was likewise Added (...) the Ten, she prophesied on the ^umber
Three, and having reckoned ^any things Existent in that nature, ^us proceeds.

But which of us observe the sacred Trine,
Three Persons in one Godhead Sole Divine,
That Individual Essence, who dare scan,
Which is, shall be, and e're the world began
Was in Eternity, when of these thru^
One of that most Inscrutable Trinity
The second person, Wisdom, shall E^tomb
A^ Majesty's within a Virgins Wom^
(...) Man, true God, shall to that be Trine Link,
True Light shall shine, and False Sta^ be Extinct.
Sybila Aerithraea was Born in Ba^^lon, and was Daughter to Berosius the Famous
Astrologer; she prophecy of the Greeks that came to the Sie^ of Troy, defined
the places when^ they came, and how long the Sie^ would last, mentioning in her
Bo^ H^^m^r, and how that he should wri^ of those Wars partially, according ^
his Affection, and not the Truth; a^ in this manner prophesied she of o^
Blessed Savior.

The time by the great Oracle assigned,
When God himself in pity to Mankind,
Shall from the Heaven decend, and be Incarnate,
E^^ring the world a Lamb Imaculate,
And of himself in wisdom thinks so Meet,
VValks on the Earth with three and thirty Feet;
And with six Fingers, all his Subjects then,
Though ^^ King Mighty, shall be Fishermen,
In Number twelve, with these war shall be tried
Against the Devil, the World, the Flesh and Pride.
Humility shall quell, the sharpest Sword
With which they Fight, shall be the Sacred Word
Established upon Earth, which Foundation
Once laid, shall be Divulged to every Nation.
Women skilled in Painting.
By the Words Feet and Finges are to be understood Years and Months. And thus I
conclude the prophesies and predictions of the Sybils; which if truly theirs,
and by their being delivered down through so many hands, they have been neither
added to, nor deminshed, it remains doubtful whether it was in the power of any
Infernal Spirit to divulge such sacred truths so long before they came to pass;
or if it was, by this we may see that the Devils themselves were constrained to
foretell what they foresaw would be the Ruin of their Kingdom.

As Limning or Painting comes the nearest to Poetry; the one Exposing things
Lively drawn to the Ear, and the other to the Eye. I shall Incert the
dexterity of some Women, skilled therein.

Thymarete the Daughter of Myca^n, was eminent in this Art: and amongst other
curious pieces drawn to the life, she drew that Masterpiece which filled the
Beholders with admiration, viz. The picture of Diana, which was afterward hung
up in the Temple of Ephesus; she being accounted the best Artist the World had
afforded to that time, and flourishedin the time of A^chelaus King of Macedon.
Pliny l. 3 c. 11.

Irene was Daughter to Crantinus (a man Famous in this Art) she by often
observing her Father, so wonderfully profited herein, that she drew the
Counterfeit of a Beauteous Virgin of the City of Eleusina so to the Life, that
after it had been a long time praised and admired, it was placed amongst the
Rarities, to be admired by succeeding Ages.

Lala Cizice Daughter to Marcus Varo, practiced the use of the Pencil in Rome,
and in the Art of Limning attained to such perfection, that she drew her own
picture to the Life by the help of a Looking-glass: She also used a sharp
pointed Quill, called ^estrum, with which she curiously cut in Ivory, as in
these days (...) do in Silver or Copper, and was commended above all the
Virgins of her time for nimbleness and dexterity of hand, none ever equaling
her in quickness; and for Fancy and Curiosity she exceeded Sopylon and
Dionysus, who otherwise found none that might compare with them: and least the
cares of Marriage should hinder her herein, she chose to spend her days in a
state of Virginity. Heywoods Hist. W.

Thus art i^spir'd, Ingenious women can
Equal, if not Exceed the skill of man.
Women skilled in Weaving.
In curious Webs the Sex claims propriety as an Art attributed to their
Ingenuity, and in this many have been Famous, as Arachue of Lydia, Daughter of
I^arus, who wrought so curiously, that she is Fabled to be turned unto a Spider
by Minerua, with whom she contended for precedence. Penelope the Chaste wise of
Ulysses, who made (...) her Employment, during her Husbands being abroad in the
Trojan Wars, and his wandering at Sea; nor would she be persuaded by any means
to Marry, during his twenty years Absence, neither by her Parents nor the
Nobles that came to Court her, although she was Informed her Husband was dead,
but when they were so Importunate that she conceived they would compel her, she
Entreated them, that she might make an end of her Web, and then she would
consent to Marry, but instead of finishing it, what she Weaved in the Day she
Unravel'd in the Night, and by that means delayed them, till her Husband came
home, and freed her from their Importunity, from whence the Proverb arose,
Penelopes, Telum Texere; or Labour-in-Vain.

Olimpias and Livia; were exceeding dexterous herein, and although great
Queens, yet they set places apart, in their Pallac^s to Exercise this Art, and
Instructed others in it, the First Weaving a Garment for her Son, Alexander the
Great, and the Second, a, Mantle for the Emperor Octavian Augustus her Husband,
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 8. cap. 4.

Tanaquil Wove a Kingly Garment, or Imperial Robe woven quite through with
Rays, and Flame; or Streams of Gold, which Robe, Servius T^llus often wore,
when he sat in the Capital, on the Judgment Seat.

Ausonias speaks of one Sabina, not only Excellent in this Art, but likewise in
Poetry, whose Memory he left to posterity, in the following Epigram.

If thou affect a Purple Robe,
Woven in the Tyrian stain,
Or if a title well Inscribed,
By which thy Wit may gain.
Behold her Works Impartialy,
And Censure on them well,
Both, one Sabina does profess,
And does in both Excel.
Of Courage and Conduct in War.
Thus much being said of the singular Virtues, and other things relating to the
Beauteous Sex; it will be convenient to say something of their Fortitude,
Courage and Conduct, relating to War, or Warlike Exploits.

Women have shined in Camps, as well as Courts,
More seen in Mars's Arms, than Venus sports.
Charging through Bloody Fields, to purchase Fame,
And raise the Trophies of a Warlike Name.
Nor is it Fabulous, as some have Imagined, that there was, if it continue not
to this day, a Nation of Women, called Amazons, descended from the Scythians,
who upon their Husband's being slain in Battle, Assumed the Government. Vowing
never more to submit to the Tyranny, as they termed it of man, but to keep as
many as were sufficient for Propagation, and to send the Super-numerary Males
that should be, when brought up, to seek their Adventures in other parts of the
World, and not return, unless recalled, upon pain of Death, and by this means
they Increased in Power and Strength, using themselves to all manner of
Military Exercise. Their First Queens mentioned, were Marthesia and Lampedo,
who Jointly Governing, divided their People into two Armies, and went to War by
turns, after whom Succeeded Antiope, and Orythia, who by their Valor much
Enlarged their Borders, the Fame of whose Valor it is said, drew Hercules with
an Army to Invade their Country, But having Experienced their mighty prowes,
stood amazed, yet the Viragoes finding their Country wasted by the Greeks, sent
to Sagillus King of the Scythians, acknowledging they were descended, from that
Nation, and therefore prayed his Aid, who sent his Son with a Gallant Troop of
Horse, but after a while, some dissensions arriseing in Scythia, the Prince
withdrew his Forces, yet the Greeks tired with a Bloody and doubtful War,
though under the Leading of the most Valiant Captain that ever Greece boasted,
upon consideration that Theseus, a Noble Grecian should have Hipolite, Sister
to these Amazonian Queens in Marriage, a peace was concluded, and the Greeks
withdrew, having enough of Female Valor.

After the Aforementioned Queens Succeeded the Valiant Penthesilaea who came in
Favor of Priam, or as some say for the Love of Hector to Troy, whilst it was
besieged by the Greecians, with a Thousand Ladies, where after she had
performed many Valarous Exploits, and done all that true Valor was capable of
performing, overpowered by Number, and weak through loss of Blood, she was
beaten from her Horse, and slain by Achilles, or as some say, by Neoptolimus,
and was the first observed to Fight with a Poleax, or wear a Shield in the form
of a half Moon, and of her, Virgil speaks, in his first Ae^^id, and may be thus
in English, Penthesilaea Mad, leads forth Her Amazonian Train,
Armed with their Moon'd- Shields, and Fights
Midst thousands on the plain.


It Is apparent, these Amazonians continued till the time of Alexander the
Great, and though Is^^ras seems to a^^irm that Alexander quite Subd^^'d their
Nation, yet others say that that King sending to demand Tribute of them, their
Queen Minithra (or as some call her Thelastria) then Reigning returned this
answer.

It is great VVonder of thy small Judgment, O King? that thou desire to wage
War against Women. If thou being so great a Conqueror, should be Vanquished
by Us, all thy former Honors would be Eclipsed, and thou perpetually branded
with Disgrace; but if our Gods, being angry with us, should deliver us up to
thy Mercy, what addition is it to thy Honor, to have Vanqrish'd weak Women.
With which words Alexander was so well pleased, that he granted them Freedom,
adding that Women ought to be Courted with fair words and not with Hostility.
Whereupon the King desireing to see her. She came to his Camp, where conversing
together, about diverse affairs of State, they separated.

The Amazonians, were by the Scythians called Aeorpatae, which in their
Language signifies Man-Killer, and the reason why this name is given, is
because they abjured the Society of Men, any more than was reasonable for
Propagation, Curtias Quintus in his fifth Book thus describes their Habit.
Their Garments ( says he) covered not their Bodies round, their Right sides
were bare toward their Breast, their upper Robe which was Buckled or Buttoned
above, descended no lower than the Knee, one of their Breasts they reserved
safe and untouched, with which they nourished Infants; but as for the other,
which was the right, the growth of it was hindered by seering in the time of
Childhood, that with the greater dexterity they might use their Arms.
Herodotus speaks much of them, and amongst other things ( he says) to Encourage
their Valor, they had a Law, that no Virgin should enter into familiar
Congress with Man, before she had brought from the Field the Head of a slain
Enemy.

And thus the brave Viragos fierce in arms,
Trained up in Camps, and used to hot alarms;
Made all the Neighbor Nations stand in awe,
And Ruled their Country by a Female Law;
In this we see that Pallas Burnished spear,
Can with the Sword of Bloody Mars compare.
Not inferior to these was the renowned Camilla, Queen of the Volscians: This
Lady in her Cradle gave token of ensuing Valor, for she was not wrapped in
Softness, nor fostered by a Nurse, but by her Father Melebeus with Milk of
Hinds and wild Goats; nor did she when come to maturity, adict her self to what
is usual for women, but vowing Chastity, she betook her to Hunting wild Beasts,
of whose skins she made her Garments; her food for the most part was Venison,
and her drink Water from the Fountain; and in this Astemious and Chaste life she
continued many years, but in process of time the Volscians for her Virtue and
Valor chose her their Queen, and when the War happened between Turnus and
Aeneas, she brought her Troops into the Field in favor of the former, and
there did wonders; but happy for Aeneas, as she was Charging furiously on his
Routed Squadron, a Trojan watching his opportunity, shot her into the Breast
with an Arrow; of which Wound she dyed, and with her the Fortune of King
Turnus. And thus Virgil in his seventh Aeniad speaks, as I find it Translated
by Heywood.

To their supply Camilla came, The Gallant Volscian Lass,
Who bravely did Command the Horse, With Troops that shined in Brass.
Atlantea was Daughter of Jasus and Clymene, in her tender Age her Father cast
her out to a desperate fortune, for no other reason than that she was of the
Female Sex; when a Shee-Bare more Compassionate than her cruel Parent,
nourished her in the Woods with her Milk, till some Huntsmen fortuned to come
by, and casting their Eyes upon her lovely Beauty, took her home and carefully
brought her up: In her Youth she adicted her self to the use of Arms and
Hunting wild Beasts, till by her Swiftness and wonderful Courage she grew
Famous. She was wonderful Expert likewise in managing swift Horses, turning
Charriots in the midest of their Careir, Wrestling, throwing Darts, etc.

Hunting the Callidonian Boar with many of the Noble Youths of Greece, she was
the first Wounded that furious Beast, on which occasion Plautanus Cites her as
an Example, as thus, As did the Meleagrian Girl, who in the Aetolian plain
Laid flat the Foaming Boar, and was the foremost of the train
That gave him bold Encounter, and as Ignorant of fear,
Notch't her sharp Arrow, and the string plucked close up to her Ear:
The first that day in Field, that Blood from the stern Monster drew,
Bearing the honor, spoil and palm from all the Princely crew.


To these it will be convenient to add some English Viragoes, who in Conduct
and Courage have not been Inferior to the rest.

Elphlelda, Sister to King Edward the fourth, before the Conquest, was Wife to
Etheldredus Duke of Mercia, she affisted her Husband in restoring the City of
Chester, after it had been demolished by the Danes. After the death of her
Husband, she Governed his Principality Wisely and Valiantly, Built many Cities
and Towns, Repaired others, as Thatarn Brimsbury; she Built a Bridge upon the
Severn, and did many other famous things. This Lady having once endured the
pains of Childbirth, refrained her Husbands Bed, though not without his
consent; saying, It was unseemly for a woman of her degree to Innure her self
to such wanton Embraces, whereof should ensue so great a pain and sorrow. The
Welshmen heing unruly in those days, she tamed them, and over-threw the Danes
in several Battles; in Memory of whom Henry the fifth left this Epitaph upon
her Tomb.

Oh Elphlelda, thou great in strength and mind,
The Dread of men, and Viottess of thy kind;
Nature has done as much as Nature can.
To make the Maid, but goodness makes then M^^;
Yet pity thou should change ought but thy mama,
Thou art so good a woman, and thy fame.
In that grows greater and more worthy, when.
Thy Feminine Valor much outssineth men.
Great Caesar's acts, thy noble d^eds excel,
So sleep in peace, Virago Maid farewell.
Heywoods Hist. Women.

Maud, Daughter to He^^y the first, was Married to Henry the fourth Emperor,
her Husband dying, she had the Title of Empress, and her Father Henry caused
the Nobility of England to Swear Fealty to her, as his Lawful Heir; but he
dying, many left her, and took part with Stephen, Duke of Bulloin; when
contending for her right, she Fought many Battles with him, in which her
Courage, Prudence and Conduct shined to admiration, and at last took King
Stephen Prisoner, whom she brought to London, the people every where, Ken^
excepted, owning her Sovereignty. Upon notice that the King was prisoner, his
Wife came to Ransom him, and offered a Renountiation of his Claim to the
Kingdom; but she not harkening to it, the People Mutined against her, which
Obliged her to fly to Oxford, there to attend the Uniting of her scattered
Forces; but being there hardly pressed by the Queen and others that had
Asociated with her, she caused her self to Escape, being made a prisoner to be
Coffined up as dead, and carried to Gloucester; her Brother Robert being at that
time taken prisoner; and King Stephen soon after getting his Liberty, Besieged
her in the City of Oxford from Michalmas day to Midd-Winter, at what time being
strained through want, she Attired her self in White, and by that means passing
the Fenns covered with Snow, she came to Wallingford Castle, and soon after had
the Kingdom put into the possession of her Son Henry, Crowned by the Name and
Title of Henry the second.

Of Loyal Women.
In Loyalty to their Prince, Women in all Ages have been unparaled Examples,
and in that case England is wonderfully Indebted to the Memory of that
Extraordinary pattern of Loyalty and unshaken Fidelity Mrs. Jane Lane, whom no
promise of reward, or the fear of loosing her own life could induce to betray
her Sovereign; but rather with an undaunted Courage and never to be forgotten
Conduct, she Courted hazard and danger for the preservation of his late
Majesty, Charles the Second, of ever Blessed Memory.

To blot such virtue, fond man strives in vain,
For it like Christ^^ purges off its stain,
And by it does a brighter L^stur gain.
The Introduction to the Reasons and Arguments, etc.
THus far with an adventerous hand, I have portray'd the Virtues of the Fair
Sex, in their many singular qualities, and yet intend not here to stop, but
produce more sollid Arguments to confirm their worth, Though there is nothing
more nice and delicate, than to Treat on the Subject of Women, especially if we
speak to their advantage, for then it is imagined a piece of Gallantry or Love,
the Extravigancy of good Humor, or the Ardent Feavour of an Extraordinary
Passion; though certain it is that the most happy thoughts that can possess the
laboring Minds of those that would acquire a sollid Science, after they have
been vulgarly instructted, may have reason to doubt whether they have been
taught aright or not, and labor still to find a way at least to a higher
Improvement of what they but indifferently understand. And in this case the
Contemplation of good Women, works wonders in the lofty Soul of Man, by making
the things contemplated, more lovely and curious to the Eyes and Thoughts, or
rendering us more pliable to Entertain a large esteem of what the Wise have
termed a Sollid happiness; so those that have but viewed the superficies of
Female Excellence, can no more be sensible of the highth of that perfection,
than a Rude American of the inward Luster of an Unpolished Diamond found in
it is Rockey coverture, amongst the common product of the Earth. At a distance
we behold the glorious Lamp of day, and though at once we well perceive it
fills the world with heat and brightness, yet by reason of innumerable spaces
'twin it and the Earth, the Vulgar think in small, and that a narrow room might
easily contain that, which more than a hundred times exceeds in Magnitude the
sedentary Globe. Those glittering flames of Night, that move i^ Mistick dances,
and keep their orde^ over the drowsy World; who that is Ignorant of Moral and
Divine Phylophy, would not take them for Shining sparks or studds, inchac'd in
the blew Firmament as seeds of Light; when if they are not Worlds or Mansions
of Celestial Spirits, yet are they mostly larger by many degrees than this
which we Inhabit. Thus in case of Women's virtues Ancient as the World, and
Universal as Mankind, the Ignorant Indulge themselves in sloth and luck-less
error, whilst those whom Heaven intrusts with larger Tallents, either hide them
in a Napkin, or suffer Envy or Ingratitude to find a lodgment in their Souls,
either to detract from that Essential good which God has placed in the fairest
Creatures, or shut their Eyes through wilful stubbornness, because thy will not
see, and by such means be made to confess their stoic dullness or severity.
Great indeed is the Soul of Man, and comprehends more than the Universe: it is
glorious Center being far above all hight, yet often like Birds that fly too ^ear
the Waves, the Damps of Morossness slag it is Wings, and hinder it from soaring
to those Altitudes, where it may pry into abstrusest things, from Vulgar sight
removed, and many times as inconsistent as the day with night, from what is
fondly feigned or imagined by those Protoyps of Wit, who would at least seem
Wise, and yet many times they fall as short of what they think, with Elevation
they have scanned, and looked for fond Aplause for a conceited Merit, as those
who through a Telescope suffer their Eyes to delude their better reason, by
fancying large Countries and Provinces, Cities, Rivers, Lakes, People, Beasts
and flying Fowl in the Moons spotty Globe; for should we grant it was a World,
and did contain all these, yet mortal sight helped by the greatest Art or
Invention brought to light, in the height of it is Improvement, cannot Penitrate
so vast a space to make distinguishment of things. Imaginations all! tha^ too
often delude us, like the wandering Fire that dances, or seems to dance before the
belated Traveller, whom fear and darkness dispossess of that reason which
should make him keep his way, obligeing him by fixing his dazzled Eyes on the
Maetorious blaze, or unctious vapor, kindled by vehement Agitation, and kept
from expanding by inviorning cold; to wander after a deluding guide, which by
his movei^g gains a motion through the yiedling Air; or like to those that
fancy by the Moons pale light, to see a Troop of Faires danceing to an Airey
Melody, and Jocond on their Mirth Intent, whil't fear and Joy at once distracts
his Reason, and in the height of a confused disorder, wild Imagination, makes
him think he sees a walking Vision, when Indeed delusion represents that which
really is not. So often has Error found a place, even where deep Wisdom dwells,
as well as in the Mansion of simplicity, and why then may not those who have at
least pretended to the Study of Female Worth, and yet rendr'd so slender an
account of it, be mistaken in what is truly valuable in that kind, by
overshooting the Mark, or in not stating it aright; as those who cannot reach
it, as well render it not only uninteligible, by over doing and not rendering
it Perspicuous in its native Sphere, as by debasing, and Endeavoring to lessen
it by meanness, and an ungrateful Contempt. Rome who worship's the Image of
Jupiter Crowned with Rays and Stars decked with Gold and Glittering Gems,
Expressed no more a Superstitious Idolatry, than Fanatique Egypt, a mean and
covetous one, by Worshipping Gods, in the likness of brute Beasts, but to wave
this dark discourse I shall proceed to give my Sense in a Method suitable to
the Subject.

Reasons and Arguments for the Capacities of the Soul of Women, etc. In
Relation to Learning, Arts, and Sciences. etc.
THough Men may boast of their Wonderful Abilities, yet certain it is, the Fair
Sex, way boast the like, especially a Capacity of performing as much, seeing
the Soul proceeds from one and the same Fountain of Life; and if we consider
the Bod^, what can we find in it, that may hinder in ought, being generally
more lively and active than that of Man, as being made of a softer Contexture,
Nature has not been wanting to frame the Cabinet of the Soul, to the best
advantage, and has therein manifested her self an excellent Mistress, for a
Creature fairer in Proportions and more Regular in every part she never made;
against this some will object that according to the Organs of the Body, as they
are more or less capable of receiving the Influence of the Soul, which Enlivens
and supports the Body, is the party, or else say they, why may not a Child have
as large an understanding as a Man? the Soul not being an Infant, but
constrained to so narrow compass, it cannot opperate, and this say they appears
likewise in an Idiot, or a Lunatic, by reason the Organs are Imperfect, or
obstructed, or confounded, by distempers, and consequently the better part,
though a Spirit is hindered in it is Motion and Office, and therefore give it as
their Opinion, that Women being of a colder and more watery Constitution then
Men, have not Organs capable of giveing the Soul scope in it is operation, as
the Bodies of Men have, seeing they contain greater heat, which causes strength
and lar^ness of Body, more Vigor and Acttivity, more Acuteness and Solid
Judgment, though had they a Woman's Wit, which upon a sudden conception or
swift turn, is many times found available, and sometimes presserable to that of
Man, yet it holds not throughout the Sex, nor is it at the best, capable of
serious matters, or to unlock the Arcanes of profound Sciences, and dive into
Mysterious things, Occult and hid from the Vulgar ways of the World, and
require a sound Judgment, capable of discovering and weighing each particular.
Should I grant that the Souls of Children, Idiots and Lunaticks, are under a
restraint, and have not the power to Act, as in other Cases, as indeed it is
true. Yet we see the same happens as well to the one Sex, as to the other,
therefore that can be no Objection, but only to show the Independency and
Obstruction, of those Effects, but where it is otherwise the case is different,
for it plainly apears there are different Constitutions in either, all are not
the same, in the one, nor in the other, for some men are Phlegmatic, some
Sanguine, some Cholorick, and others Melancholy, and yet of all Constitutions,
there have been some Famous for I earning, others in Arts and Sciences, some in
Arms, and rare Inventions, and generally the Phlegmatic, are given to the
Study of the Profoundest Sciences, What hinders then, that Women who
participate of all these complections, and undoubtedly have Souls of the same
Existence with those of Men, that they may not be as Capable of procuring
themselves to be Registered in the Book of Fame, as those who style themselves
the Nobler Sex? As for that the Composure of the Mortal hindering the Immortal
part in performing it is office, is a position frivelous and vain, and makes
more against those that object it than for them, for it is often seen that in
crooked and deformed Bodies, Wisdom chooses to dwell, a Soul endued with more
Knowledge perhaps than that which is found in a more stately fabric of Flesh
and Blood; which Knowledge is wonderfully increased by Industry, Study and
Labor; for although the Soul in it self being a spark of the Divine light, is
Immortal and a Spirit, yet it is capable whilst on Earth, of taking an
Impression by Improvement, though nothing can fully satisfy it but God, from
whom it proceeded, and to whom it must return for its reward of good or evil.
The Body, (says the Wiseman) returns to the Dust, but the Spirit to God that
gave it. Aristotle was crooked and deformed, yet the World has not since
produced a man of so Universal a Genius, so seen in all Arts and Sciences. As
for the coldness of Constitution, that can be no hinderance, for it has
appeared that men of colder Constitutions than many women, have Exceeded the
Capacities of the Sanguin and Choleric: What then may be the reason? why it is
plain, Man having attained the upperhand in Rule and Power, claiming it by
Birthright as first Created, as much as in him lies strives to keep that
station as his prerogative, by endeavoring to keep the Softer Sex in
Ignorance; and to Effect this, he uses his utmost endeavors to possess her
with a belief of her Incapacitie^, hat she may not reach at things Sublime, and
by comprehending them, know the largness of her Soul. So the Egyptian Magi^ to
gain themselves the more esteem, and be adored by the unthinking Vulgar, had
all their mystery in Hyroglyphicks, dark resemblances, which perhaps themselves
scarce understood: nor would they suffer any other Characters to pass for
significations, least the People by improvement in Learning might detect their
falseties, and grow Wiser than themselves. So the Turk will suffer no Printing
in his large Dominions, least the greatest part whom he through Ignorance,
holds as in a Chain of Slavery, Reading the Histories of other Lands, should
find how much they are Abused. The Spaniards, when they made a Conquest of the
Golden Mines, kept the knowledge of its value from the Native Indians, that
they might not strugle for it with an equal Covetousness. This is the main
reason why men decline to Celebrate the praises due to the Softer Sex, and to
let them know in General that their Souls have equal force; their Wisdom
nothing Inferior, nor their Thoughts confined to narrower Limits than what
comprehends the Soul of Man. Through this thin Webb, that would in vain obscure
their Luster, many have broken, contemning degenerate pleasures inglorious
Sloth and Ease, and choosing the better part, by which they let men see they
were no whit Inferior to them, in what might render them accomplished, and make
them Blossom in the dust, as in sundry rare Examples appears, in the foregoing
part of the Book. Nor are all Women-kind less capable in some degree or other,
to improve those Golden opportunities that God has put into their hands.

Women as I have often said, within the bounds of Virtue, the Limit her Creator
set, is the most admirable Creature in the Universe, a Creature so charming,
that we read the Sons of God beholding the Daughters of Men, that they were
fair, did not disdaign to Espouse them, from which happy Union mighty Hero's
sprung.

Thus much may suffice to prove that there is an equality of the Soul, and that
it is Independent but on God, who is it is Author and Instructor; as for the
Body it is evidently no less, except as some will object, it is made to suffer
in case of Generation, but that which they account a weakness, whereby woman is
rendered inferior to man, proves her Glory, and ought to be the chiefest Boast,
not only Nature, but the God of Nature, showing wonders therein, as an
immediate signal of Almighty Favor; his everlasting Covenant appears in this
as Lively as when first he Blessed our Parents in their happy Eden; when affable
and mild, with Aspect Calm, he Shone upon them in his Brightness, and became
their great Dictator, e're his Brows were wrinkled with their disobedience;
e're his Adored Face changed into Terror, too severe for Mortals to behold.

Thus Beauteous Ladies, who in Virtue strive
To shame bold Vice, and keep the World alive.
I have my Reason's to a Period brought,
Yet Writ no more than dwelt within my Thought;
Reasons that may induce you to improve
Your Makers gift, to gain your Makers love;
What Gallantry, what Gory, what Renown
Beneath the Skies, is worth a Starey-Crown?
Consider that, Consider yet again,
If any Creatures Love you fain would win,
Virtu'l Inamour the bright Cherubim.
Reasons drawn from the Immortality and wonderful Operation of the Soul, more
fully proving the Excellency of Womankind.
THe foregoing Considerations duly weighed and impartially considered, may give
the Unbias'd part of Mankind a just reason to believe that that deserving Sex
may justly claim an Equality in Wit, and be as capable of attaining the
profoundest Arts and Sciences as Man; for it is not the Body, but the Rational
Soul, Noble in its self, as being a spark of the Divine Essence that center
knowledge: For as all Creatures Inferior to Mankind have their Life in their
Blood, as it is Testified in the seventeenth of Leviticus; so the Life of Man,
and consequently of Woman consists in the Soul, which although by reason of
the gross Humidity of the Body is subject to sundry passions, some more Nobl^
than others, yet it being Immorta^ cannot in its self suffer change, as being a
part of the Divine Mind, and Blast of Almighty Breath, that distinguishes us
from other Creatures, and that every one Created in that Glorious Idea, has a
peculiar Soul seems to be apparent, in respect of the may differences in
Judgments and Opinions, Manners and Affections, though it is no less certain
that itsprings from one and the same Fountain of Life and Immortality.

It has occasioned sundry disputes amonst the Learned of all Ages, in what part
of the Body the Soul has its chief Residence; some affirm it has its Throne or
Regal Seat in the Region of the Heart; others with the like confidence and more
reason, conclude its Principal Seat is in the Brain, from whence proceed the
Senses, faculties and actions, and by defusing it self in operation, it
enlivens every part with Heat and Force, with Spiritual Essence, with
Supernatural Intelects and Understanding, and more particularly it communicates
its force to the Heart by Arteries, Carotides and Sleepy Arteries, the stopage
or obstruction of which causes despondencies of Mind, as I have declared in the
foregoing Chapter, and this is indifferent to either Sex, why then should not
either Sex be equaly capable of great things? what should be the reason as to
the main, I have already given, and now come to what remains, which is the
contentedness of the Noble Sex in complying with what Custom and Tradition has
rendered nature, and by their long continuance become as it were a Law; which
Generous Woman expressing thereby a kind of a Virtue in her Obedience, is
willing to submit to, and render a Compliance with, as part of that duty she
ows to her Compeere, not through Fear, but Love, a Love frequently so
Transcendent, that it nearly views with that of Angels, and is as Inviolate as
the Ties of Nature, delighting themselves within which Pale, many seek no
higher happiness on this side Heaven, practicing on Earth to imitate that
sacred Love which comprehends Felicity beyond Expression, and by contemplating
things above, wean themselves from things below, not but that they are capable
of any thing, that man pretends to, would they apply themselves thereto, and
improve themselves therein? what Kingdom knows not this, if Envy or Ignorance
cast not a Mist before their Eyes? Scepters have often deigned to Kiss their
hands; and in the Beauteous Grasp appeared as aweful as when held by the rough
Warrior. Many wholesome Laws own them their Original, and Justice has been
impartially Administered: Mercy too has found a place, and the Oppressed plucked
out of the hands of the Oppressor: Religion under their protection has
flourished in its Purity, and War been prosperous under their Heroic Conduct:
Arts have flourished by their countenance and skill: Learning and Learned Men
Indulged and Improved, great has been their Sagacity and countless their
Labors, but more the Virtues that shine in them, no where else sound brighter
in their native Purity, even such as have raise'd the admiration of the wisest
Sons of Men, and ought as a mark of goodness to have a valuable Estimation set
upon them, that they may convince the folly of the Ignorant, and shame the
Envious, and so regulate the World, that men may not for want of better
knowledge be imposed on, to believe what is not, nor the wiser sort so far
forget themselves, as to dishonor those who are the honor of Man kind.

Greater things then these might be said upon the Subject, but as to these
Particulars, for breviti's sake, what has been spoken may suffice, from which I
shall proceed, to that which comes next to be considered which is the happiness
Man Injoys in being made capable of possessing a Blessing exceeding all that he
can fancy upon Earth.

So Soft so Loving, Charming and so Kind,
That all the Creatu^'s to his use assigned,
Comprised in one, all that in them is rare,
Cannot by infinite degrees with this compare.
Search for the Unicorn of Indian Breed,
For the Camelian that on Air does feed,
For the gay Phoenix in Arabian fields,
Or for the Gold and Gems that India yields,
With cold Imaus Top, Eagles Eyes then View,
And Hibla covered with Milliferous Dew.
View Sharons Valleys all with Roses spread,
An'th Cedar Crown, on Lebanon's Large head.
Behold the place where spotless Lillies grow,
In Native pride, or where the Rivers Flow,
Rolling on Golden Sands their fluctant Waves,
Or where the Sea, which rich Armaspia Laves.
And leaves on the forsaken shore those Gems
That Star-like glitter in Kings Diadems.
View all the Spicie Grove whose Fragrance greet
The Traveller, before his Eyes can see it.
View all the Gaudy Plumes which on the Wind,
With out-spread wings an easy passage find.
And all those Animals Earth does contain,
To these, join those that cut the swelling Main.
And still add more let Floras Glory come,
Nay Ceres her Gold sheaves with su eat brought home.
And kind Pomona with her giving hand.
Nay Baccus who over Men has large command.
Let these and what of this kind, though^s can frame,
In one unite, In one their worth proclaim;
Compared with Women, Scarce they will find a name.
The Happiness that accrues to Man in the possession of so great a Blessing as
a Virtuous Woman.
ABove all Earthly Blessings, for which Man ought to pay the most profound
Adoration to the Tremendious Majesty of Heaven; Woman is deservedly placed, as
being a part of himself, and more immediately made for his sollace and delight,
a Blessing by which a multitude of Blessings redound to him, such as cannot be
received from any other Creature, because the means and opportunity in them are
wanting; nor did the wise Creator think sit to order it otherwise, for as much
as likenesses are mostly desired, and the Soul is so Essentially noble, that it
detests Familiarity with any thing inferior to its self, looking down upon
Creatures Irational, as things made for its Service, and subjected to it as in
indeed they are for Man was made to seve his Maker, and all things else for the
Service and Use of Man, wherefore nothing could be found complacient amongst
Irational Creatures; all the Beauty of the Universe looked like a Clouded Star,
till the bright Beauty of Female Excellency appeared, and like the Sun dispeld
those Damps that heaviness of Mind had raised; and so pleasing at first was the
Queen of Sublunar things, that Adam was wonderfully surpised to behold any
Mortal frame so fair; and some have fancied that e're he had better informed
himself, he took her not to be of Mortal or Material substance, and thus
imagine him to have Accoasted her.

Fairest of Creatures, found the last but best,
How am I with a sight so pleasing blessed!
If you are Mortal speak: But O! I fear
No mortal frame so Beauteous can appear!
So great a favor Heaven will not give
To Mortal Man that must consented live,
With what his Bounteous hand has given him,
And not desire a dazzling Seraphim;
Yet something strange does move my earnest Soul,
Strange thoughts about my Feeble Fabric^roul,
And to surpress them, it is in vain I strive,
Without this Fair methinks I cannot live,
Loadstone like my heart draws her, and she
Like the Blessed Nedle's moveing toward me.
O! Great Creator, now I well perceive
This is a Blessing thou intends to give,
A happy Blessing, which makes all complete,
A favor which must surely make me great,
Since I on Earth find such a Charming Mate,
In whom methinks the Graces all appear,
And native Beauty shines as in it is sphere,
An air so pleasing from her Face do sty,
Such Roses stain her Cheeks with Crimson dye,
Such Beams of light dart front her piercing Eye,
Whilst Lillies all her Beauteous structure spread,
And with their Whiteness mix the pleasing Red,
So Charming is she, that if not Enjoyed,
All favors else are by that loss destroyed.
But to come nearer to what is intended, Woman is certainly the greatest
Earthly comfort Man can be capable of possessing, as being rightly termed the
sollace of his Life, and to Wave her, being part of his Original, or an
Instrument in the hand of the Almighty to save the World from desolation; her
virtues are for the most part admirable, and no less her judgment, and the
other Intelectual faculties of her Soul. That, as I have proved being nothing
Inferior to that, in which Man centers his largest Pride and Boast, imagining
it (as it truly is) a Ray of Essence, a Effluence of his Maker. Woman from her
Infancy with pretty Smiles delights the World, and Chears the hearts of her
admiring Parents, and as she grows, Virtue takes its place well pleased to
dwell in such a Fabric, and brings as her Attendants, Modesty, Sobriety and a
wining Behavior. No sooner is Woman possessed by Man in the happy State of
Conubial Love, but she furuishes him with a shower of Blessings, wrapped in soft
Delights and decked in Chastest Charms; mild and plyant is her Temper, and her
Carriage toward him decent, and comely her Behavior, her Love is beyond
Expression, and her Tenderness such, that she values him on whom her heart is
placed equal with all but her imortal happiness, as for her Life she counts it
a Trifle, and had rather loose it than her Honor; she esteems nothing on Earth
too good for her Beloved, and inforces all her Charms to please and render him
the happy Father of hopeful Children; she is indeed his Internus Sensus, his
second self, equally shareing his Joys and Afflictions, and is not like a
Swallow that sings to the morning wake of his prosperity, and when the Winter
of his Adversity comes, takes her way upon the Winds to seek a warmer Sun; her
Smiles are not to be bought with Silver, nor her Love to be purchac'd with
Gold, but are freely and entirely placed upon her Beloved; great is her
diligence to please him, and as great her care not to offend him; when he
rejoices, she rejoices; when he is grieved, she is sad, simpathising with him
in all things, and is the secret Cabinet in which he dare repose his Secrets,
and find them there as safe as in his Soul; a Repository she is of his
abstrusest thoughts, and is ever tender of his honor, nothing she thinks too
good for him, nor nothing she can do too much; in Health, she takes care for
his necessaries, and is wonderfully tractable in forwarding his Affairs, in
Sickness; she is more studious for his Health then her Intrest, and puts up her
Prayers and Vows to Heaven for his recovery, Expressing in all her actions a
careful Love and Tenderness, and in her Words a venerable Esteem; so that
without so great a virtue as Woman, Man must be miserable and forlorn as to his
temporal Condition; nor ought he to esteem so great a Blessing unworthy his
largest Thoughts, nor render the Almighty less Tribute of Praise and
Thanksgiving, for bestowing that last best favor on him, which could only
complete his earthly Felicity.

In making Woman Nature has been Lavish, and showed her curious Art in Forming
a Creature soft and tempting, to allay the rough temper of Man by moderation
and mildness, as the Fluid Air prevents the Firey Region from Calcinating the
Earth, and renders that outrageous Element serviceable to Mankind. Great was
the cunning Nature used (or rather the God of Nature) (not to refer so great a
Work to second causes) in framing the lovely structure of the Softer Sex in
every part, proporting what by sight or touch might yield delight, forgetting
nothing that was admirable in it self, or might be pleasing to those whose
curions thoughts could scan the best Perfections; wonder not then why the Sex
is so admired by all the sages of the World, yet not so much as real Worth
commands in true desert, as has been often intimated in the foregoing Pages;
why then should Man decline so great a Blessing? why should not he, who is so
proud of being Rational, use his Rationalty to a right end, and by temporal
Love founded on Virtue, strive to raise his Soul to that which is Eternal
endless, and not dated by degrees of time; a Love unalterable as Fate, sounded
on a commixture of Blessings, in conversation with Angels, Archangels,
Cherubims and Seraphims; Thrones, Dominations, Prince-doms Virtues and Powers,
all the Starry Quire of Brightness and Batitude; and higher yet, for Love is
God, and God is Love, by it the order of the Visible World is maintained, and
things not visible to mortal Eyes supported in their sacred order and
concordence, it is that which makes all truly happy, and without it is no
happiness in this World, nor the World to come.

Then let us prize a Gift that is so fair,
So good, so just, that she our love should share,
To a degree, too great to be expressed,
Who of all Blessing Earth affords, is best,
Who only Crowns all Earthly Flappiness,
And does Mankind beyond his wishes bless.
A greater Blessing Heaven never gave
To Mortal Man, but him that Man did save.
The Reasons why Man's Happiness is not complete on Earth without the Charming
Creature Woman.
AS for the necessity of the Beauteous Sex it is evident, not only for the sake
of Generation, but for that of Mutual Society; Man without them being as a
Solitary Traveller, who Journeys through Wildernesses and Deserts, where
Rational Creatures seldom give his Eyes the pleasure of beholding them; though
some may object that the Conversation of Man with Man is materialy sufficient.
I grant it is in general relating to indifferent affairs, but where the Soul
claims a closer Union than such Innocent diversions can allow, that convers is
of little moment. Woman was taken from Man, and therefore by a simpathy of
Nature, and a secret contraction of the better part, she considers in being
cruel to her temporal Original; she is cruel to her self, and in that cruellty
offends her Maker, unless a singular vow of Chastity interposes, wherein her
aim is to be a spotless Virgin, that so she may follow the Lamb that has taken
away Original Sin, and given us leave and oppertunity to be Regenerate and Born
again through Faith and Relyance on his meritorious Death and passion, but to
come nearer to the conclusion, Eternal love ought to be our chief aim,
Life in our Saviors death we d^ly claim,
In his dear merits all our hopes must be,
Zone of our everlasting life is he,
A bright Meridian of Eternity;
But how came this great Mystery to pass?
Eternal Widom the Prime Author was:
The thing is deep, and Mortal Minds are lost,
Heaven nows alone what this dear Blessing cost.
Consider then, and let us still adore
Omnipotence, which our weak nature bore,
Compassioning us; he laid aside
Known Glory, and dispising shame, he died
^^^'raign over Death, with Death he yet complied.


Having thus far discoursed, I shall proceed to the Character of a Virtuous
Woman in all her Capacities.

The GOLDEN CHARACTER Of a VIRTUOUS WOMAN In all her CAPACITIES.
IN this case three things are more immediately to be considered, viz The
Virgin State, and those of Marriage and Widdow-hood, and of these in their
Order.

A Virtuous Virgin may be properly called the Treasurey of Chastity and
Innocence, delighting to live in that Estate, that she may have the better
opertunity to do good, and render her self an example of Piety; Meekness and
Humility are her constant Attendants, and Pride knows not her Dwelling: She
delights not in much Discourse, and flys from Vanity: the Sound of vain words
renders her restless and uneasy, till she has found a retirement: Modesty and
a Comely Behavior are the Ornaments wherewith she desires to be decked:
Affable she is, and of a sweet Temper: her Words are few, and those delivered
with deliberation: amongst Strangers she rarely speaks, unless she be asked any
Question, or otherwise Business of Importance requires it: she chooses not a
single Life for it self, but in Refference to her better serving God: she
improves her single life therewith to serve God more constantly: she counts her
self better lost in modest Silence then found in bold Discourse: at the
Repetition of any wanton Discourse she Blushes and turns away: for the future
shuning those that give themselves up to such Vanity, yet when at any time she
mentions Marriage it is done with seemly Reverence and regard to that Holy
State: her Obedience to her Parents is wonderful, and Respects to her
Superiors equals and inferiors no less; and indeed lives a Saint-like life
upon Earth, void of offense toward God and Man; and as she lives with less
Care, so she dies with more Cheerfulness.

THE CHARACTER Of a VIRTUOUS WIFE.
NOT without Reason does the Holy Scriptures Style a good Woman or Wife, the
Crown of her Husband, for so she proves being the greatest Felicity a Man is
capable off, being properly called his secon Self the Partner of his Joy and
Grief, the safe Repositorie of his Secrets, aand Sollace of his Life. A good
Wife commands her Husband in equal Matter, by Constantly obeying him, she
never Crosses him, in the height of his Anger, but patiently waits till it is
abated, and then she mildly argues the Matter with him, not so much to condemn
him, as to acquit her self. Her Husbands Secrets she seals up in her Breast. In
her Husbands abscence, she Officiates his place, in regarding and taking care
of his Affairs, but when he is present, she Intermedles in his concerns no
further than she is required, she keeps at home constantly, unless urgent
occasions require the contrary, and then she acquaints her Husband therewith,
and has his leave before she sets forward, her Habit and Attire, is rather Neat
than Costly, her Carriage is Modest, and her Words delivered with a mixture of
Discretion and Gravetie: In her Husbands Afflictions, she ever bears a part,
and uses her Endeavors to Consolate him: Her Children though many in Number,
are none in Noise, her Nod or Look, being a sufficient Helm to Steer them as
she pleases. The heaviest Work of her Servants, is made Light, by her orderly
and sesonable Enjoining it. Wherefore her Service, is counted a Preferment, and
her Teaching, better then Wages, and thus' she is happy in her self, and
renders others the like Felicity.

THE CHARACTER Of a VIRTUOUS VVIDDOVV.
AVirtuous Widow has been the Esteem of all Ages, and found the Miracle of
Piety, for the near approach of Death, even to taking from them the Center of
their Earthly affections, makes past doubt a deeper impression than can be in
others, and fills their Pensive Breasts with serious Thoughts, which turn to
Meditations; and from thence as from a Fountain flows a stream of Prayers and
Pious Ejaculations, which seldom are silent till the highest has regarded
them. As for the Virtuous Widow, though her Grief is real, yet it is moderate:
she does not only live Sole and Single, but Chaste and Honest, Though she go
abroad some times, about her bu^^ess, she never makes it her business to go
abroad, she Entirely Loves the Memory of her deceased Husband, and will hear no
(...) spoke off him, she Cherishes her Children: and Fancies in them their
Fathers Idea: she puts her Especial Confidence in God, the Father to the
Fatherless, and Husband to Widows: she is Careful and Tender of her
Reputation, yet not more Careful of her own Credit, then of Gods Glory: she is
Pittyfull and Bountyfull to People in Distress: she walks Humbly before God in
all Religious Duties: she affects not the vanity of Foolish Fashions: she roads
constant Lectures to hersolf of her own Mortality, and in this State she
continues all the Days of her appointed Time, 'Till her Change come.

FINIS.
BOOKS, newly Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey.
[1] A Discourse of Divine Providence. 1. In General: That there is a
Providence exercised by God in the World. 2. In Particular: How all Gods
Providence in the World, are in order to the good of his People. By the late
Learned Divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometimes Fellow of New-Colledg in Oxon.

Price Bound 3 s.

[2] A Pleasant and Compendious History of the first Inventers and Instituters
of the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole
World. Together, with many other Rarities and remarkable things rarely known,
and never before made public. To which are Added, several Curious Inventions,
peculierly attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole Work Alphabetically
Digested, and very helpful to the Readers of History.

Price Bound 1 s.

[3] A Discourse upon the Pharisee and the Publicane. Wherein several great and
weighty things are handled: As the Nature of Prayer, and of Obedience to the
Law, with how far it obliges Christians, and wherein it consists: Wherein is
also showed the equally deplorable condition of the Pharisee, or Hypocritical
and Self-righteous Man, and of the Publicane, or Sinner that lives in Sin, and
in open violation of the Divine Laws: Together with the Way and Method of God's
Free Grace in Pardoning Penetent Sinners; proving that he justifies them by
imputing Christ's Righteousness to them.

Price Bound 1 s.

[4] SIghs from Hell, Or, The Groans of a Damned Soul. Discovering, from the
16th of Luke, the Lamentable state of the Damned. And may fitly serve, as a
Warning-Word to Sinners, both Old and Young, by Faith in Jesus Christ, to avoid
the same place of Torment. With a Discovery of the Usefulness of the
Scriptures, as our safe Conduct for avoiding the Torments of Hell. Both by John
Bunyon, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

Price Bound 1 s.

[5] THe Saints Comfort, in all, but more especially in Evil Times. Drawn from
Twelve several Texts of Scripture; which are briesly explained in this small
Piece. By T. G. Minister of the Gospel.

Price Bound 1 s.

[6] THE True Fortune Tellers: Or, Guide to Knowledge. Discovering the whole Art
of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, and Astrology. Containing, 1. A
Description of the Planets, their power and influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angles, and sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are Governed as to
good or bad Fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Nose, Ears, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard, and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the
signification of the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles and their significations.
7. Of Dreams and their Interpretations. 8. Of Nativities and their Calculation.
9. Of the Rod by which hidden Treasure is found. 10. Of Marriages, and at what
time any Person shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the danger of Death. 12. Of
good and bad Days. 13. The manner of Resolving doubtful Questions, as to
Friends, Marriages, places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or
Business. 14. Of Pythagoras his Wheel of Fortune. 15. Of the good and bad days
in each Month relating to Health. To which are added, Aristoteles Observations
of the Heavens, their motion. Of Fiery Metors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses,
Commets, Earthquakes, and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several proper Figures.

Price Bound 1 s.

[7] A Directory for Midwives: or a guide for Women, in their Conception.
Bearing and Suckling their Children. The first part contains, 1. The Anatomy of
the vessels of Generation. 2. The Formation of the Child in the Womb. 3. What
hinders conception and its remedies. 4. what furthers conception. 5. A guide
for women in conception. 6. Of miscarriage in women. 7. A guide for women in
their Labor. 8. A guide for women in their Lying in. 9. Of Nursing children. by
Nicholas Culpepper.

Price Bound 3 s.


