A SHORT, COMPENDIOUS, AND TRUE DESCRIPTION Of the ROUNDHEADS, and the
LONG-HEADS, Shag-polls, briefly declared, with the true discovery both of the
time and place of both their Original beginnings, deduced and drawn out of the
purest and refinedst Antiquities or Records of Time.

OR, AN ANSWER To a most ridiculous, absurd, and beyond comparison, most
foolish Baffle, sent into the world by a stinking Locust, And Entitled, THE
DEVIL TURNED ROUNDHEAD.

EZEKIEL. 44. 20.

Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long;
they shall only poll their heads.

Printed in the year, 1642.

A TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE ROVND-HEADS.
ANd first there is laid down in these eight general heads: First, the
Original of them both, Genesis 2.7. Revel. 9. Secondly, where they were made, as
in the same records you shall find. Thirdly, of what made, the same records
also declares. Fourthly, by whom made, there you shall find it also. Fifthly,
how they are qualified, there you shall find it also. Sixthly, of the number of
either of them, that you shall find Mat: 7. ver. 13. Revel. 9. of their use and
particular end, Psalm 73. Eighthly, and lastly of their last, and final end
that is Math: 25.


All these are severally handled more plainly and largely in their order by W.
P.

A faithful soldier of the sixth legion belonging unto the chief general of
the most victorious regiment of the Roundheads. Written upon the plain of the
earth, in the midst of an innumerable rabble gathered together by the devil of
shag-poll locusts, for the destruction of the Roundheads.

And first to begin with the Roundheads Original:

His beginning was the sixth and last day of the worlds creation, in time
proceeding and going before that of the locust shag-polls, being of more
antiquity, and therefore more to be had in honor, of those that reverence
antiquity of time more then your shag-poll Locusts are.

Secondly, for the place where your Roundhead was made: why; he was made in a
place incomparable, more excellent then that wherein your shag-poll Locust was
made, as you shall hear hereafter, he was made in a delicate place, even in
paradise a place of spot-lesse purity, and delightful content; A place fit for
a Round-headed puritan and semy-separate to be made in: your semy-seperate,
puritan, and Roundhead, are computable 3. objects comprehended in one subject,
being all made of one and the selfsame matter, as also of one and the
selfsame nature, differing only in the precedence of the titles, the title
semy-separates, and Roundhead, issuing out of the Puritan, as the stream
issues out of the fountain, being all one as the fountain and his stream is.

Thirdly, by whom wa^ your Puritan or Roundhead made? your Puritan or
Roundhead was made by him who made the round world, and all that therein is, by
Jehovah Elohim in most perfect beauty, shape, and form, most admirable,
composed in most comely proportion and order, his Roundhead not Ass-Head like,
but round indeed, which being looked upon by God himself, he saw that it was
good, yea, most exceeding good and liked it wondrous well, so that he blessed
his round head by him made, bids him increase and bring forth fruit, yea, even
that fruit that should destroy the shag-polle locusts, and all the works of the
devil from off the earth.

Fourthly, of what made? he was made of that matter which that name which God
gave him signifies, of red earth this Adam which the shag-polls in derision
calls a Roundhead, was made of red earth or of red dust, which to prevent some
foolish objection, signifies one and the same thing.

Fifthly, how is this Roundhead qualified? admirably, with grace and virtue of
unvalued worth, as, first with innocence of life, composed and mixed with rare
ingredients, of mercy, truth, and love, as also with rare wisdom and
understanding, so that he did know the composition, and secret natures of all
the creatures in the world, and so was able to give them names according to
their nature, and so he did; thus internally and externally was this Roundhead
qualified with Admirable Wisdom, Beauty, Comelines and strength.

Sixthly, for his number and increase: why; for his increase of number it was
but small, excellent for quality, but few for quantity, in regard as the time
now is and ever was, but here and there one; excellent and exquisite things
being always scant, and rarest to be found, and that is the thing, together
with their secret virtue, that makes them be of such account with those that
knows their worth, which knowledge of them, as they are, it is only in God and
amongst themselves, for foolish shagpole locusts have no knowledge of their
excellency, nor are no more able to discern their splendour, then a blind man
that never saw the Sun, is able to judge or discern the glory of the
illustrious beauty of the Sun.

Seaventhly, of the Roundheads use, what is he useful for? the Roundheads
use is manifold, of many sorts and kinds, but all for good; and first to set
forth the splendid glory of the justice of God, his grace manifested to them in
the face and favor of Jesus Christ, but never unto the shag-pole locusts.
Secondly, to set or show forth the virtues of Jesus Christ, the second person
in the trinity, that has therefore called these Roundheads out of darkness
into light; that they should show forth his virtues, and so they do as on the
contrary the shag pole shows forth the vices of the devil. Their third use is
to be store houses of wisdom; their fourth use to be temples of the living God.

Fifthly, to be teachers and instructers of men for the praise and glory of God,
his secrets being made known unto them only. Sixthly, to denounce his judgments
against the world, Revel: 18. about the beginning, for these Round-heuds are
called his Angels, Revel: 2.

Angel being a name of office, not of nature always.

Seaventhly, they are useful to keep off his judgments sometimes from the shag
pole, as that Roundhead Lot while he was among the shag-pole locusts
Sodomites, the fire and brimstone could not come down to burn them; as also
here in England, how does these Roundheads keep off the pestilence, sword, and
famine from the shag poles here, and are the causes that many temporal
blessings does come upon them, which notwithstanding these shag pole locusts
know, that it is for their sakes that they receive these benefits, yet they
cannot endure them.

Eighthly, and lastly, what is the final end of the Roundheads? their final
end next the glory of God is the salvation of his own soul, his final is the
redemption from all miseries in this mortal life here and for ever hereafter,
which no shag pole locust must enjoy, his final end is to be a King, to reign
with Christ for ever, to be an heir with Christ, an inheritour and possesser
of all things with him to all eternity; as also to praise and glorify God for
ever in an everlasting state of blessedness in the highest heaven, out of
which all slanderous lying, scorning, barking, shag pole locusts must be shut,
Revel: 22. ver. 15. without shall be dogs, shag pole locusts, he means
inchanters, whoremongers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves lies or makes
lies, be they Priests, or Pesants, or whatsoever.

And thus have we finished your Roundhead.

The second general head to be handled is your shag pole locusts original
when it was.

Your shag pole locusts original was the opening of the bottomless pit, Rev:
9: the smoaky pit, out of that smoke; came those shag pole locusts that wear
hair like women, which was long after the making of the Roundheads; therefore
are they of no such antiquity as your Roundheads are: and therefore according
to your own rules are not so honorable as your Roundheads are.

Secondly, the place where they were made: why, they were made in the
bottomless pit, as is above mentioned, they came out of the bottomless pit,
at the place from whence they came, there were they made.

Thirdly, by whom were they made? why, by the devil the father of all
slanderers and liars, such as these locusts are, whether locusts teachers, or
locusts hearers, who made them all in uncomly, and in unmanly order, for they
had hair like women, faces like men, and teeth like a Lion, Revel. 9: verse.
7,8. all like deformed monsters, as well inside as outside, exceeding bad and
vile, full of confusion and deformed disorder as well the Priests as people.

Fourthly, of what made? why, as first his case or outside he is made of dust
as your Roundhead is, although he knows it not as your Roundhead does, but
for his pitch or inside it is semines incuba, or spermes diablus, he is made
of the seed or spane of the devil, he is of his father the devil; as concerning
his constitution of his mind, murderers and liars are they, and so is he.

Fifthly, how are they qualified? why, clean contrary to your Roundheads, not
with innocence of life, but with nocency, with gross and palpable ignorance
and blindness in spiritual and heavenly things, full of conceitednesse of
having that which they are utterly empty of, but being full indeed of the
spirit: now I know to hear the name of spirit, will vex them, for they defy
such as are full of the spirit; but to quiet them a little, I give them to
understand, that that spirit which they mean, is not the spirit I mean, the
spirit that I mean here that they are filled with; is the spirit of lying, and
slandering, and false accusing of the Roundheads, the spirit of whoredom and
unsatiable lust, the spirit of envy, malice and murder, of drunkenness,
epicurisme, and all manner of loose profaneness, the spirit of hatred against
the appearance of any goodness, though never so little, for they love nothing
almost but profit, impiety, like the devil himself, which rains effectually in
them, and he it is that has thus qualified them, and which has also blinded
them in their judgments, that they cannot discern the nature and difference of
things, but judge good to be evil, and evil to be good, John 16. 1, 2. They
shall excommunicate you, and he that kills you shall think he does God good
service: whether this be so or no, I refer you to your selves, all you
shag-poll Locusts.

Sixthly, for their number and increase, it is wonderful, in number they exceed
the Roundheads, to speak comparatively, more then the Muscetoes and Flies
exceeds in number the Eagles, they darken the light of the Sun with their
multitude, as did the Flies of Egypt.

They are not rare to be found, as are the Eagles and the Roundheads, there
are whole swarms of them in every place; and as hurtful and troublesome to
your Roundheads in old England, as your Muscetoes are to your Roundheads in
New England, and every way as evil to be dealt withal, for the more you strive
to beat them off, the more they muster and swarm about you, so that there is no
way of quietness for a Roundhead, but to avoid them.

Seventhly, for their use, that also is diverse, but tending all to hurt, yet
contrary to their minds it effects good, not to themselves, but to the
Roundheads, whom their whole intent and desire is to hurt. Now their first use
is, to afflict the Roundheads, which if your shag-poll did know, what good
they did unto your Roundheads, by afflicting of them, by their wrongs and
injuries they do unto them, then would they never do it to them; for first,
they teach them experience of the worlds vanity; secondly, they make them weary
of the world, and weane them from the love of the world, the love thereof would
be their destruction; thirdly, they make them by these their out-ragious wrongs
and injuries they do unto them, more splendid, bright, and lovely in the sight
of God and good men; fourthly, by the shag-polls hatred of them, they come to
have certain knowledge, that God loves them, which otherwise they could not
have; for if the shag-poll Locusts loved them, it were a certain sign they were
hated of God, for your shag-poll loves none but such as God hates; fifthly,
they increase the Roundheads glory in heaven, for the more they scorn them
here, the more shall they be honored there; sixthly, the shag-polls, by reason
of their out-ragious wrongs and injuries that they do unto the Roundheads,
they make this world a hell unto these Roundheads, wherein these shag-polls
like devils do torment them, so that they shall have no hell hereafter, as your
shag-polls shall; other sorts of uses that they serve for is, first, to make
vessels of dishonor; secondly, to declare the justice of his wrath upon, and
to teach the Roundheads, that though he do spare for a time his and their
enemies, that yet he will not always spare them; and lastly, to be such
firebrands of hell, as shall never be taken forth.

Eighthly and lastly, of their final end, their final end next to the glory of
the justice of Gods wrath, is to be damned, for their end is damnation, they
mind nothing but earthly things, their God is their belly, they glory in
shameful things, their conversation is not in heaven, therefore by God his
definitive sentence, their final end is damnation.

And thus much for your Roundheads and your Shag-polls.

Only this by the way of Advertisement to the honest-hearted Christian Reader,
that though some do either through ignorance, or some infirmity occasioning,
wear their hair longer then may in some men's judgments seem fitting, for men
professing themselves to be Christians to wear; know you that we intend not a
definitive sentence against any particular person for wearing of their hair,
but yet do wish them for the better informing of their judgments, to consider
the Apostles rule concerning hair, in 1 Cor. 11.14. where he may have full
satisfaction; and further also, we give you to understand, that we are so far
off from a particular sentence, that we believe that there are many among the
Long-heads, that may belong unto the Roundheads, and that may in time declare
themselves; and this also, that there are many Locusts among the Roundheads,
that now seem to be Roundheads, yet are not so, and will declare themselves to
be but Locusts; yet not withstanding that, all that wear long hair are not
Locusts; as also, all that wear not long hair, are not Roundheads, yet is
long hair the visible sign or mark to distinguish a Locust, Rev. 9. 8. and they
had hair like women.

FINIS.
Not long agone a Champion came from Hell,
To bid defiance to the host of Heaven:
But with the Puritans he has no mind to deal,
Because with them to no end he has striven.
A Periwig in stead of Helmet on his head he wears,
To prove, if he by that can hide his Midas ears.
His armor loose Profaneness is, and Hatred strong,
Disdain, contempt of God and goodness all;
Murtherous desire, by him retained long:
By which at last he hope^ to make to full
The Puritan, which now he Roundhead call:
A term, by which he thinks to overthrow,
And beat all goodness from the earth below.
By this design, he doubts not, but to stop
The breath and life of goodness in this land;
And spoil that strength that Puritans have got,
And by this title Roundhead, to set all good at stand:
But silly Long-head, that hair is not thine own,
It Is but some harlots, though by thee its worn.

