A Short ANSWER TO A Malicious Pamphlet, called, A Reply; Written by JOHN
GADBURY, the King of England's Juggler, and Astrologer in Ordinary to the Pope,
to help on the work.
THis Gadbury being a new Convert to Popery, has to admiration armed himself
with a vast Stock of Impudence and Villainy; and these being joined to Folly and
Lying, makes the Fellow the more Eminent and Notorious: as if these
qualifications were inherent principles to his new Religion. And now he appears
barefaced in defending Popery, pretending to write a Reply by way of Answer to
an Almanac for the Year 1687, designedly writ to ridicule and oppose that
Lying Religion. And this Reply of his is nothing else but a bundle of lies and
forgeries, to abuse the Author of that Almanac without the least ground
imaginable, to give Popery a Recommendation to the World, and to vindicate the
villainous Agents in the present design of Subverting the Government and
Religion of England. And in this Answer, I shall omit the taking notice of the
major part of his Nonsense and Lies, as being not worth my pains, nor the
Readers time to examine; and employ these few Pages to examine and refute those
things that are more remarkable, the rest being easy and obvious to every
impartial man: and in the first place, I will give you a Character of the
Fellow, that you may thence guess at his Credit in every thing else that he
pretends like a Champion to defend, Ex pede Hercules.

First then, This Fellow was by his Father brought up in the Doctrine of the
Church of England while he was young; and in this he continued for some years:
but after he came to London [as he tells us in his Doctrine of Nativities] he
shook off that, and went among the Presbyterian and Independent Congregations,
and followed them so long, that he says [in that Book] they made him almost mad
by preaching up the Doctrine of Free Grace. So that he then began to think of
inquiring after a new Religion.

And the first that he pitched upon, and best pleased his vicious Inclinations,
was that profane Persuasion called Ramters, Familists, or sweet Singers of
Israel, a sort of profuse debauched Atheists, at that time very numerous: and
to this he was Converted [or as the Cant then was, Begotten in the Faith] by
Abiezer Cope, whose Piety and Reverence to a Deity may be guest at by this
Expression of his, who when he was committed to Newgate by the Parliament for
spreading his damnable Heresy, and being brought to the Prison door, he set
his Arms on kembo, and said, Be thou opened thou Everlasting doors, and let the
King of Glory come in. And by the way, as he was carried to Prison, our Juggler
hung on his Coach-side to beg his Blessing, calling him Father; and in this
pious profession Jack grew in a short time so good a Proficient, that at
London-wall [being more than half drunk] he undertook to preach, his Text being
these Words, And Jephthah was the Son of a Harlot, Judges xi. ver. 1.

This Religion, after some time, grew out of Fashion with our Juggler, and then
he was again upon the hunt for a new one: and as it happened, Cromwell had then
taken upon him the Government, and Jack began to think of learning the Art of
Whineing, that he might Cant at Whitehall; for he is certainly [as all
Sycophants are] always, and in all times, of the Government side, be it never
so base and lawless. And to this end he began to ingratiate himself there, and
make friends to Cromwell that he might be permitted to dedicate his Doctrine of
Nativities to him; but in this he was prevented to his great grief: and I am
credibly informed, that he had promised all that a base Fellow could to be a
Creature in that Government to the best of his power, but was not accepted.

Cromwell being dead, and the King likely to return, he then began to set up for
a Church of England-man and Loyalty, complaining of his hard usage in the time
of Rebellion; and then it was Charles the Martyr at every word. In this Course
and Cant he went on for some years, railing at the Rebels in defense of the
Church of England, as now he does at the Church of England in defense of
Popery; till he was taken notice of by the men then in Power. In the Year 1666,
he removed to Westminster, and turned a Whitehall Broker, which in plain terms
is a Pimp; in which Profession he did mighty well. And having used the Trade a
few Years, and found the Inclination of the Court, he began to abuse
Parliaments among those he durst trust [of whom I was one, we then being
intimate,] to cry up the Kings Absolute Power, and ridicule all and every thing
that was against Popery; which indeed at that time was a great Argument to me,
that Popery was growing upon us; for I then thought he spoke the true Language
of Whitehal. And now the Fellow began to grow intimate with Popish Priests, in
whose Company I have been with him, he then hoping to make me as very a R -- as
himself; to accomplish which, and bring me off from my Principles, he would
often tell me that Religlon was nothing else but a Cheat, a Bugbear, and a mere
trick of State.

About the Year 1677, and forwards, he then being intimate with that worthy
Matron Mrs. Cellier, Midwife to the Popish Plot, and his Kinswoman, whose
Narrative he afterward writ; she came to him to ask an Astrological Question,
and that was, Whether Dangerfield was fit to be trusted or not? Trusted, to do
what? to Kill the King. No, No, but to know whether Dangerfield was fit to be
trusted to get in her Husbands Debts, who was a Bankrupt, and had never a penny
owing to him. But this was the sham Question that she told the Council, to
excuse her self.] So Dangerfield was trusted, and his business was to Kill the
King; and this by Gadbury's direction, as you may see at large in Danger-fields
Depositions.

In 1679. our Squire was for that committed to the Gate house, where he used,
in my hearing, to rail often against his Cozen Cellier, calling her Whore and
Bitch, and said, she had ruined him, and had undoubtedly been hanged if he had
come to his Trial; which to prevent, he sent a large Bribe to Sir T. D. to
desire him to procure his Pardon. But that Gentleman's honesty and integrity
was above Bribery; and besides he knew [by what he had confessed before the
Council] too much of his Villainy to be concerned in his Pardon, and so refused.
Then he sent 100 Guinea's to the late Lord Angle-say to beg the same thing of
him, to which his Lordship condescended; and by his Endeavor his Pardon was
past, and he pleaded it in Westminster Hall the Hillary Term following, and so
escaped hanging at that time; and when he came out of Prison he was by the
Papists presented with 200 pound for his faithful Service in the Cause, because
he had confessed so little of the design. Now pray consider, What Protestant
Prince or Princess can be safe in England while this Fellow remains unbanished
or unhanged; for he that did confederate with Popish Villains like himself to
murder CHARLES the Second, for no other reason but because they supposed him to
be a Protestant; will undoubtedly do it to those that he is sure are so, and
make less scruple of it too, because it is to serve the holy Cause in their
hopeless condition.

In 1685 on Sept. 9. two Romanists and my self being at his house, he showed us
a Popish Bishops Picture, and said, that now the true Religion was coming in
again, it was no crime to show an honest man's picture; with diverse such
Expressions, that were undeniably sufficient to prove him a Papist; for if
Popery were the true Religion, he was a grand fool if he were not of it, if he
did intend to be saved: but besides this, he has in diverse of his late
Scriblings, and especially his Reply, given many good Reasons sufficient to
prove him a declared Papist. So that this is the fourth time he has found it
convenient to change his opinion: and the fifth time he Renegado-like has
changed his Religion, as if he made a Trade of it. So that now he is reduced to
the principles of his original Spawn, his Mother being a Papist, of whom I
could tell you a pleasant Story, to show that he still retains the principles
of her insatiate lust. However, the Papists have the honor to see this worthy
member added to their Church, he that is as great a blemish to the Protestant
Religion as Sam. Parker is, and both of them a scandal to any but that of Rome.

I should first come to answer his Popish Objections and lying Assertations in
the Months, but that they are so notorious and impudent, that whosoever reads
will guess at the man, and his meanings; for he is to oppose all that I have
writ, and give it the Lie, that he may the better encourage the foolish
Papists, and others converted in the great work, that the Gentleman you wot of
will not dye in October next, that is, in 1688. for on his life or death
depends the whole Affair; and for all his noise he now makes, he will tell you
a year hence, about the time he is to change his Religion again, that he knew
it too, but would not speak of it.

He ridicules and denies the Hurrycane at Whitehall in March and April last,
when there was such a turning out of the Court Officers almost to Admiration.
He denies Ireland to be in distress, as I mentioned it in the Month of May: he
quarrels with and denies the Defeat of the Turk, which I predicted in July: he
denies the quarrel and difference at Rome, which I predicted in August, which
was the time that the Quietists made the first noise, and the Cardinals bearded
the Pope about it. He also denies the preferment of a Right-lined Clergyman in
October, which I predicted; but he forgets the Popish B. of Chester being sent
to Oxford in Commission at that time. In December I predicted Persecution; but
he says there neither was nor could be any such thing: I wonder what he calls
turning out so many brave learned men at Magdalen College, and forbidding them
to Exercise all and every part of the Ministerial Function, or to be Tutors,
Schoolmasters, etc. and all because they would not perjure themselves and turn
Papists; is not this persecution? No, no; it is Popish Mercy and Kindness.

This is but a short Answer to his twelve months, which I beg him to accept,
and promise to give him a Longer as soon as I come to England. Some of the same
that Colonel Mansel gave him.

The Chronology asserted, and the Lying Juggler refuted in all his Objections,
etc.
PAge 2. Since Phocas Murdered his Master. -- Here the fellow begins with a
flourish, and makes an offer as if he intended to Huff us into submission: and
calls in Platina and Heylyn for his Authors. As if by asking whether I had ever
seen them, were Authority enough for the people to rely on what he says. But I
will take the pains to examine him, and in doing that, I will prove him a Liar.

First, he tells us, that Phocas did not make Boniface Pope, but found him so:
Secondly, that the Title of Universal Bishop, was given to the Bishops of Rome
in the time of Marcian the Emperor, by the Council of Chalcedon. And thirdly,
that Phocas did not give, but justly preserved the Title of Universal Bishop to
the Sea of Rome. Which are all three notorious Lies, as you shall quickly see.

This first is false, because Phocas did not find Boniface Bishop, but Boniface
found Phocas Emperor: for when Phocas had by his Murder got the Empire, Gregory
the Great sat in the Episcopal Chair, after whom succeeded Sabinianus, and
Boniface succeeded him, so that Boniface came to be Bishop of Rome [not Pope,
observe that] about the fifth year of Phocas, as you may see by Helvicus: so
that Phocas was Emperor before Boniface was Bishop.

The second is false: because the Council of Chalcedon gave the Bishop of Rome
no Power nor Title but that of Primacy: and by virtue of that he was to take
place of the Bishop of Constantinople, and all other Bishops in public and
private Affairs, but no Universal Title. And if the Juggler pleases to
observe, John Bishop of Constantinople had been nibbling at this Universal
Title before, in which case Gregory the Great declared that it was
Antichristian, and that whosoever assumed that Title, was the forerunner of
Antichrist. So that you see this ignorant fellon knows not how to distinguish
between a Primacy of Order and a Universal Jurisdiction; between the Bishop of
Rome being acknowledged for the first Bishop, and his claiming to be Universal
Bishop over all Churches. The first was granted to the Roman See before, but
this last, Boniface the third [alias Antichrist] did first obtain of Phocas the
Murderer.

But for a further confirmation of this truth, I have here delivered, let us
see what Heylyn says, because the Juggler has made use of his name, and called
him into his assistance. He likewise gives all those before Boniface no other
Title but Bishops of Rome [pray mark that] and also makes Boniface the first of
the Popes, of whose predecessor, Sabinianus, he says this, This is the last of
the Roman Bishops, not having that arrogant Title of Universal Bishop or Head
of the Church. By all which it is plain, that there was no such Title as
Universal Bishop before Boniface the third, nor no Pope till Phocas made him
so, by giving him that Antichristian arrogant Title.

The third must naturally be false, because it is deduced from the two false
positions preceding. But here the Juggler does, as all other Sycophants do, he
gives villainous Actions, soft Expressions. He says, Phocas did not give, but
justly preserve the Title. etc. but I having spoke so largely before, it is
needless to add more about that Point. Only take this short account of Phocas,
to show that I had good reason to express that Chronological Sentence, by the
words which he reflects on, and cavils at.

This Phocas was an Officer under the Emperor Mauritius, and having
opportunity, he conspired against his Master, and Murdered him, his Wife, and
his five Children, and then by an Interest he made in the Army, was by them
Proclaimed Emperor and finding his Friends few, and he like to be shaken, he
Confederates with the then corrupt Clergy, and with that Antichristian Title he
bought them to be his Creatures. So that by a bloody Murdering Emperor, that
Antichristian Murdering Brood at Rome was set up: and they still retain their
Profane Murdering Principles, which they Blasphemously call Religion. And this
is the Faith and Piety that John Gadbury endeavors to defend.

Page 3. Of the Popish Powder Treason, etc. -- Here the Fellow draws a parallel
between this Plot, and that which he calls Oates's; thinking thereby to
ridicule it. But as for Oates's, we have now lived to see most part of what he
swore prove true, and there can be no question made of the truth of that in
1605. except by Papists, who would not have it believed, and he is one of
those. But his main Argument of Objection is, that it was a Popish Lord that
discovered it, [Mount-Eagle] and therefore it cannot be true. The Fellow here
makes a very bad Conclusion, for by his leave that objection signifies nothing
to the truth or falsehood of it. But it shows, that all Papists are not equally
wicked, and that there are some in whom Humanity and Moral Principles are too
strong for their Religion. Again he says, had the pretended design took effect,
the Powder could not distinguish between Papists and Protestants: that is true;
and for that reason they had no mind to Murder Papists with Protestants, which
was the occasion of writing the foresaid Lettter: that upon such warning that
Lord might forbear coming to the House, which some did, and were afterward
questioned for it. But the word pretended shows you what Kidney the Fellow is
of: and that he does not believe it, and indeed he has often told me that it
was nothing else but a trick of King James, and the Presbyterians at that time,
to Murder the Papists, which were for that end and purpose drawn in to Color
the thing. But when he speaks of Sir George Wharton, that he sings in Consort
with him, it is to tell you that he is a Papist, for Sir George dyed in that
persuasion: thus you see what Cut Throat Villains our Juggler Defends and
Justifies.

Page 3. Of the Burning of London, and by whom, etc. -- Here honest Jack takes
abundance of pains to excuse the Papists, and after much shuffling, he
concludes the Fanatics Burned it: and the reason he gives was this, that the
Papists would have showed themselves the most imprudent Men in the World,
having their Riches and Relations there, if they should do it; as if the
Fanatics had none there, which perhaps he may persuade others to, yet knows
the contrary himself. But pray observe, he calls all those Fanatics that were
not declared Papists, and that they Burnt the City to anger the King and the
Papists. Which if true they were really Fanatics and mad Men, to burn about
twelve thousand of their own Houses, and ruin their Families for no other
reason but to anger the King and the Papists, as this Fool affirms, Ha, ha, ha.
And again, rather than have it lie at the Papists doors [who were the real
Authors of it] he Charges it upon God Almighty, in Conjunction with the
Fanatics and the East wind, being all of them Enemies to the King, the
Papists, etc. Whence by his own words you may observe, that he makes two triple
Parties, there is God, the Fanatics, and the East wind, on the one side; and
the King, the Papists, and the Devil, on the other: now what do you think of
this Fellow that brings his King in to be a Partner with the Devil, who is the
great Patron and Father of the Lying Papists Faction, and the chief Agent for
them in this and all other their Works of Darkness -- well: but it must be the
Fanatics that burned it, why? Because Lilly had said it was a fit month for
designs against the Government, and the Fanatics were Enemies to it: so to
assist them in the Affair, he brings God Almighty in as a Friend to them, and
an Enemy to the King: and yet the Fool says it was burnt out of revenge: and he
is so particular as to say it was for the blood of Charles the first. Now were
not these Fanatics wise fellows to burn their own Houses, and ruin themselves
to revenge his death, and yet this done in spite to his Son? O you fool, lay
your Lies closer next time. -- well: But it seems Nostradamus Prophesied that
it should be Burned, and that in revenge too: and you in your Triggs Almanac
[Mr. John] gave the best time for its Execution, as you confess your self, and
yet for all this we must not believe the Papists Burned it, nor that you had
any hand in it.

But for a close of this Point, I refer the World to the Report of that Worthy
Gentleman Sir Robert Brooks, Chairman to the Committee of Parliament, appointed
to examine the Cause, and Authors of that dreadful Fire, which was Printed,
where they will find by full Evidence, as clear as the Sun at noon day, by
whose Order and Encouragement London was Burnt, and who rid up and down the
City in the Fire-time with his Janissaries to Protect and defend the Fire
Instruments, and got many of those Men that were taken in the very Act, out of
the hands of the Civil Officers, and conveyed them to Whitehal under pretense
of securing them in order to a Condign punishment, but instead thereof, they
were gratified with peresent Reward, and future Preferment. And that Honorable
Gentleman, Sir Robert Brooks, for his fidelity to God and his Country, in
discovery of that great Mystery of Iniquity, was afterward by the Order and
Contrivance of the same Party that caused London to be Burnt, Murdered in
France. All which considered, I hope none can have the impudence to doubt who
Burnt London, except the Authors and Actors in that cursed design. And
therefore the impudent Shuffles, Shams, and Excuses of our Scribler Gadbury, to
take it off from the Papists, must be a certain Argument to all thinking Men
that they, and they only were the Actors and Contrivers thereof: which perhaps
a little time may give more light to, and in the mean time I rest satisfied of
the truth of what I have here said: and now what will you think of that fellow
that turns Advocate for those Miscreants that Burnt your City, and also wait
for an opportunity to Cut your Throats.

Page 5. That the Papists Murdered 300000 Protestants in the Kingdom of Ireland
-- Here Gadbury falls to his old way of quibling again, and gravely tells you,
That it must be either lawful or unlawful; if the latter, all good men will
bewail the Misfortune; but if the former, he would very fain know how men
acting under a lawful Authority, and not going beyond their Commission, can be
guilty of Murder. So that at the first dash the Fellow tells us, that they were
Murdered by Order; and says, that it is not Murder if they do not go beyond
their Commission. Here he shows himself a right Saint of Rome, and a Casuist
for the Devil. The meaning of his words is no less than this: that if any
Popish King shall give a Commission to his Banditi, Jamsaries, or Murderers, to
cut the Throats of all his Protestant Subjects; if they do not go beyond that
Commission, and cut the Throats of more than all, then it is no Murder. Why?
because he tells you it is done by a Lawful Authority, and this calculated for
the Meridian of England. So that you see he is not for denying the thing, nor
the person; but justifies it to be Lawful, because done by Commission. And then
asks, how I will prove it? or whether I can show any one of the Commissions,
etc.

In answer to this: There needs no other proof that the Massacre in Ireland was
done by Authority than the late Kings Letter to the Court of Claims in behalf
of the Lord Antrim the Chief Commander in that horrid Murder. Where he tells
them, that the forementioned Lord had done nothing, but what was by the Order
of his Father the Royal Martyr, and his pious Queen.

Besides, when the charitable Collections were made in London and other parts
for the relief of the distressed Protestants that had escaped the Murderers
hands, and were sent away in order to go for Dublin, they were all stopped at
Chester, and there rotted and perished under the Wall of that City. Now by
whose power this was done, I will leave to the Readers Judgment, and for its
truth it is beyond all question.

Now Countrymen, is not this a good warning to Protestants to look to
themselves, seeing they are told by so notorious a Papist as John Gadbury is,
that the cutting the Throats of 300000 Protestants in pursuance of the Kings
Commission is not Murder?

Page 6. Of the Murder of Sir Ed. Godfrey at Somersethouse -- How now Jack:
what! deny that Murder to be in Somersethouse: thou do act thy part as if
thou had been a Papist these 40 years: an absolute Juggler! what, has thy
new Religion so suddenly inspired thee with its Masterpiece of Impudence? Thou
out-dost all thy Wafer-Godmakers; for they persuade us to believe but a little
kind of a Cheat about Conjuring Bread and Wine into Flesh and Blood by the
virtue of hoc est corpus, that is Hocus Pocus: but thou do endeavor to
outface a Truth, that no man, but those concerned in it, can have any cause to
question. The King, Lords, and Commons, Judges, Juries, and all unconcerned
persons, that have ever heard the Evidence, are assured of its truth beyond the
least doubt, But thou! armed with Pardon, Pension, Guilt, and Impudence, do
declare to the world, that thou would be of any side for Money. And for
Prance's pleading guilty to an Indictment of Perjury. I wonder you are not
ashamed to mention it: if you consider that we know he was hired to do it: and
that by the Priest at White Hall, etc For I saw the Letter in his own hand that
was sent to him by the order of his Wife's two Brothers, both Popish Priests,
and others of that Tribe; in Which they promised his Pardon, and that he should
again live like a Man, if he would come over, and tell the truth about that
Murder (he then being at Amsterdam) upon this he said, That to tell the truth
in their sense, was to forswear all he had swore before; and desired Ged to
renounce him, if all he had sworn about Godfrey 's Murder were not true; and
that if he should ever deny it, he desired us all that were then in Company,
which were about five or six, to call him perjured Rogue: and let him deny this
if he can. Thus Reader you see what stress they lay on the Perjury of this poor
deluded Rascal. Yet neither he, nor this man, nor their Wafer-Godmakers
themselves, have hitherto been able to give better Answers and Arguments to
desprove it; but to say, they are mere Stories.

And for the vizzanded Villains he speaks of, one of them is well known, namely
the then Queens Confessor, who there brandished his Sword on the Scaffold for
joy the King was beheaded.

Page 7. Since that Pious Prince Charles the Second dyed a Roman Catholic, and
yet Head of the Church of England. Here my Friend at the first dash does
confess, that pious Prince did dye a Roman Catholic, Really the old Gentleman
is mightily obliged to him for his kindness, to tell it so impudently, that he
lived a Hypocrite, and died an Idolater. For it is well known, he did
communicate three times every year with the Church of England in the Sacrament.
And yet by this Man he is affirmed to be a Roman Catholic. Now confider, if he
was a Papist. Do you think he was not a precious pious Head of a Protestant
Body. and the Church of England in a fine condition to be protected and
defended from Popery by a Prince of that persuasion, and the Holy Sacrament of
our Lord, is by the Lords Anointed made a Decoy to cheat the People into the
belief that he was a Protestant. But my Adversary says, that the Traitors
plotted against him, while he was not declared to be a Papist, and mentions the
Rye-house. Truly Jack, if you did not know, or at least believe, he was a
Papist then, you were a very ignorant Fellow; for it was was well known, that
he was so at his first coming into England in the year 1660.

And when he talks of the Rye-house Plot, he says, The King's precious Life was
in danger. Why? was it more in danger at that time than when Jack Gadbury was
in the Meal-Tub, scouring Dangerfields Kettle with Mrs. Celier, to prepare him
for the Murder of that pious King, etc. I think not; but besides, the Fanatics
did but talk of killing him, but the Papists did it effectually.

In the conclusion my Adversary takes care that I may know what the Church of
England is: and therefore directs me to a Treatise called Good Advice, etc.
written by William Pen the pretended Quaker, who is a Socinian, as appears by
his Sandy Foundation shaken, where he downright denis the Trinity; and a
Papist, as all men may judge by his Promotion and Favor at White-hal at this
time of day; so that I am like to be well informed of the Doctrine of the
Church of England by such a Fellow as this is. And to be plain with you Jack, I
doubt you are out in your Topic in this point, as well as in your Head of the
Church. But I perceive by your pious Opinion, that the Grand Seignior will make
as good a Head of the Church as any of them all: and then too, I am sure you
will be on the Government side, if possible you can, you are so good a
Christian.

Page 8. Since James the Second took the Coronation Oath, etc. Here the Fellow
mounts the high Rope again, and tells us, that it is true, The King did take
the Coronation Oath, but it was by his own free choice, and might have chused
whether he would or not. But let me tell him, that this is a gross Lie; for it
is not Condescension and Choice in the King to take it, but an Indispensible
duty: neither are the Subjects obliged to take the Oath of Allegiance till he
has taken that. For as he swears to preserve them in their Rights and
Privileges, so they swear to stand by him in the Execution of the Laws, so
that the Oath of Allegiance and the Coronation Oath are Reciprocal and Equally
binding. And the King is defective in diverse points of his Duty and Power till
that is performed and done. And let me tell you Mr. Jack, the Subjects have a
Right as well as the King, and both by the same Law. And if the King refuses
to be a King by Law, there is neither reason nor necessity for them to swear
Obedience; for the Obedience due to him as King by Law, does also oblige him by
the same Law to protect them in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates. So that it
is unreasonable that the Law should force the Subjects to swear to obey and
maintain a Prince in his Right, and not compel him to give them assurance by
Oath, that they shall enjoy theirs also. And if it were otherwise, it would
show great weakness in the Legislators of England to bind the one and leave the
others to his Will, when the Government of both is by Compact. But I perceive
my Friend John builds his opinion on Filmore, such another sorry Sycophantizing
Fellow as himself, who has many flourishes and words, and but very little Law,
and less Reason and Honesty. However, he and Jack together would form a most
admirable sort of Government for a Kingdom or Nation to be governed by
Dragoons, and converted by Booted Apostles: Thus you may see what a special
Englishman our Friend is, and a hopeful Casuist, that can guard and defend
their tottering Cause with nothing but Lies.

Page 9. Since Judge Street -- 00000000000 Tresilian -- How now Jack: What are
you turned Advocate for Westminster Hall? are those Benches supplied with such
Ignorant Fellows, that they must make use of a Scribler to defend them with
Arguments of downright Impudence? This is a fine Credit for your Law and your
King. Well Jack, you tell us of a Riddle, and that you have been the Oedipus to
unfold it. And you say the eleven Ciphers with Tresilian at the end of them,
shows that eleven of the twelve Judges must be hanged. Why really Jack, you are
in the right; for that is the meaning of it; and it does not only show the
merit and fate of the Villains, but it is also a piece of Prophecy, that will
shortly be accomplished. But pray observe: When the Fellow has unfolded the
Riddle, and told them that hanging is their due; lest they should faint under
the Consideration of their destiny, and think themselves into their Graves, and
cozen Tyburn; He licks them up with some Oil of Fool, and calls them Loyal
Judges, and Reverend Sages; and then perks up with a strain of his accustomed
Impudence; and asks what they have done? Done ye Slave! What have they not
done to make themselves complete Traitors, in all kind of Villainy and Treason,
that lies within the Sphere of their power and action?

First, They have by their Suffrage given the King a power Superior to Law, for
which Crime Tresilian was hanged. For it is one thing to connive at the
Non-execution of the Laws, and another to take away their Obligatory Force; one
thing to supercede a Law, wherein his own benefit is concerned, and another to
dispense with Laws made for the Safety and Security of the Kingdom, Religion,
and Subjects: and this they have done, in giving their Opinions, that the King
may dispense with all Law, as he sees good. You may remember Jack, that when
Richard the Second had picked a pack of Judges for his purpose, suppose such as
these, or not quite so bad: and those were Tresilian, Belknappe, Holt,
Fulthorp, De Burgh, Lockton, and others: the Duke of Ireland the King's
Creature, with the rest of his Consorts, formed the then design into ten
Queries, under the power of which (being granted) they intended to manage and
carry on their cursed Plot; and on the 25. of August, in the eleventh year of
the King, in Nottingham Castle, the said ten Queries were propounded to the
foresaid Judges, to which they all consented: and when they had signed and
sealed according as they were desired, Belknappe broke out into this
Expression, and said: Now I want nothing but a Ship, a nimble Horse, or an
Halter, to bring me to the death I deserve, for my Treason against the Nobles
of the Land. Which ten Queries and the thirty four Articles of Treason, which
they were after charged with, you may find Printed in the Life of Richard the
Second, which are too long here to insert. And when you have considered both
their Crimes, you will say that the Judges under James the Second have outdone
those of Richard the Second, and yet this Man asks what they have done.

Secondly, They have used their utmost endeavor to bring in Popery: they have
not only connived at the base Actions, used to encourage the Popish Party in
their present damnable designs, to overthrow the Government, and alter
Religion; but have also given advice and direction for the doing of it, and
visibly showed their Endeavor by encouraging base and unjust Prosecutions,
Fining, Hanging, etc. all those that have stood in the way of it. And when any
such Cause came to be tried where the Defendant was looked on as an Enemy to
the Government (as they usually call all those that they are minded to ruin)
they never used to consult Rastal, Pulton or Keble, etc. in the true Law that
did relate to the merit of the Cause. But took their direction from the Lord
Kings-will, Sir John doe-it, and Sir William 'Tis-well, all of them great
Lawyers at White Hall. And is not the Defendant or Prisoner in a fine Condition
in such a Case as this? But that which leaves them without excuse is, that they
know the Laws which are made, and still in force against Popery, against all
those that are reconciled to the Church of Rome, and those that do but assist
in any thing that concerns the promotion of the Sea of Rome in England.

Thirdly: They have not only showed how willing they are to have Popery
introduced; but also their readiness to assist in that work, as may be seen by
their Carriage at Oxford, where they may shortly hear of a piece of Burglary by
them committed at Maudlin College, and other kind of Violences without any
pretense of Law, unless it were that of the Ecclesiastical Commission, which at
the best can be but an Abortive sprung out of the ruins of Star Chamber
Tyranny. Which was long since declared to be against Law, and an Oppression to
the Subject.

Fourthly: In the West in 1685 when the Prisoners were brought before them to
be tried, they compelled them to plead guilty right or wrong, or else they
threatened to hang them up presently: such a piece of Barbarity that all the
Histories of England can give no parallel of it; To hang men immediately,
unless they would confess themselves guilty of such Crimes, that under the
pretense of Law they might hang them a day or two afterward: and this diverse
persons were forced to do that were innocent, and yet they were hanged for all
that. So that after this method they destroyed more men in a fortnight or three
weeks, than Tresilian, and all the rest of those kind of Rogues did in two
hundred years before, without the least remorse or extension of the dispensing
power this impertinent Fellow so idly and so knavishly pleads for. By which I
apprehend that he would have it allowed for no other end, but to protect and
maintain such Creatures as he and they are, that for Lucre and Malice will
undertake any thing they are put upon, and then they are sure to be safe in
their Villainy.

But observe, my Friend John charge Tresilian with cruelty for inditing 2000.
persons at Coventry, which was indeed a great piece of Villainy; but alas! that
was nothing to these Judges; for he did but pick their pockets of a little
Money; but these Villains murdered the men, and picked their pockets too: So that
Jeffry's need not doubt but History will record him for a famous Fellow, and
the rather because he has outdone Tresilian. And yet this man Gadbury their
Advocate asks, with whom they have conspired; what Countries they have
injured; what single person they have oppressed, and wherein they have given
the Council of Tresilian; and then bids me speak if I can. Now Sir, I have
spoke, and so much truth too, that all your shams will never be able to
gainsay to clear your villainous Clients.

But the Fellow says, That they all most happily draw in a Yoke together for
the good of the King, and by the Grace of God they may all live to be drawn
together, and yoked for the good of the Nation. And then they will think him
their best Friend that can separate one or more of their necks from the Yoke;
and also find the Effects of declaring a power in the King to dispense with all
Law; and a good pair of heels will be then of more service to them than all the
Arguments that can be raised to justify their Treasons, either by themselves,
the Popish Priests, or their great Advocate Jack Gadbury; and so I will present
them with a New Years Gift.

Dignified things! may I your leave implore,
To kiss your hands, and your great Heads adore;
Judges you are, but you are something more.
May I draw near; and with a rough hewd pen,
Give a small draught of you, the worst of men:
All of your merit, and your mighty skill,
And how your Charms all Courts of Justice fill.
Your Law's far stronger than the Common Votes,
And finely flows through your dispensing Throats.
What Rome will ask, you must her not deny;
If Hell commands you too, you will comply:
There Is none but you would in this Cause combine;
Things made like Men, but act like Bruits and Swine.
Law Books are trash: A Student, he is a Drudge:
Learn to say yes; he is the accomplished Judge:
He wins the Scarlet Robe; and wears it too:
Ay, and deserves it well, for more's his due;
All that compleats a Traitor, dwells in you.
Thus you like Villains to the Benches get,
And in defiance to the Law you sit,
And all base Actions, that will please, commit.
There must you toil for Rome, and also try
Your Irish Sense, and Cobweb Policy:
Complete your Crimes, and then you're fit to dye.
True Loyal Babes, Pimps to the Church of Rome,
Tresillians Heirs; Heirs to his Crimes and Doom.
Was ever that Hall filled up with such a brood,
All dipped in Treason, Villainy, and Blood?
Worse than Fanatic Priests, for they being pressed
By a wise Prince preached to Repeal the Test.
Then here is the difference 'twixt your Popish Tools,
You're downright Rogues, they only Knaves and Fools.
Deus dabit his quoque funem.

Page the 10th. Since the King could dispense with the Test, etc. Here my
Adversary makes a long Harangue about the dispensing power lodged in the King,
which was never questioned as ever I heard; especially in that part which
concerns himself in particular. For example: In the case of Murder, the King
can pardon the Injury done to him in the loss of a Subject; but he cannot
wholly indemnifie the Malefactor from the rigor of the Law. As you may see in
the Case of Appeal, which has hanged those that the King has pardoned. So in
the case of Treason, he can pardon that part of it which is against Him; but
all Treason is against the Subjects as well as the King: and by my Adversaries
leave, that is out of the King's power to pardon, tho e says many have
experienced it, but I know none except Papists, Priests and Jesuits; but for
Protestants he can name few or none, and them that have, bought it with their
penny as cheap as they could get it of some Miss or other Favorite.

But suppose this were granted, which he pleads for, what would he then make of
it? does that part of the Prerogative also empower the King to dispense with
those Laws made by the three Estates for the security of the Kingdom and
Religion? Certainly no. For when the Consent of the three Estates is passed
into an Act, every individual Man as a Subject is bound to keep and obey it,
and the King to see it executed. And there is no Dispensing nor Repealing that
Act, but by the consent of the three Estates that made it. And this the Papists
well know, which makes them try so many tricks to pack a Parliament to have it
done. And notwithstanding the Judges have given their Opinions, that the King
may dispense with the Test and other Laws also in any Case where he thinks fit:
Yet the Court, the Priests, and the more knowing sort of Papists are not (you
see) satisfied with that, but are still using their utmost endeavors to have
it done by a form of Law: from whence the Reader may observe two things. First,
that whosoever takes any place of Trust, etc. contrary to the Test, are
Traitors, notwithstanding the Judges Opinions and the Kings Dispensing: and
this the Papists know full well. Secondly, that this dispensing power can last
no longer than the King lives, and then those that are offenders with the
Judges, etc. will hardly escape the Gallows.

But I wonder my Adversary is so confident, as to say the Test was made to
exclude the Duke of York from the Crown, when he was the only person therein
excepted by name: but indeed it is no wonder if we consider his Folly and
Impudence in every thing else.

Likewise the Nole prosequi that he mentions: it is of the same nature which his
power to pardon, and both ought to be used only in particular Cases of
Necessity to save or relieve the Innocent, but not to make a common practice of
either to protect known Villains, Thieves, Murderers, and Papists from Justice:
and so I have done with the Ridiculous Obligations, false Assertions, and
impertinent Arguments about the Chronology, made of John Gadbury, the present
Advocate for the base Actions and Treasons of the Enemies of England and the
Protestant Religion.

I come now to take notice of the rest of his Malicious Stuff, which I find so
Idle, that I shall pass by most of it, and only take notice of some of the most
absurd things, to show you how Malice and his new Religion has transported the
fellow, and made him forget to write truth.

In Page the 18th he tells us of the great plenty and abundance of Fruit and
Herbage in the year 1687. When (says he) have we had a more peaceable calm and
quiet year? when were we blessed with greater plenty of fruit and herbage? Now
observe: for in the page next following the Summer Ingress in his Almanac for
the year 1688. he says, We have had great Scarcity of Fruit and Herbage every
year since the great frost in 1683/4, and particularly he says, that the two
last years of 86 and 87, wheat yielded almost two thirds less than it used to
do in other years. Now do you think that this man understands his own nonsense
himself? For first, he comes with a when were we blessed with a greater plenty
than in 1687? and then in his other Libel he says, When have we had more
Scarcity than in the years 1686. and 1687? Thus you see what a kind of fellow I
have to deal with; but Papists may say any thing at this time.

He also calls it a peaceable and quiet year; but for my part I have not known
the Nation in a greater Convulsion for many years than it was this last, and is
still. How many worthy Honest Gentlemen were turned out of the Commission of
Peace? Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Governors of Towns, Commanders,
etc. Men of Honor turned out, and Scoundrils put in; Tory's turned out, and
Whiggs put in; Whiggs put out, and Papists put in; English Gentlemen turned
out, and Bogtrotters put in; Law destroyed, Religion invaded, the Fundamental
Laws and Rules of Government turned up by the Roots; the Liberties and Rights
of Cities and Universities seized by force, and all to bring in Popery. And yet
this Fellow calls it a peaceable quiet year.

Then he Blusters up again, and Asks, when was Westminster Hall less thronged
in term time than now? Alas Jack! that is not from Jupiter in the 7th, as you
fondly imagine: but the people are sensible, that the Judges who sit there, are
neither wise nor honest. And what wise man will put his Cause or Estate into
the hands of Fools and Knaves if he can help it? for let a Papist be Plaintiff,
and an Enemy to Popery the Defendant, you may know who will carry the Cause
without setting a Figure. And this is the present Case of poor Ireland, which
Gadbury says, is in a very good Condition. And perhaps so it may in his sense,
that is, to destroy the Protestants.

Page 24 and 25, he makes a long impertinent story in order to abuse
Commonwealths, and after he has emptied himself of his frothy stuff, he comes
in page 26. to give reasons why Commonwealths are to be abhorred, and Monarchy
preferred, because (says he) if God had intended a man should have been in love
with a Commonwealth, he would have created him with a head on each shoulder. A
very learned Reason: and then by the same Rule, if God had intended the world
should have been governed by Arbitrary and Lawless Monarchs, he would have sent
all Princes and Kings into the world with Boots and Spurs on, and all Subjects
should have been born with Saddles on their Backs, that they might have been
rid without Control, as their Riders had seen fit.

A second Reason is, If Government (like the body natural) should have many
Heads, it would be a Monster: and would it not be the same if it had but one
Head, and that a great deal too big for the body, or a very ugly one? for a
single Head may be a Monster as well as two Heads.

A third Reason is, because there is one Sun, and but one Sun in the Firmament,
ergo, etc. What the Fellow brings in this for to prove Monarchy, seems to me a
Paradox; and especially such a King as he pleads for: which is to consume his
Subjects Wealth, to destroy the Laws he is sworn to maintain, and to bring in
and impose what innovations in Religion He thinks fit, or rather what the
Villainous Priests of Rome shall persuade him to that is most advantageous to
their Cheating Trade under the notion of Religion. But the Sun is the universal
body of Light, and like a steward in trust does disperse and dispense it to all
Stars, and to the World likewise, but does receive from none: also the Sun
preserves the Order and Government of Nature which God ordained in the
beginning, but destroys none. Lastly, let him make the best of it, and the Sun
is no more than a Stadtholder, or a King by Compact. For the Moon has as great
a share in the Government of the World as he has, and Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus and Mercury, as much as either of them, So that by his impertinent
notion, there ought to be as many Kings as Planets in the Government of every
Nation.. Because there is but one Sun, one Moon, one Saturn, one Jupiter. etc.
For each Planet has his share and power in the production of men and things;
neither would the order of Nature be perfect, if either of them were wanting;
for God made nothing in vain, But to tell you the truth of all, this is an
Arbitrary Notion, which he learned of Sir George Wharton above thirty years
ago: and therefore he might have told us here also, that he spoke in that
Gentleman's Cant, as well as in the Powder Plot. etc.

But one thing I cannot pass by without taking notice of it. And that is, in
Page 27. he tells us, that a Commonwealth is the Bramble of Confusion; alluding
there to the Parable of Jotham on mount Gerizzim, about the Trees going forth
to choose a King; and they chose the Bramble for their King. Now you know it is
the nature of a Bramble to scratch and tear all that it comes near (as Gadbury
observes:) but the Bramble was not chose for a Commonwealth, but for a King.
Therefore how he will make this serve to set out the greatness of a King, I
cannot tell, unless he has made choice of this to abuse and affront them; for
I am sure, it can be taken no otherwise: However, pity his Folly and his
Ignorance in this and every thing else, for if he knew better he would do
better; for when he calls the Bramble a Commonwealth, he calls himself a Common
Coxcomb. But it is no wonder in this Case, because he is the same in every
thing else. In his Astrology he is a very Ignarant Fellow. And his scandalous
Libel throughout is nothing else, but Cant and Noise. As you see in the
Nativity, he there talks of which is all false; his Palladium of Rome; his
Quotations out of Haly; his pretended Astrological Reasons to prove the
predictions in the Month false; in all which it is nothing else but Trick and
Sham. But I do not much wonder he is got into this false Course and Custom,
when I consider he is turned Papist, a Lying false Religion; and never was
Religion and Proselyte better matched than now in Jack Gadbury and Popery. And
this is the Course and Custom he will live in till the Government altars in
England; for when Popery goes out of fashion, then he leaves it; and I suppose
about twelve Months hence it will be Hey for a new Religion, etc.

Page 28. he says, There was never such a civilized Army in England as at this
day: and he is sure, no man has been wronged of a Pig, Hen, or Egg, without
Redress, etc. Here let the whole Nation be Judges; For the behavior of the
Soldiers, and the Complaints of the People from all parts of the Nation, are
visible evidences of the Fellows Impudence: But perhaps the Rapes, Robberies
and Murders they commit, are nothing if they let the Pigs and the Hens alone;
or perhaps he thinks the hanging of a poor Lousy Soldier or two for Robbing,
is redress and Satisfaction enough for their own Crimes, and those of their
Officers; but I would advise the Fellow to go down to Hounslow, and the parts
adjacent, or into the Countries where they quarter, and inquire there, and no
doubt but he will hear of many Abuses and Wrongs done that are yet unsatisfied,
even Rapes and Murders. But perhaps Jack may be in the right of it too: for the
Soldiers have done no man an injury in his sense, that is, no Papist; for in
his opinion the Protestants are but like Caterpillars and Vermin, that stands
in the good Catholics way, and ought to be knocked on the Head, and sent out
of the world, and therefore it is no injury to Rob and Murder them.

In Page 29. he makes a great Noise about the King's Nativity, and says, I have
calculated it, for which he does not a little Abuse me with his unmannerly
Billingsgate Complements, and says also, that I have predicted the King's
Death. Yet after all, he tells the world, that the King's Nativity is not
known. Why, is not this next door to Nonsense? For me to do a Nativity that is
not known. But if it be known, or believed to be so, the King is the less
beholding to that scandalous Fellow Gadbury, who printed it the year 1659. --
But he gives us one special Reason (and he says, that must serve for all) why
the Nativity he printed was not the Kings true one, and that is, No Imperial
Nativity can have the Moon in the twelfth House. Now how far he would strain
the word Imperial I know not. I suppose he means not less than a Crowned Head,
and in that sense I will take it. Now observe, if you look into the Collection
of Genitures, printed by Mr. J. Gadbury, page 23. there you shall find that
Henry the second, King of France, had both Sun and Moon in the twelfth House:
and in Page 52. of the same Book, you will find the King of Denmark has his
Sun in the twelfth House; and both these printed and published by that ignorant
but great Impostor J. G. Now whether he forgot these, or impudently asserted
this to outface the matter to make his Master believe, that what he has writ
is true: I will leave to his own Confession, and conclude, that a Liar ought to
have a good memory, the want of which is it seems this poor Gentleman's
misfortune: for these were both Imperial Nativities, and both Crowned Heads. Of
which I could give you more Examples were it convenient: but two out of his own
Book is more than ten out of the most Authentic Author in being, and proves
the Fellows Impudence the greater.

In Page 30. he basely abuses me, when he says, that I doomed the French King
to Death three years ago, which is false: for I never had any Discourse with
him in three years before that, except September the 9th 1685. and then we had
no discourse of that nature. So that I perceive he had it by hearsay, or else
he made it to serve the turn at this time; but be it how it will, I suppose
there is an ingenious Gentleman, living near Ludgate, that can justify me in
this that I shall now say, and he understands Astrology well, Mr. C. B. who is
the Gentleman I mentioned before, met me in March or April, 1685. in an evening
between Lydgate and St. Pau's. And after other Discourse about Nativities, he
asked me, if the King of France would dye that year; and if I had ever said so,
I told him, that he had two very bad Directions then coming up, but I durst not
be positive concerning his Death; but I did believe if he did not dye, yet he
would very narrowly escape it; but I had never said positively, that he would
dye. And in this thing, that Gentleman if he pleases, can do me Justice, till
I can come to do my self Justice upon this Lying pitiful Fellow. Now let any
man that observed that year, and the French King's Affairs, remember in what
condition he was between October that year, and April or May the year
following, when he lay in that wretched fulsom Condition, that as the Letters
gave us an account, he stunk, and was noisome to his Attendants, by reason of
that Distemper in Ano, yet it held him about a year and more: but the greatest
danger was in the first six Months. Now the reason why I could not be positive,
whether he would live or dye, was from directions he then had to operate, that
I had not had Experience of, neither does Gadbury know any thing of it to this
day.

But I remember a certain Gentleman that I could name, went to Gadbury after
the late King dyed and asked him, upon what direction he Astrologically dyed?
and with a great deal of sop-gravity he told him, that it was the Physicians:
chereby intimating that the Physicians had murdered him; which was very
disingenious of him to blame those Gentleman that used their utmost endeavor
to preserve him; but indeed he could give no true account of his death
Astrologically, nor really any at all, tho he dyed upon the operation of six or
seven Directions, and therefore he was obliged to make use of any Sham to stop
the Gentleman's mouth that asked him.

In Page 32. he shows his Skill in Astrology: where he denies that the part of
Fortune can be directed for l^^e. Pray Mr. Gadbury what direction killed
Charles the first of England? I know your Answer; for you can make no other but
this, that he suffered upon the Direction of the Ascendent to the Square of
Mars; if so, why did not the Ascendent to the Square of Mars kill in the Earl
of Essex his Nativity? Like Causes, like Effects: for none of your Shams shall
pass upon me: can you resolve this point now with all your Skill? And in the
Earl of Strafford's Nativity, you make the Midheaven to the body of Saturn
kill: and the Sun is giver of Life. Yet in the Nativity of the Princess Royal:
the Midheaven to the body if Mars gives Marriage: is not this fine Stuff? And
in the Case of Henry the Eighth, and Queen Mary, neither the body nor the
opposition of Saturn would kill: are not you ashamed of this Nonsense? if you
are not, you may. But I shall expose you and your Collection in a treatise by
it self, in which Case I will use you very kindly; but in the mean time pray
tell us fairly in print what Direction it was that killed that worthy Gentleman
Sr. Frech. Hollis: He that you promised him, he should live some decades of
years, and he was shot to pieces within fix Months after. Just so, you will
cheat the Papists and your Master too; for the part of Fortune is Hileg in his
Nativity, and so it was in his Fathers. Pray tell us, by what Rules in
Astrology you predicted the Queen of England should be brought to bed of a Boy
in the year 1686. Did not the Devil and the Priests deceive you that bout? I
suppose it was a Whitehal Scheam which you judged that by, perhaps of the same
man's setting as that was which you predicted the taking away the City of
Londons Charter by, though you laid the sham on an Eclipse of the Moon you
know. Now when you have considered all this Nonsense, Sham and Cheat, how can
you have the impudence to pretend to be Master and Teacher of any other
Astrology than a false one? and who do you think will believe you, Fools
excepted?

Likewise in the same Page 32. he is so notoriously bold as to deny my
quotations from Ptolomey, that is lib. 3. Chap. 12. de part Fortunae, and
Chap. 13. Quot sint Prorogatores. The first of which he says treats of de
Impedimentis and Infirmitatibus Nati, etc. and the second de qualitatibus
Animae Nati. Now I will appeal to all those Gentlemen that have that worthy
Author by them of the best Impression, which is that of Melancthon, who is in
the truth He or I; for if the 12. and 13. Chapters of the third Book of
Ptolomeys Quadripartite does not treat the one depart Fortunae, and the other
de Prorogatoribus; then I never have read that Book in my whole life: But I
suppose this Fellow has cheared himself with the Translation of Camerarius,
which is the worst in being, but it is indeed good enough for him; for if he
had a better, he knows not what use to make of it. Now you that are able to
examine this Case and judge it, will see what a strange Fellow I have here to
do with; for the two Chapters he there alleges are the 17. and the 18. of
that third Book.

In Page 33. he tells us, that he was there about to lay by his pen: but upon
new Considerations fresh Matter came in, and my prevarications and abuse of art
makes him enter into a long preamble about the Conjunctions of Saturn and
Jupiter, of which he gives you a very lame account, but it serves to those that
do not understand better, but to what purpose he luggs them in I know not,
neither can I apprehend any occasion for them in his pretended answer to that
Alman.

In Page 40. he brings in the Palladium of Rome, to show you that it is under
no such misfortunes as I pretend to say it is, neither says he, is there any
reason for it, in the figure he produces: in the first place, I never spoke
any thing as to the Buildings and Foundations of Rome, but the Cheating Crew
that there resides; for it is not against the stone Walls that I shoot, but the
Murder, Idolatry, and Villainy of those that pretend to be the Head, Members and
Body of that cursed Antichristian Society, who profanely call themselves the
Church of Christ, and Christians; for in the same Houses there might good pious
People dwell, were these removed or destroyed: and Rome may be Rome, when the
Pope and all his Lewd Buggering Clergy are gone: But if Gadbury pleases to
consider the present Affairs between the King of France and the Pope, and how
dreadfully that Storm threatens the Holy See if it goes forward, I suppose he
will not be so impertinently positive in his Judgment from the Palladium now,
as he was at the writing of that Malicious Pamphlet. Again, let him with this
also consider how the Lords Inquisitors and Cardinals did handle the Pope in
the Affairs of Molinos. I think this is an untoward Omen to the Grandeur of the
Infallible Power lodged in the Pope, as they say. Which is further aggravated
by that slight they put upon his Bull at Colien; all which considered together,
tells us, that either the Palladium is a false position, or else the
Prophetical Interpreter thereof gives a Lying Judgment to delude the Papists,
etc.

Rome stands, it is true, unable to defy
One Monarch's Fury, or our Prophesy.
In Page 42. the Fellow tells us, that the Heavens show glorious things not
only to England and Rome, but to all Christcadom, to the advancement of the
true Religion, and the depression of Heresy and Schism. This Heresy that he
here speaks of, is the Protestant Religion, and the (...) of the Church of
England which you see he has here (...) to destruction and ruin for which they
are infinitely obliged to (...) and the true Religion to be advanced and
established, is Popery, in which this Fellow is embarked.

In Page 46. he says, Dangerfield was fetched out of prison by a kind-hearted
old Woman: which was Mrs. Cellier, the pillory'd Popish Midwife. Well Jack, did
She release him from thence for pure Charity's sake or not? No: he was to be
her Stallion, to kill the King, and to get in her Husband's Debts Nay then I
think he was to earn his Deliverance, and She knowing that he had been whipped
and pillory'd before, as you say He was, gave Her assurance enough, that He was
fit for the design She released him for: People of an equal Share of Sense, of
Reputation or Honesty always delight in each others Company; Like the Proverb,
Similis simili gaudet.

He goes on and tells us, that I have bounded the Happiness of England; and
that it shall terminate in October 1688. but this is false. For I conclude,
that the Glory and Happiness of England, the Protestant Religion, and Church of
England, will then begin to appear, and suddenly after thrive and flourish
again, to the Eternal sorrow and grief of Jack Gadbury, and all his cursed
Faction, that so much desire and delight in the ruin and destruction of the
Protestants, and Protestant Religion. But like a Fool He tells the World there,
that I threaten the King with Poison, when I mention the Spanish Apple. I
perceive the Fellow is Ignorant what the meaning of an Orangien Apple is; and
if he be, let him be so still, till the Judgment of God comes upon them.

And at last, he hits on the great Mystery, and tells us, that I have forgot my
self, and foolishly talk of things to happen several years after we are all
destroyed. Now who He means by the word we, I cannot perfectly tell. I suppose
he means the Papists; for he cannot be so impudent after all these villainies
and abusive Language to the Church of England and Protestants, crying up
Popery, and railing at its Enemies, calling them Traitors and Rebels, etc. to
believe any man will think him a Protestant tho he says he is, or to shroud
himself under that title for security. For in his Station and to the best of
his power, he has been as ill a man as any among them, no disparagement to
others. But if he means we Papists, I do not doubt of seeing them destroyed
either in person or power, or both; and this in a shorter time than the man
thinks of; and after that, to see those other Effects of the conjunction that
will happen in those years, that does succeed the time of their opposition,
which like the conjunction is a triple one, and are in the year 1692. and 1693.
from Sagitary and Gemini, and does particularly concern London, etc.

The CONCLUSION.
NOw by way of Conclusion: I will first be so kind to Mr. J. Gadbury as to give
him half a dozen Astrological operations in his own Nativity, which he is not
able to perform himself. And secondly, I will give him some good advice, fit
for one that is under such times and circumstances as he himself is, which I
hope will reform him.

Since his coming out of the Gatehouse prison, in the year 1679. he has had
several eminent directions, the chief of which were the mid^^en to the mine of
the Sun and Venus; but now the case is altered; and he has in the years
following some of a contrary nature and ^^ect to operate, as you may here see:
Moon ad quad: Mercur: mdo dd: Arcus: 60: 48 61 ye: 2 mon. Ascend ad Corp: Jovis
-- Arc: 61: 48 62 ye: 2 mon. Sol ad par: Satur: in Zodiaco Arc: 64: 3 64 ye: 10
mon. Luna ad quadr. Solis mdo dd: Arc: 65: 31 66 ye: 4 mon. Luna ad par: Martis
motu rapto: Arc: 65: 56 66 ye: 9 mon. Sol ad oppositi Saturni -- Arc: 68: 57 70
ye: 2 mon.

The Ascendent to the body of Jupiter is a good direction, but it is so
attended, that it will lose much of its Luster; for besides those before and
after it, in that very year the Moon comes to the body of Mars, Square of
Mercury, and Square of the Sun, all Secundary; and therefore it cannot be so
great as it would have been otherwise.

But for the four last directions here mentioned, I must tell him that they
will put all his Popish Politics, and pious ver tues into exercise; and it
will be well, if he keeps out of his old Lodging at the entrance into the
Palace yard again. And yet I dare assure him, that none of these directions
will kill him, they only give trouble or travel.

Secondly, seeing the Stars will be so cruel and unkind to their great and only
Secretary and Minion Dr. Jack, I would advise him to lead a godly, righteous
and sober life, (which he never did yet) and by that means prepare himself to
undergo and receive the fury of these angry Stars. The best way I can advise
him, is to run over his beads twice a day more than ordinary, whip himself
harder and more on good Friday, hear Mass frequently, and go as often as may be
to Father Peter's to Confession; and this being done, there is no doubt of his
being a Saint, and as good a Christian as Pope John the twelfth, Raviliack, or
Guido Vaux.

And my friend being come to this pitch of piety, fit to receive instructions,
I would advise him to repent of all his villainies against the Laws and Subjects
of England, in raving to have the Test repealed, in which case I do recommend
to his consideration the Letter of the Pensimaris Fagel, where he is assured,
that the true Heir to the Crown of England is really against setting up Popery
and Repealing the Test; which I hope every true Englishman will take notice of:
and the rather, because one and twenty months is not an age.

His shaming the fire of London; for which let him read Sir Robert Brooks's
report to the Committee.

His Justifying the murder of the Protestants in Ireland. and denying that the
Papists murdered Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, with many more: which I hope so
religious a man as this is will lay to heart, and heartily repent of.

When thou saw a thief thou consentedst with him, and have been partakers
with Adulterers.

These things thou have done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm 50.

Mars in oppo^^^^^^ to the (...) and Saturn in the same Aspect with the Sun.
(...) one (...) Knave and Treader, Collec: Genitu: Aph. 87.

This (...) was made by J. Gadbury, and it takes place in his own Nativity.

FINIS.

