SOLILOQVIES THEOLOGICAL.

I am alone, and yet I am not stone, for the Father is with me. (...)

Thy people shall be Munificencies (free Princely Heroicalnesses, thy
Volunteers) in the day of thy Power (thy Army) in the beauties of Holiness.

Psalm. 110. (...)

In that day it shall be said, I am for the Lord. (...)

They steadfastly beheld him, and were abundantly enlightened.

Psalm. 34.5. (...).

Sophocles. Surely men of high degree are vanity, men of low degree a lie, to
be held in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity.

Psa. 62.8. Heu quantillum videmus! Nil scimus, nil sumus.

We know, we are, nothing.

And unto man he says, Behold, the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to
depart from evil is understanding.

Job. They have rejected thy word, therefore is there no wisdom in them.

Jer. By J. S. Gent.

London Printed by G. Bishop, and R. White, for Tho. Underhill, at the Bible in
Woodstreete. 1641.

Christian Reader,
THou I mean who art not the nominall, but the real, not the titular, but the
title-inlivening Christian. Whose heart knows the meaning of such a dreadfully
glorious, and gloriously dreadful undertaking, to be called by the name of
God. Thou that fear the Lord greatly, and art greatly awed at the least of
his words. Thou with whom the goodliest profession will pass but for a gilded
formality, that suffers it self to be wanting in morality. As knowing there
may be some virtues where there is no grace; but there can be no grace where
there is not all virtues. As knowing where the choicest eminencies of nature
come short, their Christianity exceeds; where the Moralist ends, the Divine
begins. He that lives not soberly and righteously, it is impossible he should
live godlily. It is works that must justify our faith, as well as faith our
works. It is a Christ of our own making, (and not Jesus the Son of God) that is
learned otherwise. While we think to be saved either by, or without Obedience.
The two Rocks whereon the world is Shipwrackt, while the God-instructed
Christian keeps the narrow Channel. Thou that make more conscience of, art
more watchful, more careful of the least ill word, ill thought, then the
Christian at large, of all the ill deeds of his whole life. As far more
willingly choosing the bitterest death, then the sweetest sin, as knowing thou
shat find it the end of sin, that was the beginning of death. Thou that have an
abundant entrance administered to thee, in that strait and narrow way to the
Kingdom of Heaven. That have all the Commandments of God, That keep all
his ways (in a Gospel acceptance) in the uttermost latitude, extent and
spirituality of them, to the very first rising of concupiscence, and yet have
an easy yoke, a pleasant burden: While thou art endeavoring all to the
uttermost, and utterly denying all thy endeavors. Thou that art a wonder to
thy self, the gazing stock of men and Angels: of the congratulating joys of
some of the calumniating envies of other; while thou art so wonderfully and
fearfully made! A man of such blessed wonders! being a part of that
unparalelled Masterpiece of the Eternal Wisdom, the Lord Christ. Thou that
know what it is to lie under those pressing, weighty, and over-bearing
apprehensions, of an infinite Majesty resident in the soul, crushing as it
were, and contriting it to the most disshivered minutest pieces, while it is
still firmly and entirely fixed on Him, and with full purpose of heart cleaving
to Him, in such a sweet and blessed repose, such a perfect peace, that Millions
of Millions of Worlds can neither give thee nor take from thee. Who at thy
worst (to speak after the manner of men since all is good) thy distractedst
condition, as the World calls it, find that real, substantial, that pure,
and as I may say, infinite comfort in the most clouded dark, dejected,
disconsolate hope, that is objected on a simple and infinite God, that all the
unclean, scanty-spirited, self-imprisoned World cannot once conceive at the
highest of their mad merriments, and madding jollities. That find
inexpressibly more content in the very longest waitings for any the least beam
of grace, to be glanced on thee through the face of thy Christ, then thou
can, nay then the joviallest themselves can (while they go laughing along
with the fool to the stocks) in the loudest blaze of their crackling, their
dying Thorns, that end in a bed of ashes. When thy soul shall be reposed in a
bed of ever-flourishing, soft, and fragrant Roses. The savor whereof, as by a
gentle wind from a garden of Spices is conveyed to thy Heaven-travelling
soul. And hence is it that all the world to thee that live in so sweet and
fresh a Country, is but a miery and stinking City, thou can no way endure,
longer then thou have a Pomander of this in thy nostrils. Thou sincere
single-eyed-single-hearted loyal soul, whom nothing can please, and who wilt
please nothing, but thy God. That have no affection for thy self, for any, but
what are subordinate to Him, his sweet and holy command. As having learned the
truth, in the power, the love, the life thereof, do truth, and therefore
come to it, in its searchingst discoveries, walks in it, rejoices in it,
since thou have known it as it is in Him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, the true and living way. In which never seducing path go all thy
affections, actions, motions. As holding fast the faith and love which are in
Him, living godly in Him. In Him doing, being all that thou art. Thou that art
of all men most like an Hypocrite, while of all thou do most differ from him.
That art as like him to the eye of the world, as a Diamond to a Bristoll Stone,
while thou differest from him toto coelo, as much as truth from falsehood, good
from bad, heaven from hell. Thou that art encouraged by thy discouragements,
and furthered by thy scandals, and hindrances of Christianity. As knowing that
Difficilia quae pulchra, Excellent things are hard, but when they meet with a
man of an excellent spirit. And then their very difficulties, and excellencies
make them easy; because more animate, and intend his spirit to their
prosecution. As knowing the truth sincerely, the heart and realitie of
Religion, to be so much the more amiable, lovely and choice-worthy, by how much
the more fair Commendable and admirable is its counterfeit. As arguing that if
Hypocrisy can make so goodly and delectable a show, and yet be but a show,
what then is that sincerity that is the substance? if that can attain to such
an emminencie, such a glory, and yet be as black as Hell to the eyes of the
all-discerning Sun, and inherit the place of the utmost and remotest
darkness, what then is this that differs as much from it as God from the
devil? Thou who know no readier and safer way to humility, then that which
the world makes to their pride: the consideration of their own parts, gifts,
indowments, abilities, eminencies whatsoever. As then most truly and thoroughly
humbled, when thou risest to thy highest station and take the fullest view of
all thy excellencies. As seeing nothing but what thou have of him, in him, and
for him the only ground of humility because of glory. To see thy self thus
and thus richly qualified, and yet to see thy self to be miserable, poor,
blind, and naked, to have so much and yet to have nothing, argues that the
Candle of God has shined over thy head in its brighter beams, and his secrets
have dwelt more intimately more abidingly in thy Tabernacle. While seeing thy
self of the noblest stock, of the choysest of nations, as touching learning
with the learned, concerning zeal with the most active, touching the
righteousness in the Law, blameless, etc. and yet to tread and trample all
these things under thy feet, with the utmost indignation and detestation, as
the most despicable dross and dunge in comparison of one thought of revealed
Christ, that have known, or rather art known of Him that is the only
excellency. I, such a light shining in upon the soul and out-shining the most
glorious Sun even at mid day, is that which will cast the greatest Apostle
upon his face, and make him cry out that he is less then the least of Saints.
And certainly there may be a due and selfe-denying acknowledgement of parts,
indowments, performances, etc. while there may be an impudently modest and
selfe-seeking selfe-denyall; of all the most desperate, the most detestable
hypocrisy. Besides, for a man to carry himself lowly, dejectedly,
discontentedly, upon the mere convincements of his defects, and faults, may be
mere baseness and pusilanimitie, that will soon upon the least conceit of
its own worth, turn into, and indeed (narrowly look into) proceeds from, and
carries along with it, pride and self-love. Neither is that to be thought
true humility that is not a furtherance to thankfulness. And the only course
to keep from boasting being to learn how to know all of grace, how to glory,
boast, in the Lord. We being only so far humbled as outed of our selves, so
far outed of our selves as filled with God; so far as he is pleased gloriously
to condescend, to humble himself unto us, and graciously to take us up, to
advance us into himself. There being nothing that lays the soul lower in its
own eyes, then its highest exaltation in Gods. Nothing that makes it better
know, better keep, its distance, in an humble, lovefull, trembling, joyful,
every-way-duly-affectionate, active, obedient, walking before him, then the
knowledge, then the assurance of its communion of its union with him. (I know
the wisdom of God is foolishness to the world, it is ignorant, it is
wulfully ignorant of it. But I speak to them whose hearts have the mind of
Christ, and can sensibly interpret the meaning of his spirit. And certainly he
that speaks not nonsense to nature, speaks but little supernatural sense.)
Besides nature may have a kind of Ahab-like Judas-like humility on the
apprehensions of evils morrall or natural. But to be humbled at the thoughts
of our selfe-sufficiency, in him who is our only sufficiency, our new self,
this of grace. While our hearts understand that sweet harmony of that seeming
contradiction, I, and yet not I; but the Spirit of Christ that dwells in me:
that humble, meek, gentle spirit. Thou, whose maine, whose principal study is
to know all the excellencies of the World in the face of Christ; to know it by
them, and them by it, that through it thou may know him who has ordained it
as the conveying Medium of the light, of the knowledge of his Glory. Thou whose
world-and selfe-contemning behavior, speaks thee one of those finding
seekers, and seeking finders, that with asweet sharpness, and unsatisfied
satisfaction, followest on to the knowledge of him, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Thou sweetly passionated heart, that
know what are those flutterings of the soul to fly; those holy efforts,
those lanchings forth into the great depths: what it is to be given up to, to
lie under the power of the Divine Spirit, while on thy water-like diffused
soul, it hatcheth new forms of the Divine nature. Thou tender, humbled,
shivered, and shivering spirits, that work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling; while thou biddest defiance to the gates of Hell, and laughest death
and destruction in the face. Thou, who though often assaulted with Thorns in
the flesh, with buffetings in thy spirit, art kept in such a complete peace in
the sense of the All-sufficient Grace, and can glory, can pleasure in, count
gains of thy infirmities, thy distresses, necessities, persecutions, etc. as
the advancers of the overcomming strength of thy Christ, thy only joy, glory,
gain. Thou poor, weak, feeble wretch, that can do nothing, and yet can
do all things, through him that strengthens thee. Thou whose inward and
heart-disolving sighs are the daily harbingers for thy speedy admission to
that great and eternal Supper of thy solemnized espousalls. Thou whose
lovesicke, Christ-inamoured soul, bursts for the longings that it has, that
it always has, after the full and never-interrupted embraces of thy dear,
thy only dear beloved. Thou that countest every minute an age till thou art
with Him; and yet countest seven and seven years, ages and ages, spent in
the greatest hardship he shall appoint thee, but as a minut in thy sweet
waitings on him. Thou whose Heaven-visited soul cannot but break forth in
exalting exclamations! O the beauties! the harmonies! the sweetnesses! the
riches! the glories! the Crowns! the inexpressiblenesses! the
inconceivablenesses! of the knowledge, of the love of God, in Christ Jesus, by
his holy Spirit! Thou who art Heaven, inside and outside. Who art clothed with
the Sun, and treadest the Moon under thy feet; while thou have that within
thee, that could it be seen, would dazzle the eyes of the world into an envious
astonishment. In whom is the Kingdom of Heaven, the righteousness, the peace,
the joy, in the Holy Ghost, unspeakable and glorious. Thou that countest the
doing of his Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, the turning of Heaven into
Earth, and men into Angels. And therefore see infinite more beauty in the
poorest, Priest-deridest Mecanicke, conscionably and sincerely busied in his
calling, though but in the shoveling up of dirt, and sweeping of Chimnies, then
thou do in all the guildings and paintings, the Copes and Surplusses, etc.
all the sumptuous gallant trickings of the Beast, in the wilful, sensual,
hypocritical worship of God. Yea then in the hearing the reading of Sermons,
meditating, praying, conferring, etc. or whatever more immediate services, more
world-withdrawing exercises, so as excluding the seasonable discharge of thy
several relations, the performance of thy duty to God, in and through that to
men. As knowing the worth of every thing to be as it is to the will of God; who
has made these latter ordinances in their time, as well as those former. And
that the God of nature who made nothing in vain, has given forth such a
diversity of commands not with most wise ends. To show what concord he can
make in such a seeming discrepancie between work and work, men and men,
between heaven and earth, in such a multiplicitie of employments in due time
and place; while they are all According to his will: And make an inconceiveable
melody in the answering of a good conscience to him. To show thorough what a
variety of occurrents he can carry the faithful soul while he still keeps
it with Him. And that he might keep them in an humble dependencie on him to
learn how to bring forth their fruits in due season. To set forth the glory of
Christianity in the suitable composure of such a change of Ornaments. The
excellency of it in over-comming so many difficulties, in passing so many
turnings and windings, conducted by the thus-more-commended manifold wisdom,
power, goodness of God. That take it for so much superstition, so much
idolizing of the best duties, (and therefore for so much no duties) while they
are set up against the will of God. Thou whom prosperity keeps praying,
adversity praising. That art exalted by thy humiliation, encouraged by thy
fear, rejoiced by thy sorrow, that gettest thy life by throwing it away, that
find thy self by losing it, that art watchful in every thing, careful in
nothing. That art encountered with often doubts, scruples, irresolutions,
self-disputes, and yet live at the highest rate of assurance of the divine
favor. That, yea by, feeding thy self with fear, thy watchings, prayings,
fastings art carried forth in the liveliest vigorousnesse and luxuriancy of
spirits. ((...) Mic. 4.) Thou that art now at the top of the third Heavens, in
the highest exaltations of thy spirit, and now again at the bottom of the
lowest Hell, while thou still lie as fast in the hugging embraces of the
omnipresent as ever. Thou whose modest, sober, pure, peaceable, guilelesse,
discreet, unblamable, zealous, lively, active deportment of thy self, speaks
the one that has been brought up at thee feet of Jesus. Thou whose generous,
magnanimous, God-resembling Spirit stoopes to humilty, and overtops Pride. That
while thou lie below the lowest dejection of the meanest Sainted Pesant,
bear thee above the most disastrous, dismallest aspects of the arrogantest,
Prelatickst, highest-aspiring, Kingdome-dooming Comet, as far as the third
Heaven is above the Meteory Region. Thou that can gladly stoop with that
meek Lamb to wash the feet of the meanest Minister of the Gospel, Lay down
thy life for the God-loved and therefore world hated brethren, while Lyon-like
thy righteous soul rouseth up it self against the Hypocritical Pharisee,
with the most contemptuous and undervaluing disdain. Thou that with a hearty
willingness can gladly abase thy self to unloose the latchet of the meanest
Saint, while thou know not how to give a Pontifical Peacocke the
dissembling Complement of thy have: though he swell, though he burnish, though
he bustle, though he crow it never so domineeringly; till he be furtivis
nudatus coloribus. Thou that like thy Heavenly Father, know how to be
afflicted in all the afflictions of his holy ones, his humble ones, while
wherein soever the Presumptuous deal proudly, Thou will in Him be above them,
and make their proudest wrath to praise Him. Thou that see far more beauty on
the very feet of the poorest Ambassador of the Gospel, then on the
honour-pleasure-profit-Triple-crowned head of those enemies to the Crown,
because to the (virtue because friends to the sign of the) Cross of Christ,
In making the earth their study, their belly their God, their glorious Titles
their shame, themselves destruction, and their Country distraction. Thou that
know how to turn the other cheek to him that smites thee, and to let go
thy cloak too to him that wud take away thy coat; and yet know thy time
too when to sell it for a sword, and thy life by it as dear as thou can.
While yet thou seek not so much the destruction of the enemy, no nor the
preservation of thy self, as the obedience too, as the glory of God by it.
Thou that have learnt, how to render blessing for cursing, and pray for them
that despitefully use thee, while still thou remembrest that the same Michael
that brought no railing accusation against the devil, called the Pharisees a
generation of Vipers, the evill-working Jews, the children of the devil. Thou
whose well tempered soul know the meaning of a zealous meekness, a mild
indignation, a faceat gravity, a sollid pleasantness, etc. Thou who while thy
cautelous heart is still agitated with the most quick resentments, and readiest
apprehensions of dangers, art most firmly settled in a most unshaken peace of a
providentiall security. Thou whose giving heart is streaming it self forth in
the most enlarged and selfe-loosing compassions, the most liberal supplies and
contributions to the suffering Saints, and have thy awakened fear continually
exercised with the alarmes of war and death, while thou stand with an
undaunted magnanimity, in a close, fast, fixed, Communion with thy God, like
Mount Sion that cannot be shaken; triumphing over Hell and Death. That while
thou bleedest in their wounds, art bound in their bonds, dyest in their death,
blessest for thy wounds, art freed with thy bonds, live in thy death. That
walking in the shadow of death, in the presence of thine enemies, have a set
banquet of heavenly delicacies, thy head anointed with the oil of joy and
gladness, by the over-shadowing hand of the Almighty Redeemer, while thy soul
is like a brim-full Cup, overrunning with joy and praises, with joy and
praises. Thou that amandest the wicked from thee, that thou may keep the
Commandments of thy God, whom thou find so, so inapprehensibly good. Thou
that abhorrest none more then pragmaticall, busie-body, censorious men, as the
most slight-spirited, idle self-ignorant, worthless men that are, and yet
seek not thine own things, but the things of others, and can not so hate
thy brother in thy heart, as not to rebuke him; and therefore as not to rebuke
him in love. Thou in whose eyes a vile person is contemned: whose
God-acquainted spirit, can not sit with vain, empty, triviall-spirited
persons, Sons of Belial, whose foolish hearts are not lift up in-to the ways
of God, that are above to the wise; Triflers away of precious hours in
frothie, frivolous, fruitless communications, that have no, and therefore can
administer no grace to the hearer: Men not of Heaven-ascending discourse,
spirit, life. Thou that have found the two edged sword of the word, dividing
between the soul and the spirit, and raising this as far above that, as that
is above the body, That thou may serve him, in the spirit of thy mind, in
the more extracted, as it were, and more sublimed quintessence, the morefree
and noble (...) of life, love, zeal. Thou that like that Purites strikest fire;
and throwest sparks about thee, to quick the dead and scindry souls, and
countest it far more honor to be denominated a zelot with thy Savior, from
that which fed on his marrow, that pure and undefiled zeal of his Fathers
house that consumed him, then to be counted a dead carkase, of Him who bid the
dead bury the dead. Thou Precisian that walk as accurately, curiously as
upon the ridge of an house, and therefore as wisely, if the Spirit of Wisdom
be a competent Judge. Thou that art one of the holy brethren, that labourest to
be holy as he that called thee is holy; to be holy as (though thou can not
be as holy as) thy heavenly Father; and therefore have that title linked to it,
as a concomitant of the pertaking of the heavenly calling. Thou that art
counted as so much off scouring and dung, while thou art one of whom the world
is not worthy; a seditious, factious turbulent fellow that turnest the world
topsie turvey, while thou art among the proppes and pillars without which it
would instantly and irrecoverably sink. Thou that have God for thy Father,
Christ for thy Brother, the holy Spirit for thy companion, the Angels for thy
attendance, Heaven-the-full enjoyment of God for thy perpetual home. Thou that
art his undefiled one, his jewel his glory, the Apple of his eye, his pleasant
portion, the dearly beloved of his soul, the darling of the Deity Himself.
Thou that art the subject of so rare a piece of the divine wisdom in bringing
him that stood at the vastest distance, the deadliest defiance to the nearest
the closest the most endeared intimacie. In making a lump of rude and unformed
darkness, a lamp of pure and undefiled splendor in that inapproachable
light. A wispe of straw the fuel of everlasting burning, a mingling flame in
ever-loving embraces. But whither will this sweet-sounding name transport me?
Thou man, that art worthy of the name, as fearing God and keeping his
commandments, which is the whole, the compleatnesse of a man, in him, in whom
we are complete, pertaking of an higher nature, being not carnal, and
walking like a man, but spiritual and walking (as thou may say it In, as the
knowledge of it will sweetly enforce thee to say it in the deepest, the
feelingst humility) as a dimunitive, as an opitome, of Christ, of God. While
all murmurings, envying, strifes, evil surmises, backbitings, etc. purged out,
thou possessest thy meek patient soul, like a pure and untroubled Rivulet,
over flowing in superabundancie of loves and sweetnesses. But what shall I say
of thee? thou Uniform Multiformitie, beautiful black, crosse-divided ground,
concording discord! Thou that have eternity assigned thee to contemplate thy
own worth; in thy only worth the Lord Christ. To thee candid Christian as
having known the wisdom that is from above, that is first pure and therefore
gentle, easy to be entreated without partiality, prejudicatenesse,
sensoriousnesse, Hypocrisy to thee do I present hoc qualecunque meum; this
tenue munusculum, these broken and rudely ordered meditations, (the offsprings
of those more serene, lucid, benign hours, those horae blandiores) breathing
themselves forth in these Canzonets of their serious pleasure, which have long
lain by me in loose and scribled Adversaria, and now after many and often
selfe-disputes, suddenly and confusedly according to the condition of the time
scrabled up together into this Miscellanie; as willing rather then the growing
mischiefs of hardened hearts, hearts lifted up to their ruin, should prevent
thee of all, thou shudst have some, though too those but preposterously and
promiscuously hudled together. In which ruder Rapsodie, if thou shat epsy any
brillantes estincellettes, any little sparklings forth, any glimpses and
glances, shat hear any hints and relishes, that may be suitable to thy
word-conformed spirit; and like the concurrent rays of two apposite jewels,
the concording tones of two Co-tuned instruments, might more take thee with thy
own graces, more sweeten thy soul in the sense of the divine goodness, and
annimate thee on to a more full obedience, to a further activitie in the ways
of holiness; I have my desire, and thou shall not miss of thine.

Errata.
PAge 2. Line. 5. for turns to read turn to, p. 26. l. 3. r. sprawle, p. 28.
l. 12. r. through them converse, p. 29. l. 2. r. cheer them to, p. 33. l. 17.
r. thorough, p. 48. l 12. for pleasure r. heaven, p. 58. l. 6. Psalm. 8.9.10. p.
65. l. 22. r. unshod wi'th', p. 66. l. 10. r. promise, p 67. l. 10. for were r.
will, p. 70. l. 17. r. altar'd, p. 71. l. 18. r. for; though r. then. l. 27. r.
still, p. 73. l. 16. r. glympses, p. 74. l. 5. r. hand, l. 32. r. my r'bellious
flesh p. 75. l. 7. r. what is, l 10. r. follows, Creator, p. 80. l. 4. for.
truth r. forth, l 31. r. hears, p. 83. l. 29. dele thou, page 91. read line
31. and 32. after p. 92. l. 2. p. 107. l. 5. r. that, p. 108. l. 4 r. him, p.
121. before verse. 21. r. 2 Chronicles. 20.21.22. etc. p. 128. l. 4 r. heels, p.
131. l. 5. r. leaven, p. 145. l. 27. r. I the, p. 148. l. 14. r. Is it, p. 152.
l. 24. r. father's, p. 153. l. 9. r. as, p. 157. l. 18. r. Angelicque, l. 32.
r. worlds, p. 170. l. 14. r. live, p. 175. l. 7. for false r. self-, p. 195.
l. 1. r. Vacation.

I Call to mind my song in the night.

Psalm. 77. Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing to the Lord with grace in your hearts.

Ephesians. 5. Heaven's Harmony; the Heaven-speaking strain,
That meets in Meeter is the meeter strain.
Heaven's Harmony, and the Harmonious man
Whose Hearts's right set to God, 's the Heavenly man.
Never drank'st thou drop of Helicon;
Nor know thou where Pernassus lies;
What is it then thus bears thee on
Into this vein to Poetize?
Never read'st thou Play; nor working Poet,
That in the weightier measures sings.
But all thy vacant hours bestowedst
In haunting of the spring of springs.
Nor usest artificial cheer:
No fumes of Wine, brain-hopping Beer,
No swelling Ale; yet still I hear
My simple Musa round mine ear.
But whither Nympha? Warbling lie
Still in my nursing breast. Stay; where
Wu't find wi'th' narrowest scrutiny,
A serious, sober, candid ear?
Have found 'em? Go; long-versed in
An Element of Purity,
Th'rt well content, thou heard and seen
Of The purest Puritans may be.
You Will find her like a Traveller,
In The Valley now, drink of the Brook
That runs by the way; and thence transfer
Her rising feet and mounting look.
Then down again, deject, below;
Yet still does sing, 'cause still does go;
Where never more shall be below:
Yet still does sigh, 'cause does but go.
Still sigh and sing, and sing and sigh,
Still sweetly steal the love-drawne heart,
Insensibly carried to those highths
Whence it shall never more depart.
(...):

Epict. Every thing has two handles; and a fool always takes it by the left.

Quicquid recipitur, recipitur in modum recipientis.
BIte Cynick if thou wu't,
And fill thy envenomed gut
with poison.
Burst Spider, if one Be
Get one sweet smatch, 't shall be
M'rich foison.
Hence Momus, be n't so rude,
S'unmannerly to intrude.
Dare venture;
The House is mine, and thou
'Rt a Thief, I Will not allow
Thee enter.
But wu't thou break the door?
Turn not a Paper more,
It Is Burglarie.
Steal not a glance upon
A syllable; be gone
Thou Plagiary.
Chantez a l'asne il vous fera des coups.
BRing ye an Ass unto the Harp,
And he will at the Music carp.
Skill has no enemies but those
Whose pride their ignorance does pose.
But th'man that learnes humility
Knows Music, for with God dwells he.
And he-and-he full sweetly agree,
Whose very tunings Music be.
MAy never eye (great God) behold this book,
Whose eye-affected heart with thee's not took.
O thou that made the dead alive,
Speak but the word, these words revive.
Thou free, and freeing spirit, that blowest where,
When, as, thou list'st, O that thou would blow here!
Let him that life to all things gives,
Read to the Reader, and he lives.
Carmina secessum scribentis and otia quaerunt.

Ovid. -- At Anglica nostra Carina
Pontificum insanis exagitatur aquis.
Ac agitetur aquis, etiam cantabimus illis:
Viribus ipsa suis Roma superba ruit.
Roma superba ruit, resonantque Superna canora
Voce, ruat summo pondere strata suo.
What matters that from whom these Poems came?
He Is but the silent pen that ownes the blame.
God's be the praise, the pleasant profit thine;
Bate thy mistakes, be the misprisions mine.
For whatso'ver amiss thou't see,
There wants discretion in thee or me.
There wants discretion in thee and me;
Bear Thou with me, as I with thee.
Think th 'faults are thine, I Will think they are mine.
And so they will be nor mine nor thine.
While each to lay'm on th'other's loath,
They Will fall to the ground between us both.
A politic piece of charity,
To sweeten all in amity.
SOLILOQVIES THEOLOGICAL.
A Psalm, a Hymn, a spiritual Song,
A Ballad, and Masse-chanting tongue;
A David's Harp, an aerie vein,
A vagrant Fiddle, vapouring strain;
Fond, wilful, blind, ind'stinct Devotions,
Th'inutterable sighs of faithful Notions;
A Heaven diffused Supplicancie,
A torpid, Rome-bred Lethargy;
A pompous, gaudy Ceremony,
A Gospell-Simple decency;
Selfe-prating Priests, Christ-preaching Paul's,
Gods, and the worlds Episcopals;
These, and a thousand more resemble
Each other, each other most disresemble.
Discretion is discerning, He
That sees but white from black cannot see.
But he it is sees, that sees well,
That white fro'th' brightest gray can tell.
To see sins of the foulest dye
What is it? But the fairest, t's a spiritual eye.
Heb. 4.2. with 1 Cor. 2.14.15. (...) and Jude 19. Soulie. Betwixt the most
clearly sensual, the most penctratingly rational Soul and the Spirit.
T'divide betwixt the Soul and Spirit,
That; that the name of discretion merits.
Disguised Virtue, Painted Vice,
The Proverb turned, More wise more nice;
But he who turns this turns to vice,
Is nice for want of being nice:
Here Is two men, both high-minded be;
It Is pride that, this humility;
And here is two more, in fear each is,
It Is courage that, it is cowardice this.
And so along of all the rest,
S' alike is good and evil dressed.
Things most alike often most unlike
Do prove, and most unlike alike.
The wiser He that can descrie
Th'great Distance when so close they lie.
Lay right i'th'East, and wrong i'th'West
E'rie fooled be wise-and know what is Best.
Could they be cleared by general Rules,
Where'd be the Academicque Schools?
But Limitings, Sublimitings,
With often Subsublimitings.
And every Action's of a Rate
As duly Circumstantiate.
Who is it that naturally wu'd not good?
Yet all all ill by nature wu'd.
And how haps this, but good and bad
Are in the same apparel clad.
Or rather 'cause our sight's so dull,
We cannot the fruit fro'th' refuse cull.
It Is hence I fear my mirth is sad,
It Is hence I find my grief is glad.
It Is hence I feel my Melancholy
Divine Delights, my Laughter Folly.
It Is hence I all things so suspect,
And what is most pleasing most reject
Till by the touchstone I shall try
Whether 't be'nt th'delusion of the eye.
And what need Senses spiritualized
And those so often exercised,
Were It easy to be wise, to know
The discrepance from Concords flow.
Were It easy to be wise, to know
The Concords from Discordings flow
Sages held Sots, Sots Sages be
Not viewed with perspicacity.
The Esa^ 3. with (...) To (...) reason, ^ gue, red ^ gue, wi^ Ioh. 7.^. (...).
sights an unjust Judge, if judge
Aright he do who all must judge.
It Is not so subtle edged to decide
An hairs breadth, and besides it is bribed
To often blindness by the affections;
Thus humane light takes false inspections.
I Will never believe the man that will
Believe's own eyes, but count him will
Among the Fools, that is not acquaint 2 These. 3.2. (...).

With Faith the Topics of a Saint.
Unskili'd and feigned Sounds may cheat
The Ear, Sents the Smell, the Palate meat,
Th'Touch Tangibles. There Is Sophistry
Plenty in Hell for Fallacies.
The World, Flesh, Divle's so Legier de main
Th'acut'st, nimbl'st Look may be mista'ne.
And when we think a Blow's put by
VVee're over-reach't by'a Falsisie.
Sense, Reason's grossly cozened, but Faith
Can never, for'ts information has
From Truth it self; 't may be mista'ne,
But cannot mistake. There is a vain,
A fansied Faith. So still here is work
For D'scretion. Snakes in the Verdure lurk.
'Ith' Snakes rich Cordials. Who wise wu'd prove
'Mselfe, 's rarest wisdome't does behove
TO have rarefied by that great Light
That shewst the brightest day but night.
To see men both of the same Clay
And mould, and both of the same way,
Substance, and faculties of Soul,
Yet the one as fair as Heaven, as foul
As Hell the other, and if there seem
To thee a difference, thou'd'st esteem
The Heaven were Hell, the Hell were Heaven;
So soon so much may be deceiven;
For what is the best morality,
But finer spun hypocrisy?
While he would be thought be godly too,
That with our God has naught to do.
So Heaven and Hell may wear the same clothes,
The Troubles that, and this the Repose.
Th'World's God inrob'd'n Angelicque Light,
The God of gods in sable Night.
It Is this that hurles the world to Hell,
Because they cannot the difference tell
'Twixt good and bad, 'twixt God and them.
It Is only those that he condemns
That know him not, but so mistake,
As that themselves their gods they make.
And so do all that will not learn
'Twixt things that differ to discern.
It Is this that makes the soul as God,
TO know good and evil. I Will then plod
Upon this narrow Scrutiny
With all submissive industry.
I Will then resign mine eyes to thee
Thou Only Wise to see for me.
I Will be a fool, the only way
To pass for Wise another Day.
CHristian! O how I tremble at the Name
That holds the God that holds the world in frame!
O what an Earthquake-Palsey shakes my limbs!
What Spirit-intercluding fear bedims
Mine eye! What quivering Agues hurry through
My panting veins, surprised with chilling dewes!
I tremble, how I tremble at the Name
Christian! Shall I say so? I must, my Joy constraines,
My Joy that serves it self by lighter pains
With weightier comforts. I profess; Ah Lord
Make thou my Life unto my Tongue accord.
Christian! A piece of undivided Christ:
Watch soul, for if thy self, thou God beliest.
Off Sacrilegious hands; th'ungodlike man
Ungodly is, is not a Christian;
For God is Christ, and Christ is Man.
CReep sneaking Earthworm to thy bags of Gold,
And glutt thy greedy Panch with hungry Clay.
Climb lofty Spider to thy Heights, take hold
Of Princes Palaces, toil night and day,
Spin out thy brains into a curious plot,
Kings, Kingdoms are but silly flies, soon caught.
And thou whose Life says Time was made for leisure,
Thou for an Ocean-sporting Behemoth,
To toss, to roll thy self in Seas of pleasure:
Yet know the Foot, the Broom, the Sluice, whose
Breaks through the condensed'st Earth, the Air most wrath high
Reaches, and draws the abounding'st Waters dry.
Poor! Base! Wretcht man! Are these things to compare
(That are so short, that Are not while they are)
With Him that is our Substance? With the Rare
The Only Honor t'be his Son, his Wisdom? Th'faire
Sole-pleasing Love, whose pure Essential Light
Breaths flames in all with mutual Delight.
God! Christ! Blessed Spirit! Yee-Thou-Are-art mine
For ever art One With thy Self-and-Thine.
MAT. 12. 43, 44.
Go sweep thy House, and wear out all the brooms
Of Ethics to the stumps, collect the sweets
Of Scripture flowers; garnish, perfume thy rooms.
You Are yet the Rendevous where Legion meets
And revell rout's more safe, till Christ ha'indwelt
Thee'nd kept Possession. Which had he then thou had felt
Thy sin-purg'd-thirsty soul draw wholly up
Thy daily draughts of his reviving Cup.
This sin-drean'd-Christ-replenisht soul's no rest
For th'unclean Spirit but the self-full breast.
OH where is a quiet Lamb, a gaulelesse Dove,
An humble soul, an all-enduring Love,
A Glorious-and-offence-by-passing man
That sweetly smiles at All the creature can?
A Psa. 131. (...)
smoothly plained, silenc't soul abides
No Isa. 40.4. cum Psalm. 31.20.
rugged, rough excrescencies of Pride;
A fitted soul to fall in close conjunction
With God, t'apply it self to every function;
A patient Job, meek Moses, gentle Paul,
Upright, Gods Friend, Heavens Seer, well may y'him call;
The lively Image of his Christ
Who was the lowliest-and-the Highest.
Blessed man! Has found the Philosophique Stone
That with a touch turns Dunghils into Thrones,
And of a Thorny makes a Golden Crown.
Admired Believer! While he'humbly lays him down
Below th'least mercy, in the nethmost Pit
(Walks as a man not worthy of the Name
He forfeited unto Eternal shame,
Not worthy t'look to th'God he sold for naught,
On any creature who all in bondage brought,
Below the lash oth' Diabolicqu'st tongue,
Satanicqu'st hand in doing, does no, wrong)
Sits still in Heaven with Him in Heaven did sit
While in the Grave, far, far above the reach
Of The highest reaching sins can make no breach
Upon his praising Obncords, far above
The barking or the fawning World but prove
Th'increasers of his mirth by what he felt
From their attempts while here below he dwelt.
DEny my self! Take! Up! My! Cross! Each! Day!
And follow Thee! Self? Friends, gain, ease, name, may
Not one of these parts of my self, not all
Serve? But my self and all my self must call
Thee Lord? What, no propriety at home?
An Inmate to my self? And yet must come
And bear? Must bring my shoulders to this Cross?
Nay stoop for it too, and that for My, My Cross?
How lights another, though heavier far? And say
'Twere once ones Life? a Year? a Month? but every day!
And that including subdivided times,
As often as he shall please recall our crimes
Unto our memory! And yet, thus laden travel!
Nay! after perfectness! here is that would ravell
The fin'st spun with into a sad confusion,
To draw these premises into a glad conclusion.
But wisdom's from above, and it is not nature
That sees the height, breadth, length, depth of the Creator,
H's incomprehensible love in Christ; How light's
The burden? How unconceiv'd th'delights!
Thus made more capable of vaster Bliss
By these imposed impossibilities
To flesh and blood, how much the more room for grace,
For God, to make our souls the happier Place
Of his such wonder-working residence
That makes our Faith so far exceed our Sense,
His Spirit, his power our own, that we might be
Th'more glorious Proof of his Omnip'tencie.
Omnia mea mecum porto.
TIll thou can make the Cross of Christ uncrown'd,
And snatch the Scepter from his hand confounds
Kingdoms like Potsheards, till thou can control
Him that shall roll the Heavens like a scroule
And make them melt with fervent heat to give
Me passage to my high prerogative
Its full enjoyment, till thou can untie
Or cut in two the Gordian knot where I
'M inseperably interwoaven with himself;
Till thou can rob the everlasting wealth
And dry the inexhausted Spring; Or stop
The invisible Influxes, that do drop?
That pour out Cant. 5.16. (...)

Sweetnesses come streaming through
Their pure and undiscovered Channel to
M'inlivened soul; th'ebbing world shall still redound
With floods of overflowing comforts, ground
My soul above the reach of worldly cares,
To feast upon the sweets of heavenly fare.
LUKE 1.53.
O May I daily empty me of me.
Could thou but fill me daily more with Thee?
Can thou deny thy self? Or can there be
Ought good but Thee? Or be Vacuity
In Grace more then in Nature? O'make, make me
More humble, so I rise more filled with Thee.
Ah Lord! Now where am I! sure this is right;
I, here is that is worth the name Delight.
Here, here is a Joy that swallows all my joys
In'ts shorelesse bliss, and over all m'annoyes
Triumphs in glorious peace, the while't imployes
It Is provident security, and swerves
On neither hand, but to an hair observes
Its narrow ways until it come t'innest
In The omnipresent Center of his breast.
O may I daily sill with more of Thee
T's this filling only humbles-raises me.
Humility and grace are commensurable, take the depth of the one and you have
the height, have all the dimentions of the other. Ex pede Herculem; So much
Humilitie-so much Grace-so much God; or rather so much God-so much Grace-so
much Humility (All our disposings of our selves to him being post-not
predisposings; so far as I spread downward in the root of my humble faith,
so much the more nourishment I draw; and consequently thrive in bulk and
stature toward the full measure of perfection in Christ Jesus.

We have according as we receive, but we receive according to our humility-the
hollow of the Palm, the capacity the capability of the hand of faith,
therefore we have according to it.

Again, Grace is the Indwelling of God in us and Humility the emptying and the
unselfing us of our selves, to live in him; look then as he comes in, (the
very first forming of grace,) so we go out; and as we go out so he comes in
with a daily and further transforming us into himself. Or thus, Christ is the
pattern of Humility, but in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead,
therefore Thc humblest man is the most gracious man,
Nay who 'twixt the one and the other difference can.
For indeed Grace is Humility-and Humility is Graceis godliness; they having
diverse names in a diverse respect, Humility as we are made unlike to, are outed
of, our selves; Grace-and Godliness as made like to, as Inned in our God. The
unselfdenying man therefore is the prond man-is the ungracious-the ungodly man.

Or thus, God himself has so humbled himself, take upon him the form of a
servant, to be God-with ( Phil. 2. ver. 6, 7.) The Lord of Life has shed
blood, has been slain, and that on the Cross for (...) ( Acts 3.15. 1 Cor.
11.27.) In whom it is humility look on the Earth, to look on the Heavens (
Psalm. 11) Grace then being but what a man has of God, it m^ be but what he
has of humility.

The more truly then, the more kindly the Sold humbled, the more raised, the
more sublimed it is, (...) cause more filled with him who is Above all; But of
t^ otherwhere God willing, the Kingdom standing, (...) not overturned by these
studie-disturbing, Statestroying, Over-looking Prides.

QVia des noixil en casse
Et qui n'en a il s'en pass.
He that has Nuts, to h's teeth them puts,
He that has none, lets 'em alone,
'S never troubled about 'em.
Just such toys are all the joys
This world can give, and I can live
As well without 'em.
It is not bread whereby I Am fed,
I much may carve and yet may starve
If Nature feed not.
But on the air I can well fare,
If God shall make me all forsake
So say they need not.
God is my portion, all this spacious world
^S a little-tinie Nut, that to me hurld
^'ve more ado to get the Kernel forth
Then all the world as but the shell is worth;
God's in it I know, and God's without it too,
And I get him without with less ado.
My Nuts are left, I Am off my childish stage,
Approach the Acme of m'eternall Age:
^care f'r this rattling pleasure? Counter-wealth?
These Hobbyhorse Honors? For this trumpery pelte
^arths puling sucklings stretch your throats, I draw
My Life fro'th 'Wisdome of the Gospel-Law.
ARise my Harp, my Heart is risen, up,
Praise him has filled, has overfill'd thy cup.
^rise my Heart, my Harp is risen, up,
^raise him has filled thy praise-o'rerunning cup.
^eart, Harp arise, mix your melodious notes
Whereon my soul my soul to him devotes.
^ow praises, vow thy self in praisefull bliss,
^y Heart the Spirit, my Harp the Organ is.
^ay Harp, and Heart, and sweetly both agree
(...) Him my Life, my life your Echo be.
^esse Heart, Harp bless with blessed conspiracy;
^y Life? Earth, Heaven your constant Echo be.
SIng pretty Bird, and welcome in the Spring,
And mock my silence, hark unthankful soul
How sweetly does she chant it, sing on, sing
My daintiest Bird, how nimbly does she roll
And pour out Roundelaies, as if she wu'd
Have all at once her concords understood.
Yet pretty wretch how well she keeps the time.
How gracefully she rests; how entertain
Her Flats with Sharps: how neatly does she climb
Up note by note, and run them down again,
With gentle breast breaths many a melting strain
Hark, hark unthankful soul, what still refrain?
Rouse up, put in, thou lacking in thy part?
Refuse so just a challenge? Thou have two Springs,
From Earth one, Heaven another, rise up my heart,
The winters past, rain gone, it is time to sing,
The Flowers appear, heard is the Turtles voice,
The voice of thy Beloved, Arise, Rejoice.
Up, meditate his praises on thy Lute
With a grave Higgaiion while like Seraphim
Thou burst'st int' flams; fails the tongue 'to speak depu^^
Thine eyes. They? Let astonished silence him
Proclaim, wondrous in doing, in Sanctity
Glorious, in praises fearful, I praise Thee?
Holy! Holy! Holy! Lord God of Rest,
My rest! yet restless I, how feign wu'd speak
But so over powerd with dazzling Light so pressed
With Humbling weight of Massy Glory break
M'imprisoning earth claim climb my high degree
Glory in its El'ment cannot too heavy be.
O turn away thine eye! No, turn mine eye
To a refulgent Sun, whose steady view
May feast upon unmixed Entitie
'S uncircumscribed, and uncoulerd Hew,
Till Ps. 14.5. (...) complectitur copiam and affluentiam Fluminis and Luminis
cum celeritate, lubentia, ac pronitate. Fosterus.
whelmed in living floods of streaming beams
I rise, far, far above these dunghill-steames.
To sing Blessed God, who to thy Pure in heart,
In The Sight of Thee all blessings do impart.
LOrd I believe, O help my unbelief:
My sins are great, therefore my sins remit,
Are thy thoughts, thy ways mine? To see the Chief
Of sinners Chief of Saints, a work befit
Such free! full grace! O how my soul admires!
Rapt up in wonders, lost in large desires!
How I expatiate in this Infinite.
I stretch, I retch and yet still more's before
Still I put out my self, so from Self quite
Am drawn; most happy loss to find such store;
I Have lost my empty Bark (...).
swift sailing come
Inrich't with Glory to my Glorious Home.
Toss World thy waves, Heart harker for thy Earth,
Blow Divle thy blasts. He, he is in my Bark
Shall quit me of you all. Ravished with mirth
While to my Husband-Pilots Loves I hark
With full assarance fleetly glide along
Long longing t'sing that overlasting long
Hallelujah!
Hallelujah!
-- But must I rest? I hear
A harshned touch? what interchange here needs?
Or have I so fastidious an ear?
Or is it Variety my joyings feeds
But that, that is Grounded on Simplicity?
In Jah's the confluence of all Harmony.
T'S a Princely Fabric This. What curious rows
Of glittering windows! stately Batiements!
How well compact, proportioned, trim it shows
A Masterpiece of Arts imbellishments!
And what a breadth and length it runs, as high
As if it wu'd the spangled Cope outvie
In lofty glory! And if within you pry,
How neatly furnished with rich Utensils,
How gorgeous decked with broidred Tapestry,
What Paintings, Carvings, Guildings! What so e're fills
The Eyes with content. Yet be the Seat unsound
Foundation shallow soon't salutes the ground.
This Palace Thou perkt up to Heaven, adorn'st
Thee'n specious self-admired Parts, and scorn'st
Thy neighboring Underling whose humble heart
Shall raise his praise as choosing th'Better part.
Who deeply founded on his Rock outstands
The proudest structure on the crumbling sands,
That over-charg'd with its own pondeur, shall
With lower-shooting violences fall
Entombed in its own ruins 'ith'Abysse
'T wixt which and Heaven the vastest Chasma is.
BE proud who can? Do constant use to bow
Thy serious mind by an intentive view
Of God? How Great! How Good! Vile! Sinful thou!
Mercies how excellnnt! and those not few!
God! Man! Mercy! Such! from Such! to such a man?
These, and their Suches Weighed So, Where Is the man?
NO, All. And now what letts what is now between?
Why not now join, claspe in a mutual close
And twine in full embraces? Why not lose
My Name my Life in Thee, so ever be
With Thee with Thee the only Heaven I Would see.
-- No, No, All, All be gone
For I have lost have lost my self in One.
For ever ever Lord; that I may fear
No more to be my self but still be here.
And if thy wisdom see my foolish heart
Wu'd surfeit on thy kisses and convert
This Grace to wantonness, shu'dst still impart
Unsowred sweets, yet though our lips must part
(But shall they part?) never, never shall our hands;
Though then in Hell I be yet what withstands
But I may Vault my self to Heaven on This hold
Whose touch is strength, whose strength is uncontrol'd.
I Wonder how I live! I Am but a Shade,
A Ghost. Do dead men eat? then I Will eat too.
My life is hid with Christ in God, I Am made
To men a stranger, to my self, nor do
I know ought aft'r th'flesh, live in the Spirit,
Survey the Glories that I Now inherit.
How black's this Sun! how grim a night this clear
This flearing day! O what an Aegypt's here
While in my Heaven-illumin'd Goshen stand
I viewing the palpablely-obscured land.
Which did they feel it as they think they see it
How to our Dwellings wu'd they speed their feet!
But still the world's the world. When shall I see
The Sun, the Day that make these thus to me?
I see, else knew I not these thus, wu'd see
More, yet more that more knowing I might be;
I see, but often a cloud intrudes between,
And make's me say it is darkness to have seen.
I see, one beam through th'Cranie blear's mine eye,
When all are pointed there O where am I!
My Light shall strength my sight, nay I shall be
All light, for as He is I shall Him see.
No Dark of Folly-Sin-Sorrow shall there be
When I Allight Allight shall Always see.
ACTS 10.10. (...).
It Is good it is good being Here. Shall I go down?
Shall I go eat whose stomach kindly swells
With, for, by, Food-indeed? Shall I go drown
My Faith in Sense? Or may my spirits as well
Be lost as dulled? so too the work not have?
Then go flesh, go, but dip, but sip, but Taste.
Go not unenvyed of those precious hours
Wherein thou laiest me out for dead, and yet
Extortest more for Life where funeral flowers
Are welcome sweetes. -- But what a sad regret
Comes over, if not overcomes my spirit
To hear them talk of straws, that Thrones inherit.
Nay, t'heare them talk like two wh'ave but one soul,
Bound for the same Heaven-Voyage, They fall foul?
Keep up my Faith, and there the while thee feed,
Where when I am, no more I food shall need.
Keep up my Faith and talk thee there the while
Where when I am this fear shall be my Spoil.
Keep up my Faith and then I may go down
And through my Cross the better view my Crown.
HOw is my soul distracted with content!
How full of Joys, and yet how filled with Grief!
How well composed my heart, and yet how rent!
How often straights, and yet as often relief!
Impatient of delays I patient stay:
Oh come away dear Lord I Will not away.
The more I have the more I still desire;
The more I still desire the more I have.
Thrice happy thirst whereby I so acquire
The drink who drinks he never more shall crave.
I ask no more but this, but more of this;
No more, this the only bliss, more, still there is miss.
Oh could I ever dwell where I have been,
Or once could be where I shall ever dwell;
In Kedars Tents I mourn, when I have seen
Th'Invisible, how soon my heaven to hell
Is turned? The only hell that I can see
To see the face reflects no God on me.
Cast me into those Rooms of this great Inn
Where I may hear them talk that talk of Home
And when these worldlings which thee never have seen
Chance in my-thy appointed way to come,
Oh iet me be so prepossest with thee
Hearing I may not hear, nor seeing see.
When highest I arise I lowest fall,
And when I lowest fall I highest rise;
The higher, my sin and shame me more appall;
The lower, the greater's mercy in mine eyes.
I fall rise, rise fall, move, but never remove,
So steadfast am I founded on his love.
Mount up my spirit! what not Higher yet?
Yet Higher, Higher yet, this is too low,
Till quite above my self advanced I get
Where my New self shall me His Glory show;
In this third Region shall my Eagles eye
Th'unclouded splendor of his face descrie.
Before I heard but Now, I Now behold
Those holy beauties that first struck me dead;
Those holy beauties that first did unfold
The riches of my life; thus, thus is bred
Death out of Life, Life out of Death, by his Light
More black's mydark, mydark his Light more bright.
Oh how I love to love such Desirablenesses. (...) Can. 5.16.
Lovelinesses
As Thou art Altogether! how I hate
My self I cannot love! oh th'expedite distresses
That my self-jealous soul do intricate!
Cares! Cleerings! Fears! Desires! Zeal! Indignation!
Revenge! one smile caused, cured, blessed perturbation!
By'agreeing discord how delight's augmented!
By these harsh touches how well graced the close
With a full harmony! never be repented
Shall this Repentance. When thou do Lord compose
A heart thus broken, it is then an instrument
(And never till then) can give thine ears content.
For never thou (pleased with thy self alone)
Break'st one in two, but bring'st two, hearts in one.
So am I whole again, 'cause one with Thee,
So love my self, 'cause Loving, Loved of Thee.
O What a Consort is thy Word,
When Place falls into Place.
O what a Beauty is thy Word,
When Grace is matched to Grace!
But what a What then is That Word
That shows all Face to Face!
HOw fair a Casket is thy Word!
What broken sparks it does afford
From every corner to invite
My eyes to frequenter delight!
My eyes, my wondering eyes to see
Such radiant Christianity!
Cu'd I but set these sparks in one,
What floods of luster thence were flow'n!
One's worth a world, Heaven, Earth shall pass,
But an Iota shall surpass.
All saw I'n that one precious stone
How full-rich-pleasant Glory's shown?
How I more joy my sale of all
Has got m'one Pearl is more than all.
O Let thy Pleasantnesses be Ps. 90.17 Amoenitates.

Upon me Lord, how I shall fly
About thy business, how I Will fight
With oppositions, and delight
My self and thee with praise in all,
Thus speeds the works thus on thee call.
And what is the Beauty that does so?
Oh who will lead me to that show,
And tell me yet What is my Christ
In whom all Beauties are comprised,
And whence if they receive not light
They Are but the devil dressed in white.
Frown scowling World, frown, I deride the brow
Of all thy bended powers, and scorn to bow
Before the kneenest shafts of the fatal'st look
Wherewith thy worldling's in a trembling shook.
Still looked I for these looks, and therefore Armed
Me with the Armor ever keeps unharm'd.
And for thy favors, they are beneath th'desire
Of him whose Heart-and-Treasure's far, far higher.
Here while I keep me and not walk below
My self, what petty nothings all things show
At their due distance? and how Vast the Glories
Seen in their place and not read over for Stories;
HOw vain is restless man!
Tossed too and fro with Passions, hurled
A Tennis-ball throughout the World!
Now on he flies, straite's beaten back again,
On this side now, now that, but still in Vain.
How vain is restless man!
You know not where to have him found;
His earthy thoughts now creep the ground,
Now up an hoight he flies, he will over all
Till caught in h's net or lost in's miring fall.
How! how unhappie's man!
How far his motion from his Line
His rulelesse course from what is divine!
Wu'd he but leave himself in's Saviors hand
How steedy seemly sure he would him command?
How worse then wretched man!
He Would never keep such a Racquet, never come near
The Hazard could he tell where Heaven were.
Could his Experience tell 'twere in his Heart
And's Heart in it, 'twere a mysterious Art
Of Peace and Righteous joy, how quicki' he would part
With toilsome Mock-blisse, to be truly blessed
He Would pleasure in his Rich and Glorious Rest.
Go Till the Garden man. Lord I should learn
Thy ten Commandments, the Creed, thy Prayer
Before the World, but I have these to learn
Old Child! These known then knew I Thee, and were
That known I knew the World and All, in All
I Am short, Thee first I Will learn. so All.
Thou art the only Agent act'st and yet
Not suffer'st by the Patient might I be
More Thee, then only might I be more fit
To work on that that else wu'd work on me
And worldly make who do desire to make
The World more godly and the World forsake.
While make my Calling as a Christian
The soul to act my Calling as a Man.
Go Molelike Christian to the Heathen Eagle,
Thence take instructions how to disinveagle
Thy earth beclogged spirits, while thou soar'st
Thy stately heaven approaching flight and poar'st
Thence (if thou wu't poare on it) upon this so
Admired nothing, which if ought it show
Thou't see a little-tyney Hill of petty Ants
Providing for their still successive wants
With crawling up and down to tug and haule,
O'reburdning and o'retumbling luggage, crawle
Never up again but here and there a few
With much ado, some Portering Feather-beds
Tortured with pleasures, some loading of their heads
With break-neck Crowns, some mumbling at the Mines
Of poor Peru, while one or two divines
The end of this confused moyle, gets wings
And practices to fly to Nobler things,
O wu'dst thou mount thee from this dungie Globe
To those Celestial Regions there inrobe
Thee with thy Royal vestures tishued Gold
And take the Potent Scepters uncontrolled
Thy sacred Temple's bound wi' illustrious Gemms
Adorn the endless Circle of the Diadems
The handy work of the Eternal wrought
Before the world, thou'tst say the world was Naught,
Was worse then Naught, was Naught, wu'dst take
The faster gripes o'th'Kingdome never can shake,
The undefiled Inheritance, where the
Pure Heavenly soul's Inheaven'd in Purity.
Fond soul that ever bat'st the wing to know
Again the evils of the Goods below.
Is Heaven beneath the Moon? what do above?
But is it above? what do thou Fondling move
Thy happy station? What want thou there unless
Eyes to behold thy bliss, and tongues to bless?
Here gaze, admire, adore, and never descend
Hers entertainment that has neither end
In choice nor time; all Goods resolved into
Their Simple-and-Eternall Being; who
But mad wu'd stoop to catch a fleeting shade
That has the substance that will never fade?
But art thou called away? What Calling is it
Whereby thy given heart may be dismissed
From its true Owner? What Employment is it?
Is It not a God-enjoyment where Earth has
No soul but Heaven, and Sense no Life but Faith
No quickening Flesh but Spirit? He Is a la mort
If Christ his strengthening influence don't resort
Into his Carka'st actions, who what e're
H's Thoughts, Words, Deeds do, does in, and as he bears,
His Name, from His Command, through His Power, for
His sake, from whom, and thorough whom, and for
Whom All things are, his Life does hold him forth
To the world as th'Name the Thing its Nature's worth.
Thus moves in these inferior Spheres by th'bent
O'th'Highest Mover, Ascends in his Descent.
Go then about thy businesses, but know
He Is not about his business that is below,
Eat, sleep, work,'r not, still do to, be with, God
God clothed in the Creature and a naked God.
The great contrivement of a godly aim
To see'im in diverse shapes and still the Same,
God manifest i'th'Flesh, is in the Flesh
Immanuel; mysterious godliness!
Here then is the top of that so rare an Art,
T'keep The Heart in Heaven, or Heaven in the Heart.
1 TIMOTHY 4.15. (...).
CAn they concoct well that not use to chew?
Digest that not concoct? assimulate
That not digest? Hence it is so few
The Word into their Souls incorporate.
Hence it is ensues a profane atrophie,
Or hypocritical cacochymy.
I Will meditate, be wholly in this thing
Or else to none'll appear my profiting.
Appear I must or cannot be, must fear
Must meditate lest that I but appear.
INwrap thy self in meditations, then
Go forth and through them. Converse with men.
That nothing find thee naked but s'invest
With heavenly apprehensions that the least
Insinuating air of the subtle world
May find no passage, nor the storm that is hurled
About thine ears; but thou thus wholly receiven
Up to thy God may be a walking Heaven.
MY soul's Opace, but may it be the Moon
Unto the Sun of Righteousness; full soon
I Will then reflect upon the world those Rays,
In thy ways clear them, clear them to thy praise.
Cast glimpses from that glorious Orb of Light
To guide them glade them through this dismal night.
This black-Prince-ruled world, but where in thine
Thy Word, Saints, Spirit thou art pleased to shine.
My soul is dark my brightest light but dim,
This yet's my joy, all I have, I have from Him.
With Wanes and Changes now I often decline,
But in the Full shall shortly ever shine.
Freed from this Leasehold earth, this shady night,
Fully possess? possessed by the Light
Whose beaming favors from his Darkelesse face
Condign'd his Choice Coheires of Glorious Grace.
I See no light, and yet so much I see
As darkes all other lights; I feel no love,
And yet so much I feel as makes me flee
All other loves; when other joys cannot move
My heart that sad perplexities annoyes
I joy this grief and grieve all other joys.
Lord art thou gone? What shall thou so be lost?
Thy glorious eye into this heart has sent
The spark, has took the whole, an Holocaust
It restless mounts unto its Element.
Fire of the Spirit it is, 'twill make no stay
Till to the Spirit of fire't has burnt its way.
Show me the Father and it shall suffice,
Whom never man saw, and lived; yet seen of men.
If death wu'd do it, 'twere well for wicked eyes.
Nor dead, nor living, yet seen of men, how then?
Dead, and alive in thee, and by thy Light
I feed on that full satisfying sight.
It Is not the predisposed Organ here
That needs; the Medium of a Mediator
Quicks deadned eyes, th'obscured Object cleares,
To th'lightlesse Creature the great Light Creator.
Here see I all I Would have, the world is want,
The Bed's too short, the Coverings are too scant.
BLack thoughts? as black as hell, and yet more black
Their pains extort their lies. Not Good? What lack
Have thou of all content but only this
I cannot see, not say Good, Good He is.
Mad thoughts! As mad as Hell, and what is more mad
Then to confess He is and yet is bad?
More reason's in m'unreasonablenesse
When say there is no God, then not confess
Him Good, Him only Good. O could I think
My heart so gone in love, so brought to'th' brinke
Of those Celestial Rivers thence should shrink,
And steal me to the infernal Lake? I think
Who did so deeply of his goodness drink
That this was in my heart, my heart in Heaven?
Never will I trust what has me so deceiven.
No, no, nor what I say for if I do,
'Twill cheat me in That Resolution too.
Ah Lord what will not I do? whom even now
Thou feasted'st with the sweets of God? yet how
How soon my mouth was full of gaulie taste,
That thou shu'dst throw away the world as waste,
And Fire-fit refuse, yet so sure combine
Me in that Jesu bundle of Life with Thine
Elect who'st room enough in Him for all,
Or might have kept them from their former fall.
Blessed God! it is therefore that I love thee so,
That thou these wise-hid-depths to Babes wu'dst show,
(When Fools proud wisdom scorns to stoop so low.)
Thou nothing do because it is Good, it is Good
Because Thou do it. Thy good pleasure wu'd
That this be so; even so be it, who will
Do what They will, may thank themselves for the will
Ensu's, but what Thou wu't, Thy grace;
VVho'rt placed to dwell in Satan's Place.
O love! The God of glory Come
(Good God!) in th'unclean Spirits room.
What am I Lord? And what thy whole
Creation? That Thou shu'dst condole
Were but a Man! but Millions! so condole!
As t'beare the Shame, Blame, Death the whole
Evils of thy Sainted Rebels, whom
Justice judged meriting one doom!
Love! Goodness! should I praise extend
Unto its due, I should never end.
Nor wu'd, nor will, but make my days
Expire in Panegyric laycs.
TEach me Thy Foolish wisdom Lord, and let
The blindfold world choose wiser Follies, set
My heart in frame to Learn-Love-Doe Thy will
To fear to Think, Speak, Act, the smallest ill.
Here wisdom takes beginning only Here,
Where fear shall teach me wisdom, wisdom fear.
Thou art Only-Wise-Immortall God, and He
That Is taught of Thee, but only taught is he
Whose humble fear dives in those depths too deep
For haughty Ignorance. Sleep fondlings sleep,
And hug your dreams of wit, but when you wake
You Will dearly rue your obstinate mistake.
HOw pleasantly I wear away my days
In The sense o'renewed strength! My strength decaies
And rises by his ruins. I melt away
How sweetly melt! still drop proud flesh defray
Your marrow to maintain these flames, still burn
Ble'st spirit burn, me all to fire turn.
Thoughts will prey on my spirits, life will away,
Then live my sprightfull thoughts on your decay,
Life! Life of Lives! It Is only Then I Live
When ready stand prepared with Joy to give
Up my Account, and speed me to that day
That gives me Life Indeed because for Aye.
O When shall I put off these fleshly Clothes,
And in my Earthy Bed take sweet repose,
Until that Morning come, that Holy day
In holy Pleasures I shall ever Play
On well tuned Heart that Heart inamouring ditty
That is the Consort of that Heavenly City.
Even so Lord Jesus Come, when breaks the day
Show's us Thy face, the shadow's flowne away?
Even so Lord Jesus Come, when breaks the day?
Amen, Amen the Bride and Spirit say.
I Come, I Come, so come that we may come
Riding of the Clouds unto our Fathers Home.
MElt in thy Fire my Earth, blessed Spirit blow
M'into a Glass, through whose transparent pores
My radiant streams of holy luster flow
Into my light-enliv'ned soul, now poares
On those dim glimmerings thorough this darksom dust
Yet more ob scured by th'False-lights of Lusts.
More then, more strong be those thy glorious rays
To lift my heart up to thy heavenly ways;
Till thou shall spiritualize my very flesh,
And make my glorious body see no less,
I Cannot hold, so full, so full of Thee
Sweet Father, help, the more's the Revelation
Of Truth, the more, th'more strong the test'mony
Of love, the more, th'more strong is the temptation.
My Love burns still, and from that fire comes light
Restores the day unto my darkest Night.
For still I say, I know I Am ignorant
And very bad, but Thou art Wise and Good.
I cannot but love Thee, Thy Love-Letter I cannot
But I must read, thus Truth is understood
Received with love without delusion, so
By knowing I learn to Love, by loving Know.
A holy Life's the clearest Commentary
I find of the sacred Text, the Spirit's actual
Interpretation. 'T unites what seems contrary,
Parts One in Two; show's how it is, it does call
Grief joyful, faithful fear, lofty humbleness
Destinguisheth of Prayer, Faith, show's who confess.
Who makes the Word a Lanthorn to his feet
God to his paths to mak't a Light think's meet.
HOw giddy I am with viewing the Sea! I Would know
Why Thou't so ebb to some, to some so flow.
Why this man's left, the other Love does take?
But woe t'him dares debate with h's Maker make.
O Thy Wise-knowing depth's unsounded be,
Since I cannot take Thee, take, take Thou me.
Into Thy mercies Ocean be I receiven,
I know 'twill bear me to my Haven Heaven.
That shall declare Thy righteousness, that shall
Thy Judgments manifest, God's Judge of All,
Great! Wonderful Thy Works! Just, true Thy Ways
Shall be the ditty of Thy worthy Praise.
MY Head's lost in my Heart; sure I Am in love,
Forget all, yea, m'own thoughts while thus above.
And now what is this steals slily in my head
My spirits thus in my heart concentered?
Don't I believe? My heart, my life will not say it,
And for my thoughts, what need I so much weigh it?
Thoughts often confound themselves, I love, I live,
The God the Life that none but Christ can give.
Am crucified, dead, buried, risen, ascended,
Begin the Life that never shall he ended.
MY Head does ache, and yet my Head
Does feel no pain.
My Head is well, and yet my Head
Does still complain.
Well, I Will go lay it on my Husbands knee
Where stroke it with His gentle hand shall He.
His Palm's a medecin Sovereign;
If He but touch
The Fever leaves, if He refrain
Yet I Will not grutch;
There Is somewhat in it, He Is Wise, Good, ake's't still? well,
'Ts Thy mercy Lord 't shall never ache in Hell.
Never ache in Hell? then ever in Heaven
Triumph over grief.
And shall not this all thy Sowers unleav'n
With sweet relief?
But weigh them well they will overpoise them quite;
What Is Earth to Heaven? Finite to Infinite?
And now my Faith what do? where art?
What? Yield to Sense?
Or have forgot thy Heavenly Art
How to dispense
Joys suiting every sorrow? I wonder too
Were in the Martyrs flames how Then Thou Would do.
Lord give me strength, and Thou shall take the praise,
Lord take my strength, and That shall give Me praise.
NOw mouldring Earth, why hang'st the head?
Have not a Soul? why? why so dead?
Or shal't be more enslaved by
Thy pains, whose pleasures conquered lie?
No, no, it is more ingenuous bred,
With courage as well as wisdom sped.
My spirit (not mine) 's egregious, I
'M among the Exc'llent, who so high
That I not Aemulate? And can
I'ndure to see a Publican
Thus match me? He can bless in the warm
Sun, but I Would bless in the sharpest storm.
I Would pray, I Would praise my pains away,
And lull my grief asleep, a way
Of sweet success. I Would drown my swine,
This touchy grunting grumbling repine
In my own waving passions. Swage
By reg'lar passions, passions rage;
By this my heavenly indignation
Appease this earth-fum'd perturbation,
Attempts to Shipwreck peace in vain
That still's afloat of the calmed Plain.
Thy breath the winds did blow away,
Thy Word the boistrous billows stay.
Thou said I should do greater things,
For Faith in 'ts power all things brings,
Thou Would be commanded by 't, I should
B'as sure of what so e're is good
As if thou were at their Commands
Who humbly-bold wait, watch, thy hands,
But I wu'd do what thou have done,
I Would make dim eyes play with the Sun.
Dead spirits from their graves wu'd bring,
And make deaf ears to hear them sing;
This dumb-grown tongue thy wonders tell,
I wu'd do all things wondrous well;
I Would th'lowest dullest flatnesse raise
To the highest tones of clearest praise.
I Would fighting humors reconcile,
But if they will fight, I Would feast the while.
I Would tune distempers to thy praise,
Turn cloudy nights to Sunshine days,
Teach fainting hands to ring applaud,
And parched bones to spring with laud;
Smooth wrinkling gripings with a smile,
But if they will not I Would sing the while,
How ere it be yet Thou art good
And better ditty I never wu'd.
Hold up declining Arms, hold up,
Pour praises from an empty Cup;
For Grace is no more void then Nature,
Where the creature wants, there is the Creator,
Where that goes out, there He comes in
As well as where there goes out sin.
When then there is place that's empty o'thee,
Then, not till then I Will empty be,
Thy presence then when Thou shall cease,
Then, not till then, I Will cease to bless.
(Then never shall Thou be unblest
By him wh'hath thee a constant Guest,
Though in the dark a while we be,
Yet cause I see the Dark, I see.)
The world, or want, All Is one to me,
The while in either I ha'thee,
M'thinkes I cannot but often pray
That thou wu'dst take this world away,
For while it is seen it bars my sight,
And I find faith the sweet'st delight.
But all thy counsels have their beauty,
And all my comfort's in my duty;
For thou have taught my faith the way
Through all to pass to m'eternall stay
Thee! Thee! O wu'dst thou take me now
Thy child, that to thine arms does bow
Its straining soul, loath to be held
By the world in'ts pleasing'st usage yields
But pains. O Thou that all things made
And can revive them when they fade.
Thou that the Chaos fram'dst so fair,
And from four discords matched so rare
A set of healthy harmony,
Can when thou please make all agree.
And what is my Music but thy pleasure,
And but thy self what is my treasure?
Then let it go, and go my health,
So will's my music so my wealth.
Be packing, packing, get thee gone,
No more dear friend, He Is all or none:
Be packing, packing, get thee gone,
No more dear health He Is all or none:
Be packing, packing, get thee gone.
No more dear self, He Is all or none:
Be packing, packing, get thee gone,
No more dear Nothing He Is all or none.
It Is very well then I am ill
If this be ill, be I so still;
Till thou shall see it fit to tell
M'its very well that I am well.
It Is very well friend I thee miss,
The miss of the world's a world of Bliss.
Leave out thou sai'st this paltry Crotchet,
'Twill sound but ill, and shall I botch it
Into the Song, sound it as 'twill,
And so say I ha'th'better skill?
How too it grates my curious ears,
My tender Bowels wracks, and tears
M'observant head, sets m'teeth on edge
Against my self essayed t'abridge
My joy, my stretching it besides
Thy Will, where all my joy resides.
And when all is done so must I play,
The sweet the while lost by delay.
Strike off the sin, strike as thou please,
Blot out the offense, I seek not ease.
And yet my ease because it is
Thy pleasure t'keep me still in Bliss.
My ease, my pleasure therefore is,
Or strike, or not, I Am still in Bliss.
Nay this my ease, my pleasure is,
Strike or forbear the hand is His.
Thanks! thanks! Think The Angels now are still?
The just men's perfect spirits sill
Not Heaven with their chanting voice?
You Are of the Choire my soul, rejoice,
Thou may, thou must praise with the gods,
The God makes music with his rods.
He Is one Entire, Pure, Perfect Happiness,
No shaddo' of change, in him thou art, e're Blessed, e're Bless.
2 KINGS 4.
ONce was I dead, Authority then brought,
Applied thy Word, but naught, till Thou came, wrought.
And now I languish in this fainting fit,
The means begun my life best strengthens it.
Come lay then eyes to eyes, mouth, hands, that I
May see, sing, do, more wonders till I die
To see, to sing, to do thy Will above
As here to have it seen, sung, done, I love.
When I loved death, and ran away from life,
My wanton Circuits for some fresher sin,
Mercy pursued, o'retooke, and with its strife
Inclined my will to know God Good again.
Good God! and now I fear to step awry
Thy hand's as near as thy never slumbering eye.
I stumble, but not fall; fall, off not fall;
That, shoots me the more forward, upward this;
Obliquely I ascend; why, why at all
Dear'st God? O love, O fear the Lord that is
So wondrous good! O fear th'least temporal miss
Of such a friend secures Eternal bliss.
Never leave me! such company! such for ever!
Infinite simplicity of joys! I sever
My self a moment for a momentary
Shadow of bliss? These thoughts first must I vary.
Eternity is little enough t'imploy
In him and shall I bate a moments joy?
Avaunt false loves, I Will lose you All for Ever
E're I will miss a minute of this pleasure,
To lie infolded in my Saviors arms,
To feast upon his kisses while he warmes
He melts my soul into his melting arms,
Presumptuous Rivals still your Siren charms,
My soul is at her heighths and cannot stoop
To lend an ear to your enchanting Cup.
No, no, I Have Nectar, I have Flagons here,
One drop's enough ten thousand Worlds to rear
As far above themselves as now they are
Below Him who is only worth compare.
Feed Sensualist on dreams of aerie Thrones,
Of golden Mountains, and of pleasure Own's
No parallel; but give me leave to tell
The, 'hadst been in Heaven, thoud'st say thou art in Hell.
Who ere was thus imbedded in Thy breast
Dear Lord and could find other where his rest?
His Rest that moves in such an endless sweet
Where all the Spirits of the Godhead meet
With my diffused soul entwines it self
In fresh rencounters with'ts imbettering Self.
I AM in a strait, pressed hard on either hand,
I both ways have and yet am at a stand.
I, here is Christ, but there is more of Christ,
Here in my mouth and heart, but there is nigh'st.
What is it but love can keep me from the sight
The perfect sight of my select delight?
But love's obedient, if thou't bid me go
And travel on this Pilgrimage below,
Do, suffer, seven and seven years, so to show
How grounded's my affection, that it is no
Fond fancy that the giddy world deceives,
I go, I run, I fly, yet give me leave
To bear thy Picture next my heart, to look
Upon th'adored Beauties of thy Book;
That they may be the covering of mine eyes
So to preoccupy them from these lies.
O glories! Can I hold! Can I refrain?
But still thou sai'st, and therefore I, Remain.
Love's not its own, lives in'ts Beloved, thinks good
Not what the Subject but the Object wu'd.
COntent to live, but covetous to die,
Glad here to do more good, but more to fly
Above these sad temptations to do ill.
Yet covetous again of life to fill
Heaven with more saved souls, and yet again
Death, not t'occasion more Hell filling sin.
Thus while I waver in this blessed doubt,
This blessed propensity thus helps me out
Lord while thou wu't I Would live, and when thou wu't
I Would die, my humble soul learned at the foot
Of my dear Jesu, no true rule's t'be had
To judge of right and wrong, of good and bad
But by thy Will and Nill.
Thus living die I still,
And dying live; thus m'will he gives
In both, because I die and live.
Beset with Heaven on every hand
Prepared for Heaven thy Command.
HIgh and happy is that pitch of Christianity that can so well reconcile the
greatest of enemies, Life and Death, as that they both friendly take up their
lodgings in the same Breast, and see themselves entertained with the same
respect, at the same time, without the least grudging or repining at each
other. The heart not vexed with any partial peremptory desires of either. But
they quietly residing in it, and officiously waiting on it with a dexterous
serviceablenesse, to discharge either of their duties according to the good
pleasure of God, signified to the God-well-pleased soul. Then is a Christian
like Himself, when he has that power over himself, as to walk with his life
in his hand, as ready at the least sound of the word given, either to lay it
down, or put it up again in his heart. When he wears it loose about him like
an outer garment, ready to slip on and off as occasion serves. This is the
only man that is fit to Live, who is fit to Die, and fit to Die, who is fit to
Live. He that knows how to Live hereafter is well prepared how to Live here,
and he is not prepared to depart hence, that knows not how to Live hereafter.
He that knows no difference betwixt earth and heaven, but more and less of
God, as he can not but be continually making more after heaven, because after
more of God; so can he not but be as willing to stay on the earth, while it is
more agreeable to the will of God which is Himself the Heaven of a Christian.
Blessed! blessed soul thus sented in his God! To whom the sound of the feet
of death are delightful, and the drawing out of his days is pleasant. When
the withering'st age detaines not too long in life, nor the flourishing'st
youth hastens too soon to death. As he that crowned with all the pomps and
pleasures that the fragrant'st, the fertilest Garden of the world can afford,
see's nothing in the whole but mere vanity, mere nothingnesse, less than
nothing. And on the other hand, cast forth into the driest and barrend'st
Wilderness, the vast and howling Desert, still digges up Fountains of
everliving and never exhausted waters, and makes his Bacha his Baracha, his
vale of tears a mountain of praises, as Psalm. 84. (...),
drinking Him for his Spring who is the Lord of Life and Glory.

See how this string untoucht does quickly stir.
At th'sound of that? they not, who are not so far?
Where are the soundings of thy Bowels Lord?
Our Bowels sound, and shall not thine accord?
They touch Thee not, but thine eyes-apple they touch,
And wu't not stir when their presumption's such?
And though we cannot move our neighbors heart,
Yet in our grief wu't not thou bear thy part?
Thou art our Father. Oh let there never be
Even in Inanimates more Simpathy.
Forget her Child a mother may, yet not
Thou thine, for if they are, thy selfe's forgot.
Draw out our Souls, and make us follow thee,
For where thou art, there only, there are we.
ENough Lord, July 1640.
Mercy enough, take my life from me,
I better than my Fathers? No, s'bad, I Would die.
Were I left only. Yet were I still with Thee.
But I Am so fickle, s'inconstant; one while I
Conquer Philistims, break through all, but then
My strength is gone, and I Am like other men.
(...) renewed, and now had I
(...) I Would so employ
(...) ^ation
Go their (...)
Exalts it self above the highest Throne,
And sweeps down Stars, whose luster has outshone
Their artificial Fires, and made their Light
Appear th'ditch-plunging Vapors of the Night.
Lulled were we fast asleep while they Us shave,
But in thy Name we will valiantly behave
Our selves, wee've strength an t'spare, we will be, more be
Than Conquerours, yea shortly on Them see,
Wh'have long deprived us of our sight, and made
Us grind the grist keeps up the Romish Trade,
And now wee'z make them sport, but such as makes
Them and their Conclave feel their Downfall shakes.
Down, down it goes this Lordly Machination
On their own Lordlesse hearts, this reputation
Have all His Saints; let not the vision be
Prolonged Lord. When, when shall I once see
These Cockatrices Eggs, These Spiders webbs,
Crush't and swept down? This Flood even now it ebbs
While't more Rebellion then the Ocean sounds,
That curbs its proud Waves by its Makers bounds.
Is'nt th'Myst'ry of Iniqu'tie's Measure found
Orerunning th'brim? strik't, strik't, and throw't to the ground.
O when is That Is Shortly Thou't under our feet contrite
All desperate haters of Thy holy Might!
SWell on proud Toad, and with thy swelling burst.
Spit venom still, I Have m'Antidote. How say?
I cannot indur't? Nor He thee thou accur'st,
That blessed the meek; I wonder how thou pray'st?
Thy Will be done? What? Wu't the prerogative
'S His Glory? To none other will He give.
A Touch? a Pin? a Word? a Look make such a brable?
But brought on Bed thy self-will never eased?
Gi'th'Child its will, and give the Fool its babble,
And who more pleasant? The devill's well when He Is pleased.
But, whose of God is pleased when He Is not well;
His Will's his Pleasure, and his own 's his Hell.
NO, fear not Thou for Thou do Jesus seek
Meek righteous soul, to make thee righteous meek.
Fear nothing, nothing else but Him who can
Yet cannot' cause he will not hurt a Man;
A man of God, whose single, watchful eye
Heart, mind, strength, might, joy, time, does all employ
In all Commands, with all their due extents;
And sweetly still the humble soul relents,
And drooping dropping, dropping in his breast will cry
Ah wretch't unprofitable servant I,
O blessed and profitable servant Thou
Rewarded with The All powerful God, and how
How can thou fear, wh'hast Him who all things made?
Fear not He bids; then fear to be afraid.
Fear not the Lion, but the way, watch, pray
He Would keep th'in his, who keeps His in their, way.
THat fear and love is good and great
That Goodness fears, and Greatness loves.
Good; for a slave may fear a threat;
And every rascal money moves.
Great; the greatest fear from Miserimum est fuisse foelicem. Sin-and misery
is, as it is to Holinesse-and Happiness. Had not they first been, we had never
known these. It is the full and feeling apprehension of their irrecoverable
loss that makes Hell Hell to the wicked; And the fear of their indiscoverable
obscuring that makes fear fear to the godly. In this so far exceeding that of
the ungodly, that the fear of the one arises from the loss of God, of the
other from the loss of themselves; an infinitely sweet and gracious God, a
poor petty contemptible worm. The soul of the one widened in the great and
vast apprehensions of the incomprehensible simplicity of God; of the other,
shrunk up and shrivelled in the strait and narrow bounds of its own welfare.
That being a fear of Love, the workings whereof are stronger than Death; this
of hatred that shall be kept under the power of Eternal Death. That being that
which draws the soul insinitely after him; binds it indissolvably to him,
makes it dwell everlastingly in him, who is Love, all Love, and in whom is no
hatred at all. This, that which contracts it into it self, in a straight and
scanty compass, carries it off, makes it fly, and keep at a distance, from
him who is Heaven, while they are flying from Hell. There being nothing that
lays a stronger engagement on the soul than Love, and therefore nothing that
does more intend and increase the affections conducible to its preservation:
Which did an Arminian feel, he would never exclaim against free Grace, and
absolute Predestination, as a doctrine of sinful liberty, but rather (as I may
call it) against forced Grace, and dependant Predestination. The fears, cares,
worries of the slave, and mercenary beginning and ending in himself, he not
laboring out of a single eye, but as seeing the whip and lash over his head,
the mess of Pottage at his hand, while the adopted Son, that lives at his
Fathers Court, and is ascertained of the Inheritance, can as well ( qua talis,
as such, whose heart is so enlarged and carried forth in the sense of divine
joys and loves) endure any the least aberration from its Fathers good
pleasure, as he that hearing him bespeake him with such like kind
compellations, (...)
my dear, my precious Son, the child of my kisses my pleasant embracings, for
whose trouble my bowels are troubled, (...)
on whom in tender mercy I will have tendes everlastingly tender mercy, etc.
can choose but be affected with the most quick and ready concord of bowels, the
most passionately stirring (...), the most Sonlike givings, givings up of
soul, and consequently acted with a more than manlike fear, care, working to
be ever, ever pleasing, such a Father, such a God to whom he finds it so good
to draw, to be, so near.
Loss does rise,
Heroicque spirits catch not flies.
HOw full of sweetness is my foul,
While in this boundless Ocean 't roules,
'T self in concurring floods of Bliss,
Where meets in One what ever is.
O How I dread thy mercies? How
Embrace thy judgments? on whose brow
Sits lovely Soveraignety
Enthroned in an Identity
Of awful smiles! whose holy beams
Influence Seas of grateful streams
Through all thy ways, whose every path
A sweetly fresh occurrent has
To bath my blissful soul, sings still
Jehovah is in all; and till
He cease to be, he never will
To do, Great! Good! nor I to fill
My reverentiall heart with praises,
Whose welcome fear my spirit raises
To such an height of self-contempt that all
This and the world below below me fall
Poor despicable spectacles to the soul that fears
Nothing but what it Loves, nor loves but what it fears.
Hence pedling world, with all thy paltry pack
Trusse up, away, be gone. Nor have I lack.
What? Fair foul skins? full empty bags?
Fresh rotting bays? are these thy brags?
They have no Grandeur to amuse
My freeborn spirits scorn to choose
What so inadequate will prove,
Unto the Heavenly vastness of my Love.
Nor when I see thee cross my way,
Armed in thy terrors to essay
Me with fell brows and felling blows
Can make me stoop to thy dispose.
there is no such amiablenesse appears
T'attract the sweetness of my fears.
So can not play the Cheater nor
The Thief, I thus provided for.
Nor have I time nor strength to attend
Thy gaudy trifles, nor to lend
An ear unto thy trifling threats;
Whilst such a fearefull-Love compleats
It self by growing more One in One;
My busied thoughts o're-whelm'd alone
In my exceeding! Great! Reward,
My Buckler and my shielding Guard.
Whose Sunne-amasing bright aspects,
Majestique Grace, Inf'nt protects,
Omnipotent Benignities,
Eternal favors, my soul n're sees
But wonder-struck it panting lies
For life to live before those eyes
Whose every glance conveies such sparks
As all created beauties darkes;
And wholly makes my loving fear
Enjoy th'inliv'ning dyings there;
Breaking through every object to
Th'great Love with whom I have to do.
(That fires out mixtures while he warmes
Pure hearts in's purifying arms)
Trampling on worlds with all their force
And fraud that strive to stop my course.
There lie thou sprawling fear, and there
Disheartened love, so proudly'd dare
T'usurp the name belongs to One
Does both as you yourselves oppone.
Let vulgar men, have vulgar minds,
Let false fear kill, while fond love blindes,
Let vulgar men have vulgar minds,
Move cross and stumbling lie behind;
Unenterfairing even pac't
Affections smoothl'each other have
And me on them as the same feet
Of The same Heaven-journying soul to meet
The same desire one blessed God,
Who never made passions be at ods.
BUt Sin and Satan fear not them?
No, no, nor them, they cannot condemn
Me, that must be the Higher power,
Whose fear their fear does over-powre.
Why should I so disgrace my Birth?
A piece of Heaven-inspired Earth?
Shall I degenerate from my Birth?
And to base fears resign my Mirth?
No, it is not them I fear but Him,
Whose love will never lose a limb.
I conflict with a conquered foe
Wh'hath only strength enough to show
The stronger over ruling hand
Subjecting All things to'ts command.
I Will wary, cautions, active be,
And so my fear, from fear shall free.
Give me no fear but that which meets
In hearty joys, and honved sweets;
A well composed Ingredient
To make the more complete content;
A pure, a clean, a cleansing, sound,
Strong strengthening healthy fear, whose ground
Is Love, is Faith, a hopeful fear,
A fear of great delight's my fear.
Sweet fear! How often I Would name thee, ere
I Would let thee go? who art so near
So dear unto my heart! Sweet fear!
That make such Music in mine ear!
That feast'st me with such royal cheer,
Such heavenly fare the while I hear
Thee say the King my Father's here,
The King my Husband's come to bear
Me company, to solace me
W'th all manner of pleasants hid for me
Unworthy me! to sup and dine,
To banquet with me with the wine
The generous wine repleats my soul
With raised spirits above th'controule
Of men and divles, while humbly wait
On the gracious Councels that impart
So glad a course of watchful work,
To Avoid the sad temptations lurk
About m'in every corner, and
Has promis't me he will ever stand
Close by me wi'h's never slumbring eye,
Never shortened Arm, that can epsy,
That can prevent, thought he so good,
Evill's at th'great'st distance, but he wu'd
Have them approach, assault, to try
How much of that great God may lie
In such a little piece of flesh,
What mighty power he can express
B' a broken contrite heart, what high
What unconceiv'd delights defy
The highest-aspiring grief, and scorn
T'be overreached, overborn
By'ts cruel Talons, but still soar
Their Heaven-securing flights, as more
Advanced b' its pursuits, while still
Resolve t'be uppermost, will-nill
All the ravenous griefs and Harpy fears,
Though th'hugest terriblest flock appears,
Sweet fear! still sweet! And have I met
Thy name again? Though counterfeit,
That wu'd betray me while I let
The feigned sound have entrance, yet
As error proved makes the truth
More lovely, so its falsehood does
Thy faithful friendship, while I find
They Are purposely of him designed
These hid as well as open foes,
That may the sagacity disclose
That with the courage lies enclosed
In this my faithful fear reposed
In that All-powerfull breast. Sweet fear!
Wise Valiant fear! still may I fear,
Yet never fear, to lose thee, fear
Thy miss, but not thy loss, may hear
May see as well as know thou art
A constant lodger in my heart.
While still thou art in exercise
Of some sage puissant enterprise.
Still watchest, prayest, workest, wait'st,
Still fight'st, still beat'st thy way through straights.
Sweet fear! how often I Would name thee er'e
I Would let thee go? who art so near
So dear unto my soul! sweet fear!
That make such Music in mine ear!
Well, make it still within my heart
VVe'r still together, though we part.
Il faut avoir Courage iusques and apres la mort.
THe shrill mouthed Trumpet, and the rattling Drum,
The clattering armor, and the quivering Spear,
Swords glittering, Canons roaring, these become
The Spirit that is steeled with Faith, not barred with fear
The smell of sulphur, and the sight of blood,
The sense of wounds, of death, the heart yet good.
Thus muster up thy forces day by day,
Thus fight before thou fight'st, this is the way
To carry it sure, put on thy Panoplie
Armed Capapea thy proudest foe defy,
What need'st thou Christian fear maintain the field,
God is thy Shield, Tower, Captain, never yield,
Or fear thou more the fiery darts of men
Then divles, these quenched, shall those affright thee? and when
Thou shu'dst be bold because thou art afraid;
In weakness God his power is perfect made.
Have seen the Hunter hurry down like thunder
Headlong descents, bear up the steepest Crag,
Leap hedge and ditch, cut gates and bars asunder,
Break through the thickets, plunder through the Quags,
Scowre over the Hillocks, fly it over the Plains,
Outface the winds, laugh at the storming raines?
Forget his hunger, envy not the Briars
His clothes, his flesh, wi'h's Steed undaunted prance
Through lonely Heaths perplexed Woods never tyres,
But on, still on he rides, and if he chance
To get a fall, leaps nimbly up again,
And makes the ground to feel's more swift disdain.
Thus fired with courage, naught but fear refraines,
Thus sports in 's perils, pleasures in his pains.
Up Heaven-bred heart, up This it is does demerit
The exercise of thine Heroique spirit.
Shall that brave breast recoile? what, what temptation
Dismaies the man, whose danger's recreation!
How his resisted soul will reinforce
It self, and take new valor to its course!
Through all he breaks down all he bears, over all
He flies, his says is furthered by his fall.
For what his nimble eye could not prevent
His noble heart turns to encouragement.
And counts small undertakings too too small
For that Great mind that nothing great can call
But God On, on brave hearts; What, what temptation
Dismaies the man whose danger's recreation.
Not fears the hard'st injeopardingst, and yet fears,
The light'st secur'st, Employment, since he hears
More Alsufficiencie in the Aeternall's Word
For the difficult'st exploits, and findes't conferred
On's Heaven-raised soul, then'n Himself sees
To the least good thought vast insufficiencies.
Thus by this feebleness made more apprehensive
Of The gracious supervenient strength'i's defensive,
Offensive succors, He finds so sweet a greet
In's R'covering Heart, where strength and weakness meet,
God and himself, Here'd feign b'unchamber'd, bi'th'
Free quickening Air; grown stronger,'d conflict with
The ruder winds; and yet his strength increast
Stirs up the heartned Champion to request
The King his Master to design him to
Some singular service which he passing through
With perill-edging puissance might prove
The Sovereigne vigor of his Soveregne's love
Armed w'th' All-powrefull Arm, that rends in pieces
The hugest hosts of foes as the slender Fleeces
Of The slightest rottenest Woole. What, what temptation
Dismaies the man whose Danger's Recreation?
^^st not thy exercise? Is It not to try
Thy strength that Thou may know it and magnify
^^is Giver? Is It not use legs and have them, use travel
And use shall teach thee nimbly trippe the gravill, (...). Epict. (...).

And how you are here mista'n, it is not the affliction
Whereby thou suffer'st but thine own affection.
No man can hurt thee unless thou will what may
An Heathen teach thee magnanimity? O pray
Pray for more faithful courage, let men see
Ethics are yet to learn o'Theology.
What fear but sin? looks 't after what but grace?
Since there is so much in these, then these embrace.
Count them thy Pleasure, Glory, and thy Gains
For what gets more of Christ's well worth thy pains.
From the eater meat, cruel sweet, dark light, ill good;
A Ridle in heaven's fully understood.
Here were our hearts s' Inheaven'd in Holiness
As there they will be, even here they would see no less.
(...).
SImplicitie-Immutabilitie
Art thou O'Lord? and am I as thou art?
One Spirit with Thee? this contrariety
Whence is it then whence this inconstant heart?
Were but that to thy sacred Image I
'M renewed, I Would look for more Analogy.
One spirit, yet many loves, yet many changes?
O be there now no mixtures, no estranges.
O here is my woe, incorrespondency
My deeds unlike themselves, and all to Thee.
O try, refine, rack, supernaturalize,
Extract, subtle, sublime, spiritualize.
O spirit, spirit, what shall I do for spirit?
This body of Sin, this rotten Carcass, bury it.
How 'nweldy it is! how overgrown with flesh!
How faintly it works! More spirits to refresh.
I cannot endure these lame, sick, presents to give,
Or make me lively, or not let me live.
O could I keep my Orb and constant shine,
I Would draw up worlds with influence divine,
And mount their spirits, but so dim, low, cool,
They Will fear it is but some Meteor to befoole
Them not so wise to deem the different doom
Between a setting Sun, and falling Fume.
Much light it is shows the Sun, much fruit the Root,
The Root, the Sun Thou art, then may my fruit,
My Light be much, that men may wonder much
What Is th'lightfull Root, whose fruitful Light is such!
I am thine Image, don't men judge of Thee
By me? Ah Lord, let me no longer be,
Or be more like Thee; What no more holy yet?
More perfect yet? Nay, my heart entreats Thee, let
Me branded be for a damned hypocrite,
Or my-thy Light let it increase its might.
The soul Thou sai'st, that is clean-and sound promoves
In strength; the righteous man his Light improves
Unto the perfect day; but better I
For ever perish, then Thou once shu'dst lie.
They Are foolish men, and if I once do ill
From P'rticulars to Generals argue will,
From Man to God; but how ever I be,
Yet Thou art good, when wu't Thou come to me.
O that I could but wish to wish to be
For ever in Hell, then be a jot from Thee.
This the only Hell, then may I there never be.
O could I keep my earth-freed wish to be
For ever in Heaven, then be a jot from Thee.
Thee! Thee! But' -- die for fear, for love of Thee!
Great! Good! what not? but I sin? shame
Glory! Grace! Grace? nay Then I Will live, Thy Name
With loudest praises I Will promulgate, Then
My heart, my life shall say Amen, Amen.
ORub me, rub me, He is passed by,
Passed by -- my breath, my life, my I.
O -- what -- but --
My hanging hands and feeble knees agree
To join their suit for speedy remedy.
My yearning looks, and rolling bowels make
A sad relation of Thy sad forsake.
My yearning looks, and rolling bowels make
A glad petition for Thy glading sake.
For Thy forsake I faint, I sink, I die,
But for Thy sake I live, I rise, I fly,
And over all I hie.
I post, I speed, I cannot stay,
For Faith is nimble in its way.
I post, I speed, I cannot stay,
For love and love know no delay.
I post, I speed, I cannot stay,
For Faith and Love are all my stay.
I post, I speed, I cannot stay,
For Love in Sense must end my way.
HEalth, Wealth, Name, Liberty,
The World at will, enough,
Take thy ease, and mind thee.
The World? what is that to me?
Not elbow-roome enough
To turn and wind me.
Not peeping hole to see
My Love; not breath enough
For m' Lungs to wind me?
Great! great deficiencie!
Not lightsome room enough
To loose, never find me.
Wu'd not I die? did not I eye
Thee far before my self?
Wu'd not I pray my self away
From all this paltry pelf?
Wu'd I demurre when gone so far
In love to thy Great Self?
Wu'd I descend, and not there spend
M' into Thy Endless Self?
No sure I Would go, I Would never hold my head,
And keep my flushed spirits from their flight,
To roll their chantings in the Darkelesse Light,
And sing enlargement from the living dead.
But that I hear me thinks a voice behind,
Sing Evangelick Anthems through thy life
Thy Heavenly concords woo'the I ambe a wife
Wives, and more win the spirit of their mind.
Corrivalls here increase their mutual flame,
Bi'th' mutual praysings of the all pleasing Name.
O make me then thy Instrument
So holding to thy hearts content,
So true unto the Touch each string,
Each strain so suite, each Note so bring
A grace unto the rest, that they
May fall in love that hear thee play.
May hear thee play that they may fall
In love that raises above all
To dwell with, dwell in him that is
Because the God of love, of bliss.
Where wut thou go this morning wandering soul?
With whom wut sport? or where wut make thy bait
At noone? and at the falling Sun wut roll
Thy wearied Limbs? He that Thee did create
And Re-create, He shall thee recreate,
He feed, He lodge Thee, and He be thy Mate.
Thy Mate? then like the faithful Dove complain,
Watch on the house top alone, till He come back
(Who is not gone) be all thy pleasures pain,
Thy Food thy Famine, and thy Bed thy Wrack.
Till He Is all These to Thee that is All in All,
No vain, no chaffie joys thy mind forestall.
I cannot feed on a Stone, a Scorpion.
It Is only Bread, it is Egg that I can eat.
Not on this Vanity and Vexation,
It Is Angels food, it is Manna is my meat.
To the poisonous breathed Egyptians I resign
The Leekes and Onions, the husks unto the Swine.
I tell thee worldling in my meate's such might,
That on one feast I forty days can travel,
Exposed to wind and weather, watch, ward, fight,
Defy the gates of Hell; wu'd not this gravel
Thy Earth-fed strength? Keep the' an Egyptian slave?
And make thee-Canaan leave to spirits more brave?
O how I cu'd even melt into Compassion,
Pour out my soul in pity to behold
Those that for godliness are in the fashion,
But for the power, have they skill, are they bold
About them with the two edged Sword to play
Through right, left hand temptations cut their way?
Poor souls, a taste that never yet did enjoy
How good is God; it may be wet their Lip
In a Communion Cup; or like the Boy
O'th'Vint'ners palates the essaying sip
Commends 't for good, and spurts it on the ground.
God in their Mouths, not in their Reins is found.
Poor souls that never drew their draught so deep
Of this Rich Philtre, that it threw their veins
Into those inward hidden parts might creep;
There on Loves Hearth to tine the fire disdaines
An Ocean, which should it it surprise,
'Twu'd but zeales heat antiperistasize.
HOw oughten has thy Servant wished his knees
Were glu'd to'th' ground? they were, for did he rise
The skin untorn fro'th' flesh? T's his death who sees
Such holy Beauties to divert his eyes.
But Thou bid'st rise. Well-'t's but a turn, still walk
I with my God, still Hear, still See, still Talk.
I turn not from, but with, we have many a walk;
All Mercy and Truth, Paths, rugged, lower ground.
Yet Could nor wrench my foot shall make to stray
From Him, His Angels keep me, thus I found
Not The World, not Hell perverts the conversation,
As the heart unshoo'd with his Gospels preparation.
Lord did I love Thee as I love to love
Midst crooked Men, Things, cannot I be upright?
When in afflictions waters thou do prove
My affections? Shall Not their fire increase its might?
But on command the world I Would never touch,
Search me and try me if my heart been't such.
Wu'd I not still keep in immediate vision?
How 'fraid again lest Tenter-hook'd I be
By mediate things? lest ought should cause division
Between my soul and body, God and me.
Lead me not hence unlesse't be in thine hand.
Thy Mandates Promises Promises Command.
I Would shake off all men business turn Anchorite,
And wrap my quiet soul int's own content,
Hows'd from the wind and weather wu'd delight
My self in my New World, till having spent
M' appointed time, my wished change should come
And fetch me from my Cell, to my Fathers home.
Try, Try my heart dear Lord. O where is the man
That loves his neighbor as himself, his God
Above ten thousand worlds and lives that can
With filial thankfulness runt' kiss the rod,
And pray as heart'ly for it as his food
As often as his good Father sees it good.
O where is the man that is the Inward man?
Whose Eyes, Tongue, Senses all, keep still within,
With God; never step without until he can
Receive his warrant thence, skill, strength, the ginne
To shun to break, that lies in every thing,
And so through all, himself to God Re-bring.
O where is the man that watches every thought,
That cannot miss his God a minutes space,
But's in a sown, who is heart at th'smallest fault
Boyles with revenge against himself. Where the face?
Whose smiles are all reflects, all h's sadnesses
Eclipses of the Sun of Righteousness.
His looks thus a true Lookinglasse o'h's Soul,
His Words are Ecco's to that Word was ever
With God, was God; he cannot endure to foul
His fingers with the world; if fowl'd were never
Never lin rubbing with his Fuller soape
Till they are more white than ever. Where Is the man can hope?
Whose hope can silence all his earthly wishes,
Make them subscribe to heaven? Tell him 'f a Crown,
Of Tempes, Indies? He answers 'em with Pishes.
But name but Jesus you will see him strait bow down.
But what? No fools Cap, nor no Asses knee;
With His humble'd eye rebound to heaven will he.
O where is the man that glories in his shame?
Too many, 't's true, yet not enough, 't's as true;
Millions that are a shame to God; but name
The man that he is a shame for God. How few
Who only wish that they may be, to be
Gods glory, though through greatest infamy.
Where Is He Will make godliness his only gain?
Count so much got, as got of God? Account
Him for his end, all else as means, refrain
All pains, all gains that he sees not amount
TO a thriving Sum of this; will live on Bread
On Water; die, but He Will be here well fed.
Think thou deluded Worldling Christ is Thine?
Bid'st Him good morrow for all day, and then
Hurriest to the World, toyl'st, moyl'st, when thy spirits decline
If th'st breath enough, salut'st Him with good-den,
Or once a week come with thy Dog to visit
His House, not Him, no nor His House, what is it?
Poor souls! wu'd my Tears Eyebright water be
Unto your blinded Eyes, how fast I Would weep!
But godliness is such a mystery,
As God to All save His House unknown does keep.
Let thy Life say thou know this mystery,
Or thy Presumption gives but God the lie.
Cud'st once say thus, I Will never endure this life.
Go the World, to'th' World; Not all day make a meal
Upon a Promise? How faint I Am, I a wife
Of such a husband? I of the Common weal
Of Israel? Not seen my Love to day?
No care o's' Kingdom? then well hope I may.
Nay where, in whom, when all ill sensuals meet,
Has Christ so cast in's heart that He can turn
To wine His water, His bitter into sweet.
VVher's He can sit and see his City burn
While mounted on the high Tower of his Salvation
VVarbles the Praises of his New Creation.
Yet be no Nero neither, but from those Heights
Looks and condoles poor souls cannot sit and sing
In Blood and Flames, keeps pauses with his sigthes,
And time w'th's Tears, strikes flats on every string,
Ecco's w'th's Voice, re-ecco's with his Heart,
With Ciprus face in mourning bears his part.
Still glitters in his eye mild Majesty,
Still's heard in's voice, the Lion and the Lamb,
His heart still wrapped with heavenly mealody.
It Is God that justifies, who is he shall damn?
Blessed man! Thus all, in's voice, in's looks, in's heart,
Graces, sets off, compleats his better part.
Not that he is wanting in humanity,
But that 't has gone to School to D'vinity,
Where it has learned when persecutions be
Exceedingly to leap for joy, (...).
not that he
Loves Men so little but loves God so much
Not that his griefe's small but his joy not such.
Great love! great joy! how gracious and how wise
Is our Lord God to let us s'int' temptings fall!
So to commend his love, his power make's prise.
Christ and His Christians triumph over all.
Thus live the just by Faith, thus let me live
Come Antichrists, come divles I Will praises give!
I fear not Rome nor Spain but the Armadoes
The Powder plots within, these n'otherwise
But for to watch and fight, for all h's bravadoes
I know my foe's but for my exercise
Kill me he cannot, and if he soarely wound
Sweeter's my Gilead Balm, and I more sound.
I Will keep my rank wherein my Lord of Hosts
Has placed me, so I Will be his Voluntary
In The day of his Beauties Armies, these unholy ghosts
These Gods of flies Diables nothing care I.
Wait on the Lord keep's way, thou shall prevail
See the wicked cut off, yea the Beast his Tail.
Yet 't angers me to see this trompery
When men must fain to go to'th' dancing school
To complement with heaven. Did ever see
An honor made by a Mistress Courting fool?
Or hear 'em call for sides? so of the rest,
Know one know both so 's dancing in request.
The case is altered since I learned to dance
And strangly too, we are grown less spiritfull
And yet we are taught by th'brisker spirits of France,
My honest English measures are too dull.
French Currants, Spanish Pavins now they call
For the second part to th'same tune, nor here is all.
Well be it so much money lost, I Will never
Learn to dance at this age, specially of those
Who such a one lead as I cannot see how ever
A man can keep his feet upright, but goes
Still'n danger of his neck, They may for me
Who'd rather Egypt then Jerusalem see,
The family is a little Church they say
And so't should seem, here to's but complement.
Religion knows no bonds but form,
Men pray twice, 't may be read, indifferent well content
Thus t'heare of God continually pray
Who does to hear Him see Him all the day?
O where is the man whose life has copyed out
Paul's Charity? but hence the tears the fears
The scourge must overflow to fetch about
Bring in our straggling hearts, no mar'll there appears
Unholighosts to frighten us together
Make's know whose children we are, t's high time if ever.
What shall I say? have not Thou said enough
To make us love thee Lord, love one another?
I cannot say more but pray, make smooth things ruff,
Low high, strait crooked, that fitted each to other,
We may so close be joined that we will first break
In flitters; though part in twain, be sound though weak.
Where Is he has done this, more then this, yet he
Cries out undone. He only 't is commends
That Perfect Holiness, he only see
That Mercie's Rare. Only he the world transcends.
Works us though naught were done, believes as all.
Is nothing in himself, his Christ his All.
O where is the man whose daily eager cry
Is, Come Lord Jesu, quickly come, alas
Shall we be strangers will? How long shall I
Stand looking through the Lattice on a glass?
Never see thee face to face? O come, O When!
Have my beloved, have, Amen, Amen.
How long shall I thus up unto the chin
In The Rivers of thy Right Hand pleasures stand,
And yet but get a sip that does begin
The thirst that does far deeper draughts demand.
When drink my fill, when eat of the Tree of Life
That is prepared for the Lamb his Wife?
Still shall I stay? still? when this mixon quit?
But the ought thy generation serve, though crooked,
Perverse. Lord make me wise, me fit
For this thy service. Since I Have undertook it,
My dearest surety for me undertake,
Forsake me not who all for thee forsake.
Teach me my due recesses from the throng
Of streightning worldlings, how to live among
While separate from them, how to show them heaven
My self beyond the reach of their deceiving.
That like some Angel hovering in the air
My spirit may be the while my body's here,
Relating the passages of all my travels
Through the sweet Ourania crowned with pleasant marvels,
That I might win their home bred hearts to try
The Climates of so rare Discovery.
FLy up wild Fire into the lofty Air,
Burst into Stars, and with thy twinkling fair
Allure admiring eves, make them believe
Thou't turn the night to day ere thou wu't greeve;
And with thy Crackling noise make such a thunder
Thou't fright the fates themselves into a wonder
E're they shall touch thee, yet proud powder know
Pure spirits are up when sulphury dust's below.
And when thy flashie lightning, blazing snuff,
Foole-cozening fire, robbed of its earthie stuff
Shall die in noisome stench, my sun shall shine
And show the difference of a joy divine.
And though the mighty rushing winds of prayer
Dispell not straight the unkinder clouds, yet are
They not the matter of my joy and there --
fore not the end; yea should those glimpes cease
Eft soones I have, yet what a blessed peace
Soft rest from that still gracious influence
Of warmth and life, I feel my Sun dispense
Into my humbled soul! Nay, were these gone,
(Gone to my sense) and I desert like one
Both in the dark and cold, yet I Will not grudge,
And what a sweet is meekned hope? nor budge
To fetch false fire and make my self a spark,
Whose bed of ashes is all always dark.
Fond griefe-borne man b' aspiring pride will fall
To worse, and make his dark most dark of all.
But still I keep my hold, not loase my hand
For all the comforts round about me stand
To tise my gripe, but I more catch my hold
Where that glad safety I find that is uncontrolled
Of all the world, and hug that joy within
That by a strangers eye was never seen,
Nor hard removed; that true strong sollid Faith,
More sweet then all the senses feasted has;
Cu'd'st take a man with most delicious Cates
His Palate feed, and with the daintiest baits
Of beauty his eyes, his nostrils with the sents
Of fragrant Eden, Ears wi'th' instruments
OF th'rarest consorts, his wantonizing flesh
Wi'th' softest dalliance; yet, this caitife wretch
'S but in a dream, and so too wu'd he think
If wise, who when he wakes is at the brinke
Of fatal plunges. But my joy is of
Another kind. A generous joy and loath
To borrow of the world since finds that store within
That fills me most when most I Have empty been.
Here Is that, that when my Oil seems almost gone
O'reflowes my neighbors vessels with mine own.
Here Is that, that should my feet be ready slide
Into the Wise man's Paradise does guide;
Cries, be thou every minute of the day
In'th' fear of the Lord, nor let thy envy stray
To catch a tempting apple, paltry pleasure,
A bladderd name, a rag of dunghill treasure.
Men look to Ends, and beasts unto the present;
Full Moons will waine and full will be the crescent,
Thy crescent and never waine. O here is a word
How m'thinks it stillest silent'st whisperings heard
Through th'most tumultuous insurrection broiles
My flesh can make; s' amidst these Coiles
What high resolves I take, deep pleasure draw?
While know my broils my spoils my grief my joy
Shall multiply. In what a peace is He
Whose mind is staid on Thee great God! He! He!
O man of admirations! This is he
'S in perfect peace although he cannot see
Not say it himself. For what is that but a Stay?
And where is that perfect but where is no decay?
The root of joy is Peace, and Peace it is nature
Follower it is ground; sound joy's only in the Creature
He Is in his Peace. As have thou ever been
Upon the Rouling Maine? conveyed within
Some well trimmed Barque, and under deckes wud'st doubt
You Are not within because thou heard'st without
The tumbling Billows beat against her sides
While thy closed Cabin from thy self Thee hides;
So is he In his Peace His Christ His Arc,
Though winds, waves, tempests roar and he is in the dark.
Blessed soul that rides to heaven on the world
In The Bottom like a Mussell Shel is spurl'd
Ath' foot of pride. So do thou spurl't proud wretch
Think as thou please, that build'st thy self a Catch
Of The own to swim upon the flattering calm
Of sence-delight, and never fear the storm
Till finds't, and when thou see the danger in,
Thou thought not of, thy folly, then thou't swim
From off thy broken vessel unto him
To save thee from thy death though not thy sin
The life of death. Mad soul! Thou Would have him be
Thy Savior, but saved thou would not be,
But be enslaved unto thy deadly lusts
The while for life on him thou madly trust'st.
But know till thou have learned the way to live
In him; by, with him thou shall never live.
Till thou have learnt to do, be all in him
Thy brightest light, thy livelyest joys shall dimne
Shall die, as not of the Sanctuarie's Fire
That nere goes out, but that that dies in the ire.
Of The everlasting burnings, know no fire
Not zeal not spiritual joys themselves, but such
As tine their Tapers by the faithful touch
Of that celestial and unmixed flame
The clear uncorrupted Light is still the same.
What means (dear Friend) this lot-misliking moan?
Who Is not content with any's content with none.
What had he who possessed the world alone
But not his soul as not enough in one?
What had he not, wh' had not where to lay his head
But in his fathers bosom made his bed?
The way to true content it is but one, that hit
Straight leads thee to the Presence where there sit
Millions of smiling graces that embrace
Thee in their welcome arms glanc't from the face
Whose every beam raines golden showers of love
Upon thy sugared soul in the floods of love
Melts and's exhaled unto those Thrones above
Where all thy Trials but thy Trophes prove.
Cheer up blessed heart who tremblest at his word
Has promised he will look to thee, nurse thee, afford
Thee what he is able, and wu'd'st have more?
He cannot then be rich if thou art poor.
He Will no good thing withhold, and wu'd'st have bad?
'Twere better far thou cu'd'st be poor then mad.
He Is only poor whom God does hate, but he
Hates only them that love themselves, but ye
That loath leave all for him but crave
A hundred fold more such in him and have.
He Is infinite he is nothing more too scant
To help ten thousand great then one small want.
He Would first create another world for his
E're they should want a Pointile of their bliss.
But earth and heaven and all I Ciphers call,
The number's only one, who makes is all.
He never injoyes the world that makes't his joy,
He e're injoyes't that makes it his annoy,
Such difference makes hope and fear to part
With what he spurns at's heel he lays to's heart.
Whence had he keep't t'had never gone toth'quick
When pluct away, nor left him sorrow-sicke
Whose comfort lives on healthier principles.
Subtracted crutches, Criples only Criples,
At the best it is childish not to go alone,
But grow in knowledge of that All in-one
And that shall make thee grow in strengthening grace
That makes foul way to mend they homeward pace.
A Naball seated in's sufficiency
Is still in the creatures stocks, when Job can fly
His heaven-free circuits in's proverbiall needs
And fetch the selfe-sufficiencie exceeds
The gain of worlds on worlds and makes him bless
His God for th'endlesse wealth of godliness.
There Is nothing that is without can bless or curse
Says the Philos'pher, and shall we be worse,
We Philochrists? who if he be within
And we in him, all wi'thout's not worth a pin.
Fling, fling away the world when he shall bid
You Will sweeter taste those sweeter Cates he hid
For's hidden ones before the world was made,
And vvhereupon they feast when it shall fade.
Or could thy heedy faith as clearly espy
His vviser hand vvithdrawing thy pelf as I
The hand that draws these lines, how cu'd'st thou cry
But Hallelujah to the God on high!
Who is, thence does, onl' good; long then to learn
Obedience unto what thou shall discern
Appointed by him. So make the smallest cross
Crown thee a Martyr while thy thankful loss
Shall witness what a powerful God he is
Glads thee with that from whence thy sorrow rise;
Bids thee for nothing care but how to care
For nothing, by thy praise-requesting prayer
To see to sing what rare what plentious fare,
What store of all select delights there are
In this thy Pallace-Castle-Christ secured
For ever; thus in thy boundless bounds immured
Abide, view round about thee, Mercies stand
Above, below, b'fore, b'hinde, on either hand,
Compast with mercy as a fiery wall,
But tried, refined to thee comes naught of all,
Conspire then treacherous world with that below,
And what? Come make us sport to see ye so
Ridiculously foolish to attempt
To force the Fort so far from force exempt.
So shall thy understanding passing peace
Guard th'understanding heart, whose joys increase
By opposition, while the experience knows
The freedom from i'th'benefit by blows.
Six troubles and seven m'assault with thundering bands
But still their ill at th'greatest distance stands.
Nay, act thy faith in Heaven for all thou want
In earth, and be as troubled as thou can.
Be steady, immovable, if thou't approve
By always abounding works thy trust above;
Have seen the palsy hand how'ts shaking sinews
Bungle at its work it often discontinues
And slowly rids away while marrs th'little part
It does. So th'feare-griefe-care-disturbed heart.
All things cooperate thy good? How dare
Deny't? How dare affirm it while thou scar'st
Thy self with thine own shadow fondly cast
Of The love shines clearest when the Cloud is past
The Cloudy world (the clear quick-sighted soul
Transpeirces, vvhen't detaines the dully foul)
And thus me thinks afflictions makes us sing
How good! How good they are, while they re-bring
Our straggling hearts to more demeuring views
Of him whom we cause he us first did choose.
And thus by them his holiness partake
When disincumbred frequenter we make
Immediater approaches, so to limb
Us form and feature more his own, and trim
'S more accurately to him while more see
Him as he is, the world as it is, Vanity
Of all except vexation and thereof
Full in its serled'st state, and are we lo'th
To be unmanicled to have our hand
Strengthened to hold truth more of Christ while stand
Happily 'nfetterd in these freeing Cords
That make our erst enslaved affections Lords,
Where closer kept in perfect liberty,
(Imperfect only in that t'shall closer be)
He Will point out our misprisions and give
Instructions how we may more like him live.
How good!' Twu'd make thee covet poverty,
And be ambitious of disgrace, and flee
Upon the wrack presented by thy God,
Wu'd'st thou believe that glorious abode
Of The spirit of spirits -- What is thy state
If once with all our States and Lives thou weigh it?
I knew a man (the moon has twelve times since
And only twelve by quarterly dissents
Lighted the winking world t'see how't beclings
The inconstancy of sublunary things
This man) whose Age stood in the midst of all
The earth's temptations while they roundly fall
About his neck to steal his heart with kisses
Down to'th' infernal Chambers, forearm'd withblisses
Of never failing proof where ere they cover
Marches where that sweet Dove is used to hover
Upon his God exploring head, that sought
Him in the Garden, and embracing caught
Him in his walking voice, that in the fresh
Of The day wont there to meet him, and express
Far fresher loves. When suddenly he tears
A dismal crack invade his quiet ears.
As when some mighty Structure crazed with years
And reparations negligences bears
'Ts decrepid limbs upon its friendly props,
Who strait deceived of the ground that drops
From under 'm, not over sound no little part
Themselves, forced from their tottering Charge they start
Assunder from their close conjunction. Now,
Now All Is agoing, her massy body bows
Her longue-time-drooping now quite falling head
Of The weaker Air that overburthened
Finds strength enough to lift her doleful voice
Unto the lofty skies, seemed to rejoice
By their clear cheerie countenance that they
Were so far distant from so shroud a fray.
But still the loud mouthed Air not able bear
The oppression, fumes in a furious rage and tears
Her deadly throat with envious exclamation
To rend the restie ears oth' drousie Nation,
Whose feeble Portalls too too weak to stand
So hard a stresse, fly up before the grand
Tumultuous noise attended with its Troops
Of hiddious fears, t'whom strait their spirit stoopes
With yielding slavery while they represent
Them spectacles as Potent to torment.
See Cities broyling in their bloody flames
And choked in sweltring smoke, the mincing dames
Their fashion-brooding brains dashed on the street
They thought too base a pavement for their feet,
The cankered Usurer hugging of the bags
Betray his Life, the fine-mouth'd Wanton draggs
Some poisonous carrion from a loathsome hole
For his restorative, and now there is nothing stole
That Is felony, nor slaughter's murder to
Those divle-inspired Pontificians, who
With more than Savage cruelty make death laugh
'T self fat with'flesh't devoures the blood it quaffes
In full Carrowses from the Parricide hands
Of Hell-sprung Catilines, whose Rome-bred Bands
Armed with Hierarquique powers make sculls their Cups
Bouse of their Rounds to fate and wallow up
To the reaking knees in vast Acheldamas,
Thus and beyond Thus in a thousand ways
That grim-fac't Monster shook his angry dart
Against the fearing, but God fearing heart,
Rose in undanted courage to that height
That Nature never can bear, advanced by th'sight
Of The Beauty in that breach, the Music in
That Crack, that veiled beauty that was seen
More fair through black, that Music that
Was heard more sweet through waters, that begat
That well composed temper in his heart
So fixedly prepared no force might part
It from t's Elshaddai, by whose blisse-full name
'T was so enlivened with transporting flames,
So manned with Heaven-animated spirits,
So carried forth with brave resolves, 't demerits
Some Angels Pensill to describe the joy
Intranc'd the soul, who while on All it saw
This Motto, There Is no evil but the Lord
Has don't, full nimbly aptly sweetly accords,
The will o'th'Lord be done, for He can do
Nothing but Good, but very Good. And who
Whose heart's inflamed with Thy Great Love Great Go
Can say that any thing Thou do is odd
Who Is he shall teach thee wisdom? Can thou draw
The Heavens out like a Curtain, give a Law
To The Earth to hang on nothing? Who shall lend
Him bowels that steeres our hearts? Or who extend
His goodness unto Him? Shall th'fountain come
To drink of the streams? Shall I be called to sum
M' account to Thee? Thou scan my Poesy
On thy crook't fingers? Ar'nt my ways eaven? Thy
First framings of thy thoughts wholly perverse,
And that continually, and thou redress.
Thou make thy Maker? Or was I so over taken
Like some unwary Father, who has forsaken
His goods, to live at's Sons provision, or
Have thou them of thy self, and do abhor
To be beholding unto me? Behold the man
'S become's own God himself, and scorns to stand
TO our pleasure, but to thy dust proud dust, go drudge
About thy Thorny Earth, learn hence not to grudge
Me my prerogative, and if thou do
Deal proudly still, still I Will be uppermost.
But are my doings all good? whence then this mutter?
Ar'nt they? Show me my Master, let him utter
His skill, Come Mushrome, thou of yesterday,
Come teach the Ancient of days to sway
His Scepter. Or what milder sounds the attempts
That quarrel'st at his prudent Regiment.
Who Is not a truly-throughly-humble man,
He Is but a practical Arminian.
Had but thou well studied his revealed will,
And prayed thee to'ts persuasion, wu'd't not still
Thy murmuring at the loosing of a Straw
Who had digested that Eternal Law
Of pretermission and receipt to grace?
Wu'd this in all thy Topics find no place
More than the proud Pelagian will see
Even so my Father 'cause it pleased thee,
What? shall the child in its balbutient age
Instruct the Father? or what more can engage
Me to content then, it is my Fathers pleasure,
In whose contentment 's lain up all my treasure
Of joy and bliss; But th'want o'th'laying th'foundation
Well, and well building on it makes all th'mutation
So often befall us, else might we steady stand
Upright unshaken moved on neither hand.
God is my Diapason, rise or fall,
Above all, thorough all, the ground of all.
And so he is to All his works, but they
Can hear no concords that will disobey;
But we that put our selves into his hand
Obedient instr'ments of his just command.
Who with his crosse-division running art
Gives such mysterious pleasure to the heart
Of 's understanding ones, a stranger cannot
Conceive, whose judgement's too too rude, too scant
To compass such an odd variety
Into a sweeter-sounding unity.
Nor sees th'decorum, now with smarter strokes
Of 'ts valor excitating tones provokes
Our rouzed spirits unto Martial feats,
To quiet combats with the enemies threats.
Now w'th soft retreatings recollects them by it
'S remisser touches to a watchful quiet.
Strike hard, or gently stroke, this know we still
We Are th'better music of his graceful skill.
Prosperity's a Trial too, and he that uses
'T not in that notion exceedingly abuses
Himself and it, and never sooner looses
His every-way ensnared soul then when he chooses
It not as pleasing God, but him, refuses
Adversity not because his mind induces
Him t'think it is not thought good of God, but he
Wu'd ever prosperous never afflicted be.
And wu'd'st thou so? know every state's a trial,
And all prosperity lies in self-denial.
While thou surrounded with the confluence
Of all the earths indearements that presents
Thee with its goodliest heart-alluring'st offers
Take them as not taken of them, daily proffer'st
A glad resignment, having learned the art
To have thy Food-indeed ever hungring heart
More filled with Heaven then thy hands with Earth.
Count'st Myriades of Worlds a starving dearth
Till Him thou see in All, gets Him through All,
Above all live with Him, 's in, through, 'bove, all.
O such a man? this man of Millions he
'S well bottomed bears so well so high degree?
Be rooted, grounded, stablisht in the Faith,
So may thou rear that superstructure has
A winde-and-storme-out-facing firmitude,
Whose Capstone should be constant gratitude,
Whose corner stone is Christ; whom while we see
How can we unchearefull, how unthankful be?
In every thing give thanks, 'cause every thing
Brings good to us 'cause glory to him brings;
This is the will of God. Sweet will! The will
Of God concerning me? What me? What still
More sweetness! What am I that I should be
To be the subject of such Majesty!
That thou shud'st once bestow a thought on me!
But such a, such a thought concerning me
In Christ? In Him even now translate into
The Kingdom of thy dearest Son might view
My Cross triumph't over by a patient and
Long suffering joy, while strengthened, strengthened stand
With might, all might, according to his power,
His glorious power, does all things overpower.
Of The joy! the joy! the overflowing joy
Tides on the Heavenward soul wherein the Law
Of comforts God's a hidden spring, delights
The inward man, whose chief, whose sole delight's
To be the subject of Gods will; a joy
Whose boundless inundations can destroy
And bear before it like a wispe of Straw
The hugest oppositions sad'st annoy
That Earth and Hell can raise; a joy redoubles
T's augmented forces by'ts increasing troubles.
The while he makes the more retired repaires
Unto h's entowring Name, views the Legions there
Attend him, how heavens soldiers flock about
Him with their profer'd service, and his doubts
Fly far away the while he is more intent
To the secrets of his heart, more represent
Him purity, integrity, simplicity,
Sincerity, truth, th'face of God, whereby
H's's inlargedly spirited with joyful love
'T dares wrestle a fall with death, and longs to prove
The mastery, and like some mighty Giant filled
With generous Wines, speeds sprightly to the field
Of high exploits, that the world and he might see
Th'o'repowring arm of Al-sufficiency,
What wonders 't acts in feeble flesh; a joy
That can the most blood-sucking sorrow cloy
With superabundant sweetnesses, a joy
Sings nothing sweeter then it is wished envoy
Unto the world, a joy whose skill is shown
'N extracting marrow from the dryest bone,
A joy of that extended pure delight,
'I's impossible the heart b' in such a plight
Shut up in selfish, ridgid, austere constriction,
No't can be hard while such a blessed affection
Dissolves it all in pity, draws, powers it out
In streams of meek compassions run about
On every side with heedy tenderness,
To see what ways of succouring redress
'T may find, while still it makes this gentleness prove
More flaming oil to its Seraphicke Love.
Thus, thus anoint with this Celestial joy
Diffuses weighty spirits, and imployes
M' in such a sadness to which all the rest is madness.
A grave confulting serious sober sadness
Consist's with, is the Basis of, true gladness,
'T which all other's is but a merry madness.
A joy's no light slight frothy vapouring bubble
That disappeares at th'softliest-blasting trouble;
But a perspicuous solidity,
Transplendent firmness, agile stability.
Thus kindly may the influented Art
Of that bright morning Star that rules this heart
Temper thee to it self, and warm thy soul
With spirits may raise the above the worlds control.
It Is not thy Music, Stories, Company
Thy forced ungenuin mirth can remedy
Thy wound, no i'ts but a palliated cure,
'T will fester more and thou will less endure
T's returning smart, but leave this Mountebanke trick
And search toth' coare; better once be thoroughly sick
Then never truly well. Out with this odd
This peevish humor that oppugnes thy God
His sacred will, for then and not till then
Thou't say to all his works a glad Amen.
It Is only this our inconformitie
'S the cause of all our sin and misery.
And wu'dst thou not conform did firmly believe
Him all good, thou all bad? but hence we grieve
Fond souls the griefs must be grieved over again
Cause our weak faith this maxim cannot maintain.
How can we be in our repining mood
But in our heart we say he is not good?
No, no, it is not, it is not, so easy a thing
To b'leeve him good; for whether wud 't not bring
Us duly, truly creedited? keep then to this
Say God is good, for that is all our bliss;
Our bliss is all in Christ, by whom alone
The self denying soul God good has known.
Work, wait, pray, praise, This part's thine, God's the rest,
It Is daring sacrilege to be unblest;
Gods glorie's robbed, ere thine own good; but pray
Thy Will be done, let thankful patience pray;
Blessed man how ever; There Is nothing comes amiss
Toth' man harh taken the will of God for his.
Is now no more himself is ruled by
Another soul his sole felicity.
What Is Heaven if not a seeing face to face
Sung heart to heart! were here that full seen grace
Sung to a perfect harmony of wills
We might on Earth of Heaven take our fills.
Bless't God has given us such an Heavenly Brother
To tune us all to Thee and each to other.
O what a consort's here! but ah where find
I two or three strick Unisons in mind?
Yet were they thirds, fifts, eights, yet unity
Runs sweetly through with a sweet Symphonie.
There Is one blessed One in the midst, who where he is
In turning all to One, turns all to bliss.
One! reconciled! One! Smpathy! agree!
How full's my soul with heavenly melody?
What Is sin, shame, grief, what whatsoever's bad
But discord from the good the God we had?
What else the all-sinning sin? this Tree I will
A sign of Soveraigntie I will not.
Hell! Hell! but what the all-saving grace? come do
Come suffer m'will; thy will? I come I do.
Heaven! Heaven! How harsh'n answ'r t'a sweet injuction!
How sweet an answer to so harsh a function.
Thus fin-and-sorrow follow self-willed pride,
And grace-and-peace the self that is denide.
To will thy will's the sole humility
Wherein thou dwel'st, and that is in Heaven to be.
How sweet a Heaven's the heart! still say it wu'd
It is my God do he what seems him good.
Here Is a beloved sweet singing Israel
Whose heart's full set to God's, consent's as well
In all notes as in one; and if he strike
A jarre, jarres with himself till strikes alike.
And that is a jarre that plays a pleasant moan
I'th'eares of Heaven, and therefore in his own.
What to give Grace and Glory, but to give
According to thy sacred will to live?
What is it to be in Hell? To be at ods,
Men with themselves, friends, neighbors, devils, God's;
Cursing the cause of this their sad descent
From the just inflicter of their punishment.
Gnashing their teeth for envy at the thought
Of that Salvation Reconcilement brought.
Thou only blessed in being only One,
Make us to be One spirit with thine own,
And so with one another: ere may I be
With them thee fear, they fear to disagree.
What was our blessers dying blessing? His prayer
We might be One as He and's Father are.
O were I, were I able to unfold
The riches that one syllable does hold.
There Is only One thing that is necessary.
Met we all there, how cu'd we thus contrary?
One body, one spirit, one hope, one faith, one Lord,
Baptim, God, Father, so many Ones afford
Their help to keep all One, and yet how few
Whose boisterous spirits will not bussle throw
Soft peaces bounds, so lewse loose unity?
For none but humble-candid-wise agree.
But proud-contentious-fooles will never agree
Nor with themselves, nor others, nor with Thee.
Their friendship's but dissembled enmity
Unto th'r own souls, Thee, all, since not agree
In Christ; they are not at peace wi'th' very stones
Of The field; the whole Creation groans
Under this universal enmity
It feels by man his parting friends with Thee.
Now this Commune Vinculum is broke,
All flies in pieces, and we do but cloak
Our differences, if not seem to be
Each for himself, and then what friends we be?
How now afraid of injury from each other,
Shrink up our selves into our selves, and smother
At least our mutual hatred, and not discover
The depths of malice that our hearts do cover,
Stored up against th'all-good all-powrefull
God, while self-wills, and fond desires wu'd pull
The Crown from off his head, so against our selves.
Who love, they hate, who hate, they love themselves.
But whether are we brought by this sad breach,
Or what was it brought it but our selfish reach.
Or what can bind it up but only He
In whom alone we reconciled be;
That bundle o'life b'whom His are gathered in
To One, to never part their hearts again.
Dear Savior! Cu'd we pattern lowly Thee,
How willing to our Farhers will we would be!
Blessed Love that spy'st so rare a policy
Th'Athistick Florentine cu'd never descry.
Stand soul this ground, while Heaven can provide
Himself of joy, thy joy must needs abide.
Let him have all, have all, though I get none,
My joy's my Gods content, and not my own:
Thou can not Lord displease me, 'nlesse thou wu't
Displease thy self, for I will what thou wu't.
Take, take thee all dear Lord, though I get none,
My joy's my Gods content, and so my own.
(So will the wilfull'st, but passive instruments they,
But of thy grace we actively obey)
My care's to please my husband, so my self,
He that so loves so foolish fond an else
Wu'd undo all again to put in self
Though taught so well in him t'injoy it self.
The issue? I nor know nor care, t's my bliss
His pleasure's mine and my displeasure's his;
He bears our burden we enjoy his yoke,
He wears our Thorns that has our Thrones bespoke.
O cu'd we ever keep us at this pitch
What an untroubled life we would lead! how rich
In all contents! nor wu'd there need descents
To lower arguments that cannot dispense
Us sollid true substantial comfort till
We Are raised to sing, it is our God his will.
The great'st content is none whose grounds not this,
The great'st discontent's swallowed up in this vast bliss;
That bears the soul in an unstopped stream
Of mighty force to'th' pleasure of the Suprearme.
The strength of all obedience is this,
It is his will, and not, it is my bliss.
The man that is not alive, can he be strong?
It Is Love's the life of God; bears all along
With speed, with ease, the Council taken word given,
No parley's with the flesh, On, on's strait driven
With conquering flames, and if his blood shall rise,
He Will lose his blood e're he will his God despise.
What challenge will not he take? what frowns, what blows?
What death's on deaths? who such a Guerdon knows
Awaites his certain victory? such a Beauty
As cheares him to and cleares him through his duty,
Whose thence infused vigor fears nothing more
Then want of dangert' make the world adore
Those Heart'ning Splendors that in every Ray
The all conquering strength of the Deity convey.
With what Luxuriances the turgent soul
'S borne up beyond the world and hells control!
O how it longs it longs to be imploi'd
In The greatest work the greater love's enjoyed.
How't runs at half a word! how't marks the lips,
And hears before they speak! away it trip
With speedy diligence and cannot stay
Though the thrungin'st pressing'st diff'culties beats it way
Snaps off the strongest cords like rotten threads,
Dissects the massiest bars in shivering shreds,
And drives before it all the joined force
Of The mighti'st obstacles oppugn its course
And if it feel the least repulse returns
With thrice-redoubl'd courageous onsets, burns
With spirit-incensing indignation to
Be stopped in ought that for his Christ he would do.
The man's in love. The man's in love
Whose reason's in his Mistresse' will;
This the Primum Mobile does move
His mind her madness to fulfill.
The man's in love, and loves with skill
Whose reason's in his Master's will.
The man is mad, her will's no reason.
The man's wise, Reason is his Will.
The man's a Rebel, his love is Treason.
Loyal he whose love His Law fulfils.
He Is wise that knows it, he knows that loves it.
He loves, that does, it; He does, that loves, it.
PUrities foes swell like a tottering wall,
Threatening whole Kingdoms with their shaking fall;
But they proud fools are sure to have the worst,
Our shaking settles us, they fall and burst.
Courage my hearts, the joy of God's our strength,
Then joy we most when most we have need of strength.
Courage my hearts, what shall such men as we?
Such men as we, shall we once think to flee?
Conquerours of Mell and shrink before a fly?
Sons of the everliving God and fear to die?
Nor is it death, it is but the end of death,
Our life's our death, our death it is gives us breath;
Unprison'd once ever in the open air
Perfus'd with spirits by a spirit so rare,
Pure, simple, life! O that we once were not
That we might be. Courage my hearts, it is but
This wall of mud that us and heaven parts.
So never our Center and so slow our hearts?
No holy efforts? Let the unfaithful know
Their valor's cowardice to that we show.
Laugh death in the face, and shout at his Alarmes,
Embrace him, kiss him, leap into his arms,
He Is a nimble messenger will quickly bear us,
Where unconceived endless joys shall cheer us.
'S the word given? Sa, Sa sa sa sa brave hearts
T's this wall of mud that us and heaven parts.
The wicked is Gods hand, there Sword his Lancet
Pricks our importuned soul and so advance it.
Which cu'd we as fully espy as when we see
The Surgeon breathe a vein, how glad we would be
T'come under th'cure of such a skillful hand
Translates us with a touch to the holy Land.
Fear not he bids, he is with us; now see I
Our souls on Angels wings surmount the sky.
Come let us ascend our Thrones, against our Judges
Sit with our Judge, while th'gnashtheir teeth with grudges.
Wee'z see them naked trembling at our sight
Divest of stolen Honors, borrowed might.
Hear them implore the Mountains, come and end them
But shall not so ward the blows, our mouths shall send them.
They shall not scot-free escape; and who can tell
How soon the quiet of the Land may dwell
In homes as quiet as their souls? who knows
But we may get even this day of our foes.
Th're many, cunning, false, strong, watch, malicious;
He Is One, wise, true, never slumbring strength, propitious.
And shall th'e're-waking Judah's Lion wake
And rouse his heart-dead-striking head, he will take
He Will touze them in his teeth like baffling whelps
And shake them into Atoms. None there is helps
From his own ceasing strait dismembring paw
Of all contemners of his Gospell-Law.
Come let the Spirits mighty rushing wind
Dispell those clouds from the corrupted mind
The muddy grounds of humane brains exhald
By that false Lucifer, at length b'unvail'd
That beauteous Light of Truth, at length Traditions
Damned with the Man of Sin, Son of Perdition.
Let Us clear our passage t'immateriat joye
From these materiate obstructions cloy
The Subtle veins of Sin-refined souls
And in the sense the Spirits sweets withholds.
Come lets unstoppe the Conduit pipes of Grace
From mud and trash, the sullied glass the face
Of Christ that shows, let us clear, let us clear our way
Through Antichrists to Christ, work, wait, praise, pray.
Hold up prevailing hands in praying action
Against Babylon, and the Babylonish faction.
Let God arise display his glorious rays,
Dispell the infernal mists, obscure his praise,
Undraw the Curtains intercept his face,
Precipitate each Judah's to his place
Betrays him with a Ceremonious kiss;
Their Bishoprics be others Benefice;
Clothe him with Purple, cry hail King, bow th'knee,
Yet spit, yet smight, yet nail him to the Tree.
Base spirits can hold and see him so blasphemed,
Not take his part by who we have been redeemed.
Courage my hearts, then courage to observe
All Is written in his Law, on, no hand swerve.
Help us to help thee Lord against their might;
In thy Pavilion hide's and let them fight.
In The secret of thy presence lead thy Lambs
In gentle safe conveyance, from the hands,
Pride-cruell hands of men of bloods, then damn,
Then damnifie men-devils if you can.
Die, live we are the Lords, are in our way,
Now bear the Cross, shall wear the Crown That day.
Nay the Cross is boar'n the shame despised, and we
Are glorious in the greatest infamy:
The Cross is boar'n the fear despised, and we
May, must exult in the daring'st jeopardie.
The Cross is boar'n the grief despised, and we
Are Crowned with Heaven in the Crossing'st misery.
What ailes me thus this morning? why so dull?
The flesh? the flesh? my life even in the flesh
'S by th'faith of the Son of God: O were I full
Of this, I Would walk, I Would run, I Would fly afresh.
Nor faint, nor wearies God, nor I I know
Shall be (but reap) for as he is, I am so.
Up Eagle-wing'd faith! up, remount thy mount
Of Prayer, mount of Transfiguration:
Still in this veil of Tears? Still shall I count
The tedious hours of this sad alteration.
Still buffeted? Thorns still? Lord perfect then
Thy strength in weakness, thy glory's mine, Amen.
HAd I the faith, I could do all things, cu'd
Turn earth to water, water into air,
Air into fire; from melancholy wu'd
Extract a fluent mildness, from that rear
Spiritual breathings, and they wu'd soon take fire
And bear my soul unto its high desire.
So may my faith not only go beyond
My sense, but go against it, and beyond.
Not only lead my joys above the earth,
But make my sorrows vanish into mirth.
T's an infant faith that must be handed on
By th'worlds supports, and a decrepit one
That stoops unto the ground, and cannot go
Without th'upholdings of these Reeds below.
But mine is more aged, and should the stronger grow
Int's oldest years. So make me Lord to go
From strength to strength, I may go all alone,
When but thy Hand, Word, Spirit, help I Have none.
When but this help! What? Make a But of That
Which made the world, that All-sufficient That?
What have I'n Heaven but Thee, in all the Earth
But Thee? My Heaven, my Earth, my All? what mirth
Can all the world possessed afford me'if Thou
Art wanting? But Jehovah present, how
Can Worlds, can Hells once move m'with all their ill,
Who have the God that All things has at will?
When thou that made the Sun to shine on all,
Shall make the worlds favors round about me fall,
Should I salute thee with a cheerful thanks
That may be mine and not thy Spirits thanks.
The very Ethnicks, don't they do the same?
I nothing singular that bear thy Name?
Who sit'st in the heavens far above all fears,
When all the world's together by the ears,
You Are still thy self Happy Happiness
When all the world blasphemes as when they bless;
Oh could I keep my proper place with thee
How far above the daring'st Ill's I Would be.
I Would play with flames exsult at the thoughts of death,
And make my troubles keep m' in the better breath;
I Would dance upon a dunghill, sing in fire,
I Would make a bed of Roses on a briar,
I Would teach my tears to smile, my sighs to laugh,
My pains to sport, I Would make thy rod my staff.
Wut teach me this dear Lord, teach teach m'excell;
To be in heaven while I am in hell:
For so was Christ and he and we are Christ,
Be then my dust below I Will be at the highest.
What ayl's the livelesse corpse whose soul's in heaven
My soul's soul's thou, is thou my soul in heaven.
Heaven is thy arms thy everlasting arms
Be they still under where is the hell me harms.
Let blustering winds and rattling tempests beat
About m'assaulted ears with threats on threats
Of The terriblest storms, while I inhoused lie
Imbedded in his Alisufficiencie;
And gather up my soul the closer in
To his inwrapping comforts, while I sing
And they me rock in the faster sweeter sleep
Of praising rest in the arms alone shall keep
M' in safety, maugre all the enemies
In The maddest, forciblest fury; while the world lies
In The arms of the airy Prince, who has the skill
To make fair weather, where he means to kill.
ANd have I Lord so often wished to die,
And yet I cannot live? Have I so lost
My soul for thee, yet find it cannot I?
Well, still you are good how ever I be crossed,
Still will I wish, and wish it with mine heart,
Subvert me Lord, or make me more convert.
What shall I die alive? shall I survive
My self? Shall I endure this life of pleasure?
Not I pray day and night? How do I thrive?
Where are the precious sheaves, the hidden treasure?
Where is my livelihood, my livelynesse?
Well, yet I have them 'cause I so confess.
A word soon said, but truly but of those
Whose bleeding-carefull-zealous heart it knows.
Work on my love, spare not thy pains, it is good,
T's a kindly heat, and sweat, what art a dry?
Hungry with exercise? take for thy food
My Flesh, my Blood thy thirst shall satisfy.
Work on, these putrid humors still transpire;
Fresh, pure, sound, by these Alteratives acquire.
I hunger Lord, thirst for thy Righteousness,
My zeal does so consume me, I must have
More food, or faint, much less can work afresh.
Have no wine to spare? no Milk? no Honey? I crave
For strength, not lust, not for my self but thee;
That by much strength, much honored thou mai'st be.
Be they but crumbs, yet be the of the childrens bread;
Be they but drops, yet be th'o' Salvations Well,
Even those can make a dog a dog that is dead
A living man, these greater wonders tell.
O had I but the bucket 't get a sup?
How soon unto th'spring head 't wu'd mount me up?
Here will I draw, engage here all my strength,
Tug, pull again, and yet again, and yet
I Will not give over, 't will come I know at length,
It Is very air my hope, that will not let
Me faint, but when 't comes, and I get a drink,
You that have felt those joys, what they are may think.
Lightened, inlivn'd, enlarged, extold, transport
Beyond my self unto my self resort.
I see I see, O when shall I once account
My self framed to this pattern in the mount.
Unto my Lord dear Lord make me
So like, that who sees me may see
Him drawn to the very life, each feature
Each lineament, thus a new creature.
I Am the fountain and I purpose through
These neighboring intermixed Channells to
Convey my self to each, he who will not part
His interposing earth, let out his heart,
Reciprocate the freshning streams I send,
May stand, stink, dry, not borrow who will not lend.
They Are Idiots indeed who h've private spirits, (...).

But who is not himself he only merits
Not to be counted mad, and so sought he
Us not himself in whom made wise we be.
We Are not our own, we are purchased with a prise
To live no more to our selves, but now to rise
To higher things to live beyond our selves
In, By, To Him who bought's, brought's off the shelves'
'F so great a death to bring us of our selves
Our greatest death; when selfe-besotted Elfes
Were we dissolved in the open Maine
What spacious liberty were gotten to refrain
The land bordering Rocks? O wu'd the righteous Sun
Look on our frozen hearts, how fast they would run
Their hardened self contracted clods (so often
Dash one against another) into soft
To giving enlarged streams wu'd friendly close
Themselves? wu'd quickly in each other loose
And all with sweet concurrence nimbly flow
To their embracing Ocean. O wu'd we so
Change each to other till we each were none
With what advantage should we be our own?
For one have all, thus happily unite
Are grown too strong for the world for hells despite
We 're all disjoined by our fall, but set
In one again the greater strength we get.
What I lay out in prayers purse, study pains
For them with how far multiplied gains
Of quick returns I find them all in theirs.
Should I as I should not be overwhelmed with tears,
Fears griefs grow weak and feeble, or as I should
Be always poor and needy in spirit how good
How good it is to know that he who is
In all my thoughts has me in his,
Who is more beneficial by one thought then all
The world can be by all their deeds. I fall
No sooner now but strait one helps me rise.
So farr's two better in one, how raised how high's
My drooping soul? though absent in the body
Present in the spirit with all the spiritual body.
How heartily I joy in, sweetly enjoy
Their better ordered more established joy!
M' affections are not mine nor theirs are theirs
But each in the other's mirth and sorrows shares.
How steady stand in ballance't griefs and joys
While others still supply fresh counter poyses?
I live not in my self but them-and-thee;
Live thou and they, and that is enough for me.
I live not in my self but them-and-thee;
Live thou and they, I needs must living be.
And if all comforts God-and-h's Saints comprises
All comfort then from one another rises.
Conspire we then in one, in one expire,
That makes his melting Saints a mounting fire.
It Is good being here, and hither rise might all
Wh'have skill have will int' one and other t'fall.
But he that will be of himself
May glut not glad himself with pelf.
Yea let him laugh his belly full,
Yet does the shark himself but gull;
His seeming sweet strait turns to gall,
And vomits strait his stolen all,
His Done joy's cooled by and by
With real ills in Fieri.
But stay, all this is but to seek my self
While I am studying how to loose it, I
Must fly a braver pitch, far far more high
Above the thoughts of all this selfish pelf.
ACtion is the life of a Christian, it is death to him not to be stirring. He
cannot rest in himself, though, nay becausefill'd with the greatest contents.
He receives to do, but the wicked does to receive. His pleasures, his joys,
his delights, are displeasures, are troubles to him if they do not run forth
themselves into God. Hence the soul at his stillest, and retiredest recesses
is still putting out its heart, and breathing forth it self in praises,
studying and contriving ways of activenesse for the glory of its God; and
hence the poor soul, though indeed only rich, when it lies at an under, in
truth the very height of Christianity, cries out, O it cannot do, it cannot
do. Blessed soul, that art estranged to thy self, that have forgotten thy
self and all thy good deeds, as things not worth the looking after, and have
got so forward in the ways of holiness, to be still more pressing onward to
the mark, in a more speedy and active course, by how much the nearer thou
come to it: Thou that know what it is to cry out, enough Lord, mercy
enough, what are those sweet pangs and blessed conflicts of soul under a
diverse notion, the while thou over-powred with apprehension of that Unspeakable
Gift, in whom is given thee all things richly to enjoy, and now laboring under
some present distemper, and being thereby led back to the remembrance of its
root and original, art so overcome with the sight of thine own altogether
unworthiness of the least mercy, thou do even sink and fall under such
weighty and overbearing thoughts, with a sweet-humble-resignment of thy self,
as now no more thy self, and so with an holy kind of carelessness as
concerning thy self, art become willing to suffer, to do, to be any thing for
thy God, and in that respect, the while thou tacitly, and most effectually
deprecatst these, petitionst for the removal of these distempers,
disturbances, indispositions, etc. as of themselves impediments to the more
active duty, and the more manifest expression of the divine glory, though
indeed these sweet impressions are not a little tending to it. The sincerity,
the humility, the love the zeal that is more intentively active within,
breaking forth with so much the more strength and vigor. And what can the most
eminent, lively, stirring and active Christian do of himself, since the
strongest is as weak as the weakest without God, and the weakest as strong as
the strongest with him; who accepts the sincere, hearty, studious
indeavoring will for the deed; and will thus accept of thy mite, that thus
throws away thy self as it were that throws in heart and all, although in the
meanest and weakest performance, as desiring no mercies to thy self, but to
return them as tributary streams to their first spring, even this shall he
accept before all the Rivers of Oil, all the bodies that may be given to be
burnt by a self seeking Pharisee that is still returning and winding about to
himself like those waters of Ponds, Meers and Lakes that run into themselves
(...) Psalm. 58. that are not acted by an inward principle to a
selfe-withdrawing selfe-outing end, but are merely agitated by winds by
external motions, and still move within the compass of themselves and
therefore dry away, and perish with the hypocrite. And this doing is no doing,
or if any, is aliud agere is male agere, that thus begins and ends in it
self. But what do thou O man of whom God requires only that thou should
do justice and walk humbly with thy God? And what is it to do justice, but
to give every man his right, and for every man to give thee O Lord thine; all
he does, he has, he is; all his pleasures, all his possessions, all his
abilities, of which all since he can give thee nothing, what cause has he to
walk humbly with his God? And what infinitely sweet humble action and active
humility is that that brings us to walk, to converse, to have fellowship with
such an infinitely sweet God, the author, the finisher of our ever infinitely
sweet humility; O who would not now humbly act in all, and ask his mirth
what Does it, and account his laughter madness, runs a round of self
conceited pleasure and is not like a line that takes its beginning and ending
in thee, that conveyes not the soul along to thee only? Who would not Ecco to
the command of, Come do my will, with a ready and speedy I come I come to do
thy will? If there be any truth even in natural love, is it not when it not
receives for it self, but does for its beloved, even to the undergoing the
greatest pain, the losing of the dearest life, can nature live by, do, die
for love, and shall not grace make nature subservient to Thee in all these? and
what ever there may be more then these; where can the man find himself that
knows thee, that loves Thee as he should as he would! here is the man that
sees so much of Heaven that nothing but the love of God can make him meddle
with a thought of the earth, while the God-unacquainted soul sees so much of
earth that nothing but the love of himself can make him to meddle with a
thought of heaven; all the glories of the Kingdoms of the world may well pass
away as shadows, vanities, nothings before the soul that in his Christ sees
his God, when the least tempting Apple may loose him that is not secured in
this blessed premunition. And to that happy condition is the soul brought, and
that is it which brings the soul to that happy condition, that looks after
the world and Heaven for God, when the other after God for the world and
Heaven; so while he makes himself his God, makes himself a devil, while the
other in making himself Gods, makes God himself; while he draws in only
that he might pour out, God poures in unto them while he is drawing forth,
while he takes his graces themselves drinks and fills his belly with those
living waters to this prime and principal end that the overflowing thereof may
make glad the city of God, and carry both himself and it to be swallowed up of
that infinite ocean of loves and sweetnesses. A Christian is (at least, should
be) so rich with content so superabounding with such an exuberancy of the milk
and honey of Canaan, that like the distended udders of high fed Kine, it even
looks to be drawn forth, and longs for some to be taken into the partnership
of its joys and graces; so far should he be out of any impotencie and
incontinencie of spirit to be carried out to the fond desires of the creature,
to pitchupon it as his happiness. Neither is there any thing I know that does
more raise, more innoble the soul then this open heartedness, this freeness
of spirit, nothing that makes it more like God himself, whom it has, in whom
it lives beaming forth the Sun of its favors and beneficialnesse to all that
come within the compass of his Horison and (as he has convenience) chooses the
emptiest vessel to communicate his fullness to, both of graces and common
gifts, still like his God that professes himsefe to delight most in the
company of the humblest to be in a special manner the God of the needy, the
fatherless, the widow the stranger, so he seeks the most indigent object to
draw out his soul unto, and delights in delighting the comfortless; as he
that finds it more blessed, more glorious (because more like to, more full of
God) to give then to receive. As he that is still calling his faith to account,
to see what it lays out in action. How stirring, how operative it is, how it
works by love, whether it love not it self more then God, whether it be not
more for receiving then doing? As knowing it a most strongly denying
expostulation, an evident brand of an unbeliever, and that by him who best knew
how to give every thing its proper mark: How can ye believe which receive
honor (and consequently pleasure, profit, etc.) one of another, and not seek
for that which comes from God only. Now what greater honor can there be to a
man, then to have his works bear witness that the Father has sent him, to
be enabled to do, to give any thing to God (as he is who does, gives to any in
his name) what greater pleasure, profit, then to be the servant of God,
employed in his business, to live in his sight, to walk before him, to be at
his finding? But those miserable niggardly pinching souls, that are
unacquainted with these inlargings, these fully satisfying apprehensions, no
marvel they are still raking, scraping, and scrabling on the Dunghill for
rotten rags. Certainly the soul that has ever had any quick, lively,
intimate, thorough resentments of the Divine Loves shed abroad in its heart,
that has ever feelingly found that God has not a faithful industrious
servant, who has not him an indulgent Father, a dearly affecting Husband, an
inestimable Portion, cannot be base, cannot but live at an high rate, as he
that knows the raising thoughts of so high dignity; cannot but spend freely,
communicate liberally, munificently, as not ignorant of those Mines, those
treasures inexhaustibly infinite, that are ever ready for his supply. Cannot
but be merciful, and lending, while he still guides his affairs with
discretion, and has an eye too to that discretion, lest it should befoole him
in degenerating into baseness, and slily wind him about into himself, while
he is studying how to outgoe himself in keeping the precise, and narrow path
prescribed him. Or rather an eye to it, lest it be false and counterfeit, it
being impossible for Truth but to be ever like it self. This is he that cannot
effeminate enervate himself in delicacies, and pleasures, while he knows none
but in God, and they flowing into his soul like a spring of life, and vigor,
that bear him forth in a voluble, diffusive, indefatigable course of activity
in well doing, while they still bathe him in inconceivable refreshings,
unimaginable delights. This is not a man that is but the name and shadow of
one, while like a brute beast he is carried on to eating, drinking, sleeping,
or any natural desire, and pleasure, out of a mere (...) impetus, and
propulsion of Concupiscence from somewhat to be received from them to himself.
But the very doing of these obedientially as duties, as ordinances for somewhat
to be done by them in a way of a further self-emptying and transacting himself
into God, is that which makes this very thing the service of God, when the most
glorious performances, the most public beneficialnesse, the most pain-taking
actions, activity in things materially good, is but serving themselves, and the
devil. So that that man's pleasure is Gods service, because he makes Gods
service his pleasure and this man's paines-taking in the best duties is a
serving the devil, because it is the pleasing himself; the godly man acting
not because it is pleasing to him, but it is pleasing to him because it is
action, the other contrary; the godly, not that he may get to himself, but
that he may get to God (and so indeed to himself) counting Gods glory his
greatest good. And therefore imployes himself in that which is most singular,
and especially serviceable to God and Gods, and not in that which is most
profitable to himself, he had rather spend thousands of pounds, of years, of
any thing in the service of God, then the least penny, the least minute, the
least any thing in the service, or (to say righter) the slavery of himself; as
he that counts his pleasures his works and duties, and his works and duties
his pleasures, the doing of the will of God his meat and drink, and his meat
and drink the doing of the will of God. And this were an excellent way to make
us humble in excellencies, temperate in delights, diligent in action, and for
avoiding those three consociating and Nation-destroying sins, Pride, Idleness,
and fullness of Bread. So may we make an especial use of that common byword,
questioning and examining our desires, when they call us to, or put us upon any
thing, What to doc. And thus Christian I greet thee with that ancient
salutation (...). Do well, and farewell. And indeed our own, when we ask one
another how we do, and wishing one another may do well, imports no less,
but that to do well, is to be well. Neither is the description of bodily health
disagreeable to that of the soul, it being such a frame and constitution of it,
whereby it is fit and ready for the discharge of its several duties, in their
right-due manner. So that they describe it not so much by its enjoying it self
in a sweet and fresh temperature, resulting from the well symmetrizing of
humors, and confermation of parts, as by its right and ready toward lines to
requisite actions. So the soul then healthy, not so much in regard of the joy
and comfort that it finds in God, as of the vigor by it, the active
disposition, the operativenesse toward him. Though indeed that cannot be
without, nay without being the author of this, nor this without some measure at
lest of that. The sincere soul making its work its wages, its duty, its
delight. Grace being now grown, as I may say, a second nature it being
connaturall to him, and therefore as, nay more, pleasing in its actions, than
those of our first could be; the one being but Gods ordinary common, the other
his especial choice extraordinary dispensation of himself. Grace being the
spirit of Christ working on us, in us, and through us, beginning, continuing,
and ending all in it self; happy Soul that knows what is the study of
self-denial, never can we find any where more of sweetness, because no
where more of God. O could we make this our Hoc age our business, our one
thing, whether wud it lead us, where wud it loose us, even to the following of
God fully to be full of him, and still to follow him, to empty and fill, fill
and empty in a most sweet and blessed exercise of soul till we lay down in
everlasting rest and peace, wholly emptied of our old and dying, wholly filled
with our new and everliving selves! O the unserchablenesse, the
unconceiveablenesse of the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord! O the depth of
its humility, the height of its zeal, the latitude and length of its
obedience, what thing, what time can bound it! O what is it can so free, can so
enlarge so sublime the heart, as the giving it up to the hands of its God, to
be guided by him, at his pleasure! Can the soul contain it self within it
self, that has these thoughts. O when shall we know what it is, that
singleness of heart, that being but one soul, but one heart! When shall we be
like so many closing pieces of tender wax before the fervent heat of the Sun?
When shall we be dissolved, when run into one another, and all into one holy
Lump. Even so Lord Jesus come quickly.

1 Cor. 10.24. Phil. 2.4, 5. etc. 21. Sic nos non nobis.
So we not for our selves have fame;
So we not for our selves have gain; Nobis n^ nati sum^

So we not for our selves have pleasure;
So we not for our selves have Omnia mea temp amicorum temporib^ absumend
putavi C^ Perdidid^ em. (quun^ nemini be nefecisset) Titus Imp^rator.
leisure.
So have nor mind's nor body's health
To keep to our selves our selves is stealth.
So nothing for our selves we have,
But have for Him that all things gave.
So all things for our selves we have;
Since He who all, Himself us gave.
GOes the Boat uneaven? Lean the other way;
So with more safety and with less delay.
In joying grieve, and in thy grieving joy,
So neither change shall work thee such annoy.
'Ts the man that makes his fortune: Ever's he
Prosperous thar learnes, loves, wills, adversity.
Then learn this lesson and it is worth the while,
Let sorrow be the shadow of thy smile.
Be not so joviall, frolic; so profuse,
Least plunged, up swim thou can not through disuse.
That mirth is madness where is no ponderousness,
For reason's weighty, and imports no less
Then God the moving cause, who once in thought
The faithful soul in fearful joy is brought.
Great God! I sink w'th that All-contayning name
Good God! my burden and my Heaven's the same.
What heart-betraying world wu'dst have me joy?
I Will turn my joy to my God-joying grace,
And that will quickly give true grief its place:
While both together sit with sweet accord
And make my heart the music of my Lord.
Or think to quell me with thy fell Anno^?
I Will turn my grief to my God-grieving sin,
And that will quickly turn to joy agin.
Nay they are one, for they agree in one
Blessed Father, sorrow smiles while joy does moan.
Both fall about his neck and kiss, brave sight,
To see Grief weep for joy, the day through night.
Thrice happy man this happy temper keeps!
As the golden Sun through the Silver droppings peeps
Upon the flowring earth, or softly plays
Of The gliding streams with'ts gently glittering Rays;
As the modest smilings of the native Heat
Nor Chronick nor acute diseases threat.
Thus wud'st thy sence-refined faith employ
Thoud'st the one from the other reciprocally draw.
And in the Trinessence of both compose
The temper wu'd heaven in earth, God-man disclose.
Thus grief should loose its name and nature, be
Swallowed up of Glorying Humility.
Humble I shall be in Heaven. O!'the weight of the Love
Of The Love presses my soul to solid joys!
My spungy soul so often shrunk and swelled.
Glorious I am on earth. O! the height of the Love,
Of The Love raises my soul t'an humble poyse!
A temper ad pon dus might exactness dwell
On this side the Empyraean! so be I still
Tempered to Justice, till on Sions Hill
The Spirit-pondering-God shall find me weight
Made me meet to live at such a glorious height.
LOok not so much at the present as the future, having eye in adversity to
prosperity, and prosperity to adversity; learn to estrange neither from your
thoughts, that you may welcome either; they are guests that look for
successive entertainment, be not so free to one, as that the other take you
unprovided: they are enemies to each other, and yet an indifferent respect may
make them both friends to you; be acquainted, yea familiar with both, but
indeare your self to neither; deny neither of them admission to your head, so
shall you both the possession of your heart; keep correspondency with both and
you are safe, but give your self to either, and it will lead you you know not
whither; you are betrayed, you are lost, you shall be set upon, now by the one,
now by the other, and become a slave to both; you shall then learn that it is
better to observe ten then serve two; be not led so much by sight of what is,
as foresight what may be, not so much by sense as by reason, and not so much by
reason as faith, for that is beast-like, and looks but downeright, this
man-like and looks forward, but this last, Christian-like and looks upward.
Labor then to know no such things as adversity and prosperity, but as the
will or not the will of God in your having or not having these outward things,
and learn this excellent Art of composing a mean out of two extremes. Take
somewhat of the sweet to qualify the sour, and of the sour to qualify the
sweet, yet let it savor most of the most benign, to which the other is but
subservient. It is the sour grief and fulsome joy that distempers, but it is
the joyful grief and grieving joy that is the sweet the only graceful
temper. I deny not but changes of State may move you, but they must not remove
you, they may somewhat alter the affection, but must nothing alter your
station; suppose you sing the more cheerfully in the Sun shine and weep the
more freely in the storm, yet must you mourn in this singing, and rejoice in
this weeping; this Aequanimity, unwaveringnesse, standing, even, upright
posture of soul is that which may be demonstrated the best, in that the
excellency of every thing is according to its likeness, or rather partaking of
that only excellency, and therefore as of his simplicity and infinity in the
inlargednesse and purity of heart, so its immutabilitie in the steadfastnesse
and immoveablenesse of our mind; these being as necessarily concomitant to the
proportion of our holiness as they are to his simplicity, there being nothing
to bound or alter that that is unmixed, free, absolute, and has nothing to
hinder it in its perfection. And for that suiting our selves to others, our
sympathising tears and smiles, I think it so far from being inconsistent
with this, that it cannot well consist without it, for how else shall I
accommodate my self to my friends in their present contrary extremities, how
weep with them that mourn, and rejoice with then that rejoice at the same
time. Nor can we find a greater help and furtherance to our promoving and
progress in our Christian course then this unmooveablenesse in respect of
digression. But if this station of soul be vergent to either hand, better to
sadness (I mean not of harshnesse, discontent, or any kind of malignitie, but
a more solemness, retiredness of spirit) then to jollitie, slightness,
flashinesse, pragmaticalnesse, idlebusibodiednes, etc. nothing that I know
arguing a man of a more empty and worthless spirit. By the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better; more pondering, more wary, more capable
of council, diligent in action; again, love is more taking with ingenious,
then terror with base and servile spirits, Gods mercy in Christ will sooner
fetch them up, then all his threatenings cast these down. And indeed a
Christian (so far as understanding himself, the ground and use of his own
affections) cannot but pleasure in his sorrow, delight in his mourning in his
brokennesse, in his contrition of heart, because, delights in doing the will of
God, because, he sees the hand of God working it, feels it kneading as it
were, subduing, fashioning it to his own mind, because, his affections are
answerable to God's, he delights in that which God delights, and further,
knows neither it, nor ought else of worth, further then subservient,
conducible, advantageous to his love, his joy, his confidence in, his
magnifying of Christ, etc. so his joy must needs have a touch, a tincture of
grief; because he looks on it as on all his affections, as matter of duty
and obedience (else wu'd they not differ from bruit beasts) because bid rejoice
in the Lord always, again bid to rejoice; but now he cannot so look on it,
but with a sweet and gracious regret, to see it no more, because no more pure,
that has so infinite so holy a God for its object, for its only object, either
immediately, or at least mediatly. And so indeed this very grief cannot but
intend, confirm, consolidate his joy in an humbly-thankfull (the only
comfortable and truly joyful) posture of soul, to see in what a sweet and
gracious temper the divine goodness maintains it, whose rich and abundant
mercy it is that it finds any the least smatch of true and real peace. And I
am persuaded, that even in heaven it self these hints and relishes of our own
unworthiness, made worthy in Christ, of such an enmity reconciled in such a
unity, will much further, intend and extend these inimaginable joys. Sure I am
they are a heaven upon earth. And this, this only is the grief becoming a
Christian, that lead'st it to the purest-and-sublimed'st joys. Those fears
those tremblings that keep the soul in the humblest selfe-debasing, and
therefore at the highest exaltation.

Let no man part what God has put together,
Hence all our woes, what he has jony'd we sever.
From one another our affections go,
And all from Him, and hence is all our woe.
VV --
-- Here now my soul!
Do hear him bid theetouch the world? thou may,
But with thy Head, thy Hand; thy Heart's displaced,
Is out of joint if it be a jot from Him
That tries thee how thou can be out while in
The world thou seem. I am continually with thee.
With him sweet Psalmist! may I, may I too be.
I Would too refuse these miserable joys
And wait for them are mixed with no annoyes.
It Is baseness to be cozened, I Would better know
I want, then want most when I least think so.
Give me the right or none, no painted grapes,
My stomacke's wiser than to feed on shapes.
Though the Devil play the Zeuxis, and wu'd cheat
Me with a neat drawn color, I have meat
Of such experienced and approved worth
Attends the craving soul, I Will never go forth
To tamper with his hooked flies, his pitfall chafe,
His net-alluring glass, his braine-sicke laugh.
Hence jiggish joys, give me the solemn sound
Whose Treble's zeal, humility the ground,
God makes the mean, compleats the Harmony,
For never two but three in one agree.
And hence vain man thou and thy joys so jarre
Because the God of unitie's so far
From trivial pleasures; Long enough may lay
The world to thine hearts ear, think now to play
Some pretty toy, but nere can bring't in tune,
Or if thou bring'st it in it is out as soon.
The thing's now absent to the mind, the mind
Now to the thing, when met are strait disjoined.
Let Us outside joy be other where obtruded,
That at the best but circum praecordia ludit,
But plays about the heart, the while it is sad
In The midst of'ts joviall'st mirth; give me the joy glads
In The midst of its saddest sorrows; let my Spirit
Rejoice, rejoice In Spirit; I this demerits
The name of mirth indeed, when the heart does enter
Into 't, and it into the heart its center,
Secured from the reach of the worlds disturbance, while
It Is inside outside guarded from its guile
Its thickest terriblest assailings, if
The treacherous flesh betray 't not; when a whiffe
Of The ruder winds blows the the other clean away;
This weighty, watchful, inward joy shall stay.
Delight's the life of nature; 't cannot live
But 't must have somewhat may contentment give.
But I Will take none of the false, and so of force
My soul unto the true will take its course.
My soul unto the true has taken its course,
That only, that can make me false divorse.
Then may it be for ever strongly bent
On thee, in thee may dwell; I thus intent,
Come worlds come devils they may have never an ear,
May have no part in me while I am here,
Still busied, working me out of my self
Int' him, whom while I see, I see all 's pelf.
And happy sure here is happy work enough
Still to bespeake me from this paltry stuff.
Here Here Is the ground and Pillar of thy bliss,
Thy Christ, thy God: thy God thy Christ never miss.
With whom while thou shall be, He Will be with thee,
With whom it is eternal life to be.
T'S the halest ablest-bodied man, and at
The highest embonpoint of Athletique state
Works long'st and hardest with the least supply
Of fresh repasts; as he whose symmetrie
Of nature-consentaneous juyces, in the
The abundance of their strength, 's not troubled with
Those often sharp gnawings of Hetrogeneous humors,
Nor over-evacuation following tumors.
That that is the halest strongest Christian
Best longest work with least of the creature can;
For he has most of God, and who has so
He little cares which way the world will go.
'T shall never touch his heart, nor task his brain
To lay about to fetch it back again.
As he whose lines are fallen in a fair
Large pleasant place, is made for the worse to care.
If It 'll come by fair means well and good, he will use
It when, and as he thinks convenient, loose
'T he will ere he will employ the smallest foul;
Imploy't he does that lets it pinch his soul.
T's the soundest body that feeds of the simplest fare;
The soundest soul that makes his God his fare.
A happy man the spirit 'f a healthie mind
Can in a health-injoying body find.
A happy man the spirit 'f a healthy mind
Can in a health-deprived body find.
LIft up prevailing hands in praising action
Against Edom and the Edomitish faction.
There are they fallen, proud Prilistims withal
Their Ashdod brats; so let them, let them fall
And never rise, while on our Harpes we sing
The song of Moses and the Lamb our King.
Victorious meekness! gird thy all-conquering sword
Unto thy potent thigh, give give the word
Unto thy Heavenly Host they will straight conjoyne
With earths celestial Armies; then combine
Rome, Spain, France, Hell take the devil and all,
The Mitred Captains of the high Priests Hall.
Come on brave Borgias with your pransing horse,
Ye Popes dear Nephews, or which sounds the worse
Though the same his Base Sons, whom he has begot
On an unwedded Church. Change Cannon shot
Into the shot of Cannon Tout d'an coup
Devour the Presicians, they 're a slender soup
TO a Pulpit full of Sack, a slippery yolke
In lusty Muskadine, they will never choke
So well washed down with blood; but if you think
You'z find as hard work as ye had to get a drink
Of The wary Scot; close noddles, constult together,
Hoord up in the deep'st Abbisse 'f y'r holy Father
Jesuitick plots, say a confederacy,
But 't shall not stand till truth it self can lie.
Come gather then together, and be ye broke
T'irrecomposible pieces. He has spoke.
Still will he think ye ride upon an Ass?
No no, his white steed's mounted, He Will surpass
Your forciblest finenesses; Jerusalem
Leap, leap for joy, Thy King comes and does hem
Thee round with mighty mountains, and his Host
Is all prepared thine enemies to accoast.
For His are thine, for thou art His, then boast
The in thee Lord thy God when thou art in th emost
Inextricable dangers. Here I here is
A Saint-like patience, thus to chant the bliss
Of bleeding wounds, while their Te Deums charms
Fond souls with Swan-like songs, our harmless harms
Shall sweetly breathe in sighs triumphant lays
Of conquering Ios, while our blood shall praise
That name above the proudest wrath, and raise
A generation that shall Babell raze.
Stones shall be Churches, and dead bones shall live
E're God his glory unto Rome shall give.
There Is breath enough in heaven and dust on earth
To build more men to ruin all her mirth.
How heaven derides these Gotham sages, wu'd
Drown Eeles in the water, drown the Church in blood?
What? 's the Parisian massacre forgot
How crowned with many a thousand Huganot?
Or the Marian flames? how often the Prelatique hands
Were crowded with increasing Puritans?
Or those Ten Prim'tive persecutions, what
But more Christs-honourers has their crueltio got?
But still the devill's the divill, although he know
He works the Saints more weal himself more woe,
So mad is envy, 't had rather loose both eyes
Then 'ts neighbor's one should see 'ts deformities.
Courage my hearts, we nor our cause can die,
Nay we may live to see proud Aegipt lie
Dead on the shore. What fear we? The Wonderful
In Skill, Power, Peace, Love 's ours; what shall they pull
The Palm from Him? or shall they rend a Limb
Fro' the Father of Spirits? hurt the eye of Him
Whose voice is thunder and his eves are fire,
Who hands their breath? then have they their desire,
And never till then. Thus in my Fort, my Peace,
My Castle-Christ, my flaming Wall, never cease
There are they fallen (yea though I think I fall
And all my fellow soldiers, for thus call
We death, because we think it so, when it is
The only rise unto our perfect bliss)
The irrevocable word 's past, decree 's signed;
All things are present to a faithful mind:
For he sees all in God, but he sees all
At once; and thus while he beholds, he will call
Things past and future present, things that are
As they were not, that are not as they were;
Let kingdoms clash, and their foundations shake,
Haughty hearts shrink to their heel, let fury take
The loftiest Hills and hurl them in the Maine;
Let the lively Sun his sprightly rays refrain
And wraps 's in sable might; let heaven and earth
Meet in confusion, while hell yawnes; our mirth,
Shall that be swallowed up by this? our joy
That none can take away? no foe n' annoy?
Rouse up brave spirits, glorify the name
Of that great God that ever is the same,
And we in Him; life, death, principalities,
Powers, things present, things to come, shall these
Disjoyne us from our God? if once in Him
One as He is One? What is it that can dim
Our glorious inutterable joy
That sparkles purer luster from the alloy,
(That streams more radiant luster from the alloy)
Of foyling grief? A joy whose native heat
Grows stronger by the winter winds that beat
Upon 'ts concentred spirits; A joy that rises
Higher yet higher by the fresh surprises
Of 'ts Arke-secured braveries from all
The Ocean-inundations can befall.
Nay lead me captive grief, yet one I know
Shall captive thy captivity, and show
Thy open spoils as Trophes, while I sing
How sweet's the memory of sower? to bring
To mind those tempests past, while housed in heaven
I feast on Leelesse Wines, rich marrow and leaven.
Untouched bread. So great ill turned to well
It Is makes his glory-and-my good excel.
There Is nothing, nothing ill but all is well
Is always well to those whose ways excel.
Thus is the upright as far from's neighbor as hell
From heaven; here well is ill, there ill is well.
Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri.
-- NO, give me
A Philosophic Ingenuitie;
A Bacon, Luther, truth-exploring brain,
Can cull the Wheat from the Chafe, and bring a grain
To the graynarie of knowledge; no lazy pate
Will nothing else but read, hear, transcribe, translate,
And take what is brought it at adventure an idle drone
Will suffer any thing ere't will work* but one
Whose naturalls cannot endure to be Aristotl'd
With ipse dixits, nor his spiritualls throtl'd
W'th a Spiritual Lord's irrefragable propositions;
But h's freeborn spirit mak's exquisite inquisitions
In The depths of grace and nature; scorns to have
His judgment strangled like a Turkish slave
B' usurping tyranny; a noble soul
Whose understanding w'll suffer no control,
But from his Soveraigne's Viceroy, Rational
Faith, faithful reason. A God-taught soul, in all
Consults with, credits him. No tell him of the Fathers,
He has but one and that is in heaven, and he who gathers
From him instructions, as a guided guide
He Will use h'm if needs, but first w'il hath' father well tried
By his, not his by the Father, though he be as old
As superannuated Paul's, as bold,
As peremptorle as he that raskal'd Calvin
As Holy as his Holiness no reverend Calvin,
I Would rather be a freemans slave, be thine,
Then be a slave to slaves; they will draw me fine
Directions, whose selves are but the Amanuenses
Of their imperious lusts; They Will make offenses
Of working on a play day, and none of playing
Upon an holy day; whose sweet'st mouthed sayings
Sic volo, sic jubeo stat pro ratione voluntas
Import to a discreet subaudi, as
What devillisher a Tyrant then a slave?
Heel ride to the devil, and all the world wu'd have
To bear him company; but stay Saints Peers,
Or go if you will, y'l never meet with Saint Pierre's
Keys, nor St. Paul's Cathedral there, how e're
Ye may with their attendants. But whether wut be are
M' incensed muse? Reclaim, no further forth,
Why flyest thou after Rookes? they are not worth
Thy looking on, thy slightnig'st, passing'st thought;
How came I then thus unawares transport?
I love thee Truth and thence it is I hate
Truth hating falfehood with a perfect hare.
I can as well contain my roused Spirits
As bound the Ocean when thou bid'st it ferrie its
Orerunning waves beyond its bounding banks.
What heaven-taught soul can brook these hell-learn'd pranks?
Sum Liber natus educatus and
I cannot endure be under Romes command.
The truth has made me free and I am free
Indeed, and shall I again in bondage be?
No hang 'em all, an hundred thousand Jesuits
And Jesuitized Buy-shops, these pirckly Jebusites
And Thorny Canaanites; too long the'ave been
The outers of our eyes while ran us in
The persecuted sides; and thou great God
That make my flesh to tremble, what period
Will madness put to its untamed pride,
That dares to pierce the omnipotent his side,
His eye, his heart? and is thy glory not
As dear to thee as life? what seek they but
That dreadful glory, Thy prerogative?
Their will must be our reason, and we must live
At their selfe-wir'd devotions, according to
Their monstrous wisdom, not subordinate to
The Creators word. Behold the men are God,
Are b'come like one of them these od
'Cause-God uneavened souls, the 'le not derive
Their policies from him, and will not he drive
These Rebels out from their fools Paradise?
They shall not survive our hopes, and ever tice
Fond souls with Coapes and Popes, with Chringes, Crosses, In the immediate,
solemn, public Worship, before a promiscuous people, whose Art and Heartleave
them far below the subserviencie of such means.

Pipes, Poppets, Surplus, and the Service tosses
The Psalms like Tennis balls, the while they yawle
Like Primmer Chits at their lessons, and terribly bawle
With such a mad confusion as if all
Zeal lay in the tongue and the ear, nor need we r'call
The spirits to the heart in a staid still posture
To sing with grace within. Still shall they foster
VVinde-sucking souls with superstitious milk
The while they ruffle it in their braving silk?
And like the child that prides it in its new
Gay sleeves, how burnish, swell at every view?
Who dares come nigh 'em now unless he w'ud
Be brow-beaten to the channel, unless he stood
H's due distance cap in hand. And Sir you
Look that you preach me thus and thus, you will rue
'T else, and he may believed by h's torvid looks
On the Grave learned pious Minister whose books
He is not worthy to bear; so sturdy and stout
'S advanced villainy, so pestilent devout
There Is not a Puritan but he will root him out.
(How strong Robustious lusty frollicke spracke
The zeal kindled with a cup of bribing Sack)
Now down goes the wicked houses all about
The sacred Temple, and that malapert
Parochial child that dares s' unmannerly perk
I'ts lolling head upon its Mothers side,
I'ts reverend aged Mother, I cannot abide
Th'indecencie and disorder, strike't to the ground
That not a stone upon a stone be found,
When foreign and domestique Catholics
Come by and see this Massy Aedifice
S' entire, complete a Mass of holy stones,
'T will make 'em all turn Protestants at once.
But what, when hear it in? when see within
As pretty Babes as Babie e're has seen?
They Would shake the cap from any wondering clown,
And summons all the children of the town.
Dim-sighted Gransiers, and ye moap-ey'd dames
Here Is curious spectacles to clear your aims.
Poor Souls! How ridiculous your folly! but ye,
How lamentable! And cu'd I show you the
Soft pity turns my bowels; and make you see
Th'wild fury turns your brains, how glad you would be
Your souls were rid of the servitude of men,
Your hearts were humble, self-denying; then
They Would be th'free-schooles of the highest Majesty,
Where he wu'd sit and wu'd your Master be.
The humblest, praying'st, meditating'st souls
Are those with whom he most communion holds.
There Is no man I call master, only One
Me th'truth in Him-the-only-Truth has shown.
In this Light see I light, light am I in this,
And where I a' n't, more intimately into His
I Will get, and be, till I in every part
Shall meet himself, from th'interoccurring dark
Delivered, and make my sence-beshadowed faith
Pellucid sense; in the mean, hear what he says
Has promised he will never leave his Saints untaught,
But into All Truth they should by his Spirit be brought.
And when I learn of any, it shall be
Of The humblest men, for most of God they see.
'Ts the sight of God makes the only kindly breach
On the heart, the head does only truly teach;
But when in Heaven, I most of God shall see
And therefore there most knowing-humble be.
But since this humble knowledge is such an Heaven,
I Will have a care how here I am deceiven.
Here be as truly knowing as I can,
So truly humble so an Heavenly man.
ANd art thou silenc't too sweet Lute? 1640.

Thou do nor preach, nor yet dispute.
No contraversie but consent
'S the language of my Instrument.
Yet what rude, rufling Priest appears
To pluck Appollo by the ears?
Ar't thence so mute, as out of heart to sing
Till the freed Evangelists fresh ditties bring?
Be then suspended on the willowes
While the Babilonians tauntings fill us.
My cunning hand forget thy skill,
And thou my dancing tongue be still.
There Is yet refreshing times may show
These brisk suspenders --
Then while they howl their penitential Psalm
My pitying thanks congratulate the Calm.
Then sing. Why, why not now? or how
With Him does differ Then and Now?
With him my only joy; who while
He is, my clowded brow shall smile
Serene Aspects through the grimmest night,
And teach my grievingst grief delight.
Heavens harpers did Romes Epicedium play
Hundreds of years before her fatal day.
Then come sweet Lute with gentle Aires
Come kindly touch me with the Cares
Of Christs-Crosse-bearing souls, whose share
Of common woe and weal I bear.
With Voltos then come raise my spirits
Unto the Triumphs they inherit,
Whose wo's their weal, whose wound's their cure, whose Heaven
'S their sweet, whose want's their wealth, whose hel's their Heaven.
Where am I? How this turn has giddied me? December. 1640.

Can hardly credit what I plainly see.
So far fro'th door? so backward on the stage,
Still to protract this weary pilgrimage?
Blessed Lord! so turnd'st our feare-led captive thoughts,
As those that dreampt; we saw devouring Vaultes
Heapt by the foaming Beast with Virgin Slain
Indign'd his I doll-lust. We dreampt again,
Christs-warre-preventing Throne became the Theme
Of speedy praise; but feared this was a dream.
But we awake in Paradise,
And that no fools, be we but wise
To keep our hold'our God so close,
Nor becks, nor blows shall make us loase.
Then prove the former dream yet true,
Change but the time the latter's too.
AS he whose brains are weak, and business much,
Walks here and there, now this now that will touch,
Takes up, lays down, wu'd somewhat, knows not what;
Even so my Good my God I had forgot,
Crazed by my fall; Still were my brains employed
With swarms of busy follies, still annoyed
With great pains taking in great trifles, void
Of all success, and got as soon was cloyed.
Thus hither thither flew, but never cu'd find
An object suitable unto my mind.
Beauty, honor, riches seemed an empty shade
Before I saw the substance, ere I Would made
Discovery of the Truth they seemed a lie;
But that being seen they seemed a lying lie,
A shade of shades. Natures dim glimmering light
Burnt clearer in my heart, and showed me a sight
Far worthyer choice. A soul, a beauteous soul
Enriched with rarer honor, a prudent soul,
A meek-sweet lovefull heart, whose noble spirit
Scorns a few-thousand-miled world should bury it
'N a petty speck of dirt; but pleasures in
Its larger glories by the eye unseen.
Then after this while careful search I made
Strait shun a light showed this too but a shade.
A Heaven-sent light was darted in my heart,
And made me this perverting course divert.
The world in 'ts richest ornaments, is but
A show, a show th'compleat'st nature; but
Thon only good, and therefore only true,
Give m' in a recapitulated view
Those Scripture-scattered Glories. O cu'd I those
Thy analysized Graces well compose
Into their lovely face! How deep I Would fall
In love, and say thy beauty darkens all.
The creatures beautie's but a skin-deep lawne,
That by some slight distemper soon undrawne
Reveals the lurking messengers of death
That lie in wait to snatch away the breath;
And so possess their Master of the face
That seemed but now above a creatures grace.
But take the purest in 'ts admired'st hew,
If modest, else it is none, it dares but show
Its hands and face; but He, but always He
Is altogether Lovelinesses, He
Is Lovelinesses altogether; every one
Is in Him, and but in Him there is none.
The creatures Virtue's but a fairer foul,
Lodged in too strait a room to content my soul,
That only recreated splendors loves,
Whereon simplicity and infin'ty moves.
And where may I enjoy it better then
Admitted to its near'st approaches, when
No intervenient object bars my sight
In its impure and narrow Channel? Light
Pure, perfect, boundless, inaccessible light,
When shall I live in thy delighting sight?
I live, but I wu'd live another life,
Where light and darkness know no longer strife.
I live, but I wu'd live another life
That might inform me what a death's this life.
How how m'abhorring spirit starts me back
When by thy fair I see their ugly black?
When by thy wisdom I their folly see,
And by their folly may the wiser be.
With what a mightier force my soul returns
To thee, in thee with mightier fervor burns!
O Light of Lights, when shall I see
Thee as I Am seen! When shall I be
Thou Love of Loves with Thee in the highest!
Who long to learn yet what is my Christ?
May Thoughts, Men, Books, may all I see
But answers to this question be.
May Thoughts, Men, Books, may all I see
Be Thoughts, Men, Books, be All of Thee.
May every Sermon that I hear
But break the Clouds, this Sun may clear.
May every thing I hear or see,
Be all but Testaments of Thee.
And when they have told me all they can,
I still must ask as I began.
Well satisfied in seeking, till
My search with satisfaction fill.
What Is white compared to black? to brown, to gray?
What mar'le 't excels? but take the lightest gray,
Nay th'purest white the strongest sight e're saw;
Sublime thy apprehension yet, and draw
A purer, unto which this bright'st's as black
As th'face of Hell, and yet believe there lacks
As much resemblance in this draught to the Life
As Earth of Heaven, of Heaven for all our strife
'S but pourtrai'd with a coal, revealed God
In h's holiest glories by a dirty Clod
Of The work-besoiling Clay: and yet believe
You Are altogether unable to believe
The difference till thou see it. Thou't see a light
Is able to discern an Hypocrite.
A man s'inlightned, he has skill enough
To cheat himself, and all the world; this snuff,
This dying snuff shall burn as black as Hell,
When with its Christ sincerity shall dwell.
But what is that all-surpassing splendour? O
Where Is he? Where Is he will lead me to that show?
And teach my thoughts, my rude and artlesse lines
To draw the features of that face divine.
Divine? That every foolish fondling w'll blurt
On a neat piece of finer-formed dirt.
O beauty? Cu'd I speak! but I have lost
Expressions in impressions. I Would rather lie
Admiring! Adoring! More sweetnesses suck I
So; but fire will out, must speak of him,
Rightly if I can, however speak of him
The best of things so earnestly I covet,
Th'Unspeakable Gift, yet can I say I love it.
And love will praise its object, so must I
And yet now I begin to praise, I die.
O may my life so porutrait forth my Love
To win Corrivals, mount their spirits above
With sacred flames, while I stand peering there
Where all Terrestrial beauties shad dowes are.
O see, pry, gaze, b'inamour'd, here is fare
For Myriads of Lovesick worlds and spare.
O see, pry, gaze, b'inamour'd, here is fare
Whose Rivals bring each other greater share.
For many eyes, hearts, see, love, more then one,
Fresh Graces spy to feed fresh hungers on.
O here is a banquet where the guests find ever
The more the merrier, for the cheer fails never.
Discovered such a goodly plenty show's
Whose there can grieve but that his friends it loose?
Whose there can grieve, but that his griefe's his sauce,
To make him relish more his wiser choice
Of food, of friends? Whose modest sharp-set eye
Each corner of this feasting face does pry,
And every Gospel-verset in his reach
As some Grace-whelming dish does open, and teach
His neighbors eyes the shape, and mouth the sweet.
Happy, happy souls that at this banquet meet!
T's a doubtful feast indeed; not only 'cause
We Have all that Heaven and Earth can give; but 'cause
When we remember whence we came, poor wretches
Raked up from dunghills, drawn from under hedges,
Blind, lame, sick, naked, wandering here and there
Th'beaten road to death; and now see where we are
Translate from death to life; from that dark, sad,
Disconsolate State, or which is worse, those mad
And desperately deluding joys, to such
Incircleing reallity of bliss, as much
Glory as our capacity can bear,
Angels attend us, God himself our cheer,
Our Cloathing-Light, we are not able t'beare
'T but doubt we are in a dream, and fondly fear
VVe've nothing, 'cause so much; but th'night's far spent,
Th'last watch, th'last houre's nigh, th'day w'll prevent's,
Gird up your loins, trim up your Lamps, along,
Have, tune your hearts to th'Epithalanian song.
Now, now we see the day no more through night,
Our earthy houses now so swept, so clean
There Is not a dust, a speck, a moate to dark a beam
While solemnize th'Espousals of the darklesse Light.
When wu't thou come dear Lord, and show the face
Shall blemish all these splendors? O the fire
Burns in this breast for an allay of Grace!
Of Grace that feeds not damps such blessed desire.
Some drops of love still to increase the flame,
And make it bear me thither whence it came.
VVas'e n't a reflection from the righteous Sun
Was glanced in my heart? Or was it one
From that light-likened Angel? Then undone
I am, unless quite out the fire be blown
By the holy Spirit. But can the devil come
So dressed? He has a cloven foot say some.
Sure this he has, he cannot humble be.
But he can counterfeit. But he is so bad
Heel not seem good, for nothing; now what shu d'make thee
Masque thy self in humility, who had
N'advantage hence? Sure 'twas the native hew,
I Am in a Labyrinth; but where is the clew?
Lord if it be of thee, then let it stand;
If not, down, down let it for ever fall.
It Is thee I seek in it, do thou command
Mine Isaak? here it is, and my self and all.
O how I joy I Have such a sacrifice
Whereby my God my Love unto him tries.
Sure many choiser splendors have I seen;
Yet few so choice; was it my sensual eye
I sought to please, fit objects they had been:
But a new eye new glories did epsy;
Through that bright Crystal a far brighter jewel,
That yet into this fire cast's in fuel.
How how I Am wrack't! love, hate, desire, averse,
Sorry, rejoice, fear, hope, angry, well pleased,
Careful, not care, -- cannot rehearse.
Hope t'ought not be, feare't ought, there am I eased
Diseased here; well, I Will stint the strife,
Nere loose my Love that lost for me his Life.
Lord how I love thee that thou did not leave
Me in the creatures hand; alone it is thee
Thee it is alone to whom I wish to cleave,
My other wish serves this; if thou do see
It cement fit to make me closer cling
To thee, to me dear Lord that cement bring.
I dare not fetch it least that I should bring
For mortar slime, I Will set me down and bless;
Thy name, first to thy willing of the thing,
Then to thy time, means, manner I Will adresse
Me, my way roll on thee, delight in thee,
Thou't does, I my-thy hearts desire shall see.
How full I am! what shall I do for vent?
I muse, the fire's tin'd, when will the word's burst out?
They do so crowde, throng, press, stop, they are so pent,
Come laden with such matter, that I doubt
I must be feign to let them all alone,
And in ward speak what in word cannot be shown.
Thy mercies Lord, I speak it with my heart,
Flow in so fast I am not able t'beare
The memory of them, how much less convert
My thoughts to words, yet will I have a care
Both I and others both in my word and deed
The thankful memory of Thy Loves may read.
Blessed! blessed be thee m' inligtning sun,
For now I see I Am but a shade:
Blessed! blessed I feel my life begun,
For now I feel my soul You Are made.
I am not Lord, but I wu'd be.
I Would not be I; but I Would be thee.
Not be my own, be at thy call,
Wu'd nothing be, wu'd have thee all.
I Would be but feet, and thou shud'st walk,
I Would be but tongue, and thou shu'dst talk,
I Would be but eye, I Would be but ear,
And thou shu'dst see, and thou shu'dst hear.
What see I, hear I in this field?
Thou thee through me do hear and see;
Where go I? With whom is this talk held?
It Is thou through me speak, come to thee.
Trees? birds? home? self? These? What Is all the world to me.
Thy Spirit through them all conveighs me Thee.
So I? All the world is but thy instrument.
In which thou sit'st a playing thy-my content.
Most blessed God that brought my mind in frame
Not left'st me a set-off-discord to thy name.
O rub me, rub me, I begin to fall.
My? -- What love Convulsions, pull and hall
M'adheringly-pursuing soul? (...)
-- I
'M left behind -- O for wings for strength to fly!
One drop, One little -- No Cordial left
He? No Balsome -- to keep my heart uncleft?
--
E'ne gone I was, but that a lightsome thought,
Whose season-bearing seed was deeply wrought
In The secrets of my heart, sprang up and brought
Me an Idea of the Inlivening Tree
Who stretched it self beyond the farth'st degree
Of The spacious Heavens, tendering me'ts healing leaves
And ay-preserving fruit, when my heart perceives
I'ts feare-shrunck self with hopeful joys enlarged,
Whereon m'officious spirits are discharged
Unto their several functions, while the peace
Past understanding, thence does re-increase
My watchful guard in heedy confidence
To hold my peace in holding Peace's Prince.
HAppie's the man that knows the cause of thing's!
Unhappy then is the man whom God not brings
Acquainted with himself; only happy he
Has him his friend in whom he all does see.
HOw good it is to wait on Thee
Dear Good! How good it is! To be
Possessed with that that I desire,
That Is not the thing that I require.
But to desire with what possessed
Thou Would have me be, that is my request.
The world has not the thing I would;
Till I can hear Thee say I should.
But still in aequilibrio stand,
Expecting thy scale-turning hand.
Not any thing till nothing will,
So false are th'weights of good and ill.
But thine are true Blessed Truth! O tell
My heart what is ill, and what is well.
Till then I Will lean the contrary way,
Wish not to have't 'cause wish I may,
So happily may I meet with Thee;
For we are contrariety.
The godliest heart inhabiting
The sweetest soul, is this a thing
For its peculiar interest?
Or is n't of 't in Christ possessed?
Or, what to Do? what glory wu'dst
Have more returned thee by it, shud'st
Thou give't then if thou shud'st detaine't?
What service more? Or can thy Saints
Find more content then when they do
The best service, bring the great'st glory to
Thy Name? Or could it want, it did
It make for that? wu't thou forbid
What soever's for thine honor? or
What soever's not, it not abhor!
Or is it not to wax wanton against
Him that it with his loves acquaints?
Or shall it use it as a Tipe
Of that All-signified Antitipe?
Or is'nt there rome enough in thee
To loose it in? capacity
Enough for all 'ts affections? were
They far more overflowing? were
All th'r straggling streams one channel, nay might
All the worlds be one, be poured out
To thee, how small a drop they would be!
And can it spare a thought from thee?
Or where is else that magnetique force
Can draw its hard-adhering course
On after it? Or where may't meet
With such a sympathizing sweet,
To bartre soul for soul? to change
Till each unto it self were strange;
Nor wu'd acknowledge it, nor own
It further then't was two in one.
Or can it find simplicity
Else where, else where infinity?
Or wu't thou show thy manifold skill
In passing through so nartow a quill
With fuller incomes? what is thy will?
That setst this step against that? while still
You Are going on the readiest rode
Unto the same end of sure abode
My good-thy glory. What Is thy will?
This way? or that way? That Is my will.
It is not good to be alone.
VVe're one another, not our own.
It Is very good to be alone
To him that is with All-in-One.
But so was he to whom 't was said;
Then say Lord what thou wu't, I Am said
My vote my vote shall counterpoise,
Thy casting voice shall make the choice.
It Is only good that I would have;
It Is only God then I would crave.
And yet thou sai'st, whose search has found
'T, a good, choice raritie has found.
One only thing there needs; to be
With or without all goods with Thee.
And yet how can I without 'em be?
Since I Am in Thee in whom all goods be?
How good it is to wait on Thee
Dear God! how good it is to be
Drawn after thee, the while thou hould'st
The favor forth, withdraw'st thee, towl'st
The soul from't self, to follow thee
With whom it is so good to be.
And, w'th what rich interest he repaies
Our praying praising waiting days?
A gracious John, sage Samuel,
Blessed Isaac, Immanuel.
How choice? how sweet the mermies are
When given in that were so far?
How welcome the presence of the food
To which the stomach long has stood.
How welcome the absence of the food
That Is so supplied with such a good?
The mercy of mercies when sent forth
In The fullest time's of the fullest worth.
What pleasant Music hears the man
That keep time with his Creator can?
That's nor before nor is behind,
But jumpe together mind and mind?
How good it is to wait on thee
Dear God? How good! might the world once see
My joy in things unseene, 'tw'ud still
The endless motion of their will
In fond desires, 'twud stint their care,
And set their souls on edge for the fare
Wherewith my starvingst wants grow fat
With thriving vigorousnesse; but that
'S their misery, they will not believe
That we joy most when most we grieve,
O how I pleasure in his no,
When I wu'd give the world't were so!
I surely this conversion is,
My will converted into his.
O love the Lord, all m' soul, all m' heart,
All m' might, my strength! then can I part
With ought to ought but Him? whose call
'S for all, and's worthy of more then all.
Thou shall not have this thing; what thing
Can please me then? There Is naught can bring
M'equivalent content; but that
All prevalent sweet that sweetened that.
All m' joys in it as it I see
In Thee. So, not in it, but Thee.
I then can want the world and it
But Thee I cannot, O do'nt retreat
Thou, 'nd then its here. For what is it
But a meet help, in, by, to get
More, Thee; so it thou't be
Wh'art all to me.
So make m' be
All f'r Thee.
ANd shall thy servant find refreshment here?
The garden smiles, while pretty Philomel
Stills the sweet Air. Yet naught I see, feel, hear
But filth, but stench, but screeching cries of Hell,
Unless thy spirit's my Air, in the garden be,
And my Beloved sing his Loves to me.
My dearest God! my mouth wu't not thou fill?
It Is opened wide; this is my only breath,
With this, though dead I be, yet live I still;
Without this while I live, I live in death.
Oh how it is kindly heatings do resolve
The chilling fears my sadder heart involve?
O how it is gentle coolings do allay
My sulpsury passions? how it is cleansing gales
My drowsiest dullest dumps do clear away?
Thus over my earth, phlegm, choler, blood prevails.
Dull phlegm, sad earth, mad choler, turned to blood
That Is active, cheerful, sober; thy spirit how good?
Blow with thy southern, and thy northern blasts,
Blow on my garden, they will purge my flowers,
Well nourish them, them fragrant make, and cast
Such grateful odors through our amorous bowers,
He Will quickly come and eat his pleasant fruit,
And at one Banquet we must have the Lute.
Then will he sing, and gently touch my heart,
The many-stringed instrument I keep
Tuned to his spirits recorder, t'beare it is part,
And answer grace for grace; thus softly creep
These warbled melodies through every vein,
Rapt up with raptures that I cannot contain.
But needs must beg a kiss, a stroke, a glaunce,
A sent, from those sweet lips, that glorious eye,
Hand gentle, precious ointment; needs must dance
With all my might; and if my flesh envy
Me this blessed pleasure, and not throughout the night
Let me prolong these joys, yet I Will delight.
My bed shall be his bosom, his left hand
My pillow, and his right my covering.
My Curtains Angels round about me stand,
My Canopie shall be my God his wing.
But how dare I thus speak? how dare? how dare
I not? It is presumption to despair.
I did believe therefore I spoke,
And now I sleep my heart shall wake;
Hear him in visions of the night,
But when he speaks he speaks delight.
And were it lawful t'speake but what I know,
I Would only in that monosyllable show
The soberer world a shadowed glimpse of that
Unknown, that unconceived pleasure, that
Sublime d'light the God overshadowed soul inherits
That knows the sweets result from mixed spirits.
Why wu't reveal thy self to me, and not
To the world? difference, such difference put
Where there is none? Even so my father cause
T pleased thee; to unwrap thee of thy misterious laws,
And give thy unvailed beauties into me;
And take my love-inflamed heart to thee.
To live by faith, by love, that live by action,
And but thy pleasure what is my satisfaction?
To you it is given to know the ministeries of the kingdom of Heaven. And art
not thou O Lord tui juris? art not Thou at Thine own disposal, at whose
disposal are all the things in the world? may not thou give thy self to
whom thou please? or what is Heaven but Thee? or the knowledge of its mystery
but the knowledge of Thee? and the knowledge of Thee life eternal, Thy free
and gracious, and therefore not worke-fore-seene gift. Shall Thou depend on the
creature, or that on Thee? Thou on its will, or it on Thine? Can the humble
soul say, thou saw man would be good or bad, and therefore thou must needs
order him to life and death? and so not thy will but theirs must have the
precedence, the preheminency. It is not safer to say, that thou who art an
absolute and free agent, giver and disposer of thy self, (in the inhabitation
of whom in the soul is Grace, Glory, Life eternal) that thou in leaving and
passing by a man, has left him as bad, because not pertaking of thee the only
good; or blasphemously to say, thou seeing some goodness in man without thy
self, as it must needs be if not from thee, from thy will, thou seeing of him
thus good of himself, and therefore a God, would order him to salvation; and
then how can he be a God? O into what absurdities, into what everlasting
confusions, would not the mad pride of degenerate nature lead us? and all for
want of a true thorough sight of that infinite desparitie between the Creator
and the creature, tha^ absolute soveraigntie that he has over it, that clear
and distinct understanding of his will, its positivenesse, privitivenesse,
activenesse, permissivenesse, etc. its always justice, holiness, goodness.
Can that soul but above all desire, nay desire it as that one only thing,
that it might ever dwell in the house, in the presence of God, to behold the
beauties of his holiness, and to bless him among his chosen; and yet but say
withal, but if he has no delight in me, here I am, let him do to me as
seems him good. Os what is it can more assure the soul that it has seen
him, that it shall ever see him; as having chosen that good part, that shall
never be taken from it; in whom alone it could learn to humble it self to the
death, in the willing fulfilling of a ready obedience to its Fathers will. This
is the heart that will not haste after its own inventions, but will wait upon
his counsels; that fears the Lord and dwells in his secrets.

-- Marle not my soul
If wisdom some reserved cases have
For heavens Cabinet council; he should save
Thee never an Heaven, should he fully show
The mysteries of his state here; here we would know
Him fully, and that were heaven indeed. But since
Thy conversation should be never thence,
I blame not this thy scrutinie; but wu'd
Thy gross contempt, if thy remissness should
Not pry fnr truth as life; and that to see
Sparkling in the loveliest resplendencie
That lights our Hemisphere. The soul in'ts grave
That Is not abroad in the Light. Thou't then behave
Thee wisely when thy Scripture-guided eye
Its ingenious boldness shall most humbly pry
Unto the utmost bounds of modesty;
And there where reason fails let faith supply:
Till thou shall see thy faith was rational;
That skild thy will to trust Truth over all.
When thou shall see all ends fall in together,
All knit all into one knot no time shall seaver.
No sooner now I Have gotten one, but then
The others gone, and I Am to be gone again.
Then shall thou know as thou art known, without
Discourse, at one complete sight, far from doubt.
Grow then in gracious knowledge now, and so
More Heaven in more Heaven-like manner know.
Thy Councels were not worthy of Thee great God,
Were'nt they too deep! Broad! Long! High! f'r me to plod
Them out to one full intuition; nor
My love so great, so sweetly'd enforce m'abhor
M'selfe, cu'd this blessed distraction comprehend
Thee in my own short arms; till thou shall send
Th'inlarging Light and Truth shall end
This controversy in thee my endless friend.
Now cannot I bring two ends together then
Two ends to bring together cannot I ken.
Now cannot I Mercy and Justice knit in one
Then see it shall not need for they are one;
VVrapt up in one Decree, how Thou't express
Thy uniforme sweetness in a diverse dress,
Substantial goodness in a various shade,
Complete perfection with a Cloud ore-laid.
O come then come! When breaks the day
That breaks these broken shades away!
The Clouds subjected under our feet,
Hang ore our head, so may we meet
And greet, may wholly contemplate the face
That glances here imparted grace.
SHall faith subscribe to sense? Or sense to faith?
Poor faithless faith! my eyes, my head, my ears,
My heart, say they all what they will, Thus says
Jehovah; Speak Lord, Now thy servant hears.
Cannot I believe thon art? I Will not believe
I am. Art good? N'r I bad. But I both believe.
Thou art, thou a Rewarder ar't of all
That diligently seek thee; I have sought,
Seek, and will seek, thee so. I Will nere lin't call
By thought, by word, by deed, till I am brought
Word otherwise by a messenger of Heaven,
And then I Will trust but what I have receiven.
I Would not believe, because I see, feel, hear, etc. but see, hear, etc.
because I believe; not have my sense lead my faith, but my faith my sense;
because I have a ground for it by revelation by the Word, and not so far
believe as I find ground from faith out of sense. If I cannot believe Gods
eyes, I will never believe mine own; think all I see, hear, do, as a dream,
farther then faith goes along and assures me of it, etc. To receive
apprehensions of things as merely presented by the senses, is no more then
brutish; by natural reason, no more than humane; but what by supernatural
reason by faith, is divine; though indeed that reason be but unreasonablenesse,
farther then it is enlightened by this; farther then it is acquainted with,
adheres to, works according to the will of God; The hearty, thorough, active,
complete knowledge of the Truth. Now truth is (as I may say) of fundamental
necessity to the constituting of a true and stable faith; it being impossible
that that which is founded on falsehood should prove other then false and
failing: whether concerning persons or things, our condition in general or
particular acts. Where the promise, precept, word is not taken aright, the
application of the soul to it must needs be amiss; where the ground is
mistaken the building muw needs miscarry. Where that is not sound this must
sink. Loose and spongie soiles may have a firm superficies. Hollow vaults a
hard roof. The soul that takes things by the outside is like to go away with
outside comforts; that is not penetrating, bottom-searching, inward-looking,
is like to fall low for want of looking low. Build then cauteously O my soul,
tread warily, take heed of the rashness of fools ( Esa. 32.4.) walk
accurately, circumspectly, precisely, keep thy self close to thy God, loase
not thy hand, thy hold, the least time, the least distance, walk humbly, love
him entirely, cleave to him inseperably, follow him at every turn, thou can
never be out of thy way while thou keep thy way, thy Christ, whom thou shall
only find in his fatheas, who is (who is already) found of all them that seek
his face, (not themselves but him) his holiness his glory; who of his just
goodness and gracious wisdom, to the manifestation of the power of his
light, of his love, has left thee among so many false lights, fooles-fires, in
such a mist in such a night of darkness, among so many misguiding guides like
so many false voices in a wilderness. Now to know his from a strangers, now to
discern is grace, wisdom, etc. in its richest attire. Resign then thy self
to thy Christ to thy God, live by faith in all, and fear not but when thou art
gone out of thy self, his spirit shall teach thee, when, what, etc. to see,
hear, do, etc. for while thou art with, so far as thou art with the Creator
thou can not want wisdom how to use the Creature, so as it may be most for
his glory, and that is the height of thy wisdom. Certainly so long a we are
with him, he will be with us counselling, directing in all our ways. All our
miscarriages, ill doing, and ill farings being from our departure from him, our
light, life, comfort; so that not only true faith is rational; in believing
God beyond and against sense; but true reason is faithful in conversing with
God in and thorough sense. And hither I conceive looks those places, I am
crucified to the world and the world to me; am dead and this that I live in the
(very) flesh (incarnall sensual things, seeing, hearing, talking eating,
drinking, commerce, etc.) I live by the faith, live the life, of the son of
God. We are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God. ARe dead, and the
spirit that raised up Jesus quickneth our mortal bodies, the soul of our
souls, the life of our lives. Senses spiritualized. Whatsoever is not of faith
is sin, etc. Neither can there be any thing pleasing to God but what is done
in him in whom only he is well pleased; but what we do in him we do by
faith. The nature whereof were we so happy fully to know, we should fully
know our own happiness.

VVIsdome begins with ends, makes first its last.
Not stirs a foot till wary fear forecast
Unto what good; but good, thence End, 's but One;
Then do, speak, think an act, till fear has shown
Thy faith that kind to come from, lead to, God,
A sinful folly it is. Thus, faith will plod.
He Is then the man that is only wise
That keeps his God before his eyes.
The head of wisdoms fear, but there
Are wisemens eyes, see with their fear.
His Optic nerves, his moving hence
Derive their animal influence.
THings as their principles decay and thrive;
Th'most dying Christians are the most alive.
Reduce all ills to sin, all sins to'th' First;
All goods to grace, all graces unto Christ;
Then place thy self in the midst; and thou shall see
How good it is in a trembling joy to be.
While every act, and accident shall show
Thee thee not thee; ere blessed thee so to know.
Thus shake thee from thy self, and thou shall find
How good it is to enjoy another mind.
Thus shake thee from thy self, and thou shall see
How good it is in another life to be.
While seeing whence and whether brought thou have bin,
Grace shall thee humble make and faithful sin.
But may this humble faith still acted be.
Still't wu'd from sin and sinful sorrow free.
THere is nothing wherein we are more wanting, then in what we think our
selves least; the grounds and principles of Christianity. What more commonly
confessed, than that we are all sinners, children of wrath by nature? More
readily professed then that we believe in Christ? that we preferthe will, the
glory of God above all, etc. and yet what is it we believe, we do less? What
is it is more hard, more excellent? While they are things merely notionall,
and superficially swimming in the brain, or at most but glide and coast upon
the heart, and carry it on in a way of action, so far as pleases our selves and
corrupt nature, the devil lets us run on with the undoubted, uncontraverted
conceit that we know them, that we believe them; till they have at length
brought us thither where we shall too late be forced to believe and know, that
we believed, that we knew them not. But then is it that we meet with the cross
winds, the storms, fluctuations, temptations, doubts and questionings, of
their certainty, their equity, etc. When they come with that weight upon the
soul as to sink into it, to be received and entertained of it into its
seriousest and solemnest consideration; when they come with that force and
power upon it, as not to Herere inprimis viis, to stay in the common sense,
fancy; but to take the judgment, and by that the heart, and by that the whole
man, into their possession; that they are not only on the soul, but In it, and
it wholly given up to, wholly in these things: when we come to suck sweetness
from them, to live upon them, to digest them thoroughly, to gather strength from
them, to draw them forth to practice, to make them such to our selves as they
are in themselves, etc. certainly could we fully understand, firmly believe,
cordially affect, and frequently or rather continually actuate these things,
what manner of men should we be (O could we experimentally know) in all
holiness in all happiness of conversation? we should be Christians far more
in reallitie then we can be in profession: in substance then we can be in
show. It is as impossible for that heart to make the world know what it sindes
within it self, as it is (to speak proportionably) to make them know what is
heaven. Not the thousandth part of it self is that soul able to discover that
has the powerful workings of these thoughts, these meditations within it;
though too they be such whose very nature is to carry forth the soul in the
most operative activitie.

The cause once known the cure's half done; the soul,
(And why not add the body) purged of this foul
Distempering humourous faithless pride, you are sound
Though sin, shame, pain, want, div'ls beset thee round.
The man's within, and all is in vain without,
If he that is hid in Christ will not step out.
It Is unbeleeving pride, proud faithlesnesse
'S the bitter root of all unhappiness.
Look on the humble-and-beleeving man
He will be happy do you what you can.
Below he lies the while he flies above
The great'st evils, and sweets the bitterest in love.
Still may I Act my God-adoring faith,
Not hear what sin or sinful sorrow says.
Up, up, above I am out of the reach
Of what in pact in peace will make a breach.
The cause once known the Cure's half done; the disease
Exactly taken away, the Symptoms cease,
Being as co-transient as co-incident;
Faith knows no sin nor humbleness malcontent,
Perverse and faithless, faithless and perplexed
'S the combination of the holy Text.
A generation of perversenesses
In whom's no faith, no men of blessednesses.
Were they implanted in my pleasant rivers.
And sucked the sweets m' All-abounding Name delivers
Liberal to thirsty souls, cu'd they the while
Thus feeding run to the dry and barren soil?
Cry out for any want but want of care
To keep them fatting on Angely fare?
To stretch their wider branches to receive
More of my fullness in more fruitful leaves?
Happy, happy souls indeed! big with delight!
Known of and knowing the Lord! what lust m' excite
Him sit, nay stand, nay walk in the ways of folly?
What black event, becloud with melancholy?
Pure, candid, limpid, quick, pellucid spirits
Stream from the lively fountain, well demerits
The honor of the parent grace. Why's living man
(Whose life is joy) so sorrowful? what can
What reas'n deject him? man suffers for his sin,
Which faith not suffering let us no sufferings in.
For while it comes to God it turns from evil;
That found this left, why troubled at words of devils?
(But wary, indigning, simpathizing hearts
Are Agents in their sweetly-played parts)
I Will boldly say it if truth say true,
So far untoward, so far a Jew.
Untoward, froward faith? I can as well
While melt in love against love rebel.
Untoward, froward faith? I can as well
While bless in heaven, banne in hell.
Hear then the sum of Christian art,
Keep faith in all things Acting's part.
Faith's only where it lives, and where it lives
'Ts the spirit, the pair of nerves that motion gives
To every action; the man, the work is dead,
Is sin, where this is not the heart, the head.
FOnd man! in those first loins himself unblest,
Fled from his nest, could never since find rest.
Now soars above, now headlong falls below
That place-uncircumcised Being; O
That faith would hold me still above my fear,
And fear below my pride. Durst I presume
To bless my self, my self unblessed doom?
Were thou my fear great God, how soon I Would start,
Abhor, run far from this div'l swolen heart,
Aspires thy Throne in envious discontent
To do it is homage to thy regiment.
My wanton head wu'd it more Babells plot
To reach forbidden fruit? my froward heart not
Rejoice in all thy wills? my stubborn hand
Not quickly act thy sovereign commands?
This head, heart, hand, this all that first wu'd Thee
Their Maker govern e're they would humble be.
Were thou my trust, should I still sow the wind,
And reap the whirlewind? tangle, tear my mind
With thorny cares? such tireing circuits fetch
To rake the Mammon makes me more a wretch.
Contrive a wisdom that thou never taughtst?
Create Chimaeras; flocks of monstrous thoughts,
Headless conceits, that hold not of thy Christ,
The head, the whole, where all our worth's comprised.
Resolve upon an happiness of mine own,
Though by it my happiness be quite over thrown.
Pitch such an height of learning, unto which
I will attain, what e're come on it, itch
After vain applause, be eminent or none,
Have what I will, or else let all alone.
Silly-proud-childish-obstinate-God-denying else,
How madly lost when fondly sought my self?
How faithless pride the brainessets on the wracks,
While fretting grief the heart strings gnawes and cracks.
Were God thy aim thy stay this never wu'd need
H' accepts the doing will for the willing deed.
How hard, and yet how easy now I work;
To please my Savior saved me from the Turk
My tireing Tyrant self? expects the tale
Of toylosome Brickes though time, straw, strength should fail.
I will be rich, will honors, pleasures have
Says self, or else I Will venture on the grave.
But who pursues these riches, honors, pleasures,
He knownes not Christ his Alsufficient Treasures
How easy is thy yoke, thy burden light
When with self, world, devil mandates I them tight?
The faith that once of God has got a taste
Loves not the world so well to fall for have.
But takes his time means, measure, manner, kind
As willinger to be without were so his mind.
Whose manifold wisdom shows its mighty power
To keep the soul, whom neither the golden shower
Of The glittering'st goods the cheating world can tender,
Nor the bitting'st siege, fiercest shots can make surrender.
And wherein faith most bravely has acquitted
'T selfe's not told so easily as pertinently omitted
Since then the evil heart is to depart
From thee, and to depart from Thee's the heart
Of unbeleefe, put in this faithful fear,
Then should I still be good, because still here.
All bliss is in Thy presence, the evil heart
'S in evil case cause 't will from Thee depart,
Evil departs, fares ill, and all because
This fearelesse unbelief not tends Thy laws
Stamped on the heart, in golden Carracters
Of never defaced loves, and thence transfers
Its thoughts to trash, puts forth its hand to folly,
The luscious fare's resolved int' adust melancholy,
Fond fearelesse faithless man never finds his rest,
Runs from his mercy least he should be blessed.
Then let thy fear fall and incompasse me,
From this false world, while faith makes upward fly.
Thus both made one in love, this faithful fear
Translates my soul to its celestial Sphere.
To rest from the labor, I to'th' utmost do,
And sing't along 'cause thou wu't bring me through.
So gives he his beloved rest, sweet sleep,
Amidst the sprightly est activitie do keep
My spirits in reposed freshness; while
The world breaks their sleep, head, heart, with vain turmoile
Work out salvation with a trembling fear.
Give love its perfect work 'twill cast out fear.
The excrementitious humors thus expeld,
The implanted spirit of faith's communion's held
The better with the gracious love, that sweetly feeds
Of The purer Pabulum of humble deeds.
1 John 3.9.
CUd'st thou induce the proposal to vouchsafe a touch
Unto the stateliest to yes, the fairest moile,
The richest d^^^^gerie? what brave indignation'd boil
In that Heroic breast, while thou shall see
The imminent Crown of such an eminency
Surround thee in a glorious compass has no end
Of time nor place? but shud'st thou not intend
Thy heedie faith but the glancingst squint-eye lend
From him to painted lies, how soon thoud'st mend?
O how thy bowell's'd turn within thee with
A sweet regret to think thy father sees.
Could thou now sin? while such a thought ruled in
Thy princely mind? thou could not, could not sin.
It Is death to such a one to sinnne. Nay, death?
Thoud'st run to death to free thee from this death.
Live like thy self then Christian, act, act, act,
Set, keep thy faith on work in every fact.
In vain's the power that is not produced to act.
Where what is had, 's not used, what is had is lack't.
O Leave me not my head! O stint the strife!
Can pull my head off? Can see me so to flutter
Bustle, and struggle? So labor for my life?
Do pleasure in my pain? or hear'st me utter
'Blasphemous word? yet with the tender Foul,
Or quiet lamb, I Would feign retain my soul.
My soul Thou art; (...) Psalm. 31.24. Hold fast
and now I'm' ready die,
Can see me gripe and graspe the clothes, my heart
Not strength yet? Can hear me say, I die;
I die grieved nothing, but with Thee to part,
Dear friend, dear'st husband! and yet thou my death?
What shall our children do too? O give breath!
Breath still blessed spirit; and while I am alive,
I Will have a care to see thy graces thrive.
What sweet repasts when God and hunger meet!
And stay the hungry soul, whose hunger's sweet.
How sweet the draughts when God and thirstings meet!
And stay, not quench, their thirsts whose thirst's so sweet.
I here is the soul shall eat, drink, once for all,
When want of praise no more for prayer shall.
Oh cu'd I praise! what need I pray?
But I shall praise, shall praise for aye.
That Is m' only work both here and there.
What is no praise, can be no prayer.
I AM dull, I Am dull with this my clod.
O breath these earth-rejecting veins, and make
Them full with praise of purer worth.
I Am full, I Am full of Thee my God.
O breath my blessing-turgent veins and make
Them run them spring Thy praises forth.
Wind up my soul to those Seraphique strains,
Wherewith that noble Quire entertaines
Their farre-above all praise-exalted Maker,
That joys in this that thou art his partaker.
Whose joy's his glory, glory will, will thine,
Thine his will-pleased joy, his glory thine.
Who only happy will not happy be,
Unless thee as himself he happy see,
I tremble; and this shaking gives a grace
Unto my singing voice. What? This my place?
I tremble; and this shaking opes my pores,
And thrusts my sluggish humors out of doors.
I tremble; and this shaking makes me catch
My God more fast, in h's faster foulds does catch.
I tremble; and this shaking cleares my wings,
Rouses my spirits, up the speedier brings
To sit among the gods; t'exalt the name
That deignes to Christian creatures by the same.
To sit among the gods, to give receive
Eternal blessings; thus to interweave
My joy inseparably with his glory.
Be all my pleasures hushed with this story.
Admire! Let this still music still my grief,
Till sense supply what is wanting in belief.
For carnal sense is not so far below
My faith, but spiritual may overflow.
To power out mutual blessings, and to be
Most blessed by my blessing; so to see,
It is more blessed to give then to receive;
Honored by him all honor with him leave.
To power out mutual blessings, whilst I lie
Drowned in the fountain; where no sooner I
Cry blessed, but my blessing strait redounds
With millions to my breast; and heaven resounds
With Echoed praises of those beauteous creatures,
Are all in love with one another features.
Spirits spiritualized, rarifide to such
Sublimed simplicity, there is not so much
As the smallest specke of dust, the Atom'st moate,
With 'ts interposed obscurity to floate
Betwixt their light and beauty, God and them.
Their every-way-surrounding glorious stem.
I tremble; and this shaking gives a grace
Unto my singing voice; is this my place?
I hear eternity speak, and say I love
Thee as my self whom no affections move?
I Will be thy crown of everlasting glory,
While thou shall banquet on the endless story
Of all my counsels, and survey the depths,
Highth, breadths, lengths of my er'st-untracted steps:
While thou shall hear my thwarting feet agree,
In The perfect'st set of the pleasant'st melody.
While still perfused in the richest savours
The art fed with kisses e're refreshing favors.
Still lost in admiration of thy bliss,
Thou't find so blessed 'cause s'admir'd it is.
Well, if the master of the feast shall say,
Friend sit up here, shall I dare disobey?
God knows no compl'ments; he is sincerity,
A word's enough where all is realitie.
Mount, mount my soul, and keep upon the winge;
Jehovah see, and Hallelujah sing.
O How my soul's inheaven'd in the sound,
That descants on so beautiful a ground;
See eye, love heart, sing glory, and all accord
To make my life the music of my Lord.
Rejoice my spirits, and all my thoughts within
Ride triumph with the speedy Cherubim.
While death and hell attend my conquering Carre,
Whose glory duskes the brightest glizning Star.
The brightest Sun, in all his Summers pride
'S a cloud of darkness when together eyed.
Thanks! thanks my soul, for when my soul sings thanks,
Then, only then, my joy 'ore flows its banks.
Praise! praise my spirit, for while my spirit sings praise,
Then, only then, I wear the crowning bays.
Bless! bless my heart, for when my heart sings bless,
Then, only then, my heart feels blessedness.
Heart, soul, spirit, spirit, heart, soul, zeal, fire,
Break, breath, burn, blaze, and in his breast expire.
Earth hold me not, O pinnion me no more,
When shall I be whence I shall be no more?
Still hold me earth; for heaven wu'd be no heaven,
Should not my will keep time, and fall in eaven
With his. O could I bless thee here! here were
My heaven; but want both heart and art; how ere
Cannot hold; while some want matter for their words,
I words f'r Immatteriatnesse; yet like the tender Birds,
That in the silent shadow sit forlorn,
Bill, dress their feathers by the dawning morn,
Stand perking, pearing in the blooming Sun,
And teach their light-delighted tongues to run
Their chirping welcomes to its glorious rays;
So do I strive to chatter forth Thy praise.
Praise, praise him soul, I Will never cease to praise;
And when I cry, I Will cry I cannot praise.
Why sorry, but for sin? it is folly, why
For sin but that unthankful praiselesse I?
Praise my petitions, praise him my confessions,
Praise deprecations, praise him intercessions.
And if my tongue cease praise in griefs and fears,
I Will make my tongue recant in praising tears.
In every thing give thanks, for it is his will
That gives me cause to sing, it is well it is ill.
O praise, praise, praise! let me no longer live
Then do my masters business praises give.
Nay life is praise; for then I truly live
When joy, then truly joy when praises give.
The life is best's most like the life above;
Hence I so much Psalme-singing tempers love.
The man is best comes nearest to his End,
Hence I so God-commending men commend.
And should I knit a series of the long'st,
The sad'st complaints, combined with the strong'st,
Pressingst agr'vations, that might wring them close
And hard on the soul; yet praising love breaks loose
Through all, and makes me sing, again and again,
Blessed be the Lord for evermore Amen.
Then shud'st withdraw thee, and I grow feeble, weak
Yet let my heart have strength enough to speak
Thy praises ( --) O give me strength enough
To bless my strength, and I have strength enough.
Should my thanksgiving-force decline, decay
Unto the low'st; still may I see and say,
Thou have a Seed a Generation, they
'L be ever speaking of thy praise, I Will lay
My heart unto their mouth, and while they play
Their heaven-learned descantings, I Will play
The plain-song of a broken contrite heart,
In The ears of Heaven plays the pleasant'st part.
The still, soft, sweet Music; inward-sounding drone,
W'thout which the lowd'st, highest, nimblest tongued is none.
Is worse then none, a groundless, frantic din,
A selfe-exalting, God-assaulting sin.
Provokes his mocked patience, while the zeal
'S not pitched by humility, 't does but squeak and squeale.
But, thine cannot be overwound, for they
While at the highest with the lowest play.
Rise humbled soul, and praise him in the highest,
To which thou art advanced in thy Christ.
O praise! praise! praise! let me not praises give,
But give my self to praises, praising live,
Die, sink, ore-whelm'd, swallowed up, lost, found
Upon the shore of ever-praysing ground.
O how my soul's aflote and smoothly glides
Unto the harbor where my bliss abides!
And what a calm serenitie befriends
The plimmed sails thy spirit swiftly sends
Fleeting along with speedy nimblenesse
To the pleasant Haven of their happiness.
O praise! praise him, for he is worthy praise,
That was before, and is beyond all days.
Praise him, wh' in heaven and earth does what he will,
And whatsoever he will not do is ill.
O praise praise him for he is worthy praise;
Could the mighty Fabric of the creation raise
From nothing, with a word; and govern it,
Consisting of a kind of infinite
Variety of individualls in such measure,
Weight, number, as that in all he would take his pleasure.
In such a wide, a vaste disparitie,
Of motions, a perfect contrariety,
So full! so sweet! so choice a consort played!
All honor, glory, power to him that made
All for his pleasure. And was I made to be
Thy pleasure, mighty God? what could thou see
To please thy self, besides thy self, in me?
O scrue me up to that celestial tone
Whereby thy highest-raised Saints are known;
To bless thee for thy self, though bathed in blood;
How e're I be, to sing, yet thou art good.
Yet thou art good how e're I be, or do.
Do I or no, thy works thy praises show.
Still thou art good, art good, should all the world
But like a tinie-tennis ball be twirld,
Tossed topsie turvey, whirled up and down,
Until 'twere worn to mammocks; still the crown
'S as fast upon thy head as ever; still renown
As due to thee as ever; all the creatures still
Make music, even the wicked'st though against their will.
Sunn, Moon, Stars. Heavens, Floods, Earth, Fire, Snow, Harle Wind,
Praise him, for praise is to fulfill his mind.
Deepes, Dragons, Mountains, Dales, Beast, Birds, Trees, Hills,
Praise him, for praise is to fulfill his wills.
Men, Angels, all his Hosts, one breath conspire
To praise, for praise does all he does require.
My gentle Lute with thy soft touches praise,
Praise him my sollemne-sounding vyoll, praise
My spirit-exciting dance, my nimble song,
Praise. B't stay, my longer-exercised tongue
M' outrun my heart, but most in running long.
Run, run then heart and overtake my tongue;
Run, run apace, redeem thy thankelesse years,
And bathe their memory in thy blessing tears.
Run, run apace; for thou have more to say
Then all the tongues of men and Angels may.
Run, run apace, eternity is at hand
When stinting time no more shall praise withstand.
Time? nay my self, for what-so e're I do,
I may make that sing thankful praises too.
My meat, my drink, my talk, my work, my sleep,
May all in this Commune. Concord keep,
An uniforme well-ordered conversation
Close to the rule that leads unto salvation.
I here is praise indeed, in Deed to praise;
And make my life to sing away my days.
So match my living, that my praysings may not
Be Pearls on Swine, but Jewels on a Saint.
So match my living, that my praysings may
Be stars on Azure, and turn night to day.
And light the world to those supreme ascents
Where dwells the Eternal Substance of contens.
Here shall I safely ever sit and sing,
My soul rejoices In my Savior King.
O what a twitch this In does give my spirit?
And screws it up far far beyond my spirit?
My soul's In God, In God my Savior
My soul is safe, and fears not the behavior
Of this nor the other world. My soul's at ease
In God my Savior; my soul does please
It self In him, my pleasures meet in one,
My joy is full, my joy is overflowne,
And knows no bounds, while thus my diving soul,
Environed with infinity does roll
Me all In all, and I am in my God
As In my Element; while they are odd,
And Hetrogeneous that are in, not of,
Leave, breath, have being in him, and yet are off,
Stand at the farth'st distance deadliest defiance,
Are breathless livelesse have no welbeing, 'cause no alliance.
O who w'd not love thee! fear thee! praise thee Lord!
Whose just-wise-holy ways such marv'ls afford!
Who can but loose himself in blessed blessing wonder
In The All-container! So nigh so far asunder!
As creatures in, but not, as not renewed;
Degenerate peccant humors, that are spewed
From's mouth. Are rather On then In; but we
Are heart in heart, unto eternity.
Not as the water in the vessel; but
As water turned to the wine wherein it is put.
So are we one in one, right blessed turn?
That gives such strength, life, spirits, while Thou't run
As unallay'd to thousand generations
Made happy in this iminutable mutation.
Change, change apace my soul, power out thy self
The best is last, when thou art all himself.
Though not all of himself; whose infinite sweet
In every point of timelesse time,
And boundless bounds does meet,
Himself made Thine.
^remble; and this shaking makes me catch
^ly hold more fast, in h's faster foulds does catch.
^e? what am I thou shudst vouchsafe to hear
^y praises? mine? but, for to give an ear!
Oh! that is to give thine heart, thine hand, thine all,
Who have no part more or less principal.
Who have no part at all; but wholly art
^h' possession of the selfe-dispossed heart.
^ine? cud'st n't have made a child of any stone
To bed thy bosom? but must I be one?
(...)! stonier I! rebel'd against thy grace,
And spat my venom in thy sacred face!
What saw in me to have me in thy thoughts
Of life, the worlds foundation yet unwrought?
Must I be one! how sweet a trembling joy
Runs through my veins? and kindly does employ
Me in a fearful love? must I be one?
^e then be Thine should all the world be none.
^! I be one! I Will then be none alone,
But I Will be thine, should all the world be none.
O bless! bless! bless my soul! still bless thy Bliss.
What sweeter work unto my soul then this?
Or what more acceptable unto thee?
Thou love it, and I love it, then ever be
Thou blessed of ever-ever-blessing me,
Of ever blessing me, ever blessed be.
O bless! when wu'd I cease? when thou shall cease
To be; then, not till then I Would blessing cease.
O bless! were I in Hell yet cud I bless
I were in heaven; but I cannot bless.
I cannot, cannot bless; is this to bless?
To call thee blessed? while think nothing less?
Or can I think I think it while not part
With all for Thee, Thou only blessed? while my hear^
'S not wholly given up into thine hands,
TO be melted, molded, fashn'd by thy commands?
TO be cast into a full conformity
With thee, if thought Thee the sole felicity.
Blessed art thou O Lord! the art good and
Do good, no unaccustomed song, but stand
Not deeds, thoughts, words at mutual defiance?
Thought I't, wud not there be a quick compliance
With all thy wills? wud not I have to know,
Press hard to learn thy statutes? the ways thou't go
To meet with Thine, thou only blessed goodness?
VVu'd not I still be in thy presence? Oh! the woodnes?
The wild wandering madness, has seduced my soul
Since first I turned my back upon Thee, to proule
And filtch an independent blessedness, whence grew
My aye-depending misery, while fondly threw
Me from my Eden, where the all-creating spirit
VValke't with his fleshie workmanship. But wu't blessed spirit
Return again? and be Emmanuell?
VVu't teach my heart to call Thee good? wut dwell
There? make 't thy temple? hence help me breath petitions?
I see thy goings here? the glorious exhibitions
Of the invisible? flesh spirit! God man! heaven earth!
A marriage song of everlasting mirth.
And must I sing 't! who since thou took'st me in,
And trim'st we for thy self, weedest my sin,
^lantedst thy grace, the door wide open hurled
And made my heart the through fair of the world,
Thou made thy garden! this then the pully be,
With greater swing to clap me close to Thee.
The pully be to make me stick so close,
The greatest pull may never make me loase.
But when I hear the stillest voice behind,
And hear it ecco'd by thy written mind
^ay, thy beloved's here, strait open I fly,
And blessed who knows what means He and I.
This opening shuts me in the fastest close
While in h's revealed loves my self I loose.
O how this smiling favor quite prevails!
^isolves me all in tears! and then exhales
^' ascending soul to that refining Sun,
Resolves me into it self. O turn heart turn,
And never never teturne. Thus is begun,
Consummate glory when I Am all undone.
Undo, undo apace, dissolve, melt, run,
Thy only undoing is the art not undone.
Draw out, shed, shed abroad thy self in praises,
Leave not a drop behind, let all turn praises.
But what am I thou shud'st put such a thing
Into my heart, so cordially to sing
The glories of the God against whom I have been
A constant belcher of blaspheming sin!
What thought I, spoke I, did I, but in all
My cursed life did Thee accursed call!
And must I bless! I bless! Shall I sink? O!
Hold me! Hold me in this blessed pleasure. So,
So may I over sink and sing! how sweet
Sweet sound the praises in these depths! O meet,
Meet me a diving; plundring through my heart
'S false-bottome, thorough whatsoever wu'd part
Me from Thee. Catch me in those lasting arms,
Whose closings are a close of warbled charms.
Charms warble still; and shake me up and down,
Until you rest me with my fixed Crown.
Rest warble still; for still this is my rest,
To see to sing my worthl^snesse so blessed.
Blessed spirit shake, shake on, loosen my soul
From this false world; break down, bear through the foul
False bottom of my heart, still more to meet
With truth in the inward parts; still more to greet
Those peace-heaven-sounding wellcommings; those sure
And never-over-burthened arms; those pure
Those pure embraces, whose harmonious close
Shall bless my blessing soul with full repose.
Thus may my rising falling heart in praying praise,
My falling rising heart, sing on my days.
Steadfast in joys discoursing that vast distance
That Is swallowed up in an unite persistance.
And wu't thou me forsake?
Just now I saw thee. Oh draw, faine'd overtake.
Cud, cud I but believe.
Were I in Hell, yet should I nothing grieve.
I wait, trust, walk with thee.
Revive, in peace, shall never confounded be.
REtire sad thoughts into your inmost Cells,
There view the Hell of Hells,
Thy sinne-foul'd soul.
In black flames howl
Those never-lightned hearts,
Wh'in this their day have n't done their studious parts
In their false purifying, while hope
Has Judah's fountain door kept open.
Return glad thoughts and mount the utmost bounds
Of The boundless heavens. There Is he.
Yea he is here,
The word is near.
And hence my joy redounds,
To see the Ruddy White in him and me.
The watery blood so pure, so just,
To white, to quench my pitthy lust.
--
HAng all these Puritans.
A Puritan, what is that? an Hipocrite.
Nay hold there man, for so thou do but fit
The noose for thine own neck. Do n't thou profess
The service, fear of God? yet what do less?
From thine own mouth the unrighteous servant the art:
Condemned for a Puritan; wu'd thou were
So happy to own the honor of the name,
Who that description can not but disolaime.
And say he is no Hipocrite; then sincere;
I there it is, the object of thy jeere.
-- I tell thee man,
Thou art an Atheist or a Puritan.
Within my heart the wicked's wickedness cries,
There is no fear of God before his eyes.
Within his heart the fool has madly said
There is no God, why should I be afraid.
Selfe-cozening soul, did see the curious eye
Thy bosom thoughts did at a distance pry,
How dared thy fond affections say within,
There is no God for speculative sin.
So, say there is no God: for he is his name,
Whose vengeance tears the tearers of the same;
Heart-searching and sinne-visiting he is,
Deny it and deny thy eternal bliss.
Can count thy pastime-words but passing wind?
Thy irreforming tongue shall shortly find
A word no scruple; but a tun of lead
To sink thy soul to an Infernal dread.
Then shal't thou see each minute on the scoare,
What thought, spoake, acted, while thou shall implore
That great tribunal, with Lord, Lord, for all
Thou'st done i'th'flesh, though minced n're so small.
Presumptuous wretch! thoud'st, thought there were a God,
Run trembling up and down at every nod.
What art thou to the world, that is but a drop
A dust to Him, that makes the mountains hop,
And skip like Lambekins, with his Earthquak hand.
But thou't go fair and soft, though he command
Thee fly, (for so does love) He who graspes the winds
In The hollow of his hand; the swelling Ocean binds
Up with a word; here, just here stay thy waves.
But lawless man how proudly he behaves
Himself? he stinted? he a strickt, precise
Fool? no, for he that is, is only wise.
Call'st him thy Master while thou can expect
To have thy servant show thee more respect?
Thou't bid him come, and go and stay, and so,
He must; bid's God? thou answerest Him, thou't go,
Thou't come, thou't stay, when, where he will; provided
His will fall in with thine; but if divided,
Thou Art not so silly a Puritan to displease
Thy self for him; but He must serve thy ease.
Or if thou part'st with it, it is but with less, for more,
TO avoid what is endless take what is quickly over.
So still thy selfe's thy end, thy God. O what
'S the worm a doing that assaults its God!
Whose every word is pure. All linck't together,
And woe t'him dares the least, he all does, sever.
Every word of God is pure; and woe to him dare,
Make them their jeere that make it all their care.
The pure-in-heart see Him-their Purity;
The impure their place; who them-Him vilify.
O what is the worm a doing? how every bone
'S an Aspen leaf? to see it climb the Throne
Whose footestoole's all the kingdoms of the world!
By whom such station-quitting spirits were hurled
To that unbottom'd pit; prepared is
For all such enviers; Whose vexation's this,
They never shall see what they are vexed to see,
Men truly Holy only Happy be.
Poor childish fools! wu'd have they know not what,
Heaven they wu'd have, but Heaven they wu'd not.
Cry out, braule, fight with all that will not confess
It theirs, yet when they see it love nothing less.
Through the morrall-vertue-swept yard, through the porch
Bedect with formal duties, may approach
To the very door; but they are too good to knock,
To wait; and if the least glimpse slip through the lock,
These light-abhorring Owls wink, wish their loss;
If heaven be purity, they would rather their dross
E're-scorching ne're-consuming flames inherit,
Then pass the fire of the purifying spirit,
Indeed what wud'st thou there? Heaven'd be but thy
Hell. What wud'st thou see, who here do shut thine eye
Against the God-revealing light! and open
Thy mouth? or, 's this thy purifying hope?
Accursed curre that barkest at the Moon
That but reflects, how wu't against the Sun?
Or what wud'st hear? a crew of simple Saints
With just such puritanicke Angels chants.
They Will never have done, n're linne their singing Psalms,
Unto their God for their victorious palms,
None 's still; or thinke'st while thou wind'st up thy dull,
Thy jarring heart, thou't make to wait so full
A set of fore-well-tuned instruments,
Jumps all in one compleater of concents,
Contents God? while bless that dreadfull-joyfull name
That brought their blessed minds in heavenly frame.
I tell thee man.
Thou art a Pagan or a Puritan.
Thou may a Jesus, but did Jesus know,
These Hell-devis'd revilings dare thou throw
Upon, nay thou wud'st be, his Image; did
Thy faith once see him, whom thy God has hid
From blinded eyes while with an ayrie name
He lulls thee dead asleep, to wake in flame.
But Christ is life; and so he is to all
Whom he shall with h's talitha cumi call.
A virtuall, power-exhibiting command
Reares thee a virgin; on new resolves to stand.
To walk the way of his Commandment,
To keep thee true, loyal, chaste, pure, innocent.
From selfe-world-devill pollutions; all for Him,
And so thou wud'st did thou believe in Him.
Some fancied I doll of thy wanton brain,
That will thee in thy minnion-lusts maintain;
Will wink at smaller faults; no great ado
Will make, shud'st harbor some few grosser too.
Will let thee vaunt it in thy pride, and gad
About thy eye's and flesh's lust, be glad
Of The dregs of spirit-exhausted loves, the leavings
Of The marrow-sucking world, the sad bequeathings
Of The banckrupt-soule, now hurried out of doors
To pay the debts of '^s ne'r-acquittable scores.
I here is thy Jesus; presumptuous-desperate wretch
Dare from that sovereign name such venom fetch
To kill thy soul; but for that spotless Lamb;
Who so his own to metamorphize came,
To teach them by a secret sympathy
To follow what by occult quality
He makes them know, his from a stranger's voice;
To make them run unto the breast so choice,
And with their bleating rethoricke bespeake
The simple milk that makes them strong of weak.
To teach them keep his undefiled steps;
Not dare to tread awry for each-hand deaths;
At's first smallest, stillest whistle strait to come;
To stand before their Coate-bereavers dumb;
To watch the Wolves come clothed in their skin,
The light-like Angel, selfe-deceiving sin;
To graze no pasture but His wholesome word;
To fetch no salve but what his side afford's.
To become silly that he might make them wise,
TO abase themselves he might them highly prize;
Not live to themselves; but Him an'th'common good;
And when he calls to meekely shed their blood.
I here is my Christ; of whom thou art afraid
To have too much; lest so thou shudst be made
To be too wise, pure, just, too far from hell;
For fear of Heaven fear to do too well.
Nor car'st indeed for this nor that; Earth, earth
Is thy dear home of sinne-rejoycing mirth.
But if must needs away, you are more content
To be where Angels sing, then devils torment.
And yet were there, thou would be tormented with
Their singing. Lo whither brought by thy belief.
Cud'st thus believe did thou believe him just
And faithful in his sayings? away thou would thrust
Thy heavenly joy-prevaricating lust.
There is a faith that does not love to trust.
Nor Christ to trust that faith; who sees the heart
Him never saw with all for him l'not part.
Can thou pursue thy honor, pleasure, gain,
And not believe all this beliefe's in vain?
Thoud'st hate, loathe, friends, self, All, did ever know
But what it meant to have a God to woo.
Thoud'st do, suffer, come, run, fly, did ever prove
The powerful sweet of all-commanding love.
Thoud'st live, die, by, for, love, did ever spy
The feasting beauties of that lively eye.
Poor soul! for ever past my pity, if on
Thou hold'st thy course. I know you not, be gone
Thou wicked worker; thou never livd'st above;
For what acquaintance? Thou my love? my dove?
My undefiled loving dove? what thou
Sit billing moaning with me? flyed'st thou
To the purest houses of my spirits resort?
Thou m' friend? my Spouse? we walk and talk? we sport
Our selves in hidden loves? Thou careful how
To keep me as thy life? And absent, how
To take the speediest ways to find me? Thou
In a sweet trembling at a syllable? Thou
Unlade thy bosom secrets in my breast?
Thence Counsels furnish? take thee to my rest?
Thou jealous of mine honor? did Thy thoughts
Run on my beauties day and night, that naught
Cud please thee else? thy feet in the pleasant ways
Of my commands? did count them so? How says says
Thy heart, and they? is this thy holy faith?
Clean fear? God 'ndwelling love! Now, now what says
Thy conscience? Did thy heart er'e feel a dagger? and yet
Survive the thorough-strucken wound? and yet
Thy-heart-still-killing smart survive the hope
Of Cure? this daggers it kills heart and hope,
With minute mortal stabbes of quick despair,
Myriads of endless living dyings are.
-- I tell thee man,
The art not a man, or art a Puritan.
A beast, a dog, a hog, a what-he-will,
Whose Jesu-countermands thy lusts fulfill.
-- I tell thee man,
Thou art a Devil or a Puritan.
There are but two unelimentary spirits,
Good, bad, God, the divill; and justly he demerits
T'be counted th'latter who will not be the first.
Who scoffs at the blessed spirit to be the accursed.
Bad in the extreme, who wu'd be in the mean
Of absolute good; who wu'd no nearer come
To God then needs, t'be cast in the farthest room
Of utmost darkness, there to learn too late
The remotest distance of the middle state
Of wilful neutralists, a semblance make
Of friends to heaven when Tophets part they take.
HOw now mad spark! what? pride thee in thy wit?
When pride's the Principle folly? and what is it?
What is thy wit, when it is at the best.
And worth the name? but judgment neately dressed?
The wit that is made the judgments recreation,
This play the ground while that the variation.
That made the sauce unto a weaker brain,
That else wu'd of the stronger meat complain.
And what is judgment but a childish thought,
When to the full'st maturitie it is brought?
What all our parts, but parts? and those received?
And in a moment may be quite bereaved.
The best are bad; for else they never cu'd
Be taken away; but are the parts of that good?
That only good, complete? then not our own.
So then who has the great'st, the best, has none;
But what in Him; but what in Him we see,
We see it, we feel't in humbling humility.
Well, say thou saydst, thou thought 't were somewhat well?
Why not confess his gracious gifts, as free
As of the ungracious retributions tell?
By that, that humbly thankful thou may be,
By this thankfully humble; be sincere,
Nor shame nor praises need'st thou then so fear.
I Have sat down, and council held;
I cannot fight I cannot build;
And yet I cannot but fight and build.
The war, the building's great;
Great wants do threate.
My strength my stock is small,
Is none at all.
What shall I do? I Will do thy word;
A Tool in this, that hand a sword.
My Christ will help, and wealth afford.
My strength my stock's not small;
For they are all.
The building war shall thrive,
While he is alive.
Here then I Will minutely repair;
Nay hence not budge a foot, my care
'Sonl' he who' h's life so freely'd spare
Me, and I not fetched, but spare
Such gainefull care?
Such life, such strength whereby
It Is I am I?
Ungrateful sloth had rather fall, and die,
Then stretch his bosomed hand to' the life so nie!
THe world's uncertain, and my knowledge too;
But I desire to be certified
Of nothing, but Christ and him crucisied.
Christ, from this head, all goods all grace convay;
And on him crucified all ills, sins lay.
So see my all, while see my Christ:
My evils on, my goods in Christ.
So has my foot a sure place,
Nor will I longer wandering trace
The world, to find a settling stay,
For I have one, and that is my way.
War, peace; life, death; A harbor and a shelfe.
The death of death. The Image of himself.
The omnipotent Prophet and the Priestly King,
That Learnt Obedience by his Suffering.
A sacrificing sacrifice. Simplicity
Lodged in a house of clay. Omnipotency
Sensible of humane frailties. The Lord of life
Slain. The God of glory undergoing the strife
Of vilifying tongues. The administrator
Of heaven and earth administered to, the Creator
Poor, relieved by the Creature. Aeternall happiness
Afflicted! --! stupendous godliness!
Great mystery! and they that think it small,
As do all worldlings, they know naught of all.
God manifest in the flesh! heaven dwell in earth!
Descend in hell! O how divine's my mirth
When I can in my flesh my earth my hell
See Him! See in my flesh my earth my hell
This spirit this heaven. O spiritualize me more,
Him more to approve whom Angels so explore!
Adore! A God poor heathen gospells; the God to whom
The sensual sense-refined world does come,
Drawn by believing hearts. Unbonnded glory
Caught up to glory! what created oratory
Can reach, can teach these wonders so sublime!
Profound! The celestial theme of timelesse time.
How humble should I be cu'd I still bow
My self to pry into this mystery! How
Heighthned, enlarged, cu'd I still soar aloft!
In this so broad, so long, deep-heighth to be taught.
Genesis 1.31. 2 Cor. 3.18.
THou Lord made only good my object be;
It Is only good then I should see.
But I wu'd ill, and ill now only see,
It Is only sin then I Would not be.
But I Would be Christ; when shall I only be?
It Is only God then I shall see.
Thou Lord madst only good my object be,
It Is only good then I should see.
But I wud ill, and ill now only see.
It Is only I, then I Would not be.
But I Would be thee, when shall I only be,
It Is only thee then I shall see.
You Are only good and I wu'd see
All but as spots to draughts of Thee.
All but as spots to draughts of Thee
Who art the only good I see.
The world's the Image of thy Image word,
The mire sin, that Satan blur'd
Man with, the stain strait through th'Creation crept,
But this untouched him self has kept;
And h's glorious-face-resplendent glass has left
To daily dress me, quite bereft
Of sight by that foul filth; His Spirits breath
Upon this Mirror quicks my death
Struck-eyes. And now since such a foulness in
My fairest I see, I Will never lin
To eye, to pry, to dress, redress me by
This God-conforming Theory.
Why should I envy grace? insult over sin?
Are not the Saints sins mine? my graces theirs?
All sinn's in one, in one all grace, we in
Them both: he only well himself compares,
Whose humble, thankful, watchful soul makes true,
One flesh one spirit, one Adam old and new.
THou art. Thou only art. Man's but a But,
An adj'ctive, accident, a what-Thou-wut,
Thou art, art only excellent; to be
It Is that, it is that is the only excellency.
Be It all my business, to get more Thee
That being more Thee I may more be.
More be in, more to be
To Thee.
Pass world along, with all thy pompous train.
Go ruffling in thy pride, thy richest show;
Drawn in Thy stateliest Chariot; you are too low,
Too base an object for my high disdain.
Contemn the world? I wud, were worth contempt.
Or give my indignation footing, or
On what shall trample? tell me of somewhat for
My vilifying? or how w'lt cause more contempt, then tempt?
All the world is less then nothing, none is, but
Who is I Am; and by whom every thing
Is what it is; they 're not then rich that bring
The world in possession; since when it is got it is not.
I De have the World at will And yet I care
No more for it then to buy me food and frize.
I de have't the obedient tool, I de make to rear
My building soul; and when my Master sees
It meet, lay't by, and take me to my hands,
Faith freer works the less the sense withstands.
And this is all I care for the careful world,
To keep it by my hand, and from my heart.
To have 't an inferior help, away to hurle't
When told here is a work of curious art,
Derides the bunglings of unskilful sense;
A heaven-silenc'st active patience.
THe World's a straw, through which I draw
My Canaan-milke's sweet nourishment.
But if it be taken away, I gain
The wider draughts of deep content.
While he thinks fit, I Will suck through it;
But if he speak but half a word,
A way it goes, and well he throws
That has in the steed such store conferred.
DId not I fear Thee Lord,
The world has not the cord
Cu'd bind this strong desire
From what it does require.
So vehement yet so stayed
'S the motion 'ts not afraid
Of Hell. Only thy Love
Maintains the fight, and proves
Of power to withhold
What else were uncontrol'd.
And yet the fight is sore,
And yet I cannot give ore.
O were I not so free
Or had more liberty.
And yet if neither must,
You Are very good and just.
Even this too is for good,
The more the selfe's withstood
The more the spirit is
That crowns with victories.
Good, very good are all thy ways
Thou only wise, and he who stays
His marking mind thereon, shall know
What loving kindness thou do show.
THou heart-rein-searching, spirit-pondering God,
Turn mine eyes inward, teach my head to plod;
To look to what thou look, the maine, the man,
The soul, the self; for when I gadding ran
So often abroad, the divill he gat him home
And made my wanton heart the teeming womb
Of stolen pleasure; stoale the word and sowed instead,
A world of tares a world of grief do breed.
Still may I watch, my yessell keep sincere;
Th'infusion else corrupts though never so clear.
And yet if thou dear God wu't please to come
Into my heart, my heart'l sincere become,
Though never so foul. And long'nough may 't contrive
Ways how to cleanse it, and to the utmost strive,
And all in vain; unless that foulness cu'd
Make fair. My sorrows, watchings, cares, what good
Can all from him who of himself is all
Pollution? VVu't hear the humble call?
O come, come, come away and do not stay
Until thou come, and then for ever stay.
Sure there is somewhat of thee here, so longs
To see thee, while my spirits in such throngs
Come forth to welcome thee: nay a'nt I all
Lovely in my Christ unto thy sight? yet shall
My black abide? still will I sweetly groan
To have thy coming till I Am to mine own.
Then come blessed day, come, inside outside turn,
And try each thought by the all discerning Sun.
How humbly then sincerity shall smile!
When proud Hipocrisies unpainted guile
Shall show her devill-like face! More humble were
I, I must needs become the more sincere.
Cause I have more of the God-of-puritie
Sincerity, holiness; and while I spy
More beauteous glories, the obstacles more removed,
He needs must be more humbly beloved.
Power out the precious ointment of thy name,
That sumptuous box enriched with all is divine,
Upon my wounded soul, so heal the same.
Allay its dolours, make its surface shine,
Smooth 'ts rigor's, clear its rust, soften its hard,
Make dullness nimble, mend what pride has mard.
Perfume the room thy guests does entertain,
Free't from those brimstone fumes, o'ne overcame
My tender Virgin-thoughts, had not I taken
A scent of life to life; so aptly came
With rescuing redolencies, O open 't wide,
Powr't freely forth, thou have enough beside.
O how these welcome Savours steal my heart!
And make me shrug for joy at this depart!
O how this pawn e'ne makes me wish more hearts,
That I might feel such more desired departs.
O how I love these sweets my sweet! O how,
My pleased midriffe trims my smiling brow!
O how my humble thoughts revived aspire,
Borne up with spirits to their high desire!
How how my unstraitned soul does boundless fly,
Its gazing circuits through the highest high.
Where am I now? am I a man?
I see, I see, but cannot say.
Mine eyes have borrowed all they may,
Of tongue, of all, do what I can,
My assembled spirits cannot yet devise
To tell my tongue the pleasure of mine eyes.
Stupendous sights! O cu'd I read
The world a lecture of those joys
The cleere-eyd souls so richly feed,
How they would indigne these cheating toies!
And hourly watch at wisdoms gate a glance
Might open their eyes, and thence their souls advance!
Transcendent sounds! O too too rare
'S this! Nay, too gross these carnal ears.
O tones! O tunes! what compass beare's
This stately consorts curious Aires!
Their strings are true, high, wound, incessant play,
Musicians skillful, play well, well they may.
Pure, understanding, zeal! responds
To God, Christ, h's Spirit. Endless strains
Of multiplied bliss! detaines
The blessed souls in boundless bonds!
But if such sights! such sounds! such distance brings!
O what is the midst, where Glory shines, Grace sings!
O Cud I keep me in this Option! I
Wu'd wish to live because I wish to die.
How like a little God I wu'd converse
With men! let down a while here to rehearse
Those joys above! till I had drawn up more,
Harbored their Hearts upon thy Haven's shore.
He only lives, wh' enthroned In's mansion, can
Yet condescend to sejourne with, for, man.
He only lives who in his Jesus lives,
But he so lived who h's life to, if for, gives.
How he derides his fears, his cares, his grief,
That seek to have his so-much-sought relief!
O how he pleasure's pleasure's in his pain
That but contrives more treasure to his gain!
Christ is his life, his death is more of Christ.
His joy's now high, but then shall be at the highest.
Now ebbes, now flows, then an e're-flowing tide,
Over flows, and swallows all the woes of pride.
Morn, even, eclipse, now; then, a constant no one
The Sun lights to the earth-uninterposed moon.
O draw this earthy Curtain, draw, that darkes
M' enlightened eyes from their beloved sparks.
Those lovefull beams of dreadful Majesty,
In whose exchanged rays my life does lie.
O how I strive! I wrestle to be rid
Of half my self stand's in'ts own light! but bid
Thou do my stay, and I Will obey,
Till thou shall call, who art my all,
Whose will's my heaven,
My own the leaven,
Sowes all my sweet, thine sweets my sour,
Makes me unwish my still-wish't hour.
COme flying on thy spicie mountains, on
Thy saving hills; and so convey along
Those opening odours, kindly work upon
M' obstructed soul; unlocke it from among
These streights, and let my spirits out of prison,
To praise thy name among thy second risen.
These meditations, prayers, thanks, confessions,
Thus peec'd, patcht, interrupt, when shall they end,
In endless praise? what now by dark expressions,
These volumes of thy word and works commend
Me leaf by leaf, b' one, clear, entire view,
May the Synopsis of thy Face me show.
Now see I one in all, then all in one;
So may I see, what is not all is none.
SIR,
No longer (after my long Vacation in my travells) to frustrate you of your
desire, though of force I must of the thing desired.

Fear I conceive may not unfitly be distinguished into a fear of aversion and
a fear of adhesion; of turning from and cleaving to; and this may well be
stupendous, astonishing, overcomming; in respect of the immensitie of the
goodness of its object, such a fear as may be said to fall upon the soul,
and make the soul fall under it, in a sweet God-injoying submissive humilitle.
Such a fear as one may be said to be In the sear of the Lord; to be plunged
in, swallowed up of those great and glorious apprehensions. This being both the
effect and the cause of uniting the heart to God. And hence is it a fear of
such great joy and strong confidence. The soul thus brought into God by love
that is stronger then death, and faith that interested in the power, wisdom
goodness of God can do all things, by this so near approach to, and
communion with him, discovering more of his fullness, and in that of the
creatures vanity. And hence are they so inseperably linckt together, men of
courage-fearing God-hating covetousness; fearing the Lord-and Delighting
Greatly in his Commandments. It is rashness and madness that proceeds not
from this fear; it is baseness and pusillanimitie that arises not from this
courage. The joy is sadness that is not accompanied with this fear; and
grief the more kindly it is the more it has of this delight. For that other
of aversion, whether respecting moral or natural evils, it is either a bare
and simple, or a mixed and applicative a ear, a fear of contraction, or of
dilatation of the spirit, a mere withdrawing and flight, or an aggressive
resistance and repulsion. And either of them is convenient pro re nata, as
warranted by the consideration of the thing, time, place, person, etc. For
morrall evils, it is a fear of absolute resistance, because they never
consist with the will of God quoad nos; for natural it is a respective
resistance, and flying, so far as they shall appear to be his will or not,
as we are called or not called to them. So that there may be a fear of these
evils, well consisting with a willingness too and desire of them, as it is
said of Christ, he was heard in all that he feared, and yet again, I come to
do thy will as it is written of me a body have thou prepared me, etc. The
spirit may be willing when the flesh is weak. There may be and that lawfully
an abhorrencie from evil as evil, and yet a will ingnesse to it as the will
of God, and therefore good. Father let this cup pass from me if possible, but
not my will but thy will be done. The prayer of him who himself alone in his
own person so freely drunk up that so unimaginably terrible cup of the
Aeternall wrath, that should have been the portion of an everliving death to so
many millions of souls. And certainly could all the calamities of the world
that were ever, are, or ever shall be suffered from Adam to the youngest of his
sons, steeped like so much Gall and Wormwood in one cup till all their
ill-savoured taste were extracted from them, they could never make a draught so
intensively bitter, so large a draught of bitterness, as that which was
presented to him, accepted of him, prayed for by him. To which he comes, brings
his body, as a Voluntier, as ready, as prepared for The Service, The Suffering.
So in deed should this fear of aversion be subordinate to, fall in with, and
be comprehended in, as part of, as coming from and tending to that of
adhesion. I therefore turning from evils, because pro sua virili, of their
own nature, it would turn me from God; but such being the never never
sufficiently admired power, wisdom and goodness of God that he can turn
even the greatest evil to the greatest good, the soul stands in aequilibrio
with a kind of willing unwillingnesse, or willing willingness disposed to it.
So as it may be said not to fear them, but God; fearing them because of him,
and him in, by and through them; (as it may be said to love not the creature
but God) they being but as foyles and set offs for the further illustrating the
otherwise not so apprehensible Glory. So make the soul cleave the closer to
him and gather more strength from him. So these fears differing not in their
being and nature, but in the manner of action; both being the fear of God, now
acting ad intra, now ad extra, now making good its primary object, now evil
its secondary. Christ, upon whom were the chastisements of our peace, whose
stripes has purchased us the spirit of a sound and healthy mind, who was
troubled for our ease and tranquillity; that we in him possessed of his
fathers alsufficiencie might be of an untroubled mind, having thus, like that
unparellel'd Queen to her impoysoned husband, sucked out the venom, virulencie
and malignitie of our fears, that naturally fill us with disturbance,
distractions, evill-creating and evill-nourishing conceits, over studious, and
over burdening preventions. Their deadly quality and overmastering power, thus
drawn away, and only so much left as is within the strength of inherent and
continually supervenient grace, and may by it be kept at an under, subdued, and
worke't out daily to the further manifesting the power of God in us and by us,
as well as upon us. The more then we prevail against this distempering fear,
the more is our convalescencie, the greater our recovery of that happy harmony
that was between our affections before they were untuned in their fall. Every
affection being so far good as it holds its correspondency with the other,
and all as they tend to their perfection, action. Good is the grief the fear
that after helps. A wary, circumspective, deliberating, confultive
prudentiall, providentiall fear. And to this purpose was it an answer well
worthy its Author, that Turkish Terror that even-incredibly valiant Scanderbeg
to the precipitate and unadvised advise of one of his Captains, It is good to
fear all that may be feared, that so indeed we may fear nothing. And such a,
and but such a fear is that which is becoming a Christian. Of whom there is
nothing more unworthy then base derecting unmanning (and for so much)
unchristianizing fear. God having ex consulto, and out of a gracious
forefight, left our enemies subdutos and expugnatos, though not funditus
stratos; brought under, overcome, though not utterly subverted; that, that in
nothing we might be terrified, this, that in nothing we might be secure,
lasche, remiss, dull, blunt; but might still have them as Coticulas, as
whetstones to our mettle, and animositie; as those on whose fall and ruin we
may be raised to an higher pitch of an unreachable and undaunted spirit. As it
was well counseled by that wise Statist for the sparing of Carthage from an
utter demolition, for the keeping in heart of the Roman valor, that wu'd else
languish in the want of exercise. And God sometimes (like that dedemeanure of
Edward the third to the young Prince at the battle of Cresey) withdrawes
himself as it were, and stands aloof of, at a convenient distance, on the
hills of his salvation, environed with his auxiliary troops; and thence viewes
us in the valley, how we fight, how we are matched, how we quit our selves with
the strength already received, without a more extraordinary recreut, and
suffers us often to be brought to hard stresses, pressing exigences and almost
inextricable streights; yea to the very jaws of death, yea to be swallowed up
of death; that living and dying Conquerours (like that late-and ever-famous
Swead) he may in a more special manner share to us with himself the honor of
the day; may demonstrate ours in his own glory; That we are the Sons of
such a Father, and he the Father of such Sons; That we should be so honored to
be made the instruments of his power, and he to be the Maker of such
instruments. Now the fear that thus strengthens us in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, and makes us stand fast, and quit our selves like Men in
Christ Jesus, that works up the soul to such noble and Princely
achievements, that all sordid and earth-bred-feares fall below it as Lucifer
before that pure and spotless Light; This is The fear, The fear of the Lord.
Which since it is a grace, and therefore supernatural, must as all other
graces being homogenous be conducible to the rest, and all to an active and
ready performance of the good pleasure of God, So far therefore as it
turmoyles, perplexes, casts of the hooks, and makes the soul that it is not
in a fit posture to turn and wind any way with the first significations of
the divine command, so far as it is not a fear of furtherance to, but of
hinderance from, our duty, so far is it not a fear of God; not a fear that
draws us to him, but as all our own fears, from him. And so is it
extravagant and wandering out of the way of those inseparable companions the
graces, that all jointly convey the soul to a more strict, close, and intimate
fellowship with its God. It will therefore be great wisdom to keep this kind
of fears (so far as merely concerning us and the evils) from our heart, and
seat it in the head; that it might not take hold of us, but we of it; we act
and command that, not that us; that it may be as a Sword in our hand to defend
us, and not as one at our heart to offend us; that while the heart is carried
on with the fullest gale of animositie and courage, boarne up to the bravest
and highest resolves of a magnanimous spirit, the head may wisely plot, and the
hands seasonably act. That we may undertake this fear as a voluntary work, an
expedient injunction, and not be overtaken by it as a mere natural and
necessitating affection. But thus supernaturaliz'd spiritualized we do, we
suffer, with delight all the wills of God; looking on them as designs, as
ordinances, wherein our good is inviolably interwoven with the most high glory.
So that the horse should not more neigh to the battle, nor the soldier shout
at the warning Piece, then the heaven-animated spirit summoned to the
Almighty-might-glorifying encounters, springs forth with a nimble and
cheerful alacrity. And certainly there is nothing can guard us better
against base and misbeseeming fears, then the unspeakable, unconceiveable
peace that rules in the heart, that is ruled by the fear, that is moved by the
faith of God. There is nothing that carries up the heart to a more elevated
pitch of courage and confidence, then a selfe-diffident humility; a careful
serving of Gods providence in the use of all good means, with a well-grounded
and full reliance on him alone, above and when he pleases without means. And
undoubtedly what ever the self conceited world may think, the most
God-fearing, the most-mortified, the most-meekned-humbled-soule is fortified
with the truest, with the only true courage: because he only is with God the
only sound ground of confidence. And he has, he only has, and that worthily
the name of a generous man, of a gentleman, who is the complete, the
accomplished man; furnished with all virtuous qualifications, though never so
seemingly different. He whose gentle, mild, selfe-debasing, courteous,
debonnairete is armed with the most invincible impregnable prowess and valor,
commanded and drawn forth by a judicious conducture. So the several
denominations of the Latin and English, meet well; well couched in and
accompanied with that primary and all including virtue, in that one word of the
French, un Preud home, importing (as one may gather from their use of it) a man
discreet and wise, a man of fortitude and prowess, of a sweet and gracious
comportment, a man of honesty, faithfulness, integrity, rondeur of mind.
All virtue is of choice. And where all is not chosen none is chosen. To suffer
in any case, upon any terms, is necessity not patience, meakishnesse not
meeknesses a flegmaticke dullness, a stoicall stupiditie, not a heaven-taught
compositure of spirit. Neither can the intermission of the act argue the
privation of the habit: and though the world count them sheepish moapish; etc.
because they are the quiet of the land that walk softly in the humility of
their soul, yet present them with a fitting object, and see whether they do
not give it suitable entertainment, the same command, the same spirit, having
wrought in the same heart, all requisite graces; the manifestation only of
either accommodated to a fit occasion, and drawn forth by a prudent
observation. And since they know not their Genius, no marvel they hold so
little friendship with them, whose foundation is acquaintance. Little do they
think a Chrisitian is such a one, (as such a one he is if not unlike himself)
as can bring the Drum and Trumpet in consort with the Lute and Violl, or could
thence gather what they are like to find, he can make Music of all things. As
well of the most harsh and hidious terrors, as the softest and sweetest
sounding melody; can as well play with the most froward and wrestling (so the
word Psalm. 18.) as the most pure-and peaceable disposition. As being he who
knows how to be in perils often, in weariness, in painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings, often in cold and nakedness,
besides his continual sympathizing with the Churches; knows how to run
through good report and bad report, how to abound and how to want, and how in
all to be content; a most blessed concord in the spiritual ear, the
spiritual heart! That can take joyfully the spoiling of his goods, receive any
word any precept of God as pure-holy-good-and-just, and set about the actively,
passive obedience of it, in much affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost. Happy
afflictions that help to such an holy joy! O! where! but I forbear. And if he
grief it is at the want of this cheerful and thankful deportment of
himself. And this is a higth that we are carried up to in the New Adam,
beyond the reach of the Old even in his innocence. He being altogether free
from these evils, and therefore nothing acquaint with these evill-conquering
comforts. The Almighty wisdom to the more eminently advanceing of his
glorious Grace, having thus wonderfully by our fall raised us up to an higher,
to a permanenter, to an ever-highly-permanent Station. Strike up then your
allarum when you will, you shall never carry him by force, but shall but rowse
up more spirits to man him repel you. As he is of a harsh rugged rough-hewne
proud-cruell, that is not alleviated with a sweet mild smooth temprature; so
is it an effeminated, flaccid, torpid, dispirited, enervated soul, that is not
quickened not inlivened with courage. That alone being hydropicall, this
feverish. That too dull for action, this is too quick for council, for
patience, for endurance: But both happily met together in one, in a wise,
understanding, actuating spirit, like the natural heat kindly fomented by the
radical moisture, and duly agitated by the influent and insite spirits, keep
the soul in a happy and healthy constitution; because in an apt and proxime
power for the well performance of its several functions. Hence (may be it)
those Grecian Captains were so well seen in Music as in feats of Arms and
Philosophy; as that brave-spirited Epimanondas, etc. it being a usual custom
after their feasts to have a Lute presented them to play on. And certainly he
is a man of a choice and complete temperature, that is well made up of a
Scholar, Soldier and Musician. A head full of discreet and sage knowledge, a
heart full of courageous and meek love, a hand full of indefatigable and
difficultie-overcomming action. Such a head! such a heart! such a hand! That
make such a Man! And yet what are all these, and were there a thousand more
such suches, but mere counterfeit spiritlesse and dead resemblances of that
true and living way to compleatenesse of heart, (...)
because to him the true and living God, the Creator the compleator of the
heart. There being nothing good, nothing of worth but what is in God, in whom
as in Christ we are, in these and all graces Complete. In that meek and
immaculate Lamb, that dreadful and terrible Lion of Judah, that brazen
Serpent in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Thus made
conformeable unto that All-sweet All-wise All-mightie Being, the Maker, the
Perfection of all things. By whom we are made perfect, through our likeness to
him, our living in him. And here only here is the rise of that true
magnanimity, that consists in the uncontrollable power of a sweet and humble
wisdom, God. And now since I have so insencibly slipped thus far into the
nature of this grace, and we know not how soon the Lord may settle our
distractions of State and Church; and so prevent us with his mercies, and fit
us by them, who will never be fitted for them; and it being the Carracter of an
ingenious child to fear favors and not to be affrighted with frowns, I will
a little draw it forth into that part of it which may be most suitable to those
times. It being the nature of it upon the knowledge of God to know nothing else
great, no more goods then evils. And yet either so weak is our knowledge, or
so seldom our acting it (which makes it for so far no knowledge to us) that
in those Halcyon days have we most need of the highest resolves and
Princeliest circumspection, not to have our spirits debased in the knowledge of
things after the flesh. But now to have a special care of exercising that
mysterious, that inheavening art of making all things become new, knowing,
affecting doing all things under new notions, from new principles, by new
rules, to new ends so using the World as not using it; meddling with it as in
transitu, by the way, as a viaticum a bait when needs and but what needs, etc.
See Page 27.

It Is then is the danger when the danger's past,
The inward foe fights wilier when the outward's cast.
Tacticks unheard of; covert stratagems;
Sly in his Methods, suddenly he hems
Us in with tempting troops; while w' thought he had been
Distant by many miles, we are rounded in
A Maze of fatal friends, strait rout our thoughts
To a desbausch't confounded yielding brought.
Stand sentinel soul, unless thou standst Perdu,
Loosest thy life, thou't not the loss escue.
Capua Hannibali Cannae Fuit. A rich and pleasant Asia is more dangerous then a
barren and hungry America; lue and tepid bathes then harsh and storming winds;
these confirming, those consuming the hardiest spirits, not guarded with
discretion. Neither indeed is it a thing so worthy a Christian to seek for an
abiding City when this inferior is like to be fired about his ears. To make
friends of the unrighteous Mammon when it is ready to be snatched from us; to
estrange our selves from these things when they turn their back upon us. But
when the world shail comes with its Cornucopia of riches, pleasures glory, etc.
and would pour all upon our heads; and God on the other hand ready to pour
down more abundantly of that anointing that teaches us all things, that
qualifieth us with more Kingly, Prophetical, Priestly endowments, and fills us
with joy and gladness above our fellewes; now not to leave the substance for
the shade, the Pearl for the Barly-corne, is somewhat like him that lives by
faith, and has made a true discovery of that only excellent object. Now when
the world comes fleering in all her whorish attire with the most cunning and
sophistical insinuations, and our spirits are in the height of their jollitie
ready to throw themselves into her embraces, when the outward and inward
temptations thus powerfully met in their united strength; now to command them
off, is indeed to command a man's self, the most noble conquest. And surely
this magnanimity, this inlargeing, this heighthning heat and vigor of heart
is conveyed in equally with those beams of divine illumination. Which
wonderfully mavelous light, which kingdom of Heaven first entering into us
and we into it at our first entrance on Mount Sion, works thus diffusively on
the understanding-the-heart-the whole. All things are as they are compared to
God; but him in the face of Christ I see the only good, and therefore (as
contraries illulustrate each other) whom have I in earth in Heaven but Thee? I
see nothing in the whole creation in its best and setledest state, but a black
and horrid Caos of vanity, of deformity; farther then it partakes of him;
farther then I can epsy in it the scatterings of the divine Rays. And surely
the men of the world comparing themselves with themselves, and the things with
the things of the world are not wise. Rectum est index sui and obliqui. The
light of the manifestation of it self and darkness. He then that does truth
comes to this light, to see whether his works be of God.

T's the shining Sun discovers those motes of sin,
Those subtler mists of fleshie steames, between
Our spirit our light our life and us, those beams.
Of shadowing lusts that dark our lightfull beams.
Still shine lo'd Sun! discovering still dispell,
And in dispelling discover our heart-bred hell.
Those uncouth Cells, those shades of dismal death,
Those haunts of horrid Fiends, whose mickle skeath
Of mortal wounds, housed in a golden sheath
Of minion comforts, steal away the breath
With fatal kisses; whilst the guile-favouring night
Maskes their infernal shapes; till the friendly light
Of faithful truth appear, and put to flight
Their wilely force b' its wisely succouring might.
Thus more commended it, my triumph more
Increast, such enemies so triumphed over.
Thus the sincere heart brings himself and all the world to this all-revealing
Sun; to see what they have of him, in whom he has approved the only, and
only fincere-making, excellencies, by that single eye of faith, that singles
him out as its only object, as desiring to see nothing but him, at least
mediately if not immediately. And though this latter is the way wherein the
earnestly hearty desires of the soul run after the full and uninterrupted in
oyment of God, yet in regard of the frailty of the flesh, the weakness
slenderness imbecilitie of the intermediate spirits that are as the ties and
ligaments betwixt the foul and the body, and could not long contain
themselves without being utterly dissolved, should they be unintermittedly bent
and held up to that extensive intensivenesse whereunto they are wrought by
those great and glorious thoughts of those savoury and cordial apprehensions
(which in the Lord Christ they have and without him they cannot have) of that
simple and infinite good, which not only carry forth the soul in a glad
venture but transport it in an eager pursuit of this happy dissolution, yet
bethinking it self that there may be a selfe-seeking in this selfe-loosing,
that it is to live to others not it self, to do not receive, it is willingly
forced with a kind of unpleasant pleasantness to further entertain its faith
in natural sense least it should wholly vanish into supernatural. So may our
souls O Lord be incessantly continually devoted to thy fear, so may they be
devout even in all their earthly affairs may se devovere vow themselves from
themselves, and pay their vows continually. So may they ever live in thy fight
in thy light that they may never depart from thy fear, that they may never
more give the lie to their professed knowledge and fellowship with the light,
by walking in the ways of darkness; but show forth the glory of their father in
Heaven, by the reflection of their serene sincere light some conversation on
earth. And certainly could we stand with this (...) this stretching forth of
the head in an earnest looking on him, and longing for him, we should have such
an assuence of light and life break in upon our souls, and shine on our
ways, that we should walk up and down like stars shot from Heaven, till
having dazzled the eyes of the world into an envious astonishment we should
remount for ever fixed in our highest sphere. Now according as our aspect is
on Him, so is it also to others; if that but oblique, this but dim and
obscure; but if that perpendicular, this lively and glorious, O that we were
more excellently skilled in these holy optickes; we cu'd not but be in
Theology, and therefore in Ethics Oeconomicks, etc. And cu'd we but live
soberly righteously and godlily upon (as we ran not but, cannot choose but upon)
the sight of God, avaunt then false lights, false comforts for ever, then he
that shall come will come and will not tarry; for the Lord is certainly waiting
to be gracious to that soul that is thus steadfastly waiting to be guided by
him. This indeed being the product the effect of the sense of that. Neither
know I any such (if any other) sincere and constant seeking as that when I
thought of (an absent) God I was troubled, and refused to be comforted by any
thing but himself, as knowing nothing else true comfort. Neither can there be
such seeking but from a true and lively says, not such a waiting but from a
sincere-and-fervent love; therefore not unlikely the Apostle (thus intimating
the nature of these graces) translates those passages of Esaiah 11.10. with
Romans 15.12. 1 Cor. 2.9. with Isa. 64.4. seek, trust; wait, love. Seeking
faith and waiting love. Here is that great Art of a Christian, to be seeking
still seeking the face of God. I have set the Lord Always before my face
therefore, etc. Seek ye the Lord and seek his face Evermore. I am
Continually With thee. Be in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Here is
that great difference of sincerity and hypocrisy. Will the hypocrite pray
always? Will he seek God in prosperity as well as in adversity. At mid day
in his business, all the day long, hourly and minutely as well as morning and
evening, and at the solemn assembly? Will he live the life of faith in the
flesh, in all sensual things? is he crucified to the world and the world to
him? Is he dead, and this that even his mortal body lives, is it by the
quickening of the spirit? does he walk up and down the world as a man that
has neither life nor soul, but only as inlivened as animated hence? is he
ever lifting up his face to God, that that flood of light and life that thence
with such mighty incomes flows in upon the soul, might bear down before it
every thought that exalts it self against the kingdom of the Lord Christ,
etc. that wholly given over to the power, sway and guidance of it, wholly
casting it self into its imbracings, while it lies drowned as it were in a Sea
of loves and sweetnesses, in a blessed astonishment and stupefaction, it is
elevated in the highest advancement of life and spirits in the Lord of life and
glory, that descended and ascended to draw up with him all that adheres to him.
O were the soul wound up to this pitch, and watched at it; and wound up again
if never so little slipped down; how might we live! O still still let us be in
this blessed vision of God with more continued intentivenesse; contracting
thence, or rather dilating those Coexistant, inherent, essential, which we
call attributed species. Then others beholding the steadfastness of our faith,
could not but there see more of that radiant image in its deputed Majesty; the
ball of the sensual eye not more naturally expressing the Idea of the directly
opposite and neighboring visage, then this of the spiritual, of faith, does
that of God. And certainly no sense does furnish us with more, and more clear
conceptions of God, then the sight; being for its ready commence with the
soul, for its extention, and intention, the properest most conducible and
advantageous of all; being the most spacious, farthest reaching, pure, simple,
active, and therefore most apprehensive: and next to that the hearing, being
the less gross and earthly of all the rest. But to keep to that; As the
Sun conveyeth heat and activitie inseperably with, and proportionably to its
light, so is the truth loved and done so far and only so far as it is
seen. The actions are spurious and illigitimate that are not conceived in the
heart and begotten by the eye; it will be our wisdom then so truly to inform
the latter at we desire the well and right forming and performing of the other.
Let us look on him then by no other Organ then faith, thorough no other medium
then Christ; at no other distance, then the mearest approaches; even to such an
unity, that we see our selves in him and him in us. When with the wicked we
put God far from us, and see the world draw nigh us, then seems he little
and this great; but when we draw near to him, what a pointile, what an atome,
what a nothing it seems, nay it is? And as the medium is ever the fame, so is
the Organ then best when most refined, abstracted, metaphysicall, subtilized,
sublimed and sence-rarified; cause then most proportionable and suitable to the
simplicity and purity of the object it intends, and therefore consequently to
the extensivenesse and infinity of it, God being simply infinite and
infinitely simple. And therefore as wisdom consists in the clearenesse and
quickness, so in the inlargednesse, of the understanding; but since that
knowledge that light in every thing we draw from him is the only true
wisdom, we are then wisest when our understandings are most clarified by
him, most acted on him. And surely this clarifying of our faith is according to
the intimatenesse of our humbly bold access unto him; the nature of this Sun
being to give light to the blind, and that more or less according as we are
more off, or apply our selves nearer to Him. And surely while we thus see God
in the holiest of holies, all the kingdoms of the earth in their freshest and
heart-stealingest loveliness, and that set forth in the most rich and glorious
accoutrements, will lie at our feet as a dead and rotten carkasle; so far
shall we be from committing folly with it; so far, that though then too our
spirits be at the liveliest, as they cannot but be, yet because we, nay
therefore because we, be as crucified, as dead to it, as it is to us. Such
power has this sight to fill the heart with love, this love to hold the soul
close to God, from any thing that would part it from him, and to carry it forth
in all readiness of obedience with him. When contrarily while we are looking
on the world without God, we are but looking on so many lying vanities, that
dead the heart to real and full contentments, withholding it from God, and
setting the hand on work in the ways of sin; which still estrange the soul
from Him, and keep Him at a distance from the soul; that more deading the
heart, that, etc. so the soul running on in a round of wickedness, if God not
graciously break in, and hinder its course. Which when he does, his presence
makes grace to grow by the interchangeable officiousness of all its undivided
parts. The sight of God inflaming the affections, they inciting to actions,
these again (...), stirring up the fire in more fervent flames, they giving in
greater light, that discovering more beauty, that kindling more fire, that
animating to more action, this again, etc. so truly infinitely, infinitely,
infinitely sweet is the comfort of the God-conversing soul. The soul that
has received the truth in the love thereof; and he that loves me keeps my
Commandments, and he that does my will shall know my will; he that has my
Commandments as his possession, riches, etc. and keeps them as his greatest
joy comfort life, he it is that loves me and to him will I manifest my self;
Now this manifestation again fills the heart with more operative and
effectual love, this again, etc. Thus Faith works by love, the fulfilling
of the Law, the end of the Commandment out of a pure heart and of a good
conscience and of faith unfeigned; the sincerity whereof must needs be
according to the sight it has of God, according to the loveliness, worth
chooseablenesse that it sees in him. Faith then I take to be (by what of light
in this night of blindness and darkness I can see) such a light as shining
on the intentively beholding soul through the face of Christ, has that
influence and attractive power with it, to draw it up and make it cleave and
adhaere with all its might and strength to God, to lift up the heart to, and
make it go along with him in all his ways. While like the Helitrophion, it
turns and winds; shuts and opens with the motion of the Sun of
righteousness. And this light thus influenced, thus working (how ever clouded
and obscured to a Christians self) to be wisdom unto salvation, that
effectual knowledge of God and his Christ, coming into, and received of, the
soul, that is life eternal already taken hold of, and ere long fully
prossessed, or thus, Faith is a promise-lighted, seeking, light,
Burns with pure fervent love, whose active might
In every radiant precept shining bright
Reflects its glory to the Father-Light.
Thus, these three-one obedience-faith-and love
Unite my soul to those Thee-One Above.


John 11.5.7.
A seeking ( Isaiah 11.10. with Romans 15.13.) Satisfying ( John 5.44. with
John 14.1.) Faith, ( John 1.4.19.) a sincere ( Phil. 1.10. Matthew. 6.22. Ephesians.
6.24.) Fervent ( Cant. 8.6.7.) love ( John 14.15.) an universal ( Psalm. 119.6.
Jam. 2.10. Ephe. 4.23. Matthew. 5.10.) Constant ( Cor. 1.15.58.) Obedience. So
that grace is, faith understanding, faith affecting, faith acting. And must
needs, because whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Neither indeed can I wonder
how fear has lead me to faith, but should certainly take my self to be
seduced, if it did not. All graces, how distant soever seeming, being of the
same company, going the same way; so that he that is with one, must needs be
with all. And questionless all are wrought in the soul together, and grow
together; how ever in the minority of our Christianity God may teach us
methodo analytica, may as it were parcel them forth into several lessons,
till our capacities are more widened and strengthened for the fuller and
compleater apprehension of them, according as we grow in our manhood in Christ
Jesus. And hence is it that so often in Scripture a Christian is caracterised
by one only; But especially by faith and fear, that in the old, this in the
new Testament; one, in Christ more darkly shadowed out, the other in Him more
evidently revealed, but both in Him: according to the manifold wisdom of God
in Him by whom He has reconciled all things, the several kinds of actings of
the soul as well as several souls to one another, and all to himself. So
that what they said of their virtues, that there was cognatio quaedam and arcta
necessitas between them, I am sure holds most true of graces; betwixt whom
there is cognatio certa and necessitas perquam arctissima. All of the noblest
and familiarest consanguinitie, being all of the blood of Christ. Or conceive
them as so many linkes of a Bracelet, the love token of the soul from its
Christ, lincked together in an invielable concatination; you cannot break off
one, but the whole figure and form of the work (as it is said of the
Commandments whereby these are framed (as it were) and cast) is broken. And
indeed there is nothing of Christ in the soul, but it is Christ. Christ formed
in you. You have not so learned Christ. We preach Christ, etc. the whole sum of
the Gospell-Law, and Law-giving Gospel, and consequently the whole work of
grace being only Christ. So that we cannot so much as think the least good
thought of our selves. What we do, what we have, what we are, of good, we do,
we have, we are not; but it is God, the spirit of Christ that dwells in us, and
so indeed ours, so we, as Christians as outed of our selves, as inned in God,
pertakers of the divine Nature, etc. whose being in us habitually, whose acting
in us, imminently or transiently, is all our grace. Now the spirit of God is
indivisible, and therefore are all our graces; homogeneous, harmonious; have a
graceful symetrie, analogy, proportion, to one another; make but one systeme,
joint frame, and body of Christianity; how different so ever, how discrepant
soever the parts, the members seem, they are graceful to, useful to each
other. Are like so many faculties of the same soul in innocence, before by our
fall they were like a watch dashed against, troubling and stopping the course
of one another. Which mended again by their maker, though like several
wheels they seem to move not only diversely but contrarily, yet are they all
moved by one spring, and further the due motion of each other, and all tend to
the same end, the promoveing of the same gnomen, in promoting of the glory of
their God, and setting forth the praise of that never-sufficiently admired
workmanship. (And though there may be some hamerings and knockings in setting
the mind in frame, some pains in the new birth, some harshnesse in the tuning
of the soul, yet they do all tend to the completing of that inconceiveable
harmony. Though God often times, (specially in the more powerful times of the
Gospel) brings forth Christ formed, as it were without any pain, tunes the
heart as it were with one touch, and sets up the whole and joint frame of the
temple, without scarce any the least sound of the hammer.) And as a wheel, not
only by, but in its going down, is Ipso facto going up, so those graces that
seem only to cast down the soul, do not only afterward, but in the very
doing of it, raise it up; as humility, fear, grief, etc. which so far as
divine, and as I may say Gospell-proofe, are still raising up the soul in the
greater assurance, magnanimity, joy, and these (as it were) still casting it
down, and that again raising it up, etc. As there is nothing that more
humbles the soul then heavenly mindedness, so is there nothing that more
sublimes it then humility; as there is nothing that strikes the soul with a
deeper awe then the assurance of the eternal love, so in the fear of Jehovah
is the strongest confidence; as it is an unsound and vain joy that has no
acquaintance with sorrow, so is it a sinful and death-working sorrow that
reares not up the soul to more livelmesse and joy, etc. And thus we progress
on our speedy round,
While grace helps grace to rid away the ground.
Not grace and grace, but one promoveing wheel,
Whose apprehension-parted particles feel
Their one self equally-proficients, while
We are one Christ, converts us from this soil
In never-resting fiery circles, till
In perfect motion on our holy hill,
Thus while the world runs roundly down to Hell,
We roundly up to the Heavenly Domicill.
Christ, I see, I fall, I fall in love, for love I die, this death's my life,
this life's my work, this worke's my life, this life's my light, this lively
light's my death, this death's my fall, my rise to come to fly unto my light
love life my Christ. Happy, happy soul in truth, whom the sight of God the
beauty of truth of holiness shining through the face of Christ as a mutual
perspective of reciprocal delight, keeps in an
humble-meeke-peaceable-lovefull-fearing-joying-strongly-confident every-way
gracious posture! And hither I suppose looks that of James, the meekness of
wisdom; not only cause they as all graces convene in one bundle of life, in
one poesy of heavenly fragrancies; nor of the proficiencie of wisdom by
meekness, in that the humble he will teach; nor from the nature of it, in
that the wisdom from above is first pure and thence peaceable gentle easy to
be entreated, etc. as in pure clean sweet-juiced bodies, free from the
repugnancie of sower choleric hetrogeneous humors; but because the first rise
of this so especially blessed grace is from wisdom, from the knowledge of God
and our selves. And hither that, unite my heart to fear thy name, as touched
before. And that, fearful in praises, the same discovery that presents me God
praise worthy for his great goodness presenting me him feare-worthy for his
good greatness, Hither that, now I have seen thee with the seeing of the eye
I abharre my self in dust and ashes, the soul might hear else long enough,
(though indeed too faith comes by hearing, yet so as it is made an effectual
means to open the eyes.) And hither that, holy, holy, holy, I am a man, etc.
Hither that behavior of the four and twenty Elders, that on the contemplation
of the excellencies of God threw down their crowns, their excellencies at his
feet, as being nothing but what they had of Him. in Him, for Him. But life
would fail me; in referring zeal and constancy, etc. and all other graces
hither, in what dependancie relation they stood to one another. Sin being
like so much muck and dung on the fire of zeal; the more unmixt, the more
intent, etc. The fear of the Lord being a cleant fear and abiding for ever;
make me sound in thy statutes- and steadfast in thy Covenant; The inheritance
undefiled that fades not away; (...); how that the purer the thing is, the
more free from corruption, heterogeneousnesse, the more stable firm durable it
is, so the body, so the soul. But now we know this purity, this sincerity is
by this discovery, therefore this constancy, this zeal, etc. And hither that,
the things that are seen are temporal but the things that are not seen are
eternal. The things that are not seen being rare pure holy simple, etc. and
therefore free from corruption, and therefore from alteration, from decay. But
into what a blessed maze, and gladly involving labarinth have thou wound thy
self O my soul! And shall thou be so unhappy ever to find the way out
again? Is it not good for us ever to wander here, in these paths of pleasure,
and walks of delight? Can there be any thing that can steal away the heart so
surrounded with such glories, such loves? But, art thou not to thy self but to
thy God, and does he call thee to works of an inferior nature? Still work
and wonder, work and love, work and bless; still keep thy ground, thy God,
who is the God of the valleys as well as of the mountains. And still while
thou art walking with him thorough a diverse path, loose thy self in him, who
shall shortly with all them that in truth have known his name, be ever lost in
the blessed contemplation of the wonderful contrivances of the eternal
wisdom. When there shall be no more eating and drinking, no more sleeping and
rest, no more spending of spirits, no more avocations from the immediate and
uninterrupted continually active contemplation in that full vision of the only
blessed God, and in him of all his wonderful works. When there shall be no
successivenesse of plenary intuition and perfect action, but still the heart
that knowes-loves-obeyes him, continually overpowred with the blessed vision
and overflowing in loves and sweetnesses, shall be incessantly running over in
heart ravishing praisings, and intranced in perpetual ecstasies. Who is it that
even now is able to conceive the heaven that is in his own heart? what then
when we there see- and love-and-sing-and-sing-and-love-and see eternally? when
we shall not only have the spirit in us, but be in, be wholly in the spirit.
Perfused, baptized, overwhelmed with it. Not only see and have, light, joy,
love, spirit, but be In, nay be spirit, light, joy, love! And now O Lord what
are we that it should be thus with us! O thou life of life! and being of
beings! thou incomprehensible God! What is it to thee that we know thee? that
we love thee? what pleasure have thou in our righteousness? or what profit it
is to thee that we make our ways perfect? surely O Lord thou have thou have
none! who art so infinitely above all happy and holy! none but what thou
acceptest as such in him, in whom thou only art, in whom we only are, well
pleased. In whom thou will welcome us, with a Well done, good and faithful
servant, when thou shall find us so doing, who have done, nothing. What are
our understandingst thoughts of thee; but as so many misshapen confused
conceits? What our appositest speeches but as so much jabbering and gibberish?
What our accuratest performances, but as so many trifling toys? All childish
childish all. What are they further then they are exercises of, then they are
testimonies of our love; the end; the sum, of all the Commandments. Yet what
too are our strongest our heart-possessingest loves, but as so many fond and
fleeting passions? And yet thou looking on us and we on thee thorough the face
of thy Christ, that perspective of mutual luster and glory (from, in and for
whom are all our thoughts, words, affections, actions, and ought that ought is)
art pleased to accept them as the thoughts, as the language, as the love, as
the life of Angels. Whom thou have made ministering spirits to thy chosen, thy
faithful, that we with them, and they with us, preferring each other in
honor, might all jointly promote the honor of our onely-honour-worthy God. O
the freeness of thy grace! the unfathomednesse of thy wisdom! the
incomprehensiblenesse of thy glory! O where is the learning that has learnt
thee, that would not willingly debase it self, throw down it self, as the
footstool before thy Throne and the Throne of thy Christ! as being nothing but
what it is in raising up the soul to a dutie-learning, to an humble walking
with thee: that would not willingly as it were, unlearne all, and learn it
over again in thy Christ? where are those fond and selfe-conceited Opiniasters
that would not lay down all at his feet, at least meekely and
selfe-suspectingly manage their Scripture-unevidenced tenets. O did we know in
what a black cloud of ignorance we were all involved! in what a night of
palpable darkness! (an epithet not unknown to a Christian heart, that
cannot but be feelingly sensible of it.) Had our memories oftener recourse to
that Original pride, that confounded the language of our minds, as well as
that of our tongues; or thought that multiplicitie and incertainty of opinions
may since purposely be permitted by the divine wisdom and gracious justice to
lay us low in our own eyes, to make us out of love with our selves, etc. how
could we then be so proud? and not so, so contentious? Why may not all that
hold the same head, have the same heart? why may not there be dissension,
without contention? But every one seek their own and none of Christ. Which
true foundation, or foundation of truth, lain in the heart if any shall (as
who does not) among our gold and silver, unwittingly build straw and stubble,
why should not we labor to purge one another dross with a tender love and
careful salvation (as I may say) of one another respects, content, peace,
whom the God of love and peace has promised to save eternally? Or had we
observed, that it is with Christians as with the tenent and mortesse in
building, the condyles and concavities in the bones of the body; he is that
eminent at one end (as it were) may be defective at the other, that is
excellent in this, may be wanting in that; that so we may fall in with, join
closer to one another in one and the same building frame and growing body; so
far should we be from making them as arguments to keep us at the greater
distance. And what indeed is the end of Gods various dispensation of himself
in such diversity of gifts, parts, abilities, if not that he might show the
more of his wisdom in drawing them all so completely into one graceful knot;
the bond of peace, love; that in such, if not by such a variety, can preserve
the unity, if not further the harmony of the spirit of the Lord Jesus ( Ephesians.
4. perlege) Or to what purpose is our knowledge, but for love, for charity?
the fulfilling of the Law, the end of the Commandment out of a pure conscience
and of faith unfeigned? This is the sincere, the true faith, and knowledge, that
thus works. What purity of conscience, what life of assection, I see in the
conversation (caeteris paribus) by that shall I judge of the truth of the
measure of the faith, the knowledge, as the root by the fruit; and by that I
look to be judged by the judge of all things; by him whose call is for, whose
residence is in, whose shining is into, the heart, where he shows himself,
where he is, where he has savingly. Not by what is found in my brain, my
head, but in my breast my heart; that which sits here making music to the
Lord with a gracious answering to all his wills, a glorious admiration of his
love his wisdom, etc. his merciful acceptance in the Lord Christ, and not
that which it jarring with others there. That which sounds forth God in its
life, and not that which founds forth it self in its tongue. The Divill I
believe has as much knowledge, and can dictate as excellent discourse, as all
the men of the world. Knowledge, so far as it is not cordial and living, so
far as it is not sappy savory and fruitful, but dry and barren, or bringing
forth wild thistles, so far I shall never think it to have the Lord Christ
for its root. So far as it is not sapida and sertilis, it will prove but
insipida and futilis, foolish and vain. I would have knowledge then be my
food, and my food my strength, and my strength my exercise. I wu'd feed with
delight, but not for delight; but for the better disgesting of my knowledge
into an assimulated practice. And be our opinions, notions, what they will, if
they convey no more of God along with them, certainly they never came of his
sending, who always comes along with the true understanding of his will, of
himself the only truth. And by more of his presence induces more glorious
light-more humble love-more faithful action. And to what purpose have our
hearts tugged so hard at heaven, for the pulling down of those spiritual
wickednesses, and exalted vilenesses, (...) Psalm. 12.
but as they have held up the heads, and strengthened the hands of the ungodly?
but as they are those of whom we have no warrant, that they had their
commission from him, and therefore no promise that he would dispense himself
through them, but as they are intruders between God and us, and obtruders of
their ceremonial and traditionall obstructions in our immediater approaches to
him, and they taken away we might have more of him, and that, that we might
do more for him. But now, to have the obstacles removed, and the end never the
nearer attained, to what purpose is it? To have those who under the pretense of
being the Conduit pipes, were the dirt and filth that stopped them; of being
the Contrefenestres, the shutting windows to keep out the theevery of
innovations, schisms, seperations, etc. out of the Church, keep out the light
and truth, and were the greatest schismatics renters of the Church themselves,
to have these I say removed (as sure enough they shall at what ever rate) and
we draw never the more light and life into our hearts into our lives, but
still hug our own fond imaginations, still seek about in such
extravagancies after our own inventions, lying vanities, that promise fair,
and perform worse then nothing, what other will it be interpreted by him then
the dispising, the turning of his goodness his glory into shame, while we know
God more, but know him not, and therefore worship him not, as God, the
commander of the whole man. But those (O Lord) that know what it is to know
thee, can they but be thankful, in an active, and (...) action-denying
thankefulnes? O then that thou would accomplish the work that thou have so
graciously so powerfully undertaken. How long shall thy servants nauseate at
the fulsomenesse of their pride? Though they make the hearts of kingdoms still
ache with it, let them be vomited, be vomited forth thoroughly. Rather let us be
pained with our cure, that not prevent our death. We, yea, thou art sick of
their Lukewarmenesse, O when wut^^ thou spue them out of thy mouth. So will we
flock up to mountains of thy house, and pour forth our souls in thy
praises. So in the humility of our spirits will we sit at the feet of thy
Jesus; and learn at the mouths of thy holy servants. So shall our hearts bow
before thee, and out hands be dilgent in thy service. So shall holiness be
written on our paths, and our lives be the memorialls of thy mercies. So shall
the review of thy favors be as the fringe for remembrance of thy precepts. So
shall the wonderfulnesse of our deliverancies be read in the wonderfulnesse of
our obedience. So will we commune with our own hearts and be still, and say,
what have we returned thee? What sin have we more crucified, what duty have
we more, have we better done? So will we offer unto thee, the sacrifice of
righteousness, of a broken and contrite heart. While we bind all the
faculties of our soul and members of our bodies to thy Alcar: With the cords
of our affections to thy Christ, and thou shall accept them graciously.

O Lord, our hearts, thy Sion!
Delays are neither constant grounds of suspect, nor despair, neither of
suspect of the promisers present good will, nor of despair of the promise it is
future performance. In my last I promised you another, which till now you
received not; yet has this delay neither proved an utter silence, nor
proceeded from an unfriendlike disrespect. God has promised you deliverance
which yet you have not yet received; yet can this protraction neither argue a
change of his fatherly affection, nor unchangeablenesse of your child like
afflictions. Neither is it a ground for your doubt of his great prudence or
gracious goodness in correcting, nor of your comfortable support in, or
seasonable freedom from, the correction. He that believes makes not have.
Faith is confident of the issue, patience attendant on the time. Two sweet and
never-parting companions. An unbeleeving patience, or an impatient beleese, how
dissonant are they in the ears of a Christian? How can I with a truly
submissive and not presuming patience, wait on that God either for help in or
from distress, whom I believe not on good grounds to be my reconciled father
in Christ? Who in him has promised both; who is faith full and will not
suffer, etc. 1 Cor. 10.13. and thus beleeveing, how can I but thus patiently
wait on him? And happy thrice happy man is he that thus waits, thus believes!
Let our afflictions be never so various, never so tedious, let our minds be
never so disquiered, our bodies never so diseased, our estates never so
distracted, in a word let deep call upon deep, and all the waves and billows
of God pass over us (as David complains, Psalm. 42.7. let afflictions be
continual (as v. 3.) yet but let us with the hand of faith lay fast hold on
his loving kindness ( v. 8.) on his power in taking him for our rock ( v. 9.)
and this will bear up our heads from sinking, cheer up our hearts from
fainting, close up our mouths from murmuring, yea fill them with praises (v.
ult.) in the midst of the waters, be they never so violent, never so
shorelesse. Confess I do the multitude and continuance of crosses are of
themselves too heavy weights, and may add much to the burden; so much it may
be as may bruise, but never so much as may break the back of a true
believer. And yet why talk I either of bruising or breaking? since I may
boldly say, be but consident, and you shall be patient, be but patient, and the
burden shall be tolerable, and not only tolerable, but easy, not easy only
but pleasant. A paradox to a natural man, but to a spiritual a most approved
truth. Otherwise what less then a rigid taskmaster might the spirit of God
seem. Who instead of facilitating a Christians suffering, should by the
imposing of an impossibility exasperate it, were it not a grace that he wu'd
give to the humble? James 1. v. 2. a verse with the two following well worthy
your serious consideration. He says not, repine not, or further, be patient,
but yet further, rejoice; and how? coldly, or by halfes? no, with all joy: and
that when in temptation only? no in temptations: and those diverse too; and
that indefinitely for degrees, not in little only but in temptations, be they
what they will be, more or less, more or less violent: and that when we meet
with temptations? No, when we fall into them, when we tumble as it were
headlong into the pit, whence there is no easy or sudden rising. So that we
must not only not repine, but be patient, not only be patient but rejoice,
and that with all joy, and that even in the midst of the most tedious, most
various, most grievous temptations: not only in the calmness of peace, in
the Sunshine of honor, in the harvest of riches, in the Eden of pleasure, in a
word when the fair sky of prosperity on every side invites us thereunto, but
even then when the glorious Sun of comfort, our evergracious God withdrawes
his loving countenance from the sensual eye, within the dark clouds of
poverty disgrace sickness, etc. when on every side the tempests of trouble and
anxiety beat hard on the soul; then even then is it time for it by the
spiritual eye of faith to pierce these clouds and see the loving countenance
of its God shining on it even then as bright as ever. Then is it time for
patience to be a prop to the head, for joy to be a cordial to the heart. Away
then with that distrust that breeds impatiency, that impatiency that breeds
sorrow, that sorrow that breeds affliction. For indeed no evil afflicts
further then it affects, nor affects farther then it enters, nor enters farther
then it finds a distrusting and yielding heart. Let not therefore unbelief
betray your soul to the tyranny of grief. Let then the devil, the world, and
the flesh conspire against us, let them muster up all their forces, let them
environ us with the closest siege, let them cut off all comfortable supplies,
let them make the most thundering temptations, the most piercing calamities;
they can devise? yet why should we so dishonor our good, disadvantage our
selves; as to yield where he has undertaken to defend? where with out yielding
there is no being overcome, and where the being overcome is so dangerous?
Maugre all the sickness and pain of the flesh, all the discredit displeasure
disprofit of the world, yea all the temptations of the devil whatsoever, make
but God your stay and strength, bring but your heart to him by unfeigned
repentance for your swarving from him; and him to your heart by a faithful
dependence and relying on him, and you shall remain as mount Zion that shall
not be removed, And happy, happy sure is that man whose enemies make him such
a friend. And indeed nothing, nothing so happy were you, when they presented
themselves unto you under the specious vizard of health wealth and honor. When
they fang unto you their intising songs of ease peace and pleasure, as now when
they show themselves in their colors, come against you with banners displayed,
and beat up on every side alarums of terror and amazement. For then were those
fained songs apart to lull you asleep in the cradle of security, those false
sights to make you take them for friends, at least not for foes, at least not
so deadly foes: But now you see them in their right shape, hear them in their
right tone, you fly for succor from a dissembling enemy to a faithful friend.
Who in that he is God cannot but give safe protection, who in that he is good
cannot but give all ready and requisite protection, to all that truly come in
unto him. And surely he that is all in all, is able to counterpoise, yea
infinitely to over-poyse all carnal contentments. For indeed what of delight
is there in any of these worldly things we call good, as health wealth, etc.
Which from him they have not, or without him can have. There is, there is
surely nothing in them of themselves, but vanity and vexation of spirit.
Neither is it the mere want or possession of them, but the absence or presence
of (our ever-present God) in or with them that can make a man (...) ^^acher
happy or unhappy. How else can Paul and Sylas sing in a prison, when Ahab lies
sorrow-sick in a Palace? How else can Jobs loss make him patiently dedendon
God, when Judahs gain makes him desperately depend on a tree? God then must be
the ingredient in all these earthly things, else are they like those physical
drugges with uncorrected sooner ruin then restore. So that what is prosperity
unsanctified, but adversity, what adversity sanctified but prosperity. And
blessed ever blessed is that man, that thus knows the peace of perplexity,
the riches of poverty, the credit of discredit, the pleasure of pain, the
health of sickness, the liberty of imprisonment; the joy of sorrow, in a word
the prosperity of a adversity. And this he knows that has God for his God.
Fail then heart and strength, yet shall the strength of our heart fail never.
Shall be with us in the fire and in the water, be an Arc to his Noah a Zoar
to his Lot.

Et pater and matter dosunt, nec restat amious,
Nec manet ulla domus, noc manet ulla salus
Tot haud habere sentias necem mala.
Omnia quae multis dantur, tibi nulla, sed ipsum
(Quod vel perpaucis) reddidit ille Deus.
Hic instar omnium fit, atque praevalet.
MY near and dear friend in the Lord Jesus, I cannot but according to your
desire acquaint you with present passages; and passages I may well say, for all
these things are but passing shadows, nothing. Were we in our own place, we
might look down upon them as little fleeting vapoury clouds, without rain. Or
else see our selves so far above them in this third region, as we need not
fear the storm. It is unworthy the thought of a Christian that has already
laid hold of eternal life, to shrink at the appearing loss of a mortal. But
we are men. But God is God. And he is our own God, the God of our salvation,
etc. O that we could, that we always could see our selves so partakers of the
divine nature, so filled with all the fullness of God, that we could look upon
life and death, principalities, powers, etc. as things given in unto us, and
all as things under our feet, at our command; for so they are to him that
believes, for all are ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Our faith
must fall before we, and our God before our faith. For it is founded on that
rock, that living stone, that is the life of all the building. Let us stand
therefore having taken us unto the whole armor of God, for what can the man
do that comes after the devil? And surely little, nay no cause have we to
fear in adversity, that can stand in prosperity. That soul, and only that
soul that in this estate can follow God fully, be so satisfied with the
hourly, minutely presence of God, that in all things it crosses it self of
its own will, as not enduring the least estrangement from him, certainly in the
other the mercies of God shall so follow him, so shall he delight himself
continually in him, as that in all things he will cross men and devils of
their wills against him, and so over-powre him with the light of his
countenance, without which he was dead in the dearest enjoyments, and with
which he lives in the deadliest confusions) as shall make them gnash their
teeth to see such a divine reflect from that light unspeakable and glorious,
whereby he shall be able to laugh death and destruction in the face. But shall
we not fear, not grieve? He is no true Christian that does not. Shall the Lion
roar, and we not tremble? Yet must we be confident in this fear, and joy in
this sorrow. And indeed the fear of God is strength, ( Prove. 14.26. Psalm.
112.1. with ver. 7. and 8.) And by the humility of our heart is our trust in
the Lord, Prove. 28.25. But audaciousnesse and pride will shrink in the
wetting. Neither will James his joy, 1.2. hold good without Paul's sorrow. 2
Cor. 7.7. Nor his sorrow without his joy. It is not the excess of fear and
grief, but the defect of confidence and joy that hurts us. Our own weakness
can never too much fright us. Our own and others sins grieve us. Neither will
it be found so proper and sovereign a salve to those happily languishing
consciences, to tell them they are too much dejected, cast down, sorrowful;
but rather they have too little lifted up Christ in their hearts, and their
hearts in Christ. It is impossible to think too basely of our selves (and if
there may be degrees in impossibility) more impossible to think too highly of
Him. When we are led back by any particular sin to the Original source of all
(as we must if we mean to know it to any purpose) and see the horrid shape of
it, and become sensible of the malignity, the universality, the inherencie of
it, etc. with all those infinite (as to us) actual breakings out of rebellion
from it, or rather the diverse kind of breaking out of one continued
unintermitting act; now while the soul is thus taking a bottome-and
through-searching view of it self, by a beam of the divine Light and Love
shed abroad in its heart (without which it could make no through, no true
discovery of it) and thereupon throws it self below the lowest hell, in a
sensible self-condemning, while it is still held up by the hand of faith in an
unspeakably blessed distraction; now to see this Sun of Righteousness still
rising, and rising with its infinite-surpassing infiniteness of glory,
splendour, loveliness upon the lighttransformed soul, lying under the gracious
droppings of its healing wings, O how sweet is that healing! How, how glorious
that Sun! But the seeing, the feeling soul, where is it? How high! how low! How
lost between both! Be then as sorrowful my soul as may be, thou can not be
enough for sin. As joyful as may be, thou can not be enough for grace. Abate
not of that sorrow, but increase this joy. Go as low as thou can, but be
sure thou risest higher by it. To be so dejected and cast down, as not to be
heightened, raised by it, in the admiration, the love, the life of thy Savior,
is indeed to have proud and haughty thoughts of thy self, and low and
undervaluing of thy Christ. Never fear thy liveliness and cheerfulness so
far, as duly objected on him. Nor lessen so much thy love to the creature, as
augment it to Him thy Creator. Affect with the strongest and heartiest
indearement any thing beside him, and yet abhor it with the most detesting
and abominating hatred for him. There is nothing that I set my eye on that I
wu'd not love as proceeding from him, as subsisting in him. But so far as
degenerate from him, as coming in competition with him, the indignation
wherewith it affects me is inutterable. Thus shall Caesar best have his due, and
God his: Himself, and what is subordinate to him. God takes away no affection
no nor the intensivenesse of it, but only its obliquitie to the object. Nay I
am persuaded that all worldly fear, all worldly sorrow fall far short of
spiritual; the one being from a displeasing world which is finite, the other
from a displeased God who is infinite. But how great then is that consident joy
to which this fearing grief is but a set off? For these to overcome the soul
and them for Christ to come and overcome that conquest what a triumph will
there be? Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
etc. And blessed, ever blessed be our God that we are not of them from whom he
has hid the mystery of godliness! strength made perfect in weakness,
concording discord. And if it be the glory of God to bring light out of
darkness, good out of evil, how can we but rejoice that by being subjects of
the one we come to bethe instruments of the other, 2 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 2.5. And
if good be the object of the concupiscible faculty, why should we make our
affections the object of our irascible. The Lord strengthen us with joy in the
inner man, and then go it how it will with the outer. So may we gladly keep
the word of his patience in the saddest and patience-assaultingst times; so
shall he keep us from, or at least in, and therefore from, the hour of
temptation that shall come upon all the world to try them. Now is it a time for
the patience of the Saints, for them that keep the Commandments of God and
the faith of Jesus: Now is it a time for those that have held fast this
inviolable knot in the bond of love, to hold up their heads in rejoicing, as
then knowing the greater redemption draws nigh when the greater calamity
approaches. Thus what ever of these things we may know already (feelingly in
the heart, if not notionally and perspicuously in the head) let us not fail to
put one another always in remembrance. Always striving together in our
Prayers, and that with no small conflict of heart that we may be comforted,
being knit together in love and unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and the Father,
and of Christ. Had we more godly and brotherly love, we should have more
comfort, and that would hunger after more knowledge, and that fill with more
assurance, and that furnish with more grace, and all acknowledge the mystery of
the purity, of the wisdom, of the love of the Godhead. So much spirit so
much faith, so much faith so much Christ, so much Christ so much love, so much
love so much knowledge, so much knowledge so much fullness of God. Ephesians. 3.16.
etc. Come then what may come, befall what may befall to the flesh: The Lord be
with, the Lord will be with, will be, our Spirits.

Ruat Mundus, Restat Deus.
PLay on about the Candle wanton fly,
Play, sindge thy wings, consume thy soul, and die.
Make jests of Scripture-jeere the God of heaven,
Laugh at the Light-mock them who has receiven
It in their hearts-and shine it in their lives.
Invent unheard of opprobries; contrive
New fashioned obloquies; scum hell for scurrulous wit,
Or dive th'lowest depths of the unfathomed pit.
'T will furnish thee with just sufficient store
To make thy self a fool and nothing more.
Enough, and but enough, to overreach
And cheat thy self, the infernal cheater'l teach.
Else shud'st be wiser then thy master, should
Thy wit have wit enough to make thee good.
On madness, belch thy deadly Antipathie
To heaven in thy horrid blasphemy.
Cast up thy works, and rear thy mounts on high,
Heap fetch on fetch, to overtop the sky.
Shield thee with distinctions, say it is not him
Thou shoot'st at, but his word, Saint, Image, Limb.
Not God, but God in them. While merrily along
To the correcting stocks the fool holds on
His heedlesse way, tickled with the high desert
Of h's flattering wit into his endless smart.
PUritan, the invention of Hell, the Character of a Christian, the language of
profaneness, the blasphemy of God, the evomition of a heart desperately
wicked, a glorious defamation, an undermining of, an open thrust at the very
heart, life, and power of Religon, an evident preferring of Pharisaicall forms
and Laodecean neutralitie, a Match-divillian device to kindle sire in Church
and State; a sly practice of the old Serpents old maxim, Divide and Reign; a
word that is as it is made, enterteined. And what indeed is this Puritan but a
Protestant drawing natural conclusions from his own praemises, believing and
living according to his own profession, at the highest pitch of his own
principles. Nor know I indeed how one differs otherwise from the other then a
Papist from an Arminian. A perfect birth from an Embrio; a Bird from an Egg.
Time and due heat (Cateris non obstantibus) will give them both their full
maturity. And as I have had it from good hands, confessed by a Papists that
Protestanisme not kept down wu'd naturally grow up to Puritanisme. And surely
that which does not is but a dry and dead stumpe without branches, or at
farthest leaves without fruit. Is that tree which cumbers the ground, is that
ground which is nigh unto cursing, to the executed sentence of its
amendment-unaverted judgment. Let then this or whatsoever other synonymous
Nickname, any divill-brooded brain has latelier hatched, be sent forth dressed
in the gave feathers of proud and selfe-conceited and therefore desperately
foolish wit, yet shall they prove but finer colored excrements, but ensigns
of their vanity (and therefore not seasonably prevented) of their eternal
vexation of spirit. But what then those more black and dark aspersions of
impudently-forheaded calumniators, with the very thoughts where of I abhor to
defile my memory. Whose empty whose witless wit, is so taking with, because so
easily apprehensible by, so aptly suitable to, corrupt nature: While the
substantial wisdom of heaven is only justified by her children. Who have
learnt of her, how ever these scoffers deceive themselves, God, whom in his
word, Saints, etc. they mock, will not be mocked, Jude 15. Act. 4.9. Matthew.
25.42. etc.

Try all things, hold fast that which is good.
REject the Branne, retain the flower.
All things abide their sifting hour.
Perfection only in Heaven is.
It Is knowledge here to know we miss.
But they who studdy not to advance,
Are ignorant of their ignorance.
But we that follow on to know,
In floods of lights and loves shall flow.
Baptized in glory, till we see
The unseene in all his Purity.
But what? O what! then shall we be,
Who so much of him here can see?
Chant in a fire of humble zeal,
Soule-loosing hymns of restless weal.
Ravished, and ravished, while we rest,
Hugged in his aye-fomenting breast.
Surrounded in a Maze of bliss:
Distracted with felicities.
While firmly resident in one
In whom All knowables are known.
The things that neither eye, ear heart,
Can see hear think the milliont'h part:
Who see nor love simplicity,
Inf'nit Invisibilitie.
O what! what then! who this now, know!
Yet know not ought, as w' ought to know!
It Is calm within, and so I sang before.
It Is calm without, so sing what sang before.
My head-my heart-my hand shall sing
My God my Prophet Priest and King.
These three below with those above
Shall make six parts unite in love.
And so I sang in the extremest storm,
And what else can I'n the serenest calm.
O Teach thy servant to be humble,
for the humble thou will teach.
Let him see thee and he dies,
and he lives for ever.
Send forth thy Light and thy Truth,
and let them lead him in thy presence.
Cause thy face to shine upon him,
and it will teach him they statutes.
Thy loving kindness is better then life,
O let it never depart from him.
O Comfort him with thy Aples,
and refesh him with thy Cordialls.
For his soul is sick, is sick with love,
O thou Discerner of hearts.
Why are thy Chariot wheels so slow,
How long shall he look out of the window!
How, how long shall those beauties be masked,
and the God of glory veiled!
When shall this night of ignorance turn day,
and these thick clouds be dispersed!
Why have thou shown thee and but shown thee,
O fully, abidingly,
Thou have wounded his heart with thy glories,
and it bleedeth inwardly.
It sinkes, it falls, it dies,
for want of more wounding.
It Is sweetly imbittered with thy inconceavable,
thy insupportable Loves.
What bounds can hold it, what thing detain it,
what expressions describe it.
How long shall it languish in thy strength
and expire in thy breathings.
O never never shall these gracious
visitations forsake it.
THus all my life's a course of seeking Thee,
Who lived, who lost Thy life, in seeking me.
Such is my faith, such shall my finding be,
Whose love has found the way to wait on Thee
With righteous works, which cannot extended be
To Thee, but thou wu't meet so doing me.
So running from my self to be
Ingulph't in ever-blessed Thee.
So twining streams in sweet confusion,
Till know my Love without allusion;
Closed in a Close without Conclusion.
I have gasped after thy Salvation O Lord!
Even so come Lord Jesus come quickly.

