The Famous History of the Valiant London-Prentice.



Printed for J. Back, at the Sign of the Black-Boy on London Bridge. 1686.

THE Famous History OF AURELIUS, The VALIANT London- PRENTICE SHOWING His Noble
Exploits at home and abroad, his LOVE, and Great Success.

Very Pleasant and Delightful.

Written for Encouragement of Youth, By J. S.

This may be Printed, R. P.

Printed for I. Back, at the Sign of the Black Boy on London Bridge.

The History of the London-Prentice, etc.
CHAP. I. An account of his Birth, Education, and early Valor, etc.
IN times past, there was Born in the Famous County of Cheshire, a young Man of
excellent beauty, promising very great things, even in his infancy; to promote
which, his Parents being wealthy, spared not to Educate or bring him up in the
best manner the Country would afford, nor did he, as he grew up, fail in any
thing their expectation. In learning he was well seen, and in many other
matters, but nothing so enflamed his mind as the desire of Exercising himself
in ^eats of Arms, and was the more incited thereto by Reading the Famous
adventures of Knights-Errant how successful they were in overcoming Giants and
Monsters, and rescuing beauteous Ladies from death and misery; and as these
heroic thoughts increased, so he found his strength abound, nature not sparing
to give him manly limbs and an able body, so that in his Childish Encounters,
those that far surpassed him in Years, were not able to resist his force, nor
come near him in Wrestling, Iumping, Running, casting the Bar, Stone or Dart;
which made not his Parents but a little proud of such a blessing, whom they had
named Aurelius, as one that promised great things.

CHAP. II. An account of his first adventures and Enterprises, where he won the
Virgins hearts, etc.
WHen Aurelius was at the age of fourteen, he went to a Wake or Mercy meeting
to recreate himself with other Youths of the Country, where he so well behaved
himself, that his courage, activity, strength and beauty, gained great
applause, and took so mainly with the Virgins, that some of them began to fee a
Feavour in their minds, which Cupid who at such mercy meetings is seldom
wanting in Promoting the Business of Love, failed not to increase, but he as
yet not capable of feeling the flame of passion that way, regarded not their
amorous glances, nor understood the silent Language of inflamed hearts, though
it notwithstanding created him those Enemies that were causelessly jealous of
him as a most dangerous Rival, and who gathered their reason for it from the
many praises their Mistresses bestowed on him in his absence.

CHAP. III. How the fair Lucinda fell in love with him, and how those she
despised for his sake, conspired against him.
Our Youth increasing his Strength and beauty with his years, and continuing as
occasion offered to appear in public amongst those admiring Virgins that in a
manner doted on him, and often wished to be Mistress of his affections: Lucinda
the fair Daughter of a Wealthy Shepherd was the chief who sought by many ways
to oblige him, and to let him understand her passion; but Modesty sealing her
Lips, he did not, or would not Interpret her dumb signs, but kept on his
Merriment, without any regard of her passion; which made her sigh and grow
Melancholy, refusing to entertain the Address of those that adored her, and
doted on her Beauties more than she did on those that adorned our Heroic
Youth. This sudden alteration made them restless till they knew the cause of it
which was not long e're they did from her Virgin Compan^ons to whom she had
droped some words of her pass^on; as likewise by a Letter she had written in
order to send to him by a trusty hand, but had accidentally droped it, in which
were these words:

Dear Aurelius,
seeing you do not understand the Language of a Lovesick Virgins Eyes, pardon
my Boldness, if with Blushes I have taken the liberty to let you know Lucinda
doats on you, and begs you would requite her Love with Love, who for your sake,
renounces the rest of Mankind: Then have Compassion or Lucinda must be
miserable.

Subscribed Lucinda.


This giving the Amorists a full knowledge upon whose account they found such
cold Entertainment from their beloved Mistress, whom every one of them feared to
loose, they bent their study how to remove that Screen that stood between them
and their much-desired happiness; some were of opinion that nothing but the
death of Aurelius could effect it; but others of a milder disposition,
declared, that it would not only be too much Cruelty, but bring their own
lives in question; therefore considering womankind was generally more taken
with the Beauty of the Body, than with that of the Soul, they thought it fit to
Deform him with Poison, but where to get it they knew not, and so came to
re^u^t, that disfigure his Face, etc. with Wounds might work the same effect,
and put an end to the passion of their dear Lucinda, which they knew not any
other ways to distinguish.

CHAP. IV. How they attempted to destroy Aurelius, but were overcome and left
naked in the Wood.
THe Plot thus laid against our valiant youth, many ways were sought for an
opportunity to put it in practice, till at last they understand he was gone to
pay a visit to an Aunt of his, who lived at a Village about two miles from his
Fathers house, and that he must return by a Wood: This Lucky opportunity, as
they imagined it, made them all Leap for Joy, there being four in number, they
Armed them with mischievous Weapons, and in disguise, placed themselves in
Ambush under a Thicket of Trees, in the way he must pass, each Swearing to the
other to keep the thing secret, though they keep not their Oaths, as you will
hear. Long they had not stayed, but as they wished, our Valiant Youth not
dreaming of such Treachery, came on, but hearing the Bushes rusle, he made a
halt to see what it meant, when out leaped the Lovers, and incompassing him,
after they had uttered many big words, and reviled him at an unseemly rate,
they made in to graple with; who ignorant of their intent, and scorning to
stoop to fear, took the two foremost in either hand, and by main force brought
their heads together, that they rung like a Barbers Basin; so that stunded with
the violent Knocks, after staggering some paces, down they fell; and having by
this time wrested a Weapon from one of them, he set upon the other two with
such fury, that giving them several Wounds, they, when they found the blood run
about their ears, fell on their knees, and cried for mercy, as did the other,
who by this time were recovered from their Trance; yet could not they obtain
their wish till he had Thrashed them into a Confession of the whole matter, and
thereby became sensible of the Love Lucinda bore him; and that she might come
to the knowledge of what had happened on this occasion, and that their
Treachery might be rewarded with disgrace, he caused them to unstrip, and with
such Tackling as their Garments afforded, he bound them to four several Trees
stark-naked, where these hot-brained Lovers took a fit of Cooling till the
morning, which discovering the whole Intreague, their rash Valor became for
some time aftter, the Mirth of the Country; but most of all it pleased the fair
Lucinda, whose favor they lost thereby.

CHAP. V. How his Father put him Apprentice to a Merchant, and the leave he
took of Lucinda.
THe Father of young Aurelius having received an exact account of all that had
happened, and fearing these Lovers might study a further Revenge to repair
their Disgrace, as also to prevent any Amors that might happen between him and
Lucinda, to whom he was not willing he should be Married; he took an
opportunity to discourse him about putting himself in a way that might render
him capable of living in Credit in the World: when finding him pliable and
ready to submit to what he should propose, he told him it was his pleasure he
should go to London, and there be put an Apprentice to some Honorable Calling,
that he might be a comfort to him in his Old days; and that it should be in his
power to choose him a Master of any Profession. Upon this he had not long
considered, e're he rep^y'd, That seeing it was his pleasure, he was contented;
and for the desire he had to Travel and see strange Countries, he could fancy
none better than a Merchant. To this the Old Man agrees, and shortly after he
was sent up to London, and placed to a Turkey Merchant upon London Bridge, and
upon his departure directed these Lines to Lucinda.

Pardon me Beauteous Maid, if Love as yet
No power a Conquest over me has to get;
That you deserve what e're Love can bestow
I must confess, but I, alas! must go
And wander over the World e're I can Love
Then be contented, and for me never grieve.
Subscribed Aurelius.


This flat denial made the fair Lucinda shed many tears, and bewail her hard
fortune, in loving where she was not repayed with an equal passion; but soon
after a Rich Farmers Son offering service to her, she having with much
struggling over come her former affection, she changed her passion, and
Sacrificed her Virginity to the pleasure of this newcome Lover, where Revelling
in excess of joy, we will leave them, and follow Aurelius to his new preferment.

CHAP. VI. How he gained the love of his Master, and became Enamoured of
Dorinda his fair Daughter.
Our Youth upon his Trial proved so diligent and respectful, that it was not
long e're he was Bound, according to the Custom of the City; and then doubling
his diligence, he won the love of the whole Family, not omitting any thing that
might please or be for his Masters Interest; and what time he had to spare, he
employed in Manly Exercise, of recreating himself in the Fencing-School, and in
Martial Exploits, gaining every where the name of a bold and hardy Youth, and
one that promised great things. In this happy state he lived near three years,
when Fortune who is as unconstant as the Wind, conspired to give him some
disturbance, for Dorinda his Masters Daughter, a beautiful Virgin of about 14
Years of Age, returning from the School where she had been brought up at Board,
her Modesty, winning behavior, and Charming Graces, by his often gazing on
her, prompted him to admire her, and by degrees, to conceive such a passion for
that excellent Creature, that he was no longer master of his heart, which his
eyes had given away: A while he smothered the flame, but in the end it broke
out the fiercer, and then he knew experimentally what Dorinda had suffered
often, he attempted to discover his passion, and as often fear to offend,
stayed the words at his Tongues-end, and all he could do, was to sigh and stand
confounded in her presence; whilst the innocent Lady would frequently ask the
reason, but had no answer, but what his eyes delivered in burning Glances. Thus
he continued for a month or more, at the end of which, he resolved one way or
other to make his passion known, and soon found an opportunity to drop a Letter
in the way of the lovely Dorinda, containing these words:

Beauteous Dorinda,
after many sighs and eager looks, I have presumed to let you know, if this
come to your fair hand, that I love you dearer than my own life, and to be
requited with your Love, there is not any thing so hazardus that I would not
undertake for your sake; the inequallity I must confess, is great, yet Love is
a power obedient to no Law but his own: pity me then as a Lover, that love you
above all Earthly things, and look not on me as your Fathers Servant, but your
devoted Slave, by whose Smiles I live, and without which, my Life must need; be
miserable.

Subscribed Aurelius.


This did not a little surprise the beauteous Maid, who considered, that
although she might have cause to love him, yet he being as then a Servant, it
would be highly displeasing to her Parents, if she should countenance his
affections; wherefore preferring her duty and obedience before her fancy or the
passion of Aurelius, the next time she met him her words were, That she could
not but wonder, he should presume to make Love to her who was his Masters
daughter, e're half his time was expired, and wished him not to make mention of
it any more by Letter or Word, least her Father were made acquainted with it,
to his prejudice; and so with a kind of a scornful frown, left him as one in a
Maze of Grief.

CHAP. VII. How he got leave to go for Turkey, and what ensued.
Aurelius being thus repulsed in his first Love, found himself altogether
restless, and that as often as he beheld his beautiful Mistress, his flame
increased, and his torture was more and more augmented; and though he tried
many ways to give way to his laboring mind, he found them in vain, and
therefore concluded, unless he was removed from the lovely Object, he must be
always miserable; and perceiving her looks and carriage every day more scornful
toward him, he resolved to request his Master that he might go for Turkey as
his Factor, in the next Fleet: Which Request of his was granted without much
difficulty, and in a gallant Equipage took leave, though not without some tears
of his scornful Mistress, who by this time, began somewhat to relent that she
had so unkindly repulsed his Address; but being young and beautiful, and
considering that those advantages, her Indulgent Father would add a large
Portion, her thoughts of a higher advancement, hushed that care, and so they
parted, the valiant Aurelius to the Ship, and the Lady to her Chamber, where we
must leave her, who shortly after Married a Rich Merchant, and followed him
into Turkey.

CHAP. VIII. How he arrived in Turkey, and of his Reception: How he overthrew
the Turks, and killed a Turkish Prince.
THe gallant Aurelius having passed the danger of the Seas, and a while
contended with the Storms of Winds and Love, Landed at Constantinople, where he
was received with much respect by the English Merchants and Factors residing
there, and behaved himself so well in the Management of his Affairs, that he
gained a general Esteem; and in all this, he forgot not to exercise his Valor
as occasion required; and being by this time grown to his full strength, he
found none able to Encounter him, though he was too Modest to boast of his own
Abilities: Now it so fell out, that upon the Marriage of one of the Turks
Daughters, great Sports and Shows were prepared, and all the Valiant Knights
summoned to Exercise at Tilt and Turnament, in Honor of the Ladys, and of
their Countries. This News pleased Aurelius so well, that he resolved to make
one amongst them, and show his Prowels for the honor of the English Nation,
against the proud Infidels, and thereupon provided Armor, a Horse, Sword, and
Lance, bearing in his Shield a Golden Phoenix, to signify he was a Subject to
a Virgin Queen, and under it Neptune Bridling the Ocean, showing that the Seas
Sovereignty depended on her Will; as for his Armor, it was White, signifying
Innocence.

Thus bravely Accoutred, he hasted to the List to await the Trumpets sound,
where all the Nobles and Ladies were Seated in their Degrees, clad in Gold and
Gems, when on a sudden, three Turks well Mounted and Richly Armed, Advanced
with their Mooned Shields, and with a loud voice, did Defiance, as the
Bridegrooms Champions, to all the Knights of Christendom; which made Aurelius
mad to let them know what English Valor was; but perceiving the Champions of
other Nations preparing for the Encounter, he forbore till he might by a
witness of their Fortune, and that his Honor might be the greater, in
overcoming their overcomers, nor did amiss, for the Turks being of a Monstrous
size, and w^ll Managed to such Feats of Arms, at the first Encounter cast them
from their Saddles, and so passed on, and did the like to three others, which
made the bold Aurelius believe it was time for him to Advance, and thereupon
se^^ing Spurs to his Horse, he met the foremost with a full stroke on his
Breast, that it tumbled him with his heels upward, quite over the Crup, and
passing on, struck the second on the Crest with such force that he broke it,
and the Lance entering his Brain, he fell breathless to the ground, which the
third perceiving, who was of a Gyant-like Stature, came upon him with his
Sword, and with a full blow, cut through his Shield, and much bruised him, but
he Charging furiously upon the Infidel, soon made him give ground, and after
diverse Wounds, obliged him to kiss the Earth, and beg quarter for his Life.

To revenge this disgrace of his Champions, the Turkish Prince, with the leave
of his Father-in Law, entered the List in great rage, and defied the bold
Aurelius, Swearing by Mahomet, he would Chastize the great Affront, and with
many reproachful wods, bid him come on, upon which they set Spurs to their
Horses, and met with such fury, that their Lances burst, and shivered in the
Air, when the Turkish Prince drew his Sword, but Aurelius neglecting to do the
like made at him with the Truncheon of his Spear, with which he gave him such a
weighty blow on the top of his Helmet, that broke his Neck (...) sunder, and
down he fell in a Morca^ trance; after which, the Turks strained Complement, and
none durst undertake the Valiant English Champion.

CHAP. IX. How he destroyed two Lions prepared to Devour him, and had the
King's Daughter in Marriage.
THe Great Turk upon notice that Prince Grodmon his Son-in-Law, whom he thought
had only been stunned, was dead, vowed that Aurelius, whom he called English
Boy, should dye the cruelest death that ever man dyed, and thereupon sent a
strong Guard to seize him and convey him to Prison, till he consulted what
manner of death to put him to to, which in the end was conc^uded, that he
should be cast alive to two Lions, who to be the greedier in devouring, were
kept fasting many days.

The day of his death, as by appointm^nt being come, and the King, his Nobles,
and all his Ladies seated to behold the Execution, the brave Aurelius was
brought forth in a Shirt of Cambrick, and Drawers of white Satin, Ambroidered
with Gold, and a Crimson Cap on his head, but had scarce time to bow
respectfully to the Ladies, who greatly praised his Manly Beauty, and began
highly to pity his misfortune, e're the Lions were let loose, who at the sight
of their prey, easting their eyes upon him, began to Rore ho^ribly, insomuch
that the Spectators trembled; but behold Aurelius, whom Death could not daunt,
laying aside all fear, as they came fiercely at him with open mouth, charged
his Hands into their Throats, and e're they had power to get from his strong
Arms, forced out their Hearts, and laid them dead at his feet, demanding of
the King what other dangerous Enterprises they had to put on, and he would
gladly do it for the Honor of his Queen and Countries sake; when immediately
the Turk descending from his Throne, tenderly Embracing him, Swearing he was
some Angel, withal, Pardoned him, and gave Beauteous Theraza his Daughter in
Marriage, with great Riches, who for his sake became a Christian; and after
spending some time in that place, they both returned to England with great joy,
where they lived many years very Loving and Happy.

FINIS.
J B


John Back, at the Black-Boy, on London Bridge, Furnishes any Gentlemen or
Chap Men with all sorts of BOOKS, BALLAD and all other Stationary-Wares, at
Reasonable Rates.


