A short Account of the late Presbyterian and Shaftburian-Plot, seasonably
discovered, and now published for the satisfaction of all inquisitive and
impartial Readers.
TWO Houses of Parliament having successively passed the following Vote, with a
Nemine contradicente; That they were fully satisfied by the Proofs they had
heard, that there now is, and for diverse Years last past, has been A HORRID
AND TREASONABLE PLOT AND CONSPIRACY, contrived and carried on by those of the
Popish Religion, for the Murdering of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and for
Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the ancient and well-established
Government of this Kingdom: And having unanimously applied themselves to the
consideration of the most speedy Remedies, for the prevention of the eminent
Dangers threatened by their restless Adversaries; the Papists were hereby so
much alarmed, that they applied all their Strength, Policy and Industry, to
raise a Jealousy and Division amongst the Protestants; which they effected by
the following means.

Mrs. Celliers, a restless Agent of the Romish Party, having made a strict
enquiry amongst the Catholic Prisoners in Newgate, if it were not possible to
find a man of Courage amongst them, and one who would reform? And having
received that Character of Dangerfield, she strictly enquired into the cause of
his Confinement, concerning his Religion, Parentage, Education and Travels, and
finding him a fit Tool for her purpose, she first encourages him to pursue his
Design in drawing up Articles against Capt. Richardson, and thereupon gave him
some Instructions for the same in Writing; this he performed so much to her
content, that she forthwith promised to use all possible means for his
Enlargement; which was speedily procured for him, and his Fees paid by her. But
no sooner was he out of that Prison, but he was Arrested for Debt, and carried
to the Counter; but by an Habeas Corpus was suddenly removed to the
King's Bench, where he was allowed 20 s. per Week by Mrs. Cellier, and then put
upon a Design of getting an acquaintance with one Stroud, in order to
invalidate Mr. Bedlow's Testimony: Which was first attempted by Drinking with
him, then by dissolving Opium in Brandy, and giving it him in the heat of
Drink, then by drinking him upon the square; by which means Mrs. Stroud
discovered, Dangerfield wrote down and sent to Mrs Cellier; the sum of which
was thus; May the 16th, 1679. STROUD told me, that about 15 years since he knew
Bedloe, who was then in a mean condition; that when Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe
came to view the Prisoners in the King's Bench, he spoke to Mr. Bedloe, and told
him of some former passages; and that from that time he sent him Money every
Week. May 17th, Stroud told me, his wife in the Country had in a Cabinet diverse
Papers that concerned Mr. Bedloe. The same day he told me, his allowance from
Mr. Bedloe was the larger, because he was to observe the motions of several
Priests which were Prisoners there, and their Correspondence. From these
Passages they would have had Dangerfield to Swear, what Munson had framed out
of these Papers, viz. that Stroud told him, That one Mr. Johnson, a Servant to
the Earl of Shaftsbury, Mr. Johnson, a Servant of the Lord Shaftsbury's charged
for Subornation, Dangerfields Narrative, p. 7.
had been with him diverse times, to persuade him to be a Witness for the King,
against the Lords in the Tower; and in order to it, offered him a considerable
Sum of Money; but that he demanded what he must Swear, and who it was must
instruct him. Mr. Johnson replied, You shall not want for that; and I am very
glad to find you so ingenious. But hold, says Stroud, I will not perjure my
self for the world, etc. After this, Mr. Dangerfield was allowed Money for the
compounding his Debts, which amounted to 700 l. Which having done, he
immediately marches to Mrs. Celliers House, and from thence was conducted to
Powis-house, and from thence in a little time to another Lodging; shortly after
he was sent into Buckingham-shire, to one Mr. Webs, at a place called Peterley,
The Author of the Presbyterian Plot, p. 10.
with a Packet of Letters to one Mr. Jeane a Priest, who sat up all Night to
answer them, and then returned by him the groundwork of the Presbyterian-Plot,
which was to this effect;

The Presbyterian Plot, p. 10.
Some store of Pamphlets must be writ, and spread about the Town against the
Presbyterians; persons must be employed to go to Coffee-Houses, and rail
against the PRESBYTERIAN- Party; and if they meet with any that offer to
contend, matter of Treason or some such thing may easily be laid to their
charge, to have them secured; but there must be many persons so employed: And
it will be great Prudence, not to let them know one another; nor to let any one
know more than his own part, etc.

How this Plot was carried on by frequenting Coffee-houses, and dispersing
Pamphlets, p. 16, 17.
This Plot was carried on by Dangerfield at Farrs Coffee-house, and by others
at Procters, Man's, Garraways, Fords, Jonathans, and Combs Coffee-houses, where
they made it their business to spread abroad the rumor of a Plot amongst the
Presbyterians; and as for the dispersing of Pamphlets and other Seditious
Books, Dangerfield was so diligent in that, that some he directed into the
Country, to the Gentry there; others he sent to little petty Coffee-houses
about the Town; and some he would venture to drop in the Street, and in all
Houses where he could.

After this Dangerfield received from Nevel diverse Papers, Pamphlets and
Letters to transcribe, amongst which were forty Lists of Names, each List
containing about eight hundred Names; and a while after Dowdwell brings him
Twenty seven Letters more, the Contents of one of which was, That their
business went here on well, and that Commissions would be speedily issued out,
etc.

The Plot against the Presbyterians how to be carried on and proved? p. 19.
Persons were then to be employed to carry the Papers and Letters relating to
this New-Plot, into all Parts of England, and some means or other used to lodge
them in the Houses of such as were the most eminent of the Presbyterian-party:
Then others were to obtain Warrants upon other pretenses, to make search in
those Houses, and to get the persons committed in whose houses they were found.

The Impressions of diverse Coats of Arms to be engraven, p. 90.
A Packet of Letters were likewise sent about this time to one Holder at
Brvssels, to acquaint him with the whole Design, and earnesty to desire his
good Advice in an affair of that weight; and in one Letter he was desired to
employ some ingenious person there, to cut and engrave the Impressions of
diverse Coats of Arms; the patterns had been taken in Wax from the Seals of the
persons to whom the Coats belonged (as Dangerfield believed) and were sent over
enclosed in a Letter, being fastened with other Wax to the margent of it.

500 l. offered to kill the L. Shaftsbury, and why, p. 22, 23.
Dangerfield was after this offered 500 l. to kill the Earl of Shaftsbury,
because it was taken for granted, if they were rid of him, they should find it
no hard matter to bear down all the rest of their Opposers. This Money was to
be paid him by a Virginia-Merchant, when he heard of the Lord Shaftsbury's
Death, and should receive a Note from Dangerfield, that the Money should be
paid to his use.

The Duke how to be persuaded of a Presbyterian Plot, 8.
Advice was then given to Dangerfield to go forwards with all speed, to set
some Intrigue on foot against the Presbyterians; for the Duke being expected in
Town, something must be done to make His Royal Highness believe the
Presbyterians were carrying on a Design against the King and Government. In
order to which, Dangerfield was commanded to use all the speed he could, to
find out some idle persons, that appeared well in Apparel, and give them Money
to go to the Coffee-houses, and make enquiry of all the Clubs and Meetings that
were about the Town, and get the Names of such as frequented them, and
endeavor to learn how things went in all parts of the Town.

The Presbyterian^ Plot believed by some, p. 30.
Dangerfield was now very busy in visiting most Coffee-houses, who there found
many persons hot against the Presbyterians; some saying, the Plot was now most
apparently discovered to be theirs.

Dangerfield being sent for to give the Duke an account of this New-Plot, he
had the following Instructions given him: An Abbreviation of the Meal-Tub Plot,
al. the Presbyterian Plot, p, 30, 31.
Four Clubs or Meetings.
Sir Robert Peyton's, at the King's Head Tavern. Mr. Bennet*s, at the
Green-Dragon. Sir Francis Clark*s, at the Sun-Tavern. Col. Blood's, at
Westminster-Market.


The three first being the Council-Meetings, and the last the Messengers for
the Countries at present; but when occasion shall require, they shall be
Field-Officers.

Mr. Goodings promise to support D. M. if Banished. Major Alsop's promise to me
for a Commission. Friday the 12th of September, M. went to Sir Thomas Player.
The manner of sending Messengers to all parts of England. The manner of all
their Meetings, and how they converse with one another for the concurrence of
matters. The manner of their contributing, and to what purpose Money is raised.
The posture they were in for a rising if His Majesty had died, and how they had
a considerable Army posted in and about the Town for that purpose. The
contrivance of the Bill against -- The design to rise in the North, in order to
join with an Army of Scots commanded by --
Goodine*s and others accounts about their Government.

For Council. Lord Hallifax, Lord Shaftsbury, Lord Radnor, Lord Essex, Lord
Wharton, Duke of Buckingham and others
Duke of Monmouth General. Lieutenant Generals. Lord Gray of Warke, Lord
Gerrard and his Son, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Blood,
Sir William Waller and others Major Generals. Colonel Mansel Quartermaster
General.
Most of the Field Officers meet at Blood*s Club (as Sir William Waller, Coll.
Mansel, Col. Brown, Col. Barrington, Col. Heart, Col. Jenks, Major Coult) and
others at Cities and great Towns in the Countries.

The Detachment to be made from His Majesty's Guards, etc. and also from the
Trained-Bands and Militia both in City and Country.

Alsop promises to bring me to my Lord Shaftsbury, L. Shaftbury to give
Dangerfield a Commission, p. 31.
to be employed for an Intelligencer, and to have his promise for a Commission.

Dangerfield acquaints the Duke with this Sham-Plot, and after that being
introduced to the King, he had the following instructions given him by the
Popish-party, Dangerfield instructed to charge the Presbyterians with a Design
to alter the Government, and bring in a Commonwealth.
viz. That he should be sure to lay all the burden he could upon the
Presbyterians, but particularly upon the Lord Gray, L. Howard of Escrick, D. of
Monmouth, D. of Buckingham, Sir William Waller, Col. Blood, and some others,
and that he should explain to His Majesty the meaning of the several Contents
of the Paper he had before presented to the Duke, and how the Presbyterians
were resolved to use their utmost endeavors for the subverting the present
Government, and setting up a Commonwealth once more, and setting the D. of
Monmouth in it; and that the L. Shaftsbury and other persons of Quality were
issuing out Commissions to that purpose, and had promised some to diverse
persons.

This Story Dangerfield told the King, and not long after wrote His Majesty a
Letter to New Market, L. Shaftsbury to give out Commissions, p. 35.
That he had discovered a great correspondence between the Presbyterians and
the Dutch.

L. Shaftsbury to be stabbed, p. 37.
Dangerfield now receives fresh Orders to murder the E. of Shaftsbury, in order
(...) unto is sent to Father Sharp to Confess and Receive, which he did, and
was by him conjured by all that was good, to use all possible speed to Stab the
said Lord; for which purpose Mrs. Cellier furnished him with a French-Dagger;
but he being struck with a sudden fear and horror of mind, was utterly
disabled from doing the mischief intended.

Lord Shaftsbury charged for promising Dangerfield an employ, p. 38.
Dangerfield, after this, was ordered to wait upon the King, to tell him, that
the L. Shaftsbury had promised him an employ, and that he would take care of
him; and after that, sent a second time to the L. Shaftsburies to make a second
attempt, and to frame a Discourse to him to this effect. That he was now come
with something that very nearly concerned both his Lordships Honor and Person,
viz. For High Treason, with Letters under his own hands to prove it, p. 38.
That if his Lordship should be sent for before the King and Council, and there
have several accusations of High Treason brought in against him, and thereupon
be committed to the Tower, and that the evidence to maintain those accusations
should prove to be Letters written by his Lordship's own hands, that then he
hoped his Lordship would believe he was his faithful Servant. This Dangerfield
undertook, and was furnished a second time with a Dagger, by Mrs Cellier, to
dispatch the L. Shaftsbury; but the former trouble and confusion of mind seized
him, so that he could not act the bloody Tragedy designed.

The Design against Col. Mansell, how first contrived, p. 41.
This bloody design failing, Mr. Dangerfield was ordered to get an acquaintance
with Col. Mansel, and to take him to a Tavern and drink smartly, and then take
an opportunity to lodge Treasonable Papers in some part of his Clothes, and
immediately upon his pretense of having spoke Treason, call a Constable and have
him apprehended and searched, and carry the Papers to the King and Council, and
so have him Committed; Which, says he, if I had done, the Plot had gone on,
What would have followed its taking effect, p. 41.
and I was to have moved the King and Council to have empowered me to make
search in many other Gentlemen's Lodgings and Houses both in City and Country;
but being afterward advised rather to take Chambers, How the Design against
Col. Mansel was acted, with Dangerfield's being Discovered and and Committed,
p. 42, 43, 44, 49.
where Colonel Mansel lodged, he found an opportunity of fixing the Treasonable
Papers behind the Colonels Beds-head; which being afterward discovered by
himself and the Custom-house Officers, employed by him; Col. Mansel by his
great Care and Prudence proved before the King and Council, that they were
lodged (where found) by Dangerfield; and upon this proof a Warrant was made for
his Commitment to Newgate, for forging of Letters importing High Treason, and
fixing the same privately at Mr. Mansel's Chamber, to render him Guilty thereof
without cause. After this, upon a full hearing of the several Informations and
Examinations, this was the result of the Council.

Whitehal, November. 2. 1679. The result of the Council upon hearing several
Informations and Examinations, with Mr. Dangerfield's Information.
Mr. Thomas Dangerfield having been Examined, the 27th past, by the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, concerning certain Dangerous and Treasonable
Papers seized in Mr. Roderick Mansels Chamber, which it appeared to their
Lordships had been conveyed thither, was thereupon by Order of the Board
committed to Newgate; And having since given in an Information to the Lord Mayor
of London, of several Treasonable Practices against His Majesty's Person and
Government, and of his having been prevailed with by several of the Popish
Religion, to counterfeit the abovementioned Papers and Letters, by which
diverse Noblemen and other Protestants were to have been brought under a
Suspicion of carrying on a Plot against His Majesty's Government, etc.
Haec meminisse Juvat.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwyn, 1681.


