The most delectable HISTORY OF Reynard the Fox: Newly Corrected and purged
from all grossness in Phrase and matter.

As also augmented and enlarged with sundry excellent Moralls and Expositions
upon every several Chapter.



London Printed by J. Bell at the East End of Chrst-Church. 1656.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THou have here (courteous and friendly Reader) the Pleasant and delightful
History of Reynard the Fox, which in an humble and low style (couched to the
natures of the Beasts it treats on) bears in it much excellent Morality and
hidden wisdom, worthy both thy regard in reading and thine application in the
course and commercement of thy life and actions: for the aim at which it
bends, is the overthrow of vice, and the advancement of the good and virtuous.

Now forasmuch as hitherto it has flowne into the World (like Sibilla's loose
papers) covered with much obscurity and darkness: I have for thy more ease and
contentment, to every several Chapter annexed the Moralls and Expositions of
such dark places, as may hold thy judgment in seeking to wind out a
labyrinth so dark and curious? A labor which I doubt not but will prove both
pleasant and wholesome, since as a friendly guide it will keep thy meditations
from wandering astray, and as a pleasant companion hold thee with such
delightful discourse, that thy Journey therein will neither be long nor
irksome: at which end if it arrive with a fair safety as it is faithfully and
truly intended, I have the sum of my wishes, and thy self the prosperity, both
of this and other men's endeavors.

Farewell.
The Pleasant HISTORY OF Reynard the Fox.
CHAP. 1. How the Lion Proclaimed a solemn Feast at his Court, and how Isegrim
the Wolf and his Wife, and Curtise the Hound, made their first complaints of
Reynard the Fox.
ABOUT the Feast of Pentecost (which is commonly called Whitsontide) when the
woods are in their lusty hood and gallantry, and every Tree clothed in the
green and white livery of glorious leaves, and sweet smelling blossoms, and
the earth covered in her fairest mantle of Flowers, which the Birds with much
^oy entertain with the delight of their harmonious songs.

Even at this time and entrance of the lusty Spring, the Lion the Royal King
of beasts, to celebrate this holy Feast-time with all triumphant cerimonie, he
intended to keep open Court at his great Palace of Sanden, and to that end (by
solemn Proclamation) makes known over all his Kingdom, to all Beasts
whatsoever, that upon pain to be held contemptuous, every one should resort to
that great celebration: so that within few days after (at the time prefixed)
all Beasts both great and small came in infinite multitudes to the Court, only
Reynard the Fox excepted, who knew himself guilty in so many trespasses against
many Beasts, that his coming thither must needs have put his life in great
hazard and danger.



Now when the King had assembled all his Court together, there were few Beasts
found but made their several Complaints against the Fox, but especially Isegrim
the Wolf, who being the first and principallest complaint, came with all his
Lineage and kindred, and standing before the King, said in this manner.

My dread and dearest Soverain Lord the King, I humbly beseech you, that from
the height and strength of your great power, and the multitude of your mercies,
you will be pleased to take pity on so great trespasses, and unsufferable
injuries which that unworthy creature Reynard the Fox has done to me, my wife
and our whole family: of which to give your highness some taste, first know (if
it please your Majesty) that this Reynard, came into my house by violence, and
against the will of my wife, where finding my children laid in their quiet
couch, he there be-pist them in so rank a manner, that with the sharpness of
his urine they fell instantly blind for this offense a day was set and appointed
wherein Reynard should come to excuse himself, and to take a solemn oath that
he was guiltless of that high injury: but as soon as the book was tendered
before him (he that well knew his own guiltiness) refused to swear, and ran
instantly into his hole, both in contempt of your Majesty and your Laws. This
(my dread Lord) many of the noblest Beasts know which now are resident in your
Court: Nor has this alone bounded his malice, but in many other things he has
trespast against me, which to relate, neither the time, nor your highness
patience would give sufferance thereunto: suffice it mine injurys are so great
that none can exceed them, and the shame and villainy he has done to my wife is
such, that I can neither abide nor suffer it ^^^eve^ged, but I must expect from
him amends, and from your Majesty mercy.

When the Wolf had spoken these words, there stood by him a little Hound whose
name was (...), made likewise a grievo^us complaint, (...) ^nst the Fox,
saying, that in the extre^m (...) inter when the frost was most violent he
being half (...) and detained from all manner of ^r^y, had no more (...) left
him to sustain his life, then one poor Pudding: which Pudding (he said)
Reynard had most uniustly taken away from him.



But the Hound could hardly let these words ^ie from his lips, when with a
fiery and angry countenance, in sprang Tibert the Cat amongst them, and falling
down before the King, said; My Lord the King, I must confess the Fox is here
grievously complained upon, yet were other Beasts (...) searched, each would
have enough to do for his own clearing. Touching the complaint of Curtise the
Hound, it was an offense committed many years ago, and though I my self
complain of no injury, yet was the Pudding mine, and not his; for I got it by
night out of a Mill when the Miller lay asleep, so that if Curtise could
challenge any share thereof, it must be from mine interest.

When Panther heard these words of the Cat, he stood forth and said, Do you
imagine, Tibert, that it were a just or a good course that Reynard should not
be complained upon? why the whole world knows he is a murderer, a ravisher,
and a thief, and that indeed he loves not truly any creature, no not his
Majesty himself, but would suffer his Highness to lose both Honor and
renown, so that he might thereby attain to himself but so much as the leg
of a fat Hen: I shall tell you what I saw him do yesterday to Kyward the
Hare, that now stands in the Kings protection, he promised unto Kyward that
he would teach him his Credo, and make him a good Chaplain, he made him come
sit between his legs, and sing and cry aloud Credo, Credo: my way lay thereby,
and I heard the song: then coming nearer, I found that Mr. Reynard had left his
first note and song, and began to play his old deceit for he had caught Kyward
by the throat, and had I not at that time come, he had taken his life also, as
you may see by the fresh wound no Kyward at this present. O my Lord the King,
if you suffer this unpunished, and let him go quit that has thus broke your
peace, and profaned your dignity, and doing no right according to the judgment
of your Laws, your Princely children many years hereafter shall bear the
slander of his evil. Certainly Panther (said Isegrim) you say true, and it is
fit they receive the benefit of Justice, that desire to live in peace.

The Moral.
Howsoever a vicious man persuades himself to escape ^unishment, by absenting
himself from the presence of the Magistrate; yet he deceiv^ himself, and by his
contempt anima^s his enemies to be more bold in their complaints against him,
as appears here by the Wolf; who, although worse then the Fox, yet does he
with his absence, and the seasonableness of the time for free liberty of
speech, ^ake opportunity to say the worst he can against him, and by his
example makes others of fear full nature to do the like. And therefore let no
wise man shrink from his just trial, but either defend his own innocence, or
else submit to mercy for dead men and absent, find slack Advocate;

CHAP. 2. How Grimbard the Brock, spoke for Reynard before the King.
THen spoke Grimbard the Brock (that was Reynards sisters Son) being much
moved with anger: Isegrim, You are malicious, and it is a common Proverb?
Malice never spoke well? what can you say against my kinsman Reynard? I would
you durst adventure, that which of you had most injured one another, might die
the death, and be hanged as a fellon? I tell you, were he here in the court,
and as much in the Kings favor as you are, it would be much too little
satisfaction for you to ask mercy: you have many times bitten and torn my
kinsman with your venomous teeth, and oftener much then I can reckon, yet some I
will call up to my remembrance.

Have you forgot how you cheated him with the Plaise which he threw down from
the Cart, when you followed aloof for fear? yet you devoured the good Plaise
alone, and gave him no more but the great boanes, which you could not eat your
self: the like you did with the fat flitch of Bacon, whose taste was so good,
that your self alone did eat it up, and when my Uncle asked his part, you
answered him with scorn, Fair young man thou shall have thy share: but he got
not any thing, albeit he won the Bacon with great fear and hazard; for the
owner came, and caught my kinsman in a Sack, from whence he hardly escaped with
life: many of those injuries has Isegrim don to Reynard, which I beseech your
Lordships judge if they be sufferable: again, he complains that my kinsman
has wronged him in his wife: it is true, and I confess Reynard has lien with
her, yet it was seven years before Isegrim did wed her, and if my uncle out of
courtesy did her a pleasure, what was that to him? she was soon healed of the
sore: nor ought he to complain of any thing not belonging to him; wisdom
would have concealed it, for what credit gets he by the slander of his wife,
especially when she is unagrieved?

Now comes Kayward the Hare with his complant, which to me seemed but a tri^^e,
for if he will learn to read, and read not his lesson aright, who will blame
the Schoolmasters Reynard if he give him due correction? for if scholars be
not beaten and chastised, they will never learn.

Lastly complains Curtise, that he with great pain had gotten a Pudding in
the winter, being a season in which victuals are hard: me thinks silence would
have become him better for he had stolen it: and Male quefisti, and male
perdidisti, 'its fit it was evil lost, 'twas evil wonn, who can blam^ Reynard
to take stolen goods from a thief; It is reason that he which understands the
Law, and can discern right, being of great and high birth as my kinsman is, do
right unto the law Nay had he hanged up Curtise when he took him with the
manner, he had offended none but the King, in doing Justice without leave;
wherefore for respect to his Majesty, he did it not, though he reapt little
thanks for his labor: alas how do those complaints hurt him; mine Uncle is a
Gentleman, and a true-man, nor can he endure falsehood, he does nothing without
the counsel of the Priest: and I affirm, since my Lord the King proclaimed
his peace he never thought to hurt any man: for he eats but once a day, he
lives as a Recluse, he chastises his body, and wears a shirt of hair cloth:
it is above a year since he eat any flesh (as I have been truly informed by
them which came but yesterday from him) he has forsaken his Castle Malepardus,
and abandoned all royalty, a poor hermitage retains him, hunting he has
forsworn, and his wealth he has scattered, living only by arms and good
men's charities; doing infinite pe^ance for his sins, so that he is become pale
and lean with praying, and fasting, for he would feign be with God.

Thus whilst Grimberd his nephew stood preaching, they perceived coming down
the hill unto them, stout Chantecleere the Cock, who brought upon a Beer a dead
Hen, of whom Reynard had bitten off the head, and was brought to the King to
have knowledge thereof.

The Moral.
Vice is never without his advocate, and be a man never so lewd, yet he shall
still find one or other to plead for him; especially where there is either
greatness or wealth in the offender, or any alliance of blood to those in
favor, as appears here by the Brock, which pleads for the Fox; first, because
he was of his kin, and next he was rich, and able to pleasure him; lastly, here
is to be obser^ed, the insinuation of the Advocate, excusing the Foxes faults
with a new form of penitence, cloaking the (...) done with zeal and hypocrisy,
then the which no king (...) brings a good man to belief and forgiveness.

CHAP. 3. How Chantecleere the Cock complained of Reynard the Fox.
CHANTICLEERE marched foremost, smote pitiously his hands and feathers, whilst
on the other side the Bier went two sorrowful Hens, the one was Tantart, the
other the good Hen Cragant, being two of the fairest Hens between Holland and
Arden? these Hens bore each of them a straight bright burning Ta^er, and these
Hens were sisters to Coppell (which lay dead on the Bier) and in the marching
they cried piteously, alack and well-a-day for the death of Coppell our dear
sister. Two young Hens bare the beer, which cackled so heavily, and wept so
loud for the death of Coppel^ their mother, that the hills gave an echo to
their clamor: thus being come before the King, Chantecleere kneeling down,
spoke in this manner.

Most merciful and my great Lord the King, vouchsafe, I beseech you to hear
our complaint, and redre^^e these injuries which Reynard has unjustly don to
me, and my children that here stand weeping; for so it is (most mighty Sir)
that in the beginning of April, when the weather was fair, I being then at
the height of my pride and glory, because of the great stock and lineage I came
of, and also in that I had eight valient sons, and seven fair daughters,
which my wife had hatched, all which were strong and fat, and walked in a yard
well walled and fenced round about, wherein they had in several sheds for
their guarde, six stout Mastife Dogs, which had torn the skins of many
wild Beasts; so that my children feared not any evil which might happen unto
them: But Reynard, that false and dissembling traitor, envying their happy
fortune because of their safety, many times assailed the walls, and gave such
dangerous assaults, that the Dogs diverse times were let forth unto him, and
hunted him away; yea once they light upon him, and bit him, and made him pay
the price for his theft, and his torn skin witnessed, yet nevertheless he
escaped, the more was the pity; yet we were quiet of his trouble a great
while after: at last he came in the likeness of a Hermit, and brought me a
Letter to read, sealed with your Majesty's Seal, in which I found written,
that your Highness had made peace throughtout all your Realm, and that no
manner of Beasts or Foul should do injury one to another, affirming unto me
that for his own part he was become a Monk, or cloystred Recluse, vowing to
perform a daily penance for his sins; showing unto me his beads, his books,
and the hair shirt next to his skin, saying in humble wise unto me, Sir
Chanticleere, never henceforth be afraid of me, for I have vowed never more to
eat flesh.



I am now wa^ed old, and would only remember my soul, therefore I take my
leave: for I have yet my noon and my even-song to say: which spoke, he
departed, saying his Credo as he went, and laid him down under a Hauthorn: at
this I was exceeding glad, that I took no heed, but went and clocked my
children together, and walked without the Wall, which I shall even rue; for
false Reynard lying under a bush came creeping betwixt us and the gate, and
suddenly surprised one of my children, which he thrust up in his male and bore
away to my great sorrow, for having tasted the sweetness of our flesh, neither
hunter, nor hound, can protect or keep him from us: Night and day he waits
upon us with that greediness, that of fifteen of my children, he has left me
but four unslaughtred, and yesterday Coppel my daughter (which here lies dead
on the Bier) was (after her mother) by a kennel of hounds rescued from him;
This is my complaint, and this I leave to your Highness mercy to take pity of
me, and the loss of my fair children.

The Moral.
When wicked men cannot compass their wickedness by strong hand, or violence
against their enemies; then they study deceit and shifts to entangle them: of
all which none is so powerful, as the show of Religion: for that working upon
the easy belief of the simple, makes them many times ship themselves into
the rough Seas, whence there is no help but shipwreck, as the foolish Cock did
to believe the subtle Fox. Also in this a man may see, that though an evil man
may be now and then excused of some faults, yet still his sins will so dog
him at the heels, that in the end he shall be discovered, and lie to open Law
and punishment; as now it hapened to the Fox, notwithstanding, the Brocks
excuse and maintenance.

CHAP. 4. The Kings answer to the Cocks complaint, and how they sung the Dirge.
TPen spoke the King, Sir Grimbard, hear you this of your uncle the Recluse? he
has fasted and prayed well: well, believe it, if I live a year, he shall
dearly abide it: as for you Chantecleere, your complaint is heard, and shall
be cured: to your daughter that is dead, we will give her the right of burial,
and with solemn Dirges bring her to the earth with worship; which finished, we
will consult with our Lords, how to do you right and Justice against the
murder. Then began the Placedo Domine, with all the verses belonging to it,
which are too many to recite: and as soon as the Dirge was done, the body was
entered, and upon it a fair Marble stone laid, being polished as bright as
glass; in which was engraven in great letters this inscription following,
Coppell Chanticleers daughter, whom Reynard the Fox has slain, lies here
buried; mourn thou that re^^est it, for her death was unjust and lamentable.
After (...) the King sent for his Lords and wisest Counsellore, to (...) how
this foul murder of Reynards might be punished. In the end it was concluded
that Reynard should be sent for, and without all excuse to appear before the
King, to answer these trespasses should be objected against him and that this
message should be delivered by Bruine the Bear: to all this the King gave
consent, and calling him before him said sir B^ui^^ it is our pleasure that you
deliver this message, yet in the delivery thereof have great regard to your
self, for Reynard is full of policy, and knows how to dissemble, flatter,
and betray, he has a world of snares to entangle you withal, and without
great exercise of judgment, will make a scorn and mock of the best wisdom
breathing. My Lord (answered sir Bruine) let me alone with Reynard, I am not
such a truant in discretion, to become a mock to his knavery: and thus full of
jollitie the Bear departed: if his return be as jovial, there is no fear in his
well-speeding.

The Moral.
Here those that excuse bad actions, may see how such offenses return to
disgrace, because evil men's vices being disclosed, the excuse are their shames
that make them; as it happened now to the Brock. Also in the Lion may be seen the
effects of a good disposition, which is expressed in the honors and rights of
Burial done to the Hen, which is a (...) of satisfaction for the grief her kin
endured; In the Bears willingness to fetch the Fox, is expressed how apt a
malicious nature is to be imploi'd in any thing that may offend his adversary,
and how commonly such imploiments miscarry.

CHAP. 5. How Bruine the Bear sped with Reynard the Fox.


THe next morning away went Bruine the Bear in quest of the Fox, armed against
all plots of deceit whatsoever, and as he came through a dark Forest, in which
Reynard had a by-path, which he used when he was hunted, he saw a high
mountain, over which he must pass to go to Malepardus: for though Reynard have
many houses, yet Malepardus is his chiefest and most ancient Castle, and in it
he lay both for defense and ease: Now at last when Bruine was come to
Malepardus, he found the gates close shut, at which after he had knocked
(sitting on his tail) he called aloud, Sir Reynard, are you at home? I am
Bruine your kinsman, whom the King has sent to summon you to the Court, to
answer many foul accusations exhibited against you, and has taken a great vow,
that if you fail to appear to this summon, that your life shall answer your
contempt, and your goods and honors shall lie confiscate at his Highness
mercy: Therefore fair kinsman, be advised by your friend, and go with me to
the Court to shun the danger that else will fall upon you. Reynard lying close
by the gate (as his custom was for the warm Su^ne sake) hearing those words,
departed into one of his holes, for Malepardus is full of many intricate and
curious Rooms, (which labyrinth-wise he could pass through, when either his
danger, or the benefit of any prey required the same) where meditating a while
with himself how he might counterplot and bring the Bear to disgrace (whom he
knew loved him not) and himself to honor at last he came forth and said, Dear
Uncle Bruine, you are exceeding welcome, pardon my slownesse in coming; for at
your first speech I was saying my Even-song: and devotion must not be
neglected: believe me he has done you no good service, nor do I think him
which has sent you this weary and long journey, in which your much sweat and
toil, far exceeds the worth of the labor: certainly had you not come, I had to
morrow been at the Court of mine own accord, yet at this time my sorrow is much
lessened, in as much as your counsel at this present may return me double
benefit: Alas Cousin, could his Majesty find no meaner a messenger then your
noble self to employ in these trivial affairs? truly it appears strange to me:
especially since next his royal self, you are of greatest renown both in Blood
and Riches: for my part I would we were both at Court, for I fear our journey
will be exceeding troublesome: for to speak troth, since I made my abstinence
from Flesh, I have eaten such strange new meats, that my body is very much
distempered, and swells as if it would break. Alas dear Cousin (said the
Bear) what meat is that which makes you so ill? Uncle (answered he) what will
it profit you to know? the meat was simple and mean; we poor men are no Lords
you know, but eat that for necessity, which others eat for wantonness: yet not
to delay you; that which I eat was honey-combs, great, full, and most pleasant
which compelled by hunger, I eat too unmeasurably, and am thereby infinitely
distempered. Ha (quoth Bruine) honey-combs? do you make such slight respect of
them. Nephew? why it is meat for the greatest Emperor in the world: Fair
Nephew; help me but to some of that honey, and command me whilst I live; for
one little part thereof, I will be your servant everlastingly. Sure said the
Fox (Uncle) you but jest with me: but just with you (replied Bruine) beshrew my
heart then: for I am in that serious earnest, that for one lick thereat you
shall make me the faithful'st of all your kindred. Nay (said the Fox) if you be
in earnest, then know I will bring you where so much is, that ten of you shall
not be able to devour it at a meal, only for your love sake, which above all
things I desire, Uncle, Not ten of us (said the Bear?) it is impossible: for
had I all the honey betwixt Hibla and Portugal, yet I could in a short space
eat it all my self. Then know Uncle (quoth the Fox) that near at hand here
dwells a Husbandman named Lauferr, who is master of so much honey, that you
cannot consume in seven years, which for your love and friendship sake I will
put into your safe possession. Bruine mad upon the honey, swore, that to have
but one good meal thereof, he would not only be his faithful friend, but also
stop the mouths of all his adversaries. Reynard smiling at his easy belief,
said, If you will have seven tun, Uncle, you shall have it. These words pleased
the Bear so well, and made him so pleasant, that he could not stand for
laughing.

Well thought the Fox, this is good fortune, sure I will lead him where he
shall laugh more measurably: and then said, Uncle, we must delay no time, and I
will spare no pain for your sake, which for none of my kin I would perform. The
Bear gave him many thanks, and so away they went, the Fox promising him as much
honey as he could bear, but meant as many strokes as he could undergo: in the
end they came to Lanferts house, the sight whereof made the Bear rejoice. This
Lanfert was a stout and lusty Carpenter, who the other day had brought into
his yard a great Oak, which (as their manner is) he began to clear, and had
struck into it two wedges, in such wise, that the clost stood a great way open:
at which the Fox rejoiced much, for it was answerable to his wish, so that with
at laughing countenance he said to the Bear, Behold now dear Uncle, and be
careful of your self, for within this tree is so much honey, that it is
unmeasurable, try if you can get into it, yet good Uncle eat moderately: for
albeit the combs are sweet and good, yet a surfeit is dangerous, and may be
troublesome to your body, which I would not for a world, since no harm can
come to you, but must be my dishonor, Sororw not for me, Nephew Reynard said
the Bear) nor think me such a fool, that I cannot temper mine appetite. It is
true my best Uncle, I was too be so, I pray you enter in at the end, and you
shall find your desire. The Bear with all have entered the tree, with his two
feet forward, and thrust his head into the clost, quite over the ears: which
when the Fox perceived; he instantly ran and pulled the wedges out of the
tree, so that he locked the Bear fast therein, and then neither flattery nor
anger availed the Bear, for the Nephew had by his deceit brought the Uncle into
so false a prison, that it was impossible by any Art to free himself of the
same. Alas, what profits now his great strength and valor? why they were
both causes of more vexation: and finding himself destitute of all relief, he
began to howl and bray, and with scratching and tumbling to make such a noise,
that Lanfert amazed, came hastily out of his house, having in his hand a sharp
hook, whilst the Bear lay wallowing and roaring within the tree, which the Fox
a far off seeing, he said to the Bear in scorn, Is the honey good (Uncle)
which you eat: how do you? eat not too much I be^^ech you: pleasant things are
apt to surfeit, and you may hinder your journey to the Court: when Lanfert
comes (if your belly be full) he will give you drink to digest it, and wash
it down your throat: and having thus said, he went toward his Castle. But by
this time, Lanfert finding the Bear fast taken in the tree: he ran to his
neighbors, and desired them to come into his yard, for there is a Bear fast
taken there. Which being noised through all the Town, there was neither man, nor
woman, nor child, but ran thither, some with one weapon, and some with
another; as Goads, Rakes, Broom-staves, or what they could gather up: the
Priest had the handle of the Cross; the Clerk, the holy water sprinkled and
the Priest's wife Dame ^ullock with her distaffe, for she was then spinning:
nay, the old Beldames came, that had nere a tooth in their heads. This army
put Bruine into a great fear, being none but himself to withstand them, and
hearing the clamor of the noise which came thundering upon him, he wrastled
and pulled so extremely, that he got out his head, but left behind him all the
skin, and his ears also: insomuch that never creature beheld a fouler or more
deformed Beast; for the blood covering all his face, and his hands leaving the
claws and skin behind them, nothing remained but ugliness; 'twas an ill
market the Bear came to, for he lost both motion and sight, feet and eyes: but
notwithstanding this torment, Lanfert the Priest, and the whole Parish came
upon him, and so be^cudgell'd him about his bodie-part, that it might well be a
warning to all his misery, to know that ever the weakest shall still go most
to the walls: This the Bear found by experience, for every one exercised the
height of their furies upon him; even Houghlin with the crooked leg, and
Ludolf with the long broad nose, the one with a leaden Mall, and the other with
an iron whip, all to be-lashed poor sir Bruine, not so much but sir Bertolf
with the long fingers, Lanfert and Ortam did him more annoyance then all the
rest, the one havink a sharp Welsh-hook, the other a crooked staff well leaded
at the end, which he used to play at stab-ball withal, there was Birkin, and
Armes-Ablequake, Bane the Priest with his staff, and dame Jullocke his wife,
all these so belabored the Bear, that his life was in great danger: the poor
Bear in this Massacre sat and sighed extremely, groaning under the burden of
their strokes, of which Lanferts were the greatest, and thundered most
dreadfully, for Dame Podge of Casport was his Mother, and his Father was Marob
the Steeple-maker a passing stout man when he was alone: Bruine received of him
many showers of stones, till Lanferts Brother rushing before the rest with a
staff, struck the Bear in the head such a blow, that he could neither hear nor
see, so that awaking from the astonishment, the Bear leapt into the River
adjoining, through a cluster of wives there standing together, of which he
threw diverse into the water, which was large and deep, amongst whom the Parsons
wife was one, which the Parson seeing how she floated like a Sea-mew, he left
striking the Bear, and cried to the rest of the company, help, oh help? Dame
Jullocke is in the water, help both men and women, for whosoever saves her, I
give free pardon of all their sins and transgressions, and remit all penance
imposed whatsoever: this heard, every one left the Bear to help Dame Jullocke,
which as soon as the Bear saw, he cut the stream and swam away as fast as he
could, but the Priest with a great noise pursued him, crying in his rage, Turn
villain, that I may be revenged of thee, but the Bear swam in the strength of
the stream, and suspected not his calling, for he was proud that he was so
escaped from them: only he bitterly cursed the Honey-tree, and the Fox, which
had rot only betrayed him, but had made him lose his hood from his face, and
his gloves from his fingers: in this sort he swam some three miles down the
water, in which time he grew so weary, that he went on the land to get ease,
where blood trickled down his face, he groaned, sighed, and drew his breath so
short, as if his last hour had been exspiring: Now whilst these things were
in doing, the Fox in his way home stole a fat Hen, and threw her into his
male-and running through a by path that no man might perceive him, he came
toward the River with infinite joy: for he suspected that the Bear was
certainly slainl; therefore said to himself, My fortune is as I wished it, for
the greatest enemy I had in the Court is now dead, nor can any man suspect me
guilty thereof, but as he spoke these words, looking toward the River, he
espied where Bruine the Bear lay resting, which struck his heart with grief,
and he railed against Landfert the Carpenter, saying, Silly fool that thou art,
what mad man would have lost such good venison, especially being so fat and
wholesome, and for which he took no pains, for he was taken to his hand; any
man would have been proud of the fortune which thou neglectest. Thus fretting
and chiding, he came to the River, where he found the Bear all wounded and
bloody, of which Reynard was only guilty yet in scorn he said to the Bear, Mon
Sire, Dieu vous guard. O thou foul red villains, said the Bear to himself,
what impudence is like this? But the Fox went on with his speech, and said,
What Uncle? have you forgot any thing at Lanfert^, or have you paid him for
the honey-combes you stole? if you have not, it will redound much to your
disgrace, which before you shall undergo, I will pay him for them my self:
sure the honey was excellent good, and I know much more of the same price; G^d
Uncle, tell me before I go, into what order do you mean to enter, that you wear
this new fashoned Hood? will you be a Monk, an Abbot, or a Friar? surely he
that shaved your crown, has cropped your ears, also your fore-top is lost, and
your gloves are (...); fie sloven, go not bare-handed, they say you can sing
^eccavi rarely. These taunts made Bruine mad with rage; but because he could
not take revenge, he was content to let him talk his pleasure: then after a
small rest, he plunged again into the River, and swam down the stream; and
landed on the otherside, where he began with much grief to meditate how he
might get to the Court; for he had lost his ears, his talons, and all the skin
off his feet, so that he had a thousand deaths followed him; he could not go,
and yet of necessity he must move, that in the end compelled by extremity, he
set his buttocks on the ground, and tumbled his body over and over; so by
degrees tumbling now half a mile, and then half a mile, in the end he tumbled
to the Court; where diverse beholding his strange manner of approach, they
thought some prodigy had come toward them, but in the end the King knew him,
and grew angry, saying, It is Sir Bruine my servant, what villains have wounded
him thus, or where has he been that he brings his death thus along with him? O
my dread Sovereign Lord the King, (cried out the Bear) I complain me
grievously unto you: behold how I am massacred, which I humbly beseech you
revenge on that falls Reynard, who for doing your royal pleasure, has brought
me to this disgrace and slaughter. Then said the King, How durst he do this?
now by my crown I swear I will take revenge, which shall make the traitors
tremble: whereupon the King sent for all his Counsel, and consulted, how, and
in what sort to prosecute against the Fox; where it was generally con^^^ed,
that he should be again summoned to appear and answer his trespasses; and the
party to summon him they appointes to be Tibert the Cat, as well for his
gravity as wisdom: all which pleased the King well.

The Moral.
In this encounter between the Fox and the Bear, is expressed the dissimulation
of two wicked persons, each plotting to do the other mischief: wherein though
the wisest commonly get the victory at first, yet the just cause in the end
prevails. In the Bears greediness to eat honey, is expressed, the lascivious
in constancy of a loose and unrestrained nature, that for a minutes enjoying
of their own delight^, quite forget the business and cares they have in hand.
In the Fox is expressed the cunning of wisdom, which ever cast out (to loose
natures) those baits of delight, which being swallowed with greediness, do
ever choke the swallower, as appears by the Bear, who is not only wounded,
and in danger of his life, but also made a mock and scorn to his enemies.
Also by the ernc^ty used on the Bear by the common people, is showed, how when
an ill man is once snared in his vices, how every one of what degree soever
from the highest to the lowest, are ready to prosecute and revenge themselves
for the ^lls they have received.

CHAP. 5. How the King sent Tibert the Cat for Reynard the Fox.
THen the King called for Sir Tybert the Cat, and said to ^him Sir Tybert, you
shall go to Reynard, and say to him the second time, and command him to appear,
and answer his offenses; for though he be cruel to other beasts, yet to you he
is courteous; assure him if he fail at your first summons, that I will take so
severe a course against him, and his posterity, that his example shall terrify
all offenders. Then said Tibert the Cat, My dread Lord, they were my foes which
thus advised you, for there is nothing in me that can force him either to come,
or tarry: I beseech your Majesty send some one of greater power, I am little
and feeble: besides if noble Sir Bruine, that is so strong and mighty, could
not enforce him, what will my weakness avail? The King replied, It is your
wisdom, Sir Tibert, I employ, and not your strength, and many prevail with
Art, when violence returns with lost labor. Well, said the Cat, since it is
your pleasure, it must be accomplished, heaven make my fortune better then my
heart presageth. This Tibert made things in readiness, and went toward
Mallepardus, and in his journey, he saw come flying toward him one of Saint
Martins Birds, to whom the Cat, cried aloud, Hail gentle bird, I beseech thee
turn thy wings and fly on my right hand: but the bird turned the contrary way,
and flew on his left side; then grew the Cat very heavy, for he was wise and
skillful in Augurisme, and knew the signs to bs ominous, nevertheless (as many
do) he armed himself with better hope: and went to Mall^pardus, where he fonnd
the Fox standing before the Castle gates, to whom Tibert sai^^. Health to my
fair Cousin Reynard: so it is that the King by me summo as you to the Court in
which if you fail or defer time, there is nothing more assured unto you, then
a cruel, and a sudden death. The Fox answered, Welcome dear cousin Tibert, I
obey your command, and wish my Lord-the King infinite days of happiness, only
let me entreat you to rest with me to night, and take such cheer as my simple
house affords, and to morrow as early as you will, we ^ill ^o toward the
Court, for I hare no kinsm^n I trust so dearly as your self. Here was with me
the other day the trech^rous Knight Sir Bruine the Bear, who looked upon me
with that tyra^nou cruelty, that I would not for the wealth of an Empire
hazarded my person with him, but my dear cousin, with you I will go, were a
thousand sicknesses upon me. Tibert replied, You speak like a noble Gentleman,
and me thinks it is best now to go forward, for the Moon shines as bright as
day. Nay dear cousin (said the Fox) let us take day before us, so may we
encounter with our friends the night is full of danger, and suspicions. Well,
said the Cat, if it be your pleasure I am content, what shall we cat? Reynard
said truly my store is small, the best I have is a honeycomb too pleasant and
sweet, what think you of it? Tibert replieth, it is meat: I little respect, and
seldom eat: I had rather have one Mouse, then all the honey-in Europe. A mouse
said Reynard) why my dear cousin here dwells a Priest hard by, who has a
Bar^e by his house so full of mice, that I think half the Wains in the Parish
are not able to bear them. O dear Reynard (quoth the Cat) do but lead me
thither, and make me your servant for ever: why (said the Fox) but love you
mice so exceedingly? Beyond expression (quoth the Cat) why a mouse is beyond
Venison, or the delicatest cates on Princes Tables: therefore conduct me
thither, and command my friendship in any matter: had you slain my father, my
mother, and all my kin, I would clearly forgive you.

The Moral.
By the sending of the Cat to fetch the Fox, is expressed the care of Governors,
that when they have been deceived by the prde and often^ation of such as they
did employ, and thought discreet; that then they seek cut those that are known
wise, and employ them; because wisdom: is even circumvented by a greater
wisdom, in the Cats much loathness to go is expressed, the unwilingness a wise
man has to meddle in dangerous matters, especially when they hold the party
with whom they have to do, of a reach far beyond them; yet when authority
commands, they must obey, though never so many dangers attend.

CHAP. 7. How Tibert the Cat was deceived by Reynard the Fox.
THEN said Reynard, Sure you do you but jest. No by my life, said the Cat, Well
then (quoth the Fox) if you be in earnest, I will so work that this night I
will fill your belly; it is not yossible, said the Cat: then follow me said the
Fox: for I will bring you to the place presently: thus away they went with all
speed to the Priests Barn, which was well walled about with a mu^^-wall, where
but the night before the Fox ha^ broken in, and stole from the Priest an
exceeding fat Hen; at which the Priest was so angry, that he had set a grin or
snare before the hole, to catch him at his next coming, which the false Fox
knew perfectly, and therefore said to the Cat Sir Tibert, creep in at this
hole, and believe it you shall not tarry a minutes space, but you shall have
more mice then you are able to devour: hark, you may hear how they peep: when
your belly is full, come again, and I will stay and wait for you here at this
hole, that to morrow we may go together to the Court: but good Cousin stay not
too long, for I know, my wife will hourly expect us. Then (said the Cat) think
you I may safely enter in at this hole? these Priests are wise, and subtle and
couch their danger often close, that rashness is soon overtaken. Why cousin
Tibert (said the Fox) I never saw you turn coward before: what man, fear you a
shadow? The Cat ashamed at his fear, sprang quickly in at the hole, but was
presently caught fast by the neck in the Grin, which as soon as the Cat felt
and perceived, he quickly leapt back again: so that the snare running close
together, he was half strangled, so that he began to strugle, and cry out, and
exclaim most piteously: Reynard stood before the hole and heard all, at which
he infinitely rejoices, and in great scorn said, Cousin Tibert, love you Mice?
I hope they be well fed for your sake; knew the Priest or Martinet of your
feasting, I know them of so good disposition, they would bring you sauce
quickly; me thinks you sing at your meat, is that the Court fashion; if it be,
I would Isegsim the Wolf were coupled with you, that all my friends might be
feasted together: but all this whlie the poor Cat was fast, and mewed so
pitiously, that Martinet leapt out of his bed, and cried to his people? Arise,
for the thief is taken that had stolen our Hens: With these words the Priest
unfortunately rose up, and awaked all in his house, crying, the Fox is taken,
the Fox is taken: and arising stark naked, he gave to Jullock his wife an
offering candle to light, and then came first to Tibert, he smote him with a
great staff, and after him many other: so that the Cat received many deadly
blows, and the anger of Martinet was so great, that he struck out one of the
Cat's eyes which he did, to second the naked Priest, thinking at one blow to
dash out the Cat's brains: but the Cat perceiving his death so near him, in a
desperate mood he leapt between the Priests legs, and with his claws and teeth
so fast'ned on his genitors, that in all the great Turks Seraglio, there was
not a clearer Eunuch: which when Dame Jullock his wife saw, she cried out and
swore, she had rather have lost the whole Offerings of seven years, then that
one poor little morsel: and witha^l erst that ever the Grin was invented, and
calling Martinet, See, my Son, this thy Fathers delight, and my Jewel, but it
is ^ow spoiled, to his shame, and my utter loss for ever: for howsoever he be
cured, yet to me he can never more be comfortable. All this while Reynard stood
before the hole, and saw what passed, and laughed so extremely, that his body
was ready to break, saying to Dame Jullock, Fie woman, do not torment your
self so, the Priest has lost but one stone, you may yet receive due
beneviolence: there is many a Chapel in which but one Bell rings. Now whilst
the Fox thus scoffed the Priest's wife, the poor Priest fell down in a swound:
so that every man left the Cat, to revive the Priest: which whilst they were
doing, the Fox returned home to Malepardus, for he imagined the Cat was past
all hope to escape: but the poor Cat seeing all her ^ors busy about the
Priest, he presently began to gnaw and (...) the cord till he had sheared it
quite asunder in the (...) one he leapt out of ^he hole, and went roaring and
tumbling ^^ke the Bear; to the Kings Court. But before he got thither, it was
fair day, and the Sun being risen, he entered the Court, like the pittifullest
beast that ever was beheld, For by the Foxes craft his body was beaten and
bruised, his bones ^^ivered and broken; one of his eyes lost, and his skin
(...) and mangled. This when the King beheld, and saw Tibert so pitifully
mangled, he grew infinitely angry, and took counsel once more, how to revenge
the injuries upon the Fox. After sam consultation, Grimbard the Brock, Reynards
Sisters son, said to the rest of the Kings counsel, My good Lords, though my
Uncle were twice so evil as these complaints make him, yet there is remedy
enough against his mischeifs: therefore it is fit you do him Justice as to a
man of his rank, which is, he must be the third time summoned, and then it he
appear not, make him guilty of all that is laid against him. Then the King
demanded of the Brock, whom he thought fittest to summon him or who would be so
desparate to hazard his hands, his ears, nay his life with one so tyrannous
and irreligious? Truly (answered the Brock) if it please your Majesty, I am
that desperate person, who dare adventure to carry the message to my most
subtle Kinsman, if your highness but command me.

The Moral.
By the Fox insnaring of the Cat is expressed, now when wise men will (...) their
enemies, or give credit to reconciled Friends, they evermore miscarry in their
designs; and therefore every wise man should so temper his affections, that he
grow no^ fond of any thing in his enemies power; how agreeable soever ^^ be
either with his nature, or his power. For the bai^s of an enemy are only
gilded pills, which are fair to look on, but most bitter to, taste. By the
mischief which the Priest received, ^s showed, that they which harm watch, harm
eatch, and that the trap which men now and then set for others, bri^gs hurt to
them selves,

CHAP. 8. How Grimbard the Brock was sent to bid the Fox to the Court.
THen said the King, Go Grimbard, for I command you^ yet take heed of Reynard,
for he is subtle and malicious. The Brock thanked his Majesty, and so taking
humble leave, went to Mallepardus, where he found Reynard Ermelin his wife,
sporting with their young whelps; then having saluted his Uncle and his Aunt,
he said: Take heed fair Uncle, that your absence from the Court, and not more
mischief to your cause, then the offense does deserve: believe it, it is high
time you appear to the Court, since your delay does beget but more danger and
punishment: the complaints against you are infinite, and this is your third
time of Summons; Therefore your wisdom may tell you, that if you delay but one
day further, there is not left to you or yours any hope of mercy, for within
three days your Castle will be demolished, your kindred made slaves, and your
self exempted for a public example. Therefore my best Uncle, I beseech you
recollect your wisdom, and go with me presently to the Court. I doubt not but
your discretion shall excuse you, for you have past through many as eminent
perils and made your foes ashamed, whilst the Innocence of your cause has born
you spotless from the Tribunal. Reynard answered; Nephew, you say true, and I
will be advised and go with you, not to answer offenses, but in that I know the
Court stands in need of my counsel; the Kings mercy I doubt not, if I may come
to speak with his Majesty, though mine offenses were ten times doubled, for I
know the Court cannot stand without me, and that shall his highness understand
truly: though I know I have many enemies, yet it troubles me not, for mine
innocence shall awaken their injuries, and they shall know that in high matters
of State and policy, Reynard cannot be missing: they may well harp upon
things, but the pith and ground must come from my relation: it is the envy of
others has made me leave the Court, for though I know their shallowness cannot
disgrace me, yet may their multitudes oppress me: nevertheless (Nephew) I will
go with you to the Court, and answer for my self, and not hazard the welfare of
my Wife and Children, the King is too mighty; and though he do me injury, yet
will I bear it with patience. This spoke he turned to his wife and said Dame
Ermelin have care of my children, specially Revnikin my youngest son for he had
much of my love, and I hope will follow my steps; also Rossell is passing
hopeful, and I love them entirely; therefore regard them, and if I escape,
doubt not but my love shall requite you. At this leave taking Ermelin wept, and
her children howled; for their Lord and victualler was gone, and Malepardus
left unprovided.

The Moral.
In the sending of the Brock to fetch the Fox, is showed, that when the vi^ious
cannot be overtaken and brought to answer, then it is meet to use their own
weapons against them, and with policy, which can no way be better done then by
employing their kindred, and such as they most dearly affect to persuade them,
because Affection is ever a prevailing Orator.

CHAP. 9. Mow Reynard shrove him to Grimbard the Brock.
WHEN Reynard and Grimbard had gone a good way on their journey, Reynard
stayed, and said. Dear Nephew, blame me not if my heart be full of care, for my
life is in great hazard, yet to blot out my sins with repentance, and to cast
off the burden, give me leave to shrive my self unto you; I know you are holy,
and having received penance for my sin, my soul will be quiet. Grimbard bad him
proceed. Then said the Fox, Confi^ebor tibi pater. Nay said the Brock, if you
will shrive to me, do it in English, that I may understand you: Then said
Reynard, I have grievously offended against all the Beasts that live, and
especially mine Uncle Bruine the Bear, whom I lately massacred; and Tybert the
Cat whom I ensnared in a grin: I have trespassed against Chanteclere and his
Children, and have devoured ma^y of them; nay the King has not been quit of my
malice, for I have slandred him and his Queen, I have betrayed Isegrim the
Wolf. and called him Uncle, though no part of his blood ran in my veins. I made
him ^ Monk of Elmane, where I became also one of the order, only to do him open
mischief I made him bind his soot to the bellrope to teach him ring, but he
p^al had like to have cost him his life, the men of the parish beat and wounded
him so sore: after this I taught him to catch fish, but he was soundly beaten
therefore, and feels the strip^s at this instant. I led him to steal Bacon at
a rich Priest's house, where he fed so extremely: that not being able to get
out, where he got in, I raised all the Town upon him: and then went where the
Priest was set at meat with a fat Hen before him: which Hen I snatched away, so
that the Priest cried out, Kill the Fox, for never man saw thing so strange,
that the Fox should come into my house, and take my meat from before me.

This is a boldness beyond knowledge: and with these words he threw his knife
at me, but he mist me, and I ran away whilst he pursued me crying. Kill the
Fox, Kill the Fox, and after him a world of people, whom I led to the place
where Isegrim was, and there I let my Hen fall, for it was too heavy for me
(yet much against my will) and then s^ringing through a hole I got into safety.
Now as the Priest took up the Hen, he espied Isegrim, and then cried out,
Strike friends, strike, here is the Wolf, by no means let him escape us: Then
the people came all together, with clubs, and staves, and with a dreadful
noise, giving the poor Wolf many a deadly blow, and some throwing stones after
him, hit him such mortal blows on the body, that the Wolf fell down as if he
had bin dead, which perceived, they took him and dragged him by the heels over
stocks and stones, and in the end threw him into a Ditch without the Village,
and there he lay all night, but how he got thence I know not. Another time I
led him to a place, where I told him were seven Hens and a Cock, set on a
perch, all lusty and fat, and hard by the place stood a false door, on which
we climed: then I told him if he would creep in at the door, he should find
the Hens. Then Isegrim with much joy went laughing to the door, and entering in
a little, and groping about, he said, Reynard, you abuse me; for here is
nothing: then replied I, Uncle, they are further; and if you will have them,
you must adventure for them: those which used to sit there, I my self had long
since; at this the Wolf going a little further I gave him a push forward, so
that he fell down into the house, and his fall was so great, and made such a
noise, that they which were asleep in the house, awaked, and cried, that
something was fallen down at the trap-door; whereupon they arose, and lighted a
candle, espying him, they beat and wounded him to death. Thus I brought the
Wolf to ^a^y hazards of his life, more then I can now either remember or
reckon, which as they come to my mind, I will reveal to you hereafter. I have
also grievously offended against Dame A^sewinde his Wife of which I must repent
me for it was highly to her dishonor. Uncle, said Grimbart, I understand you
not, you make your shrift unperfect; for you say you have offended, but declare
not in what. Pardon me, Nephew, I know you hate to hear dishonor of Women: the
truth is, I have laien with her: Thus have I told you my wickedness now order
my penance as shall seem fit in your discretion, Grimbart was both learned and
wise, and therefore brake a rod from a tree, and said, Nephew, You shall three
times strike your body with this rod, and then lay it down upon the ground,
and spring three times over it without bowing of your legs, or stumbling: then
shall you take it up, and kiss it get fly, in sign of meekness and obedience
to your penance: which do^e, you are absolved of your sins committed to this
day, for I pronounce unto you clear remission. At this the Fox was exceeding
glad, and then Grimbart said unto him: See that henceforth Uncle you do good
works, read your Psalter, got^ Church, fast vigils, keep holy days, give alms,
and leave your sinful and evil life, your theft and your treason, and then no
doubt you shall attain mercy. The Fox promised to perform all this, and so
they went together toward the Court, but a little besides the way as they
went, (...) a religious house of Nuns, where many Geese, Henns, and Capons
went without the wall: and as they went talking the Fox led Grimbert out of his
right way to that place, and finding the Pullat^^ walking without the Barn,
amongst which was a fat young Capon, which straye^ a little from his fellows:
at which he suddenly leapt and caught him by the feathers, which flew about
his ears; but the Capon escaped: which Grimbert seeing, said, Accursed man,
what will ye do, will you for a silly Pullet fall again into all your sins?
mischeife it self would not do it: to which Reynard answered Pardon me dear.
Nephew, I had forgotten my self, but I will ask forg^^eness, and mine eye shall
no more wander: and then they turned over a little Bridge: but the Fox still
glanced his eye toward the Pullen, and could by no means refrain it; for the
ill that was bred in his bones, still stuck to his flesh, and his mind carried
his eyes that way as long as he could see them: which the Brock noting, said,
Fie, dissembling Cousin, why wander your eyes so after the Pullen? The Fox
replied, Nephew, you do me injury so to mistake me, for mine eyes wandered not,
but I was saying a Pater Noster for the souls of all the Pullen and Geese which
I have slain and betrayed, in which devotion you hindered me. Well, said
Grimbart, it may be so, but your glances are suspicious. Now by this time they
were come into the way again, and made haste toward the Court, which as soon
as the Fox saw, his heart quaked for fear: for he knew well the crimes he was
to answer, for they were infinite and heinous.

The Moral.
The shrist of the Fox shows, that when evil men are in danger, then they
ever fain most religion, and by a show of a penit^nce, win pity from those that
dive not into the depth of their deceit and knavery, where by though they be
never so evil, yet they get a good name, and steal opinion of the multitude.
By the absolution which the Brock gave the Fox, is showed, how easily an honest
simple man may be brought to believe a knaves penance, and how apt they are to
forgive tresuppasteson fained sorrow, which indeed should not be done without a
more strict and severe examination. The Foxes leading the Brock by the
Monestary and taking the, Capon, shows, that where wickedness is rooted and
made as it were a habit, that there notwithstanding all hypocrysie, I will
still flash out, and a knave will be a knave in despite of all persuasions and
good counsel.

CHAP. 10. How the Fox came to the Court, and how he excused himself.
AS soon as it was bruited in the Court, that Reynard the Fox, and Grimbart his
kinsman were arrived there, every one from the highest to the lowest, prepared
himself to complain of the Fox: at which Reynards heart quaked, but his
countenance kept the old garb, and he went as proudly as ever he was wont with
his Nephew through the street, and came as gallantly into the Court, as if he
had been the Kings son, and as clear from trespass, as the most innocent
whatsoever: and when he came before the chair of State in which the King sat,
he said. Heaven give your majesty glory and renown above all the Princes of
the earth: I assure your Highness there was never King had a truer servant then
my self have been to you, and yet am, and so will die: Nevertheless (my dread
Lord) I know there be many in this Court that seek my confusion, if they could
win belief in your Majesty; but you scorn the slanders of malice, and although
in these days flatterers have the most rooms in Princes Courts, yet with you
it is not so, nor shall they reap any thing but shame for their labor. But the
King cut him short at these words, and said, Peace traitorous Reynard, I know
your dissimulation, and can expound your flattery, but both shall now fail
you: think you I can be caught with the music of your words? no, it has too
often deceived me: the Peace which I commanded and swore unto, that have you
broken. And as he would have gone forward, Chaunticleere crying out, O how
have I lost this noble Peace? Be still Chanticleere (said the King) and then he
proceeded. Thou Devil among good ones, with what face can thou say thou
invest me, and see all those wretched creatures ready to disprove thee,
whose very wounds yet spit bloody defiance upon thee: and for which believe
thy dearest life shall answer. In nomine Patris, etc. said the Fox, My dread
Lord, if Bruins crown be bloody what is that to me? If your Majesty employed
him in a message, and he would neglect it to steal Honey at the Carpenters
house, where he received his wounds, how shall I amend it: If revenge he
sought, why did he not take it himself? he is strong and puissant, it was not
for to be looked for at my wickedness. As for Tibert the Cat (whom I received
with all friendship if he against my will or advice, will steal into the
Priests Barn to cath Mice, and there lose his eyes, nay his life, wherein is
mine offense? or how become I their guardian? O my dread Lord, you may do your
royal pleasure, and how-ever mine innocence plead, yet your will may adjudg me
to what death contents you: I am your vassaile, and have no support but your
mercy: I know your strength and mine own weakness, and that my death can
yield you but small satisfaction, yet whatsoever your will is, that to me shall
be most acceptable. And as ^e thus spoke, Bellio the Ram stepped forth, and his
Ewe-dame Oreway and be sought the King to hear their complaint, with them
Bruine the Bear, and all his mighty lineage: And Tibert the Cat, Isegrim the
Wolf, Kyward the Hare, and Panther the Bore, the Cammel and Bruel the Goose,
the Kid and the Colt, Bauldwin the Ass, Bortel the Bull, and Hamell the Ox, the
Weesel, Chantecleere the Cock, and Pattler with all her children. All these
with one entire noise cried out against the Fox, and so moved the King with
their complaints, that the Fox was taken and arrested.

The Moral.
In the Foxes appearing at the Court is showed, that when a malefactor is
brought before the Justice, that then is the fit time for all men that have bin
injured, to utter their complaints, because then only redress is to be had.
In the Lion is expressed the lawfulness of Justice, and how terrible it is to
every offender, especially such as have the guilt of Conscience within them.
The Foxes bold behavior shows, that impudent male factors, when they are
called in question, make audacity their chief guard, and by railing against
their adversaries, do seek to extenuate the looseness of their offenses, but
truth and Justice will not be hoodwinkt.

CHAP. 11. How the Fox was Arrested and judged to death
UPON this Arrest a Parliament was called, and every voice went that Reynard
should be executed: notwithstanding he answered every objection severally,
though great Art was used both in one and the other; to the wonderful
admiration of all that heard him But witnesses examined, and every proof made
pregnant, the Fox was condemned and judgment was given, that he should be
hanged till his body were dead. At which sentence the Fox cast down his head,
for all his Iollity was lost, and no flattery nor no words now prevailed. This
done, Grimbart his Nephew, and diverse others near him in blood, (which could
not endure to see him die) took their leave of the King and departed from the
Court. When the King roted what gallant young Gentlemen departed thence, all
sad and weeping, being near of the Foxes blood and alliance, he said to
himself, It behooves us to take good and mature counsel; though Reynard have
some faults, yet he has many friends, and more virtues. As the King was thus
thinking, the Cat said to the Bear: Sir Bruine, and you Sir Isegrim, Why are
you slow in this Execution? the Even is almost come, and here be mary bushes
and hedges, if he escape and quit himself of this danger, his subtlety is so
great, that not all the Art in the World shall ever again entangle him: If you
mean to execute him, then proceed, for before the Gallows can he made, it will
be dark night. At these words Isegrim remembering himself, said, There is a
pair of Gallows near at hand (and with that fetched a deep sigh) which the
Cat noting, said: Are you afraid sir Isegrim, or is this execution against your
mind? you may remember it was only his work, that both your brethren were
hanged: and sure had you Judgment, you would thank him for the same, and not
thus stand trifling time. But Isegrim, half angry answered, Your anger puts
out tho eye of your reason, yet had we a halter that would fit his neck, we
would soon dispatch him. Reynard that had been silent a great while, said, I
beseech you shorten my pain; Sir Tibert has a Cord strong enough, in which
himself was hanged at the Priests house, when he bit off the Priests genitors,
besides he can climb well and swift: O let him be mine Executioner, for it
neither becomes Isegrim nor Bruine thus to do to their Nephew: I am sorry I
live to see it. But since you are set to be my hangmen, play your parts, and
delay not: go before Bruine, and lead my way; follow Isegrim, and beware I
escape not: you say well said Bruine, and it is the best counsel I have heard
you give. So forth they went, and Isegrim and all his friends guarded the Fox,
leading him by the neck, and other parts of his bodies when the Fox felt this
usage, he was dismayed, yet said: O why do you put your selves (my best
kinsemen) to this pain, to do me hurt? believe it I could well ask you
forgiveness, though my pai^es be pleasant unto you? yet well I know, did my
Aunt your wife understand of my trouble, she would for old affection sake not
see me thus tormented. But I am subject to your will, and can endure your worst
malice: as for Bruine and Tybert, I leave my revenge to justice, and with you
the reward of Traitors, if you do not to me the worst of your powers: I know my
worst fortune, and death can come but once unto me; I wish it were past
already, for to me it is no terror: I saw my Father die, and how quickly he
vanished, therefore the worst of death is familiar unto me. Then said Isegrim,
let us go, for his curse shall not light on me by delaying: So he on one side
and Bruine on the other, led the poor Fox to the gallows; Tybert running before
with the halter, hoped to he revenged of his wrong formerly received. When they
were come to the place of Execution, the King and Queen, and all the rest of
the Nobility, took their place to see the Fox die. Then Reynard full of
sorrow, and busily bethinking himself how he might escape that danger and how
to inthral and disgrace his proud enemies, and also how to draw the King on his
party, saying to himself, Though the King and many others be offended with me,
as they have reason, for I have thoroughly deserved it, nevertheless yet I hope
to live to be their best friend. During this meditation the Wolf said; Sir
Bruine, now remember your injuries, take your revenge in a full measure, for
the day is come we wished for; Tibert, ascend quickly and bring the rope to the
Gallows, making a running nooz, for this day you shall have your will of your
enemy: and good sir Bruine take heed he escape not, whilst I my self raise up
the Ladder. When all things were prepared, the Fox said, Now may my heart be
heavy, for Death stands now in all his horror before me, and I cannot escape:
my dread Lord the King, and you my Sovereign Lady the Queen, and you my Lords
that stand to behold to see me die, I beseech you grant me this charitable
Boon; that I may unlock my heart before you, and clear my soul of her burdens,
so that hereafter no man may be blamed for me? which done, my death will be
easy, and the assistance of your prayers will raise my soul to heaven.

The Moral.
By the violence of the Bear, the Wolf, and the Cat, in persuing the Fox to
death, and making themselves executioners, is showed the great malice of great
persons against their enemies, and such from whom they have received mischief,
in which they will many times rather hazard their, honors, then their
reve^ges, so blind is wrath, and deformed, it makes men that are clothed
therewith. The Foxes patience and mild temper shows, that when men are in
extremity, they must make use of all their virtues, especially meekness. for
that soon est does insisinuate with men's natures, and draws forth pi^y,
whereas roughness ever increases mischief.

CHAP. 12. How Reynard made his Confession before the King.
EVery creature now took compassion on the Fox, and said his request was small,
beseeching the King to grant it: which was done, And then the Fox thus spoke:
Help me, Hearen: for I see no man here whom I have not offended: yet was this
evil no natural ine^^iation in me, for in my Youth I was accounted as virtuous
as any breathing: this know, I have played with the Lambs all the day long, and
took delight in their pretty bleating, yet at last in my play I bit one, and
the taste of the Blood was so sweet, that since I could never forbear it; This
liquorish humor drew me into the Woods amongst the Goats, where hearing the
bleating of the little Kids, I slew one of them, and after, two more, which
slaughter made me so hardy, that then I fell to murder Hens, Geese, and other
Pullen. And thus my crimes increased by custom, and fury so possessed me, that
all was fish which came to my net. After this in (the Winter season) I met with
Isegrim whereas he lay hid under a hollow tree, and he unfolded unto me how he
was my Uncle, and laid the Pedigree down so plain, that from that day forth we
became fellows and companions: Which knot of friendship I may ever curse, for
then began the flood of our thefts and slaughters; he stole the great things, I
the small; he murdered Nobles, I the meanest Subjects: and in all our actions
his share still was ever the greatest: when he got a Ram, a Calf, or Wether,
his fury would hardly afford me the horns to pick on: nay when he had an Ox,
or a Cow, after himself, his wife and his seven children were served, nothing
remained to me but the bare bones to pick on. This I speak not in that I wanted
(for it is well known I have more plate, Jewels, and coin, then twenty Carts
are able to carry) but only to show his ingratitude. When the King heard him
speak of this infinite treasure and riches, his heart grew inflamed with a
desire thereof: and he said Reynard, where is that treasure you speak of? The
Fox answered, My Lord, I shall willingly tell you, for it is true, the wealth
was stolen, and had it not been stolen in that manner as it was, it had cost
your Highness your life (which heavens I beseech keep ever in their
protection). When the Queen heard that dangerous speech, she started, and said;
What dangers are these you speak of, Reynard? I do command you upon your souls
health, to unfold these doubtful speeches, and to keep nothing concealed which
concerns the life of my dread Lord. The Fox with a sorrowful and sad
countenance replied to the Queen, O my dread Sovereign Lady, at what infinite
ease were I, if I might dfe at this present? but gracious Madam, your
conjuration and the health of mine own soul so prevails with me, that I will
discharge my conscience, and yet speak nothing but what I will make good with
the hazard of my damnation. It Is true, the King should have been piteously
murdered by his own people, and I must confess by those of my dearest kindred,
whom I am unwilling to accuse, did not the health of mine own soul, and the
fealty to the King command the contrary: The King much perplexed at this
discovery, said: Is this true Reynard, which you protest? the Fox answered,
Alas, my dread Lord, you see the case wherein I stand, and how small a sand is
left in my poor glass to run: Can your Majesty imagine I will now dissemble?
what can the whole world avail me, when my soul perishes? and at that he
trembled and looked so pitifully, that the Queen had great compassion of him,
and humbly besought the King for the safety of his own Royal person to take
some pity of the Fox and to command all his subjects to hold their peace, and
keep silent till he had spoke the uttermost of his knowledge: all which was
presently done, and the Fox proceeded in this manner: Since it is the pleasure
of my sovereign Lord the King, and that his royal life lies in the balance
with my present death, I will freely and boldly unfold this capital and foul
treason, and in the relation not spare any guilty person for any respect
whatsoever; whether it be blood, greatness, or authority: Know then, my dread
sovereign Lord the King, that my father by a strange accident, digging in the
ground, found out King E^mericks treasure; being a mass infinite and
innumerable, of which being possessed, he grew so proud and haughty: that he
held in scorn all the Beasts of the Wilderness, which before had been kinsmen
and companions; at last he caused Tybert the Cat to go into the vaste Forest of
Arden to Bruine the Bear, and to tender to him his homage and fealty; faying,
If it would please him to be King, he should come into Flaunders, where he
would show him means how to set the Crown upon his head. Bruin was glad of this
Embassage (for he was exceeding ambitious and had long thirsted for
sovereignty) and thereupon came into Flaunders, where my Father received him
nobly. Then presently he sent for his wife Grimbart my Nephew, and for Isegrim
the Wolf, and for Tybert the Cat: then these five coming between Gaun^ and the
village called Elfe, they held a selemne Council for the space of a whole
night: in which by the assistance of the Devil, and the strong confidence of my
fathers riches, it was there concluded, that your Majesty should be forthwith
murdered; which to effect, they took a solemn oath in this manner: The Bear,
my Father, Grimbart, and the Cat, laying their hands on Isegrims Crown, swore
first to make Bruine their King, and to place him in the Chair of Estate at
Acon, and to set the Imperial Diadem on his head: and if by any of your
Majesty's blood and alliance they should be gain-saied, that then my Father
with his treasure should hire those which should utterly chase and root them
out of the Forest. Now after this determination held and finished, it happened
that my Nephew Grimbart being on a time high flown with wine, he discovered
this damnable plot to dame Slopard his wife, commanded her upon her life to
keep secret the same: but she forgotfull of her charge, disclosed it in
confession to my wife, as they went a Pilgrimage over an Heath, with like
conjuration of secrecy: but she (women-like) contained it no longer then till
she met with me, and gave me a full knowledge of all that passed; yet so, as by
all means I must keep it secret too: for she had sworn by the three Kings of
Cullen never to disclose it: and withal, she gave me such assurance by certain
tokens, that I right well scund all was true which she had spoken, insomuch,
that the very affright thereof made my hair stand upright, and my heart became
like Lead, cold and heavy in my bosom, which made me call to mind the story of
the Frogs, who being free without subjection, complained to Jupiter, and
desired they might have a King to rule and govern over them, and he presently
sent them a Stork, which eat and devoured them up: ^^ that by his tyranny they
became the most miserable of all creatures; then they complained again to
Jupiter for redress, but it was then too late; for they that could not be
content with their freedom, must now of necessity suffer in thraldom.

Thus I feared it might happen with us, and thus I sorrowed for your Majesty,
although you little respect my grieving: I know that ambition of the Bear, and
his tyranny is so great; that should the Government come into his hands, (as
heaven forbid) the whole Commonwealth will he destroyed? Besides, I know your
Majesty of so royal and Princely birth: so mighty, so gracious, and so
merciful, that it had been a damnable exchange, to have seen a ravenous Bear
to sit in the throne of a royal Lion; for there is in the Bear, and in his
generation, more prodigal loosnesse and inconstancy, then in any Beast
whatsoever. But to proceed, from this sorrow, I began to meditate how I might
undo my Fathers false and wicked conspiracies, who sought to bring a base
Traitor and a slave into the throne Imperial: for I well perceived as long as
he held the Treasure, there was a possibility of deposing your Majesty, and
this troubled my thought exceedingly, so that I labored how I might find out
where my Fathers Treasure was hid, and to that end I watched and attended night
and day in the Woods, in the Bushes, and in the open fields: nay, in all places
wheresoever my father laid his eyes, there was I ever watching and attending.
Now it hapened on a time as I was laid down flat on the ground, I saw my father
come running out of a hole, and as soon as he was come out, he gazed round
about him, to see if any discovered him; then seeing the coast clear, he
stopped the hole with sand, and made it so even, smooth and plain, that no
curious rye could discern a difference betwixt it and the other earth: and
where the print of his foot remained, that with his tail he stroked over; and
with his mouth so smoothed it that no man might perceive it: and indeed that
and many other subtilties, I learned of him there at that instant: when he had
thus finished away he went toward the village about his private affairs: then
went I presently toward the hole, and notwithstanding all his subtlety, I
quickly found it out, then entres I the Cave, where I found that innumerable
quantity of treasure, which cannot be expressed: which sound, I took Ermelin
my wife to help me, and we ceast not day nor night, with infinite great toil
and labor, to carry and convey away this treasure to another place, much more
convenient for us, where we laid it safe from the search of any creature. Now
during the time that my wife and I were thus employed, my father was in
consultation with the rest of the traitors about the death of the King: in
which consultation it was concluded, that Isegrim the Wolf should travail over
all the Kingdom, and promise to all Beasts that would take wages, and
acknowledge Bruine for their sovereign, and defend his title, a full years
pay beforehand. And in this journey my Father accompanied him, carrying letters
Patents signed to that purpose, little suspecting that he was robbed of the
wealth which should supply his treason: When this negotiation was finished
between Elve and Soame, and a world of valiant soldiers raised against the
beginning of the next spring: then they returned to Bruine and his consorts, to
whom they declared the many perils they had escaped in the Dukedom of Saxony:
where they were pursued by Huntsmen and Hounds, so as they hardly escaped with
life: after this relation they showed Eruine the muster-rolls, which pleased
him exceeding much, for there was of Isegrims lineage about twelve hundred
sworn to the actions, besides the Bears own kindred, the Foxes, the Cats, and
the Dassens, all which would be in readiness upon an hours warning. All this I
found out (I praise Heaven) by perfect intelligence: now things being brought
to this perfection, my father went to his Cave of treasure: but when he found
it open, spo^^'d and ransackt, it is not in me to express the infinite agony
and sorrow he fell into, that grief converting to madness, and madness to
desperation: suddenly he went to the next tree and hanged himself.

Thus by my Art only was the Treason of Bruine defeated, for which I now
suffer: from hence sprang all misfortune as thus: These foul traitors Bruine
and Isegrim, being of the Kings privatest Counsel, and sitting in high and
great Authority, tread upon me poor Reynard, and work my disgrace:
notwithstanding for your Majesty's sake, I have lost my natural Father. O my
dread Lord! what is he, or who can tender you a better affection, thus to lose
himself to save you? The King and Queen having great hope to get this
inestimable treasure from Reynard, took him from the Gibbet, and entreated him
to unfold where this great treasure was. But the Fox replied, O my Lord, shall
I make mine enemies my heirs? shall these Traitors which take away my life, and
would devour yours, be possessed of the good I enjoy? No, that is a madness I Will
never dye guilty of. Then said the Queen, fear not Reynard, the King shall save
your life, and grant you pardon, and you shall henceforth swear Faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty. The Fox answered: Dearest Madam, if the King out of
his Royal nature will give credit to my truth and forgive my former offenses;
there was never King so rich as I will make him. Then the King staying the
Queen, said: Madam, will you believe the Fox? know you not that it is his
natural quality to lie steal, and deceive? The Queen answered, My dear Lord,
now you may boldly believe him, for howsoever in his prosperity he was full of
errors, yet now you may see he is changed? why he spares not to accuse his own
father, nay Grimbard his dearest Nephew and kinsman; had he dissembled, he
might have laid his imputations on other Beasts, and not on those he loves
most entirely. Well Madam (said the King) you shall at this time rule me, and
all the offenses of the Fox I will clearly pardon: yet with this Protestation,
That if ever again he offend in the smallest crime whatsoever, that not only
himself, but his whole generation I will utterly root out of my Dominions. The
Fox looked sadly when the King spoke thus (but was inwardly most infinitely
glad at his heart, and said, My dread Lord, it were a huge shame in me, should
I speak any untruths in this great presence. Then the King taking a straw from
the ground, pardoned the Fox of all his trespasses which either he, or his
Father had ever committed: If the Fox now began to smile, it was no wonder, the
sweetness of life required it: yet he fell down before the King and Queen, and
humbly thanked them for their mercy, protesting that for that favor he would
make them the richest Princes in the world. And at these words the Fox took up
a straw, and proffered it unto the King, and said to him; My dread Lord, I
beseech your Majesty to receive this pledge as a surrender unto your Majesty
of all the Treasure that the great King Ermerick was master of, with which I
freely infeoffe you out of my mere voluntary and free motion. At these words
the King received the straw, and smiling, gave the Fox great thanks for the
same. But the Fox laughed outright to think of the abuse. From that day
forward no man's counsel prevailed with the King as the Foxes; which the Fox
seeing, said to the King: My gracious Lord! you shall understand, that at the
West Side of Flanders there stands a Wood called Husterloe, near which
runs a River named Crekenpit this is a Wilderness so vaste, and unpassable,
that hardly in all the year there comes either man or woman in the same. In it
I have hid this Treasure, whither I would have your Majesty and the Queen to
go, for I know none but your selves whom I dare trust in so great a design: and
when your Highness comes thither, you shall find two Birchin trees growing by
the pit, into which you shall enter, and there you shall find the Treasure,
which consists of the Coin, rich Jewels, and the wealthy Crown which King
Ermerick wore. With which Crown Bruine the Bear should have been Crowned, if
his treason had succeeded according to his determination: there shall you see
also many rich and costly precious stones, of which when you are possessed, then
remember the love of your servant Reynard. The King answered, Sir Reynard, you
must your self help to dig for this Treasure, for else I shall never find
it. I have heard named Paris, London, Acon, and Cullen, but Crekenpit I never
heard of: therefore I fear you dissemble. The Fox blushed at those words, yet
with a bold countenance he said: is your Majesty so doubtful of my faith? nay
then I will approve my words by public testimony: and with that he called
forth Kayward the Hare, from amongst the rest of the Beasts, and commanded him
to come before the King, charging him upon his Faith and Allegiance which he
bore to the King and Queen, to answer truly to such questions as he should ask
him. The Hare answered, I will speak truth in all things, though I were sure to
dye for the same. Then the Fox said: Know you not where Crekenpit stands? Yes
said the Hare, I have known it any time this dozen years, it stands in a
wood called Husserloe, upon a vast and wide Wilderness, where I have in^ured
much torment both of hunger and cold: Besides, it was there where Father Simony
the Friar made false Coin, with which he supported himself and his fellows.
Yet that was before I and Ring the Hound became companions. Well said the Fox,
you have spoken sufficiently: go to your place again: so away went the Hare,
Then said the Fox. My sovereign Lord the King, what say you now to my relation,
am I worthy of your belief or no? the King said, Yes Reynard, and I beseech
thee excuse my Iealousies, it was my ignorance which did thee evil: therefore
forthwith make preparation that we may go to the pit where this Treasure lies.
The Fox answered, Alas my Lord, do you imagine that I would sain go with you:
If it were so that I might go without your dishonor, which I cannot do; For
you shall understand, (though it be my disgrace) that when Isegrim the Wolf in
the Devils name, would needs grow religious and turn a Monk: that then the
permision of meat which was for six Monks; was too little for him alone.
Whereupon he complained so pitifully unto me, that I commiserating his case,
(being my kinsman) gave him consell to run away, which he did: Whereupon I
stand accursed, and excommunicated under the Popes sentence: and am determined
to morrow as soon as the Sun arises, to take my way toward Rome to be
absolved, and from Rome I intend to cross the Seas to the Holy land; and will
never return again to my native Country: till I have done so much good, and
satisfied for my sins; that I may with honor and reputation attend on your
Highnesses person. The King hearing this, said: Since you stand accursed in the
censures of the Church, I may not have you about me, and therefore I will at
this time take Kayward the Hare, and some others with me to Crekenpit: and
only command you Reynard, as you respect my favor, to clear your self of his
Holinesses curse. My Lord (said the Fox) it is the only reason of my going to
Rome, neither will I rest night nor day, till I have gotten a full absolution:
the course you take is good (said the King) go on and prosper in your intent
and purpose.

The Moral.
By the Foxes confession and accusation of his enemies, is expressed a three
fold subtilty in the Fox: First, by his voluntary confession of his faults, is
showed his sorrow for the same, and the little hope he had of life, which
piercing into the weak nature of the Queen, being a woman, and subject to pity,
begot much compassion toward him. 2. The accusing of those whom he was known
most assuredly to love, was a means to draw belief to that he spoke. 3. The
engaging of the life of the King, and making the treason so foul, was a way to
affright the Queen, and others of the tenderness of heart, and to bring his
enemies into disgrace and scandal, where in the Fox shows, that he which will
slander, or will have any untruth believed: must first strengthen his opinion
with pity, then get belief, and lastly exercise his mischief, against all which
a wise man will shut his ears as the Lion did: If he be not overtempted by
those he loves, as the Lion was by the Queen and his own covetousness, in
desiring that infinite treasure, then which there is nothing draws a man sooner
to the belief of untruth and of falsehood: for what a man desires, that his own
desire will make him credit, and where such credit is given, there commonly the
wicked escape from punishment, as here it fell out with the Fox.

CHAP. 13 How Reynard the Fox was honored of all Beasts by the Kings
Commandment.
AS soon as this conference was ended, the royal King mounted upon his high
Throne made in manner of a scaffold, made of fair squared Stone, and then
commanded a general silence amongst all his Subjects and that every one should
take his place according to his Birth, or dignity in Office, only the Fox was
placed between the King and the Qeen. Then said the King: Hear all you Noble
men, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of inferior quality: This Reynard, one of
the chief and supreme Officers of my household, whose offenses had brought him
to the least reckning of his life; as being in the hands of the Law and
Justice: has this day in requital of those Injuries, done that Noble and
worthy, service to the State, that both my self and my Queen, stand bound to
render him our best grace and favor. Therefore know, that for diverse things
best known unto our selves, we have freely given pardon to all his offenses,
and restored back to him whatsoever to us was confiscate: therefore henceforth
I command all of you, upon the pain and hazard of your dearest lives, that you
fail not from this day forward to do all reverence and honor, not only to
Reynard himself, but also to his Wife and Children, whersoever or wheresoever
you shall meet them, whether by night, or by day: not that any one hereafter be
so audacious, as to trouble mine ears with any more complaints of him: for his
wickedness he has cast behind him, and will no more be guilty of wrong
doing: which to effect the better, to morrow very early he takes his journey
toward Rome, where from the Pope he will purchase a free Pardon and Indulgence
for all his offenses, and then on Pilgrimage to the Holy Land. This speech when
Tisellin the Raven heard, he flew to Bruine, Isegrim, and Tibert, and said;
Wretched creature! how are your fortunes changed? or how can you endure to hear
these ttioings? Why Reynard is now a Courtier, a Counselor; nay the prime
Favorite: his offenses are forgiven, and you are all betrayed. And sold unto
bondage. Isegrim answered, It is impossible Tisellin, nor can such a thing be
suffered: do not deceive your selves (said the Raven) for it is true as that
now I speak it. Then went the Wolf and the Bear to the King; but the Cat staid,
and was so sore affrighted with the news, that to purchase the Foxes
friendship again, she would not only have forgiven the exile received, but
willingly have run into a second hazard. But now Isegrim with great majesty
and pride tracing over the Fields, came before the King and Queen, and with
most bitter and cruel words, inveighed against the Fox in such a passionate and
impudent manner, that the King being infinitely moved with displeasure, caused
the Wolf and the Bear to be presently arrested upon high Treason: which
suddenly was done with all violence and fury, and they were bound hand and foot
so fast, that they could neither stir nor move from the place where they were
couched. Now when the Fox had thus inthralled and entangled them, he so
labored with the Queen, that he got leave to have so much of the Bears skin,
as would make him a large Scrip for his Journey: Which granted, he wanted
nothing but a strong pair of Shoo's to defend his feet from the stones in his
travel: Whereupon he said to the Queen; Madam, I am your Pilgrim; and if it
would please your Majesty but to take it into your consideration, you shall
find that Sir Isegrim has a pair of excellent long lasting ones, which would
you vouchsafe to bestow upon me, I would pray for your Majesty's soul in all my
travel, above my charitable devotion. Also mine Aunt, dame Arsewinde, has
other two shoo's, which would your Majesty bestow upon me, I should be most
infinitely bound to you, nor should you do to her any wrong, because she goes
seldom abroad. The Queen replied, Reynard, I cannot perceive how you can want
such shoo's, for your journey is full of labor and difficulty, both in respect
of the stony mountains, and the gravelly ways, and therefore you shall have
(though it touch their life never so nearly) from each of them a pair of Shoo's
to accomplish and finish your journey.

The Moral.
By this honor done to the Fox, you may see, that when policy and wisdom get
the upper hand of their enemies, it never rests till it makes known to the
world the greanesse of their Conquest, both to express their ambition, as also
to ex^enuate their crimes, and keep their foes in aw with the goodly shows of
new grace and favor. By the complaint of the Raven, is showed they jelousie
and fear of the weaker sort. and how in their troubles they fly to the Heads
of faction, and stir them (with their own safteies) to prevent evils. By the
Wolf and the Bears commitment, is showed, that when men complain in
unseasonable times, they ever run themselves into most apparent and grievous
mischiefs.

CHAP. 14. How Isegrim and his wife Arsewind had their shoo's plucks off for
Reynard to wear to Rome.
AFter the Fox had made this petition, Isegrim was taken, and his shoo's pulled
off in most cruel and violent manner, so that all the veins and sinews lay
naked, nor durst the poor massacred Wolf either complain or resist. After he
had been thus tormented, then dame Arsewinde his wife was used on the same
manner on her hinder-feet, as her husband was on his fore-feet: which the Fox
seeing, said to her in a scornful manner: Dear Aunt, how much an I bound to
you, that takes all this pains for my sake? questionless you shall be a sharer
in my Pilgrimage, and taken part in the pardon I shall bring from beyond the
Seas by the help of your Shoo's. Then Arsewinde (though speech were troublesome
to hor) said: Well Sir Reynard, you have your will accomplished; yet heaven (I
hope) will requite the mis-doer. This she said, but her husband and the Bear
lay mute, for their wounds were grievous unto them: and surely had the Cat been
there also, he had not escaped some extreme punishment. The next morning very
early, Reynard causing his shoes to be well oyled, put them on, and made them
as fit to his feet, as they were to the Wolvs, and then went to the King and
Queen, and said, My Lord, and Lady, your poor subject boweth himself before
your Majesty's, humbly beseeching your Highnessss, to deliver me my male and my
staff blessed, according to the custom due unto Pilgrims.

This said, the King sent for Bellin the Ram, and commanded him to say
solemn Mass before the Fox, and to deliver him his staff, and his male: but
the Ram refused saying, My Lord, I dare not, for he has confessed he is in the
Popes curse: and the King said, what of that; have not our Doctors told us,
that if a man commit all the sins in the world, yet if he repent himself, be
shriven, do penance, and walk as the Priests shall instruct him, that all is
clearly forgiven him? and has not Reynard done all this? then answered
Bellin, Sir, I am loath to meddle herein, yet if your Majesty will bear me
harmless against the Bishop of Pren^^lor, (my ordinary) and against the
Archdeacon of Loos-wind, and Rapiamus his Official, I will effect your
commandment. At this the King grew angry, and said, I scorn to be beholding
unto you: but when the Ram saw the King offended, he shook for fear, and ran
presently to the Altar; and sung Mass, and used many ceremonies over the Fox,
who gave little respect unto them, more then the desire he had to enjoy the
honor. Now when Bellin the Ram had finished his Orizons, he presently hung
about Reynards neck his male, which was made of the Bears skin, and put into
his right foot a Palmers staff: and thus being furnished of all things, he
looked sadly upon the King, as if he had been loath to depart; and fained to
weep (though sorrow and he were never farther asunder) only his worst grief
was, that all in that presence were not in the same case that the Bear and the
Wolf were, yet he took his leave of them, and desired every one to pray for
him, as he would pray for them: and then offering to depart, (for knowing his
own knavery, he was very desirous to be gone.) The King said, Sir Reynard, I am
sorry we must part thus suddenly: then said the Fox. There is no remedy my
Lord, nor ought I be slow in so devout an action. Then the King took leave, and
commanded all that were about him (but the Bear and the Wolf) to attend Reynard
some part of his journey. O he that had seen how gallant and personable Reynard
was, and how well his staff and his male became him: as also how fit his shoos
were for his feet, it could not have chosen but have wirred in him very much
laughter: yet the Fox carried himself outwardly very demurely: however inwardly
he smiled at the abuses he had cast amongst them, especially to see his
enemies, now his attendants, and the King, whom he had most palpably wronged
with false lies, to be aiding to all his vain desires, did accompany him also
as if they dad been his commpanions. But the Fox being now onward his way, he
said to the King, I beseech your Majesty trouble your self no further, but in
respect of your ease, and the danger that might happen to your royal person,
for you have arrested two capital Traitors, who if in your absence they should
get at liberty, the danger were infinite, which might ensue thereon. And this
said, he stood upon bis hinder feet, and entreated the bests that were in his
company, and would be partakers of his pardon, that they would pray for him:
which done, he departed from the King with an exceeding sad and heavy
countenance: Then turning to Kayward the Hare, and Bellin the Ram, he said with
a smiling countenance: My best friends, shall we part thus soon? I know your
lov's will not leave me yet: with you two I was never offended, and your
conversations are agreeable to my nature: for you are mild, loving, and
courteous, religious, and full of wise counsel, even such as my self was when
I was first a Recluse: if you have a few green leaves, or a little grass, you
are well content, as with all the bread and fish in the world, and you are
temperate and modest: and thus with a world of such like flattering words, be
enticed these two, that they were content to go along with him.

The Moral.
In the spoiling the Bear of his skin, and the Wolf of his shoos, is showed,
both the malice of a revengeful enemy, that never thinks his Foe weakened
enough, till he be utterly ruined, as also the indiscretion of an over-angry
nature, that cannot stay to give his wro^gs advantage, but utters his spleen
before he can either get relief or remedy. By the ceremonies done to the Fox,
and the curiosity of the Ram, is showed, that in cases of indifferency, (where
authority has power to command) for any man to stand upon nice and
puritanicall terms with his superiors, does not only breed reprehension but
punishment. By the Foxes Hypocrisy, is seen the dissimulation of worldly men,
and how to effect their mischief to the full height, they ever put on a most
false cloak of Religion. By the general attendance of all the Beasts on the
Fox, is showed, the flattery and baseness of many people, that never look how
good a man is, but how great, and that favor and countenance, is ever enough
to command at their services.

CHAP. 15. How Kayward the Hare was slain by Reynard the Fox, and sent by the
Ram to the King
THVS marched these three together, and when Reynard was come to the gates of
his own house, he said to Bellin cousin, I will entreat you to stay here
without a little, whilst I and Kayward go in: for I would have him a witness
of some private passages betwixt me and my wife, Bellin was well content, and
so the Fox and the Hare went into Mallepardus, where they found dame Ermelin
lying on the ground, with her younglins about her; who had sorrowed exceedingly
for the loss and danger of her husband: but when she saw his return, her joy
was ten times doubled: But beholding his male, his staff, and his shoowes,
she grew into great admiration, and said, Dear husband, how have you fared? to
whom he delivered from point to point, all that had passed with him at the
Kings Court; as well his danger, as release, and that now he was to go a
pilgrimage, having left Bruine and Isegrim to pledge for him till his return:
as for Kayward, he said, the King had bestowed him upon them, to do with him
what they pleased, affirming, that Kayward was the first that had complained of
him, for which questionless he vowed to be sharply revenged. When Kayward
heard these words, he was much appaled, and would fain have fled away, but he
could not: for the Fox had got between him and the Gate, who presently ceazed
the Hare by the neck: at which the Hare cried unto Bellin for help, but could
not be heard, for the Fox in a trice had torn out his throat: which done, he,
his wife and young ones feasted therewith merrily, eating the flesh, and
drinking the blood to the Kings health. but Ermelin growing suspicious, said, I
fear, Reynard, you mock me? as you love me, tell me how you sped at the Court.
Then he told her how extremely he had flatttered the King and the Queen, and
abused them with a fained promise of treasure, that was not, in so much, that
he knew when it should come to be revealed, the King would seek all the means
he could to destroy him. And therefore Wife, said he there is no remedy but we
must steal from hence, into some other Forest where we may live in better
safety, and in a place more fruitful, where we shall have all the delicate
meats that can be wished for clear Springs, fresh Rivers, cool shades, and
wholesome air: here I know is no abiding: and now I have gotten my thumb out of
the Kings mouth, I will no more come within the danger of his ta^o^s. Yet (said
Ermelin) I have no fancy to go from hence, to a place where I am utterly
unacquainted: here we possess all that we desire, and you are a Lord over all
that lives about you, and it is but an indiscreet hazard, to change a certain
good for a hoped contentment: besides, we are here safe enough, and should the
King besiege us never so straightly, yet have we so many passages and by-holes,
that he can neither cut from us relief, or liberty. O what reason have we then
to fly beyond Seas? but you have sworn it, that is my vexation, Nay Dame (said
the Fox) grieve not at that: the more forsworn, the less forlorn: Besides I
have heard some say, that a forced Oath is no Oath, nor do I make account that
this pilgrimage will not avail me a rush. And therefore I am resolved, and will
not start from hence, but follow thy counsel: If the King do hunt after me, I
will guard my self as well as I am able, and against his Power apply my
Policy: so that being forced to open my sack, let him not blame me if he catch
hurt by his own fury.

All this while stood Bellin the Ram at the Gate, and grew exceeding angry,
both against the Fox and the Hare, that they made him wait so long: and
therefore called out aloud, for Reynard to come away: Which when Reynard heard,
he went forth, and said softly to the Ram, Good Bellin be not offended:
Kyward is in earnest conference with his dearest Aunt, and entreated me to say
unto you, that if you would be pleased te walk before, he would speedily
overtake you, for he is light of foot and speedier then you: nor will his Aunt
part with him thus suddenly, for she and her children are much perplexed at my
departure. I but (quoth Bellin) me thought I heard Kyward cry for help. How,
cry for help? can you imagine he shall receive hurt in my House far be such a
thought from you: but I will tell you the reason: as soon as we were come into
my house, and that Ermelin my Wife understood of my pilgrimage, presently she
fell down in a swoone: which when Kyward saw, he cried aloud: O Bellin come
and help my Aunt, she dies, she dies: then said the Ram, In sadness I mistook
the cry, and thought the Hare had been in danger. It was your too much care of
him, said the Fox, but before he should have any injury in my house, I would
leave to respect either Wife or Children. But letting this discourse pass, you
remember Bellin, that yesterday the King and his Council commanded me, that
before I departed from the Land, I should send unto him two Letters, which I
have made ready, and will entreat you my dearest Cousin to bear them to his
Majesty. The Ram answered, I would willingly do you the service, if there be
nothing but honorable matter contained in your Letters: but I am unprovided of
any thing to carry them in. The Fox said, that is provided for you already, for
you shall have my male, which you may conveniently hang about your neck: I know
they will be thankfully received of his Majesty, for they contain matter of
great importance. Then Bellin promised to carry them: So the Fox returned into
the house, and took the male, and put therein the head of Kyward, and brought
it to the Ram, and gave him a great charge not to look therein, till it was
presented to the King, as he did expect the Kings favor: and that he might
farther indeare himself with his Majesty, he bade the Ram take upon him the
inditing of the Letters. which will be so pleasing to the King, that
questionless he will pour upon you many favors.

The Ram was exceeding glad of his advice, and thanked the Fox, saying that the
favors he did him should not die unrequited: and I know it will be much to
mine honor, when the King shall think I am able to indite with so great
perfection: for I know there be many in these days as ignorant as my self,
that are risen to high promotion, only by taking upon them the worth of other
men's Labors: And therefore why may not I run the same course also? Yet I pray
you Reynard farther advise me: is it meets that I take Kyward the Hare along
with me? O by no means (said the) Fox) let him come after you, for I know his
Aunt will yet not part with him. Besides, I have other secret things to impart
to him, which may not yet be revealed. This said, Bellin took leave of the
Fox, and went toward the Court, in which journey he made such speed, that he
came thither before noon. where he found the King in his Palace, sitting
amongst the Nobility.



The King wondered when he saw the Ram come in with the male which was made of
the Bears skin, and said: Whence come thou Bellin, and where is the Fox,
that you have that about you? Bellin answered: ^^y dread Lord, I attended the
noble Fox to his house, where after some repose, he desired me to bear
certain Letters to your Majesty of infinite great importance, to which I
easily consented. Whereupon he delivered me the Letters enclosed in this male,
which Letters my self had formerly indicted, and I doubt not but are such as
will give your Highness both contentment and satisfaction. Presently he
commanded the Letters to be delivered to Bocart his Secretary, who was an
excellent Linguist, and understanding all Languages: that he might read them
publicly: so he and Tybart the Cat took the male from Bellins neck, and
opening the same, instead of Letters they drew out the head of Kyward the Hare:
at which being amazed, they said: Woe and alas, what Letters call you these?
Believe it, my dread Lord, here is nothing but the head of poor murdered
Kyward. Which the King seeing (he said) Alas! how unfortunate was I to believe
the traitorous Fox? And with that being oppressed with anger, grief, and shame,
he held down his head for a good space, and so did the Queen also: but in the
end shaking of his curled locks, he groa^ed out such a dreadful noise, that all
the beasts of the Forest did tremble to hear. Then spoke Sir Firapel the
Libard, who was the King's nearest kinsman, and said: Why is your Majesty thus
vexed in heart? this sorrow might serve for the Queens Funeral, I do beseech
you assuage your anguish: Are not you King and master of this Country? and are
not all things subject to your power? The King replied Cousin this is a
mischief beyond indurance, I am betrayed by a hase villain, and Traitor, and
have been made to wrong and abuse my best friends and subjects, even those of
my blood, and nearest counsel; I mean the stout Bruin, and valiant Isegrim,
whose wrongs speak loud to my dishonor, yet in my self I found an
unwillingnesse thereto, only my Queens pity working upon the easiness of my
belief, has made me guilty of that which will evermore grieve me. Why (said
the Lybard) what of all this? you are above all (...), and with one smile can
salve the greatest wound that can be made in honor, you have power to
recompense, and what reputation is it that reward will not sawder? as for the
Bear which lost his skin, the Woolfe and his wife Dame Arsewinde, that lost
their shoes, you may in recompense (since Bellin has confessed himself a party
in this foul murder) bestow him and his substance upon the parties grieved: as
for Reynard, we will go and besiege his Castle, and having arrested his person,
hang him up by the Law of Arms without farther trial.

The Moral.
By the killing of the Hare, is showed, that whereas men out of the lightness
and easiness of their belief, do give credit to the enticements of their
Adversaries, or new reconciled Friends, that evermore some inevitable mischief
does still follow such folly and improvidence. Also how easily a malicious man
can find cause of quarrel with such as are too weak for them, or as eye-sores
stand between them and the end of their purposes, or are able to reveal and
hinder their projects By the Rams carrying the Hares head to the Lion, and
taking upon him to indite the Letters, which he saw not: is discovered, that
ever such vainglorious pickpurses of others qualities, do ever carry their own
shames and disreputations, and when they look for most honor or renown, they
reap nothing but misery, scorn and disgrace.

CHAP. 16. How Bellin the Ram, and his Lineage, were given to the Bear and
the Wolf.
TO this motion of the Libard the King consented, so that Firapell forthwith
went to the prison, where the Bear and the Wolf were, and said: My Lords, I
bring a free and general pardon from the King, with his love, and a
recognition of your injuries: which to recompense in some large manner out of
his Princely bounty, he is pleased to bestow upon you both Bellin the Ram, and
his whole generation, with whatsoever they possess, and is now confiscate to
his Majesty, to hold from henceforth, to you and yours, till doomsday, with
full Commission to slay, kill and devour them wheresoever you find them; be it
in Woods, Fields or Mountains. And also the King granted unto you full power to
hunt, kill, or wound Reynard the Fox wheresoever you find him, or any of his
lineage or generation: and of this great privilege you shall receive Lettere
Patents at your pleasure, with only a reservation of your fealty and homage to
be due to his Majesty, which I advise you to accept, for it will redound much
to your honors. Thus was the peace made between the King and these Nobles by
the Lybard, and Bellin the Ram was forthwith slain by them; and all these
Privileges does the Woolf hold to this hour, nor could ever any reconcilement
be made between them and the Rams kindred. When this peace was thus finished,
the King for joy thereof proclaimed a Feast to be held for twelve days after,
which was done with all solemnity.

To this feast came all manner of wild Beasts for it was universally known
through the whole L^f^ g^o^^ nor (...) there wanting any delight or pleasure
that (...), as music, dancing, masking and all Princely (...): As for several
meats they were in that abundance, that the Court seemed a storehouse which
could not be emptied. A^^o to this see resorted abundance of ^^ather^^ fowl,
and all other Creatures that held peace with his Majesty, and no one missing
but the Fox only. Now after this feast has thus continued in all pomp the
space of eight days about high-noon came Laprell the Cony before the King and
Queen, as they sat at dinner, and with a heavy and lamentable voice, said; My
gracious and great Lord have pity upon my misery, and attend my complaint,
which is of great violence, force and murder, which Reynard the Fox would
^rss^rd^y have committed against me, as I passed by the Castle of Malepardus,
where standing without his gates, attired like a P^grime, I supposing to pass
peaceably by him toward my ^est: he crossed my way, saying his Bea^s so
devoutly, that I saluted him: but he returning ^^ answer, stretched forth his
right foot, and gave me such a blow on the neck, between the head and
shoulders, that I imagined my head had been stricken from my body: but yet so
much memory was left me, that I leapt from his clairs; though most grievously
hurt and wounded. At this he grieved extremely, because I escaped, only of one
of my ears he utterly deprived me; which I beseech your Majesty in your royal
nature to pity, and that this bloody murderer may not live thus to afflict
your poor Subjects. Now whilst the Conie was thus speaking to the King, there
came flying into the Cout, Corbant the Rook, who coming before the King, said:
Great King, I beseech you vouchsafe to hear me, and pity the complaint I shall
utter: so it is that I went this morning with Sharpbeake my wife, to recreate
our selves on the Heath, and there we found Reynard the Fox laid on the ground
like a dead carcass, his eyes staring, his tongue lolling out of his mouth,
like a dead Hound, so that we wandering at his strange plight, began to feel
and touch his body, but found no life therein at all: then went my wife (poor
careful soul) and laid her head to his mouth, to see if he drew any breath:
which she had no sooner done; but the foul murderer awaiting his time,
snatched her head into his mouth, and bit it quite off. At that I screaked out,
and cried: Woe is me, what misforiunes are these? But presently the murderer
starts up, and reached at me with such a bloody intent, that with much
trembling and anguish, I was fain to fly up into a tree, where I saw him
devour up my wife in such terrible manner, that the very thought is death to me
in the repeating.

The massacre finished, the murderer departed, and I went to the place, and
gathered the feathers of my lost wife, which here I humbly present before your
Majesty, beseeching you to do me justice, and in such manner to revenge mine
injury, that the world may speak fame of your great excellence; for thus to
suffer your Laws Protections, and safe Conducts to be violated a ^^ broken,
will be such disreputation and scandal to your Crown and Dignity, that your
very neighbors and Colleagues, will note and point at your remissness:
besides the sufferance of the evil will make you guilty of the trespasses
which arise from such sufferance: But to your great considerations I leave it:
since I know your Majesty's own goodness will make you careful of your honor
and royalty.

The Moral.
By the giving of Bellin unto his enemies, is showed, that when simple men give
themselves to pride and vain glory, they are over taken by their enemies, and
made slaves to shame and destruction. By the complaint of the Conie, is showed,
that when the weak will believe the fair shows of the strong and cruel, and so
commit their safeties to their enemies mercies, they seldom escape with life,
or if they do by some hidden providence, yet it is not without ever some maime,
either to their bodies or reputations. The complaint of the Rook, shows, that
when the evil man sleeps, or seems to have least power or in ^ent of
wickedness, that then his thoughts are most busied and laborious to destroy
the innocent, and the mischief is more violent, then when he lies most
apparent and publishes himself an open enemy; wherefore the simple and
innocent ought at such times to be most fearful, and to keep farthest out of
his danger.

CHAP. 17. How the King was angry at these complaints, took counsel for
revenge; and how Reynard was forewarned by Grimbard the Brock.
THe royal King was much moved with anger, when he heard these complaints both
of the Coney and the Rook; so that his eyes darting out fire amongst the beams
of Majesty, his countenance was dreadful and cruel to look on, and the whole
Court trembled to behold him. In the end he said; By my Crown, and the truth I
evermore reverence and owe unto the Queen my Wife, I will so revenge these
outrages committed against my Crown and Dignity, that goodness shall adore me,
and the wicked shall die with the remembrance: his falsehood and flattery shall
no more get belief in me.

Is this his journey to Rome, and to the Holy Land? are these the fruits of his
Male, his Staff, and other ornaments be coming a devout Pilgrim? Well, he shall
find the reward of his Treasons: but it was not my belief, but the persuasion
of my Queen; nor am I the first that has been deceived by that soft gender,
since many great spirits have fallen through their inticements. And this said,
he commanded all that were about him, both Noble, worthy, and every discreet
spirit to assist him with their counsel, and to lay him down such sure ground
for his revenge, that his honor and royalty might be anew revived, and every
offender made to know and feel the heavy price for their most unjust actions.

Isegrim the Wolf, and Bruine the Bear, hearing the Kings words, were
wonderfully well apaid, and doubted not but now to gain their full revenge
against Reynard: yet still they kept silence, and spoke not a word. Insomuch
that the King being much moved with their dumbness, and noting that none durst
freely deliver their opinions: He began to bend his forehead: but the Queen
after solemn reverence, said to the King; Mounsieur, Pour Dien croyez mei
toutes chooses qu'on vous, and ne jurez point legerement. Sir, it is not the
part of any excellent wisdom to believe or protest in any thing, till the
matter be made most apparent and pregnant to his knowledge: neither should both
his ears be engaged to any complaint, but one ever reserved to entertain the
defense of any accused: For many times the accuser exceeds the accused in
injury. And therefore Audire alteram Partem, to hear the other Party, is the
act of perfect Justice: For my own part howsoever I have erred, yet I have
strong ground for my persuasion, and whether Reynard be good or bad, yet it
stands with your Excellency not to proceed against him, but by the true form
of your Laws: for he has no power to escape you, but must obey whatsoever
your sobriety can impose upon him. When the Queen had thus spoken, Firapel the
Libard to second her entreaty, said; My Lord, the Queen has spoken
graciously, and I see not wherein your Majesty can straie from her judgment:
Therefore let him take the due trial of your Laws, and being found guilty of
the trespasses whereof he is accused, let him be summoned: and if he appear not
before your feast be ended, to clear himself, or submit to your mercy; then
may your Highness proceed against him, as it shall seem best to your pleasure.

To this speech Isegrim the Wolf replied; Sir Firapel, for my own part, I think
not any of this assembly will dissent from your counsel, so it may stand with
the pleasure of my Lord the King: yet this I dare maintein, that howsoever
Reynard shall clear himself of these, and a thousand such like trespasses which
shall be brought against him: Yet I have that lodges in my bosom, which shall
approve he has forfeited his life: but at this time his absence shall make me
silent, only touching the treasure of which he has informed his Majesty to
lie at Crekenpit in Husterloe, there never came a falser information from the
mouth of any creature: for it was a lie made out of malice to wrong me and the
Bear, and get himself liberty to rob and spoil all that pass by his house, as
now he does: but not withstanding I held it meet that all things be done as
shall seem god to his majesty, or you Sir Firapel: Yet this believe, that if
he had meant to have appeared he had been here long since for he had summons
given him by the Kings Messenger.

To this the King answered, I will have no other course of summoning him, but
command all that owe me allegiance or respect mine honor, that forthwith they
make themselves ready for the war: and at the end of six days appear before me
with their Bows, Gunns, Bumbards, Pikes and Halberds; some on horseback, some
on foot, for I will besiege Malepardus instantly, and destroy Reynard and his
generation from the earth for ever: this if any dislike, let him turn his back,
that I may know him for mine enemy. And they all cried with one voice, we are
ready to attend your Majesty. When Grimbard the Brock heard this determination
he grew exceeding sorry (though his sorrow was desperate) and stealing from the
rest of the company, he ran with all speed possible to Mallepardus, neither
sparing bush nor brier, pale nor rail: and as he went, he said to himself; Alas
my dear Uncle Reynard! into what hazards art thou drawn, ha^ing but one step
betwixt thee and thy death, or at the best, thine everlasting banishment? Well
may I grieve for thee, since thou art the top and honor of my house, art wise
and politic, and a friend to thy friends when they stand in need of thy
counsel; for with thy sweet language thou can inchant all creatures, but all
is now bootlesse. With such manner of lamentations as these, came Grimbard unto
Mallepardus, and found his Uncle Reynard standing at the Castle gates, who had
newly gotten two young Pigeons as they came creeping out of their nest, to try
how they could learn to fly. But now beholding his Nephew Grimbard, he staid,
and said, Welcome my best beloved Nephew, the only he I esteem above all my
kindred: Surely you have run exceeding fast, for you sweat wonderfully: What
news man, how runs the squares at the Court? O said Grimbard, exceeding ill
with you; for you have forfeited both your life, honor, and estate. The King
is up in arms against you with horsemen, and footmen, and soldiers
innumerable: besides Isegrim and Bruine are now in more favor with his
Majesty, then I am with you; therefore it is high time you have great care of
your self, for their envy has touched you to the quick; they have informed
against you, that you are a thief and a murderer: and to second their
informations. Laprel the Coney, and Corbant the Rook have made heinous
complaints against you, so that but your shameful death, I see no escape or
freedom.



Tush (said the Fox) my dear Nephew, if this be the worst, let no sorrow
affright you: but let us be cheerful and pleasant together, for though the
King and all the Court would swear my death, yet will I be exalted above them
all, well may they prate and jangle, and tire themselves with their counsels,
but without the help of my wit and policy, neither can the Cour or
Commonwealth have any long continuance. Come then my best Nephew, let us enter
into my Castle and feast, I have a pair of fat Pigeons for you, which are meat
of pure and light digestion; I love not any thing better, they are young and
tender, and may be almost swallower whole, for their bones are little other
then blood; yet come I say, my wife Ermeline will receive you kindly, but by
all means report not to her of any dangers, for she is of soft and melting
temper, and it might strike her into sudden sickness, for women are apt to
entertain grief. When we have feasted, I will then to morrow early in the
morning go with you to the Court, and if I can but attain speech with the King,
I shall gall some deep enough, only this I desire (dear Nephew) at your hands,
that you will stand to me, as one friend and kinsman ought to do one by
another. Doubt me not (said Grimbard) for both my life and goods shall be at
your service. I thank you Nephew (said the Fox) and you shall not find me
ungrateful. Sir (said the Brock) be bold of this, that you shall come and make
your answer before the Lords freely, for none shall dare to arrest or hold you,
for that favor the Queen and the Libard have purchased from the King. I am glad
of that (said the Fox) nor eat I then a hair for their worst malice. And this
said, they went into Malepardus, and found Ermelin sitting amongst her
younglings, who presently arose, and received the Brock with all reverence, and
he on the other part saluted her and her chidren with all courtesy. Presently
the two Piegons were made ready, and they supped together, each taking their
part though none had so much as they desired: then said the Fox, Nephew, how
like you my children Rossel and Reynardine? I hope they will do honor to our
family, they are towardly I assure you, for the one lately caught Chicken, and
the other has killed a Pullet: they are also good Duckers, and can both deceiv
the Lapwing and the Mallard: I tell you true, I dare already adventure them
far, only I mean first to instruct them how to escape the Grins, and to
prevent both the Huntsman and his Hounds; they are of the right heir Nephew,
and like me, both in countenance and quality; they play grinning, entangle
soothing, and kill smiling: this is the true nature of the Fox, and in this
they are perfect, which is great pride unto me.

The Moral.
The anger of the Lion at the Foxes trespasses, shows the disposition of a good
Prince; which is ever moved and offended, when his good subjects are injured.
And the persuasion of the Queen and the Libard, shows, the true temperance
which every Prince should use when he administreth Justice. The moderate, yet
biting words of the Wolf, shows, the cunning malice of a subtle foe, who before
such as are of his contrary faction, will conceal the violence of his malice:
that so he may gain a more quiet attention, and then mixing his calm words
with bitte^ bitter promises, and doubt full injuries, does the uttermost he can
to poison the re^na^tion of him be hates. The Brocks ^oing to the Fox, shows
the office of a true friend, which bo h^g^veth warning and advice to them they
love, when the^ see them run into evil courses. The Foxes carelessness shows
the true nature of a desperate man; that when he has plunged himself into the
depth of evil, has nothing but an audacious countenance and an impudent show,
to make him seem innocent, yet evermore his heart is nip^ with the stinging of
his conscience, as o^^ as he is alone, which is the torment of every offender.

CHAP. 18 How the Fox repenting his sin^, does make his confession, and is
absolved by the Brock.
UNCLE, said the Brock, you may be proud that you have such toward children:
and rejoice because they are of my blood. I thank you Nephew, (said the Fox)
but I know your journey has made you weary, therefore you shall go to your
rest: to which the Brock consented, so they laid them down upon straw litter,
and all slept soundly, but the Fox, whose heart was heavy with sorrow, lay
studying, how he might best excuse himself before the King. But as soon as the
morning began to rise from the top of the Mountains he arose, and went with
Grimbard toward the Court; yet before he went, he took leave of his wife and
children; and said, Think not mine absence long; (dear wife and children) for I
must go to the Court with my Cousin Grimbart, and though my stay be more then
ordinary, yet take no affright thereat; and what tidings soever you hear, yet
consider all things for the best; and be careful of your selves, and keep my
Castle close, and well guarded: as for my self doubt not but I will defeat all
mine enemies. Alas Reynard (seid his wife) what moves you to take this sudden
journey? the last time you were at the Court, you know what daggers you
escaped; and you vowed never to see it again. Will you now run a second hazard?
Dame (said the Fox) the occurrants of the world are diverse and uncertain; and
we are subject to the strokes of fortune: but rest you content, there is
necessity that I go, and I hope my stay shall not be above five (...) at the
uttermost, and so embracing his wife and children, he took leave and departed:
and as they journied over the Heath, Reynard said to the Brock: Nephew, since I
was last shriven, I have committed many sins, therefore I beseech you let me
make before you my confession, that I may pass with less trouble through my
worst dangers.



Then he proceeded, and said: It is true Nephew that I made the Bear receive a
great wound for the Male which I o^^ cut off his skin; and I caused the Wolf,
and his wife to be stripped of their shoes: I appeased the King one^y with
falsehood; I fained a conspiracy against hi^ Majesty's life, by the Bear and
the Wolf, when there was never any such determination: also I reported of great
treasure to be hid in Husterlo, but it was as fabulous as the rest: I slew
Kyward, and betrayed Bellin. I wounded the Conie, and killed Dame Sharpbeake,
the Cooks wife. Lastly, I forgot at my last shrift one great deceit which I
committed, but I will reveal it, and thus it was.

As I went talking with the Wolf between Houthlust, and Elverding, we beheld a
goodly Bay Mare grasing, with a black Fool by her side; which was exceeding fat
and wanton: the Wolf at that instant was almost dead for hunger, in so much
that he entreated me to go to the Mare, and know if she would sell her fool? I
went and demanded the question. The Mare said, she would willingly sell it for
Money: I then asked the price? and she said, the price was written in her
hinder foot, which if I pleased I might come and read it at my pleasure; but I
that well understood her politic anger, said, It is truth that I cannot read,
neither do I desire to buy your Fool, only I am a messenger from the Wolf, who
has a great^d sire to have it. Then (said the Mare) let him come himself; and
I will give him satisfaction: Then went I to the Wolf, and told him what the
Mare said; assuring him, that if he pleased he might have his belly full of the
Fool: provided he could read, for the price was written in the Mares hinder
foot. Read (said the Wolf) what should a^^e me; I can, Cousin read, both
Latin, French, English, and Dutch, I have studied in Oxford, and argued with
many Doctors; I have heard many stately Plays, and sitten in the p^ace of
Judgment: I have taken degrees in both the Laws; nor is there that writing
which I cannot discipher: So desiring me to stay for him there; away he went to
the Mare, and craved that he might see and read the price of the Fool: to which
the Mare consented and lifting up her hinder foot, which was newly shod with
strong iron, and seven sharp naile-heads, as the Wolf looked thereon, she smote
him so just upon the forehead, that she threw him over and over, and he lay in
a dead sound whilst a man might have ridden a mile and better; which don, away
trotted the Mare with her Colt, and left the poor Wolf bloody and wounded, in
so much that he howled like a Dog: then went I to him, and said Sir Isegrim,
dear Uncle, how do you, have you eaten too much of the Colt? indeed you are
unkind, that will give me no part with you. I went your message honestly; me
thinks you have out slept your dinner: good Uncle tell me what was written
under the Mares foot, was it in Prose or Rhyme? indeed I would fain know it: I
think it was a Prick-song, for I heard you sing? nay, you show your
scholer-ship in all the Arts.

Alas, Reynard, (alas said the Wolf) I pray you forbear to disdain me, for I
am extremely wounded, and mine anguish is so great, that a heart of flint would
pity me; The damned Mare on her long leg has an iron foot, and I took the
nails to have been Letters, on which I looked: she hit me so full on the head,
I think my scull is cloven. Dear Uncle (said the Fox) is this truth which you
tell me? believe it, you make me wonder, why I took you for one of the greatest
Clarks in this Kingdom: Well, I perceive the old Proverb is now made good in
you: The greatest Clarks are not the wisest men. Poor men sometimes may
outstrip them in Judgment; and the reason is, you great Scholars, study so
much, that you grow dull, in that you so much overlabour. And thus with these
mocks and taunts, I brought the Wolf within a hairs breadth to destruction.
And now fair Nephew. I have unladed my Conscience, and delivered as many of my
sins as I can call to remembrance; wherefore I beseech you let me receive
absolution and penance: and then come what chance shall at the Court, I am
armed against all dangers. Then Grimbard said, your trespasses are great and
heinous, neverhelesse who is dead, must abide dead. And therefore here I freely
absolve you, upon assurance of your hearty repentance: only the contempt you
made in sending him Kywards head, and the abuse of so many falsehoods, will lie
heavy upon you. Why (said the Fox) he that will live in the world to see this,
or hear that, and understand the third, must ever converse with affliction. No
man can touch Honey, but he must lick his fingers. I often feel touches of
repentance, but reason and our will, are ever in continual combat; so that I
often stand still, as at my wits end: and cry out against my sins, feeling a
detestation of them. But presently the world and her vanities appear to me
again: and when I find so many stones and rubs in my way, and the examples of
the crafty Prelates, and rich Priests to inchaunt me, that I am forthwith taken
again? the world fills me with covetousnese, and the flesh with wantonness; so
that loos^ing my good resolutions. I am only for Hell and wickedness. I hear
their singing, piping, laughing, playing, and all kind of mirth; and I see
their words and actions so contrary, that nothing is more uncertain and
various: from them I learn my lying, and from Lords Courts my flattery: for
certainly Lords, Ladies, Priests, and Clerks, use most dissimulation. It is
now an offense to tell great men truth: and he that cannot dissemble, cannot
live. I have often heard men speak truth, yet they have still graced it with
falsehood: for untruths many times happen into discourse unwillingly and without
knowledge: yet having a handsome garment, it ever goes for current. (Dear
Nephew) it is now a fashion to lie, flatter, sooth, threaten, pray and curse,
and to do any thing that may keep the weak in subjection; who do otherwise is
held foolish: but he that cannot wimble falsehood, in truths kerchiefe, has
neither Art nor cunning: but he that can do it, and deliver error without
stammering, he may do wonders; he may we^r Scarlet. Gray or Purple: he shall
gain both by the Laws spiritual and temporal, and write himself conqueror in
every designment. There be many that imagine they can i^ neatly: but their
cunning often fails them: so that when they think to feed of the fat morsells,
they slip quite besides their trenchers. Others blunt and foolish, and for want
of method mar all their discourses, but he that can give to his lie a fit and
an apt conclusion, can pronounce it without rattling, and make it as truth, fair
and amiable: That is the man, and worthy of nomiration. But to speak truth is
no cunning, it never makes the Devil laugh: foly^ well and with a grace: to
lift up wrong above right, to make mountains and build Castles in the air: to
make men juggle and look through their fingers, and all for hope of gain only.
This Nephew, is an Art beyond expression; yet evermore of the end comes misery
and affliction. I will not deny but sometimes men may jest or lie in small
things, for he that will speak all truths, shall sometimes speak out of season.
To play Placebo, may now and the be born with; for who so speaks allways truth,
shall find many rubs in his way: men may err for need, and mend it by
counsel, since no trespass but has his mercy: nor any wisdom but at sometime
dulleth. Then (said the Brock) Uncle; you are so wise you cannot fail in any
purpose, and I would grow inamored of you; your reasons so far surpass my
understanding, that it is no need of your shrift; for your self may both play
the Priest and confessor: you know the world in such sort, that it is
impossible for any man to halt before you.

With these and such manner of discourses, they held on their journey toward
the Court: yet the Foxes heart (for all his fair show) was sad and heavy; yet
countenance bewrai'd it not: but he past without amazement through all the
press of the Court, even till he came to the presence of the King, and the
Brock marched close by his side; saying, Uncle, be not afraid, but be of good
cheer, it is courage of whom Fortune is ever enamoured Then (said the Fox)
Nephew, you say true, and your comfort avails me: and so on he went casting
many disdainful countenances on those he liked not; or as who would say, Here I
am: what is it that the proudest of yon dare object against me? he beheld there
many of his kin which he knew loved him not, as the Otter, the Bever, and
diverse others which I will name hereafter: and many he saw which loved him. As
soon as he was come in the view of the King, he fell down humbly on his knee,
and spoke as follows.

The Moral.
The Foxes sh^^ving him self to the Brock, shows the Art of all disemblers,
which ever make devotion their cloak. By h^buying of the Foal of the Mare, is
showed, that when proud men make instruments of wiser then themselves, and such
as affect not their qualities, the service they do them is ever to bring them
to mischief, etc Also when ambition or covetousness blinds men, and makes them
trust only in their own skill and knowledge, that then they are ever so^ainly
overtaken with one mischief or another, and made a mock and scorn to their
foes, and such as led them blindfold into the evil.

CHAP. 9. How Reynard the Fox excused himself before the King, and of the Kings
answer.
THat divine power from whom nothing can be hid, save my Lord the King, and my
Lady the Queen, and give them grace to know who has right, and who has wrong,
for here are many false shows in the world, and the countenance bewraieth not
the heart: which I with were openly revealed, and that every creatures
trespass stood written in his forehead, albeit it cost me the uttermost of my
substance or what you (my sovereign Lord) knew me as nearly as my self, and
how I dispose my self early and late, laboring in your service. For which
cause only malice makes all her complaint against me, shi^^ing to thrust me
out of your grace and favor. Insomuch that out of my anguish I must needs cry
shame upon them which have so deadly belied me. nevertheless I know that you
my Lord, and sovereign Lady, are so excellent in your Judgment, that you will
not be carried away with falsehoods: and therefore I most humbly bes^eech your
Majesty's, to take in to your wisdoms all things according to the right of your
Laws: for it is Justice I look for, and desire that he which is found guilty,
may feel the weight of his punishment. For believe it, dread Lord, it shall be
known before I depart from your Court who I am, that I cannot flatter, but will
show my face with an unblemished forehead.

All they that were in the presence stood amazed, and wondered when the Fox
spoke so stoutly. But the King with a stately countenance said: Reynard, I know
you are expert in fallacies, but words are now too weak to relieve you, I
believe this day will be the last of your glory and disgrace: for me I will
not chide you much, because I intend you shall live but a short time: the love
you do bear me you have showed to the Coney and the Rook, and your requital
shall be a short life on earth, The ancient saying is A Pot pass may long to
the water, but in the end comes broken home. And your evils have so long
succeeded, that they will now pay you the hazard. At these words Reynard was
stricken into a great fear, and wished himself far away, yet he be-thought
himself that now he must bear through, what fortune soever came: Whereupon he
said (My sovereign Lord the King) it is but Justice that you hear me answer my
accusations, for were my faults more heinous then envy can ma^e the^ yet
equity gives the accused leave ever to answer. I have with my counsels done you
service in former time, and may no love still: I have never started from your
Majesty, but walked by your side, when others have gone from your presence: if
then my enemies with their slanders shall prevail against me, blame me not to
complain. Time has been it was otherwise, and time may bring it to the old
course, for the actions of good servants ought not to be forgotten. I see here
diverse of my kindred and friends, which now make no value of me, whom I can
approve, go about to deprive you of the best Servant you possess. Can your
Majesty imagine if I had been guilty in the least imagined crime, that I would
thus voluntarily have made my appearance even in the throng of mine enemies? O
it had been to much indiscretion! nor would the liberty I had, been so easily
subjected. But heaven be thanked, I know mine innocence, and dare confront my
worst enemy. Yet when my kinsman Grimbart first brought me the tidings, I must
confess I was half distract with anger; and had I not been in the censure of
his Church, I had appeared ere they had left complaining; but that detained me.
And I wandered with sorrow on the heath, till I met with my Uncle Martin, the
Ape, who far exceeds any Priest in Pastoral business; for he has been
Attorney to the Bishop of ^am^rick any time this nine years: and seeing me in
this great agony of heart, he said, Dear Cosen, why are you thus heavy in
spirit, and why is your countenance dejected? grief is easy to carry, when the
burden is divided amongst friends: For the nature of a true friend, is to
behold and relieve that, which anguish will not suffer the oppressed to see or
suffer. Then I answered him, You say true dear ^^^le, and the like is my
fortime, for sorrow is without cause said upon me, and of that I am not guilty,
I am accused by those I ranked with my best friends, As namely the Coney, who
came yesterday to my house as I was saying Martins, Saying, he was traveling
toward the Court, but was at that time both hungery and weary: and therefore
requested of me some meat, I willingly consented, took him in and gave him a
couple of Manchets, and sweet Butter: For it was on Wednseday, on which day I
never eat flesh. Besides it was then a fust, by reason the feast of Whitsontide
was near. At which time we must have cleansed and prepared hearts, Et vos
estote Parati. Now when he had almost well refreshed himself, my youngest
son Rossell came in, and offered to take away what he had left (for you know
the nature of Children is even to be eating and craving.) But presently the
Coney smot Rossel on the mouth that his teeth bled mid the poor fool fell
down almost in a swound, which when as Reynardine (my eldest son) beheld: he
forthwith leapt to the Coney, and caught him by the head, and questionless had
slain him, had I not come to the rescue. Which done, I went and gave my son
correction for his fault. But presently Laprell the Coney posts to my Lord the
King, and informs that I (my less) sought means to ^urther him. Thus I am
accused without cause and brought in danger, that in truth have best cause to
accuse others. But not long after came Co^brant the Rooke flying to my house
with a sad noise, and demanding what he ailed? He answered: Alas, my wife is
dead. I craved the cause (...): A dead Hare lying on the heath full of mothes
and Veri^i^^^, of which she had eaten so much, that the worms had gnawed he
throat in sunder; and without speaking to me any more words, away he flew,
leaving me much amazed, and now reports that I slew his wife, which how could I
by any po^^^ble means do, considering she flies in the air, and I walk a
foot on the ground? Thus dear Uncle you may see how I am slandered, but it may
be it is for my old sins, and therefore I bear it with more patience. Then
said the Ape to me. Nephew, you shall go to the Court and disprove their
falsehoods. Alas, Uncle (quoth I) it cannot be, for the Archdeacon has put me
in the Popes curse, because I gave counsel to the Wolf to forsake his holy
orders, when he complained to me of his unablenesse to endure that strict li^e,
and much fasting: of which Act I now much repent me, since he repayed my love
with nothing but hatred and malice, and with all the sland ^s he can invent,
stirs his Majesty daily against me, These things (dear Uncle) bring me to
my wits end, for of necessity Inrust go to Rome for absolution, and in mine
absence, what (...) may happen to my wife and children through the malice of
these bloody wretches, any one may guess: whereas on the other part were I
free of the Popes curse, then I could go to the Court, and plead mine own
cause, and turn their malice into their own bosoms

Then said the Ape, Cousin, cast off your sorrow for I know the way to Rome well
and am experienced in these businesses for I am called the Bishops Clerk,
therefore I will go thither, and enter a plea against the Archdeacon, and in
spite of his will bring you from the Pope a will seel'd absolution.

But, man I have many great friends there as (...) Uncle Sim^^, and others,
Pren tour, Wai^, and the like, all which will stand unto me: besides I will not
go unfurnished of money, for I know Paratersare best heard with gift; and the
Law has no feet to walk on but money: a true friend in tried in necessity,
and you shall find me without dissembling: therefore cast off your grief, and
go to the Court as (...), for I will presently to (...) and in the mea^e time,
here I quit you of all your ^^nues and ^^sences and an^^y p^t them upon my
self: when you come to the Court you shall find there Dame Rukenaw my wife,
her two sisters, and my three children, with diverse others of our family. I
pray you salute them from me, and show them mine occasions: my wife is
exceeding wife, and she shall find that her distressed friends shall not
shrink when I can help them I know she is faithful and as behooves her, will
never leave her friend in danger. At the uttermost If your oppression be more
then you can bear, send presently to me to Rome, and not an enemy that you
have, be it King or Queen, or Sub, ject even from the highest to the lowest,
but I will presently put them in the Popes curse, and send back such an
Interdiction, that no holy or sacred duty shall be performed till you have
right and Justice restored you.

This assure your self I can easily perform, for his Holiness is very old,
and little regarded; only now Cardinal Pare-gold bears all the sway in the
Country, as being young, and rich in many friends: besides, he has a
Concubine: of whom he is far enamoured: that he denies nothing she
demands: his Lady is my Niece, and will do whatsoever I request her:
therefore Cousin, go boldly to the King, and charge him to do you Justice,
which I know he will, since he understands the Laws are made for the use of
all men.

This (my Sovereign Lord the King) when I heard him speak, I smiled, and with
great joy came hither to relate unto you the truth? that can charge me with any
Creature within this Court, that can charge me with any trespass whatsoever,
and prove it by testimony, as the Law requires, or if otherwise, he will
oppose himself against me, person to person, grant me but a day, and equal
lists, and in combat I will maintain my innocence against him: provided he be
equal to me in birth and degree: this Law has ever hitherto stood constant,
and I hope neither in me, for me, or by me, it shall now be broken.

When all the assembly of Beasts heard this, they were dumb, and amazed to
behold his stoutnesse, As for the Coney and the Rooke, they were so scared they
durst not speak, but privately stole away out of the Court, and being far on
the plain, they said, This develish murderer has such Art in his falsehood,
that no truth can look with better countenance, which only our selves know,
but have no other witness, therefore it is better we depart, then try combat
with him, which is so much too strong for us, and so away they went.

Isegrim the Wolf, and Bruine the Bear, were very sad when they saw these two
forsake the Court: whereupon the King said, If any will appeal the Fox, let
him come forth, and he shall be heard: Yesterday we were laden with complants,
where are they to day? Here is the Fox ready to answer. Then said the Fox, My
sovereign Lord, absence makes impudent accusers bold, when presence dants them,
as your Highness may see both by the Coney and the Rooke: O what it is to trust
the malice of these Toward! and how soon they may confound good men: but for
me it matters not: nevertheless had they (at your Majesty's commandment) but
asked me forgiveness, I had quickly cast all their offenses behind me, for I
will never shake hands with charity, nor ever hate or (...) mine enemies: my
revence I (...) to heaven, and Justice by your Majesty (...) said the King
Reynard. you speak well i^ the inwar^ heart be like the outward show, yet I
(...) your grief is not such as you express it: It far surmo^ is it said the
Fox: No quoth the King (...) I must (...) you with one foul treason, which is,
when I had (...) your great transgressions and you had promised me (...)
pilgrimage to the holy Lord: when I had furnished you with male, with staff,
and all things fitting that holy order, then in the greatest despite you sent
me back in the male by Bellin the Ram the head of Reynard the Hare, a thing so
nowriously to my disgrace and dishonor, that no treason can be fo^mer. This
you have no color to ^^ny for Bellin (our Chaplain) at his death revealed the
whole process, and the same reward which he then gained, the same you shall
receive, or else right shall fail me.

At this sentence Reynard grew so fore afraid, that he knew not what to say,
but looked with a pitiful countenance upon all his kindred which stood round
about him; his color went and came, and his heart fainted, but none sent him
either hand or foot to help him: then the King said, Thou dissembling and
false T^aytor, why art thou now so dumb, But the Fox being full of anguish,
fetch a sigh as if his heart would have broke; so that every beast pitied him,
save only the Bear and the Wolf, which rejoiced to see his sorrow.

The Moral.
The boldness of the Foxes apperance and speech, shows the impudence of a
desperate offender, that having nothing but his own boldness to bolster out his
cause, still cries for Justice; and caring not so much to excuse himself, as
to accuse others, and by digressions and extravagant speech to bring all those
into disgrace which are able to testify any thing against him. By the tale of
the Apes going for him to Rome, and his threatening the King, is showed, the
ignorance and sottish blindness of the old times, which would thrall Kings
under the Popes Curse, and make them subject to his Commands, though they were
never so heathe^sh and Diabolical. By his excusing him of the crimes against
the Coney and the Rooke, is showed, that whosoevers is resolved to do an ill
act, will never make conscience to tell a loud Lie; nor is he ever uprovided
thereof, because they are the (...), which he ever ^^^a^hes his knavery with.
By the Apes friend is (...), as Sin o^ or Simau^e ^re^t ^ou^ or take ill, and
Wait S^ath or do ^^scheife, is showed the wickedness of these days in Rome,
and how by much mea^es a man might purchase any thing he w^^t about. By his
insinuating with the Apes wise (who was then a great favo^^^^ about the Queen)
is (...) showed the (...) o^^ subtle head, that (...) himself among party,
will not spare any (...), for a^^^^^ those ^^^ar ones ^are not the in^erior
open their lips. ^y the slight (...) the Core^^^ (...) soon the weak are
terrified and danted with the threatenings of the strong and mighty, that it is
better to sit down with wrong, then to contend with one that holds too strong
a party. And also how by such advantage the offender takes heart, and thereon
grounds the ^trength of his greater innocence. By the Lion, last accusations
and the Foxes direction, is showed, that when truth and authority stand up
against the wicked, that then studying with his own conscience, he is able to
abide no longer, but with ^ilence and down cast look, he shows plainly the
guile which lies within him.

CHAP. 20. How Dame Rukenaw answered for the Fox to the King, and of the
Parable she told him.
DAme Rukenaw the she-Ape (being Aunt unto Reynard, and a great favorite of the
Queens) was much grieved when she saw this distraction, and it was well for the
Fox that she was in the presence: for she was exceeding wise, and durst boldly
speak: and therefore rising up (after reverence done) she said, My Lord the
King, you ought not to be possessed with anger when you sit in judgment, for it
becomes not Nobility to be void of reason: it is discretion which should
only accompany you in that season: for mine own part I think I know the Laws
as well as some which wear furred Gown^s, for for I read many, and put some in
use: It is well known, I had ever in the Popes palace a bed of straw, when
other Beasts lay on the bare ground, and I was ever suffered to speak freely
without interruption, because I talked not beyond my experience. It is Senecas
opinion, that Princes are bound to do Justice to all men, nor may the law waver
or halt with any partiality. I do not think but If every man which stands
here should call to account all the actions of his life, he could not choose but
pity much the estate of my poor kinsman Reynard, and therefore I wish every
one to know himself, for none so sure but they may fall, and for him that
never erred, he is so good he needs no amendment; To do amiss and mend it
by counsel, is humane and manly: but to trespass and still gallop forward in
iniquity, is devilish and unsufferable: the holy Book says, Be merciful and
judge not, least you be judged. And in another place when the Pharisees brought
a woman taken in adultery, and would have stoned her to death, asked our Lord
what he said thereto: he Answered: Which of you all is without sin: let him
cast the first stone: But they all departed and left her: In mine opinion it is
so here to day, for here be many that find straws in other eyes but see not the
beams in their own: he that falls off, and in the end arises and comes to
mercy, cannot he said to be damned: goodness never forsakes her own servants.
This counsel, would some take to their hearts, the day would not appear so
dark as it does to my Cousin Reynard. It is well known that both his
Grandfather and Father ever bare greater reputation in this Court, then either
Bruine or Isegrim, or their whole generation. Alas, when have their counsels or
wisdoms been worthy to have held comparison with those of my cousin Reynards?
why, the passages of the World are to them Prophesies, which they understand
not, and the Court is turned topsie turvy by his absence: the evil are now
advanced, and the good suppressed: but how this can long endure I see not,
since the end of their labor is but the ruin of your Majesty.

To this speech the King made his answer: Dame, had the Fox done that offense
to you he has done to others, your excuse would couch in another nature, you
cannot blame me to hate him, since it is only he which breaks my laws and
covenants? you have heard him accused of theft, murder and treason, how can
you then defend him? if you will needs make him your Saint, then set him upon
the Altar, and do him worship, but believe it, there is no one good thing in
him: and however you imagine, yet search him, and you shall find him rotten and
deformed, there is neither kinsman nor friend (but your self) that will assist
him, and therefore your violence draws my greater wonder. What companion has
he that ever thrived by his society, or whom has he smiled on, that his tail
has not after dashed out the eye of.

To this the she-Ape replied: My Lord, I love him, and have ever born him a
singular reverence, and I can well recount one noble and good action he did in
your presence: for which then you thanked him, though now forgotten: yet the
heaviest thing should ever weigh the most, and men should keep a measure in
their affections, and not hate, nor love with violence; since constancy is the
greatest ornament of a Princely nature. We should not praise the day til the
evening come, nor is good counsel availeable, but to those which mean to pursue
it.

I remember about some two years since, there came to this court a man and a
serpent to have judgment in a doubtful controversy: For the Serpent attempting
to go through a he^g, was taken by the neck with a snare so that there was no
way to escape with life: A certain man passing by, the Serpent called and cried
unto him, and desired his help, or else he should perish presently. The man
taking pity of him (said) If thou will faithfully promise me neither to do me
hurt with thy tooth or tail, or other poison about thee, I will release thee.
The Serpent presently swore he would not, neither at that time, nor any time
hereafter: so the man unloosed him, and set him free, and they went forth and
traveled together a long season.

At the last the Serpent grew exceeding hungry, and rushing upon the man,
offered to kill him: but the man started aside, and said; What meanest thou to
do? have thou forgotten thine oathe the Serpent replied no: but I may justly
kill thee since I am compelled thereto by hunger, which cancelleth all
obligations. Then the man said, if it be so, yet give me leave to live till we
may meet with the next passenger, which may judge the controversy.

The Serpent agreed thereto; so they traveled till they met with Tisellin the
Raven, and Slinopere his son: to whom relating the difference, the Raven
adjudged that the Serpent should eat the man, hoping that he and his son should
get a share also. But the man said, How shall he that is a robber, and lives by
blood, judge this cause? it must not be one but diverse, and such as know both
Law and equity, that must judge this contention: the Raven is neither just, nor
indifferent.

Then they traveled till they met the Bear and the Wolf, unto whom also they
told the matter, and they adjudged against the man likewise. Then the Serpent
began to cast his venom, at the man, but the man leaped away, and said, You do
me wrong, thus to attempt to kill me: and the Serpent said, Has not Judgment
gone twice on my side? Yes (said the Man) by such as are murderers themselves,
and such as never kept promise: but I appeal to the Court, let me be tried by
your King, and what judgment he gives, I will willingly abide. To this all
consented: So they came to the Court before your Majesty, and the Wolfes two
children came with their Father, the one was call Empty-Belly, the other
Navel-full, because they sought to devour the Man. So the full process of the
matter was declared to your Majesty: But the Man's kindness and covenant, the
Serpents danger and Faith-breach, occasioned through the extremity of hunger.
Remember how much your Highness was perplexed with their difference, and all
your Counsel also: For the Man's sorrow, the Serpents hunger: the Man's goodness,
and the Serpents ingratitude, equally raises much pity in your bosom. But in
the end such doubts rose, that not any in your Court was able to judge it. At
the last, when no help could be found, then you commanded my kinsman Reynard
to decide the business: the a was he Oracle of the Court, nor was any thing
received, but what he propounded: But he told your Majesty it was impossible to
give true Judgment according to their relations, but if he might see the
Serpent in what manner he was fettered, and the greatness of his danger, then
he knew well how to give Judgment therein. Then you commended him, and called
him by the the title of Lord Reynard, aproving that to be done which he had
spoken.

Then went the man and the Serpent to the place where the Serpent was snared,
and Reynard, commanded the Serpent to be fastened as before in the snickle,
which being done, then said your Majesty, Reynard what Judgment will you now
give? And he replied, They are now my Lord in the same estate they were before
at their first encounter, they have neither won nor lost: Therefore this is
my censure, if it be your Majesty's pleasure, If the man will now loose and
unbind the Serpent, upon the same promise and oath made formerly unto him, he
may at his pleasure: But if he think that hunger or other inconvenience will
make him break his Faith, then may the man go freely whither he will. and
leave the Serpent bound and inthrailed as he first found him: for it is fit
that ingratitude be so repaid. This Judgment your Majesty then applauded for
the most excellent, and held the wisdom of the Fox unlimitable, tearming him
the preserver of your Honor. When did ever the Bear or Woolf the like? they
can howl or scold, steal, robb, and eat fat morsels, make their guts crack
with others ruins: and condemn him to death which takes a Chickin: but them
selves which kill Kine. O^e^, and Horses: O they go safe, and be accounted as
wise as Solomon, Avicen, or Aristotle, and their deeds and Statutes must be
read for monuments. But if they come where vertus is to be exercised, they are
the first which retreat and let the simple go for most, whitest they follow in
the retreat, with shame and cowardice. These (my Lord, and their like, are the
fools of these corrupt times yet destroy Towns, Castles, Lands and People: nor
care they whose house burns, so they may warm them by the fire: for it is
their profit only at which their aim bends. But Reynard the Fox, and all
his Family, have ever made the honor of the King their renown and advancement,
and applied their counsel to do him service, not pride and b^^sting: this has
been and is his exercise, though it now be thanklesse. But time I hope will
produce whose merit is greatest: Your Majesty, says his kindded is fallen from,
him and start at his fortune: would any but your Highness had affirmed it, you
should then have seen, there could not be a thing of greater falsehood: But your
grace may say your pleasure, nor will I in any word appose you: for to him that
so durst do, would both he and we bend our forces. It is known we dare fight,
nor are we descended of any base generation: Your Highness may call to mind the
worth of our Pedigree, and how dearly from time to time they have respected
him, willing ever to lay down their lives and goods for the safety of their
noble kinsman Reynard, For mine own part I am one my self, and allbeit I am
the Wife of another, yet for him I would not stick to spend my dearest blood.
Besides, I have three full grown Children, which are known valiant and strong
in arms, yet for his sake I would adventure them all to the uttermost peril.
Allbeit I love them with that dear affection that no Mother does exceed me: my
first son is called Bitelas which is most active and nimble, my second
Fulrumpe, the third is a daughter called Hatanet, a girl that can look a man's
head, and pick out lice more nimbly then all the combs in Christendom: and
these three are loving and dear to one another: and with that she called them
forth unto her, and said Come my dear children, and stand with your kinsman
the Noble Reynard, and with you come all the rest of our ancient family, and be
all petitioners to the King, that he will do to Reynard the equity of his
Laws and Kingdom. Then presently came forth a world of other Beasts, as the
Squirill, and the Ferret: for these love Pullen as well as Reynard does; Then
came the Otter and Pentecro^^ his wife, which I had almost forgotten, because
in former time they had taken part with the Bear against the Fox, but now they
dare not but obey Dame Rukenaw, for they stood in awe of her wisdom and
greatness? and with these came above twenty her beasts for her sake, and stood
by Reynard. Then came also dame A^^o^ and her two sisters, the (...) easel and
Hermel the Ass, the Beck, the water-Cat, and many others, to the number almost
or an hundred, and stood by Reynard with such affection, as if his trouble did
equally concern them. Then said the shee-Ape, My Lord the king, now you may see
that my kinsman has friends which ta^e avow him, and we are your true and
ioyal Subjects, which will never fail to do you faithful service. Therefore let
us with one voice beg of your Majesty, that Reynard may have Justice, and if
he be not able to disprove his adversary, and clear the crimes imputed
against him, let the Law pass, for we will not murmr to see his destruction.

Then said the Queen to Rukenaw: Thus much I told into his Majesty yesterday,
but his anger was so great, he would not give ear to me. Also the Libero said,
Sir, you must judge according to witness: for to be governed by will is
tyrannous and ignoble. Then a^swered the King, It is true you inform me? but
the disgrace done to my particular self in Kywards death, and others
informations robbed me of patience, that I had no leisure to look back either
to Law, or reason: Therefore now let the Fox speak bold'y, and if he can ^ustly
acquit himself of the crime laid against him, I shall gladly restore him his
liberty, and the rather for you his dear friends sake, whom I have ever found
faithful and loyal.

O how infinitely glad was the Fox when he heard th^se words, and said in
himself, Thanks my noble Aunt a thousand times, thou have put me new blossoms
on my dried Roses, and set me in a fair path to liberty. I have one good f^^t
to dance on: and I doubt not but to use my Art of di^^im^lation so bravely,
that this day shall be remembered for my renown and victory.

The Moral.
By the she Apes answering for the Fox, is showed how apt weak women are to be
flattered into any beliefs, in which they may either express their pity, or
gain glory. Also it shows the verifying of the old proverb, That a Friend in
Court is ever w^rth a pound in a man's pu^se. By the violence of her defense, is
showed, the true nature of a woman that evermore turns into extremes, and so
she may do the good or evil she in tends, will not keep any thing concealed
with may any way work for her purpose, nor yet any thing unurged which may
disgrace those that are ^f the contrary faction, as may appear by the ta^e of
the Man and the Serpent, in which she shows the wisdom of the Fox, and the
folly and disability of the Bear, the Wolf and the rest of the Foxes enemies.

CHAP. 21. How Reynard excused himself of Kaywards death, and all other
imputations; got the Kings favor, and made relation of certain Jewels.


THen spoke Reynard the Fox to the King, and said; Alas m^ sovereign Lord, what
is that you said? Is good Kayward the Hare dead? O where is then Bellin the
Ram, or what did he bring to your Majesty at his return? For it is certain I
delivered him three rich and inestimable Jewels, I would not for the wealth of
India they should be detained from you: the chief of them I directed to you my
Lord the King, the other two to my sovereign Lady the Queen. But (said the
King) I received nothing but the Head of poor murdered Kayward, for which I
executed the Ram, having confessed the deed to be done by his advice and counsel.
Is this truth (said the Fox), then woe is me that ever I was born, for there are
lost the goodliest Jewels that ever were in the possession of any Prince
living: would I had died when you were thus defrauded. For I know it will be
the death of my wife, nor will she ever henceforth esteem me. Then said the
shee-Ape: Dear Nephew, why should you sorrow thus for transitory wealth? Let
them go, only discourse what manner of Jewels they were, it may be we shall
find them again: If not, the Magician M. Alkarin shall labor his books, and
search all the corners of the earth. Besides, whosoever deteins them, shall be
cursed in all Parishes, till he restore them to the Kings Majesty. O Aunt (said
the Fox) do not persuade your self so, for whosoever has them will not restore
them to gain an Empire, they are so goodly and precious: yet your words do
something appease me. But whom shall we trust in this corrupt age, when even
sanctity it self walks maskt and mistaken? And then fetching a deep sigh, with
which he gilded his dissimulation, he proceeded on and said, Hearken all you
of my stock and lineage, for I will here discover what these rich Jewels were,
of which both I and the King are defrauded. The first of them (and which indeed
I intended to his majesty) was a Ring of fine and pure gold, and within this
Ring next the finger, were engraven Letters enamelled with Azure and Sables,
containing three Hebrew names. For my own part I could neither read nor spell
them, but M. Ab^ion of Trere, the excellent linguist, who knows the nature of
all manner of Herbs, Beasts, and Minerals, to this famous Jew I showed the
Ring once, and he assured me, that they were those three Names which Seth
brought out of Paradise, when he brought to his Father Adam the Oil of Mercy.
And whosoever shall wear these three Names about him, shall never be hurt by
Thunder or Lightning, neither shall any Witchcraft have power over him: He
shall not be tempted to do any sin, neither shall heat or cold ever annoy
him. Upon the top of the Ring was encast a most precious Stone of three several
colors; The first lik red Crystal, and glittering like fire, and that with
such brightness, that if one had occasion to journey by night, the light
thereof was so great as that at Noonday. The other color was white and clear,
as if it had been burnished; and the virtue of it was to cure any b^emish, or
soreness in the eyes, or any part of the body: Also (by stroking the place
agrieved therewithal) it presently cured all manner of swellings, headache,
or any sickness whatsoever: Whether it were venom, weakness of stomach,
chollick, stone, strangulion, Fistula, or Canker, either outwardly applied as
aforeshewed, or inwardly by steeping the stone in water, and then drinking the
same. The last color was green like grass mixed with a few small spots of
purple: and the learned affirmed for truth, that whosoever wears this stone
about him, could never be vanquished by his enemies; and that no creature, were
he never so strong and hardy, but would yield unto him, and he should be victor
day and night in all places. Again, as far as one bore it fasting, into what
company soever he chanced (and be his worst enemies) yet should he be of them
infinitely beloved nor should any anger or ill turn be remembered: Also if one
should be naked in a vast wild field, against an hundred armed enemies, yet
should not his heert fail him, but he should come off with honor and victory:
only he must be Nobly bred, and of ^o churlish disposition; for the King gave
no virtue to any which was not a true Gentleman. Now all these virtues
considered, I thought my self unworthie to keep it: and therefore I sent it to
you my Lord the King, knowing you to be the excellent of all creatures living,
and one on whom all our lives depend, and therefore fittest to be guarded with
so rich a Jewel.

This Ring I found in my Fathers treasure, and in the same place also I found a
Comb, and a glasse-Mirrour, which my wife desired of me: they were Jewels of
great wonder, and a^miration: these were sent to my Lady the Queen, because of
her grace and mercy extended toward me: To speak of the Comb; it can never
be too much praised, for it was made of the done of a noble brast ramed
Panchera, which lives between the ^reater India and earthly Paradise: he is so
goodly and fair of color that there is no beautiful color under heaven but
some splendour thereof appears in him: also the smell of him is so delicately
sweet and wholso^, that the very savor cures all infirmities, and for his
excellent beauty and rare odor, all other beasts attend and follow him, for he
is the Physician to all their sicknesses. Then Pan^hera has one fair bone
broad and thin, which whens^^ver this beast is slain, all the virtues of the
whole Beast do rest in that bone, which can never be broken, neither ever rot,
consume or perish, either by fire, water, or other violence: yet it is so
light, a small feather may poise it: the smell of it has that virtue, that
whosoever sents it, takes delight in no other smell whatsoever, and they are
presently eased of all manner of diseases and infirmities; and the heart is
cheerful and merry ever after.

This comb is polished like unto fine silver, and the teeth of it be small and
straight, and between the great teeth and the small, in a large field or space,
there is graven many an Image subtly made, and eunningly enamelled about with
fine gold: the field is checked with Sables and Silver, and enamelled with
Eybor and Azure: and therein is contained the story how Venus, Juno, and Pallas
strove for the golden Ball in the mountain Ida, and how it was put to Paris, to
give it to the fairest of them.

Paris at that time was a Shpherd, and kept his Flocks with Oenon on that hill,
and as soon as he had received the Ball, Juno promised, if he would bestow it
on her she would make him the richest man in the world. Pallas said, That she
might have it, to make him the wisest man in the world, and the most fortunate
against his enemies. But when Venus said, What needst thou wealth, wisdom or
valor? Art thou not Priamus son, and Hectors brother, which have all Afia
under their power? Art thou not one of the heirs of mighty Troy? come give me
the Ball, and I will give thee the goodliest treasure of the world, and that
shall be the fairest Lady breathing; she, whose like no Sun shall ever again
behold: so shall thou be richer then riches, and climb above all in glory:
that is the wealth none can praise too much, since beauty is that heavenly
Elixar, which turns all things in man to joy and contentment.

When Paris heard this, he desired to know the Lady; and Venus said, It is
Hellen of Greece, the wife of King Menelaus; she that is the Iem of the world,
the treasure of beauty, and the glory of all eyes which did be hold her: then
presently Paris gave her the Ball, and confirmed her fairer then the other
Goddesses. Then another place was figured how he won Hellen, brougt her to
Troy, the solemnity at the marriage, the honor at the triumphs, and all
things else contained in that large story.

Now for the Glasse-mirror, it was not inferior to either of the other: for the
glass which stood thereon was of such virtue, that men might see and perceive
therein whatsoever was done within a mile thereof, whether it were the actions
of men, or beast, or any thng else the owner should desire to know, and
whatsoever but gazed therein, if he had any malady whatsoever, it was presently
cured. So great were the virtues of this rare Glass, that wonder not if I shed
tears to think of the loss: for the wood in which this glass stood, was light
and fast, and is called Oatine, it will last ever: for worms, dust, wet, nor
time can consume it; and therefore King Solomon seeled his Temple with the
same: the va^ue exceeded far the value of gold, it is like to the wood Habenus,
of which King Crampart made a Horse, for the love of the most beautiful
daughter of King Morcadiges. This Horse was made with such Art within, that
whosoever rode on it, if he pleased, he would run above an hundred miles in
less then an hour, which was appproved by Clamades the Kings son; who not
believing in the Engine, and being young and lusty, leapt upon the Horse, and
presently Crampart turning a pin that staid in the breast of the Engine, moved,
and went out of the Palace through the windows, and in the first minute he was
gone at least ten mile, Clamades was much affrighted at the wonder and imagined
(as the story said) that he should never have returned back again: but of his
long journey, much fear, great trouble, and infinite joy when he had learned to
manage and govern the wooden beast. I leave to speak for tediousness sake,
only the high virtue of all issued from the wood.

Of this wood the Glasse-case was made, being larger then the Glass by half a
foot and more square, upon which verge was decyphred diverse many strange
Histories, in Gold, in Silver, in Sables, Yellow, Azure and Cynope: and these
colors were very curiously wrought and interlaid together, and under each
History the words so engraven and enamelled, that any man might read the whole
Story: believe it, the world never produced a thing of a greater worth, luster,
or pleasure. In the upper part thereof stood a Horse in his natural glory,
fat, fair, and fiery, which braved a stately Heart which ran before him: but
seeing he could not overtake this Heart in swiftness, at which he infinitely
disoained, he went to a Heardsman standing by, and told him, if he would help
him to take a Heart which he would show him, he should have all the profit of
the conquest, as the horns, skin, and flesh: Then the Heardsman asked him what
means he should use to get him: the Horse said, mount upon my back, and I will
bear thee after him, till with tyring we take him. The heardsman took his
offer, and bestriding the Horse, followed the Dear: but he fled away so fast,
and got so much ground of the Horse, that with much labor the Horse grew
weary, and he bade the Heardsman light, for he would rest himself awhile. But
the Heardsman said; I have a bridle on thy head, and spurrs on my heebs,
therefore know thou art now my servant, neither will I part with thee, but
govern thee as seems best to my pleasure. Thus the Horse brought himself into
thraldom, and was taken in his own net for no creature has a greater
adversary then his own envy, and many which labor the heart of others still
fall upon their own ruins.

In another part was figured an Ass and an Hound, which were both the servants
of a rich man. This man loved his Hound exceedingly, and would often play with
him, and suffer the dog to faun and leap upon him, and ^ow and then to lick him
about the mouth. Now when Baeldwin the Ass saw this, he began to envy the
Hound, and said, Whet sees my Master in this foul Houmd, that he suffers him
thu^ to leap upon him, and kiss him? I see no profitable service he does him.
I labor, bear and draw, and do more service in one week, then the dog and his
whole kind are able to do in a year, and yet have I not the tithe of his
favors: for he sits by his trencher, eats the fat of his meat, and lies on
Carpets and pillows: when I that do all, am fed only with Netties and
Thistles: well I will no longer endure it, but I will study to have my Lords
favor as much as the Hound if not in greater measure. Anon the Master of the
house came home; and the Ass lifting up his tail, leapt with his fore-feet on
his shoulders, and braying and grinning, and put forth his mouth to kiss him,
and used such rude unmannerly actions, that he rubbed all the skin from his
Masters ears, and almost overthrew him: so that the man was forced to cry out
help, help, for this Asss will kill me. Then came in his servants with staves,
and beat the Ass so exceedingly, that he was almost slain: which door, he
returned to his stall again: and was an Ass as he was before. In the same
manner they which do envy and spite at others welfare, if they receive the
same reward, it is nothing more then is due to their merit: for an Ass is an
Ass, and was born to eat Thistles: and where Asses govern, there order is
never observed, for they have no eye either on this side, or beyond their own
private profit: yet sometimes they are advanced, the more is the pity.

In another part was figured the Story, how my Father and Tybert the Cat
travailed together, and had sworn by their troath, that neither for love nor
hate they would depart one from the other: but it happened on a time, they saw
Hu^ters coming over the fields with a Kennell of Hounds, from which they sled
apace, for their lives were in danger, Then said the Fox, Tybert, whither shall
we fly: for the Hunters have espied us? for mine own part I have a thousand
wiles to escape them, and as long as we abide together, we shall not need to
fear them. But the Cat began to sigh, and was exceedingly afraid, and said,
Reynard, what needs many words? I have but ore wile, and that must help me, and
forthwith he clambered up to the top of a high Tree, where he lurked amongst
the leaves that neither Huntsman nor Hounds could hurt him, and left my Father
to abide the whole hazard, for the whole Kennell pursued him, horns and hallows
ecchoing after him: kill the Fox, kill the Fox.

This when Tybert saw, he mocked my Father: and said: New Cousin Reynard, it is
time to let loose all your wiles for if your wit foil you I fear your whole
body will perish. This my Father hearing from him he most trusted, and being
then in the height of pursuit wearied, and almost spent, he let his male ^^ip
from his shoulders, to make himself so much lighter, yet all avai^ed not, for
the Hounds were so swift they had caught him, had he not by chance espied a
hole, into which he entered, and escap^d the Hounds and Huntsmen. Thus you may
see the false faith of the Cat, whose like there be many living at this time,
and though this might well excuse me from loving the Cat, yet my souls health
and charity binds me to the contrary, and I wish him no hurt, though his
misfortunes shall never be grievous to me: not so much for hatred, as the
remembrance of his injuries, which often contends against my reason.

Also in that Myrror stands another History of the Wolf, how on a time he sound
upon a Heath a dead Horse, whose flesh being eaten away, he was sain'to gnaw
and devour the bones, which he did with such greediness, that swallowing them
too hastily down, one fell so cross his throat, that he was almost choked,
and hardly escap^d with life: whereupon he sought every place for the
cunningest Surgions promising them great gifts to ease his torments: but having
lost much labor, in the end he met with the Crane, and besought him with his
long neck and bill to help him, and he would highly reward him. The Crane
greedy of gain, put in his head into the Wolfs throat, and brought out the
Bone. The Wolf started at the pull, and cried out aloud, thou hurt'st me, but I
do forgive thee, yet do it not again I charge thee, for at another hands, I
would not bear it: then the Crane said: Sir Isegrim, go and be frolic, for you
are whole, I look for no more but the reward you promised me: How (said the
Wolf) what impudence is this? I suffer and have cause to complain, yet he will
be rewarded, he will not so much as thank me for his life, but forgets that
his head was in my mouth, and how I suffered dim to draw it out again without
hurting, albeit he put me to exceeding much pain: I suppose it is I which
deserve the reward, and not the Crane.

Thus you may see the fashion of ungrateful men in these days, however they
reward good with evil: for where as pride is exalted. there honor is ever
laid in the dust. There be a world which ought to reward, and do good to those
that have advanced them, which now complain, and make those advancements
injuries, but the gu^r^on will follow: for it is the wisest counsel, that
whosoever will go about to chastise another, should ever be sure of his own
cleareness. All this, and a world more then I can well remember, was curiously
wrought on this Glass: for the work-master thereof was the cunningest and
profoundest Clark in all Sciences that ever breathed. And because the Jewels
were too good and precious for me to keep, therefore I sent them to the King and
Queens Majesty's as a present, to witness my faith and service: O he that had
seen what sorrow my Children made when I sent the Glass away! would have
wondered; for by reason of the great virtue therein, they often gazed in the same;
both to behold themselves, and to see how their clothing and apparel became
them.

Little did I then imagine that good Kyward was so near his death, for then
but himself, and Bellin the Ram, I knew no messenger worthy to carry so rich a
present. But I will search the whole world, but I will find the murderer, for
murder cannot be his. It may be he is in this presence which knows what is
become of Kvward, albeit he do conceal it; for many devi^s walk like Saints,
Yet the greatest wonder of all is (which troubled me most,) that my Lord the
King thould say, that my Father, nor myself, ever did good. But the troubles of
affairs may well breed forgetfullness in Kings, otherwise your Majesty might
call to mind how when the King your Father lived, and you were a Prince not
above two years old: My Father came from the School at Moun^pelio^, where he
had studied five years the Art of Physic, and was expert in all the principles
thereof; and so Famous in those days, that he wore clothes of Silk, and a
Golden Girdle. Now when he was come to the Court he found the King in great
extremity of sickness, (which was no little grief unto him, for he loved the
King most dearly) and the King rejoiced at his sight, and would not suffer him
to be out of his presence. All others might walk whither they would, only he
must ever be near him Then said your Father, Reynard I am exceeding sick, and I
feel my sickness increasing. My Father answered; my Lord, here is a Vrinall,
make water therein, and as soon as I behold your state, I will give mine
opinion. The King did as he was advised (for he trusted not any equal with
him.) Then said my Father, My best Lord, if you will be eased of your grief,
you must needs eat the Liquor of a Wolf of seven years old, or else your
disease is incurable.

The Wolf at that time stood by your Father, but said nothing: whereupon the
King said, Sir Isegrim, you hear how there is nothing which can cure me but
your Liquor. The Wolf replied: not so my Lord, sor I am not yet full five
years old. It is no matter (answered my Father) let him be opened, and when I
see the Liquor, I will tell you if it be medicinable: Then was the Wolf
carried to the Kitchen, and his Liquor taken out, which the King did eat, and
was presently cured of his sickness. Then the King thanked my Father and
commanded all his Subjects on pain of death, from thenceforth to call him
Master Reynard. so he abode still about the King, walking by his side, and was
trusted in all things and the King gave him (for an honor) a Garland of Roses,
which he must ever wear upon his head. But these remembrances are all lost and
gone, and his enemies are now only advanced, virtue is put back, and Innocence
li^es in sorrow: for when baseness and covetousness are made Commanders, they
neither know themselves, nor look at the lowness from whence they are risen.
They have no hearts for pity, nor ears for ye par man's cause. Gold is the go^e
they run to, and gifts the god which they worship. What great man's Gate does
not look upon Covetousness? where is not flattery entertained, and what Prince
takes hate at his own praises? But should greatness need their honest service,
well might they starve ere they could gain that employment: For like Wolvs,
they had rather see their Masters dye, then lend them the least part of their
Liquor.

This my Lord was an accident which fell in your youth, and you may well forget
it: Yet (without boasting) I my self may say, I have done to you both honor
and service, and you happily also forget this which I shall repeat, which I vow I
do not to upbraid your Majesty, for you are ever worthy of more then I can
tender, and my uttermost is but the rent of a loyal Subject, which I am ever
bound by the laws of God and nature to perform.

So it was, that on a time Isegrim the Wolf, and I had gotten a Swine under us,
and by reason of his extreme loud crying, we were compelled to bite him to
death. At which time your self came out of a Grove unto us, and saluted us
friendly, saying: That you and the Qeen your wife which came after you, were
both exceeding hungry, and entreated us to give you part of our getting:
Isegrim then whispered in such manner, that none could understand him, but I
spoke out aloud: With all my heart my Lord, and were it better then it is, it
were too mean for your service. But Isegrim according to his wont departed
grumbling, and took half of the Swine, giving you and the Qeen but one poor
quarter, the other he himself unmannerly devoured, and left me for my share but
p^r^^alf of the Lungs. When your Majesty had eaten your part, you were still
hungry, but the Wolf would deliver none: so that you reached him a blow with
your foot, which tore all the skin from about his ears, so that he ran aw^y
crying and howling with extremity. But you Majesty commanded him to return
again speedily, and bring you more meat, but he went away grumbling. Then I
besought your Majestly, that I might go with him: and I well remember your
answer. So away we went together, his ears dropping blood all the way as he
went: In the end we took a C^if, and when your Majesty saw us bring it, you
laughed, and said to me, I was a swift Huntsman, and could find my game
quickly and therefore I was fit to serve in time of necessity: Then you bade
me to divide it, and I did it, and gave one half thereof to your Majesty, the
other half to the Queen: As for the Muggets, Liver, Lungs and all the inwards,
I sent them to the young Princes your Children: As for the head I gave it to
Isegrim the Wolf, and took unto my self but the feet only. Then said your
Majesty, ha Reyna^d, who taught you to make these courteous divisions? My Lord
(answered I) that did this Priest which sits here with his bloodly pate: for he
lost his skin for his too much inequality, and for his covetousness has reaped
nothing but shame and dishonor. But it matters not, for there be many Wolvs in
these days, that would even eat up their best friends and kindred: Nay if they
had power, even your Majesty also, for they make no respect either of friend or
enemy. But woe to that Commonwealth where such have the upper hand and
government.

My gracious Lord, this and many such like actions as this have I done for your
Majesty, which were it not for tediousness sake, I could well repeat. But they
are all now cast out of your remembrance, but time and my loyalty I hope will
one day again recall them. I have seen the day when no matter was finished in
the Court without my advice and censure, though now that Judgment is not so
reputed: yet it may be, the same reputation may spring up again, and be
believed as firmly as before, as long as it swerves not from Justice, which is
the only thing I aim at. For if any one can charge me otherwise, and prove it
by witness, here I stand to endure the uttermost the Law can inflict upon me:
But if malice only slander me without witness, I crave the combat according
to the Law and instance of the Court. Then said the King, Reynard, you say
well; nor know I any thing more of Kywards death, then the bringing of his head
unto me by Bellin the Ram; therefore of it I here acquit you. My dear Lord
(said the Fox) I humbly thank you: yet is his death so grievous unto me, I
cannot let it pass so easy: I remember my heart was heavy at his departure,
and I was ready to sink to the ground, which was a certain presage of the loss
which happened.

These words, and the sad looks of the Fox, so amazed all the beholders, that
they could not choose but believe all that he uttered, so that every one
bemoaned his loss, and pitied his sorrow. But the King and Qeen were most
touched with the same, and then entreated him that he would make diligent
search for the finding of them out, for his praises had stricken them far in
love with the Jewels? And because he told them, he had sent those Jewels unto
them (though they never saw them) yet they gave him as great thanks, as if they
had been in their safe possession, and desired him he would be a means they
might be restored to them again.

The Moral.
By the relation which the Fox made of the Jewels, and their several virtues
and riches, is showed the policy of the wicked, which are ever prepared of
those baits which they know will so n^^^ catch the minds of them they are to
entangle. as wealth health, honor and virtue, all which be lodged in those
Jewels. As for the stories contained in them, the Fox does moralize them
himself, showing in them severally, the imputations he would have the Lion know
to be in his enemies, and such examples are evermore bitter, and work more in
the minds or the hearts, ^^en any violent speech or invection whatsoever. By
the repeating of his and his Fathers services, is she^ed, he subtle
insi^nuation of offenders, which to extenuate present crimes, call to mind
their good deeds Past not so much for the memory of the good example, as to beg
a new reward though it have bin never so often paid for; for noble spirits have
ever a tender seeing, and are soon touched with the remembrance of any good
turns received for it is an obligation they seldom cancel.

CHAP. 22. How Reynard made his peace which the King, and how Isegrim the Wolf
complained of him again.
THe For understood their meaning exceeding well, and though he little meant to
perform what they entreated yet he thanked the King and Queen for the comforts
they gave him in his great extremity, vowing not to rest neither night nor
day, but to search all the corners of the earth till he had scund what was
become of those Jewels: also entreating his Majesty, that if they should be
concealed in such places where he might be withstood by force, so as neither
his prayers nor power might attain unto them, that then his Highness would
assist him: both because it was an occasion which concerned him nearly, as also
a t^ing required from his Office, being an Act of perfect Justice, to punish
these and murder, both which were contained in this action.

Then the King answered him, that so soon as it should be known where they
were, no help or assistance should be wanting. The Fox gave the King humble
thanks, for now he had gotten all his purposes to the wished end he expected,
and by his false tale and flattery, had so fastened the King unto him, that now
he might go freely whither he pleased, and none should dare to complain upon
him: only Isegrim the Wolf stood all this while infinitely displeased, and not
able to contein his anger any longer; he said, O my Lord the King ^ is it
possible your Majesty should be so much childish or weak of belief, as to fix
your trust upon the falsehood of this ever-deceiving merchant, which has
nothing but shadows and Chymera's wherewith to inchant you? O be not so easily
seduced, he is a wretchall covered and besmeared with murder and treason, and
even to your own face has made a scoff of your Majesty. For my own part I am
glad he is here in your presence, and I intend to ring him such a peal of
contray nature, that all the lies he can invent, shall not bear him away with
safety.

So it is (my dread Lord) that this dissembling and false Traitor not long
since did betraie my wife most shamefully: for it happened upon a a Winters day,
that they two traveled together through a very great water, and he persuaded
my wife that he would teach her a singular Art how to catch fish with her tail,
by letting it hang angle-wise in the water a good while: whereunto he said,
there would so much fish instantly cleave, that half a dozen of them should not
be able to devour it. The sillly fool my wife (supposing all to be truth which
come from him) went presently into the mire up to the belly before she came to
the water; and coming into the depth of the water (as he directed her) she held
her tail down still in the water, expecting when there the fish should cleave
to: but the weather being sharp and ^ro^tie, and she stood there so long, that
her tail was frozen hard to the Ice, so that all the force she had was not able
to pull it out: but when this lustful villain beheld that, he presently leapt
upon her and ra^ished her, in such beastly and shameful manner, that no modest
ear is able to hear the odiousness of the action. My poor Wife being disarmed
of all resistance, well might she shrink, cry, and feed upon the brine of her
own tears, but all to no purpose, the deed was done, and the villain triumphed.
This no impudence can make him deny, for I came and took him in the action. O
how much jealousy, grief, and fury assailed me at that instant, I was even
distracted to behold them: and cried, Reynard, villain what art thou doing: but
he seeing me so near approaching, presently leapt from her and ran his way: So
I went unto her with much sorrow and heaviness, having a world of labor ^re I
could break the Ice about her: and in despite of all my cunning, yet she was
compelled to leave a piece of her tail behind her: and indeed we both escaped
hardly with our lives. For by reason of the great anguish she endured, she
barked so loud, that the people of the next village rose up and came with
staves, and bills, with flairs and pitch-forks, and the wives with their
distaves; and so fiercely assaulted us: crying, kill, kill, and slay, slay,
that I was never in so desperate a taking. One slave among the rest, which was
strong, and swift of foot, hurt us sore with a Pike-staffe, and had not the
night befriended us, we had never escaped that danger. From hence we came into
a field full of Brooms and Brambles, where we hid us from the fury of our
enemies. Thus my Gracious Lord, you have heard how this Traitor and murderer
has used us, and against the same we crave the right of your Law and Justice.

But Reynard answered, and said, If this were true, I confess it would touch
me near in honor and reputation: but God forbid that such a slander should
be proved against me. I confess I taught her to catch fish, and taught her
how to enter the water, and never touch the mire: but her greediness so
transported her when she heard me name the fish, that she ran without respect
of any path or direction; and so coming into the Ice, the was there presently
frozen, by reason of her too long tarrying; for she had more fish then would
have satisfied twenty reasonable appetites: but it is commonly seen, that who
all would have, all forego: for covetousness seldom brings any thing well
home: yet when I saw her so fastened in the Ice, I used all my best endeavors
to loosen her, and so indeed was heaving and shoving about her, but to little
purpose; for by reason of her weight I was not able to move her.

Now whilst this was in doing came Isegrim, and seeing me so busy about her,
Churle-like he most vilely slandered me, like a profuse Wittal, which takes
delight to be accounted a Cuckold: but believe it, my gracious Lord, all was
false, and his wife virtuous, for any thing within my knowledge: whence I am
persuaded, that surely his eye dazzled; for indeed he uttered many a grievous
curse, and threatened much revengement against me; so that more to eschew his
blasphemy then fury. I went my way, and he came; and with as great ado, and as
much heave and shove, he helped her out: which done, (they then almost starved
with cold) ran and skipt up and down the fields to get them heat: and that this
is all truth which I have spoken, I will willingly be deposed, for I would not
be the father of any falsehood before your Majesty, to be master of many
millions: however my fortunes go, I respect not, truth is my badge, and has
ever been the Ensign of all my Ancestors: and if there be any scruple or doubt
made of mine assertion, I ask but eight days liberty, that I may confer with
my learned Counsel, and I will so approve all my words by the oath and
testimony of good and sufficient witness, that your Majesty, and your
honorable Counsel shall accord to the justness of my pretestation. As for the
Wolf, what have I to do with him? It is well known already that he is a
debausht and almost notorious villain; false both to heaven and to your
Majesty, and now his own words witness him a base slanderer of women:
therefore I refer my self to the trial of his wife: if she accuse me, let the
world hold me guilty; provided she may be made free from her husband, whose
tyranny will compel her to say any thing, though never so unjustly.

At this, forth stepped dame Arsewinde the Wolfs wife, and said; O Reynard, thou
have so oily a smooth tongue, and so dipped in flattery, that no man is safe
from thine enchantment: it is not once, but often thou have deceived me; remember
but how thou did use me at the Well with two buckets: which hanging at one
cord, and running through one pulley; which ever as one went down, the other
went up: I remember how thou getting into one of them, fell'st down to the
bottom of the Well, and there safest in great danger and peril, so that I ran
thither with great haste, and heard thee sigh and make great moan: then asking
thee how thou came there? and thou answeredst me, that thou were there a
fishing; and had so much fish, of which thou had eaten so many, that thy
belly was ready to break with swelling: then I asked how I might come to thee;
and thou said, Aunt, leap into that bucket which hangs there, and thou will
be presently with me: which I no sooner did, but (being much heavier then thy
self) I fell presently to the bottom of the Well, and thou came up to the
top: at which when I seemed to be angry, thou said; Aunt, this is but the
fashion of the world: ever as one comes up, another must go down; and so said,
you leapt out of the bucket, and ran your way, leaving me there all alone,
where I remained a whole day, pined with hunger, and starved with cold; and ere
I could get out from thence, receiving so many blows, that my life was never in
greater danger. The Fex replied; Aunt, though the strokes were painful unto
you, yet I had rather you should have them then my self, for you are stronger,
and better able to hear them, and at that time of necessity one of us could not
escape them: besides Aunt, I taught you wisdom and experience, that you should
not trust either friend or foe, when the matter he persuades to, is the
avoiding of his own peril: for nature teaches us to love our own welfare, and
he which does otherwise, is crowned with nothing but the title of folly.

Then said dame Arsewinde to the King: I beseech your Majesty, mark how this
dissembler can blow with all winds, and paint his mischiefs with false
colors: a world of times has he brough me into these hazards. Once he
betrayed me to my Aunt the shee-Ape, where ere I escaped, I was fain to leave
one of mine ears behind me: if the Fox dare tell the truth of the story (for I
know his memory to be much better: besides he is apt to catch advantage from
the weakness of language) I desire no better evidence against him. Then said
the Fox, willingly I will do it, and without flattery or falsehood, and
therefore I beseech your Majesty lend me your Royal patience.

Upon a certain time the Wolf here came to me into the Wood, and complained
unto me that he was exceeding hungry, (yet never saw him fuller in my life) but
he would ever dissemble: at which presently I took pity of him, and said, I was
also as hungry as he: so away he went and traveled half a day together without
finding any thing; then began he to whine and cry, and said, he was able to go
no further. Then hard by the foot of a Hathorn tree, we espied a hole all
covered over with Brambles, and heard a great rushing therein, but could not
imagine the cause why: then I desired the Wolf to go in and look if any thing
were there to profit us, (for some thing I knew there was) then said he;
Cousin, I would not creep into the hole for a hundred pounds, till I know
certainly what was therein, for there may be danger: but if you please to
attempt it, who I know has both Art and wit to save your self, I will stay
here under this Tree till you return: but I beseech you make haste, and let me
know what is there in as soon as you perceive it.

Behold, my dread Lord the King thus he has made me poor silly beast to go
before into the hazard, and he who is great, strong, and mighty, did abide
without in peace, wherein I expressed no little friendship, for I would not
endure the like danger for a Kingdom: but to proceed, I entered into the hole,
and found the way dark, long, and tedious: in the end I espied a great light,
which came in on the further side of the hole, by which I saw there lying a
great shee-Ape, with eyes glimmering and sparkling with fire, her mouth set
round with long sharp teeth, and on her hands and nails sharp as an Elsin, or
Bodkin. I imagined her at first a Marmazin, or Baboon, or else a Market, for a
more dreadful beast I never beheld in all my life time; and by her side lay
diverse of her children, which like her self were cruel and stern of
countenance: when they saw me come toward them, they gaped wide with their
mouths upon me, so that I grew amazed, and wished my self far from the harbor.
But resolving with my self, that now I was in, I must quit my self as well as I
could; I looked more constantly upon her, and me thought she appeared bigger
then Isegrim the Wolf, and the least of her brats much larger then my self (for
a fouler company I never saw) they were all laid in foul litter, rotten and
durtie, with their own piss, they were all daubed and clogged with their own
dung, which stunk so filthy, that I was almost poisoned with the smell. For my
own part I durst not but speak them fair, and therefore I said, Aunt, God give
you many good days, and bless you and my Cousins your pretty children:
questionless they are the sairest of their ages that ever I beheld, and so
surpass in beauty and perfection, that they may well be accounted of most
princely issue. I ruly Aunt, we are infinitely beholden to you that does add
this increase and glory to your family. For mine own part (dear Aunt) when I
heard you were laid down and delivered, I could not stay, but needs must come
and visit you: Then replied she, Cousin Reynard, you are exceeding welcome: you
have found me like a slut, but I thank you for your kind visitation: you are a
worthy Gentleman, and (through the Kings Dominions) for your wit and judgment,
held of singular reputation; you do much honor to our kindred, and are famous
for the means you work to their preterment: I must entreat you to take the
charge of my children, and instruct them in the rules of knowledge and science,
that they ^ay know hereafter how to live in the world. I have thought of you
ever since they were born, and resolved upon this, Cousin because I knew your
perfection, and that you accompanied your self with none but the good and the
virtuous.

O how glad was I when I heard those words to proceed from her, which kindness
was only because at first I called her Aunt, who indeed was no foul kin unto
me: for my true Aunt indeed is only dame Ruk^naw, which stands yonder: who
indeed is mother of excellent children. Yet notwithstanding I answered this
foul monster; Aunt, my life and goods are both at your service, and what I can
do for you night or day, shall ever be at your commandment and your childrens.
Yet. I most heartily wished my self far from them at that instant, for I was
almost poisoned with their stink. And I pitied Isegrim, who was sore griped
with hunger all this while? and offering to take my leave, and fain^ing that my
wife will think it long till my return, She said, Dear Cousin, you shall not
depart till you have eaten something, I shall take it unkindly if you offer it,
then rose we up, and carried me into an inner Room, where was great store of
all kind of Venison: both the Red Deer, F^llow Deer, and Roe: and great store
of Partridge, Pheasant, and other Fowls, that I amazed much from whence such
store of meat should come. Now when I had eaten sufficiently, she gave me a
side and half a haunch of a Hind, to carry home to my Wife, which I was
ashamed to take, but that she compelled me: and so taking my leave, and being
entreated often to visit her, I did depart thence, much joied that I had sped
so well.

Now being come out of the Causey, I spied whereas Isegrim lay groaning
pitifully, and I asked him how he fared? He said, wondrous ill, and so
extremely ill, that (dear Nephew) without some meat I die presently: then did I
take compassion on him, and gave him my wifes Token, which preserved his life,
and for which then he gave me a world of thanks, though now he hate me
extremely. But as soon as he had devoured up my Venison, he said, Reynard, my
dear Cousin, what found you in the hole? believe it I am now more hungry then
I was before, and this small morsel has but sharpened my teeth to eat more.
Then said I to him, Uncle, get yon into that hole, and you shall find store of
victuals, for there lies my Aunt with her children: if you can flatter and
speak her fair, you need fear no hard measure, all things will be as you would
wish it.

I think (my gracious Lord) this was warning sufficient, and that which might
have armed any wise spirit, but rude and barbarous beasts will never understand
wisdom. And therefore they loath the policies they know not. But yet he
promised to follow my counsel: so forth he went into that foul stinking hole,
and found the Ape in that filthy sort as before I described, which when he
saw, (being affrighted) he cried out, Woe and alas, I think I am come into hell:
did ever creature see such fearful goblins? drown them, for shame drown them,
they are so ugly, they are able to scare the Devil, why they make my hair stand
an end with their horrid deformity. Then (said she) Sir I^egrim, their
creation is not my fault, set it suffice, they are my children, and I am their
Mother. Nor ought their beauty or hard favor to displease you: here was a
kinsman of theirs to day, and is but newly departed, who is well known to
exceed you both in birth, virtue and wisdom, and he accounted them fair and
lovely, for your opinion I care not: therefore you may depart at your pleasure.
Then he replied (Dame) I would have you know, that I would eat of your meat, it
is much better bestowed one me, then on those uglie Vrchins. But she told him,
she had no meat: Yes (said he) here is meat enough, and with that, offering to
reach at the meat, my Aunt start up with her children, and ran at him with
their sharp nails and so clawed him, that the blood ran about his ears, and
I heard him erie and howl so extremely, that it appeared he had no defense,
but to run out of the hole, as fast as he could. For indeed he came out both
extremely beaten, and extremely bitten, and all his skin slasht like a Spanish
Ierkin: and one year left behind as a paune of his manners.

This when I saw, I asked him if he had flattred sufficiently? and he said he
had spoken as he found, for the Damme was a foul Bitch, and the Litter most
ugly monsters. Then I told him, how he should have commended their beauties,
and take them for his best of alliance. And he replied, he had rather have seen
them all hanged. Then (quoth I) you must always receive such reward as now you
do, but wisdom would do otherwise, a lie sometimes as much a^a^^eth, as a true
tale: and fair words never come out of season, and better then we, hold it for
a rule worthy Imitation.

Thus my Lord, I have told you truly how he came by his red nightcap, which I
know he ca^mot, nor dare to (...), for all is true without any addition.

The Moral.
By the complaint of the Wolf, is showed, the envy that one ill man bears
another, and how loath they are that any of their contrary faction should escape
punishment; and that to gain reve^gement, they care not what indignity they do
to themselves, as does appear by the Wolfs slandering of his own wife. By the
rising of the Town up against the Wolf and his wife, is showed, that one
mischief seldom comes to all folks, but another still follows it at the heels.
By the Foxes excuse, is showed, how policy has ever an evasion, or a cloak for
any evil it does, and can color every things with a presence of goodness. The
Foxes contempt of the Wolf, shows, that the strength or policy consists in
disgracing the adverse part, and calling his good name in question, by which
means he may lose his life and credit. By the shee-Wolfs falling into the well.
shows the effects of covetousness, which never brings any thing home but loss
and danger; and that policy cares not who pines, so he feel no pain, as
appears by the Foxes tempting her into the Bucket. By their entering into the
she Apes Cave is showed, the difference betwixt temperance and rashness, and
how far good words will prevail before rude and churlish behavior.

CHAP. 23. How Isegrim proffered his Glove to Reynard to fight with him, which
Reynard accepted; and how Rukenaw advised the Fox how to carry himself in the
fight.
THe Wolf answered the Fox: I may well forbear (false Villain, as thou art) thy
mocks and scorns, but thine injuries I will not. You say, I was almost dead for
hunger, when you helped me in my need: but thou ^iest falsely therein, for it
was nothing but a Hare-bone thou gave me, when thou had gnawed all the meat
thereof: and therefore know in this thou injurest my reputation; again, thou
accusest me of treason against the King and to conspire his Majesty's death,
for certain treasure thou say is in Husterloe: also thou have abused and
slandered my wife, which will ever be an infamy to her name, if it be not
revenged: these things considered, I have for born you long therefore now look
not to escape; wherefore seeing there is no other testimony but out own
consciences; here before you my Lord the King, and the rest of my Noble Lords,
friends and alliances, here I will affirm, and approve to the lost drop of my
blood, that thou Reynard the Fox, art a faise Traitor and a murderer; and this
I will approve and make good upon thy body within the Lists of the field body
against body by which means our strife shall have an end; and in witness
whereof I cast thee here my Glove, which I dare thee to take up, that I may
have right for mine injuries, or else die like a Recreant.

Reynard was something perplexed when he saw this, for he knew himself much too
weak for the Wolf, and feared to come by the worst: but straight remembering the
advantage he had, by reason the Wolfs fore-claws were pulled away, and that
they were not yet fully cured, he said, Whatsoever he be that says I am a
Traitor, or a murderer, I say he lies in his throat, especially Isegrim above
all others: poor fool, thou bring me to the place I desire, and to the
purpose I wish for, in sign whereof I take up the gage, and throw down mine,
to approve all thy words, lies and falsehoods.



This said, the King received their pledges, and admitted the battle,
commanding them to put in their surety, that the next morrow they should try
the combat: then stepped forth the Bear, and the Cat, and were sureties for the
Wolf: and for the Fox were sureties Grimbard the Brock, and Bytelus. When all
ceremonies were finished, the she Ape took Reynard aside and said, Nephew, I
beseech you take care of your self in this battle, be bold and wise, your
Uncle taught me once a prayer of singular virtue, for him which was to fight:
and he learned it of that excellent Scholar and Clarke, the Abbot of Audelo,
and he that says this prayer with a good devotion fasting, shall never be
overcome in combat, and therefore my best Nephew be not afraid, for to morrow I
will read it over to you, and the Wolf shall never prevatie against you. The
Fox gave her many thanks for her favors, and told her his quarrel was good
and honest and therefore he had no doubt of his happy success: so all that
night he rested with his kins folks about him, who drove away the time with
pleasant discourse. But Dame Rukenaw his Aunt, still beat her brain how to
work him advantage in the combat, wherefore she caused all his hair to be
shaved of even from his head to the tail and then she anointed all his body
quite over with dyle Olive, so that she made it so smooth and slippery, that
the Wolf could catch no hold of him: besides he was round, fat, and piumpe of
body, which much avails to his advantage: when she advised him that night
to drink exceeding much, that he might be more apt to piss in the morning, but
in no wise to shed any still he come into the field: then (said she) when you
are in the fight, and see time fitting, piss upon your bush tail, and strike
it in the Wolfs face, and as near as you can into his eyes, by which means
blinding his sight, he shall be little able to offend you: and but at these
especial times keep your tail as close as can be between your legs, least he
catch hold thereon, and pull you to the ground: also look carefully to your
self at the first, and by all means shun his blows making him to toil and
run after, especially there where most dust is, and spring it up with your
sect, make it fly in his eyes, take your advantage, and smite and bite him
where you may do him most mischief, ever and anon striking him on the face with
your tail full of piss and that will take from him both sight and
understanding: besides, it will so tire and weary him, that his feet not being
fully cured of their hurt by the loss of his shoo's, which you caused to be
pulled off) he will not be able to pursue you: for though he be great, yet his
heart is little and weak. This (Nephew) is mine advice, and assure your self in
these cases, Art prevaleth as much as courage: therefore regard your self well,
that not only your self, but your whole family may gain honor and reputation
from your fortune: as for the charm of prayer which your Uncle Martin taught
me by which you may be invisible, it is this which follows, then laying her
hand upon his head, she said, Blaerd, Shay, Alphenio, Rasbue, Gorsons,
A^sbuifr^o. Now Nephew, assure your self you are free from all mischief or
danger whatsoever, therefore go to your rest, for it is near day, and some
sleep will make the body better disposed.

The Fox gave her infinite thanks, and told her she had bound him (to her) a
servant for ever: and in those holy words she had spoken, he had placed his
confidence iremovable and so he laid him down to rest under a Tree in the
grass, till it was Sun rise: at what time the Otter came unto him and awaked
him, and gave him a fat young Duck to cat, saying, Dear Cousin, I have toile^
ali^ti i^^^ight to get this present for you, which I took from a Fowler, here
take and eat it, and it shall give you vigor and courage. The Fox gave him
many thanks, and said, i^ was fortunate hansel, and if he survived that day, he
should find he would require it: so the Fox eat the Duck without bread or
sauce, more then his hunger, and to it he drank four great draughts of water,
and then he went to the place appointed where the lists stood, with all his
kindred attending on him.

When the King beheld Reynard thus shorn and opled, he said to him: Well Fox, I
see you are careful of your own safety: you respect not beauty so you escape
danger. The Fox answered not a word, but bowing himself down humbly to the
earth, both before the King and the Queens Majesty's, went forth into the
Field, and at the same time the Wolf was also ready, and stood boasting, and
giving out many proud and ^ai^^^ orious speeches. The Marshals and Rulers of
the Lists, were the Lib^rd, and the Loss. These brought forth a book, on which
the Wolf swore, and maintained his assertion, That the Fox was a Traitor and a
Murderer, which he would prove on his body, or else be counted a Recreant.
Then Reynard took the book, and swore, belied as a false Traitor and a Thief,
which he would pro^e on his body, or be accounted a Recreant.

When these ceremonies were done, the Marshalls of the Field bad them do their
devoir. And then every creature avoided the Lists, save Dame Rukenaw, who stood
by the Fox, and had him remember the words and instructions she had ^iven him,
and call to mind, how when he was scarce seven years old, he had then wisdom
enough to piss the darkest night, without Lanthorn or Candlelight, or the
help of the Moon, when any occasion required him: and that his experience was
much greater, and his reputation of wisdom more frequent with his companions:
and therefore to work so as he might win the day, which would be an eternal
monument to him and his family for ever. To this the Fox answered (My best
Aunt) assure your self I will do my best, and not forget a tittle of your
counsel, I doubt not but my friends shall reap honor and my foes shame by my
actions: to this the Ape said, Amen; and so departed.

The Moral.
By the W^lfs challenging the Combat of the Fox, is showed the madness of rage
and fury, and how negligent it is in respecting his own hazard, so it may do
mischief to the adversary. The Foxes accepting of it thewes how when policy
has no other shisting hole, that then it grows desperate, and will outface
any thing to the uttermost danger. By the she Apes counsel is showed, the care
of a true friend, which is t^en ever most busy, when he sees his companion in
danger, and leaves ^o way unsought that way ^ree him from trouble.

CHAP. 24. Of the Combat betwixt the Fox and the Wolf; the event, passages,
and victori.


WHen none but the Combatants were in the Lists, the Wolf went toward the Fox
with infinite rage and fury, and thinking to take the Fox in his fore-feet,
the Fox leapt nimbly from him, and the Wolf pursued him; so that there began a
tedious chase between them, on which their friends gaxed. The Wolf taking
larger strides then the Fox, often overtook him; and lifting up his feet to
strike him, the Fox avoided the blow, and smote him on the face with his tail,
which was all to b^^^ist; so that the Wolf was stricken almost blind, the
piss smarted so extremely. And he was forced to rest while he glaired his
eyes, which advantage when Reynard saw, he scratched up the dust with his feet,
and threw it in the eyes of the Wolf. This grieved him worse then the former,
so that he durst follow him no longer, for the dust and sand sticking in his
eyes smarted so sore, that of force he must rub and wash it away, which Reynard
seeing, with all the fury he had he ran upon him, and with his teeth gave him
three fore wounds on his head, and s^o^fing said; have I hit you Mr. Wolf? I
will yet hit you better: you have killed many a Lamb, and many an innocent
beast, and would impose the fault upon me, but you shall find the price of
your knavery: I am marked to punish thy sins, and I will give thee thy
absolution bravely. It is good thou use patience, for Hell is Purgatory, and
thy life is at my mercy: Yet notwithstanding, if thou will kneel down, and
ask me forgiveness, and confess thy self vanquished (though thou be the
worst thing living) yet I will spare thy life, for my pity makes me loath to
kill thee. These words made Isogrim both mad and desperate, so that he knew not
how to express his fury; his wounds bled, his eyes smarted, and his whole body
was oppressed. So that in the height of his fury he lift up his foot, and
struck the Fox so great a blow, that he felled him to the ground. But Reynard
being nimble, quickly rose up again, and encountered the Wolf, that between
them begun a dreadful and doubtful combat. The Wolf was exceeding furious, and
ten time he leaped to catch Reynard fast, but his skin was so slippery and
oily, he could not hold him. Nay, so wondrous nimble was he in the fight, that
when the Wolf thought to have him surest, he would shift himself between his
legs, and under his belly, and every time gave the Wolf a bite with his teeth,
or a swap on the face with his tail, that the poor Wolf found nothing but
despair in the conflict, albeit his strength was much the greater.

Thus, many wounds and bitings passing on either side; the one expressing
cuning, and the other strength; the one fury, the other temperance. In the end
the Wolf being enraged that the battle had continued so long (for had his feet
been sound, it had been much shorter) he said to himself, I will make an end of
this combat; for, I know my very weight is able to crush him to pieces, and I
lose much of my reputation to suffer him thus long to contend against me. And
this said, he struck the Fox again so sore a blow on the head with his foot,
that he fell down to the ground, and ere he could recover himself, and arise,
he caught him in his feet, and threw him under him; lying upon him in such
wise, as if he would have pressed them to death.



Now began the Fox to be grievously afraid, and all his friends also, and all
Isegrims friends began to shout for joy: but the Fox defended himself (as well
as he could) with his claws, lying along, and the Wolf could not hurt him with
his claws, his feet were so sore; only with his teeth he snat^^^^ at (...) to
bite him: which when the Fox saw, he smote the Wolf on the head with his fore
claws, so that he tore the skin between his brows, and his ears and one of his
eyes hung out of his head, which put the Wolf to infinite torment, and he
howled out extremely: then Isegrim wiping his face, the Fox took advantage
thereof, and with his struggling got upon his feet.

At which the Wolf was angry, and striking after him, caught the Fox in his
arms, and held him fast: never was Reynard in so great a strait as then, for at
that time great was their contention: but anger now made the Wolf forget his
smart: and griping the Fox altogether under him, as Reynard was desending
himself, his hand light into Isegrims mouth, so that he was in danger to lose
it. Then said the Wolf to the Fox, now either yield thy self as vanquished, or
else certainly I will kill thee; neither thy dust, thy piss, thy mocks, nor
any subtle invention shall now save thee, thou art now left utterly desperate,
and my wounds must have their satisfaction. When the Fox heard this, he thought
it was a hard election, for both brought his ruin; and suddenly concluding, he
said; Dear Uncle, since fortune commands me, I yield to be your servant; and at
your commandment will travel for you to the Holy Land, or any other
Pilgrimage, or do any service which shall be beneficial to your soul, or the
soul of your forefathers: I will do for the King, or for our holy father the
Pope: I will hold of you my Lands and revenues; and as I so shall all the rest
of my kindred; so that you shall be a Lord of many Lords, and none shall dare
to move against you: Besides, whatsoever I get of Pullins, Geese, Partringes or
P^oter, flesh or fish, you, your wife and children shall h^ve the first choice
ere any come in my belly. I will ever stand by your side, and wheresoever you
go, no danger shall come ne^r you: you are strong, and I am subtle, we two
joined together, what force can prevail against us: Again, we are so near in
blood, that nature forbids there should be any enmity between us: I would not
have fought against you, had I been sure of victory, but that you first
appealed me, and then you know of necessity I must do my uttermost: I have also
in this battle been courteous to you, and not shows my worst violence, as I
would on a stranger, for I know it is the duty of a Nephew to spare his Uncle:
and this you might well perceive by my running from you, I tell you it was an
acion much contrary to my nature; for I might often have hurt you when I
refused, nor are you worse for me by any thing, more then the blemish of your
eye, for which I am sorry, and with it had not happened: yet thereby know that
you shall reap rather benefit then lose thereby, for when other Beasts in their
sleep shut two windows, you shall shut but o^^. As for my wife, children, and
lineage, they shall fall down at your feet before you in any presence:
therefore I humbly desire you that you will suffer poor Reynard to live. I know
you will kill me, but what will that avail you, when you shall never live in
safety for fear of revergment of my kindred? Therefore temperance many man's
wrath is excellent, whereas reshnesse is ever the mother of repentance but
Uncle, I know you to be valiant, wise, and discreet, and you rather seek honor,
peace, and good same, then blood and revenge.

Isegrim the Wolf said; Infinite dissembler, how fain would thou be freed of
my servitude? Too well I understand thee, and know that if thou were safe on
thy feet, thou would forswear this submission: but know, all the wealth in
the world shall not buy out thy ransom; for thee and thy friends I esteem them
not, nor believe any thing thou have uttered: too well I know thee and am no
bird for thy Lime-bush chafe cannot deceive me: O how would thou triumph, if
I should believe thee; and say I wanted wit to understand thee but thou shall
know, I can look both on this side, and beyond thee; thy many deceits used upon
me, have ^ow armed me against thee. Thou say thou have spared me in the
battle: but look upon me, and my wounds will spew how falsely thou lie, thou
never gave me a time to breath in, nor will I now give thee a minute to
repent in; and the rather when I think of the dishonor thou did to my bed,
and how inhumanely thou did ravish my dear wife, Dame Arsewinde.

Now whilst Isegrim was thus talking, the Fox be thought himself how he might
best get free, and thrusting his other hand down between his legs, he caught
the Wolf fast by the stones, and he wrung him so extremely and hard thereby,
that he made him shrink and howl out with the anguish: then the Fox drew his
other hand out of his mouth, for the Wolf was in such wondrous torment, that he
had much ado to contein himself from swounding: for this torment exceeded above
the pain of his ^ie, and in the end he fell over and over in a swound: then
presently Reynard leapt upon, and drew him about the Lists, and dragged him by
the legs, and struck, wounded, and bit him in many places, so that all the
whole field might take notice thereof.

At this all Isegrims friends were full of sorrow, and with great weeping and
lamenting went to the King, and prayed him to be pleased to appease the combat,
and take it into his own hands: which suit the King granted, and then the
Lybard and the Lesson (being marshals) entered the Lists, and told the Fox and
the Wolf that the King would speak with them, and that the battle should there
end, for he would take it into his own hands, and determine thereof: as for
themselves they had done sufficiently, neither would the Kinglose either of
them: and to the Fox they said, the whole field gave him the victory.

The Fox said, I humbly thank them, and what pleases my Lord the King to
command, I am ready to obey, for mine ambition is no further then to be victor:
therefore I beseech you let my friends come to attend me, that I may proceed by
their advice. They answered, it was reason: so presently came forth dame
Slopecard and Grimbart her husband, dame Rukenaw with her two sisters, Bitelus
and Fulrumpe her two sons, and Malice her daughter, the field Mouse, the
Weasel, and above an hundred which would not have come, if the Fox had lost the
conquest: for to him that has honor, will over flock attendants; but to him
that is in loss, will nothing but contempt follow. Alas, the Fox came to the
Bever, the Otter and both their wives Pauntcerrote, and Ord^gale, and the
Olt^o^e, the Mar^in, and the Fi^chews, the Firri^, the Squirril, and a world
more then I can name, and all because he was the victor: nay diverse which
before had complained of him, were now of nearest kindred; and ready to do him
all service. This is the fashion of the world, he that is rich and in favor,
can never be poor or hungry for friendship, every one will seem to love him,
every one will imitate his fashions.



Then was a solemn feast held; Trumpets were sounded, Cornets winded, shawms,
and all instruments warbled, and every one cried, Praised be heaven for this
glorious conquest. Reynard thanked them all kindly, and received them with
great joy and gladness: then asked their opinions whether he should yield the
victory to the King or no: and Dame Slopard said, yea by all means Cousin, for
it stands with your honor, nor may you deny it. And (so the Marshalls going
before) they went all to the King, garding the Fox on every side, all the
Trumpets, Pipes and Minstrills sounding before him.



When Reynard came before the King, he fell on his knees, and the King bade him
stand up and said to him Reynard, you may well rejoice, for you have wen much
honor our this day; therefore here I discharge you and set you free, to go
whither your own will leads you, for all contestations I ta^e upon my self, and
will have it discust by the wisest of the Kingdom, as soon as Isegrims wounds
shall be cured, at what time I will send for you, and so proceed to judgment.

My worthy and dread Lord (said the Fox) I am well appaid with any thing that
shall please you: yet when I came first to your Highness Court, there were
many malicious persons which sought my life (whom I never injured) but they
thought to overcome me, by joining with mine enemies against me, and thinking
the Wolf had greater favor then I with your Majesty: this was the ground of
their indignation, wherein they showed their simplicity, not to alter the end
which followed.

These men (my Lord) are like a great kennel of Hounds which once I saw
standing at a Lords house on a dunghill, where they waited for such as should
bring them meat, anon they saw a Hound come out of the Kitchen, which had
thence brought a goodly rib of Beef: but the Cook pursuing him, threw hot
scalding water after him, and scalded all his hinder parts: but notwithstanding
away he went with his booty: but when his fellows perceived him, they called to
him, and said; O how much art thou bound to the good Cook which has given thee
that goodly bone so well furnished with flesh; but the Dog replied, You speak
according to your knowledge, and praise me in such sort, as you see me before
with the bone in my mouth; but if you please to look upon me behind on my
buttocks, you shall find how dearly I paid for it; and they beholding how he
was scalded, and all the hair and skin flayed from his hinder loins: they began
to be aghast and amazed at his torment; neither would they any more of his
fellowship, but fled and ran away from him. In the same sort (my Lord) these
faise and unworthie Beasts, when they are made Lords, possess their desires,
and are mighty and renowned: then do they extort, pill and pell the poor and
needy, and cat them up like so many hungry starved Hounds; for they are the
dogs with bones in their mouths, no man dare to meddle with them, but praise
all their actions: no man dare offend them; nay, many assist and help them in
their unlawful actions, only that they may lick their fingers, and be
partakers of their extortions

O (my dear Lord)! how can those men go safely, which go thus blind-fould? Or
how can they expect but a shameful fall, whose steps are so uncertain? neither
can any man pity them when their works are disclosed; but continual curses and
upbraidings follow them to the grave with destruction: many of these have lost
their hair (which is their friends) as the Hound did, and have none left to
cover their mischiefs, but all forsake them as the Hounds did the dog which was
scalded.

My gracious Lord, I beseech you remember this moral example, and it will
nothing impair the greatness of your virtue, for doubtless mary of these evil
exrorting creatures are under your subjection, both in Towns, Cities, and great
Lords houses, who outface the poor, and sell away their freedoms and
privileges, and threaten things upon them which they never knew, thought, or
imagined, and all to make up the Commonwealths of their own particular
profits: but the ends of such are vile, and heaven has for them a judgment:
but of these errors I hope none shall justly accuse me, nor any of my kindred,
but we shall acquit us nobly from the same, I fear no creatures accusations;
For I will ever be the Fox, though all my foes swear to the contrary. My Lord,
you I adore above all mortal creatures living; nor can any wisdom divert me
from you, but I will abide by you to the last gasp: and though malice have told
your Highness to the contrary, yet I have ever disproved them, and so will do
to the last moment.

The Moral.
By the W^lfs (...) assaul^ing the Fox, and the Foxes watching and pursuing of
advantages, is showed, the ^olly of ^age and passion, and the discretion of
temperance and wisdom; the first never bringing any thing (...) lo^^, the
other commonly accompanied with honor and safety. By the pist^^il is expressed,
the sharp afflictions with which wisdom ever punish as rashness, and by the
loss of the Wolfs eye, is ^hewed, that madness and rage is evermore but
^lindnesse. The Wolfs catching the Fox, and holding him in (...), power, shows,
that so sure sometime ^avour, fools, but never gives them grace to enjoy the
benefit The Foxes flatt^^ing of the Wolf, sh^ws, That whenever wisdom is
oppressed, it has yet still one temperate means or other to gain his own
liberty; and that fair words do ever either vanquish, or astonish Lastly, by
the weak Foxes conquering the strong Wolf, is showed, that in all these
accidents of change, neither force, rage, nor violence do prevail so much as
wisdom, discretion, and temperate and wary carriage.

CHAP. 25. How the King forgave the Fox all things, and made him the greatest
in his Land; and of his noble return home with all his kindred.
THe King said; Reynard, you are one that owe me homage and fealty, and I
hope I shall ever enjoy it: And for your service, here I make you one of the
Lords of my Privy Counsel. Take heed you do not any thing unworthily, for here
I place you in all your power and authority as formerly you were, hoping you
will administer Justice equally and truly. For as long as you employ your wit
unto virtuous actions, to long the Court cannot miss you: for you are a Star,
whose luster exceeds all other, especially in finding out mischiefs, and
preventing them. Therefore remember the Moral you your self told me, and be a
^^over of trush and equity. From henceforth I will be governed by your wisdom,
and there shall not breath that creature in any Kingdom which shall do you
injury, but I will highly revenge it. This you shall proclaim through all the
Nation, and be the chiefest Governor in the same; for the Office of
High-Bayliff here I freely bestow upon you, and I know you may reap great
honor thereby.

All Reynards friends and kindred humbly thanked the King, but he told them it
was much short of that he intended to do for their sakes; and advised them all
to admonish him to be careful of his faith and loialty. This said Dame Rukenaw,
Believe it my Lord, we will not fail in that point, neither fear you the
contrary? for should he prove otherwise, we would renounce him. Then the Fox
also thanked the King with fair and courteous words, saying; My gracious Lord!
I am not worthy of these high honors you do me, yet will ever study with my
service how to deserve them: nor shall my best counsel at any time be wanting.
And this said, he took his humble leave of the King, and so departed with the
rest of his friends and kindred.

Now whilst these passages happened, Bruin the Bear, Tibert the Cat, and
A^sewinde and her childdren, with the rest of their Lineage, drew the Wolf out
of the field, and laid him upon soft Litter and Hay, and covered him all over
very warm, and dressed his wounds, which were to the number of five and twenty,
by the help of many skilful Leeches and Surgions. His sickness and weakness
was so great, that his feeling was lost: but they rubbed and chafed him on the
temples and under the eyes, till he leapt out of his (...), and howled so
loud, that all were amazed which heard him: but the Physicians gave him
Cordials to drink, and a dormiture or potion to make him sleep. And then
comforted his wife, telling her there was no danger or peril of his life. So
the Court brake up, and every Beast returned to his own home.

Amongst the rest, Reynard the Fox took his leave of the King and Queen, they
desired him not to be long absent from them. To whom he answered, that he would
be ever ready at their service, as was his bounden duty; and not himself alone,
but all his friends and kindred also. And so begging license of his Majesty in
all solemn manner, and with fair speech, he departed the Court.



Was never creature that ever flatterd braver, or to better purpose, for he
that could do the like might be a Master of the eight liberal Sciences. And no
Lord whether Spiritual or Temporal, but would have an ear open for all his
language. Nor dyed he without issue, for he has Children almost in all places.

And indeed he that has no alliance to him in the Art of dissimulation, shall
hardly prosper, as the world goes: Though he want his heir, yet if he have his
heart, it is enough to make him accepted.

Plain dealing is now an exile, and Coveteousness and fraud have taken
possession of his Tenements: not the Popes Palace, the Court of Emperors,
Kings and Princes cannot be excepted of this error.

Money is now grown the only Favorite of the times; the very Church-Idol, and
the Country worship: it can purchase all things, defend all things, and
confound all things: And mad men travel over the world, to gain this folly,
this fashion: Who is not a true Fox, is but a beast of base estimation.

This is the worlds custom, and what will become of the use, the wise man can
hardly judge or imagine: Only that these heinous sins of falsehood, Theft,
Murder and Ambition, can never walk but hand in hand with Judgment: From which
I heartily pray that the hand of the Highest will defend us, and make us walk
in those paths which shall be suitable to virtue and piety. With which I
conclude, since these misdeeds are not fit Theames for me to treat of, since
at the last day every one is sure to give an account for his own burden.

WIth Reynard all his friends and Kinsfolks to the number of forty, took their
leave also of the King, and went away with the Fox, who was no little glad
creature tha^ he had sped well, and stood so far in the Kings favor: for now
he had power enough to advance whom he pleased, and pull down any that envied
his fortune.

After some travel the Fox and all his friends came to his Borough, or Castle
of Mal^pardus, where every one (in noble and courteous manner) took leave of
other, and Reynard did to every one of them great reverence, and thanked them
for the love and honor he had received of them; protesting evermore to remain
their faithful servant, and to second them in all things wherein his life or
goods might be available unto them: and so shook hands and departed.

The Fox went in to Dame Ermeli^ his wife, who welcomed him with great
tenderness: And to her and her children he related at large, all the wonders
which had befallen him at the Court: and mist no tittle or circumstance
therein. Then grew they proud that his Fortune was so excellent: and the Fox
spent his days from thenceforth (with his Wife and Children) in great joy and
content.

Now whosoever shall relate unto you (of the Fox) more or less then you have
heard: I would not wish you to build any faith upon his reports. Only this
which you have already heard or read, you may believe at your best pleasure: Or
if any refuse, he shall notwithstanding be accounted an Heretic, since he that
only saw it, may best give credit unto it; and yet many in this world believe
the things they have not seen.

Besides, there are many Plays, both Comic and Moral, which figure out things
that never were, only to make use and benefit of the example: That men may
thereby the better shun Vice, and pursue Virtues. In like manner, this Book,
though it contain but matter of jest and sport, yet if he look seriously
thereinto, he may happily find much Moral matter and wisdom, worth his
consideration. Goodness nor any Good man shall he find in it disreputed, for
all things are generally spoke, and every man may take his own part as his
Conscience shall instruct him: If any man find himself too much oppressed, let
him shake it off with amendment: If any man be clear, let him hold on his path,
and av^yd stumbling: And if any take distaste or offense, let him not blame me,
but the Fox, for it is only his language. But if all things suit to my wished
imiginations, I shall then be encouraged to salute the world with a second
part: clad in some neater English, deeper matter, and if not more, yet every
whit as pleasant Morals.

The Moral.
By these honors done to the Fox by the Lion, is showed, that seldom one good
for^^e comes with (...) another, and he that has once a chieve^ same and
renown, to him will the world fly, and dignity on dignity shall be heaped upon
him: as on the contrary part, be that is once fallen, either in state or
reputation, it is a thing of much difficulty to ^^e him advanced without
miracle; for worldly men are said to be like Dogs, which when one of their own
kind is down, all the rest will fall upon him and worrie him. But wise men, or
good men (for both are scarce) are said to be like Hogs; which when one of
their kind is down, all the rest will presently assist and help him. For any
thing else contained ^n this Chapter, it is either Moralized by the speeches of
the Fox, or else by the Author.



A Table of the Contents of all The CHAPTERS.
HOW the Lion Proclaimed a solemn feast at his Court: And how Isegrim the Wolf
and his wife, and Curtise the Hound, made the first complaint of Reynard the
Fox. Chap. 1. How Grimbard the Brock spoke for Reynard to the King. Chap. 2.
How Cauntecleere the Cock complained of Reynard the Fox. Chap. 3. The Kings
answer to the Cocks complaint, and how they sung the Dirge. Chap. 4. How Bruine
the Bear (...) with Reynard to (...) How (...) How the Fox came to the Court,
and how he excused himself. Chap. 10. How the Fox was arrested, and judged to
death. Chap. 11. How the Fox made his confession before the King. Chap. 12. How
Reynard the Fox was honored of all Beasts by the Kings commandment. Chap. 13.
How Isegrim and his wife Arswind had their Shoos plucked off for Reynard to wear
to Rome Chap. 14. How Kaywarp the Hare was slain by Reynard the Fox, and his
head sent by the Ram to the King. Chap. 15. How Bellin the Ram and his linege
were given to the Bear and the Wolf. Chap. 16. How the King was angry at these
complaints, took counsel for revenge, and how Reynard was forewarned of
Grimbard the Brock. Chap. 17. How the Fox repenting his sins, does make
confession, and is absolved by the Brock. Chap. 18. How Reynard the Fox excused
himself before the King, and the Kings answer. Chap. 19. How dame Rukenaw
answered for the Fox to the King, and of the parable she told. Chap. 20. How
Reynard excused himself of Kaywards death, and all other imputations; got the
Kings favor, and made a relation of certain Jewels. Chap. 21. How Reynard made
his peace with the King, and how Isegrim the Wolf complained of him again.
Chap. 22. How Isegrim proffered his Glove to Reynard to fight with him which
(...) and how Rukenaw advised (...) Chap. 23.



