A SHORT, BUT JUST ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF Benjamin Harris, UPON AN INFORMATION
Brought against him For Printing and Vending a late Seditious Book called An
Appeal from the Country To the CITY, For the Preservation of His Majesty's
Person, Liberty, Property, AND THE Protestant Religion,

Printed in the Year 1679.

On Thursdry, the fifth of this Instant February, at the Guildhall in the City
of London, There was an Information exhibited by the King's Council before my
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, against Benjamin Harris Bookseller to this purpose,
viz, That He the said Benjamin Harris, did maliciously and designedly to
scandalize the King and Government, cause to be printed, and sold, a late
seditious Book called, An Appeal frem the Country to the City, for the
preservation of His Majesty's Person, Liberty, Property, and the Protestant
Religion; and after it was read, Mr. Recorder made a speech to the Jury, and
the whole Court, to this effect.

Gentlemen,
I Hope, This being a matter to be tried in the City of London, Persons coming
here in great Multitudes, come to blush rather than to give encouragement to
it; and if we can give Your Lordship, and this Jury satisfaction that this
Person is guilty of the offense, according as it is laid in the Information, I
hope that both you, and all others that shall hear it, (for I perceive there is
a great expectation this day from this cause,) I hope, I say, You will all
abominate any man that shall offer at any such like thing. Indeed we live in an
age where all sort of Faction and Rebellion is countenanced, Magistrates
reviled, and scandalized by some persons, who think they have Authority so to
do. It is just like such another kind of Religion, which some have now of late
taken up, that rather than they will be thought to turn Phanaticks, they will
turn plain Atheists, and others, who scorn to be either downright Rebels. This
Book is as base a piece as ever was contrived in Hell, either by Papists, or
the blackest Rebel that ever was: It seems to carry with it a fine Character,
and has a figure of all plausible obedience to the Crown, to wit, an Appeal,
etc. For the preservation of His Majesty's Person, Liberty, Property, and the
Protestant Religion. But if any of you have seen it, I hope you will be so far
from giving any countenance to it, as that you will, with me, think, it is so
far from tending well to the Government, that it is only designed to rake up
all Sedition and Rebellion, and the very worst of all Rebellion. I must
confess, I would rather have believed that it was only the sake of lucre made
him do what he did, for that would have somewhat extenuated his Crime, if he
had not read it first; but then to go, and have it Printed, and exposed to
sale, etc. this it a great aggravation,

If the same sort of Insinuation had been used toward any private Tradesman,
as has been offered to the KING and Magistrates, I believe there is no man but
would say, That e're this time he might have hid his head.

But Dissemblances of Pretenses for the sake of the Protestant Religion now
adays in his Shop will pass well enough, and Persons can tell you there how far
you may go from hence to Rome with safety; and after they have blackened their
mouths with Tobacco and Smoke, and do not rail against the Church and the
Government, they are looked upon strait as no Protestants.

But still as to this Person, the farther to urge it, by way of aggravation
upon him, he could vauntingly make his Boasts, when it was put home to him, Why
he would venture to do such things, etc? That he had above a Thousand Persons
who would stand by him in whatsoever he did.

Lord Chief Justice. There was hardly ever any Book more pernicious to set us
together by the Ears than this, nor any thing a greater Incendiary; One can
hardly write a worse --

Says he, We in the Country have done our parts, in Choosing; for the
generality, good Members to serve in Parliament; but if (as our Two last
Parliaments were) they must be Dissolved, or Prorogued, whenever they come to
redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may be pitied, but not blamed. If the
Plot takes effect, (as in all probability it will) our Parliaments are not then
to be Condemned, for that their not being suffered to Sit occasioned it.

So that here is a sly way of casting it upon the KING Himself. And if it be
not downright Treason, I am sure, it is just upon the heels of it. It Is a most
abominable Piece.

Then were called the Witnesses, to prove that the Books were Sold in his Shop,
and after they were all Sworn, first of all Mrs. Grover, a Printer's Wife,
stood up, who confessed she had half a dozen of them, but not of him; for he
was either gone out, or not in the way, but she had them of his Man.

Then stood up one Mary Darby, and she said, She had four of them.

After her, Mr. Benjamin Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard
Bookseller, was Examined, who said he saw several Quires of them in the Shop.
And being asked by Mr. Harris, How he knew they were all those Books? He
answered, That he turned over a great many of them, and found them all the same.

Mr. Recorder. My Lord, he was so mighty zealous of this Book, of so great
importance, no doubt, to his Party, that for fear he should be disappointed in
time, he gave somewhat to hasten it.


Mr. Recorder. Call -- the Printer's Man, and swear him.

[Who stood up, and was sworn.]
Mr. Recorder. What did Mr. Harris give you, ha?


Printer's Man. He laid me down Sixpence.


Lord Chief Justice. And what, that was for hastening the Book, was it not?


Printer's Man. I cannot tell Sir, not I, but he gave me Sixpence.


Mr. Recorder. And what, did you do it in the Daytime, was you not at it in
the Night?


Printer's Man. Yes, I was upon it in the Night.


Mr. Recorder. Ay, it was a deed of darkness, and so fit for Night-work.


Mr. Sergeant Strode. My Lord, If it can be made out to your Lordship and this
Jury, that he designed maliciously to scandalize the KING and the Government by
it, we must acquiesce, but that, my Lord, he absolutely denies; but seeing it
running up and down the Town, he gets some of them, and suffers them to lie up
and down in his Shop, and this only as a common thing to get money, so that we
suppose it may not lie within the Information, because it does not
intentionally scandalize the KING and the Government.


Mr. Williams. He in his Trade sold this Book, and that we admit; but, my Lord,
it is a material part of the Information, that it was done with a malicious
design, etc. and we do not take it so, but for the other matter we submit to it.


Lord Chief Justice. Then you do admit, that he did sell some of these Books.


Mr. Williams. We do, my Lord, that he did sell one.


Mr. Ollibear. My Lord, this Book was publicly sold in other Booksellers Shops
before we had it, and so we thought in a way of Trade, we might do the like;
but as soon as ever we heard there was any thing ill in the Book, we suppressed
the selling of it.


Mr. Sergeant Strode. They say, my Lord, the Printer had Sixpence given him by
Mr. Harris. -- Friend, does not he come, and give you some money at other
times? have you never had any of him before?


Printer's Man. No, Sir, I never Printed any thing for him before.


Mr. Sergeant Strode. Was not this Printed before you saw it?


Printer. Not to my knowledge.


Mr. Sergeant Strode. Pray ask the first Witness. Was not this in Print before
you saw it in his Shop?


Mrs. Grover. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, he is a man of other Principles than to do such things.


Lord Chief Just. There is scarce any but Smith, that is so Factious a Seller
of Books, as Harris: All your Domestick-Intelligences are so; for which, you
know, you have forfeited your Recognizance almost in every Book.


A Neighbor was called by Mr. Williams, to give an Account of Mr. Harris.
Neighb. My Lord, I have known him about a Twelvemonth; and I have always
looked upon him, to be a fair Conditioned, Quiet, Peaceable Man: He is, and has
been so Reputed among his Neighbors. And I have never seen any thing from him,
but what was very Quiet and Peaceable.


Mr. Recorder. A Bookseller, that causes a Factious Book to be Printed, or
Reprinted, if it was Printed before, is a Factious Fellow.


Lord Chief Just. You say right.


Mr. Goodall (another Neighbor of Mr. Harris's) said, upon his being asked, If
he were acquainted with him? and, If he were wont to Oppose, or to Scandalize
the KING or Government? That he never heard such a like thing of him.


Mr. Recorder. I presume, that none of these do stand by him, in any such
thing: But he, being advertised of it, and being asked, Why he would offer to
Expose to Sale such a Book at this? He answered and said, That he had a
Thousand Persons, that would Stand by him.


Call Robert Stevens. Lord Chief Just. What can you say?


Rob. Stephens. My Lord, I have seen this Book several times in his Shop, and
others too: And I have asked him, Why he would so publicly Vend them? (I did
not indeed Buy one of them my self, but I caused a Man to Buy one for me) and
he said, He had several Thousands to Stand by him: and he is accounted an
Anabaptist. He said so before the Masters and Wardens of the Company; who
questioned him, why he sold such Scandalous Things? and he said, He had several
Thousands to Stand by him.


Then spoke the Lord Chief Justice to this Purpose.
BEcause my Brother shall be satisfied with the Opinion of all the Judges of
England, what this Offense is, which they would insinuate, as if the mere
Selling of such a Book, was no Offense. It Is not long since, that all the
Judges met, by the King's Command; as they did sometime before too: and they
both Times declared unanimously, That all Persons, that do Write, or Print, or
Sell any Pamphlet, that is either Scandalous to Public, or Private Persons;
such Books may be seized, and the Person punished by Law: That all Books, which
are Scandalous to the Government, may be seized; and all Persons of Exposing
them, may be Punished. And further; That all Writers of News, though not
Scandalous, Seditious, nor Reflective upon the Government, or the State; yet if
they are Writers (as there are few others) of False-News, they are Indictable,
and Punishable upon that Account.

So that, your Hopes of any thing of that kind, will be vain; for all the
Judges have declared this Offense, at the Common Law, to be Punishable in the
Seller, though in the way of his Trade: The Books may be seized, and the Person
punished.

As for this Book, in particular; You can hardly read a more base, and
pernicious Book, to put us all into a Flame: It gives you such Incitements, and
such base Encouragements, with such Reflections upon all sorts of Persons, (for
I have Read it upon this Account) that I think, there can scarce be a worse
made. He would set up another Man, that has no Title, to the Crown: For (says
he) the Greatest Danger accruing to your Persons, as well as to the whole
Kingdom, upon the KING's untimely Death, will proceed from a Confusion, and
want of some Eminent and Interested Person, whom you may trust, to Lead you up
against a French and Popish Army: For which purpose, no Person is fitter, than
his Grace, the Duke of Monmouth; as well for Quality, Courage, and Conduct, as
for that his Life and Forture depends upon the same Bottom with Yours. He will
stand by You; and therefore, You ought to stand by him. And remember the Old
Rule is, He who has the worst Title, ever makes the best KING; as being
Constrained by a Gracious Government, to supply what he wants in Title: That
instead of, GOD and my Right; his Motto may be, GOD and my People. He says,
Such a one would make a better KING; for, as you see, the Worse the Title, the
Better the KING. A KING, with a Bad Title, makes a Better KING, than he that
has a Good One; for, he shall be obliged to Comply with, and will humor the
People, for want of a Title. A Thing, which is of the basest Nature, that can
be: And yet this Man must give Money, to hasten the Printing of such a Book;
and he had several Quires of them in his Shop. Except the Writer of it, there
cannot be a worse Man in the World; who, for Trival Profit, will neglect the
Peace and Quiet of his Country, and set us all together by the Ears, for a
Groat. And, Mr. Harris, if you expect any thing in this World, of this kind of
Favor, you must find out the Author; for he must be a Rebellious, and a
Villainous Traitor: For, though he seems to inveigh against Popery, it is only
to be a Rebel. And certainly, he has rejected all the Laws of God, and all
Obedience that Man requires; and profaned all Holy Writ. He is some Body,
whose Fortune does not suit with his Condition; and who, because he is not at
ease and quiet himself, will let no Body else be so neither.

You have nothing more to do, but to give your Verdict: Speaking to the Jury,
who presently withdrew.

If there be any thing in Law, let me know it; because you go out.

Then one of the Jury asked my Lord, if they might not have the Book with them,
which was there in the Court, and it was answered in the Negative.

Before the Jury went out, Mr. Harris would fain have spoke to them for
himself, but it was not permitted him.

Then, after a little while tarrying, they returned to the Bar.
And being, as is usual, asked if they were agreed on their Verdict, and who
should speak for them; they answered yes, and appointed their Foreman, who said
He was guilty of selling the Book.

At which there was a very great and Clamorous Shout.

Lord Chief Justice said, that was not their business, they were only to
determine whither barely Guilty, or not Guilty.

The Recorder would have had them given their Verdict by the Poll, but they all
unanimously Cried out, they were all Agreed, and then the Foreman gave the
Verdict again, Guilty.

Mr. Recorder then prayed, that he being for the King, Mr. Harris might stand
Committed; who was thereupon presently delivered to a Tippstaff to be carried
to the Kings Bench.

Mr. Harris earnestly beseeched his Lordship, that he might be sent to any
other Prison, and named Newgate three or four times, but it was not granted
him: Thereupon he said, I hope God will give me Patience to go through it.

Then my Lord Chief Justice spoke to the Jury to this Effect.
I am sorry you gave Countenance to this Cause so much, as to stir from the
Bar, when the Evidence was so full, and when I told you plainly, not only my
Opinion, but likewise that of all the Judges of England, that selling this Book
was an Offense at the Common Law, for which they ought to be punished: and yet
with your Scruples, you give the Party (with their Hollows, and Shoutings) to
take Advantage; though you did mean upon the matter, the same thing then, you
do now: Yet you see, upon every little occasion, when a thing shall seem to
thwart the Government, how ready they are to send up their loud Hollowings. It
was not so prudently done as might have been done.

We had need look about us, for if at such a time, and for such a base Book,
such Clamorous Noises shall be made, what shall become of us? Our Lives and
Fortunes are at stake. Would I knew some of those Shouters, I would make them
know, I would punish them: I am Incensed in the behalf of the Government, and
of all our Lives and Fortunes, that such shall go unpunished.

FINIS.

