ARCHERIE REVIVED; OR, THE Bow-Man's EXCELLENCE. An HEROIC POEM: BEING A
Description of the use and noble Virtues of the Long-Bow, in our last Age, so
famous for the many great and admired Victories won by the English, and other
Warlike Nations, over most part of the World.

Exhorting all brave Spirits to the banishment of Vice, by the use of so Noble
and Healthful an Exercise.

Written by Robert Shotterel, and Thomas Durfey, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, Ann. Dom. 1676.

TO THEIR SACRED MAJESTY'S OF Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
May it please your Majesty's,
WERE not Archerie a Noble and Heroic Exercise, and fit to be understood as
well by Monarchs as the Commonalty, our growing Ambition durst not have
presumed to molest Your Majesty's by the sight or perusual of so mean a Trifle
as this Poem. But since it is an Art so worthy and excellent, that it has been
esteemed by General, as well as Particular Understandings, though we tremble at
our own Audacity, yet sheltring our selves under the goodness of our Theme, and
encouraged by the Innocence and Loyalty of our present Design, we (amidst our
Fears) hope the Eyes of Your unvalued Understandings will perceive in this Work
the meaning of our Hearts: And then (but not till then) we shall be cherisht
with a belief that our Loyal endeavors in this Poem, however meanly writ, and
only happy in the Epistle bearing Your Majesty's Sacred Attributes, will in
some part at one for the Crime of our Presumption.

We therefore presume to hope that now (the Storms of Rebellion being blown
over, and our happy Nation flourishing under the Peaceful Reign of so Great and
Glorious an Augustus) we shall draw this Ancient and Commodious Exercise of
Archerie out of the poisonous Lake of Oblivion, and revive a Science, that
will, if cherisht and aptly followed, prove an Everlasting Pillar to support
the Kingdom, and be again as undoubtedly famous as when esteemed an Exercised
by our Forefathers.

For the furthering of which, we (in all humble Duty and Loyal Obedience)
appeal to Your Sacred Majesty's, as to the Fountain from whence flows the
Springs of Immaculate Virtue and Power, which makes the happy Land blessed in her
own Abundance. Be You the Sun, Dread Sovereign, by whose All-delighting and
Powerful Influence the baleful Storms of Vice may be dispersed, Britain's
Ancient Glory once more flourish, and we be honored in the happy Success of
our Endeavors on this Subject: The perseverance of whose Worth is (next our
unfeigned Wishes and Prayers for Your Majesty's long Lives and happy
Pro-Prosperities) the greatest Hopes and Desires of

Your Majesty's Loyal, though unworthy, Servants, Robert Shotterel, and Thomas
Durfey.

TO THE READER.
Judicious Reader,
WE presume to present thee here with a Poem declaring the use and Noble
Virtues of Archerie, which (although our Modern Authors have or'elook't the
Theme, and forgotten to create Applauses equal to the Goodness and Excellency
of the Subject) is undoubtedly worthy of a Noble Pen, and rather fit to be
published and extolled by every one, than any way obscured by Oblivion.
Besides, the multiplicity of Poems of natures far different from this (and
indeed far different from any thing tending to the Nation's profit) still
crouding into view, larded with bombast Notions, and stuff't with reiterated
Hyperboles, or some more pitiful Passion, unfit to visit the World's light,
much less the the Eyes of a Judicious Reader, has emboldened us to present
this Piece; which, however rudely compacted or dully rendered, is beautified
with a Subject, that, maugre the barrenness of the Phrase, or the Envy
indiscretion or ill nature of a sort of Critical Detractors, that only find
fault with things for want of better Employment, will find favor with honored
Patriots, whose care for their Country is equal to that of their own safety,
and whose Loyal Hearts, confiding in Virtue, cherish the Endeavors of those
that employ themselves on a Work that is not only laudable, but every way
beneficial and profitable to our English Nation.

Archerie (we mean) whose useful Art and Noble Science was approved and
cherish't by our Forefathers as their Summum Bonum, and whose Excellence is so
renowned, that it is supposed, any one that arrives to the understanding of his
Grammar has either read or heard of it: And those that have read of it, and do
endeavor to practice it, will (we doubt not) honor our Endeavors with a
favorable thought, it being an Art that we wish we had power or ability to
improve, as well as to applaud: An Exercise in time of Peace fit to grace a
Noble Spirit, and in War to oppose the worst of Dangers. The proof of whose
Fame, and the Noble and Great Exploits achieved by the power of the Bow, are
so common and so often declared in all our Ancient Chronicles, and other
Histories, over most parts of the World, as well as in our Native Isle, that
from us here it will prove rather a prolix Rehearsal, then an acute Description
of what has been so universally famous.

Yet as Rust by degrees penetrates our hardest Metals, and Oblivion of a Noble
Art proves not only obstructive to a particular Person, but to the Nation in
general; we have endeavored to refresh the Memory of this forgetful Age, and
emboldned by the Loyalty and Zeal we bear to our Sovereign and Country, have
presumed to declare, That the want of this Noble Science has weakened our
Forces, and what would prove Invincible, if joined and commixt with our present
Militia, proves now not only void of that Success, but incapable of that Fame
and Glory it might atchieve, if assisted by this brave and magnanimous Exercise
of Archerie.

Some perhaps that understand it not will be apt to term it a dull and
laborious Pastime, and more fit for the capacity and natural strength of a
Peasant, than to be a Recreation for a Gentleman. But did they understand the
true worth of this Noble Exercise, whose use and virtue has in pristine Ages
been sought and cherish't by Princes, and acknowledged by the Learned and
Judicious to be not only a Sport fit for the brawny Commonalty, but the
generous Nobility, the Excellency of whose Nature is such, that it banishes
growing Distempers from the Bodies of such whose destructive Idleness nourish
their Diseases, and increases Health, begets Strength, and infuses Courage into
the Breasts of all worthy Practitioners of this Science: Then undoubtedly those
that through Ignorance depraved it, will with shame confess their causeless
Detraction, and convert their critical Intentions into real Applauses. Nor is
it our design to molest or displease any one, but to content and please every
one, our chief intent being to publish the Virtues of this Noble Science in
this Nation, and to incite our generous Countrymen to further and approve of
what will be not only fit, noble, and successful, to be used in War, but
pleasant and commodious in times of Peace, whose power we doubt not but, if
raised and exercised successfully, will be a main Prop to support the Basis of
this Kingdom, and a secure Guard against approaching Dangers.

Let those whose Incredulity, as an Enemy to our present Endeavors, are so
far from believing the Virtues of this Art, that they maliciously condemn it,
spend an Afternoon in perusing the Chronicles of our Nations achievements by
this Weapon, and the History of the Wars of the Romans, Persians, Scythians,
Parthians, Grecians, and many other Warlike Nations, whose greatest Strength
lay in their Bows and Shafts, whose noble and dangerous Enterprises and
Victories have been often declared and published by several worthy and Judicious
Authors, not difficult to be found of any Inquisitor, and then their Judgments
(refined by so many ^nfallible Proofs of the ancient Excellency of this Art)
will, we doubt not, acknowledge the malignity of their Inclinations, and the
unparalled worth and virtue of our present Theme. As for others, whose
^gnorance of its worth, and whose illiterate Capacities are so irreparably
dull, that the Proof by History is far above the reach of their grovelling
Understanding, we shall unconcerned sustain their harmless Censures, and rather
pity their Imperfections, than blame their Licentious Tongues for want of
Judgment.

Therefore, as our present Design is Loyal and Virtuous, it is our hope the
Success will be favorable and prosperous: And we doubt not, but there are some
worthy Spirits in this Kingdom, whose love to this Heroic Exercise, and whose
Loyalty and Faith to their King and Country will by their Actions express their
Care and Fidelity, and by their Endeavors be a means to plant this wholesome,
noble, and warlike Science in this Realm: The furthering and approving of which
will be the greatest content that can arrive to us, whose Hopes, as well as
Wishes, are continued to see the Art of Shooting prosper, and whose Abilities,
were they equal to our Endeavors, should be the first to lay a Foundation,
whereon the noble Structure of this Excellent Science should be built; but
since Fortune has dealt unkindly with us in depriving us of that Power, we
hope it will be worthy of the General Care, whose sufficiency is far more
capable of the performance, than any Particular Ability: The pursuance of
which, and the happy Success of our present Endeavors, will not only bring us
a particular content and happiness, but be a benefit fit to be chronicled by
our Natives, and admired by succeeding Ages.

Vale.
To his Ingenious Friends, Mr. Robert Shotterel, and Mr. Thomas Durfey, on
their Book of Archerie.
ALthough this Virtue of the Ancients long
Lost in Oblivion's Grave, has suffered wrong:
Although the Fame of Archerie in Wars
With the cold Dust of our Progenitors
Has lain an Age forgotten, in which time
No Treatise past, nor no facetious Rhyme
Was published to applaud it is worth; yet now
Methinks I see our happy Genius show
From Heaven a splendid Face, whose Smiles presage
Unmatch't perfections from this latter Age:
Whose Gratitude must yield Applauses due,
Since it this Spring of Virtue has from you.
Your Poem, Friends, has added to their store,
And they admire what they despised before.
From your Instructions they have learned to know
The worth, as well as profits of the Bow;
And now not only like, but love each Line,
Decking with Plaudits your unmatch't Design.
Apollo, whilst with Wit he you endows,
Will with his much loved Laurel crown your Brows,
And Fame's loud Trump resound in distant Skies
Your happy Work, your Names and Loyalties.
I to preserve my Friendship then entire,
Whilst others pine with Envy, will admire
At what I read, and in your Treatise find
A perfect Copy of the Authors mind.
Persevere then, and let your Phansies climb
To what is more great, more splendid and sublime:
Let your exalted Genius stist aspire,
And give us fresh occasion to admire;
Whilst I the Critics do presume to tell,
Some perhaps better write, but few so well.
In Laudem Authoris and Operis.
ARma and arundineam Phaebei Numinis artem
Dum numeris decoras, nobilitasque, tuis,
Ipse Apollo.
Deus miratur opus, gratusque Poetae
Sacra fronde premit tempora chara sui;
Teque lyra celebrans clamat, punctum omne tulisti,
Et te jam superi terrigenaeque canent:
Dumque alios tanta Art doces attingere metam,
Haud mirum est Calamo te tetigisse scopum.
R. Wright.
To his good Friend Mr. Thomas Durfey on his Poem of Archerie.
THe more I looked upon thy Muses pains,
The more I did admire;
The more I saw and read thy polish't strains,
The more I did desire:
Nay, to that height my Fancy did aspire,
That when I had read over thy blooming Wit,
Methought I could not read too often what thou so well (had writ.
2.
With care I pondered on thy brave design,
And after did adore it:
Nor did I taste the Fruits of such a Vine
In all my life before it.
This Boon from Heaven I therefore will implore,
That men, before they Archerie despise,
May look upon that Noble Art with my impartial Eyes.
3.
The Sacred Monarch and blessed Martyr Charles
Did Archerie approve,
And then not only the Poor, but Lords and Earls
That manly Sport did love.
Was Virtue only then rained from above?
Our Nation's still the same, as fertile and as good,
Why should insulting Vice then brood over English blood?
4.
But to dispute of this would take up time,
Which I now ill can spare:
Let it suffice your Sense as well as Rhyme
Does the Authors worth declare,
Whose Judgment is so splendid and so fair,
That should thou give me half thy Wreath of Bays,
I only could deserve the Gift by penning of thy Praise.
T.L.
ARCHERIE REVIVED, OR THE Bow-Man's EXCELLENCE.
IN Ancient times, when learned Homer writ
Of Grecian Conquests, Valor, Weapons, Wit,
The Age refined from Vice an Emblem showed
Of all those Virtues Heaven at first bestowed.
And though gross ignorance did much deface
The Souls of Men, whose want of Heavenly Grace
Knew not that bliss, which Happy We embrace;
Yet so much Moral Honesty did Crown
Their faultless Deeds, that it was plainly shown,
(Although Divinity was then disguised)
They might be styled both Pious, Just, and Wise:
Then was the Subject of this Story thought
Brave and successful, and was used and sought
By Spirits Noble, Glorious and Supreme,
That loved and cherished my ensuing Theme.
No Tragic History my Fancy moves
To use my Pen; nor no disastrous Loves,
Care-reaping Policies, or dire Mischance,
My Early budding Genius does advance
So soon to write: Nor has my Muse thought good
Some Conquest to relate purchased with blood,
Where mingling gore swelled high th'adjoyning flood,
describe their Troops and Orders, or to tell
On heaps of breathless Foes how Princes fell.
To that vast heigtht my Genius dares not climb,
Nor change plain Verse for Loud Heroic Rhyme.
Yet as the aspiring Cedar, now grown high,
Was once a small and tender shrub, So I
Beginning Low, may rise the more secure:
Well stands the Fabric whose Foundation's sure.
The warlike Bow my Muse designs to praise,
Whose Feathered Shaft, so famed in ancient days
Before Hell's Sulphur made the trembling fruit
Of Peasants valiant) durst Fame's cause dispute,
And own him most renowned who best could Shoot.
We then were ign'rant of that murdring Smoke;
Bright Honor flourished on a Manly Stroke;
And daring Valor with a threatening brow
Durst face the worst of dangers Fate could show,
Well armed with Barbed Shafts and Parthian Bow.
Famed Grecian Writers gloried often to tell
By what brave Weapons their Fierce Heroes fell;
And in their lofty praises would enhance
Stern Ajax Faulchion, and Achilles Lance;
Enlarging Trophies with ingenious speed,
Equal to the merit of the haughty deed.
And Shall I th'Archer's praise fail to rehearse,
Because I want their unmatched skill in Verse?
They but endeavored well, and so do I,
And to write well my utmost power I Will try,
Although my Genius cannot soar so high.
How Bows were first invented few have shown,
Nor need we care, since their tried worth is known:
The Wise and Famed Claudianus,
Egyptian Poet sung,
Through Nature the first use of Shooting sprung;
Men imitating Porpentines that grow
Armed with Sharp Pricks to shoot the approaching foe:
Others ascribe th'invention first to be
Made perfect by the Apol.
Delian Deity;
Whose Arm with heavenly influence endued
Life-conqu'ring Shafts in Python's blood embrewed:
Whence that still loved and charming Soul of Rome,
Silver-tongu'd Ovid, took this Fancy from.
The God with numerous Shafts the Monster slew, Ovid. Metam.

And through black wounds the Clotted poison drew.
And in our first Age Lyra does explain, Nich. de Lyra.

'Twas with a Shaft that Lamech murdered Cain,
This ancient and continued use does raise
Unto the Shooting Art no little praise;
It Is Virtue being most extolled by those
That knew the worth and goodness of their Bows:
Whose worth in war attended with success,
And glorious palms, hereafter I Will express;
Declaring to the girded Parthian's Fame,
No Land unconquered lay, where Archers came.
Cyaxares the Median Emperor, Herod. in Clio.

Triumphant Cyrus'fam'd Progenitor,
A sort of hardy Scythians kept to show
And teach his Son the Virtues of the Bow;
Thinking (so well he did good Shooting prize)
He could not learn a Nobler Exercise,
That might (if Fate e're cast him from the Throne)
By valor raised obtain a second Crown.
Corn. Tacitus.
Nero, it is said, on th'Harp so cunning was,
He all Rome's famed Musicians did surpass,
And gave this Reason, That, if Destiny
By War enforced him from his Realms to fly,
He had that Art to get his Living by.
If then such Trifles can such praise obtain,
What glorious Characters may Shooting gain?
Whose use the death-defying Romans prized
As most succesful in their Victories;
And thought their Eagle no ill Fate could know,
Guarded by him that drew the strongest Bow.
Tranq. Suct.
Domitian Shooting loved to that extent,
And in the practice was so excellent,
That it is recorded he from far could stand,
And Shooting through the Fingers miss the Hand;
Which Virtue by the Romans so desired
(Maugre his shameful Vices) was admired.
And Commodus, his Brother in all ill,
Had in the Shooting Art such matchless Skill,
No obvious mark to him too far did show,
That lay within the Level of his Bow.
Nor was this Virtue only practiced by
Men famous for their vicious Tyranny:
In Ages past 'twas called bright honor's Beam,
The Prince's Pastime, and the Schollar's Theme:
And those, that most loved virtue, most desired
To learn that Virtue which the Age admired.
'Twas then the Soldier's guard, the Coward's shame,
The Monarch's Trumpet to divulge his fame,
And swift-wing'd Herald of a glorious name.
Such as had skill its worth did soon discern,
And such as could not Shoot made haste to learn.
None were esteemed but who that Art did own,
And he that Shot best still had most Renown.
Kings for their strongest guards did Archers claim,
As most conducing to their growing Fame.
Leo de S^a. ^^^
Leo Rome's famed and valiant Emperor
Did (in his Book entitled Sleights of War)
Prescribe a Law; that Soldiers should resort
In time of Peace, and daily use this Sport;
By which good use, his well armed Troops did share
Choice Skill to do, as well as hearts to dare;
Omitting which decree, to the Romans shame,
Proves now chief cause of their declining fame.
But more of this, when I the profits show
Arising from the virtues of the Bow,
Shall be declared: this only here is placed
To show by whom brave Archerie was graced;
Whose worth not only by the vulgar sort
Was made the glorious Mistress of Report,
But whose loud fame great Monarchs did create,
Calling this VVeapon, Guardian of the State:
So prizing it that in their strictest Laws,
The Archer's Plea was voted with applause.
This in our Native Clime has been allowed,
When stubborn factions to the Mandate bowed;
Witness that Statute that declares it plain,
The Third of the Illustrious Hen. VII. Stat
Henry's Reign:
Where 'twas enacted every Subject should
Keep ready Bow and Shafts for the public Good.
More proofs and large examples I could show
Of Archers worth; but now it is fit you know
Its virtue, and why the Ancients loved this more
Than that, which more stupendous Titles bore.
And though from the Rules of History I move,
Whose use is to declare a thing, not prove
The Cause, or why it is so admired; Yet I
The place of some famed Nuntius will supply,
And boldly thus divulge it, as a thing
Fit for the Pastime of the greatest King:
An Art, whose worth would prove to Honor's Son
A Fertile Branch to graff his Glories on:
An Exercise for Youth most fit and good
To warm the slackned Nerves, and stir the Blood
of Sloth infected Bodies, whose disease
Springs from the Ills of Luxury and Ease;
A Pastime Manly, whose health-saving Art
Adds strength to the Limbs, and courage to the Heart;
Rowzes distempered bodies from their Graves,
And the death-wounded sick men often saves
By their endeavors to this active Sport.
Nor care I thought some forward Wits retort
On my presuming thus; Since it is assured,
Consumptive Archers have been often times cured
By practicing to Shoot; and Maladies
Remedied by this wholesome Exercise.
Then, it is a Sport so Harmless, that therein
Lurks not the smallest scruple of a Sin,
Unless abused by Vicious Libertin;
From whose Debauches Scripture is not free,
Nor Pious Maxims of Morality.
But if the Nature of the Sport may move
The Undertaker's deeds obscene to prove;
It Is the Archers Glory, that no Pastime shares
So much of God-like Innocence as Theirs.
Methinks I see an Ordinary, where
The Strutting Town-Huffs Revelling appear,
Filled with Contagion, Noise, rank Indian Fume,
And debauched Relics, that one might presume
'Twere Pluto's Cave, or Hell's Withdrawing Room:
Imagine then a Dozen Fops, or more,
(Newly broke loose from Surgeon, or from Whore)
At Hazard; and consider, at what cost
Their deep mouthed Oaths, at every Piece was lost,
Were ragingly surrendered, 'twould appear
The Scene of Horror, and the seat of Fear:
Here sits a Couple Venting new-coin'd Curses;
Just opposite Two shaking Empty Purses,
Blaspheming Heaven for their want of skill,
And daring Hell, because the Dice ran ill.
Another that calumnious breath defends,
Telling him, Fate must sometimes make amends,
But softly cries, these Fulhams were my Friends;
And smiling with new Grimmace brought from France,
Dammee, to Night I Have had excelling Chance;
Then mingling noises like Disorder's Court,
They straight begin afresh the Hellish Sport.
But now exalt your long-fix'd Eyes again,
And view the virdant surface of yon Plain,
Within whose clear and smooth dimensions lies
A Plat, where Archers daily Exercise:
See there a Troop of Youths with bended Bows
(Whose unmatched worth no braver Weapen knows)
Contending for a Prize, and mark what Grace
Sits in each line of every Shooters Face;
And with what manly force the Shaft is sent,
Of their choice skill to show a President.
The ensnared Eye to the heart soft pleasure draws,
And guides the Tongue to publish their applause.
No Hell-born Oaths, nor Stigian Curses there,
Like Poisonous foggs, infect the purer Air;
Nor are their Betts or Pledges known so great,
To ruin men by loss of an Estate.
The noble Sport they prize far more than Wealth,
And use it as protector to their Health,
Not for their Gains. Then weigh the difference,
One's cursed effects, and to others innocence;
One's noble Pastime, to others idle Game;
One ever getting Honor, the other Shame:
And then you loudly will confess the prize
Belongs to the Archers noble Exercise,
As famed and wholesome, and most fitting for
Those Martial Spirits, whose success in War
Is mighty as their Valors, such as court
The grand perfection of this Royal Sport,
That own no worth beyond their Faith, nor know
No manly Weapon equal to the Bow;
Yet glory in that knowledge, proud to be
Known Sons of War, bred up in Honesty.
Virtue, as Plat. in Phedro.
Plato Learnedly displays,
Is to the World declared two several ways;
Either by deeds of such as Knowledge prize,
Or the love they bear some Virtuous Exercise.
Vice riots fearless in a glorious dress,
Lulled with the present Joys it does possess,
Not minding the Before-gone ills of Fate,
Nor caring what comes after, till too late;
This Scene, to one that can subdue his will,
Declares which Exercise is good, which ill
Gamesters thirst for, and present bliss pursue,
Though with the draught they swallow poison too,
Making the place by their disordered Game
The House of Riot, and the Throne of Shame:
Whilst Archers by their pleasant painful sport
Make their abiding Virtue's happy Court;
Where men may learn to do well, not displease
The Powers above by cursing a Disease
Sprung from their Idleness, but to prevent
A Fate which Heaven to Libertins has sent:
Labor the Parent is of Shooting still,
Nor can he own that Art, whose want of will
Renders him dull, whose Nature (far from good)
Serves but to nourish his corrupted Blood;
But he whose Active Spirit does despise
Soft ease to follow manly Exercise,
And learn an Art that does not only show
A choice delight, but is defensive too
To guard his Country from the insulting Foe.
The first Inventor of famed Archerie
(As Plat. in Zim.
Plato mentions) was a Deity;
A God of worth and boundless Excellence,
Patron of Music, Medicines, Elloquence,
Wit's Paragon, and Virtue's Quintissence.
But Dicing, though it may Plat. in Phedro.
Two Parents claim,
Yet both were so allied to Vice and Shame,
That Ancient Poets blushed to have their Crimes
Cloud the unblemished Luster of their Rhimes
By Mentioning those vicious sons of Scorn,
One being a Grecian, the other Lydian born;
Which Nation still so dissolute appears,
That it the slander of all people bears
For wild unthrifty Courses, Herod. in Clio.
Vanity,
Debauches, and their scorn of Archery:
Whose Virtue their rank Natures did displease,
As being a Foe to their Luxurious Ease.
We read how the too wild Sardanapalus:
Assyrian King,
Whose shameful vices did the Nation bring
To Ruin, from his tender youth was trained
To vice, which his immortal Honor stained,
Soft ease and idleness, the spurious brood
Of Hell's black Monster, the infectious food
Of those accursed Libidinists, that know
No power beyond what they to Nature owe.
The Blooming Sons of Virtue Action love,
Action, that from the Soul does Vice remove.
Hell has no snares to catch their Innocence,
Employed in harmless sports; Sin no pretense
To draw them to extremes, nor blast their Wills
With the consuming quintessence of ills.
And those that think good Exercise a Crime,
Live not like men, but slumber out their time
Making their blood with too much sordid Ease
The poisonous Fountain of uucur'd Disease.
How many Noble Spirits in this Land
Of Matchless Shape, and worthy to command
An Host of Heroes, think 'twould better prove
Their Honors to enjoy a vicious Love,
Debauch their Country, Kinsmen, and advance
Their deeds to the height of all extravagance;
Than to be seen in the Field like Archers trussed,
Following a Pastime noble, wholesome, just,
An Exercise less Impious than Divine,
Where Manly force and Innocence combine?
It might be granted, had our reason been
Corrupt as the Ancients, vicious and obscene;
Had our unweeded knowledge known no odds
In Piety, but as Immortal Gods
Adored the Sun and Moon, pursuing Crimes,
Like untaught Natives in remoter Climes;
Bowed to the Earth thinking it did produce
From its own power all things for humane use:
Or were we ign'rant of a Deity
That gave us Souls, and rules mortality,
Thinking our prayers to Idols better done
Than to the Great All-seeing Three in One,
Within whose Heaven a boundless Ocean lies
Of Joys for Virtuous Men, and Plagues for Vice;
We had some reason to prefer Lewd Games,
(Though Harbingers to our Eternal shames)
Before this Noble Pastime; nay to prove
Our Vicious Sports were licensed from above,
And that no good had there pre-eminence,
Because we knew no greater God then Sense;
But since Almighty Providence has given
Our Souls a Reason next the Blessed in Heaven,
And unto Man Earth's Creature Vassals made,
Why should a Bestial Lust our Souls invade,
Polluting by some damned impiety
The Image of the Glorious Trinity?
Why should our Souls, that amongst Stars should shine,
Swim to perdition through a Sea of Wine,
A Sin that obtains nothing excellent
But Oaths, infernal brawls and excrement;
Obscures Men's heedless Errors, till too late,
Leaving them little health, and less Estate?
And to come nearer to our purpose, Why
Should this brave Exercise of Archerie
(Admired by the Ancients, wholesome for the Blood,
A Manly Sport, and grounded on all good)
Yield precedence to the Hellish Vice
Of those two Twins of Horror, Cards and Dice?
And by a practice Diabolical
Deny our Souls were ever Rational.
It Is true, in shooting there is labor used;
But it is a toil, if it be not abused,
So pleasant, that the softest Pleasures are
Laborious troubles, should we once compare;
A Sport that brings us Profit, Honor, Wealth,
Excelling Courage, heart-delighting Health.
And if, as Ancient Zen: de dict. and fact. Socr.
Epicharmus writ,
(An owner of a matchless Knowledge, Wit)
Heaven sells its Blessings to Mortality,
As a return for painful Husbandry:
Heaven unto Archers will choice Virtue sell,
That shunning Vice eschew the path to Hell.
Yet do I not so little Reason know,
To think the painful Pastime of the Bow
Fit for all Seasons: Rain or nipping Frost,
More than delight, procures the Archers Cost.
Besides, continual use of one Disport
Dulls the nice Sense, and cuts the pleasure short.
Fencing or Bowling may, if not abused,
For change be by the bravest Archers used:
Or if their tired spirits would essay
Some gentler Exercise -- To see a Play,
And gaze on Nature in her best array,
Best suits a noble Soul, whose worth's expressed
In wisely weighing a Satyrick Jest.
There are some Plays, on whose well polish't Scenes
The quintessence of Art and Nature leans;
Where Poesy is fluently expressed,
And learning triumphs in a glorious Vest:
Plays, that the horrid Rules of Vice controuls,
Teaching the moral Virtues of the Soul.
And, as learned Randolph quotes, at first revives
Our nauseous Crimes, then shows to mend our Lives
By feeling Characters. To such as these
I would our Archers good Opinions raise:
On whose sweet Cates they may their senses feed,
Cordials which Nectar of the Gods exceed.
Love they a Tragic Scene? there may they see
Indulgent Age and splendid Majesty
Stoop to an abject Fate, Empires o'return'd,
And Virtue by a Hell-bred Treason spurned
To unseen Atoms: whilst pale trembling Guilt
Broods like a Serpent over the blood it spilt.
If they in Comic History delight,
There may they have presented to their sight
Variety of Characters, whose Names
Declare their Vices, and in Vices shames:
There may they by the true Presentiments shown
Of others hateful Vices purge their own;
And smile at what they think, not what they see,
The worthless Subject, not the Effigy.
To all Judicious Souls a Scene well writ,
Garnish't with reason, sense, ear-charming wit,
Infuses secret pleasures through the Veins,
Which the base froth of idle Vice disdains.
It Is Reason clothed in splendid Phrase that flies
Into the heart, and robs the faculties
Of grosser entertainment, shining there
Like glittering Phebe in our Hemisphere.
Yet suit not Plays all tempers: Some there are
That have choice strength, but little wit to spare;
That through their want of Learning damm that part,
That most ingenious seems to men of Art.
But here perhaps the curious Reader may
Retort, and cherish't by Opinion, say,
They little have, but I perhaps have less,
Which by this barren Poem he may guess.
And though I grant that Fortune was my Foe,
And envious, not permitting me to know
The precious depth of that Castalian Spring,
Which on learned Themes makes our famed Poets sing:
Yet I can glory, I from Nature own
A good, which Art has not all Students shown;
A budding Fancy, to invent and raise
Some good designs, though writ in barren phrase.
But to our Theme: Let him, I say, whose Fate
Has made his better part unfortunate,
Not tasting that most blessed and luscious Fruit
Of Heaven-infusing Knowledge, Learn to shoot,
And by that Noble Exercise prevent
A Life luxurious and incontinent.
For were a General Randezvous of Sports
Mustered from Cities, Theaters, and Courts,
The fame of Archerie would soar above,
And from its Throne all meaner Pastimes move;
As being most delightful, manly, good
To cherish Health and purify the Blood*
Let Princes therefore shoot for Exercise;
Soldiers t'inlarge their Magnanimities;
Let Nobles shoot, 'cause it is a Pastime fit;
Let Scholars shoot to clarify their Wit;
Let Citizens shoot to purge corrupted Blood;
Let Yeomen shoot, for the King's and Nation's good:
Let all the Nation Archers prove, and then
We without Lanthorns may find virtuous men.
But lest this praise ungrounded should appear,
And perish in a proof-expecting Ear,
The Archers Conquest next I will rehearse;
Aid bright Thalia, and inspire my Verse,
The Ancient Jews Josephus c. 5
, as learned Joseph writes,
In all Domestic Wars and Foreign Fights,
Where their brave Chieftain Macchabeus came
To plead his Countrie's Cause, and purchase Fame,
Their chiefest Strength lay in their Archers thought,
Never doubting any Conquest where they fought:
The flying Gentiles sigh their silent woes,
Chased by their dreadful Death-denouncing Bows,
Inured to suffer Fates transcendent harms,
Wanting wise Conduct and Success in Arms.
The Power of Heaven in the Scripture is compared
To shooting, mentioned as a fierce Reward
For their Transgressions, and styled there Vid. Psalm.
Bow;
With which, it is said, his Might shall overthrow
The Hosts of wicked men, men hating Good,
And dye his dreadful Shafts in the Gentiles Blood.
This a redoubted Argument is known,
Why all the Noble use of the Bow should own,
Since Reason quotes that thing of great regard,
To whom the Power of Heaven is compared.
And one proof more, which from Diviner Phrase,
Than now I write, my Genius first did raise;
When Saul was slain (he that had first command
Over Israel's Hosts as King) by the base hand
Of a perfidious Slave, with his brave Son,
A man so truly valiant, that he won
Even his Foes hearts, One that such proofs could show
Of skill and unmatch't knowledge in the Bow,
That several worthy Authors do explain
He never was known to shoot a Shaft in vain:
When he, I say, the peerless Jonathan,
Over power'd by Foes, Death's rugged race had ran,
And Judah's Regum 13. David:
best of Monarchs straight was known
To be chose next Successor to the Crown;
The first Edict that issued from his hand,
Was an entire and absolute Command
That all the Israelites should learn to shoot:
From whence proceeded that delightful fruit
Of Peace and Plenty, Wealth and Blessings joynd
To grace that Realm where Arts and Arms combined.
And thus we see that shooting was an use
Renowned, and much esteemed by the valiant Jews.
The great Herod. in Thalia.
Cambyses having battered down
The Egyptian Power, and raised his glittering Throne
Upon their humble Necks, sent certain Spies
To Ethiopia's Monarch in disguise,
To pry into his strength; But he, too wise
To be beguiled, and finding th'flatterers
Slaves, though in shape they were Ambassadors,
Before them ordered to be brought his Bow,
Whose hardened Steel, forced by his Arm to show
A choice Obedience, plucked by yielding String,
The Shaft obeys his power: Which done, the King
Turns to the Persians, who with wonder look
Upon the mighty Weapon, and thus spoke;
Give to great Persia's Monarch this from me,
And bid him, when his Magnanimity
Into his nervous Arm such strength can yield
To make the Shaft's head kiss the bending Steel,
Then let his Pride over my Dominions soar,
And yoke my Sunburned Natives, not before,
The Bow was after to Cambyses brought,
And through his numerous Host a man was sought
To bend it, but yet none such Strength could bring,
Till Smerdis, valiant Brother to the King,
By his great power two Inches stirred the String:
Which Act Gambyses's Envy did create,
Whose impious Rage soon ushered Smerdis's Fate.
The proud Sesostris.
Egyptian Monarch (he that rode
Through wealthy Memphis, honored like a God,
His Chariot drawn by Kings, whose overthrows
Sprung from the terrors of his fatal Bows)
So scourged the Eastern World, spreading his Fame,
And winning Realms where e're his Archers came;
That by his Foes he was accounted there
Patron of Nature, Dignity and War:
He Savage barbarous Nations brought to thrall,
The Assyrians, Thracians, wild Arabians; all,
That his well-guarded Archers durst repel,
And slight his Power, in heaps before him fell.
So numerous were his Conquests, that he made
Statues of Brass, whose Effigy's displaid
His Person armed with mighty Bow and Shaft;
Which Diod. Sic. 2*
Weapon made him Conqueror so often,
That 'twas his Glory, the World should understand
By what great Power he so enrich't his Land.
Like him brave Herod. in Thalia.
Policrates, Samos Prince,
Over the Greek Ocean bore pre-eminence,
And his strong Foes vast power long withstood,
Dying his Feathered Shafts in Persian blood;
Whose fatal numbers by their overthrows,
Declared the mighty power of the Archers Bows.
Conquest and Honor flourish't in that Age,
Treasons slight Plots not daring to engage
A glorious Nation echoing Wars Alarms,
Where Valor gloried in triumphant Arms.
A Sword and Spear were but additions then,
And only served to grace the Valiant men,
Or to be used at the Barriers: It Is the Bow,
To whose unimitable worth they owe
Their numerous Conquests, fought and bravely won,
When Shafts, like Storms, obscured the splendid Sun.
The treacherous Cannon with its murdering breath
Was then unknown, and shooting ushered Death
With a more noble speed, where he that kills,
Stands bravely facing him whose blood he spills,
Acting it boldly. This great Cyrus knew,
Whose flying Troops the Herod. in Clio.
Massagetans slew
With Bows and barbed Shafts, whose piercing Heads
Death, crowned with Horror over his Army spreads.
The valiant Scythians did such knowledge share
In Archerie and wise conduct in War,
That diverse Monarchs hoping to atack
Their too well guarded Realms, were beaten back:
Amongst the rest, when great Darius there
With a vast Power had watch't above a year
Some intervenes of Chance, that would express
Some joyful Omens of a good success;
At last, being wearied with so long a stay,
And ready with his Power to march away,
There from the Scythians a man was sent,
That to Darius did four Gifts present,
A Herod. in Melpom.
Bird, a Frogg, a Mouse, and next to these,
A Quiver full of Arrows. He, to ease
His laboring thoughts, endeavors thus to sift
The dubious meaning of so strange a Gift.
And to his own advantage wrests the sense;
Saying, The Scythians yield pre-eminence
To my known Power, and by their Gifts declare
They render up their Strength, Earth, Sea, and Air.
This Vote undoubted past; till Gobrias,
A Man, whose natural Prudence did surpass
A vulgar Genius, spoke, and nobly bold
In's Country's Cause thus his Opinion told;
Unless, O Persians, ye like Birds could fly
With wings, and dauntless hover in the sky;
Unless like Mice ye could in Caverns live;
Or Frogg-like, in unsounded Waters dive,
Whose vastie depth no slimy bottom knows,
You never shall escape the Scythian Bows.
This so serene and prudent did appear,
And sank so deeply in Darius's ear,
That raising the Seige, he straight marched home again,
Ashamed of an attempt so much in vain.
The bold Suidas.
Athenians did such trust impose
In the known power of their Archers Bows,
That glorying in their blessed Securities,
They from their Walls would dare their Enemies,
Whose ponderous Arms, the Legacies of Death,
With an unthought of slowness did bequeath
A sort of men, bold, valiant, noble, strong,
Unapt to suffer, or receive a wrong;
So practiced in brave shooting, that it is said,
Some there could draw a Shaft yard long to the head;
Bloody and rough in War, but soon appeased,
Few bearing Envy, and as few diseased;
A Nation famous both for Arts and Arms,
Whose noble hearts the beams of Honor warms.
Witness Diod. Sic. 2.
Demosthenes, whose noble Soul
Scorning the haughty Lacedemon's scrowl,
Sent him in bold Defiance, hating too
In Honor any one should him outdo:
First, with an Elegant Oration made,
The glory of his Enterprise displaid
To his brave Archers, then advancing on
To a hot Charge, before the setting Sun
Had from the clear Horizon snatched his Light,
His Foes main Force had met Eternal Night;
The rest a certain danger escaped by flight,
And toward Pylos, Nestor's ancient Seat,
To shun th'inrag'd Athenians, took retreat.
Learned Thucid. 4:
Thucidides writes, the Shafts that day
Into the Air such darkness did convey,
They wanted light to view their good Success,
Shooting the Shafts (not aiming) but by guess,
Like showers of Winter's Hail, amongst the press
So strong, and so continued, that their Force
Scattered whole Troops of the Foe's ill-govern'd Horse,
Who often by Shafts oppressed with deadly wound,
O'rethrew their trembling Riders to the ground,
Whose fate to an abas'd disaster bowd,
Trampled to Death by the unruly crowd:
So that of twenty thousand fighting men,
To tell their ill Success went home scarce ten.
He that had seen the Glories of that War,
The Archers valor, and their Chieftains care,
The fatal Skirmish, when rough danger steeled
Their hearts, and Death's pale Victims in the field
Lie bathing in warm Gore, whose destinies
Sent from the Shafts of their fierce Enemies
Seemed far more dreadful, than Death's Sickle e're
Was agent in, more horrid, more severe,
Would hide his wondering face, amazed to see
The fatal Trophies of brave Archerie.
He that had been Eyewitness to that field,
Where daring Valor dying scorned to yield;
Where reeking Blood and Clouds of Arrows made
The Sun-enlightned Sky appear a shade;
Where liveless Trunks o'respread the blushing Earth,
Horror gained triumph, and Destruction birth;
Would think Confusion's pristine Chaos come,
As dreadful Usher to the day of Doom.
Nor can I the Bows brave Acts too highly show;
My grovelling Genius rather creeps too low
In the applause of what does so excel,
This drowzy Age never knew its parallel.
What won the Worlds Alex. Magn.
great Conqueror such fame
But valiant Archers? What advanced his Name
Above the reach of Envy, Calumny,
Ear-charming Flattery, Malice, Treachery,
But warlike Minds and matchless Archerie?
Search Arianus 2.
Arianus's Works, and see the cause
Of his eternized Conquests; read the applause
Paid his industrious Bow-men, whose brave Arms,
Equaled with Valor, had such potent Charms,
That Asia's barbarous Ignorants, that knew
No greater Power than what in the Skies they view,
With trembling heart, bowed knee, and Arms displaid,
To the victorious Archers offerings made.
And though upon this Theme no dulcid Pen,
Though guided by the wisest amongst men,
Can write sufficient praise, a Theme that is
So much above unlearned Emphasis,
That to the World its true applause to bring
Requires a Quill plucked from an Angel's wing;
A Genius filled with heavenly influence,
To praise an Art surpassing Excellence;
Yet this advertisement of Plinius may
Th'undoubted worth of Archerie display.
Plin. l.6. c. 3^.
He that the honor of the valiant Greeks,
Or the tried fate of potent Kingdoms seeks,
Their dangerous Adventures, Quarrels, Fights,
Care-reaping Stratagems, well-grounded sleights,
And last, their famous Victories would know,
Will find the Ancient, noble, useful Bow,
To be famed Honor's guide, Kings noblest aid,
The bravest Weapon Mankind e're essai'd.
Scipio, Scipio, vid. Cor. Dac.
the Numantines in Spain had long
Sought to overcome in War, but they too strong
In their undaunted aids, his Force repelled,
Whose fresh Supplies still forced them from the field;
But when at last a Band of Archers spread
Their piercing Shafts, the frighted Spaniard fled,
Too well foreseeing the destructive woes
Attending Death from mighty Roman Bows.
Tiberius Corn. Tac. 2.
fighting with the German Twins;
A brace of wild and impious Libertines,
Though mighty in their power, won such fame
By his brave Archers Bows, that where they came,
The closest Ranks were broke, and th'Foe too late
Feared an invisible, though certain fate.
The Romans then were worthy of Applause,
Trained up in War, and skilled in Honors Laws;
So Martial and so Generous, they thought
Honor achieved by Death too slightly bought;
A Nation famed for warlike Policies,
Admired Triumphs, dangerous Victories,
So loving Archerie's famed Excellence,
They thought the warlike Bow their chief defense;
And mighty Leo 6. ^.
Leo's Treatise often surveyed,
Whose wise Directions were by all obeyed,
Till that Hell-searching Imp of Pluto's brood
Invented Guns to wrack the general good.
But more of this hereafter, when the state
Of England's pristine Conquests I relate,
Shall be enlarged: and since my wearied Muse
Is tired with showing the true noble use
Of Bows in Foreign Climes, I Will now essay
The Fame of English Bow-men to display,
Since none were ever more renowned then they.
How first to England Archerie was brought
Historiographers long in vain have sought
To understand, and those that nearest guess,
Far from the truth perhaps their minds express.
The plainest proofs Sir Thomas Elliot writ,
A man of boundless Knowledge, Learning, Wit,
Who in his Treatise writes De Rebus memor. Angl.
in the ancient time,
When Ignorance was England's greatest Crime;
When Vortigern the Saxon Monarch first
^n British Blood allai'd his brutish thirst,
Nothing so much did terrify his Foes
As the dread terrors of his Archers Bows*
By which I gather Vortigern was he
That into England first brought Archerie.
An Art most dreadful to the French, whose power
Would never admit of a Competitour,
Till the brave use of Bows and feathered Shafts
Scattered their Forces, and out-did their Crafts:
Which is confirmed by the immortal fame
Of Vid. Hen. 3. Cressie.
Henry, the third Monarch of that Name,
Who, with his valiant Archers, overcame
The Chivalry of France: Their Monarch too,
Proud Philip, who before had scorned to do
Great Henry's just Decrees, in Prison tried
Too soon the rough reward for too much Pride:
A glorious Fight; the potent power of France,
Proud of their Strength, and certain of their Chance,
As being thrice their number, charged the Foe,
But met at last a fatal overthrow.
Like him, John King of France hoping t'attack
The English men, Prince Edward styled the Black
Near to the walls of Poictiers met his Force,
Being a mighty Power of Foot and Horse.
But he that never knew the wretched state
Of those that fear, resolved to try his fate;
And aided by his Archers, who enlarged
Their Courages by his, their Battles charged,
And e're the Sun had journied half his way,
Routed the Power of France, and won the Day.
Nor can I overpass the famed report
Sprung from that glorious Fight at Agincourt, Speed. Chron.

Where that brave Hero, Henry the Fifth,
A Prince dropped down from Heaven as a Gift
To cherish Piety, achieved such Fame,
That Ages yet to come will speak his Name
(With reverence and admiration crowned)
With joy to read a Story so renowned,
As the rehearsal of his glorious Deeds,
And his famed Archers Acts: But farther needs
My Pen not rove, since they that e're have read
The living Works of Speed, Stow, Holling shead,
And other Modern Authors, there may see
The noble Conquests sprung from Archerie
In a compendious method, which relates
Those Themes at large my Pen abbreviates.
As also in the contumelious Jarr
Between the Houses York and Lancaster,
Where thousands perish't by a Civil War,
Great use was made of Bows and Shafts to quell
Insulting Vice in Natives that rebel.
Nor is that true, though vulgar, Story less
To be esteemed, the Fight at Speed. Chron.
Chevy-Chase
Has amongst tried Judgments admiration gained,
However by a Fifth-rate Genius stained
In dull Lampoon: He that had seen that Day
Stout Douglas and the Northern Earl display
Their more than mortal Valors, would appear
More scared with looking, than with fight they were:
He that of the Battle had Spectator been,
And the bold Scots by English Archers seen
Sent breathless to Death's Icy bed of Rest,
Each with a Shaft stuck fast in bleeding breast,
Would soon forget to praise a Sword and Spear,
And call the Bow Death's fatal Harbinger:
Whose worth most excellent and powerful too,
May well a just precedence pursue,
Since nothing is more brave, nor nothing more
In War successful, or of greater power.
This found the Speed. Chron.
Scots, of whose two thousand men
Went home to tell the News scarce five times ten:
The rest by Shafts from Bows of bending Yew,
In streams of Crimson Gore paid Nature's due:
The Peasant with the Peer Death's lodging shared,
To quell whose power they were alike prepared,
And their weak-founded Strength did vainly show,
When Fate sat frowning on each Archer's Bow.
Many Examples more might be expressed
To prove the worth and powerful interest
Of this brave Art of shooting; but to them
That thoroughly search a Fact e're they condemn
Men knowing and judicious, these few Rules
May satisfy, though lost in the Ears of Fools:
The wise may easily discern the good
Arising from a Virtue understood
And taught in Persian Colleges, where those
That best could shoot and drew the strongest Bows
Were most esteemed, and best deserved to prove
The dulcid Blessing of the Prince's Love;
When such, whose minds that rank Corruption bred,
Whose poison got by too much Ease does spread
Too fast over pampered Bodies, rot, and die
The nauseous Heirs to Vice and Calumny.
'Twas Plato's Counsel that the Athenians should
Hire Stipendaries with choice skill indu'd,
To teach the Youth to shoot, they knowing well,
No Weapon with the Bow could Parallel.
Nor was his Vote the noblest Theme of Fame's:
England's blessed Monarch, prudent, learned Johan. Major 6. Hist. Scot.
James,
Amidst his Noble Peers in the Parliament
Voted an Act -- a glorious President
For this dull Age to Copy, every Scot
Should learn to shoot: blessed noble Patriot
How I adore thy memory! yet they
That knew no worser Hell than to obey,
Neglecting his Decrees, their Foes defied,
And slighting Archers often by Archers di'd.
The valiant English then were most renowned:
Where was that City, or that Plat of Ground,
Where Britains honor grew not? where that Clime,
Where her brave Archers Acts shone not sublime,
And loudly published by the Trump of Fame?
Or where that Nation, that, when Bow-men came
Graced by the English Cross, feared not too late
The dreadful Omens of ensuing Fate?
'Twas then a Nation full of pleasing Charms,
England, famed Mistress both of Arts and Arms,
Was Europe's Treasure styled, the Heavenly Seat,
Where Honor and Immac'late Virtue met.
No Exercise like shooting was then prized,
The prudent Father would his Son advise
To use the Bow, assured no Weapon should
Prove half so useful for the Public Good
As that, being light, and easy to reverse,
In Action brave, in Execution fierce:
Whose Force had, like the uncontrolled will
Of Heaven, the power who e're it struck to kill.
Or as the dreadful Thunder from above,
Thrown by the Death-commanding hand of Jove,
Kills where it touches, whose dread sorce divides
Sky-kissing Cedars, rends the Marble sides
Of some great Rock, whose strength has long withstood
The raging Winds and Deluge-threatning Flood,
Never ceasing till it shroud its dreadful head
Ten Fathoms deep in Natures Earthy bed:
So flies a Shaft as swiftly to bequeath
The fatal Legacy of conquering Death
To the two bold Opposer, whose proud Power
Sinks with his liveless Trunk, and is no more.
The use of Guns ('it is granted) has of late
Been thought and proved chief Minister of Fate.
The murdering Cannon with its thundering breath
In many dreadful fights has ushered Death
With speed and violence; and Muskets have
Pregnant with shot sent thousands to the Grave;
Within whose noble hearts fear never bred,
Yet fell as Victims to the fatal Lead:
And though it be successful and secure,
Dreadful in War, and able to endure
The strongest charge; yet if compared to th'Bow,
Its high exalted Fame will nothing show.
Not but Death flies as certain from that Fire,
As from the Bow and Shaft we so admire:
But it is impossible it e're should own
By its weak single power a Famed renown,
So nobly splendid as our Archerie
Could gain commixt with Magnanimity.
But if with shooting used, 'twould nobly show
A power, which never any could outdo
By fight or single Force; a dear-bought prize
Which the succeeding Age would canonize.
Draw out a Band of Archers to the Field,
Brave Spirits trained in War, with courage steeled,
Whose influence was bred, and nourish't grows
In (...) brute bosoms, whose well tempered Bows
Dismiss the Steel-tipt Messengers, whilst Fame
By Shouts applauds the Shooters skilful aim;
And see with wonder that undaunted force,
Which the dread rage of Death could never divorce:
See those that at pale Terrors face scorn e're to shrink,
That still encouraged boldly stand on dangers brink
With daring Breasts, six't Eyes, and Arms displaid,
Drawing out Shafts three quarters long to the head:
Mark with a curious Eye the wretchedness
And fears a Coward's caution does express;
And next the Archers noble Actions Eye,
Each Face this Motto bearing, We defy:
And then declare the most unequal wrong
Done to the Bow, its Praise deferred so long.
The Archers power above all in War
Is never to be questioned, since they are
A sort of skilful Undertakers, young,'
wedded to Arms and Honor, Valiant, Strong:
The Art of shooting was their Infant sport,
By which in Troops they daily did resort;
By which they gained health, strength, fame, courage, skill,
Hearts to love virtuous deeds, and banish ill.
No Impotents diseased can ever know
The worth and matchless virtues of the Bow.
Archers must strong and healthful prove, and Just,
Not weakened with bad Wine, soft Ease and Lust,
But always fit to entertain a Foe,
And by brave Deeds the worth of shooting show.
Had that too studious Bertholdus Swart first Inventer of Guns.
Chemist that first brought
Into the World his fatal Guns, but sought
The use of Bows to grace what he designed
Should be a matchless Weapon for Mankind;
It might be granted that united Power
Treason, nor Rust of Time, could never devour.
But since it is abused and common grown,
The glorious Palm to Archers must be thrown,
Whose noble hearts all pannick fears disown.
Yet must not my affection to the Bow,
Like a great Torrent, Reason overflow:
There doubtless are some men that fight with Guns
Of an approved valor, the noble Sons
Of Heaven born Honor, that dare stake their Blood
And dearest Vitals for their Countrie's good,
And in that Cause think it a bliss to bleed,
Else 'twere a miserable Age indeed.
But with a general Eye survey a Troop,
Each smiling face with the many there that droop,
And amongst five hundred fifty scarce shall bear
A Martial Spirit bold and fit for War.
But in a Band of Noble Archers all
The matchless Sons of Valor I dare call,
And prove it true, since still inured to shoot;
Which Manly Pastime the weak trembling fruit
Of Cowards never durst follow, but possessed
By sturdy Bow-men, whose famed strength encreast
By daily Exercise; nay 't has been found
By such whose Intellects have been unsound,
Using the healthful Art, Distempers fled,
And Strength and Courage through the Body spread,
A flowing lively warmth possessed each Vein,
And sprightly Health banished Disease and Pain.
A wholesome Pastime which all Sports exceeds,
And he that shooting loves no Physic needs;
A noble Archer his own Doctor is,
And soars above the reach of rank Disease.
Agues or lazy Fevers are for those
That cherish the repute of Guns, not Bows.
England was once the Seat of Archerie,
Parent of Honor, Magnanimity,
And over all Nations bore Supremacy
For Arts and Arms; her daring Archers then
Durst charge a numerous Host of Warlike men,
Without respect to numbers, death, or fate,
Cherish't with hopes of being fortunate
By their precedent Conquests, which did grow
As if they were entailed to grace the Bow,
That Weapon being easy to be born,
Of exc'lent Nature, and by Valor worn.
Besides the speed with which brave Archers make,
Their fame is such, that I dare undertake
To shoot ten Shafts well aimed and carried on
In Battle, e're you twice can charge a Gun.
What then can be inserted to proclaim
That Weapon's worth before the Bow? what Fame
Can be allowed to that, which Archers have
Not by their Valors won? If to be brave,
Valiant and fort'nate, be a blessing proved
By those that War and Acts of Honor loved;
The Bow may make as great and powerful claim,
As any Weapon incident to Fame.
Why then should that, which only has of late
Been used in England's Battles, now create
Oblivion in the best of Weapons use,
That in our pristine Ages did produce
Such glorious Spoils? Or why should Guns, that owe
No worth but what is adherent to the Bow,
Be more esteemed? It only does express
This Age's Vices more, it is Virtue less,
Than what by the honored Ancient was possessed.
Great Vid. Baker. Chron.
Charles of blessed eternized memory,
Celestial Heaven's unmatch't Epitome,
So loved this Art of shooting, that even he
The charms of other Sports would often resist.
To be a Partner in the Archers List.
And can we soar at greater Excellence,
Then prizing Arts loved by so wise a Prince,
Whose greatest Crime was too much Clemency?
Can England e're forget her Archery,
And give t'an upstart power precedence?
No, like the Phoenix from old ashes sprung,
We Will give the Bow new life, once more make young
This Art, and once more be renowned and strong.
We Will once more tear Hell's dreadful Banner down,
And bravely armed the Front of Virtue crown,
Our conquest win by Valor, not relate
Our good or ill Success the Gifts of Fate,
But by our Deeds, which must be fortunate,
Gained and archiev'd, since trembling Destiny
In Archers meets too strong an Enemy.
Therefore if England would victorious prove,
The Spawn of Vice and Cowardice remove:
If, as it heretofore has been the Seat
Of Fame, it would those Glories past repeat,
And like a Taper late extinct Connive
At Vices past, and from a Spark revive
A precious Fire that out-shines the Sun,
And proves a Phoebus in Fame's Horizon,
To light the wandering Hero to a place
Where th'Souls of Archers Heaven's bright Palace grace*
If, as some Jewel of unvalued worth,
We once more would give glorious Luster birth,
And Dignify with its past proper style
The World's Exchequer, this most happy Isle:
Let us call back lost Archerie again,
And with it is matchless worth possess our men:
Let Gunners with our Archers now join hands,
And both in Power combining share Commands;
And then the Land invincible will be
From all Attempts or Foreign policy.
Rash Undertakers may return with loss,
And curse that Fortune that complies with us;
Whilst we triumphant over the World may spread,
Well armed with fatal Bows and hissing Lead,
Our vast united powers the World will awe,
And to our aid fresh numbers daily draw.
The ambitious French, and stubborn Turk will fear
Afresh that fatal power that did appear
In our last Age so dreadful, who overcome
With pannick doubts, scarce think they are safe at home.
Regions remote our Forces will admire,
And with large Sums our Archers strive to hire.
Honor will triumph, Valor walk in state,
And Wealth with Piety participate.
Soft-finger'd Peace and bounteous Plenty here
Will bless and smile upon us all the year:
Nor can we ever fear our Foreign Foes,
Our Frontiers guarded well with Guns and Bows,
Whose strong contracted Power would dare Alarms,
And Conquest win, though Hell rose up in Arms.
The Bow and Pike
Bow and Pike has also been approved
By such as Arms and Acts of Honor loved,
And often has been found most excellent
Either to act a purpose, or prevent.
From far use Bows, but Pikes, when near at hand,
The beguiled Horsinens thoughts may countermand;
And many that long idle stood may be
Employed, and prove main helps to Victory.
Bow fixed to the Pike will execution do
As well as single, and as bravely too;
The Shaft being no way hindered, nor its power
Opposed, but rather is augmented more.
My Genius is to barren too express
A benefit, which prudent Heads might guess
Better than I relate: and though the Fame
Attending Archerie deserves a Name
Greater than Wit can attribute to grace
An art that does all other Arts surpass;
Yet this, to call it the illustrious prize
Of an eternized Honor, shall suffice;
And writ in lasting leaves of Brass, remain
Till this vast Globe to Chaos turns again.
The Golden Age shall once more be renewed,
And the accursed Brood of Vice subdued,
Whilst Virtue triumphs as the chiefest good.
Treason her blunted Weapon shall lay by,
And bright Astrea once more leave the Sky
To take her dwelling amongst the Sons of Men.
Our bedridden Power shall grow strong again,
And armed with fierce and double Power, despise
The Plots of our ambitious Enemies.
In vain remote Possessors shall design
To suck the sweetness of our English Vine,
Whilst our Hesperia's precious golden Fruit
Is watch't by Dragons, ( viz.) brave Men that shoot;
Let 'em revive Alcides, and then know
The use and matchless power of his Bow,
Ere they gain hopes of England's overthrow;
And then perhaps as Impotent as ere,
Assaulting Warriors that never knew to fear,
Each Archer proving an Alcides here.
Therefore to you, most honored Patriots, now
Prostrate to Earth my Muse does humbly bow;
You that your Nations famed Militia sway,
And your known Valors over the World display
By glorious Deeds, whose Magnanimity,
Guarded by Honor from your Infancy,
Gave early hopes of future Gallantry:
You, whose brave thirst of Glory has been known
In Foreign Climes, and to Opposers shown
Bateless and noble: You, whose Valors have
Dared Death to's Face, courted a gloomy Grave,
Your Country's Fame immaculate to save,
And, like obstreperous Thunder, terrified
With your dread Fames the rash Insulters pride:
To you, the Souls of Honor, I appeal
To further my Intentions, and reveal
A Good to this forgetful Age, that may
Flourish when we lie mixed with common Clay:
You that have power to do things great and good,
Whose Actions should be Noble as your Blood,
Cannot advance the Nation's profit more,
Than England's best of Weapons to restore
To its first Dignity; nor act a thing
More bravely beneficial to the King,
Than the reviving of old Archerie
To its pristine Estate, Posterity
Will bless your Memories, when they shall read,
Your noble Wills that benefit decreed
For the Nations good, whose powerful interest
The nearest Mansions of your hearts possessed,
And crowned with Loyalty and Faith recalled
a Virtue long by scorching Vice exhaled
From the English hearts, but now revived again,
Sent from above t'incourage valiant men.
And next to you, blind Fortune's wealthy Heirs,
That fenc't about with Riches banish cares
For the Realm's good, that never could express
A harm you felt, till too much idleness
Ushered a fierce Disease, first learn to shoot,
And on this Theme of Archerie dispute;
And doing so, you will not only bind
All generous Spirits to applaud, but find
A dulcid Health, and growing Courage seize
Your Nerves infected late through too much Ease:
The Bow renewed once more in England raise,
And merit by that Act a Wreath of Bays,
Styled Patrons of your Country, live adored
By faithful Subjects, that can never afford
Applause to more Deservings, nor partake
Of greater Blessings than that Grant can make
To fertile Britain, lend your potent aid
To plant an Art, through want of use decayed,
Amongst our Natives, though of greater worth,
Than that which first gave glorious Conquest birth:
And Fame (when dead) your Monuments will crown
With everlasting Trophies, your renown
Will charm each Breast, whilst every gazer on
Pays watery Tribute to the Marble Stone
For loss of those, whose virtues did create
A Blessing known so useful to the State:
And, whilst you hear inhabit, daily Prayers
For your long Life will still assault your Ears.
The Virtuous and the Loyal will allow
No Wreath, but what shall flourish on your Brow,
Which to their Benefactors paid must prove
The undoubted sign of their united love.
Think what a precious benefit 'twill bring
To happy England, from whose use will spring
Honor and Honesty, the glorious Twins
Of Excellence-infusing Cherubins.
And you industrious Yeomen, who with toil
Manure the bosom of your fertile Soil,
Cherish't with growing hopes of future gains,
When you shall reap the Harvest of your pains,
Forsake your loved Olympian Games a while,
With which the tedious Minutes you beguile,
And give the Bow, so useful to the Nation
When bravely exercised, your approbation:
Leave Quoits and Ninepins, those Bear-garden Sports,
And follow shooting often used in Courts;
An Exercise that rather adds to Fame,
Than any way it is incident to shame;
The worth of your Progenitors pursue,
Whose Loyal Valors often did subdue
With their dread Bows and Shafts fierce Enemies,
Though strengthened with fresh Legions, or Surprise:
No rash intruding bold Antagonist
The force of their brave Weapons durst resist,
But hush't as Midnight Dreams deliberate
The potent sway of their Superior Fate.
If then that Ignorant Age such Knowledge shared,
And of their Archers had such choice regard,
Knowing no Weapon could such Trophies bring,
Such Profit to the Land, Fame to the King;
Why should not you, Successors to their Fate,
New Presidents in the shooting Art create,
And by your brave Example animate
The noble Spirits of your Countrymen,
To rouse and bring up Archerie again?
By Action all base slothful Ease debarr,
That creeping Poison, Vice irregular.
Let every Village prove the Seat of War,
Whose small Dimensions then need never fear,
When manly Archers once inhabit there.
Enrich't with Peace, you may possess your own,
And reap with Joy the Fruit your care has sown,
Free from Commotions or Dissentions base,
Whose cursed effects do English hearts disgrace,
And for your pains procure a rich Reward,
You also still may stand on your own Guard,
Despising those that Peace and Virtue shun,
Though Law not suffers you to use a Gun:
Or if your dwellings e're molested are
By Foreign Insolents, or Civil War,
Each man that bears a Bow may guard his own,
And see his rash invader overthrown.
But such Contentions may I never see:
Our Bows against an Outland Enemy
Would bravest be employed: should Archers join
With our thrice-fam'd Militia, and combine
United to overcome some neighboring Land,
What Potent Nation could our Force withstand,
Our men well armed with Guns, fierce Bows and Darts,
Led on by Heaven, and steeled with English hearts?
Or were our Noble Warriors Excellence
Only enacted in our own defense,
Were our joint Forces called, not to command
On some brave purpose, but to guard the Land;
Thus aided, Female breasts their fear might cease,
And we in spite of Danger sleep in Peace:
Peace, whose delightful branch would firmly grow,
Watered by Plenty's stream, whose Wealth would flow
About our Land, and pearly Treafures heap,
When the delighted Swains the Grain should reap:
Still free you will live from Mischiefs brooding Vice,
Treading the narrow Path to Paradise,
Employed by this brave Pastime; and atchieve
What Virtue craves, or Piety can give:
Your sporting hours pleasantly will fly,
Refined from Ill or cursed Impiety:
Whilst active Vice in Cities ushers harms,
Couching Perdition in her softest Charms.
There may you by the Art of shooting prove
A matchless Courage sent you from above:
And when at Targets striving you essay
Each with a Shaft to bear the Prize away,
Piercing it often, endeavoring to hold
Your Fortunes high, and hit the wished for Gold,
You may imagine then what you could do,
If that six't Object were a living Foe.
But on this Theme I have too long digrest,
And the Profits of the Bow too often expressed
By this prolix Relation, yet excuse
The now Abortive Issue of my Muse,
And her affection to this honest Sport,
Whose worth and innocence seems to court
The unnerv'd Iuventus thus to exercise
An Art, sworn Foe to Infamy and Vice.
My Zeal to the Nations good in^orces me
TO unfold the precious worth of Archerie,
Prompted by England's Genius to declare
A thing so sweet in Peace, so fierce in War,
As Manly Shooting, the Ancients chiefest good,
Whose Virtue then was better understood
Than in this drowzie Age, where nauseous Ease
Our too much pampered Natures best does please:
This by instinct infused into my heart,
And next my knowledge of this Noble Art,
Flattered my daring Muse to take in hand
Shooting's applause, whose Virtue may command
A second Virgil's Fancy to proclaim
The Bow's well merited and matchless Fame:
And upon this, as others have of late
Essai'd their Wits and benefits of Fate,
I, though the meanest of a thousand men,
Something have writ, though with a ruder Pen.
Thou then, the happy Genius of this Age,
Break through these gloomy Clouds, that do presage
Ill to the Realm; and let thy Influence
Infuse in all the useful Excellence
Of Bows and Shafts, rouse thy refulgent head,
And it is famed Virtue through the Nation spread;
Search with thy All-discerning Eye the Cave,
Where Treason broods destruction to the Brave;
And then declare the Bow can best defend
The barbarous deeds proud Rebels did intend:
Display its worth, and like distilling Dews,
Into their Souls its influence infuse.
That charmed with knowledge of so brave an Art,
They may to all its unmatch't worth impart;
Style it a Good, useful in Peace and War,
In Pastime prized, in Battle singular;
It ushers Health, and struggling Vice confines,
Whose Smiles Eternal Misery designs,
Drawing a Model, whereby all may Scan
The blessed Effigies of a Vertuousman,
Pure and Immaculate, as when at first
His Infancy in Innocence was nursed.
Rise from your hateful Couches therefore you,
That in a Sea of Vice your Souls imbrew,
That destitute of Reason to prevent
A nauseous Destiny, too evident
Run headlong to Perdition; now take hold
Of my untwisted Clew, and be not sold
For a short pleasing Dream to endless Woes,
Learn to be good, and Exercise with Bows
Your happy Strength, and by that use create
A Blessing useful, just, and fortunate:
Let the Infectious that have long been nursed
In black and horrid Vice, whose Souls accursed
By Heaven for some Enormance, first repair
Their vicious Life by uncorrupted prayer;
And next confine themselves to shooting well,
So may they stifle Passions that rebel;
Since it is an Art allied to Honesty,
Where Virtue, Fame, and Magnanimity
Combine to show its precious Excellence,
Unbounded Worth, and heavenly Innocence,
The Weeds of Vice thereby are rooted out:
Nor need the generous Undertaker doubt
The Justice of his Actions, since this Art
Nothing but VVorth and Virtue can impart.
No Execrations forged in gloomy Stix
Shall here have vent, nor any Heretics
VVedded to Sin with Archers e're combine,
Nor taste the dulcid Pleasures of their Vine,
Unless unblinded by blessed Heaven to see
The loathed Scene of their Impiety.
The Ancients used it both for Exercise,
And a Defense against their Enemies;
For Sport in Peace, but for great Deeds in War,
Whose then prized worth was known so singular,
That Children, taught by Nature to suppose
The worth of Archerie, would cry for Bows:
And though the dull and drowzy World has since
That blooming Age obscured the Excellence
Of this so noble Pastime, trampling down
That Power, which with success their deeds would crown;
Let us, the Heirs of Fame, not Ignomy,
The inthral'd Art of Archerie set free,
And glorying in our Loyalties advance
A Jewel's worth, long lost by the ignorance
Of this Luxurious Age, a Jem, whose price
The wealth of Kingdoms cannot comprimise.
Were it a thing obnoxious to the Land,
A baleful ill, where Vice had most command;
Were it a sport unfitting for a Man
That had the glorious race of Virtue ran,
And from his Cradle had that bliss possessed,
With which All-seeing Heaven rewards the blessed;
Or did it cherish Vice, raise Calumny,
Or stain pure minds with blots of Infamy,
And by his nauseous Rules reduce the Nation
From innocent to vicious Conversation;
It were an act of Justice to deprave
This Art my Genius does declare so brave.
But as Judicious Souls do shooting prize
Only as healthful, and known Foe to Vice
As it displayes the Theme of Piety;
Procures us Fame, Health, Courage, Honesty,
Brave wills to do, and power those Deeds to own;
And from our Hearts roots out what Vice has sow'n;
It must by prudent Souls acknowledged prove
The choicest Blessing sent us from above,
Either for our disport in times of Peace,
Or guard in War when we expect success.
Join therefore all ye Noble Souls that have
Hearts to encourage and reward the Brave,
Where the Decrees of Virtue gain applause:
You that met danger in your Countries Cause
With joy and resolution, once more try
The blessed effects of Noble Archerie;
Do you but plant, it of it self will grow,
Then shall ye reap the Blessings that ye sow
With treble gains, commixt with bliss to see
Your brave endeavors thrive so fruitfully:
Then shall this happy Land once more proclaim
Its brave defense, and it is precedent Fame,
Whose ancient Laurel Wreaths will withered show,
Compared to the glorious Virdure of our new;
Heaven with continued blessings will possess
Our Natives, and the Land with Plenty bless,
Whilst here enrich't by the Virtues of the Bow
And noble Deeds, Astrea rules below
Impartially over all, from whence shall spring
Peace to the Realm, and Honor to the King,
Wealth to the Inhabitants, Glory unto those
Whose Valors dare reprove insulting Foes:
The world immaculate will be and good.
As when first purged by the o'rewhelming Flood
Mankind learned Innocence and Virtue: so
Shall we, unfound by Sin, its Blessings know,
And this last Age by Archerie possessed,
Maugre its brooding Vices, prove the best.
Postscript.
HAving spoken so liberally in the Applause of this Noble Exercise in the
precedent Poem, perhaps it will be expected that we should instruct Persons in
the Practick Part of it, as well as delight them with the Theorick. And though
it is confessed there is a large portion of Skill to be used in the exact managing
of this Weapon; yet it is sooner to be learnt by Ocular Observance and daily
Practice, than by Verbal Demonstration, Affection to it, and often endeavoring
to do like those that are Masters of this Science, being a greater and readier
means to make any One perfect, than the Description of it by the Pen can be.
Yet, to let the Ingenious perceive we are not Ignorant of the Use and Nature of
that Science which we so much applaud, and which is indeed so worthy to be
applauded, we have inserted these following Rules, thereby briefly relating the
Implements, and the Knowledge that an Archer must be possessed of, before he can
attain to a perfect form of Shooting.

First, I shall have relation to the Implements that are necessary, and to be
used by all Archers, which are these; A Bracer, A Shooting Glove, A String, A
Bow, A Shaft, A Bow-Case, and A Pouch.


The Bracer, although first mentioned, is of no great use, except to some
Persons whose Clothes hinder the passage of the String; or such whose Bows are
not bent accordingly. It is commonly used for these two Causes: First, to keep
the Arm or Wrist from being hurt by the String, and the sleeve from being
dammag'd. And secondly, that by gliding or slipping quickly off the Bracer, the
Shaft may have the more vigor to perform your will; for, wanting this Bracer,
if the String should light upon your Sleeve it would hinder the force of the
Shoot, and so cause you to miss of your intended purpose.

A Shooting Glove is only used to save a man's fingers from hurting, that he
may be able to draw the String to the utmost of his strength; and therefore his
Glove must be lined at the fingers with thick Leather, fit for that purpose.

A String of a Bow, though little in it self, ought to be much regarded, for
great Judgment is required in choosing of good Strings: for an ill String
breaks many a good Bow. They have formerly, as many Greek Fav^rinus.
Authors write, been made diversely; as of Flax, of Silk, of Hair; but in our
last Age new Hemp was thought best for a String. In stringing a Bow there must
be great care taken, that the String be not too short, nor too long, but equal
to the length and temper of the Bow: and take heed the Bow be well Nock't, lest
the sharpness of the Horn, by wearing the String out, endanger your Bow: For if
the String begin to fret or wear, trust it not, but take another; for you had
better lose a String than a Bow.

As to the Bow, the Ancients used to make them diversely; as of Brass, Iron,
Steel. Hiad. 4
Pandarus, the best and most famous Archer amongst the Trojans (as Homer
writes) had his Bow made of two Goat's-horns joined together, which was proved
to be of great power. Herodotus In Thalia
writes that the Indians used to make Bows of a certain Reed; and several
others have used Brasile, Elm, Wych, Ash, all which are very unfit to be used
in this Age if considered rightly, Yew being most suitable now to our strength
and abilities. And indeed it is of that excellent Nature, that nothing can
excel it, in making a good, quick, and well tempered Bow.

A Shaft must be made according to your Bow, and equally weighed: ill Shafts
often make an ill Archer. Therefore there ought some Judgment and Care to be used
in having your Shafts made by some skilful Fletcher, that can both see a defect
and mend it.

A Bow-case is to preserve a Bow from the Weather, and it ought not to be too
wide or too narrow, but indifferent. A Bow-case of Leather is not good by
reason of its dampness; Woollen being most fit for that use, by reason of its
warmth. If you keep Bows at your House, a Quiver of Wood is good to preserve
them in; but take heed it stand not too near a Stonewall, for the moisture of
that will make your Bows weak; nor too near a Fire, lest the heat make them
brittle.

A Pouch serves only to contain necessaries, as your Glove, Bracer, Silk for
your String, and wax to rub it with. And though a man may shoot without it, yet
a good Archer will find it necessary.

Next, in breaking a Bow there are several ways; either by the String, by the
Shaft drawing too far, or by frets; if the String be either too short or too
long, not well put on, or dammag'd, the Bow being ill Nockt, or being too old.
Therefore an Archer should take a great deal of care in keeping all things fit,
that his good Bow may not be in danger.

These are the Implements generally used in shooting: But now we shall say
something relating to their use and management; viz.

Standing, Nocking, Drawing, Holding, Loosing.
First, when an Archer is about to shoot, he should always be sure to take
such footing or standing as shall be both graceful to the Eyes of Spectators,
and profitable for his own use, framing his Countenance and his other parts so
decently, that all his strength may be employed to his advantage, and other
men's delight. He must not be too hasty, nor too tedious in taking Aim; for the
one will be accounted Temerity, the other an affected Curiosity. His Body must
be straight, his Legs not stradling, nor too far distant, but in such a
Posture as may declare to the stander by his Judgment, by his deportment and
management of his Weapon.

To nock your Shaft well is easily done if any care be taken; the only
diligence being in placing your Shaft well and equally cross your Bow: for
unconstant nocking makes a man often miss of his Aim, and sometimes makes the
Bow to be in danger of breaking, for if nockt too high or too low, the Shaft,
if it be little, will start; if great, hobble. Always nock the Cock-feather of
your Arrow uppermost, and take heed the String slip not out of the Nock, for
then all is in danger of breaking.

To draw a Bow well is the best and most graceful part of shooting. The
Ancients used to draw their Bow to their Breasts, as Homer demonstrates in his
description of Pandarus shooting: Iliad. 4.
Up to his Pap the String he did pull, his Shaft to the hard Iron --
The Warlike Women of Scythia used also the same manner of shooting low at the
Breast: and for that reason in their Infancy, Penthesilea caused the right Paps
of her Amazons to be feared away. But this manner of shooting is not used now;
the drawing to the right Ear being certainly the best and most graceful way:
for a man has not only freedom to use all his strength, and aim right, but it
is a posture so comely and graceful, that it will exceedingly delight the
Spectators.

You must not hold your Bow too long when it is drawn; for if it be not of
exceeding good temper it will break: The performance of this can better be
imagined then described; only there must be an equal measure of Time between
drawing and holding, or else it is ten to one but your shot is spoiled.

Loosing is much of the same nature; it must be quick and hard that it may be
without girds: and take heed of letting any of your Clothes touch the String.
Leo the Emperor would have his Soldiers heads polled, and the beards shaved,
for fear lest the hair of their Heads should hinder their Aspect, or their
Beards obstruct the force of the String. These Precepts truly observed and
followed, will doubtless instruct a Lover of this Art in its greatest mystery.

Two other things there are which are general to all Archers; which is Weather,
and Mark.


Of the Weather as thus: He must observe how the Wind is, whether with him,
against him, side-wind, full side-wind, fide-wind quarter with him, side-wind
quarter against him, or the like, that thereby he may shoot freely without
being at all obstructed by the badness of the Weather. Frost is the only Enemy
to a Bow, for without good rubbing and care it will be apt to grow brittle and
break.

In shooting at a Mark observe this, to fix your standing, to shoot compass, to
draw always alike, to nock even, and to loose always alike. Then to consider
the nature of the Prick on Hills, in Valleys, straight Plains, or winding
Places, and to keep a just Decorum equal to the length or shortness of the Mark.

This heedfully understood and followed, will I doubt not instruct a Beginner
how to shoot, especially being daily taught by seeing the practice of others
skilful in this Art, whose worth I hope will finish the Documents I have here
epitomized, and make the Practitioner's Knowledge equal to our Hopes and wishes.

Orders and Observations touching the Noble Exercise of Shooting in the
Long-Bow, to be observed by those which practice that Noble Art.
1. INprimis, For the finding of your Mark, it must be within every man's
reach, and truly named, for prevention of cavil.

2. For Whites, you may have as many as you please, so that they be all
forwards: and if a loose White be sticken out of sight, it is no Mark.

3. For the highest Stakes, if there be a Pin, you must measure to it, though
the wood be higher, for the Pin was put in for that purpose.

4. If you shoot at a Bush, or Black, or whatsoever else, you are to take the
highest part thereof, for your place to measure at.

5. For all Trees, you are to measure at Foot and Pole, except in the naming of
it you say, At the Nayl, or, At the Hole, in such a Tree: or if you can reach
the top with half your Bow, then you are to take the highest to measure at; but
for Foot and Pole, you must measure a foot above the highest ground which joins
to the Tree.

6. If in measuring a Shoot, the difference be so small that it cannot be
decided, then that Competitor shall win the Shoot, which is best at the next
Mark.

7. If in measuring a Shoot, the Mark be stirred out of its place, he loses
the Shoot that removed it.

8. If at first coming to your Mark you claim two or more, and the opposite
side draw their Arrows, you can have no more than you first claimed, although
your Partner when he comes challenges more.

9. If you name one Mark, and Shoot at another, you are to lose your Shoot, and
the other are to follow at the Mark named.

10. If your Arrow break, you may measure to the nearest piece which has wood
and head, or wood and feather.

11. If you have any mishap, as in nocking amiss, etc. if you can reach your
Arrow with your Bow, you may shoot again; if it fly further, it is a Shoot.

12. In shooting at Rovers, you must stand no further from your Mark than you
can reach with half your Bow; but at Pricks you are permitted to stand two Bows
before your Mark, and as much behind it as you please.

In laudem Sagittariorum.
WHen English Archers first in Warr's appeared,
England was honored; Honored? nay, 'twas feared:
Iows still claim credit, and first merited fame,
When great Duke Will. that Norman Conqueror came:
With him came Bows; and since, with warlike chance,
Proved terrible weapons still, against Foes in France:
Witness those Battles (where we Laurel wore)
Cressie, Poitiers, strong Again, many more;
In which, by valor of our Archers stout,
Some slain, some taken, but ALL were put to rout:
From which then grew that French Proverbial Saw,
Run, Run! for English Archers 'gin to draw.
Then came that thwick-thwack thundering Instrument,
First hatched in Hell, and from the Devil sent;
In all which time, what Battles have we won,
Since we laid by our Bow, to bounse a Gun?
Tell but one brave Battle ever fought,
And won (since then) if not, account them naught:
And, like brave English Archers, still extol the Bow,
And then be Conquerours wheresoever ye go.
FINIS.

