VIRTUE AND SCIENCE.

Pindarick Poems.

DEDICATED To the Most Illustrious PRINCESS, ANNE, Duchess of RICHMOND and
LENOX, AND To Her Sister, The Right Honorable, FRANCES, Countess of NEWBURGH.

By J. S.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

PREFACE.
To the Judicious and Pious READER.
THat Virtue, or the Love of Heaven above all things, is a necessary Requisite
to the Attainment of Salvation, and the High Road to Beatitude, is the constant
Judgment of all those, who are not mere Libertines, or Deists; nor can any
doubt but Faith is also necessary, except those Naturalists, who deny all
Divine Revelation. For, How can any man Love Celestial Goods, if he does not
first in some manner know them? And, How can the Generality of Mankind know
things Unseen and above the pitch of their Natural Reason, but by way of
Authority; that is, by Faith, or the Believing others who do know them?

But yet, mere Faith is not alone sufficient for that Great End: St. James
assures us, that Faith without Works is Dead; and Life being the Principle of
Action or Motion, we cannot move or Promote our selves toward Heaven, by that
which is Dead or without Life. Wherefore the Endeavors of all Spiritual
Directours are employed in rendering Faith Lively and Operative; and this can
only be performed, by making it more Clear, and more Familiar to our
Conceptions; that so the Obscurity of it may not Retard our Progress, or Benum
and Chill the Fervor of our Devotion. To this end our Common Directress, the
Church, Instructs her Ghostly Children, the Faithful, by Catechisms, which
Explain to them their Faith; She Obliges them to Pray at some Set Times, and
Exhorts them to do it often; She proposes to them the Good Examples of Holy Men
to excite their industry; She Administers to them Sacraments, the most
pregnantly-expressive Signs to represent to them Spiritual things: She enures
them to Practice their Devout Tenets, by enjoining them to keep many Signal
Seasons, (as Sundays and Festivals) Holy: Lastly, She Lays a kind of Sweet
Force upon them, to keep up their Spirits from Drooping and Lazy Dullness, by
her well-ordered Discipline; which puts them upon Exercising what Her
Instructions had Taught them: And all this to no other end, but by Acquanting
them more familiarly with their Faith, to make it Vigorous, Lively and Active.

But now, besides those Ordinary ways of advancing Faith, there are other
Clearer Lights; to attain which, is the work of but a few more Elevated
Christians; though, if Industry and Instruction be not wanting, they may, to a
fair degree, be compassed, by considerable Multitudes; all of them tending to
perfect Souls in the Knowledge, and consequently in the Love of God, and in a
great measure supplying the Disadvantage of Faith's Obscurity. Such as are,
First, The Science of Controversy; which if rightly managed, shows the Absolute
Certainty of the Grounds of Faith, by Evidencing the Truth of Christ's Doctrine,
and that it has been sincerely and incorruptedly Transmitted down to us who
live now. Secondly, Cheology, which renders that Doctrine more Intelligible by
showing its Agreeableness to Natural Principles, and its Connection with those
Truths which are more Clear and Obvious to our common Conceptions. Thirdly, By
Higher, Purer, and more Empyreal Lights gained by Abstraction from the world
(either Totally or at Seasons) and continual Employment of our Thoughts in
Meditation and Contemplation; which burnish the Rude and Unpolished Ideas we
have of Heavenly Goods with a more Bright and Dazzling Luster; being (as far as
our State here will allow) a certain kind of Experience of their Transcendent
Excellency. And Lastly, Natural Science, or the true Knowledge of the Book of
Creatures; which (and especially that part of Metaphysics which treats of
Abstracted Spirits) if Solid, and applied as it ought, is apt to raise the Soul
to very sublime Contemplations. And These Knowledges are particularly They,
which are meant here by Science as she is the Handmaid to Dirtue: For they do
all conduce highly in their several Stations, to make our Apprehensions of
Heavenly Things more Clear, Active and Lively: They rivet and confirm in us our
Adhesion to Heaven-reveal'd Truths, and add to our Spiritual Progress
Incomparable Advantages. This is that Wisdom, which St. Paul tells us he spoke
among the Perfect; and which is recommended here to all those that aim at
Perfection.

I thought fit to deliver my Conceptions, though they were of the Highest Points
of Christian Morality, in the way of Poetry, because this is more Elevated, and
more becoming Great Subjects than Prose. The thoughts of a Poetical Writer use
to be more Comprehensive; which renders his Sense more Full, and his
Expressions more Smart. And I took the way of Courtship, to show that there is
no manner of dressing up a Subject, but may be Useful to Devotion; especially
when the Matter guards the Author from all suspicion of Levity. Besides, there
is something of Charmingness in such kind of Addresses. Love is so Tender and
Soul-melting a Passion, that it is Grateful to all whose Natures are not
Sower'd by a Rigid Humor: Nothing can be either more Attractive or more
Persuasive, than the Soft and Delicate Language in which it uses to be
delivered. But I can need no more Authentic Voucher than the Holy Ghost, nor a
more Warrantable Precedent, than the Sacred Scripture it self endited by his
Inspiration. Never was any thing more affectionately writ than that Song of
Songs, the Canticles of Solomon; in which the Dearest Love between the Church
and Her Heavenly Spouse is penned throughout in such Amorous Language, and such
Ravishingly-kind and Courtly Expressions, that perhaps the most High-Soaring
Fancy that ever Writ since in that strain, has never been able to reach or
equal it. He is but Meanly Verst in Poetry, who sees not that that Devout Piece
is a perfect Love-Poem; and which is most dislik't by some Nice-judgments, a
Dramatick Poem too; or as we familiarly call it a Play; where the several
Persons Come in, Speak, and Answer in their turns. Whence we may farther
discern that it is not the Artificial Form of Writing this way or that, which is
Displeasing to God, but the applying that Form to Foolish Matter, or Unworthy
and Unchaste Subjects. Besides, in taking this Method, I had a due Regard to the
Devout Sex, who take more delight in the Tender Expressions of Poetry, than in
severe Precepts delivered in Rougher Prose; their Genius leading them to be
more affected with what is Quaint, and to profit more by such Instructions as
are ushered in with Pleasure, and some kind of Gayity.

That I Dedicated these Pieces to those Illustrious Ladies, was a Natural
Effect of the Just Honor and Highest Respects I do, for many Regards, bear
Themselves and all their Noble Family; which dilates it self into so many
Branches adorned with most signal Marks of Honor, as perhaps Few in our Nation
can equal it: And it is the greatest Encomium I can give to those Two Excellent
Personages, that by publishing to the World they have a special Title to such
Dedications, I declare at the same time that their Virtuous Education and
Personal Endowments are such as render them capable of understanding the most
solid Grounds of Christian Morality, and of benefiting Themselves by such
Productions as exceed the reach of those Ladies who are not far above the
common Level of their Sex and Quality.

The Annotations may in one passage or two seem too speculative. But, I desire
it may be considered that those speculations that are Aerie and Fantastic are
indeed justly Blameable; but that those which are nothing but a deep Search and
Inspection into the Nature of the Thing, which is under consideration, (as I am
well assured these are) cannot justly be taxed with any thing but their being
too well-grounded, and too solid; which are such Good Faults that they can need
no Excuse: Nor can any thing be deemed too Obscure, which the daily Course of
our Christian Life, with a due Reflection on our Interior, will, after a while,
beat out Plain to us; and requite our Industry and Patience with the Evidence
and Satisfaction it will bring along with it when it is fully comprehended.

J. S.

DEDICATION: To Her GRACE The DUCHESS of RICHMOND.
LO, Madam, here is a Noble Guest,
Bespeaks a Room in your good Breast.
She seems a Stranger and Unknown,
Attired in the Mode of Helicon;
At a late Visit given her there
By a Maiden Muse with Child of Her.
But, if Y' unveil the Tiffany Dress
Her Friend there lent her, she will confess
Her self Your Inmate; vowed to dwell
Constantly in Your Heart's dear Cell:
'Twas Orderd by Heaven's Kind Decree,
Your Soul should be her Landlady.
Your choicest Entertainment bring
For this Great Daughter to Heavens King.
Of Your Heart Adorn each room
With purest Thoughts, with Prayer perfume,
Who thus receives her nothing loses,
She all her Father's Gifts disposes:
The Title she will give You, is,
Heiress to Eternal Bliss;
And your Aim at True Glory to advance,
Whole Heaven will be your Rich Inheritance.
To VIRTUE, His Soul's Mistress.
Stanza I.
(a) FAir Maid of Honor, to Heaven's Court;
What Pencil, or what Colors be
Fit to Resemble, or even Emblem Thee,
To Fancy whom lifts Art into Transport!
I am all Exta^
When I mean Thee,
Dear Ravisher of Hearts and Brains
Each High-Expressive Attribute
Lisps, or is mute:
Blazons of Honor prove but Blots and Stains.
Courtship, which racks Truth, is Detraction here;
Complements in Realities disappear.
II.
Hence you Untutour'd Wits, whose Vein
Is only Gallant when Profane;
Your Chattering Muse is hoarse where the High Theme
Leaves no Power to Blaspheme.
Your Aerie Art affords
But Empty Lying Words,
Slandering Heaven, and All-rich Nature,
To Flatter one poor Clayie Creature.
Stars, Violets, Gems and Spice,
Roses and Paradise
All are dissolved into Loose Rhyme,
Which to Hell's service movingly does Chime:
Are all distilled by fulsome soultry Fires
Of Cole-black Lust-enkindled Desires
TO Extract (alas) a Motley Mistress thence,
Vice's and Vanity's Compound Quintessence.
Bold Chemists that dare try
What God and Nature both deny!
Dust-creeping things be gone;
Your Highest Music is but Hisses,
The Old Serpents Tone,
When he beloved Corruption devours with Kisses.
Let Chloris, Celia, and that Idol-Crew,
Your Wanton Dotages, pack all away with you;
And in their ill-fill'd Room
Let Virtue, Heavens-Enamouring Darling come.
III.
Virtue, dear Virtue! Hark how the lovely Sound,
Climbing its Native Sky,
Compendiously
Echoes the Sphere's whole Consort at each sweet Rebound!
While my Joy-ravish't Soul sweet Virtue sings,
All Heaven's concerned, and Counter-rings,
Tuned to the Self-same Key
By Mysterious Sympathy,
Such sweet and secret Force has Correspondency.
Dear Virtue, my Soul's Queen!
(b) Come, and come Glorious, as thou would be seen
By they Dread Lord, when at his Session's Day
He shall the Palsy'd World in Flames survey;
And with the purest Beam of his Bright Eye
Thy Metal try,
And with one Powerful Glance Purge all thy Gross Allay.
In that dazzling Form appear;
Nor fear,
Lest our Flesh-veiled Sight
Cannot sustain thy pure Meridian Light;
True, we are dim-ey'd Bats and dwell,
Bright Virtue, in a dark and gloomy Cell;
Yet Starry Lights and Thine
More needfully do shine
Cimmerian Midnight to expel.
Deal forth a gentle Ray,
And create a Newborn Day,
Which in Red Letters We
Will Write, and Consecrate to thy Dear Memory.
We with Devoutest Incense will it feast,
And every Sweet of the Arabian Nest.
IV.
Lo where she comes, she comes amain,
(c) And Nature's whole Great Household in her Train,
All pressed by Reason's Law to follow Her!
The Obedient Well-train'd Band
Stands still, moves forward, turns at Her Command.
To Heaven their Procession is, and she
The Van does lead;
Nor ought they tread,
In their Calm March, One Step until her Beck they see;
Or, if some grow disordered, and do,
All Natures Well-Rank't Army grows Disordered too.
It Is She allies
Our Sublunary World to the Bright Skies:
She is the Wedding-Ring 'twixt God and Nature;
If any poor Exalted Creature
Heaven's Blessed Affinity partakes,
Virtue the Marriage and Relation makes.
She stands between,
A Reconciling, not Dividing Screen.
It Is Love alone
That can Two Spirits join in One.
V.
Being, which in its Notion's spacious room
All possible Perfections does enwomb,
Could not in her whole Line a Scale contrive
By Steps at Heaven to arrive.
Add new Gradations, until
You fill
All the far-stretched Length in Numbers Row,
In multiplied Excesses let Proportions grow and grow,
Still, still, that Entity sinks infinitely Infinity below.
Let Great Creation exert its utmost Skill,
It Is Product's but deep Nothing's Valley to Heaven's Topless Hill,
Whither to arrive transcends, oh far transcends Impossible;
Unless Great Virtue, Heaven's next Neighbor, stand
On the top of Causes Climax, and there lend a hand
To help the Lame, though Winged, Spirits on high
TO attain and reach the else-Inaccess'ble Deity.
VI.
(d) Thy Essence is of Harmony composed:
(e) That Old Philosopher had said true
Had he meant You,
Soul to the World and our Souls too.
A Map of Symmetry
Best Epitomizes Thee,
In Order's perfect'st Mould disposed;
(f) Order, as when New- Coined in Heaven's High Mint,
Retaining still the All-Wise, All-Good Finger's Print.
A Calm Sereneness is thy proper Grace,
Smooth as a smiling Angel's Face.
(g) Oh, you are all Smile, Smile shadows best thy Feature,
One constant serious Smile of well-pleased Nature.
A never-clouded Genuine Smile,
Not coined fond Lovers to beguile,
To tempt Loose Vanity,
Or guild some Complemental Lie;
Thou'st better Arts
T'eamour Hearts,
Thy Strict, Chaste, Cold, yet Mild and Sweet Indifferency.
All Love is Feavour, and Physic needs,
Which thy Just Temperament exceeds.
VII.
When thou breathe, thy Breath is Prayer,
Exhaling Thee in Perfumed Air:
In such Air Angels wave their Wings,
With such Air the Seraph sings,
Such Air the Heavenly Dove
Wafts down; or, if above
(h) Seemingly a while it stays,
(i) This Air our interchanged sighs conveys.
Through such Air Kind Heaven dispences
And transpires its Influences;
Which, in Soul-quickening Rays sent down,
Our dry and barren Earth with showers of Blessings crown.
Thy Fragrant Breast
Is a Phoenix Cherub's Nest,
Where she does brooding sit
(k) On thousand Birds of Paradise in the shell as yet;
Which, with a Wise Impatiency,
Peck and spurn at their Prison to get free;
And, ripe to be released, they
Chirp at the Dawning Glimpse of their Immortal Day.
Poor Unfledged things! whose Pinions aim Heaven's Eye,
And in their Downy Nonage meditate the Sky.
VIII.
Sum up thy Thoughts, my Soul, sum up thy Treasure;
This All Is too Poor of Worth, and Time's too Short a Leisure,
Thy dearest Saint
In Form and Colors, worthy Her, to Paint.
Alas! what can be found
In Nature's Round,
(l) Whether we look up to those Nimble things
Fancy-clad with Wings;
Or down to this dull-pac'd Corporeal Sphere,
(m) Nature's Well-furnish'd Shop of Instrumental Ware,
From neither can w' expect other Supplies,
But Rags of being, Torn in thin Formalities.
Too narrow far
To define Her,
In whom Each single Good and Sweet
Do in a Sacred Eminency meet.
IX.
Be then thy Self, Dear Saint, be Thine Own Beauty;
Our Slender Fancies shall not dare
To injure Thee, who art supremely Fair,
By a detractingly-Officious Duty.
Be still thy own Pure Self, admit no Leaven,
For if thou be Thy Self, thou wilt be a Heaven:
Heaven wrapped up in the Oar thou art, refined
To Glory when we are made all Mind.
Life of often- self-reflected Grace-directed Reason,
Still ripe to act when Providence points the Season.
Spirit of Spirits, Seraphick Quintessence,
Which none but such Pure Fires
As Heaven it self inspires,
(n) Blown too by God's own Breath can extract thence.
Balsom of Souls, whose Vigor when it leaves 'em,
Naught from Eternal Death and Sin's Corruption saves 'em.
Suburbs, or Gate to Heavens Metropolis,
Planter of Paradise, and Seed of Bliss:
The Flowery High Way to my Endless End,
My Loveliest and my Everlasting Friend,
Oh may no Loves Master this Heart of Mine
But that, Dear Mistress, of Sweet Thee and Thine.
FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS.
(a) BY Virtue is meant that Queen of all Virtues, Charity, or an Entire Love
of God; no Virtue being truly and indeed such, but That which directs all our
Actions to our True Last End, and only Sovereign Good, the Enjoyment of Him:
This, and none but This, being able to Satiate Man's Natural Inclination and
Propension to Happiness. No wonder then the most elaborate Expressions fall
short of reaching the Character Due to such a Transcendent Excellency: This
being the Highest Perfection of which a Creature can be capable in this world:
Since none is, or can be above it, but that which is beyond all our
Conceptions, the Unspeakable State of Glory, or the Actual Fruition of God as
in Himself.

(b) After the Author had disgraced the Idle Courtships and Ridiculous
Flatteries, used by the common sort of Poets to their Worldly Mistresses, he
addresses himself to Invoke his Spiritual Mistress, Virtue; and so makes the
same, which was his Subject or Theme, to be his Must also. And, to ennoble his
Conceptions as much as may be, he raises his Thoughts to contemplate Her in
that most Perfect State in which she will be found in every Holy Soul at the
Last Day; when all Venial Imperfections, expressed by St. Paul by the Metaphors
of Hay, Stubble, etc. which alloy'd the purity of Heavenly Love in most of
them, shall be purged away, by the Ravishing Sight of their Dear Savior (whom
they had loved here chiefly, though not so perfectly as they ought) now appearing
in his Glory; and coming to deliver them from their tormenting Pains, caused by
their suspensive Hope of their long-delay'd and earnestly-desir'd Bliss; and
from those pains of Sense also which they endured for their By-Affection, and
Undue Adhesion to Creatures; the love to which they did not so entirely order
to the Love of Heaven.

Let then the Readers but fancy to themselves that Ardency of Divine Love,
which at the World's happy Period, when the Course of Nature, now for ever
useless, shall be at a Stand, and Time shall be no more, will transport those
Holy Souls, and instate them in the Eternal Inheritance of those Blissful
Mansions: Let them next reflect on what Faith assures them, that either they
must strive to store up in their Souls, while they are here, that Disposition,
which, and which only, can immediately fit them for Heaven; or, they must be
eternally Miserable if thy wholly neglect it, or else suffer unspeakable
Torments in the Intermediate State, if they but slightly cultivate their Minds
with Virtue: Let, I say, Loose Livers and Tepid Souls, but reflect steadily on
these two Points, and it must needs excite in them a Sollicitous care to
improve their Wills with a fervent Love of Heaven; which may be with less
labor attained, and at a far easier rate purchased here that hereafter.

(c) The Whole Material World was created for the Salvation of good Souls, and
consequently, to breed and nourish them up in Virtue; without which Salvation
is Vnattainable and Impossible: And, it is the peculiar effect of Charity or
Virtue, to order all those Creatures we make use of as Means to compass that
Best End. Whence by the Rule of Contraries, we may gather the Hideous Enormity
of Sin; which, consisting in the Choosing some Creature for our Ultimate End,
and in the Directing all our Actions to the Attaining and Enjoying that
Perishable and False Good, does of it is own nature disorder all the World, and
ravel it into a wrong Frame and Method; and would actually Pervert the Order of
the Universe, did not the Infinite Goodness of God, to support his own Work,
and supply the Failings of his Weak Creatures, mercifully bring a Greater Good
to the World out of their Miscarriages, make a More perfect Harmony Spring out
of that Confusion; and so contrive things, that the Vices of the Wicked should
advance Holy and well-meaning Souls to a higher pitch of Virtue.

(d) As Vulgar Poets use to extol their Worldly Mistresses for their rare
Nature, the Composition and Symmetry of their Bodies, the Gracefulness and
Beauty of their Face, the Agreeableness of their Humor, the Sweetness of their
Breath, and Deliciousness of their Breasts; so all these Considerations are
turned here to a Spiritual Sense, in Commendation of Virtue under each of these
Respects.

(e) Anaxagoras the Philosopher held the Soul was made of Harmony: Too Musical
a Conceit, unless meant as here, that she is a Principle of Order. And
certainly of all Orders That is the most Harmonious, best proportioned and
Exact, which directs every thing to Man's True Last End for which his nature
was Created: A Property only belonging to Charity or Virtue.

(f) For the Order of Sublunary things passing through the hands of Creatures,
who are Themselves disabled by Weakness, or disorderd with Passion, (and
therefore in both regards Imperfect Agents) does oftentimes seem Straggling and
Perplexed: And only the Supreme Manager of the World, can bring all those
Crooked Windings to meet in a Direct Line, and knit up all those Ill-order'd
and Monstrous Actions in a Beauteous Cloze.

(g) The Love of Heaven gives a good Soul a Cheerful Contentedness, a hearty
Interior Satisfaction and Spiritual Joy, (which is therefore one of the Fruits
of the Holy Ghost) sets her above all Peevish Regrets which discompose the
minds of those who over-sollicitously affect Sublunary Goods or Temporary
things; For it is This that balances all Her Discontents by giving Her an
Inward Assurance that no Crosses or Contradictions are in the least able to
hurt Her; but on the contrary, born with a Glad Resignation, they do (as the
Apostle says) Cooperate to Her Salvation. Wherefore, this Vivacity of Spirit,
best resembles the Genius, Comportment and (as we may say) the Good Humor of
Virtue.

(h) Heaven seems often times to delay it is Spiritual Favors to increase our
Reward by striving longer and more earnestly to obtain them by our Ardent
Wishes, and Fervent Prayers; by which (as our B. Savior expresses it) the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence.

(i) Mutual Expressions of Love, between the B. Spirit desirous to diffuse its
Gifts, and Courting us to dispose our selves to receive them; and Devout Souls,
soliciting with Affectionate Wishes for Grace in the Way and Glorious Fruition
in the End.

(k) Fervent and Frequent Desires of Heaven.

(l) Angels.

(m) All Corporeal Nature, or Bodies, are Unable to move themselves, but must
be moved by another; which is the definition of an Instrument. Whence the whole
Material World is but one Great Instrument of the Intelligences or Angels,
which order and move the several parts of it according as may suit best with
the Designs of God's Providence.

(n) All our good Actions, and even Desires of Virtue, Spring from the Motions
of the Holy Ghost, breathed (as it were) into our Souls.

DEDICATION: To the COUNTESS of Newburgh.
Madam,
NAture's best Flower unblossom'd long,
And late from Riper Reason sprung,
Begs She may in your Bosom sit,
Both to Perfume and Balsome it;
And Virtue's Handmaid humbly sues
You would her sober Service use.
She prays You not to think her Light,
Framed for Fond Toys or Vain Delight,
To vapor in big Talk, or show
How much we more than others know:
She vows it is Heaven's and Her Design,
To make first Virtuous, next Divine.
Truths are her Daughters; Truths allied
To Heaven by the Fathers side.
Truths, which would their Birth disown
Did they on one another frown,
Not constantly self-link't remain
In an Inseparable Chain.
The Natural are Foundation-stones,
To bear the Supernatural ones;
Which, though they to Heaven's Top aspire,
It Is the same Ground raised Stories higher.
Blessed Soul, which to the Throne Divine
Winds it self up by it is own Line!
And, if through Ignorance's Night
Our Stumbling Nature can by the Light
Of Faith's Dark-Lanthorn to Heaven run,
What would it, guided by this Sun?
To SCIENCE, Virtue's Handmaid.
Stanza I.
(a) HAndmaid to Her
To whom my Soul does humblest Homage owe,
And far before a whole Seraglio
Of Worldly Mistresses prefer,
Daign the poor Tender of this Sprig of Bays,
My Muse to Thee and thy Relation pays.
(b) Who wooes the Mistress e're he wins the Maid,
By his preposterons Boldness has his Suit betrayed.
She is my Soul's Fire, Thou my Light;
The All-wise Hand
This Order put, and bid it stand,
E're She Heats Thoroughly Thou must first Shine Bright.
II.
Some near-acquainted Friends you have
Who this Relation wave;
Maintaining that it is Another,
And that thou art fair Virtue's Mother,
Made Pregnant by Great Father Providence
His more Particular Grace-seeding Influence.
Some call thee even Her Sister-Twin, and say
Both from same Parents came, both in the same Womb
As Light and Heat do ly
Pent in one pretty Beam glanc't down from Heavens fair Eye.
(c) Other Great Men of Art affirm they know,
That, when thou do not Monstrous grow,
Thou come to be the self-same thing;
Only differing
As Blossom from the Rose full-blown,
Or Tender Damsel from her self now a Stayed Matron grown.
And that, as the Early Sun,
New sprung from the Cool Morning Horizon,
At first only with Light
Visibly affects our Sight;
But, bowling on his Ball of Fire,
Up to his high Meridian Spire,
Still, as he goes, in Heat he thrives,
Till, when he there arrives,
His self-redoubled Beams
Become at length advanced into Flame-darting Streams,
So Vigorous Active Virtue's no New thing at all,
But only Strengthened Science now made Vertical;
Which into Virtue grows, not fades away,
As faint-light Morn spreads into full Noonday.
III.
Be her Relation what it will,
She is Subordinate to Virtue still;
And amongst her many Titles this is best,
She Is made to advance Great Virtue's Interest.
Pardon, Bright Maid, if Virtue we prefer,
And make thy Height humbly submit to Her;
Pardon Thy Self, Dear, if I be too Bold,
For 'twas Thy Self this Truth unto me told:
Thy Self-indifferent Self, which can deny
This Truth no more than Truth it self can ly.
Yet I swear, Science, by the Fair-sweet Hand
Of Sacred Virtue, our Loves Faithful Band;
Were Heaven as fond Atheists dream,
Naught but an Idle Theme,
And Solid Virtue but an Aerie Name,
No Bliss at all deserving,
But only vainly serving
To blow the Empty Trump of Fame,
That is, were She not She,
Thou my First Mistress, Thou my Love should be.
I know the Ancients of Philosophy,
That silly Rabble
Whose false-pretended Love of Truth was spent in Babble,
Did with Preposterous Civility
Neglect Fair Virtue, only Courting Thee;
But sunk by this so deep in Thy Disgrace,
They scarce obtained one Constant Look from Thy sweet Face.
Rather, indeed, I fear, in stead of Thee,
They wooed some othe'r Imaginary She;
And, like to Men in Dreams, they idly talked
Of some fine Faiery Toy that in their Fancies walked:
For they that know not where their Journey ends,
How should they Science know, the Way that thither tends?
IV.
(d) Thou art that Rare
Rich Chain of Gold let down
From Heaven's sure-fixt Throne,
Which ties the Earth, his Footstool, to Joves Chair.
Jacob's well-fram'd Ladder; which
Presses Earth, yet Heaven does reach:
Whence by immediate Steps we climb
From Nature 'bove the sphere of Time,
And with Familiar Sight descry
What Vulgar Eyes think Mystery.
Adam, until he was unmann'd
By that Fair Apple, dish't up in Eve's Fairer Hand,
And that sin-poyson'd Fruit its Venom spread,
On better Meat, Blessed Contemplation, fed.
Each Lively and Full-breasted Thought
A Rich Meal brought,
Made up of daintiest Rarities,
Which took Root in his own, branch't to the Supernal Paradise.
But when the Black Fiend, Sin, possessed
It Is cursed self of his Soul's Breast,
Her same-colour'd Friend and Shade,
Dark Ignorance,
Did his besotted Soul invade
And all his former Powers Intrance.
His Vigorous Knowledge was thereby
Doz'd to a stupid Lethargy;
Which saddest Legacy we inherit still,
A Dark Night in our Mind, a Dull Sleep in our Will.
V.
But Thou, Bright Science, do dispel
Those Lazy Mists exhaled from Hell,
Which stifle Virtue, cloud our Day,
Reflect, or else Refract Heavens Ray.
Thou rescu'st Reason, purgest Sense
From that Original Offense.
And, as who Lovely Objects spies
By the Soul's Spectacles and Burning-Glass, the Eyes,
Catches Love's Fire
With far more Vigorous Desire
Than others could
By what dull Sounds and Hearsay told;
Such is the Advantage Thou win'st here,
As Sight are Sound, and Eye over Ear.
Thy clear Proposals gather, and draw Heaven in
Through the Soul's widen'd Pores, and squeez out putrid Sin.
(e) Faith but supplies thy room, and brings
Heaven wrapped in Words, thou writ in Things:
Faith's Lesson all may read that look,
But thine's the Clearer, yet the Harder Book;
Oh Book! Oh World! Oh Sun clad in thin shade!
Oh Book the Best, and All that God e're made!
Dull Clods, Drops, Sparks thou seem to be,
Small Atoms of Great Entity;
But, Big with GOD is thy each part,
And Vaster Truths far than thy Whole Self art.
VI.
The Architect, and Owner of this All
Delivered out in Gross
The All-rich Ball,
In Number, Measure, Weight,
Proportioned aright,
And bid us Traffic with 't and thrive;
But we were at a Loss,
None could into it is hidden Treasures rightly dive;
'Till his Wise Steward, Science, came,
Acquainted with her Master's Will,
And with rare Skill
(f) Did subtly take in pieces the vast Frame;
And to Heavens Merchandise the more to woo us,
Detail'd in Parcels, and chaw'd small the too-great Morsel to us.
When Prudence, the wise Governess
Of Virtue's Family, would try
A Pattern of her perfect Managery,
And Rational Actions, her sweet Children, dress;
Fixing upon them in fit places
Her whole bright Set of Circumstantial Graces;
By thy square, Science, she each Line does draw,
And makes thy Word her Rule, thy Dictates Law.
VII.
(g) When Virtue her self to Heaven a Journey takes,
And quaintly dresses
Her shining Tresses
With the most Curious and Enamouring Art,
To ravish so the High King's Heart;
Fair Science, thy Bright Eye her Looking-Glass she makes.
In thine Eye, Reasons best Mirror,
She can spy each slender Error,
And the least Blemish of Deformity,
(h) What Is wrinkled, loosely set, or pinned awry.
(i) When Music would the ravished Soul beguile
To dwell in the Ear's Labyrinth a while,
(Nature's well-ecchoing Musick-room)
Whither repairs
A pretty Quire of nimble light-foot Airs,
Ferry'd over in quavering Undulations
Interwoven on a thousand Fashions;
And there presents an unseen Masque of Sounds,
Sent from the Tattling Strings, or Whistling Pipes Rebounds:
While She makes Friends in Consort each Discording Part,
Her Art tunes Instruments, but Science tunes her Art.
VIII.
Thou art that Bright
Reserve of Light
For the Wise Church, when grown
From Unripe Nonage to her Manly Noon.
Her Youth's Schoolmaster, dark Credulity,
Too weak to govern mankind now a Child no longer
But fit for the University,
Will her dear Charge to Thee in Part resign
And those Soul-binding Charms of thine,
To govern such a Freeborn Subject stronger.
GOD is the Fountain-Sun, Thou his ne're-changing Moon,
That deal'st as great a share of Borrowed Light
As can consist with our Flesh-veiled sight:
Fair Dawning to Bright Bliss, Dark Nature's fullest Noon.
IX.
But, ah! my lisping Lyre
Is now quite spent, yet Thou art still Entire.
Farewell Bright Science, thrice farewell:
Yet part not from
My Soul, such kind of Houses use to be thy Home.
Nature has built Thee there fine (k) Crystal Rooms;
And I will woo
Virtue her self to strew
There for Thee her Best Perfumes.
The Fabric thou wilt embrave beyond all Art and Praise
With thy own Soul-guilding Rays.
There, there vouchsafe to dwell,
There, there farewell.
Farewell in me, and thy Dear Self improve
To Full Light in my Head, and, in my Heart, Firm Love.
FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS.
(a) WHat is meant here by Science, is already declared in the Preface; viz.
All those Knowledges, whether acquired by Prayer or Study, which, superadded to
Faith, are apt to render it Lively. And indeed, should we restrain the common
signification of that word (which imports no more but Knowledge) to the
Stricter Sense in which the Schools take it, nothing ought (even speaking of
Natural Objects) in true speech to be called Science, unless it be in some Sort
derived from God, and by means of that Derivation, be apt to raise us to the
Knowledge of Him: For, since all Truths are Connected, and Science is the
Knowing of things by their Causes; hence, only such Knowledges as relate to the
First Truth, and inform us of the Derivation of Things from the First Cause, or
of their Connection with it, can pretend to the Honor of being reputed True
Sciences: For which reason the Epicureans, who deny a First Cause, and hold all
things to be done by Chance, can lay no Claim to Scientifical Knowledge of any
thing in Nature; Whence, of all other Sects of Philosophers, Their Principles
are the most Absurd, Precarious, and Inconsistent.

Moreover, Science is intended to Perfect the Understanding Faculty; but when
it is Practical, and fits the Soul for Action, that is (in our case) for the
Love of God, then it is Full, Lively, and in that state, which makes Science be
as it should be, that is Unmixt with Ignorance: Whereas, when it is merely
Speculative and Unactive, it is Weak, Faint, ofttimes Airy, and always (as to
Heaven) Useless; and by reason of it is Imperfection, being alloy'd with some
degree of Ignorance, it degenerates from the Sincere and Genuine nature of
Knowledge. For it is to be noted, that Virtue and Science are here treated of,
as in their Abstracted Ideas, or as perfectly depur'd from all their
Imperfections; as may be seen in the third Stanza upon Virtue, and in the 7th.
and 8th. Stanzas here. With which it may well consist, that there may be many
inferior Degrees of both of them, that are not acquired either by Art of
Contemplation, but are Instilled by the Common Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church, which may suffice to bring Souls to Heaven sooner or later, though they
may not perhaps come so high, as to dispose them Immediately for the Beatifical
Vision; this being only attainable by those, who are Pure in Heart, and
cleans'd from all Inordinate By-Affections to Creatures; which requires more
than Common Illuminations.

(b) For the Connatural way to Love any things, is to Know and Conceit Lively
the Goodness that is in it; and therefore Regularly, and in due order of
Nature, according to the Express and Lively Knowledge a Soul has of Celestial
Goods; so great in proportion is her Love of them. Whence, whenever she falls
into Sin, or Loves not Heaven as she ought, it is because some Temporary or
False Good, making a more Agreeable Appearance to her at that unlucky Season,
the Knowledge of the Incomparable Good of Heaven, which she had before, is
Darkened and Dimmed by Passion, or (which is the same) by too much affection to
some Creature; according to that saying of Divines, Omnis peccans ignorant,
Every one that sins is (to some degree) Ignorant. How far Ignorance is Culpable
or Excusable, belongs to that Great Judge to determine who knows the Heart?
Only this we can certainly affirm in common, by the Light we have from
Christian Principles, that whenever the affection to any Creature so besots and
Blinds us that we do not Love Heaven above all things, but fail in those Duties
which only can dispose us to attain it, we are plunging our Souls into that sad
condition, which, unrepented of, must inevitably bring us to Eternal Misery;
when our Jolly Days, so carelessly spent, are past, which God only knows how few
they may be.

(c) To illustrate this Point held by some Great Divines, we may reflect, that,
as when in other Animals the Brain is Full of Species, or Particles received
from any Object that is agreeable to their Natures, it happens, that by this
Total possessing of the Fancy, abundance of Spirits are sent forth thence into
other parts, whence the Animal becomes Active and Eager to pursue it; which
Principle or Power of Acting we use to call Appetite or Sensitive Love of it:
In the same manner, when, in a Rational Creature or Man, the Understanding is
Wholly taken up with the Knowledge of Heaven, clearly appearing to it as its
only True and Eternal Good, that Fullness of Heavenly Thoughts excludes and
hinders the Co-existence, much more the Competition of the deluding and
seducing Appearances of Transitory Goods; whence the whole Man strains toward
the attainment of it, and becomes Active to pursue; which Knowledge, now made a
strong Practical Judgment and Operative, does the same that the Will uses and
is to do, and therefore (say they) it is the same Power which we call the Will:
Whence the Great St. Austin, no less solidly than acutely, says that the
Understanding and Will do differ as Luna semiplena and plena; that is, as the
Moon Half-full and Full.

To apply this to our Point in hand: In the same manner that these Powers,
called the Understanding and Will, do differ; so, in the same proportion
(according to this Opinion) must Knowledge and Love of Heaven, (that is,
Science and Virtue) which are the Acts, or rather Habits, of those Powers be
distinct also; and the Difference between them, if we take Knowledge as in its
perfect State, is this, that the One is considered as received from Outward
Objects, and perfecting the Soul interiourly, as it is Intellective; and the
Other, as it has respect to those Acts it is to produce, and to the End it is
apt to work for or pursue.

The Usefulness of this Doctrine may seem to evince its Truth: For, hence we
may clearly see that the only secure way to resist Temptations, to avoid Sin,
to raise our Souls to Heaven and keep them up at that pitch, and (in a word) to
manage our Actions so as to attain to Salvation, consists in this, that either
we fix and rivet in our Minds by wise Reflections strong and steady Habitual
Judgments of the Incomparable Good of Heavenly Bliss, and of the Nothingness in
comparison of all Temporary Goods, which is the Way Proper for the Learned and
more Elevated Souls. Or else by Frequent Dints and Impressions made by constant
Prayer, Devout Reading, Pious Discourses, Use of Sacraments, etc. To lay up in
our Souls Great store of Spiritual Ideas, and Express conceits of Heavenly
Objects, so that they may be ready and at hand to make head against, and subdue
the Weaker Band of the Impressions made by False Goods assaulting our Fancies
with their Glossy and Sophisticate appearances, and Tempting us to follow their
Sinful Suggestions. For our constant Experience informs us upon a Cursory
Reflection, that we never Conquer in our Spiritual Warfare, but when we are well
furnished with such Heavenly Ideas, which keep our Soul upon her Guard, and
Fortify her with the Lively Representations of our True Good; and that, on the
other side, we are never Overcome, but when, through our Neglecting to stand
prepared for our Christian Battle, we have either Ranged but a Thin Troop of
Heavenly Thoughts on Reasons fide; or else, through our Slack Discipline, we keep
them not Watchful to repel the Fiery Darts of Concupiscence, which our Ghostly
Enemy makes use of when he assails us. Whence Assiduity and Constancy in our
Spiritual Exercises, and Devout Duties, not for Fashions sake, but out of a
Sincere and True Intention to bear up to Heaven, is the Only Sure and Effectual
way to attain it; and whenever we grow Careless and Negligent in performing
those Duties, we do most certainly lie Exposed to the Stratagems of our
Adversary the Devil, and are in imminent danger of being Spiritually Wounded by
Sin; and if that Wound be Mortal, of Spiritual Death, Eternal Damnation.

(e) Had all Men Perfect Science of the Excellency of Heavenly Bliss (of which
we only Treat here) Faith would not be needful for that particular; neither
(if all other Respects were Equal) would there be so much Sin in the World?
Which is one Reason why the Saints in Heaven are absolutely incapable of
Sinning, or falling from their Happy State.

(f) By considering the Particularities, found in each Piece of Nature, apart;
which, thus singled out, become fit to be the Objects of the several Sciences
that Treat of them: Whereas, were those Distinct Considerations blended
together confusedly as they are found in the Thing it self, our Imperfect way
of Knowing, being unable to comprehend the whole Object, and all the several
Respects that belong to it at one Intuitive View (as do the Angels) and
consequently, not being able to fathom it, we could not have any Science at all
of it.

(g) To accomplish a Soul in Exact Virtue, either our own Knowledge, enabling
us to look thoroughly into Christian Principles and our own Interior; or, the
Guidance of Skilful and Knowing Spiritual Directors is absolutely necessary;
without which many Imperfections and Deviations from the straight Rule of
Christian Morality must needs happen.

(h) That is, what is Uneven and Inconsistent; what Tepid and Weak through want of
Habitual Steadiness and ^^rmness; and what is against the Exact Rule of Christ's
most Immaculate Law, or beside that Rule.

(i) It being too tedious, and indeed impertinent, to mention the other Liberal
Sciences, notice is here taken of Music only; which is used in all Public
Solemnities as an Incitement to Devotion, and absolutely necessary for Sacred
Poesy, (Psalms and Hymns) in which the most Soul-melting Strains of Piety are
delivered.

(k) An Intellectual or Spiritual Nature.

FINIS.

