AN ACCOUNT OF THE SCOTTISH ATLAS, OR THE DESCRIPTION OF SCOTLAND ANCIENT and
MODERN, BY His Sacred MAJESTY'S special Command To be published presently, BY
Sir ROBERT SIBBALD D. M. His MAJESTY'S Physician in Ordinary, and Geographer
for His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

EDINBURGH, Printed by DAVID LINDSAY, Mr. JAMES KNIBLO, JOSUA van SOLINGEN and
JOHN COLMAR. M.DC.LXXXIII.

Mark ALEXANDER BOYDS Verses in commendation of Scotland translated out of
Latin by J. B.
A Noble place near the Pole Artick lies,
Which on each side the Sea with Waters plies.
Yet is it not sore pinched with Winter-Frost,
Nor do the Sun's hot fiery Beams it roast.
To which both Name and Honor Scota brings
A Noble Branch of the Egyptian Kings.
Their Granaries she filled with store of Corn;
Laws and Religion stablish'd, them t'adorn.
Their Vales with Corns, Pastures with Flocks abound;
Store of rich Metals in their Mines are found.
Nor does this Plenty make them idle sit:
Artificers they have of skill and wit.
Though gentle-natur'd, soon they fly to Arms;
Not more devout, than causing hot Alarms.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE WORK Designed, OR THE SCOTTISH ATLAS To be Published.
AMongst the many Sciences, which perfect and adorn the mind of man, Geography
is worthy of all praise: because it both affords matter of much delight, and
likewise is of much use for the life of man. This World being a Theater,
whereupon each act their Part, and by the several Personages, which they
represent, very much demonstrate the mavelous Wisdom, Power and Goodness of
GOD, who has contrived all for the perfection of the Universe his great Work,
and by his never erring Providence brings all about to the accomplishment of
his good will and pleasure: Man, who is the lesser World and Abridgement of the
Greater, cannot but find the advantages of Geography, by which we see all the
parts of this great Machine, even which are most remote from us, and look upon
these who are absent, as if they were present with us. What delight must it
give us, when we learn by it the Situation of Countries, Towns and Rivers, as
well as if we had viewed them with our eyes! It is certain that most of men
have a great desire to travel, and it is certainly an inexcusable fault to be
ignorant of what concerns our own Country: Yet many, because of their
poverty or want of health, are deprived of these Advantages. And therefore we
are much beholden to Geography, by which all the face of the World is exposed
to us, and we can even sitting at home view the whole Earth and Seas, and much
sooner pass through them in our studies, than Travelers can do by their
Voyages; and so may, without the hazard of being infected by the vices of
Forreiners, improve our minds and reap all other Advantages from them. Not to
mention here, how the Policy of each place, the studies of Theology, of Natural
Philosophy, History and several Arts may be improved by this knowledge. I shall
only instance in Merchandising, Navigation and the Pactice of Medicine.

And for Merchandising, (which with Navigation is the great support of
corporations) it can hardly be entertained without the knowledge of the
Countries and their Products, of the nature and manners of the Inhabitants and
Rodes that lead to them, which the Maps and descriptions joined to them inform
us of; and by the Maps the Mariners come to know the situation of the Countries
they intend for, the Rout they are to follow and the Dangers they are to be
aware of.

As for the Practice of Medicine, Hippocrates has abundantly proven, that a
Physician, who would practice aright, must first know the place. Lib. de Aere,
Aquis and Locis.


Now considering these great uses of Geographical Descriptions, many complained
that there was so little done, as to the Description of our Country: For the
Theater of Scotland published by Bleau, for all its Bulk (except it be the
Description of some few shires by the learned Gordon of Straloch, and some
sheets of his of the Scotia Antiqua) contains little more than what Buchanan
wrote, and some few Scrapes out of Cambden, who is no friend to us in what he
writes. And in respect that there are many Islands around this Ancient Kingdom
of Scotland; and many impetuous and contrary Currents and Tides, and in several
places the Coast is full of Rocks, or Banks of sand, which ought to be exactly
described for the security of Trade. And because the face of the Country, by
the peace and quiet we enjoy under his Majesty's happy Government, is quite
changed from what it was of old; and now for Stately Buildings, Parks, fertile
Fields, we begin to contend with the happiest of our Neighbors: therefore a
new and full description was much desired by all ingenious persons.

For these considerations His Sacred Majesty, the Father of his Country, and
gracious and wise provisor of all that may be for the profit and honor of it,
has commanded and ordained, by His Letters patent under the Seal, Sir Robert
Sibbald one of His Phisicians in ordinary and His Geographer for His Ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, to publish an exact description of Scotland Ancient and
Modern, with the Maps. And, that the Maps may be exact and just, the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council in Scotland gave Commission to John Adair
Mathematician and skillful Mechanic, to survey the Shires. And the said John
Adair, by taking the distances of the several Angles from the adjacent Hills,
has designed most exact Maps, and has lately made an Hydrographical Map of
the River of Forth Geometrically surveyed, Wherein, after a new and exact way,
are set down all the Isles, blind Rocks, Shelves and Sands, with an exact
Draught of the Coasts, with all its Bays, Head lands, Ports, Havens, Towns,
and other things remarkable; the Depths of the Watters through the whole
Firth, with the Courses from each Point, the prospect and view of the
remarkable Islands, Head-lands, and other considerable landmarks. And he is
next to survey the Shire of Perth, and to make two Maps thereof, one of the
south side, and another of the North. He will likewise be ready to design the
maps of the other Shires, that were not done before, providing he may have
sufficient allowance therefore. And, that these, who are concerned, may be the
better persuaded thereto, there is joined with this Account the Map of
Clackmanan-Shire taken off the Copper-Plate done for it, where may be seen not
only the Towns, Hills, Rivers and Lochs; but also the different face of the
grounds, which are Arable, and which Moorish: and by convenient Marks you may
know the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, the Churches, Mills, woods and
Parks etc,

In obedience to His Majesty's command, the said Sir Robert Sibbald printed
Queries for obtaining the Information that was necessary for the Description of
each Shire; and has been at the pains to collect several Manuscripts Ancient
and Modern, which may illustrate the said work; and has recovered several
Ancient Inscriptions, which were never published before; and has now made that
advance in the work, that if the rest of the Informations from the Shires be
sent in shortly, and these few Shires be designed, which are not yet done, this
Description in English (whereof this is the Account) may be very soon ready for
the Press. For the further encouragement of these, who may be Subscribers for
the Copies, it is fit there be some Account of it given, which is as follows.

The said Atlas Scoticus or Description of Scotland Ancient and Modern is to be
in two Volumes; the one in Latin, the other in English.

The Atlas in Latin may contain about an hundred printed sheets of large
Lumbard-Paper, in the great Letter the Atlas is usually done upon: and it will
contain some seventy Maps, whereof there are upwards of twenty more than are in
the Theatrum Scotiae done by J. Bleau; and of these several are exactly
surveyed. In this Latin Copy the Scotia Antiqua will take up more than twenty
sheets of Print, and is done exactly from the Greek and Roman Authors, and the
best Manuscripts and Ancient Records. The contents of the several Books are set
down in the Latin Account premised.

The Scotia Moderna likewise is done in Latin, according to the account given
there, so it remains that there be ane account given of the Atlas in English,
which is to be published first.

The Atlas of Scotland in English may contain eighty sheets of printed large
Lumbard paper, and about seventy Maps. It is divided into two parts, the
General and the special part. The General part Contains the general
description of Scotland, where there is a short Description of Britain and
Ireland. Then Albanie or Ancient Scotland is briefly described, where the names
and the reason of them are given; the condition of the Country from its first
discovery and Possession till the coming in of the Romans; whence they came,
where the first Inhabitants are showed and the several Nations that frequented
it then; and the customs, manners, Religion and Government of the State under
that Period are made known. Then the condition of the Kingdom, while the Romans
were here, how far they prevailed, what Monuments they left, the division of
the Country and Names of the People then, the condition of the Picts till
their Overthrow, and the planting of the Christian Religion in Scotland is
manifested; The state of Religion and Government from thence till Malcom
Canmore, in whose time the English Tongue, and the Titles, Manners, Customs of
Living, which is now, was introduced. There is an Account also of the
Foreigners, that invaded us during this Period.

To Ancient Scotland belong these Maps. Albion and Ireland, With the lesser
adjacent Islands. The Map of the British Islles, done by Ortelius. A New Table
of Albania or the Most ancient Scotland. Ancient Scotland, done by Robert
Gordon of Straloch.


Then Scotland, as it is now, is described, where is showed the Extent and the
Bounds of it, the Latitude of it, the Figure of it, under what Climate and
Parallels; the length of the longest Day there; the Division of Scotland into
three Peninsulae, the South one, the Middle one and the North one, The Rivers
upon each side running far into the Country are separated by a small Tract of
Land from meeting, else they would make three Islands of the continent of
Scotland. It is also divided by the Mountains, and by the Quality of the Soil,
and Nature of the Inhabitants and their different manner of life, into the
High-Lands and Low-lands, and the Highlanders and Low-land-men. And by the
several Jurisdictions it is divided into Shires, Stewartries, Baileries,
Bishoprics; which are showed, with the Counties under them. Formerlie it was
divided into two Kingdoms; that of the Scots, and that of the Picts, beside the
Roman Province.

The Islands about Scotland are showed, and there is an Account given of the
Nature and Quality of the Soil, and the natural products of it: viz. the
grains, Potherbs and Fruits, and other useful Plants; The Animals; Four-footed
Beasts domestic and wild, the Fouls, the Fishes, the Insects; The Metals and
Minerals, the substances cast up by the Sea, the Mineral Waters; The Advantages
by the Sea for Trade and Fishing; The great Rivers Forth, Clide and Tay, with
their Firths, of each of which there are particular Maps, with full
Descriptions of them; The Lochs and the rare properties of some of them.

There is an Account of the Air of Scotland, where the Winds are treated of,
and the Advantages and Disadvantages the Country has by them.

The Nature of the Country Hilly and and Mountainous; how these Hillsruns
through the Country. Of the Woods and Forests, Heaths or Moors, and Mosses.

An Account of the ancient Inhabitants, their Diet, Drink; their Exercise,
Clothing; their Arms, Discipline of War, their Valor, strict Justice,
Learning and Arts; their Trade, nature of their Government before the Kings;
Their Ancient Religion; Of the Druides; Their Ancient Burials, and the
Dignities in use amongst them; The rise of their Property.

The History of the Alliance betwixt the Scots and the French begun in the time
of Charlemaigne and Achaius, and continued to our times. The Advantages and
Privileges the Scots got in France, The establishments of the Scots in other
Countries. The many Scots Families settled abroad.

The Nature and Qualities of the present Inhabitants. Their Diet, Exercises,
Recreations and Games. Their Apparel, their Language, their Humor. Of their
Trade; the Commodities exported.

The Nobles, their several Degrees; the Names of them according to the Order of
the Parliament-Rolls.

The Clergy; the several Orders of them. the Archbishops and the Bishops their
Dignity, their Chapters, their Jurisdiction; exent of their Dioceses; their
Courts.

The Gentry; the several Ranks of them, Whereof the Ancient order of the
Thistle.

The Commons, and the several orders of them

The Royal Buroughs; the list of them, their Privileges.

The Religion of Scotland under the several Periods.

Many of old famous for their Sanctity.

The Universities and Colleges of Scotland; their Constitution.

The Scots famous for all sort of Learning and Arts, for several new
Inventions. Many of the Nobility and Gentry educate abroad; many famous for
their valor and Conduct; Many of them General Officers abroad.

A List of the Bishops and Archbishops of Sanct-Anrews since the time of the
Picts,

An Account of sixty of the Pictish Kings out of a Manuscript.

An account of the Kings of Scotland.

The State of the Government done by his Majesty's Advocate.

Of the King and His Prerogative; the Succession to the Crown, Ancient
Dominion. The Revenue of the King of Scotland. The Power of the King of
Scotland.

Of the Officers of State. The Officers of the Crown.

Of the Courts of Scotland and the Constitution of them.

Of the High Court of Parliament: Where of the Electors, the Members, the
Solemnity at the riding of the Parliament, the ranking of the Members. How they
sit in Parliament; the manner of Procedure in Parliament. Of the Lords of the
Articles. What the Parliament cognosceth.

The Convention of Estates; the Nature of it.

The Privy Council; the power of it.

The Session: the number of the Lords and Clerks, their Habits.

The Outerhouse, Inner-house Matters that come before them. The Law of
Scotland. The time the Session sits.

The Justice-Court; the Constitution of it.

The Court of Exchequer; the Nature of it,

The Court of Admirality; the Privileges of the High Admiral.

The High Constables Court; its Nature.

The Court of Regality; its constitution.

The Sherif-Court; the Constitution of it.

The Stewart's Court; the Nature of it.

The Baron's Court; the Nature of it.

The Commissary Court; the Nature of it.

The Lyon's Court; its Nature.

The Royal-Burroughs their Constitution.

The Burrough-Courts their constitution. Where of the Convention of Buroughs.
its Nature.

Of the Burghs of Regality their Nature.

Of Burghs of Baronie their Nature.

Of the Justices of Peace their power.

The Forces, where of the Military Government.

Of the Mint, where of the Money of Scotland.

The Government of the Church. Where of the several Ecclesiastic courts; of
their Nature. Of the Kirk Session. The Presbyteries, their Number; The Synods.
The Highest court, the Convocation. The number of the Parishes in Scotland.

Of the Commission for Teynds and Plantation of Churches.

Of the Commission for the Fishery,

These make up the first Part, viz. the General Description of Scotland.

The Second part of the Scotia Moderna is the special, wherein the Shires and
Counties, and the Islands are particularly described.

Scotland is divided into the Continent and the Isles.

The Continent most conveniently is divided into three Penninsulae by the three
Isthmi or narrow Necks of Land.

The first is the South-part, which toward the South is divided from England
by the River of Tweed, and, Where it fails by a Line drawn from Solway-Firth;
toward the North from the rest of the continent by the Firth and River of
Forth, and a short Line from thence to Clide, by which and its Firth it is
divided from the North-west-part of Scotland. Of this part there is a new Map,
the Counties contained in this part (of all which there are Maps) are these.
Mers. Lauderdale. West-Lothian. Teviotdale. Mid-Lothian. East-Lothian Twadale.
Lids-dale. Eus-dale and Esk-dale. Adnandale. Nides-dale. All Galloway.
Sherifdome of Wigtoun. The country betwixt the Water of Dee and Cree. The
Stewartrie of Kircudbright. South part of Carrick. North part of Carrick. Kyle.
Cuninghame. The upper ward of Clids-dale. The Nether ward of Clids-dale.
Renfrew. Sterling-Shire.


The Middle part of the continent has, to the South, the Firth and River of
Forth, and the Line betwixt it and the River and Firth of Clide; to the west
and East, the Sea; and, toward the North, it is parted from the rest of the
continent of Scotland by the water and Loch of Lochty in Lochaber, and a line
from the foresaid Loch through a short Neck of Land to the Rise of the Loch and
River of Ness. You may see it in a new Map thereof. It contains these
following Counties and Shires whereof there are particular Maps. All Fife. The
West part of it. The East part of it. Angus.


The south part of Perth-Shire, where are Strathearn, Bequhider, Strathallan
and Menteith. The water of Earn is done in the Map of Tay, and with it there is
a plan of the Roman camp at Airdoch.

The North-part of Perth-Shire, where are Braid-Albin, Athole the Rannoch,
Glen-Lyon, the Over and Lower Gourie.

Calckmanan Shire. Lennox. The Sherifdome of Argyle, or Innerara, where are
Knapdale, Kintyre. Cewal, Lorn. Knapdale. Lorn. Kintyre. Aberdeen and
Bamf-Shire. Braid-Albin, Athol, Brae of Mar, Badenoch, Spey and Lochaber.
Lochaber. Mernes. Murray.
The Northern part of the Continent has, to the South, the Water and Loch of
Lochty, and a short Line from thence to Loch-Ness and the Water of Ness; to the
West and East, it has the Sea; and to the North, the Sea. It may be seen in
the Map entitled Extima Scotiae Septentrionalis Ora, and contains these
Countries, Ross, Sutherland, Strathnavern, Caithness; that part of Lochaber on
the North side of Lochty Water, and Loch Edir, Chilis and Assin. The Countries,
of which there are Maps, are these; Ross. Sutherland. Strathnavern. Caithness.


And this is for the Continent of Scotland. The Isles are divided into the West
Isles, the North-Isles and the Isles lying to the East.

The Islands lying to the East are these, which ly in the Firth of Forth, and
may be seen in the Map of Forth and are described with it.

The West-Isles are these called Hebrides and Aebudae, and of them there are
these following Maps. Aebudae, or the West-Isles. Aran. Boot. Lews and Harris.
Lews, Harris and SKY in a Map together. Ila. Jura. Viste. Mulla.


The lesser Islands Rumm, Canna, Egg, Muck.

The North-Islands, as these of Orckney and Schetland; and the Maps of them are
these.

A Map of Orkney and Schetland.

A new Map of Orkney, with the Roads and Harbors.

A most exact new Map of Orkney, with the Forelands, Rocks and dangerous places
marked, done Mr. by James Wallace Minister of Kirckwall in Orkney.

A new Map of Schetland.

Besides these there is a Hydrographic Map of the Seacoast from the Island of
Cocket to Orkney.

THE SECOND PART OF The SCOTIA Moderna.
IN this second Part, which contains the Descriptions of each Shire and the
Countries in it, and of the Islands, There is also an Account given of the
names, situation, bounds of each Country; the nature of the Country, and
these Products Nature has formed in it are showed. The Forests, Woods, Parks;
the Springs, Rivers, Lochs, with their various Properties. What Mountains,
Valleys, Caves most remarbable, that it may be known what in every place
abounds and may be communicate to other Countries; and what is wanting, that it
may be carried in to them in order to Trade. The Plants, Animals, Metals,
Substances cast up by the Sea.

As to Rivers, the Rise of them and their Emboucheurs are showed, and in the
adjacent Sea the Roads, Bays, Ports and Harbors are described; the Roks and
Sholes on the Coast, and the time of the Moon that causes High Water is marked.

The Ancient Monuments, Forts and Camps, Inscriptions, graved and figured
Stones; the Singularites of Nature or Art, that are there, or have been found
there.

The great Battles that have been there fought, and the memorable Actions or
Accidents there.

The Towns of Note in each Shire, especially Buroughs Royal; their Magistracy,
the Trade of the Town. Their public Buildings, their Jurisdiction, their
Hospitals and Workhouses. The Market Towns in each Shire.

The Monasteries, Cathedral Churches, Ancient Churches, Colleges and Public
Schools.

The Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants in each Shire, their Manufactures.

The Government of each Shire and Country; in what Diocese it is; who is
Sherif, Stewart or Bailie there. Who commands the Militia there. The Castles,
Forts, Woods, Forests, Parks belonging to his Majesty there. What places give
Title to Noblemen there; and the Seats of the Noblemen and most considerable
Gentrey.

There is ane Account likewise of the Temperature of each Country, the Ancient
Inhabitants of it.

And, for illustration of the Work, the Dignities and Privileges of several
Noble Families, and the Rise and Branches of them are showed.

The Constitution of the Royal Burghs, their Privileges, and their Longitude
and Latitude is showed.

The Constitution of the Universities, their Privileges, their Foundations,
Bibliothecs and rare Instruments are recorded. And whatsoever of these
occurreth in the Islands is showed in the Description of them.

Printed Books and Manuscripts not yet come to my hand, which I entreat may be
sent to me: and after I have made use of them for the Work, they shall be
restored.
1. The Navigation of King James the fifth around his Kingdom, with the Maps;
whatever Language it be in, and Whether Manuscript or Printed. 2. Cornelius
Hibernicus. 3. Veremundus. 4. Joannes a Campo bello, or Cambell. 5. Turgot. 6.
Liber Sconae. 7. Liber Pasletensis. 8. Liber Pluscartensis. 9. William
Elphinhstoun Bishop of Aberdeen his Treatise of the Scottish Antiquities. 10.
The History of Scotland done by Dempster and mentioned in his Apparatus ad
Historiam Scoticam. 11. Andersonus de Sanctis Scotis. 12. The History of the
family of the Gordons. 13. The Government of Scotland, written by Straloch. 14.
Remarques, done by one who traveled through most of the West-Isles. 15. The
new Map of Shetland, with the exact Description thereof.
And what else in Manuscript or Print may be for the further advancement and
embellishment of the Work, is humbly desired; And there shall be an honorable
acknowledgment of these persons, who transmit the Manuscripts or Printed Books
with assurance that they shall be returned to them again. The Work being a
public Work and so much for the honor of the Nation, it is hoped, that all
ingenious persons will contribute the necessary Information in Answer to the
General Queries conjoined with the Proposal and there shall be a due
commendation of them set down in the Work.

It is earnestly desired, that the Informations anent the several Countries,
Towns and Universities may be sent to the Author betwixt and Martimass ensuing:
for that it is resolved (if so be there be a sufficient number of Subscribers
to encourage the Work) they shall begin God willing, to print the Atlas of
Scotland in English once in January next 1684.

Relations given in for the WORK.
1. ANe Account of the Government and the Laws, done by Sir George Mackenzie
his Majesty's Advocate 2. Ane account of Rona and Hirta by the Lord Register,
Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbat. 3. Observations by the same Noble Person. 4.
Account of the Metals and Minerals in Scotland by Colonel Borthwick. 5. The
Honors and Privileges of the High Constable of Scotland. 6. Answers to the
General Queries concerning Caithness, given by Mr. William Dundass of Wester
Kincavile Advocate. 7. Some Account of Sutherland, and of the Family of Suther
land given in by Mr. Douglas. 8. A Relation of the most considerable things
observable in Orknay by Mr. Matthew Mackaile, who stayed several years there. 9.
Ane account of the Current of the Tides there by the same. 10. Observations of
several remarkable things in Caithness by the same. 11. Memorandum of the
Minerals in Scotland, containing the places where they are found by Colonel
Borthwick. 12. Ane description of Shetland, and of the fishing there made upon
the place. 13. Ane account of the Burgh Royal of Hadingtoun from the
Magistrates thereof. 14. Ane account of the Miraculous cure of mad people, at
Saint Mackassac well in Stratherne, Extracted from the Trial the Presbitery of
Sterling made thereanent. 15. A description of the North East part of Aberdeen
Shire, by the Right Honorable the present Countess of Erroll. 16. Ane account
of the Leakies in the River of Forth by the Reverend Mr. Wright Minister at
Alloway.
The PROPOSALS FOR The PRINTING the SCOTTISH ATLAS.
WHereas DAVID LINDSAY is to undertake the printing of this Description of
Scotland, Ancient and Modern, in the English and Latin Languages and is with
all possible diligence to proceed thereto.

And for many considerations is to make use of the Paper the Acts of Parliament
were lately printed on, for the Description, the Lumbard paper amounting to a
Greater expense then most of the Curious, will be at the charge of The said
DAVID LINDSAY, will find sufficient Security to deliver to the Subscribers for
the English Copy (which will consist of upwards of one hundred sheets, Folio,
in a greater letter then that the Acts of Parliament are done upon) one Copy in
sheets against the middle of January 1685. Which is to contain the Description
without the Mapps, each Subscriber paying for the said Copy twenty Shillings
Sterling, whereof ten is to be advanced presently, and the other ten to be
paid at the delivery of the said Copy in English.

And he likewise will find sufficient Security at the same time of January
1685. to deliver 69 Mapps General and particular of Scotland to each Subscriber
who shall pay twenty five Shillings Sterling more, whereof twelve shillings and
six pence is to be advanced at the subscribing; and the other half at the
delivery of the said Book of Mapps, which is to be in the Ordinary Lumbard
paper, without Descriptions.

He likewise will find sufficient security to deliver against the middle of
January 1686. a Copy of the Scottish ATLAS in Latin, (which will contain the
Scotia Antiqua and Moderna in upwards of six score of sheets, and is without
Mapps, Folio, in the Paper the Acts of Parliament were lately done upon, but a
greater letter) to each Subscriber therefore, who shall pay twenty five
Shillings Sterling, whereof twelve shillings and six pence is to be advanced at
the subscribing, and the other half at the delivery of the Book.

And he will find security to deliver against the same term of January 1686 a
Copy of the 69 Mapps (Lumbard paper as before) to each Subscriber, who shall
pay twenty five Shillings Sterling, whereof twelve shillings and six pence at
the subscribing, and the other Moyetie at the delivery of the Book, that is to
be without Descriptions.

These Volumes will be dearer to these who subscribe not: and the Subscribers
will be first furnished with the Books, they calling timely for them.

And because that this work will be very costly to the said DAVID LINDSAY
(There being many Mapps to be graven new, such as were never done before, or
not right done) He will find sufficient security to dedicate the said Maps to
be insert in this ATLAS Scoticus to such who shall advance five pounds
Sterling, and their name and Coat of Arms shall be Graven upon the Map
condescended upon.

The money is to be paid in to John Melvill Merchant in Edinburgh, who will
find security for the performance of what is undertaken. The said John Melvill
will be found at his Shop over against the Cross upon the North-side of the
Street: and he will depute some to receive the money and give security in other
places.

That the Work may be the sooner finished, it is humbly desired that the
Subscribers may presently pay the money above-specified.

FINIS.
The form of the subscription for the Copies.
We whose names are underwritten, well approving and Highly commending the
Design of DAVID LINDSAY, do for his encouragement Subscribe our selves for one
or more Copies of the said Book, and do recommend so noble and useful a Design
to all ingenious persons throughout his Majesty's Dominions.

APPENDIX To the former Account of the SCOTTISH ATLAS.
1. THE Shires of Selkirk, Kinrosshire, Innerness, Nairn, Cromartie, Elgin,
Bamf, Ross and the Shire of Tayne were done jointly with other Mapps. But if
the Sheriffs and others concerned in these several Shires desire that they may
be done apart, they may be so drawn, they paying for each Shire five pounds
Sterling to JOHN ADAIR (who is commissionat by the Right Honorable the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council for surveying the several Shires) and five
pounds Sterling more to DAVID LINDSAY for the graving of them upon Copper
Plates with their Coat of Arms and the Dedication to them.

2. The Right Worshipful Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE His Majesty's Advocate is
pleased to grant his Manuscript-Treatise done by himself, wherein all the most
considerable Families of the Nobility and Gentry in Scotland are digested in
the order of the Alphabet, and the Stock of each Family, its Rise and the
Branches of it are set down from the Original Records; the Registers of the
Abbacies, and the Charters of the said Families; the Coat of Arms they bear, as
it is blazoned by the Lion Herald; and likewise the Plates with the Coats
graven upon them.

3. The several Coins in Gold and Silver coined in Scotland done from the
Copper Plates, which Sir JOHN FALCONER Master of the Mint caused to be made for
them.

4. As likewise the Plans of the ancient Monasteries done by direction of
Master SLETCHER His Majesty's Engineer for the Kingdom of Scotland. All which
are to be joined with the Description of Scotland in English.

5. In the Ancient Scotland in Latin are done the Plans of several ancient
Camps, the Altars, Sepulchers and other ancient Monuments of the Copper Plates
made for them.

6. There is an Account of the Constitution of the Session, by the Right
Worshipful the Lord PITMEDDEN.

7. An Account of the Admiralty-Court, by Sir PATRICK LION Judge of the said
Court of Admiralty.

8. A Manuscript and large Account of the noble and ancient Family of Seton.

9. A full Account of all that is observable in the Town of Aberdeen, given by
Mr. SKEEN late Bailie there and delivered to me by Bailie WALTER ROBERTSON.


