The manner of the BEHEADING OF Duke Hambleton, the Earl of Holland, and the
Lord Capell, in the Palace yard at Westminster, on Friday the 9th of March
1648 WITH The Substance of their several Speeches upon the Scaffold,
immediately before they were Beheaded.

March 9. 1648. Imprimatur Theodore Jennings*



Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson.

THE Manner of the Beheading of Duke Hambleton, the Earl of Holland, and the
Lord Capel, March 9. 1648.
ON Friday March 9. 1648. Duke Hamilton, (Earl of Cambridge) The Earl of
Holland, and the Lord Capell were beheaded in the Palace Yard at Westminster
Hall gate, in the middle of the Palace yard, toward the old Standard, at that
end of the Palace yard toward the waterside, The manner was thus.

There were a great Guard of Soldiers both horse and foot, and many thousands
of people. There were many Scaffolds made about the Palace Yard, and they were
very full, insomuch that diverse Scaffolds broke, and some people fell down. The
windows and tops of houses were all full.

First Duke Hamilton (the Earl of Cambridge) was brought upon the Scaffold,
There came along with him, Lieut. Col. Beecher (who had the charge of them all,
as well the Lord Goring, and Sir John Owen, who are reprieved as these three
who are this day beheaded) Also Dr. Sibbols the Minister came upon the Scaffold
with him, and a Gentleman of his own retinue with some other Officers, and
Gentlemen, but very few were admitted to be there.

Duke Hamilton was upon the Scaffold above an hour, before his head was cut off.

Some part of the time was spent in a speech to the people, other part of the
time was spent in speaking to those on the Scaffold; he had much conference
with Dr. Sybolls. And prayed very humbly (and with a deal of reverence) to
God, both with the Minister, and with himself, some times he prayed aloud, and
other times he prayed to himself.

Duke Hamilton was in a black Suite with a Silver Star upon his cloak.

The h^adsman came to him, and asked him forgivness which he said he did.

Putting on a white Satin Cap, he sitted himself to lie down, embraced his
servants, and Doctor Sibbols, and took his leave of, them and then he pray^^ at
the Block.

He gave advertisment to the Executioner, that when he spread forth his arms
he should do his Office.

A piece of red silk was spread upon the block, and when he was to die, and
also to receive his head when it was cut off.

He having put off his Doublet was in his shirt and prepared himself to dye,
and lying down prayed a little upon the block, and then stretching forth his
arm, the executioner struck off his head at one stroke, which was wrapped in
the red Silk that was laid down for receiving of it, and his Coffin being
brought upon the Scaffold, his body and his head was put into the said Coffin,
and carried away. And a Chyrurgeon (appointed for the purpose) sewed on the
head again to the body, in an house in Westminster, to which he was carried in
the Coffiin.

The Substance of Duke Hamiltons Speech.

That he was a Protestant by Religion, that he had justly deserved to dye, but
at this time, in this way he left it to God, That he was sent into England by
the Parliament of Scotland, that he had no thought of hurt to the Parliament of
England, that he had his hopes in heaven, and found peace in his conscience
with God, desired them to pray for him, and prayed the Lord to have mercy upon
him, and save his soul. He embraced the block in his arms and cried out,
Lord Jesus receive my Soul to thy Mercy.



Next to him, the Lord of Holland was brought upon the Scaffold, where were
Lieut. Col. Beecher, Dr. Sybals and most of those Gentlemen, save (only two or
three of the Dukes attendants) that were upon the Scaffold with the Duke.

There came with the Earl of Holland Mr. Hodges, and Mr. Knight two Ministers,
a Gentleman of his, and some others, who were upon the Scaffold, besides Dr.
Sybals Lieut. Col. Beecher, and the rest.

The Earl of Holland came in a long gown of silk, lined with fur (that he wore
at his Trial) of a brownish color, he was upon the Scaffold nigh an hour
before he was beheaded.

When the Earl of Holland was come upon the Scaffold, he first went to that
side next the waterside, and showed himself to the people, but presently
turned his face inward to the Scaffold again, and had some discourse with those
Gentlemen that were on the Scaffold.

Afterward he went to the end of the Scaffold against Westminster Hall gate,
and there put off his hat to the people, and leaning upon the rail, with his
hat off, and in his hand, he made a speech to them.

He had conference then with the Ministers, and went to the other side of the
Scaffold toward the gate going into Kings-street.

He had a great deal of conference with Mr. Knight the Minister, and all the
while carried himself very humbly, and with a great deal of devotion and
reverence; he took much delight in those things that Mr. Knight spoke, and
heard him a great while with much reverence.

Mr Hodges turned to the other side of the Scaffold and wept, and so also did
another Gentleman that did belong to him.

The Earl of Holland having put off his gown and his doublet, he had a white
satin wastcoat on, and after that he spent some time in prayer, and prayed at
the Block also.

He had on the same white satin Cap, with silver lace, that he wore at his
Trial.

He took his leave of Li^ut. Col. Beecher, and the Ministers, and his servants,
and the rest.

The Executioner having asked and had forgiveness, and received the sign of
spreading out his arms, the Earl of Holland lay down upon the block, and then
prayed a while, and then giving the sign, the Executioner cut his head off at
one stroke.

His head and body were wrapped in a sheet, and put into a Coffin brought upon
the Scaffold for that purpose, and he was carried away, and his head was after
sewed to his body by a Surgeon,

The substance of the Earl of Hollands Speech.

That he for Religion is a Protestant, for breeding he is of an ancient
honorable family, was well bred, though he had not lived so well as his
breeding was, that he has been always settled in his Resolutions; and as he
took the Covenant at first for King and Parliament, as the Parliament had
declared, so he had lived, and so long as his judgment concurred with the
Parliament therein, he stayed with them; and what was the rerson why he left
the Parliament to go to the King? why he came back to the Parliament, and that
afterward he rose for the peace of the King and Parliament, and to settle the
peace of the Kingdom; He much applauded the King, and said, that as for his
own part, he saw no blood shed by the Forces that he commanded; He died
patiently, and prayed to God to receive his soul. Last of all the Lord Capell
was brought upon the Scaffold; he had no Minister at all with him, nor had he
any show of sense of death approaching,

He was in a sad colored Suit and Cloak, and white Gloves, without his
Perrewig, and came with his Hat cockt and his Cloak thrown under one arm,
outfacing death with a great deal of carelessness, as one notably resolved.

When he came first upon the Stage he looked toward the people, put off his
Hat, as at a salute, and then cockt it, and strutted about the Scaffold in a
careless posture.

He had a little discourse with the Gentlemen upon the Scaffold, where he
stayed very little between the time he went upon it, and the cutting off of his
head, in all a little above a quarter of an hour.

He went to the rail of the Scaffold on that end toward Westminster Hall
gate, and made a Speech, leaning over to the People, which Speech took up most
part of the time he was upon the Scaffold: He put off his Hat during the time
that he spoke, and his Speech was made with much earnestness, as if a Minister
had been in a Pulpit rather then like a man dying. After that Speech he said
little, some small discourse he had with the Gentlemen upon the Scaffold, and
the ceremonies about the Executioner, in all which he was very short.

He then took off his Cloak and laid it upon the rail toward the waterside,
and his man took out a linen Cap and gave him, which he put on, delivering
away his Hat, and then he put off his Dublet and was in his Shirt.

Then kneeling down before the Block he lifted up his hands and eyes toward
heaven a very little while, and then lay down, but his shirt collar being too
high he rose up again and had it helped, (for though he was tall yet he had
but a short neck.)

He prayed a while lying on the Block (to himself) lfiting up his right hand
from the boards of the Scaffold, and then stretching forth his arm the
Executioner cut off his head.

A Coffin and Sheet being ready his Corpse was carried away, and his head after
sewed on.

It was a very fair bright Sunshine day.

He found fault with the putting of him to death; appealed to the people, said
he dyed for his affection to his King, applauded the late King, to be the most
Religious of all the Princes in the world, And said that he had free quarter
given to him for mercy, but must now dye, and prayed the people to pray for
him. He applauded Prince Charles, and the rest of the Kings children, desired
they might be Kings, and said the Kings children were all born to the Crown.
He often prayed the people to pray for them, and asked them whether they would
pray for him, and again said, I pray you Good People pray for Me. FINIS.

