THE PRESENT CORRECTION AND REPROOF of SIN, OR A Discourse on 2 Jer. 19. verse.
Thine own Iniquities shall correct thee, and thy Backslideings shall reprove
thee.

Hoc sunt peccata Lapsis, quod grando Frugibus, quod turbidum sydus Arboribus,
quod Armentis pestilens vastitas, quod Navigiis saeva Tempestas. Cyprian Sermon.
de Lapsis. LONDON, Printed for J. Eaglesfield, at the Marigold, near
Sarisburrycourt in Fleetstreet. 1685.

TO His much Honored Friend, Mr. * * *.
SIR,
I Have not adventured to displeas you by publishing your Name to the World;
whereby you will easily apprehend, that I send you this Discourse as to a
Friend, for your impartial Opinion of it; rather than to a Patron for
Protection: (the stale Complement of Epistles Dedicatory.) I designed it should
have been accompanied with several other Discourses, concerning the Evil of
Sin, and its Agravations. First, in relation to the B. Trinity; as it
dishonours God, disparageth the Divine Nature, and bespatters every Attribute
and Perfection of the Godhead; and consequently strikes at the very being of a
God. As it is a Rebellion against his Souveraingty; Enmity to his Holiness; a
Provocation to his Justice; a Contempt of his Wisdom; an ungrateful Affront to
his infinite Goodness; challenging his Allmighty Power; giveing the Lie to his
invariable Truth; slighting his Omniscience; wearying his Patience; etc. as it
opposes his Glory, and contradicts his holy Will, and the great design of all
his Revelations, Institutions, and Providence. Secondly, with respect to us as
it thwarts the end of our Creation, perverts our rational Faculties, and the
very principles of our Nature: as it blurrs the Image of God upon our Souls;
robs us of his Delight and Love; and renders us incapable of any friendly
Convers and Communion with him. As it deforms and defiles the Soul; inslaves us
to many foolish and hurtful Lusts; as it gratifyes the Devil, and brings us
under his power; as it infects others with its contagion; disturbs Societies;
is the great Makebate of the world, and the fatal source of all he Mischiefs
and Calamities, under which the Creation groans, and Thirdly, In comparison
with all other Evils of Affliction and Punishment: whereby sin will appear to
be the most pernicious and intolerable Evil: especially as the cause of the
Eternal Ruin of Souls. Where I intended to consider the certainty of that
Everlasting Destruction threatened in Holy Scripture to the finally Impenitent.
A Doctrine which so many would feign persuade themselv's to doubt of. I cannot
wonder at it, since Intrest and Inclination are instead of Evidence in other
cases as well as this: men are loath to admit any such Premises, whose
Conclusion would engage them to change their course of Life: it is not therefore
strange if after having forfeited the Blessedness of Heaven, they endeavor to
extinguish the flames of Hell. But being at present diverted from finishing
what I began in that kind, I am desired to let this be published alone. I have
not bespoke the Readers candor, as is usual, by representing in a Preface the
seasonableness and usefullness of the Argument treated of; because both are
sufficiently obvious.

There is hardly any man whose Experience and observation will not oblige him
to acknowledge, that Sin does very often correct and reprove the sinner in this
world. The Evidence is too sadly notorious to be denied, in the miserable
Catastrophe of Apostats, in the afflictive consequences of great
Transgressions, and in the ordinary fruits of Lust and Folly, Lewdness, and
Passion, Intemperance and unrighteousness, and a disorderly Life. Nevertheless,
through the deceitfullness of Sin, and the subtility of the Tempter, the neglect
of Consideration, the powerful Influence of bad Company, and sometimes the
Righteous Judgment of God, (suffering men to harden themselv's in their
wickedness) the far greater part will not receive Instruction by this voice of
the Rod; but turn the deaf Ear to all the Calls of God; and will not be
reclaimed, by all the methods of his Grace, to bring them to Repentance.

SIR, by the following acount that is given of it, you will be furnished with
abundant matter of Thanksgiving to God: who partly by the early communications
of his Grace, and the pious Care of those who had the conduct of your younger
years; and partly by the kindness of his Providence, in keeping you at a
distance from Temptations; and by your own vigilance and prudent Caution in
places and seasons of Danger; has preserved you from those Vices, which are
thus attended with Temporal sufferings. Such an Improvement of this Discourse
should be made by all those happy Persons, who cannot confirm this sad Truth by
their own Experience, save in very few and the less considerable Instances of
it.

The best men may reap this Benefit by perusing it: that the consideration of
the mighty Prevalence and Growth of wickedness, with the present bitter fruits
of it, may promote their being crucified to this World, and willingness to quit
it, as soon as God shall please: and so dispose them to desire and wait to be
translated to a better state; where they shall neither Sin, nor feel the smart
of Sin any more for ever; or be greiv'd and sadned by the sins or Sufferings of
other men.

In this Life our corrupted Nature is not perfectly healed, but does ever and
anon cast forth Mire and Dirt. Tho we are dyeing daily unto Sin, and long for
the funeral of the old man; to is not quite Dead; neither will it entirely be
so, till our own Dissolution: on which acount the Deceitfullness and desperate
Wickedness of the heart discovers it self in an hour of Temptation. So that
some of those, who were thought to be Established and Confirmed Christians, have
dishonored the name of God by scandalous Backslideings, discredited their
profession, falsified their most solemn vows and obligations, hardened the
hearts of some, and weakened the hands of others, and shamefully disparaged the
Religion of our B. Savior. Whereupon God testifves his displeasure by inward
and sometimes outward Troubles: a terrifyed Conscience writes bitter things
against them; or God denies the aids of his Grace, after such a forfeiture; and
their minds are darkn'd, their hearts hardened by degrees, and they become
careless and remiss in the Matters of Religion, and continue in their security;
till by a severe Providence, or a more than ordinary Grace, they are awakened
to consider their ways, and remember whence they have fallen, and Repent; and
thereby recover his lost favor, and God restores the Joy of his Salvation.

But this, Sir, is our Encouragement, and ought to be argumentative to
continued watchfullness, and the utmost endeavors to persevere, that if we are
faithful to the Death, (which may be nearer then we are aware) we shall then
enter into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and Sin no more. We shall
no more provoke him to Anger, by our Apostasy; or suffer his correcting Rebukes
for our Backslideings. We shall no more be exposed to Temptation; or seduced by
Satan, to defile our Consciences, to destroy the Peace of our minds, and greive
the H. Spirit of God. We shall no more start aside like a broken Bow, and
violate our holy promises and Resolutions. Ignorance shall no longer darken our
minds, or unmortifyed Lust lay lurking in the Heart, or the Body any more
betray the soul by unruly passions to the Commission of Folly. And as the
blessed Consequent of a sinless state, no sorrow shall ever more be felt, and
therefore no complaint ever more he heard. Oh that these thoughts were more
delightful and more connatural to us! This should be the highest of our
Wishes, and the object of our most deliberate and Resolved Choice; to be made
more pertakers of the Divine Life; and to glorifye God by a more perfect
conformity to his holy Image. I most heartily be seech the great Sanctifyer and
Lover of souls to effect it more and more on the my own heart and yours. And
tho one Kingdom do not hold us, and I may never see your Face on Earth again;
yet before that glorious Everlasting Kingdom we expect, (when by seeing God, we
shall be changed into his likeness,) we may daily meet at the Throne of Grace;
and there I humbly beg you would be my Remembrancer, as I promise to be yours.
I most affectionately kiss your hands, and remain

SIR, Your most Obedient Humble Servant JOHN. SHOWER.

THE PRESENT CORRECTION AND REPROOF of SIN.
From 2 JER. 19. former part. For thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and
thy Backslidings shall reprove thee.


THese words may be considered in relation to the Jews, and their causless
revolt from the worship of the true God, and obedience to him. In the preceding
verses God acquits himself from the imputation of having ever given them or
their Fathers any just occasion for such an Apostasy. Verse. 5.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and have walked after vanity and are become vain. And then upbraids them with
their ingratitude and folly, in the following verses. V. 11, 12, 13.
Has any nation changed their Gods which yet are no Gods? but my people have
changed their glory for that which does not profit. Be astonished, o ye Heavens
at this, and be horribly afraid, for my people have committed two evils, they
have forsaken me the fountain of liveing waters, and hewed them out cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no waters. Thereupon God charges them as the
authors of their own ruin, as having brought upon themselfs the calamities
under which they smarted. V. 14.17.
Is Israel a servant? is he an homeborn slave? why is he spoiled? Have thou not
procured it unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God? In
vain therefore do thou seek for help to Egypt, or have recours unto the King
of Assyria: for thou shall eat of the fruit of thine own ways, Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall reprove thee.

Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, 7 Hos. 15.
or thou shall be bound and fetterr'd, and held in the chains of thine own
sins, as the original word does sometimes signify. or rather, thou shall
beinstructed and taught by thine own folly, 4 Job. 3.
how evil and bitter a thing it is, to sin against God. Which is the meaning
of the word in other places, and therefore the Septuagint make use of a word in
this place which signifies both, to teach and to chasten.

And thy backslidings shall reprove thee, or convince thee by argument and
demonstration. The fruit of thine Apostasy shall convince thee of the folly of
it: in forsakeing the way of truth for lyeing vanities; the fountain of living
waters, for broken cisterns. The miserable effects and consequences of sin
shall correct and reprove thee.

What is here spoken to a community, may be as truly aserted of Individuals,
and particular persons, that the calamities they suffer are the fruits of their
own folly; that they bring miseries on them selv's in this world; and are ten
times severely corrected and chastened by their own wickedness. My present
design is, to make it evident that it is so, by showing in several instances,
how sinners are reproved and punnisht by their own sin and folly, even in this
Life, as well as in the next. And then shall improve this argument by some
practical inferences, which may be gathered from it. I shall endeavor to
manifest this truth.

1. From the justice and righteousness of God, which does oftentimes proportion
and suit temporal punishments to the sins of men.

2. From the more immediate effects and consequences of Sin, which in this life
do ordinarily correct and reprove the sinner.

1. We may consider, how the Justice of God does oftentims suit the punishment
to the sin even in this Life. This is evident, either on their own persons who
were guilty: or on their Relatives and posterity. As to the former, 2 ways.
Either when one sin is the punnishment of another: or when some calamity is
inflicted which is answerable to the sin.

1. God does sometimes correct sinners in this world, in the punishment of one
sin by the permission of more. Which may be either, by their own further sin,
or by the sins of other men.

1. God does sometimes punnish former sins, by permitting the offending person
to commit more and greater. That this is the severest punishment of sin in this
life, may easily be evinced. To be left of God to sin on, and to commit more
and greater abominations, is a kind of damnation, were there no other Hell to
succeed it: for we know the the life of the Prodigal is dated from his
Repentance, and not from his birth: This my son was dead, but is now alive. And
that some of the heathens themselv's have concluded any man to be more worthy
of a public lamentation, at the time of his debauchery, then of his death.
Some sins, it is true, have almost an inseparable connection and dependence on
each other, as lust follows gluttony, and folly drunkenness: but God in
righteous judgment may leave a man to the power of Temptation, and suffer him
to encreas the number, and add to the measure of his former sins, and so
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Thus he punnisht the wantoness of
Solomon, by permitting him to fall into Idolatry: and the covetousness of
Judas; by suffering him to betray his Lord, and Peter's first denial of Christ,
by his forswearing him afterward. The Jews, for killing the Prophets, were left
of God, to crucifye the Messtah; and Israel, when they committed wheredoms with
the Daughters of Moab, 12 Numb. 1: 2.
were left to be ensnared by their Idolatry. One sin makes way for more; as the
Idolatry of the golden Calf was ushered by intemperance and Idleness: 32 Ex.
The people sat down to eat, and drink, and rose up to play. Thus what men get
by oppression and acts of injustice, they oftentimes spend in pride and luxury.
The wages of unrighteousness, or what they purchased by unlawful means, is
sinfully employed and wasted, and that so quickly sometimes, as if they
resolved their silver and gold should not tarry to witness against them. God
suffers their treasures of wickedness to melt away by intemperance and riotous
living. Besides when one sin is made a cloak to conceal another, and to hide
the shame, or avoid the punnishment of one crime, they are sufferr'd to commit
more: as Joseph's Brethren, after their cruelty to him, in selling him into
Egypt, they were as unkind and cruel to their aged Father in bringing him his
bloody coat, in revenge for his particular fondness and affection to their
Brother. After the commission of any wickedness God may justly leave us to
excuse it with a Lie. Which is the greatest folly imaginable, as thereby
professing that it is better to be really guilty of two faults, then to be
thought guilty of one. And then you may proceed farther, to protect that Lie by
on oath, and at length grow impudent and incorrigible. Therefore fear the
beginnings of sin.

2. Sometimes God corrects the sins of one, by the sins of another. Jacob the
younger son stole his Father's blessing by the deceit of his elder Brothers
garment: and not long after his Father in Law Laban, Genes. 27.29.
by a like fraud gives him Leah instead of Rachel, substitutes the elder sister
in the room of the younger, whom he loved, and served an apprenticeship for.
God by the faults of othermen repays us for our own. As David's secret
adultery, by Absolon's openincest, in laying with his Father's concubines: and
by the lust of his son Ammon toward his sister Tamar. And when David neglected
to execute justice on Ammon for that offense, Absolon injustly slew him.
David's treachery against Uriah was requited by the treason of his Son, and the
rebellion of his own subjects, who joined in conspiracy with him against his
Father. Thus God employed the ambition of the King of Moab to punnish the
Idolatry of Israel, 3 Jud. 9.14.
and they became slaves for eighteen years to that people, with whose
Idolatrous customs they had wickedly complied. Thus those who were disobedient
to their Parents are oftentimes punnisht by the undutifullness of their own
children. Unfaithful servants may meet with some hereafter who will be so to
them.

2. God does oftentimes in this world inflict some calamity that is suitable to
the crime, and in some respect or other carries the resemblance of it. And the
Justice of God is more especially visible in the likeness and proportion
between the sin and the punnishment in these four respects. 1. In the kind and
quality. 2. In the quality and measure. 3. As to the time. 4. As to the place.

1. The kind and quality of the temporal punishment is oftentimes suited to the
kind and quality of the sin. As men sow, so they reap, 8 Hos. 3.
and to every seed its own body. They plow wickedness, and sow iniquity, and
reap a punnishment that is adapted to the sin. They sow the wind, and reap the
whirlwind, as the Prophet speaks. 14 Prove. 14.
The Backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. And the foolish
sinner eat the fruit of his own doings, and be filled with his own counsels.
23 Numb. 32.
And their calamity be so remarkable, that their sin shall find them out.

There are some peculiar punishments that ordinarily attend some sort of
crimes: that follow the guilty persons almost as constantly as giddiness does a
drunkard, as that the spoiler shall be spoiled, he that defrauds others, shall
be outwitted, the Liar shall loose his credit: the censorious talebearer be
blasted in his reputation, the oppressor be brought low: the proud be scorned,
and despised: and he that stops his ears against the cry of the poor, shall
want a friend to succor him in distress, shall cry himself and not be heard.
That he that judges shall be judged: the slanderer be evil spoken of: that he
that takes the sword shall perish by the sword: and that the Murderer shall
not live out half his days. If Jacob deceive his old Father Isaac, by the
borrowed garments of his Brother Esaw; his own children, when he is old impose
upon him by the bloody garment of his beloved Joseph. Abimelech slew seventy of
his Brethren, 6 Jud. 9.5: 6.
on one stone, and he himself was slain by a piece of a millstone. God
sometimes observes even an arithmetic proportion, demands, an eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth: gives blood for blood, and burning for burning. 1 Jud.
9.6.
We have a pertinent example in Adonibezeck, who had his Thumbs and great Toes
cut off. And in the next verse he owns that he had served seventy Kings in the
like manner. He was so affected with the equity and justice of his punishment,
that he cries out, 1 Ex 15.12. c. 29.14. c. 23.
As I have done, so has the Lord requited me. Pharaoh resolves to destroy the
male infants of the Israelites, and the firstborn in every family of the
Egyptians was cut off in a night. He gives order to the midwifes that they
should be drowned, and he and his mighty host perished in the waters. Joseph's
Brethren sold him into Egypt, that his dream concerning their sheaves bowing
down to his, might not be accomplished, and that was the very means to bring it
about. The Jews crucified the son of God, that the Romans might not come, and
take away their Land: and as the punishment of that crime, God sends the Romans
to destroy their Temple, city, and Nation. Jeroboam thought to prevent the
revolt of Israel to the King of Judah, by erecting calves in Dan and Bethel,
near to Sechem, (where the Samaritans had their Temple, and where Abraham built
an altar) and forbidding the people to go up to Jerusalem to worship, 2 Cron.
36.21.
and by that wretched policy he and his posterity lost the government of
Israel. The captivity of Israel for seventy years was the punnishment God
inflicted for their profaning the seventhday Sabbath, and not suffering their
Lands to rest every seventh year. The unnatural lust of the Sodomites, we read
was punnisht by fire from Heaven. 19 Genesis
The punishment is in such cases the very echo of the sin that brought it:
Which honors the Justice of God, and renders it conspicuous to all observers.
If Absolon take a pride in his hair, his destruction shall come by that means.
If Nadab and Abihu offer strange fire to the Lord, 2 Samuel 18: 9.
by fire shall they be consumed: as face answers to Face, so does the
punishment to the impiety, that brought it. 10 Levit.
If David glory in the numbers of his men of war; seventy thousand shall be
swept away by a pestilence, to diminish the number: that he may see cause of
humiliation in the matter of his pride. Because Solomon served God with a
divided heart, his Kingdom shall be divided, 1 Kings. 11: 30.
and but a part of it descend to his posterity. Because the Israclites served
strange Gods in their own land, God threatens that other Lords should have
dominion over them, and they should serve strangers, in a land that was not
their own. Thus some herbs bear the marks of those parts of the body, to which,
if ill affected, they are medicinal; so does the punishment and the calamity
oftentimes describe the sin for which God sends it. The sinners Temporal Cross
is formed as it were out of that forbidden Tree whereby he offended, or rather
like the cross of Christ, carries on it in capital Letters an account of the
crime, for which he suffers. Tho many of God's judgments, I confess, 36 Ps. 6.
are of a great depth, past our sounding, as to the grounds and reasons of
them, yet in several of them his Righteousness is as the great Mountains, i: e.
visible and apparent to the dullest eye.

2. There is sometimes a Suitableness in respect of the quantity and the
measure. He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows
plentifully, so does he reap. which is true of evil actions as well as good:
Impudent and extraordinary sinners ha^^ been signalized by as remarkable
judgments and plagues from Heaven. God lays judgment to the line, and equity to
the Ballan^^, rewards them according to their works, and measures out their
calamities and sorrows in proportion to their sins. Tho sentence be not all
ways speedily executed against great offenders, and sometimes not at all in
this world, but they are bound over to the laff Great Assize in the world to
come: yet in all ages divine justice gives some instances how notorious and
exemplary sinners have had as extraordinary punnishments.

3. There is srequently a proportion and resemblance between the sin and the
Punishment in respect of Time. In that very hour, when Belshazar was quaffing
and carowsing in the vessels of the Temple, with his Princes, his Wives, and
Concubines; and praising the Gods of gold and silver, the hand of the Lord was
against him, 5 Dan. 3-6.
and he saw his Doom written on the wall; which made his countenance fall, and
his Thoughts tremble, and the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees
smote one against an other. When Benhadad the Syrian, with the 32 Kings with
him, were drinking themselves drunk in the Pavilions, 1 Kings. 20. c. 16: 19. v.
the young men of the Princes of the Provinces of Samaria, came out against
them, and slew every man his man, etc. Jonah is pursued by a Tempest, at that
very Time, when he fled from the Commandment of God. Many who have been going
out of God's way, have been arrested and seited by some strange rebuke of
divine Providence: wherein the Circumstance of Time has been peculiarly
remarkable.

God sent the Prophet Jonah to Ninive, that exceeding great City, 3 Jon. 3.
of three days journey, to deliver his terrible message to that People: but he
disobeyed his voice, and fled to Tarshish. 1 c. 3. v.
For which God condemned him to be three days a Prisoner in the belly of a
great Fish. The word whale is not in the original Hebrew, or septuagint Greek.

The Jewish captivity for seventy years in Babylon, is attributed to the
prophanati on of the Sabbath, as one principal provoking cause, as will appear
by comparing these following Scriptures, 2 Cron. 36. c. 17. -- 22. v. 13. Nehem.
18: 17. Jerem. 27: 22. Ezekiel. 26. and 23. c. 38: 46. 't was at the time of the
Passover, that the Jews put to death the Lord of Glory; and afterward about the
same time of the year, the wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost for
that sin: their Temple, City, and Nation were destroyed by the Romans.
Nebucadnezar was admonisht of his Pride, and warned of that Judgment which
afterward befell him: And as the Punnishment in its kind was proportioned to
his sin, (his Brutish condition being a suitable Rebuke for his insolence and
vain glory,) the Time also of the execution of that Judgment is observable; it
was just a twelve month from Daniel's interpretation of his dream concerning
it, 4 Dan. 29: 30: 31. v. 12 Acts. 32 Exodus
and took effect while the proud words were in his mouth, Is not this great
Babylon that I have built, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty? So in the case of Herod: and of the Israelites, in the case of the
molten calf. Your own reading and observation may furnish you with examples of
Blasphemers, Swearers, Liars, Murderers, and Sabbathbreakers etc. who have been
either punished in the act; or have been followed by some particular judgment
afterward, at the same time of the year, the same day of the month, or week
or hour of the day, when they committed the sin. So that the very season of
their calamity, has brought the sin to remembrance for which they suffered.
Several Villages, Towns, and Cities, have been taken notice of, to have
suffered greatly by Fires, which broke out on the Lordsday, that were before
observed and talked of as infamous for the profanation of the Sabbath, more
then other places, and some of them forwarned of such Judgments for that very
Sin.

4. Oftentimes they meet with some Rebuke and Punishment in the same Place,
where they commit their folly. As in that very house where Rahab hid the Hebrew
spies, she and her kindred were afterward preserved, as the Reward of her
Faith: So divine Judgment does frequently overtake men, in the very place where
they acted their Wickedness. 10 Levit. 1: 2.
Nadab and Abihu are destroyed by Fire from Heaven before the Lord, where they
offered strange fire, and they are said to dye before the Lord. How often does
the Drunkard get his death in the same house, where he drank to Excess, by
causless quarrelling? And the Adulterer loos his Life in the same room, where
he committed Folly? Ahab, by the advice of Jezabel, murders Innocent Naboth, 1
Kings. 21. c. v. 13. v. 19. c. 22. v. 38.
and his sons: but the Lord had said, that in the same place, where Dogs lickt
the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick thy Blood, even thine. Which was not long
after exactly full filled, in a Place of the same nature. A public and common
place, within the Territory of Samaria, but because of his Humiliation, 2
Kings. 9. c. v. 23.
it was more literally and expressly accomplished in the death of his son Joram.
Who was slain by Jehu, and cast into the same plat of ground, v. 33.34. etc.
to remain unburied, as a prey for Dogs, according to the word of the Lord.
And of Jezabel, for the same crime, spoke the Lord, saying, The Dogs shalleat
Jezabell, by the wall of Jezreel. Which was exactly verified.

This illustrates the Justice of God, and makes it conspicuous to every Eye. As
Public Magistrates condemn notorious Criminals to be executed at or near the
place, where the Fact was committed. That the very Place may make the Sin to be
the better Remembered, and render the Equity of the sentence the more manifest
and observable.

2 We are to consider those temporal Punishments of sin; which flow from the
sins themselus. that are either inseparable from, or do commonly attend and
follow them. Such as these which follow,

. 1. Shame. As Soon as our first Parents had sinned, as if the color of the
forbidden fruit had got into their faces, they blushed and were ashamed of their
nakedness, and of their folly which brought it. And is it not in some measure
thus, with their posterity also? Such an inseparable Shame is the fruit of sin,
that hardly any man will own himself guilty of the practice of any vice, till
he has changed its name: given it an honorable title, and varnisht it with
some appellative of virtue: that so prudence and wisdom, thrift and good
husbandry, friendship and good humor, valor and generosity, may protect
worldliness, covetousness, debauchery, and foolish mirth, and conceal madness,
fury, and pride. The like may be said of other faults. If men are surprised in
some acts of Impiety, what silly excuses will they frame? what childish
pretenses, and frivolous evasions will they make? what slender shifts and weak
apologies, to justify them selv's, to extenuate, or prevent the publication of
their folly? their disordered, and down cast looks, or stupid silence, make it
evident they are ashamed. The shame of being thought guilty makes them shift,
and turn, and try all methods, to excuse them selv's, or defend what they have
done: and so throw the blame on some what else, as on the temperament and
constitution of their bodies which they cannot help, on the importunities of
their Company which they could notresist, on the temptations of the Devil; or
rather then fail, with Adam, they will charge God himself as accessory to their
crimes, and reflect upon his holy Providence. Except among a few Savages like
beasts, there is no nation or people under heaven where filthiness, and
intemperance, and some grosser sins, are not reckoned shameful. The voice of
nature it self is against such sins, and we thereby violate the modesty of our
own natures, and offend against an internal witness that condemns us. And when
once we begin to do so, God may leave us to proceed, till we become public
spectacles of shame to all that know us, and wish us better. There are very few
I hope who have sinned them selv's beyond all shame; tho more of late then ever,
who work all uncleanness with greediness, and glory in their shame. Who boast
of that which should cover them with confusion of face; but such have sinned
them selv's within a step of Hell; and being past feeling, are so far past all
hope of being reclaimed. None but such Absolons would commit lewdness on the
house top, in the face of the sun, and the view of the world. It Is a shame says
the Apostle, 5 Ephesians. 3.2.
to speak of what some men do in secret. I wish such sins were secret still,
which were not then so much as to be named among Saints. i: e. not without
need, and not without abhorrence. They that are drunk, says the same Apostle,
1 These. 5. c. 7.
are drunk in the night. The Heathens them selv's never celebrated the feasts
of a drunken Bacchus, but by night. So for uncleannes, The eye of the Adulterer
waits for the twilight, 24 Job. 14:15:16.
saying no eye shall see me, and he disguiseth his face, in the dark they dig
throthouses, which they had marked for themselv's in the day time: they know
not the light. For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. So for murder, and
theft and other works of Darkness, to which shame is inseparably annexed. How
shamefully are men disfigured by Drunkeness, How do thy talk and act like
fools, when wine has filled them with more Spirits then they are able to
govern? how ill favored are their looks? and how ridiculous their carriage?
betraying that folly in their drunken fits which afterward they are ashamed to
think or speak of, exposing themselves to the pity of their friends and
neighbors, to the contempt of children, and the scorn of their own servants.
It Is sad to consider how the commonness of this, and other vices has in great
measure taken off the shame of committing it. So that we may ask the question
with the Prophet, Were they ashamed, when they commitmitted all these
abominations? and make the same answer, No, they were not at all ashamed,
neither did they blush. If ever they reform, and return to God with all their
hearts, they will then be heartily ashamed, E del mio vaneggiar vergogna e'l
frutto,
E'l Pentirsi, e'l conoscer chiaramente,
Che que quanto piace al mondo, e breve sogno.

when reflecting on their past folly, they shall ask themselv's, what fruit
have we of those things whereof we are now ashamed? But if a timely repentance
do not bring them to holy shame and confusion of face before they dye; they
shall arise again to shame and everlasting contempt.

. 2. The pain, and trouble, and slavery, and sufferings, that wait upon sin,
do correct and reprove the sinner. And this will appear if we consider 1. the
preparatories to the commission of some crimes. 2. 12 Dan. 2.
The actual commission 3. The consequent trouble by disaponitment. etc.

1. The preparations necessary to the commission of some sins. They who have
had any tolerable education in the knowledge of Christianity under Religious or
sober Parents cannot presently adventure upon great Transgressions. They must
first stifle their convictions, and debauch their reason, and baffle
conscience, and lay aside consideration and serious thoughts, forsake the
ministry of the word, neglect the reading of the Bible and other good books,
leave off secret prayer, entertain loose company, and admit some principles of
Atheism or Sadduceism, before they can date to adventure. For the debauching of
a young man well educated, is not to be done all at once; it is a work of some
time, and must be effected by degrees, and many arts of the Devil are requisite
in order to it. And after all, it is with reluctance at first, that they dare do
as others, and run into the same excess of riot. And some grosser villainies
they boggle at still, and are afraid to proceed. It Is a strange expression of
the Psalmist, (7 Psalm. 14.) They Travel with Iniquity, and conceive mischief:
are in as great pain almost as a woman in travel, and all this, to bring forth
a Lie. The Law of God stares them in the face, and something within tells them.
It is better to forbear, and they ought to do otherwise: so that they are not
easy, or free from distracting fears, till the way be prepared by lesser sins,
and a gradual Apostasy.

2. We may consider the trouble they meet with in the actual commission of some
sins. Not only as the demands of several lusts are contradictory and
inconsistent, and Satan in such a case must needs cast out Satan, because all
cannot be gratifyed: but the very act of some crimes is a down right
punnishment. So that with equal reason a man might desire a fever, or choos to
be scorcht upon the fire; to quench his thirst with his own sweat. One man eats
out his own heart with Envy and malice, to see his neighbor prosper: another
burns with impatient lust, and cannot meet with the opportunity to acomplish
his lascivious design. A another is even choakt to death with thirst for gold,
and yet he labors in the fire, and cannot reach that estate he covets. Or if
he do, he is still as far from true content and satisfaction as he was before;
yea farther, because his drought increases, his fever grows upon him: the
more he has, the more he thinks is necessary to make him happy: like the
horsleech, he will still be crying, Give, Give, till the diseas be cured.
Moreover, to bring about a wicked purpose what pains do some men take, to
contrive the model, to remove difficulties and objections, to obviate Rivals,
and prevent disapointment, surprise, and discovery? what mean things must they
stoop to? what base submissions must they undergo? into how many different
shapes must they be transformed? and into what an agony do they put themselv's?
their countenance altered, their eyes fiery, their hands trembling, their
breath short, and the whole man, body and soul, in disorder. Whereas it were
comparatively very easy, and the way plain, to keep in the path of
righteousness, and obey God.

3. We may consider the consequent trouble upon the immediate commission. The
uneasiness and remorse of a natural conscience, and the frustration of their
hopes, the enjoyment falling short of what they promised themselv's, and
eagerly expected. They looked for pleasure and they meet with disquiet, from
the reflections of their own minds on their disapointment, and a consciousness
to themselv's that they have not done well. They promised themselv's ease, and
meet with dissatisfaction. What they sought for, they do not find; but instead
of their expected joy, regret; conscience threatens them with an after
reckoning: to stop its mouth, and silence its clamours, they have recours to
company, and fresh pleasures: and being weary of one sort, they must change for
another, by various methods endeavoring, tho in vain, to appeas their bosom
enemy. But more of this under another head. And is it not a shame, to consider
what pains men take to be undone, what Gibeonites they are in the Devil's
service? while we are such lazy dreamers in the service of God; whose yoke is
easy, and whose burden is light. What and how many are the cares and fears, and
difficulties of the Proud, and Ambitious? (who perhaps may take it ill I began
not with him first,) to be filled with the wind; and applauded by the people,
and honored in the world? how jealous of every Rival; how watchful of every
advantage; and how diligent to improve, and make the most of it. When the favor
of God, that is infinitely preferable, may be had at a cheaper rate. Why shall
not we mind the things above, and our future intrest, with the same eagerness,
that sinners do the satisfaction of a sensual lust? why shall not we strive to
enter into Heaven, with the same diligence as others hasten to the Gates of
Hell? why shall not we seek the Kingdom of God, and its righteousness, with
equal vigor and resolution, as they the enjoyment of a forbidden pleasure?
especially, since instead of pain, and trouble, sorrow and dissatisfaction,
which they meet with; the joy of the Lord would be our strength, encouragement,
and support. For even in, as well as after, the keeping his commandments, there
is great reward. His burden would be lighter too, the more we are accustomed to
bear it: and his yoke easier, the longer we have carried it.

. 3. Sin corrects the sinner in this world, by spoiling that peace, and
concord, that love, and unity, among men and Christians, which is necessary to
our temporal happiness. Whence come wars sightings, tumults and disorders,
animosities and divisions, quarrels and contentions, but from lust in the
heart, and the fruits of it in the life? from what other original can we derive
the unchristian heats and janglings, strifes and persecutions, among
Professors; the uncharitable fewds and hatred among neighbors, unnecessary and
tedious law suits, and the consequent malice and contumelies of vexatious
quarrelling, on which the impoverishing of particular persons, and the ruin of
whole families, is so often consequent? did we but observe the Christian rules
of Justice, and charity, meekness, and humility; did we but endeavor, as much
as in us lays to live peaceably with all men; being kindly affectioned one
toward another; apt to be reconciled, and ready to forgive, restraining our
exorbitant passions, and interpreting every thing of each other in the best
sens; with how different a face would the world appear, how happy would be the
nation, the city, the family, where the case were thus. But what contentions
and enmities are caused every day by Pride, drunkenness, and Evilspeaking? in
every town, village, and neighborhood, we might find Instances. Were it not
for the corruption of mankind, and the sad effects of that, there were no
foundation in any sens to call the state of Nature the state of War. And the
peace and harmony, and consequent happiness of the world had not been
destroyed, but by the sin of man. What Nation was ever set on fire within it
self or made desolate by a foreign power; what battle was ever fought, (much
less a Duel,) what war was ever commenc't or prosecuted, but on one side or the
other or both, Ambition, or Pride, Rashness, or Rebellion, Fury, or Revenge was
at the bottom? hence they spring as from their grand source, by these were they
cherisht as by their proper fuel: the great convulsions and desolations that
tear Provinces and Empires, and destroy Kingdoms, are caused by armies of
Iniquities rather then of soldiers. 13 Pr. 10.
Discord, contention and war, are the scumm of pride. Whereas, the meek shall
inherit the earth, and be delighted with multitudes of Peace. Among the sinless
Angels, 37 Ps. 11.
tho there be many Legions, we read of no wars. The Earth only is the seat of
war; Jerusalem above is free. If men would cease to do evil, and learn to do
well, Spears must be turned into ploughs hears, and swords into pruning hooks.
And the inhabitants of the earth would learn war no no more, did they once
forbear to be wicked. Princes would not then oppress and murder their Subjects;
nor would Subjects rebel against their lawful Souveraigns; a blessed universal
peace would return to the earth, which is now so much a stranger to the far
greatest part of the inhabited world. So that the Reproof and Correction of sin
thunders in our ears by the noise of canon, and the Instruments of war; is as
loud as the beating of Drums, and the sound of trumpets: it should pierce our
hearts, as do the last cries of mangled soldiers: and affect us with a like
resentment, as do the tragical effects of a desolateing War.

. 4. Sin does correct and reprove the sinner in this world, by impoverishing
his Estate. Gluttony and Drunkenness, Uncleanness and Lust, Ambition and Pride,
Contentions and Quarrelling, Prodigality, the Gameing humor, etc. have all a
tendency to Poverty, and commonly effect it. If men will sell themselves to
commit wickedness, they must sell their estates, to make provision for their
lusts. The Drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, 23 Pr. 21.
and Idleness cloth a man with rags. He that loves pleasure shall be poor. 21
Pr. 17.28. c. 19.
And he that loves wine, and oil, shall not be rich. And he that follows after
vain persons, shall have poverty enough. Such men are not only unfitted for
the works of their calling, whereby they should subsist; but will pawn all they
have, borrow all they can, and sell all they are worth, to maintain their
vices. They mispend their time, and neglect their Employments, which would
otherwise find them a livelihood, and so poverty comes upon them ere they are
aware. For no man resolves from a vast estate to make himself a Beggar; but at
the long run how many do so? this needless expense is for their honor, or
rather pride; and will not undo them: that is for their pleasure, and
diversion; and they think they may bear it, it will not ruin them: and so for
others, no one of which alone brings poverty, but altogether in a little time
do it. What large revenues have been wasted in vanity? how many considerable
patrimonies devoured by lust? men that had estates left them, almost sufficient
to maintain an army, have been beggered by a ritious course, and made as
indigent as a disbanded foot soldier; reduced to a morsel of bread, and
deprived of necessaries, and forced to depend on those, who were once their
dependants. It would be endless to give a bill of all the cost and charges,
which some men are at, to maintain and feed their lusts. How many have been
forced to feed on husks, and ready to starve, as the Prodigal, by following his
lustful and riotous courses. They that have glistered in scarlet, 4 Lam. 5.
have by this means embraced dunghills. Great estates have been turned into
sauce, to pleas a glutton, and he that once fared deliciously every day, was
choice in his diet, and delicate in his food, and prodigal in his treats and
intertainments, is at a loss where to find a dinner. His throat was an open
sepulcher, and his houses, lands, and livings, and money too, have been buried
in this tomb. So for other sins, the poor and the Deceitful man shall meet
together i: e. the latter be brought as low, as mean, and miserable, and
indigent as the former. What the oppressor wrings from the Fatherless and
widows, or gets by over reaching his neighbors, 29 Pr 13.
through the little arts of cheating, which are called the mysteries of Trade,
shall be put into a bag with holes. 1 Hag. 6.
And methinks this reproof of sin should be very audible and affecting, that
you cannot loos your souls, throw away your hopes of Heaven, and be miserable
and undone for ever, but you must part with your money too, and be beggered
here on earth. I might add under this head, that sin does impoverish the sinner
by consuming his precious Time. God gives us other blessings with a larger
hand, in a greater plenty and abundance at once: only our Time he distills by
drops; and never gives us two moments at once, but takes away one, when he
lends us another. To teach us the price of so rich a Jewel. And what opinion
have sick and dyeng persons of the worth and value of their irrecoverable Time,
which we prodigally consume in sin and folly: in vain company, and sinful
mirth; in sensual pleasures, and diversions; with the neglect of the great end
and business, we ought to prosecute in this Life, in order to the felicity of
the next. Forgetting that we hasten daily to the end of time, and our final
judgment, and that wither we sleep or wake; wither we work, or are Idle; wither
we prepare for death, and judgment, and our Everlasting state, or do it not;
our glass runs, and we are hastening to our last hour. Oh that we would think,
with serious self-Reflexions, what despairing souls beyond the grave would give
for some of that Time, we know not what to do with, but spend in vanity, or
what is worse! or what we our selus shall ere long be willing to give for a
little of it upon the same terms as now, when time is past, and it is too late.

. 5. Sin does correct and reprove the sinner in this Life, by blasting his
Reputation. There must be some appearance at least of virtue, and goodness, of
justice and honesty, to render any thing honorable, and recommend it as praise
worthy. The grosser acts of wickedness are almost every where acounted of ill
repute, hence it is that few arrive to that height of impudence and degeneracy,
as to rail and speak evil of others for being upright and religious, being
honest men and good Christians, but for being Hypocrites: for pretending to be
what they are not: practical religion, and the power of godliness has still
such an invincible awe upon the minds of men, and commands that respect and
inward reverence, which they cannot refuse. So true is it, that they who honor
God, shall be honored. And it is equally certain and universal, that they who
despise and forsake him, shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30.
And we find by experience, that men expose themselv's to contempt, and loos
their reputation by forsakeing God. Lust and Drunkenness cloud the reason, and
weaken the understanding, corrupt the judgment, and destroy wisdom, and render
men not only an abomination to God, and his holy Angels, but the contempt or
pity of all wise and sober men. Their vices make them vile, Ecclips the glory
of their birth, and the honor which their ancestors, and families, or their
own other good qualities would give them. The name of a Liar is a brand of
disgrace, and a mark of dishonor, among the worst of men who often resent it
so far, as to demand his blood for reparation of the affront, who presumed to
call them so. Sin, says a late Author, as some beasts, has a stinking breath,
as well as deadly claws, and brings infamy and disgrace, as well as pain and
trouble. If men degrade themselves into swine by Intemperance, or into goats by
lasciuiousness, and lust, they must not expect the reward of virtue, to be well
reputed, and spoken of. If they are slaves to an Imperious lust, they must bear
the Infamy of being so. And no better are they in the practice of Impiety: for
as Slaves are at the command of their Masters, and blindly obey their wills,
and are no gainers by what they do, and oftentimes feel the lash and the whip,
notwithstanding their drudgery; such is the case of sinners, under the power of
a domineering vice. Yea their service is more dirty, and dishonorable, their
chains stronger, and their recovery more difficult, as being less apprehensive
and sensible of their thraldom. And who can honor or esteem such voluntary
slaves, under the worst of Tyrants? they render themselv's infamous and
despicable; and can not expect better then to be scorned, or pitied. No man
will esteem or trust one that is a known drunkard, and whoremaster: a frugal
honest man that has but half the estate, is better loved, and will be farther
trusted, then such a one, tho he have twice as much. Who can think or speak
well of a drunkard any otherwise then of a cask or vessel to be often filled
and emptied. As of one that is a confident boaster of himself, his own actions
and undertakings: a slanderer and backbiter of others; one that is vain and
scandalous in company, foolishly babbling all he knows, unfaithfully revealing
the secrets of his friends, rash and hasty in his resolutions; extravagant in
his projects, irregular in his actions; etc. And what reputation can such a man
expect? the like I might say of the Glutton, who spends his Life in carrying
meat from the Table to the Dunghill; and so of others. The name of such men
shall rot, says the wise man. It shall putrify as soon as their bodies, and
sometimes long before. Yea some men's wickedness makes them infamous after they
are dead, kills them to immortality, and poisons their memory to future ages:
they stand upon record as great Villains, and warnings to posterity.

. 6. Sin corrects and reproves the sinner in this world by destroying his
health. How does gluttony and drunkenness correct men by evening vomits, and
morning qualms, crudities of the stomach, pains of the head, and inflammations
of the liver, rheums, gouts, dropsies, cholick, consumptions, apoplexies,
palsies, decay of sight, want of appetite, loss of memory, and judgment:
stupifyeing the brain, weakening all the members of the body, and hastening old
age and death? How many an healthy constitution has been destroyed by
intemperance? besides that it inflames passion, and excites quarrels, makes
men more apt to give affronts, and more unwilling to take them. On which acount
says Solomon. Who has woe, who has sorrow, 23 Pr 29.
who has wounds without cause? they that tarry long at the wine etc. who can
recount all the mischiefs to the body, by an excess of eating and drinking?
whereas abstinence and a temperate life has been proved by many to be the
certain cure of catarrhs, and gouts, and other diseases, wherewith formerly
they have been tormented. How many miserable instances have we known, of men
tortured by acute distempers, swollen with gouts, burned with fevers, rackt by
the stone, torn with cholicks, etc. and forced to pine away a great part of
their days in pain and misery, by the effects of Intemperance and lust. By
this means Princes and great men have been forced to own, that it is an evil
thing and a bitter, to forsake God, suffering such torments as the fruit of
their Impieties, that have made them envy the condition of Peasants, Slaves,
and Beggars. How many sacrifice their health, and strength, to a beastly
opportunity, and are punished by pains of the head; oppressions of the heart;
conturbations of the stomach; gripeing of the bowels, continual thirst;
unseasonable and unquiet watchfullness; (when nature and digestion require
rest.) Besides that horrible disease imparted by this vice, the most cruel, the
most filthy, the most shameful of all maladies: (from which no lustful person
can be secure: Because it is the nature of vice, and of this in particular, to
precipitate from one degree of excess to another.) A diseas which anticipates
the corruption and uncleanness of the grave; whereby sinners meet with their
Limbo, their Tophet here, as a sad preface, without repentance to an
everlasting Hell.

. 7. By an untimely Death. It Is true a natural Death is the fruit of sin, we
may consider epidemical diseases, and our common mortality, the trouble of
sickness, and the pains of dyeing, as some correction, and reproof of sinners.
Their tears and groans, and ghastly looks in a dyeing hour, their broken sighs,
their distorted members, their trembling languishing pulse, their putrid
breath, and last agonies, do all bespeak us to consider what sin has done. But
a natural death being the punnishment of the first transgression, and common to
all mankind; it is an untimely death, I am now to speak of.

Without disputeing wither the period of Life he mutable, or not, This is
certain, that God from the infinity of his nature must needs be present in all
duration at once; and so cannot but foresee and know how long we shall live.
And to is likewise evident from Scripture, reason, and experience, 55 Ps. 23.
that some do not live out half their days, to which they might have arrived
according to the course of nature. The meek, and such as are blessed of God,
shall live long to inherit the earth, but the Transgressors shall be cut off.
37 Ps. 22.
The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened. Some think that Balaam when he desired to dye the death of the
Righteous, and that his last end might be like his, 23 Numb. 10.
meant only the prevention of an untimely death, and that he might go to his
grave in a good old age. And God has promised, among other temporal blessings,
that the good man shall be gathered in peace to his Fathers like a shok of corn
fully ripe: and crowned with length of days; as well as with riches and honor.
It Is true a short Life, and an hasty death, are not allways a curse, or the
fruit of God's displeasure. To a prepared soul, to is a blessing, and as such
more desirable, then to abide in the flesh, in order to our being with Christ,
which is best of all. But how many are there whose impieties shorten their
days, and Hinc subitae mortes, atque intestata senectus,
It nova nec tristis per cunctas fabula coenas:
Ducitur iratis plaudendum funus amicis.

hasten their dissolution. How many dye martyrs by the fire of lust. By the
strange woman, many fall down wounded, and many strong men are slain by her.
Her house is the way to the grave, and leads to the chambers of death. How many
have extinguished their vital flame, by intemperate drinking, and brought those
diseases, or furnished the matter of them, by excess, whereof in a short time
they dyed. Besides the many thousand Murders which drunkenness has caused: in
a drunken fit men have murdered themselv's, their best friends, and dearest
Relations. The rise of most duels has been from hence: the challenge sent from
the tavern, or the resolution of fighting commenc't there. Not to mention, what
every sessions and assize may inform us, how many expose themselv's to the
penalty of humane laws by great Transgressions, and perish by the sword of the
civil Magistrate. Which may be considered as another instance, whereby Sin does
correct and reprove the Sinner in this world.

. 8. By troublesome reflections, and horror of Conscience. Rather then sinners
shall escape unpunnisht, they shall correct themselv's: Conscience that was
privy to their Impieties, and keeps a register of their crimes, and is more
then a thousand witnesses, shall accuse, condemn, and torture them, (and that
it may be for secret sins, which none of their acquaintance can charge them
with,) shall be witness, Judge, and Executioner too, before their irreversible
doom at the day of judgment. Hence many are continually haunted by the Specter
of their former wickedness; and their own guilty minds frequently check them in
their greatest jollity, and make a sad discord in their mirth: so that in the
midst of laughter, their hearts are sorrowful. They are always uneasy, and
walk in fear, least vengence overtake them. As the first Murderer Cain, who was
afraid of being slain by every man he met, when he was sure to meet with none,
but Brethren and Nephews. What can we suppose should be able to give such a man
courage and support? when he is dejected by his own fears, and cast down by an
inward sens of guilt. They must needs have sad hearts, not withstanding
cheerful countenances, from the biteings of this Tarantula within, which no
outward applications will cure; any more then an inward bruise may be healed by
a plaster upon the outer garment. Yea some from the horror of their own minds,
have been ready to make away themselv's, and become their own Executioners; as
if the Worm, which never dies, were more Intolerable then the fire, that never
goes out. And certainly the most sharp and terrible bodily pains are much
inferior to the anguish of an awakened guilty Conscience, under the
apprehensions of divine wrath. Did you never hear the outcries of a dyeing
sinner, after an impenitent wicked Life, convinced of sin, and sensible of
Eternity, expecting within a few hours to appear before his glorious Judge?
When his past Impieties stare him in the face, and Death, and Hell, and Gods
Eternal vengence, are open and naked before him: Despairing now of the mercy of
God, which all his Life before he slighted, and curseing those fugitive
pleasures, and vain Companions, that intic't him to mispend his time, and
commit folly, and neglect his preparations for another world.

But many sinners feel these rebukes of Conscience in health, as well as
sickness; Terrors possess their guilty minds, and curdle all their delights.
They tremble with tormenting fears, which they cannot get rid of: and not
taking the right method of cure, they at last sigh away their fainting breath,
in total despair. In the mean time what arts do they use, to drive away this
evil spirit, which perpetually haunts them? but none of their tried methods of
running to company, and recreations, to drunkenness and riot, etc. have been
found effectual for any considerable time. But still they are dogged by their
own guilt. In vain do you think, to laugh and sport and drink away your fears;
they will soon return upon you with greater violence, when the company is
broken up, and the heat of wine is over: Which like sprightly music may raise
a man's mind for the present, but will leave him more dumpish and melancholy
afterward. Yea it makes farther work for Repentance, and so will but augment
your terrors. Mirth and pleasure, instead of giveing eas to an accusing
conscience, will but aggravate and increas your trouble: you will speed no
better then the Philistines did, when they sent for Sampson, to make them sport:
who pulled the house down upon their heads.

Backsliders, of all others, are perticularly reproved and corrected by sin, in
this instance: how many such have been known, who when they come to themselv's,
and repent, are even distracted by the terrors of the Lord, through remorse for
their apostasy? such before Repentance haveless pleasure in the commission of
sin then others, who never had so much light, or knew so much of the common
workings of the Spirit: And afterward have more terrible apprehensions of
God's avenging Justice. Conscience speaks louder in their ears, and the flames
of Hell flash oftener in their eyes. So that commonly they doubt, wither God
will ever receive them to mercy; and sometimes wither they have not committed
the unpardonable Sin.

Backsliding Christians, who have formerly rejoyc't in the light of God's
countenance, and walked in the comforts of the holy Ghost, (while they walked
in their Integrity) after the commission of presumptuous sins, have dearly
experienced how evil and bitter a thing it is, to forsake God. Conscience
flies in their faces, being commonly awakened by some afflicting providence)
and setts their sins, with the aggravations of them, in order before them; and
writes bitter things against them. All their joy is turned to wormwood, and
their very lives are become a burden, and yet they dare not dye. They read
their Indictment, but cannot see a pardon, or scarce entertain any hopes of
one. They are covered as with sackloth, and lay in the dust, bewailing their
folly, and confessing their guilt, with broken, bleeding hearts before the
Lord. Oh vile Apostate that I am! after such a profession for so long a time,
after so many convictions of the evil of sin, and so much experience of the
sweetness and satisfaction of holy walking, thus to forsake my own mercies,
dishonor my profession, and provoke God. It had been better for me never to
have known the way of Righteousness, then after having known, and tried it,
thus shamefully to revolt. Such a man's sin appears with horror, and fills him
with anguish: so that he would give all the world he had not been guilty of
that apostasy he repents of. Lord! what a wretch, what a fool was I? will such
a man say, Thus wilfully to offend thee, in spite of the clearest knowledge,
and the most indearing kindness? against so many obligations, so many vows, and
resolutions, those made upon the most weighty reasons: what grace, what love,
what mercy, have I trampled on, and sinned against? whither shall I go? what
shall I do? how dare I appear before that God, on whom I have thus
perfidiously turned my back! how can I ever hope to regaine his lost favor!
Against thee only, holy God, have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. Lord!
I am unworthy to appear in thy presence, I am ashamed and blush to look up to
Heaven. How shall I escape thy justice, when I have despised thy goodness, and
forfeited thy grace! What can I reply, if thou utterly forsake me, and refuse
to be entreated by my prayers, or accept my return? Eternal wrath is my due,
Hell is my deserved portion: and even there may I justly carry these stings of
conscience; even there must I acknowledge I was justly condemned, and punnisht;
and own the righteousness of my doom, to unquenchable fire, with my flameing
tongue and breath. Wretch that I am, who shall deliver, and save me! only the
mercy of God, in Christ, whose blood, cleanses from all sin, can possibly
relieve the exigence of my case. And will thou pity, and pardon, and
graciously receive such a rebel? For Jesus Christ his sake, spare me, and give
me repentance; blot out my transgression, for it is great, and hide thy face
from my sin, from my sin, which is ever before me. I cannot avoid the sight of
it; I cannot but remember it, and abhor my self in dust and ashes, and go
mourning all the day long.

These are the thoughts, this is the language of an humble Penitent, under the
sens of former backslidings. To this purpose, David tells us in one of his
penitential Psalms, 51 Ps. 3.
that his sin was ever before him. And in another, that his sorrow was
continually before him. The one as the cause, 38 Ps. 17.
the other as the effect. His sin as the reason of his sorrow; and his sorrow
as the fruit of his sin, was continually before him. This made him cry so
earnestly for pardon, O Lord, blot out my transgressions; and remember not my
sins. i. e. I remember them, I acknowledge, I humbly confess them, they are
ever in my view, and before my face. O do not thou remember them, but cast them
behind thy back. On this account, he complains of broken bones, and a wounded
spirit. That the arrows of God stuck fast in his soul, and his hand pressed him
sore: that he roared all the day long: and watered his couch with his tears.
These conflicts and terrors, this darkness and despondency, are the fruit of
backsliding, and it is well if it do not issue in the sin unto death, in final
incurable Apostasy. TO is true some who are fallen from so great an height, are
raised again: and God upon sincere Repentance will pardon and save returning
Backsliders, yet so as by fire, with great difficulty. And they may never
recover their former tranquillity and peace, but walk heavily and softly, under
doubts and fears, and dejection of spirit, to their dyeing day. And likewise
suffer smart Afflictions, to scour off the filth they have contracted by their
revolt, and to humble them more deeply under the apphrehension of their
agravated guilt. In these, and other such instances, as might be mentioned, sin
does correct and reprove the sinner in this world.

What remains, is to consider what Inferences of truth and duty, may be
collected from the preceding discourse, for our instruction and practice; or
what improvement we should make of it. Which I shall dispatch in these following
Propositions.

. 1. That we ought thankfully to admire the wisdom and goodness of God, who
has, in so great measure, connected our present duty and happiness. That we
cannot disobey God without injuring our selv's, and feeling the smart of it,
even in this Life. Let us thank him for hedging up our way to Eternal death, by
the thorns and briars of temporal calamities. By making sin so unreasonable,
painful, shameful, troublesome, and against our Intrest, even on this side the
Grave. In so much, that in many instances we can not be undone forever, without
being miserable now: nor loos the happiness of the other world, without
exposeing our selv's to many sorrows, and calamities in this. By our sin and
folly we make the Rod which corrects us: our own finger twists the cords,
whereby we are rebukt and chastened: the web which insnares and intangles us is
spun out of our own bowels. And God in wisdom and kindness so orders it, to
prevent our perishing in both worlds.

. 2. We ought hearthly to bless God for restraining us, by his grace, and
providence, from Presumtuous Crimes. That he was pleased to stop us in our way
to ruin, and mercifully prevent us from running into those excesses, which
would have been attended with such miserable effects here, and at last have
exposed us to his condemning sentence. Had he not sometimes withheld us by his
grace, when we were tempted: and prevented us, at other times, by his
providence, from diverse Temptations, by which others have fallen; we had ere
this been deplorable spectacles of divine Justice, and severely corrected by
our own folly. And this is the favor, which God is pleased to vouchsafe to his
Children, to succor them when they are tempted, and to keep them from such
Temptations, as they would not be able to resist. Not that he is a good man,
who would live wickedly, if he were but tempted to do so, by those ordinary
trials that humane nature may expect: but he who prefers God, and the
blessedness of the other world, before all things else; and lives agreeable to
such a choice; if he so continue shall be saved: tho there might have been
supposed a Temptation so strong, as would have conquered his resolutions, with
that measure of Grace he then had, if it had not been fortified with new
supplies. Therefore thank God for the care of his providence, which secures us
from many dangerous Temptations: and for the assistance of his Grace in
inabling us to come off wit victory, when we have been tried.

. 3. How much better then is a Life of holy Obedience to God, then the practice
of sin, if there were no reward to be expected after Death? If in this Life
only we had hope (the case of cruel persecution excepted: such as St. Paul
speaks of 1 Cor. 15. And extreme Poverty, and bodily Pains, etc. because under
these the hopes of a future blessedness are the chief supports: otherwise) We
should be so far from being of all men the most miserable in this world, by
obeying the Gospel of Christ; that to is apparently for our present Intrest,
to observe the precepts of natural and Christian Religion: the Yoke of Christ
is easier, and his burden lighter, and the service of God less difficult, then
the drudgery of Sin, with such consequences, as have been mentioned. Let me
seriously appeal to your Experience, wither it be not evil and bitter to
depart from God, and cast off his fear? have you not found it so, to your cost?
have not you your selv's, and many others whom you know, been severely
chastened and reproved, by sin? and what fruit have you, or they, or what fruit
have you ever had, of the sins you are now ashamed of, but such as has been
described? what profit has he, says the Wiseman, 5 Ecl. 16.
who has labored for the wind?

Bring in your acounts of what you have ever got by a wicked Live: and compare
it with the present reward of holy liveing. Set down your income, and proceed
to a reckoning, and see what the total sum amounts to. So much Shame and
Fear; so much Care and Trouble; so much Loss and Damage; so much Ignominy and
Disgrace; so much Disquiet and Dissatisfaction; so much Discredit and
Disparagement; so many Frustrations and Disapointments; so many Difficulties
and perplexities; so many Diseases, Griefs, and Aches. An ill name, an empty
purse, a decayed Fortune, a distempered Body, a guilty accusing Conscience,
etc. And all this for a little sensual mirth and pleasure, for wine, and
women, for a feather, a fancy, an humor, a lust. Te miseriae, te aerumnae
premunt omnes, qui te Beatum, qui te florentem putas: Tuae libidines te
torquent, tu dies noctesque cruciaris. Te conscientiae stimulant maleficiorum
tuorum, te metus exanimant judiciorum, atque legum quocunque aspexisti, ut
furiae; sic tuae tibi occurrunt incuriae, quae te respirare non sinunt --
Cicero.
Whereas if you would seriously return to God, and walk humbly, and
circumspectly before him, you will quickly be able joyfully to relate from your
own Experience, the contrary fruit of holy Obedience. Remember therefore the
vinegar, and the Gall of former sins, and return no more to folly. Especially
considering that,

4. If sin do thus correct the sinner in this Life, how much more severly will
it do so in the next? If the consequences of sin in this world, are oftentimes
so dreadful, how much more intolerable will they be in that which is to come?
never did any sinner without Repentance escape the justice of God; but sooner
or later his sin did find him out. You cannot swallow poison, but you will feel
the effects of it. Even those sins you now justifye and glory in, shall be your
Everlasting punishment. Tho you should not be scourged and chastened in this
world, as many others are. Conscience that is now asleep, will ere long awake
to purpose; and be faithful to its office when the most stinging
apphrehensions of your own guilt, shall vex and torture your Souls, with a
fruitless remorse for past folly, and remediless despair under an intolerable
wrath.

All those inquities, which you designedly forget, are written down in God's
book of Remembrance. And the day is hastening when a strict Reckoning will be
demanded; and justice impartially executed, on those who will not now believe a
future Judgment; and on those who live, as if they did not expect it.

It is obseruable in the word of God, or may be inferred from thence, to the
glory of divine justice, that in the proceedings of the last day, God will suit
and proportion the future punnishment of flagitions men, to their present sin.

Every vice shall have its proper torment: and the miseries which now correct
men, as the Beginning of Hell, shall be then consummate. Is not the Disorder
and Confusion, the Everlasting Pain and shame of Hell, begun to be inflicted on
sinners in this Life? some impieties are now troublesome and painful, the full
wages will be exquisite and intolerable anguish. As there is nothing more loath
some then some crimes; there shall be stench in the lake of Brimstone here
after. Sinners are now in slavery to their lusts, and led Captive by the Devil;
and in the prison of Hell, there are chains of Everlasting Darkness. They shall
reap as they sowed; and every man receive according to his works. God's Eternal
curse shall be the portion of the Impious swearer, and Blasphemer. Outer
Darkness is reserved for the wilful despisers of natural, and Evangelical
Light. The Atheists heart shall tremble under the vengeance of that God whose
being and authority he denied. The Glutton's teeth shall gnash; The Lascivions
and unclean be tormented in unquenchable flames, and vainly sigh for a drop of
water to cool their tongues.

As they who were useful in the world, and did good to others, shall shine as
stars in glory; the malicious, spiteful, and Envious, shall gnaw their own
bowels. As the Lovers of Peace, shall see the God of Peace, and be blessed;
Furious, Passionate, Angry, Turbulent sinners shall rave and roar for ever
under the wrath of God. As the merciful shall find mercy; the Covetons, and
uncharitable shall remember their lost opportunites of doing good, with extreme
regret; and the thoughts of their unimployed Riches be as Thorns in their
sides. As the meek and Humble shall be exalted; The proud shall be covered with
Shame: and thrown down to the bottom of contempt. As the Diligent soul shall be
rewarded with a glorious recompense; the slothful shall lament their stupid
neglicence; in trifling away their precious seasons, without a possibility of
retreiveing them. As holy Mourners shall then be comforted; the merry Jovial
sinner, who now laughs at serious piety, and derides Religion as a melancholy
humor, shall weep and wail, for ever. Every impenitent sinner shall after
Death be condemned to a state of unspeakable misery: not only far beyond the
present punishments of sin; but infinitely above all we can now apprehend or
fear; to continue as long as God and Heaven endure. i: e. it shall be without
the least hope of an intermission or Period. And this without unfeigned
Repentance, you will find to your cost, when it is too late, to be no groundless
fancy, or melancholy Dream, no politic device, or fine contrivance to keep the
world in awe; but the words of soberness, and the certain truth of God.
Therefore

. 5 This may abundantly convince us of the great absurdity and sottishness of
most sinners, in the prosecution of their Lusts. Who turn the deaf ear to all
these loud reproofs and smart corrections of their own Sin. Tho God has made
the wages of Iniquity to be troublesome and afflictive in this world, as well
as threatened eternal sorrows to the Impenitent hereafter; tho some crimes do
not only merit punnishment, at the hands of Justice, but inflict it; yet
foolish sinners court their own misery, with the refusal of Happiness. They
will feed upon husks, when Manna is offered them: they forsake the Fountain of
liveing Waters, to purchase a Fever: they neglect an Everlasting Heaven, in
the other world, for the Beginnings of Hell, in this. They forfeit and
relinquish the favor of God, and peace of conscience, and eternel Life, for the
embraces of an Harlot, for unjust gain, for Drunkenness and Riot, and such
like follies, with the afflictive consequences that attend them in this Life.

As if Pain were preferable to ease, and disquiet to satisfaction, and
contentment: as if Trouble were better than Peace: and Poverty than Riches. As
if sickness were more desirable than health; and Disapointment than Certainty:
and the horror and anguish of an accusing Conscience, then calmness and
serenity of mind. As if a long and happy Life, with the Love of God, and the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and the joyful prospect of a future
blessedness after this Life is ended, were less eligible than a miserable,
shameful, and untimely Death. Is it like Men, who have rational Souls, to make
such a choice? But to is more foolish and unreasonable, if you are considered
as professing Christians; to betray your God for a lust; your Redeemer, with
all the purchase of his death, for Pain, and Shame and loos your immortal
Souls, redeemed by his precious Blood, not for nothing only, but for what is
worse: and in order to be miserable for ever, choos to be so for the present.
Can you look upon Sin with all these disadvantages; and has it, can it possibly
have, any beauty to entice and charm you? But you will object, it may be, that
many who live in Sin, do not meet with these mischeivous effects and
consequences, upon the account whereof I would dissuade you from it. Therefore

6. We ought to consider that it is very consistent with the Justice of God, and
reconcilable to his wisdom, that all wicked men should not equally receive the
correction and punnishment of Sin in this world. Many men may so far bridle
their lusts, or enjoy the pleasures of Sin with so much craft and cunning, as
to escape many of those rebukes and smart corrections, which others meet with.
We have Instances of some who spend their days in Pride, and Cruelty, Lust, and
Luxury, and Rebellion against God, and yet leave this world without any
remarkable stroke of his anger and Justice: to the wonder, and stumbling of
Diverse who observe it.

In all Ages this has been a difficult objection against the Providence of
God; and urged on all occasions by Atheists and Sadducees in favor of their
cause against the Worshippers of God. And it is more easy of the two, to give
sufficient reasons of the persecutions and sufferings of good men, then to
solve the Impunity and Prosperity of the Wicked. 21 Job 7: 8. and seqq.
But neither can be done with clearness and satisfaction, without the belief of
a Future Judgment; and both of these are argumentative in their kind to persuade
that Belief. 12 Jer. 1.
David himself was puzzled for a time with this mystery of Divine Providence:
till he went into the sanctuary, 73 Ps. 22.
and seriously considered the latter end of Sinners. And then he exclaims
against himself, and cries out of his folly, How foolish was I and ignorant: I
was as a Beast before thee. For the Consideration of another Life, and a
Judgment to come will abundantly satisfye us of the reasons of divine Patience
and long-suffering for the present.; Why Sentence against Evil doers is not
speedily executed, or not at all in this world. They are condemned by the holy
Law of God, and bound over to his final Judgment; and tho the Execution be
delayed for a while, they cannot escape the hand of Justice, since God is
Omnipresent, Allmighty, and lives for ever. And how short is the time of God's
forbearance in this Life, if compared with an endless duration of misery after
the judgment day. We have little reason to envy them their present Prosperity,
when we consider that the day of Execution is appointed, and that they are
hastening to it; 2 Pet. 2:3.
for their Judgment does not linger, and their Damnation slumbreth not, says
the Apostle. The honor of God's Justice will then be more publicly
vindicated, and more openly manifest to all the world, then it could be by the
present punnishment of all great offenders. It will not be long ere they feel
the dismal effects of that Allmighty vengence they now deride; see the Heaven
they have lost and scorned; and suffer those intolerable and remediless
torments which they will not now believe or consider. In the mean time they are
not all of them altogether unpunisht in this world, but feel the lashes of
their own guilty self-condemning thoughts, by inward horror and anxiety of
mind, and continual fears of divine Justice: Which all their outward
prosperity cannot remedy, any more than music can cure the stone or Gout, or a
Crown of gold give eas to the headache. And these very fears of an after
reckoning are a mighty check and restraint upon those, who are above the
control of humane laws, and have power to defend and justifye their crimes.
The world would be filled with cruelty and blood, and mankind be destroyed by
the Lusts of Tyrants, and great Oppressiors, were they not in some measure
restrained by the fears of a future Judgment, and punishments in another Life.

Some such it may be are spared, in order to their Repentance and Amendment;
for some Persecutors, and Blasphemers, and notorious Criminals have been called
to Repentance; and afterward have been instrumental to glorify that God, whom
before they affronted and provoked. Or it may be God forbears them, as the
Executioners of his wrath upon others, as the scourges of the world, to punnish
the wickedness of other men. And when they have done his work, they shall be
seized by his Justice, and their latter end be as exemplary and remarkable, as
were their Jam non ad culmina Rerum,
Injuste crevisse queror; tolluntur in altum,
Ut lapsu graviore ruant.

Impieties. Of this Instances may be given in the Roman Emperors, and others.
For of nineteen or twenty Emperors, that passed between Antoninus the
Philosopher, and Claudius the second, not one of them escaped a violent Death.
Moreover, God may design to instruct us in our duty by his own Example, to
teach us by his infinite condescension and patience toward those who provoke
him, how to exercise meekness and forbearance one toward another. It being
impossible any injury we receive from our fellow creatures should ever be
heightened to such a guilt, as our sins against God are clothed with* But
whatever be the reason of Divine Patience, it is so far from being an argument
against his Providence, and a Future Judgment, that it may serve to establish
both. For some sinners are now corrected, and pursued by his justice, least we
should question wither he do at all concern himself in the affairs of mankind,
or would ever call men to an acount for what they do: and all great offenders
are not,, that there may be room for the exercize of Faith: and that we may the
better see the need of a judgment Day, and believe the certainty of it: and
that the threatenings of Everlasting miseries may have the more influence and
effect upon us; because some in great measure do escape the present
punnishments of their Impiety. And no wonder if the Providence of God in the
distribution of temporal good and Evil be now more dark and intricate then
formerly; that we can not so clearly observe his displeasure against the wicked
by present punishment, or his approbation of the Righteous by prosperous
Events: because we have now less need of such indications of divine favor or
wrath: since the extraordinary revelation which he has made of himself in the
holy Scriptures, especially in the new Testament, whereby we have a much clearer
light to guide us and a fuller and more manifest assurance of Eternal Rewards
and Punishments. But because ordinarily men are chastened, and corrected by
their wickedness in this world. Therefore

. 7. Let us resolve to avoid Sin, as ever we would avoid being meserable in
both worlds. The number is not great of those who abhor Evil by contemplating
it merely in the abstract; or choos piety by viewing in only in a Metaphysical
dress. Holiness, 't is true, should be loved for it self, as the image of God,
the most Excellent and most perfect Being: and Sin hated for its own intrinsic
Malignity, the Deformity, and Evil of its nature. But while we dwell in
bodies; present sufferings, and temporal calamities will very much affect us:
and as they are the usual consequents of Sin, may be likely to dissuade us
from it. Let us therefore gather grapes from these thorns, and figs from these
thistles, and turn these stones into Bread, by learning to be wise at a cheaper
rate then others. Let the Justice of God upon them be mercy to us, for our
Instruction and Warning: that we may not be corrected and reproved by our own
folly.

Because some have been impious without feeling all those miserable effects, or
but very few of them; shall we therefore run the hazard? will we swallow a cup
of poison, when we are foretold of the fatal consequence, because some have
done so unawares and escaped with their lives? Because some have been in a
tempest, and not drowned; would we choos to adventure our selv's in a storm?
will any Wiseman rush upon the point of a sword, because it may possibly miss
his heart, and not mortally wound him? whereas in case, if it should not, yet
the wound, will cost him dear by Repentance; and the dearer still, the longer
he delays the remedy.

Be persuaded therefore to receive instruction, before you taste the bitter
fruit of your own folly: and do not purchase Everlasting sorrows at the price
of Temporal. Be not such Enemies to your selv's, and to your own intrest, as to
run the hazard of being calamitous and afflicted now, to secure thereby
irrecoverable perdition hereafter. But if Sinners entice thee consent thou not,
1 Prove. 10: 15.4. c. 15.5. c. 4.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
walk not in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path. Avoid it,
pass not by it, turn from it and pass away. For the end will be bitter as
wormwood etc. Therefore avoid the occasions of Sin, least thou give thine honor
unto others; and thy reproach be not wiped away; least strangers be filled with
thy wealth; and thou mourn at the last, when thy Flesh and thy Body are
consumed, and say how have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised Reproof.
Consider the Reproof, and avoid the Correction of Sin, which now it gives you;
that these smaller drops may not preface a shower of vengence: that your final
ruin be not the consequent of your incorrigibleness under present
chastisement: that these Temporal Punnishments may not introduce more terrible,
insupportable, and endless wrath. Especially since our merciful Savior has
offered to deliver us from both: from the Temporal Punishments of Sin, by our
present Obedience to his holy Gospel; and from Everlasting Destruction, by that
Eternal Salvation, whereof he is the Author to All that obey him, and to none
but them.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Besides the literal faults and falls pointings, Page 3. line 3. read often. p.
4. l. 4. sar the r. that. l. 24. (...) p. 20. l. 26. r. riotous. p. 36. last
line r. with.


