A SACRED POEM OF THE Glory and Happiness OF HEAVEN.

By J. Shute

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

THE GLORY and HAPPINESS OF HEAVEN.
ABove the tallest most exalted View
When stretched and lifted up by Optics too;
Above the Unequal of this Azure Vault
So out of sight we cannot tell what to called,
High above all that our Conceits can reach
When sublimated to their utmost stretch,
There is, what we call Heaven, a joyous State
Too happy for a Guess to calculate:
The greatest Riches that a Miser's Dream
E're conjured up to tempt and flatter him
The most of Honor that a Monarchs Court
Can give those Men that hunt and rival for it,
The rarest Scenes that raptured Saints have viewed
When Fancy wrought in a Prophetic Mood,
Fall infinitely short of Heaven, and cannot
Yield Joys enough to treat or tempt a Saint:
He to whose Palate nothing suits but Bliss
Cannot relish such ignoble Fare as this:
Alas his noble Soul cannot stoop to esteem
Things so inglorious and unworthy him.
Heaven has more Glory couched within a Point
Than all this worthless scanty World has in it;
It Is guarded round with double Walls of Gold
As hard to force as stately to behold,
The Batteries which Damned Spirit's make
Cannot Scale its Bulwarks nor its Pillars shake
Their Hellish Engines spend their Strength in vain
For Bullets shot do but rebound again;
The gay Embroid'ry of the Place invites
All Admiration, and the gaudy Sights
Which charm the Eye on every side proclaim
The Power and Skill of him that wrought the same:
It Is garnished round with Light, and blazoned all
With those bright Rays which from Gods Image fall,
Thrones and Dominions here in order stand
Rankt in their Stations like a charging Band;
Mansions like Leaves in their Autumnal Falls
Lie scattered up and down on Pedastalls;
Above hang Canopies of vast Extent
Propt by the Power of God Omnipotent;
Scepters and Crowns of costly sorts here are
Rank't and enshrined like Magazines of War;
Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds in Clusters shine
And hang like Grapes upon a fruitful Vine;
The bright Piazza's of the Palace Court
Are paved with Rubies of the richer sort;
Three Royal Thrones all curiously wrought
Carved by the Skill of an Almighty Thought
Are fixed on a commanding Place, wherein
The Father, Son, and Spirit Sit and Reign
Their Crowns are charged with richer Pearls and more
Than India yields or ever Aaron wore;
And being triple-shap'd they do imply
The deep-lay'd Mystery of the Trinity;
In Godhead these are One, in Will the same,
Yet Three in Personality and Name.
The Fathers Looks are so divine, his Face
Bears in its Visage such Majestic Grace,
That it is a Happiness it self complete
To be enabled to contemplate it:
His aspect is so gravely great, and shows
So much of Deity to him that views,
That it is a Question managed in Disputes
Which does it most This, or his Attributes;
He Is happy in himself, and's Creatures are
Happy so far as they his Image bear.
The Prospect of his Glory shines as bright
In Hellish Darkness, as in Heavens Light,
He does enjoy his happy self as well
Amidst the daring Blasphemies of Hell
As the Saints Songs, but he has praise of Them
Because they bless themselves in blessing Him:
He is to them both Theater and Stage
And all they act is in his Personage
His Self-sufficiency completely fills
His Breast with Goodness, some of which distills
In Drops of Love on all his Works, but this
Is only what o'reflows from his Abyss:
The Son the Second of the Three appears
Bright with that Glory which his Image bears;
His Throne is such as He that fills it, none
Can fancy to be less than Three in One.
The Host salute him God and jointly sing
Hosannah's to their Prophet, Priest, and King;
That yet these Functions are in act is true
For Honor's paid him to each Office due.
He Is Prophet for his Spirit does reveal
The dark Intendments of his Fathers Will
And working with his Word affords us Light,
That shows us all the deep Designs of it.
He Is Priest and makes an Altar of his Throne
To offer up the Church her Prayers on,
His Intercession makes an Off ring good
When hallowed with the Merits of his Blood.
He Is King, this by his Scepter may be guest
Besides his Presence speaks him such at least;
His Church on Earth entitles him Supreme
And all Heavens Hierarchies second them.
Embroidered thus with Offices, and dressed
With all that speak one Beautiful or Blessed,
He sits enthroned and naked to the View
Of those that wonder and adore him too.
The Holy Ghost the Last in Order shows
Himself as great as Son or Father does.
His Presence is Divine his looks do own
A Grandeur proper to a God alone:
The Beauty of his Image does express
A shining, pure, untainted Holiness;
His Graces sweeter Odours do present
Than e're Arabia from her Spices sent
The Gifts wherewith he is embalmed descry
The Sweetnesses that in his Nature lie
The Grace and Greatness of his Presence draws
The Eyes of all Spectators, where they pause
Not out of Fear but Wonder while they see
So much of Sweetness, Love, and Majesty:
Before these Thrones the whole Celeftial throng
Do Homage, Couching as they dance along,
Where each devoutly on his bended Knee,
Lauds the distinct, but undivided Three;
The Fathers mighty Will and matchless Power
Are what in Him they most of all adore;
The Saints rejoice in these because they know
These made them happy and will keep them so.
They bless that Word whose mighty sound awoke,
Dull lifeless Nothing to a World, and spoke
A lumpish Chaos to a curious Frame,
And still has governed and upheld the same.
They reverence his Greatness most, and bow
To the grave Grandeur of his Godly Brow.
Their low respectful postures plainly prove
Their filial Sense of his Paternal Love.
They praise his Works below and sing them forth
In Numbers measured to express their Worth,
But when they view those Instances of Love,
That make more Figure in his Works Above;
When they survey the whole Celestial Sphere
And paraphrase on all the Wonders there,
They tune to higher strains and make their praise,
Keep pace with what Deserts its Object has.
So then Gods Power most applauded seems
Nay it is the Burden of their Sacred Hymns.
The Sons Perfections they as much proclaim
Couching in Homage to his Sacred Name.
They honor him as Sovereign, and own
How much they hold by Virtue of his Crown;
They Style him Prince of Peace, and all accord
In dutiful Allegiance to their Lord;
His Name of Savior sounds so sweet to all
It makes their Raptures Epidemical.
His bright unmantled Glory spreads it is Rays
And heats their spirits to delight and praise.
Some his Humility extol, and some
His Love that made Man from his Mansion come.
Some his Example, some his Doctrine bless,
Some his Compassion, some his Holiness;
All join his Incarnation to adore
That Blessing which begat ten thousand more.
Thus all in tributary Songs applaud
Their Prophet, Priest, their King and God.
The Holy Ghost whose Godhead is the same
Has Adoration proper to his Name.
Those of his Excellences that appear
In's Gifts and Graces most applauded are.
Some bless him for those first Convictive Calls
That kindly warned them against After-falls.
Some for Converting Grace from whence they had
Good Habits given to supersede the Bad.
Some for his Promises that banished Cares
And taught their Faith to overcome their Fears.
Some for his Testifying Seal that gave
Assurance of the Joys they hoped to have.
Some for the Comforts of his Presence here
Which cheered their Hearts whatever their Sorrows were,
Which after Trial of their Faith did quite
Take off the Cross or make it sit but light.
Some honor this, some That Grace most of All,
Yet their discordant Praise is musical;
For all in one harmoniously close
As differing Music in a Chorus does.
Thus Three in One and One in Three receive
The pers'nal Homage Holy Spirits give;
But though They are distinctly blessed, no One
Has Praise for what the other Two have none;
Neither in Glory or in Might excels
But in Perfection they are Parallels.
Yet this Description is not with Design
To grasp the Godhead nor its Bounds define;
To aim to scan or draw it out to view,
Would be Presumption and lost Labor too:
Who knows how God's distinctly Three in One
And One in Three without Division?
Who understands and will explain to me
This numerous One and yet unnumbred Three?
It Is too Mysterious for our Faith to clear,
He that believes must never reason here.
It Is Riddle to the Saints and little less
To the deep Insight of an Angel's Guess.
Oh topless Pile of Mysteries! its Height
Is undiscoverably out of Sight.
Our Reason when it proudly tries to view
Quickly grows giddy and confounded too:
It Is too much Light for Mortal Eyes to bear,
It Is inaccessibly Divine and clear;
I aim not then by this descriptive Guess
To found the Depth of what is bottomless.
If any Verse shall make the Riddle known
Some Angel-Laureat must drop it down;
This Height will keep its Mystic Distance still
In spite of Reason's counter-charming Skill;
Since then the more I look the less I see
Of what in Mercy is concealed from me,
I Will henceforth plainly take the Three in One
And mean them All when I name God alone.
But as the Deity can never admit
A Short-arm'd Human Thought to fathom it,
So punctually to copy out the Bliss
Which to the Saints in Heaven dispensed is,
Is more than Reason's able to direct
Me to perform or any to expect;
In Nature's Search we to the Cause advance
Before we can inform our Ignorance;
To judge of Acts we must their Objects know,
Else as unlearned as when we came we go.
So to proportion out the boundless Love,
That is imparted to the Blessed Above;
We ought to understand the Fountain whence
These happy Souls derive their Influence.
What Is in the Effect is in the Cause be sure,
Streams will not run muddy if the Spring be pure.
First to know God does necessary seem
To know the Happiness of Souls in Him,
But Spirits are so exquisitely fine
They escape our Notices and pass unseen;
And if our Reason cannot discourse of These
Who knows what God the Father of them is?
So then I Will only speak my Thoughts and give
This loose Account of what the Blessed receive;
The Throne Imperial is encompassed round
With Guardian-Angels to their Stations bound;
These glittering Courtiers all of Royal Blood
Seem by their Services to credit God;
Each in the Brightness of his Glory spreads
More Rays of Luster than proud Phoebus sheds,
But yet those Beams in which they shine so bright
Are all reflected from Diviner Light.
They borrow all their Beauty which would soon
Decline and fade if God should hide his own.
Their different Orders comlily agree
And jointly make a graceful Symmetry.
All know their Distance and devoutly give
To God the Rights of his Prerogative:
Next these there does another Order wait
Of Beings less insufferably great,
I mean the Saints whose Faith and Patience sought
This Purchase which their Elder Brother bought;
Whose thrifty Stewardship of Talents gained
These large Possessions in the Holy Land;
Of These, the Patriarchs (from whom proceed
The numerous Offspring called the Holy Seed)
With all their pious Progeny beset
Are here in Universal Council met.
Hard by assembled in a spacious Sphere
The grave Society of Prophets are;
These are a Sage Prognosticating Race
Exalted by the Chemistry of Grace,
Above the Vulgar Saints; their Office proves
Them more Divine by two or three Removes.
They sit all clad in the Mysterious Dress
Of Hieroglyphick Schemes and Images,
The Pageantry of their Prophetic Dreams
Is painted in their Robes, the Mystic Schemes
Of Types and Visions drawn in Perspective,
Make pictured Things seem to the Eye alive:
Thus gayly dressed in party-colored Plumes
They sit like Limners in their Image-Rooms:
By these as near as Order will permit
The grave Apostles in a Synod meet.
These by their Presence would be guessed to be
Committee-Saints or Patres Patriae;
Hard by the Martyred Champions of the Cross
That died least Life should be a public Loss,
Whose Courage to the Death unshaken stood
And wrote their Cause in Characters of Blood.
Ranged in Battalia joyfully advance
Their dear bought Spoils of Faith and Patience.
These and a thick innumerable Host
Swarming throughout the whole Celestial Coast,
Stand all devoutly ready to fulfill
The welcome Orders of their Makers Will:
And they are done just as they are embraced
With a most Zealous Cautionary Have;
It Is neither base nor servile to submit,
They work Gods Will and will in working it;
No Time nor Strength is in a Message spent
The Errand's done as soon's the Saint is sent;
Thus God and They are pleased in that as soon
As his Design is known to Them, it is don:
Nor does their Zeal in Ministering decline
Its strength is Energetic and Divine;
It knows no Chills and is from Pauses free
There acting where 'twould always active be;
Thus the Employments which they here pursue
Are both their Business and Diversion too:
Delight is all they know, here is only That
For Souls to feed upon and center at:
They find a happy Welcome here, and are
Enobled for the Dignities they wear.
Their Souls and Bodies are refined and freed
Of those Infirmities Corruption breed;
They both receive such great Improvements here
That they take leave of being what they were.
The Soul now fashioned in a purer Mould
Finds its New-make more noble than the old.
Its Powers those of Intellect and Will
Are much improved by Glory's Chymic Skill;
Its Knowledge is not seconded with Fear
Or jealous Doubts of some Delusion near;
It learns but labors not nor is afraid
It shall forget what in it self is laid;
It knows by Intuition, and has got
The sweet Advantage of the Shorter Cut;
No cloudy Doubts do intercept its sight
It Is now embodied in a Vest of Light.
Passion and prejudice are Things unknown
And Ignorance that Brand of Sin is gone.
Organs and Optics now would match it ill,
Readiness Armor did but cumber David's Skill.
These do but cheat and give a faithless Light
Just like an Ignis Fatuus in the Night,
Which treacherously leads the Pilgrim on
Pretending Kindness when it means him none.
It needs no painful searches to descry
Where Truths though hid in Intricacy's lie,
For all in naked view and prospect sit
Unfolding even they Secrecies to it.
It spies a series of Things without
A gradual Discourse to find them out.
It sees how amicably Truths cohere
How different Notions clash and interfere;
A Glance now brings more secrets on the Stage
Than the less-fruitful Studies of an Age;
Nor can Saints doubt or err for what they know
Is sure in Object and in Subject too:
Their Souls too thirsty to accept a stream
Have here the Spring of Truth unlock't to them,
And ah! how joyfully they bathe herein
They drink till drinking makes them dry again.
And sure this easy way of knowing cannot
But aggravate the pleasures of a Saint;
To know himself to be directed right
By the sure Guide of undeceived Light,
To have all Cheats and Sophistry removed
And see each Truth by its Exemplar proved;
This cannot choose but please him and the more
Because unhappy in his Doubts before.
Alas imperfect Knowledge here on Earth
Though (...) to gain and painful in the Birth:
Though mixed with Doubts and never sifted clean
But some perplexities still intervene,
Is thought the best Endowment Nature can
Give to complete and gratify a man.
It Is true the search is long and far about
Yet when a latent Truth is started out
How comfortable is it then, how good
To make a few Reviews and chew the Cud!
This Men call Pleasure and pursue as such
But that of Saints surpasses it by much;
What the Soul knows on Earth is hardly gained,
What here, like Jacobs Venison comes to hand:
Here't has the Garb of Light wherewith it is clad
As cheap and easy as the Lillies had,
It never brings a Matter to debate
But knows it e're it can deliberate.
Alas their Knowledge is as quick and free
As the Conception of a Thought can be.
It takes the compass which their Fancies run
Whatever they Will or wish to know is known.
The Soul thus purged from Ignorance and Sin
Is all Illumination within;
It Is pleased in knowing how it knows and does
Draw Pleasure from the Mode and Object both.
Truth is its standing Banquet and the Feast
Has Plenty fitted for the greedy Guest.
The Understanding now awakned sees
The Truth of Things it thought false Prophecies.
A state of endless Pleasure once did seem
The fond Illusion of a sickly Dream:
Joys in Reversion were but gilded Lies
And Heaven it self but some Fools Paradise;
And though Faith taught it some believing Skill
Yet Carnal Scruples kept it doubting still;
But now all faithless Jealousies are fled
And full Assurance introduced instead;
And Reason taught by what it has received
Owns with a Witness all it disbeliev'd;
The Will's now rectified and settled well
In that free happy Frame from whence it fell;
God's Goodness is its Object whose alone
Yields an Infinity to act upon.
How greedily it fastens here? it makes
Eternal seizure on the Good it takes.
It feeds as hungrily as if it knew
Some Famine would the present feast ensue,
And does the Zeal of its Approaches prove
By the strong efforts of a sprightly Love.
It gapes as if it thought its Nature might
Suck in and swallow down the Infinite;
It clasps about him, grasps, and grasps again
Still thrusting out it self to take him in.
Its passionate Embraces plainly show
That it is enamored and transported too.
Thus it is employed and will for ever be
Raptured in one Eternal Ecstasy.
The Faculties of Soul being thus renewed
Are balanced to their proper Rectitude.
The Reason governs by prudential Skill
Never Taxes nor exacts upon the Will,
Its mild Decretals are embraced so soon
As the least Intimation makes them known.
The Will trained up on purpose to submit
Is wholly tempered to comply with it;
No Prejudices interrupt its Choice,
No Passions bribe it to suspend its Voice,
But what its Guide enjoins it strait obeys
Without the least exceptionary Pause.
The Reason's pleased that his proposals have
Such kind Acceptance from his willing Slave.
The Will is gladded too in that it knows,
Whatever unerring Wisdom shall propose
Must needs be good; and therefore loves to choose
What would appear Self-murder to refuse.
Thus both are pleased and from their being so
Proceeds the greatest pleasure Spirits know.
The Fancy too has here a lovely Scene
Of beauteous Visions to entertain,
All Heavens Glories in one Object meet,
That all at once may always ravish it;
Nay it is delighted to so strange a Height
It has the Joys it can it self create:
Those tempting pleasures which a working Brain
Can paint in prospect to delude a man,
Their Fancy's here by an Almighty Power
Can reallize; and raise ten Thousand more.
Thus it is employed Eternally to seize,
Some New-found-Lands of Joy and Happiness.
The Soul thus pure, the Body must be dressed
To welcome in this Honorable Guest:
Which when the Dormitories shall resign
The Sacred Dust of Saints they did enshrine;
When Graves shall offer up their Dead and give
All to an Atom which they did receive,
Shall be accomplished to the great Delight
Of all that view the Glory of the Sight;
The scattered Portions reunited then
Shall to their Bodies be composed again.
Which being new-inform'd and nobler made
Shall reassume the former Souls they had.
But no pale Face, no feeble Joints presume
To enter, here no peccant Humors come
To usher Sickness in, no sense of pain
No Weaknesses or Lassitude remain;
All the Infirmities of Youth and Age
Are forced to vanish and decline the Stage.
For though the Body rose yet these must stay
Where the Soul left them when it fled away.
And here it does a new Dimension gain
As glorious as its Nature can sustain;
A just proportion is to it assigned
It leaves all gross ignoble parts behind;
Corruptions and Infirmities are gone
And a new livelier Image fastened on.
Consistency must always be its state
Wherein it shines pure and immaculate;
It can not Youth nor Age from Time receive,
But in Eternal Springs of Years shall live;
It lives, but to Declension never shall grow
Its budding Verdure shall no Autumn know.
Its Countenance does such a freshness yield,
As baffles far the Glories of the Field.
Such Lights and Flames its Visage does disperse
As would illuminate the Universe.
Its Senses also great Advancements gain
Fit for the Objects they must entertain:
Senses I call them still, but it is for want
Of Terms more proper and significant;
Nor do all these perhaps admittance find,
It Is probable that some are left behind,
As Taste and Smell; but all do Hear and See
Else when shall Faith to Vision changed be?
Which Two I think are so endowed that they
Have all their Imperfections purged away.
For if by Grace we are changed from what we were
Why should not Glory make such Changes here?
But whether here are Some, or All, or None
To own or not is free for any One.
This we believe, All Requisites concur
To make the Body glorious and pure.
Body and Soul thus dignified are dressed
To solemnize a second Marriage Feast.
No jarring Faculties untune the Soul
But all conform to Reason's Music Rule.
Its Thoughts are calm and find an easy Vent,
Its Passions are all Love and Merriment;
Its Humors even, sociable, and sweet,
Its Pleasures constant and intensely great;
Its Virtues all are consonantly tuned
And dance in Consort when they run their Round.
No cross Propensions counterstrive within,
No stubborn Humors clash and intervene;
No Aversations cramp the Will's Decrees,
No Stops arrest it in its Purposes.
But all such civil Altercations cease
And usher in an universal Peace;
The Body too is well in Frame, the Tongue
Speaks of no Parts that suffer Want or Wrong;
All factious Insurrections are suppressed,
Its Work is Ease, and all its Labors Rest.
No sickly Fastings made its Beauty Fade,
No Pains nor Hardships do its Strength invade;
The Veins are Channels only to conveigh
The Peaceful Inundations of Joy.
The Nerves grow big and consciously proud
As being inspirited with nobler Blood.
All parts in their Relation to the whole
Do dutifully join to serve the Soul.
Whose Precepts being mild the Body has
An easier Service than its former was.
Thus One has no Rebellious Lusts to tame,
The other no Severities to blame;
But both their mutual Affections prove.
By interchangeable Returns of Love.
Now when the Elect shall from the Quarters come
To be possessed of their Eternal Home
When at the Judgment of the Just the Saints
Shall take their ultimate Accomplishments.
Then Soul and Body shall unite, that Both
When joined may make what neither single does.
What joyful Ecchoings will then rebound?
How will the Cloisters and Piazzas sound?
What Acclamations will the Legions make?
How will the Kingdom and its Pillars shake?
What a glad aspect will the Heavens wear
When this great Marriage Rites in Action are?
How will Praise sound amidst the jolly Crew
When every Saint is Bride and Bridegroom too?
Oh blessed Harmony when All in One,
Sing sacred Hymen's in a Bridal Tune!
This glad triumphant Day Blessed Spirits state
The Epoch for their Eternal Date;
So will I date these Lines, and as I go
Still take that Time as if 'twas present now.
Now Divine Wisdom does it self reveal
And all those Depths it did so long conceal;
Ah what a lovely sight is This? and how
Do Saints in Praise and Admiration bow!
How does it gratify their Souls to see
The faithful Records of Eternity!
These Legends show how God did first create
Things in that Order they continue yet.
These Comment on the World and represent
A Modul of its Make and Government.
They teach them how his grand Designs were laid,
What Issues and Results his Counsels had,
How his deep Thoughts and Purposes were wrought
To that effect which most advantage brought.
The Southern Queen thought it a happy Thing
To hear the Wisdom of a Jewish King;
But here is that Happiness as much out-don
As God is Wiser than King Solomon.
His Power also stands in View, and shows
It self as Glorious as his Wisdom does,
It Is neither terrible to view nor meet
Allays of Love do so attemper it.
On Earth his Presence dreadful we believe
We know we cannot behold his Face and live;
But here these Bosom-Favourites do treat
With God their Sovereign as their Intimate:
Now they delight to see and feel the hand
That fixed the Heavens in the Place they stand,
That raised this Earthly Frame, and did subdue
The Power of Men and Rage of Devils too.
That saved his Flock when Wolves about it stood
Threatening its Death thirsting for its Blood.
That turned the Wheel of Providence about
And ordered all things that were fastened to it.
That made cross Dispensations work for Good,
And all things work as 'twas his Will they should
The sight of this so heightens their delight
That all their Joys are aggravated by it;
If Power and Wisdom so delightful are
How will the Aspects of his Love appear?
Sure this endearing Spectacle does want
Naught that may ravish and transport a Saint;
When Love shall show it self without a Vail
And nothing of its Loveliness conceal;
When it shall smile without a frown and dart
Its Beams direct to the Spectators Heart.
When Saints shall see that gracious Breast wherein
Love from Eternity has active been,
Whence all designs of Mercy did proceed,
Where all great Acts of Grace were born and bred:
When they shall see what made God's only Son
Put off his Glory and desert his Throne.
What made him condescend to take a Birth
And pitch his Tabernacle here on Earth.
Why 'twas that he with such submission died
And prayed that he might live who pierced his side?
Their Souls sing Anthems with a freer Vent
Being rapt beyond themselves in Ravishment;
Let him that can their Joyfulness express
I wont confine it to my scanty Guess.
And as the sight of these foments their Bliss
So does the prospect of his Holiness.
Alas this cannot choose but give Delight
They live and move and have their Beings by it;
Self-Love would make them long to have this seen
Being what themselves are made and molded in;
To see a Being so intensely pure
That nothing can exalt or drain it more;
A Nature so untaintedly Divine,
So spiritually spotless, and so fine;
So simple, lovely, and endearing too,
Must needs exasperate their Joys anew.
Thus these Perfections and as many more
As endless Sums can add unto the score,
Or God that owns them only knows are seen,
By those glad Eyes which always suck them in;
And what a Prospect entertains their sight
With an unbounded Province of Delight;
In him there are so many Things that call
For Admiration, that the Angels all
Together with the Saints still eye their God
And hover in the Light of his Abode:
Now Happiness is all they do pursue
They Have that of Vision and Fruition too.
Their full eyed Souls have now a strength to bear
Gods Glory though its Brightness does appear.
They Are so intent on Vision, that they seem
To prey on God whilst they are viewing him;
Their Eyes behold with such a thirsty Zeal
That where they set them first they settle still;
They look till what they for their Object had,
By Transformation is their Beings made.
For God, while they behold him, does impart
Some of himself to each Spectators Heart,
And still the more they look the more they seem
To have of what they view and praise in him;
And thus his Likeness is impressed and wrought
In all the Parts and Powers the Saints have got.
It Is stamped in lively Lines, its parts are all
Drawn full and perfect, clear and symmetral.
This Image is not like an outward Grace
Drawn to imbellish and adorn a Face,
It Is rather radicated and innate
Wholly transformative and intimate;
It is the Principle that does begin
Eternal Peace and Harmony within;
By this the Soul in Act and Habit too,
Is taught its Good and Glory to pursue;
It Is wholly bent on Duty and does own
That Happiness and That is all but one.
Now holy Actings are in Flux, and run
Free from their Souls like Atoms from the Sun.
Each Action now is ravishing and sweet
Such large Rewards of Pleasure wait on it.
Each Saint is now so beautiful and bright
He is the Object of his own Delight.
Ah how it does Solace his Soul to make
Surveys upon himself, to search and see
How the Impression and the Seal agree?
To see how Glory has transformed him all,
How the Draught answers the Original?
To see himself made one with God, from whom
All his sweet Incomes and Illapses come?
How does this heighten and enhance their Bliss?
What Transports do their ravished Looks confess?
They tune so many Anthems that the Host
Do sing till Praise be in their Numbers lost.
They clap their Hands and Wings for Joy, and run
In endless Coronets about the Throne:
And this they do with as familiar Ease
As they themselves can think of what they please;
For being like Orbs, all to their Stations bound
God's Central Magnetism draws them round.
Thus they are happily employed and feel
More Joys than we or they themselves can tell;
Nay, they are glorified to such Degree
As to affirm must needs be Blasphemy.
Or high Presumption, had not God the Lord
Strongly confirmed it in his Sacred Word.
Who else dares say for fear he should Blaspheme
That Saints are one with Christ and He with Them?
Or say (methinks even now it sounds profane)
They dwell in God, and God in Them I mean.
These Heights of Speech (which Reason cannot conceive
And therefore is engaged to disbelieve)
We question not, for Faith forbids Distrust
And tells us This we would believe and must.
God's more to Them than Souls to Bodies are
Through him they act, and ever acting were.
He and They truly correspond (like Doves)
In joint Reciprocation of Loves.
They possess Him, and are of Him possessed;
Thus He in Them, and They in Him are blessed.
From which uniting Juncture does ensue
Immediate Intercourse of Action too.
On Earth we Interceptions meet, but here
Their Joys with Grief never interrupted are;
Gladness is all their Soul, they cannot conceive
What it is to be disconsolate or grieve;
Their pampered Wills no Disappointments know
They Are always pleased and always would be so:
Delights no Measure, Joys no mixture bring;
But both from pure unwasted Fountains Spring:
They have a Heaven fully to enjoy,
Where neither Want does pinch, nor Plenty cloy.
Their luscious Pleasures surfeit to delight,
They always eat to gain an Appetite.
Joys in Reversion once, are now possessed;
And Love in Motion's changed to Love in Rest.
Desire is made Delight, and Hopes that were
Mixed with Mis-givings, have Assurance here.
They swim in pleasantness, and always find
Fresh Banquets to caress and feast the Mind;
Nay what yet swells their Joy, they know its date
Is too long-lived for Time to terminate.
They know their Sun of Glory shall never set,
They Would lose Heaven did they fear the losing it;
It Is sure for Christ has signed it with his Blood,
And God has bailed his Truth to make it good.
Their Paradise is built too firm to fall
For Truth and Promises composed it all,
Love is its Cement, Christ the Corner Stone,
And God the Basis which it is built upon.
What great Additions do the Thoughts of This
Bring to enlarge and stretch their Happiness.
To think that Heaven when Time is past and gone
Shall be as new as when it first begun:
That when innumerable Years are past
Their Joys shall still retain their Virgin Taste.
This makes their Mirth more pallateable still,
As sweet Infusions in a Cordial will;
To think the Feast they eat so gladly now
Shall still be plentiful and pleasant too.
To think their Appetites shall never forbear
To be as keen as they at present are;
And that their Feast shall be as luscious still
And as continual as their Stomachs will;
This blessed Assurance glads their Spirits more
Than any single Joy they had before:
For taking thus Eternity in View
Makes all its future Pleasures present too.
Each single Comfort carries in its Womb
The luscious Foretast of still more to come.
One brings the relish of the rest in hand
As Joshua's Grapes did of the Promised Land.
Their Joys are never adjourned but always near
For Expectation is Enjoyment here.
Thus all have now Eternity of Bliss
And yet it is still in prospect to possess.
This aggravates their Joys and scrues their Thoughts,
To Heights scarce vented in Seraphick Notes;
Each in his proper Sphere of Duty pays
His honorary Tribute of Applause;
Just as the thankful Birds devoutly sing
Their Mattins to the Goddess of the Spring;
Hymns and Hosannahs from all Quarters sung
Is all that can be heard amidst the Throng.
And that must needs be an Harmonious Noise
Where Mirth and Melody do counterpoise;
Anthems and Halelujahs rise in Swarms
And sound to Praise as Trumpets do to Arms;
They sing so sweetly, and so long, they seem
To be all Lungs or what is instead of Them;
Ah with what Joy these jocund Spirits move
Round in the Orb of God's suffusive Love!
Their Souls so strut with Joyfulness that some
Take up even Heaven it self for Elbow-room.
Ointments of Love still sweetning as they fall
Bedew, embalm, and overrun them all:
Thus are they all delighting in their God
And gladed with their Being and Abode:
Glory is shared, in common all unite
In one Community of Love and Light;
Here are no Guardians of forbidden Fruit,
But Happiness is free and prostitute:
Yet Blessedness has its Degrees, nay such
As make the Blessed Spirits differ much:
Glory is carved and parcell'd out, but yet
Its Portions are not all commensurate.
Heaven is no lawless lev'lling Anarchy
But a Monarchical Theocrisie;
And therefore we have no reason to conclude
That all are uniformly Great or Good.
In Monarchies we own the King Supreme,
The Princes next, the Viceroy next to Them;
And so through all Degrees which represent
The great Decorum of a Government.
So Here, JEHOVAH supersedes the State,
Beneath his Footstool Seraphims are set;
Next Cherubims, and Thrones, Dominions then,
So till we take the Hierarchy in;
As Angels, so no doubt but Saints do bear
Their gradual subordinations here;
The Elders are a Rank of Worth, but yet
The Apostles Order is transcending that,
For They with Christ as Sacred Writings tell
Shall judge the Tribes the Twelve of Israel:
To each God gives that Portion of his Love
To which by Faith he did a Title prove:
Each Order and Degree of Grace shall meet
A Form in Glory that shall answer it:
He whose five Talents gained five more, and He
Whose Two, gat Two, do differ in Degree.
A Patron of Religion shall have Store
Of Glorious Dowry's but a Martyr more:
A late Repentant shall have Room prepared,
But long Obedience shall have large Reward.
Yet tho they differ he that has the least
Has what contents his Will and fills his Breast
He has as much as he can grasp, his soul
Is complacentially stufft and full;
He murmurs not that other Saints have more
Or He has least, but rather does adore
In Love and Gratitude his God that gave
What He enjoys and all his Fellows have:
Such are the Dignities, they here abide
As those to whom they are given are qualified;
All their Perfections are arrayed and dressed
To suit those Powers by which they are possessed:
For were they modeled more or less to crave
Than by Eternal Charter they can have,
'Twould bate so much of Happiness, 'twould be
The long complaint of Endless Misery;
If they had more than they could bear the Weight
Finding no Powers to preponderate;
Would in the Cruelty of Kindness kill
And press their Souls from Heaven into Hell.
If less they would still be hunting in Pursuit
Of what must ever be forbidden Fruit.
Thus disappointments would torment the Mind
Finding it self for Misery designed;
So that if This, This also must be true
That Saints are happy and unhappy too.
There Is none but Graduates in Grace that e're
Commenced a Degree in Glory Here.
But those good Works which ushered in the Saints
Now being useless are excluded hence;
Mercy is needless in this happy state
For Misery can no Admittance get.
Here are no sick to visit or bemoan
For all are healthy and Immortal grown.
Here Hospitality unpractic'd lies
And Burial of the Dead for Nothing dies.
Here are no Foes to reconcile, no Need
Of Interceding, They are all agreed:
And sure where works of Mercy find no Room
Those of Necessity must never come.
No Heat nor Cold can ever them molest
For, by a wonder not to be expressed,
That Sun who by his Heat does them relieve
Does by his Shadow also shelter give;
Through Exercise they neither sleep nor faint
Because their Labors no Repose does want.
Their hardest Work is easy to Delight
And never impairs but re-inforces Might;
And as their Power is able so their Will
Is likewise vigorous and active still;
Love consecrates their Services and Zeal
Gives Oil and Motion unto Duties Wheel:
Nor is it servile to obey the Saints
While they submit are in their Elements;
Nay they attend Gods Will as much or more
Than Artick Needles do the Magnet's Power.
And being delighted in the Work they do
They act in Rest, and rest in Action too.
Their Wills are tuned to Gods, and all in One
Do Echo in Consent when his is known.
These and innumerable Millions more
Of unknown Pleasures treasured up in store,
Are plentifully on the Saints bestowed
By their free-hearted openhanded God.
It cannot be thought with what Delight they move
In endless Circles of repeated Love:
With what exalted Melody they sing
The Song of Canaan unto Judah's King:
Their dissolved Souls even drop in Mirth and Zeal,
And run as Metals melt with Lightning will:
Pleasure is all they know or do possess
They breath no Air but Joy and Happiness:
Now Glory Triumphs, Praise is fully Crowned,
And Songs of Jubilee (whose joyous sound
Eccho's in Tune) are ravishingly Sung
By the joint Voices of the Jolly Throng:
Joys do commence the Height of Heights and flow
From Springs that neither Banks nor Bottom know.
Their Souls are lost like Things in an Abyss,
In Trances of ungovernable Bliss;
Their Joys never fail them, but are still renewed
In endless Transports of Beatitude.
For this they ever bless their God, and seem
As sacrificed in Flames of Love to him.
Let Silence speak the rest and Faith believe
It Is far beyond their Hopes what Saints receive;
Our Thoughts of Glory are too dwarfish still
And all drop short as charmed Bullets will;
It Is neither Faith nor Fancy can pretend
To know its Height or Depth, its Breadth or End.
The only Thought that can describe this State,
Is to think what you cannot Think, It Is That.
THE REVIEW.
IS it thus then? Is all that Reason says
As short of Heaven as Folly is of Faith?
Is Glory hid from our presumptuous sight
By the dark Vail of its obscuring Light?
Does Reason after Trial made, confess
Its Depth unfathomably Bottomless?
And is my Soul whom Toys and Follies please
Born Heir expectant of such Joys as these?
Will Faith and Patience by an Act of Grace
Entitle me to this Triumphant Place?
Farewell all sublunary Joys, be gone
You empty Shadows I once doted on.
All Earths evanid Glories I despise,
Here are no Objects that shall tempt my Eyes.
I am resolved to follow and pursue
The Heaven which Faith not Fancy leads me to.
It Is thee, O God I will design who art
The Peace and Portion of my Better Part.
Farewell ye fruitless Vanity of Youth
The frothy Fits of Pride and Passion both:
Farewell those thrifty and ambitious Crimes
Which pass for Virtues in these Modish Times.
What Is an Estate that I should toil and sweat
Or pawn this Happiness to purchase it?
Misers are happy only in their dream
When fancied Heaps of Riches real seem,
For when the Visionary cheat is over
With a rich Sigh they Sigh for waking Poor.
What is a Name? It Is Nothing in disguise,
A Bubble dressed in gilded Vanities;
There Is Nothing solid in it to be found,
It Is empty Things that yield and spread a sound;
The Noise that does from Men's Applauses come
Is like the empty Loudness of a Drum.
These Toys so highly prized, so much embraced
By some, I once more bid Farewell in Have:
Farewell my Friends and dear Enjoyments too,
Nay I must bid my former self adieu.
I have but one thing of this World to crave
And that is the parting Kindness of a Grave;
If I must pay for it, I Will not give Receipt
But leave my Body Prisoner for the Debt.
I am designed, if nothing spoils my Aim,
A Pilgrim to the New Jerusalem.
This is my Purpose, and I hope 'twill stand
Till I set Footing in the Holy Land:
Let Egypt be forgotten and forsook
I wont give Sodom a recanting Look.
But let the progress of my Journey show
That I was willing and Believing too.
Mount then my Soul and make thy full Career
Never stop till thou must stop thy Courser there.
Lift up thy lowly Stature now and View
What it is the Promises invite Thee to?
Rouse up thy self, shake of these Bands that keep
Thy Powers entombed in a Lethargic sleep.
Get the Innocence and Pinions of a Dove
Then clip away unto thy Rest above:
But why so Careless, Sluggish and remiss
In Business so importunate as this?
Ah how I Am plagued with an unwilling Mind!
It shows Averseness while it lags behind!
Do sin or sleep out all thy Days, and yet
Hope to awake in this most joyous State?
Would thou have Holiness perfected there
But hate to have't initiated here?
Ah Carnal Madness! how its Actions run
Quite to unravel what thy Hopes had spun?
Has he a Harvest that neglects to Sow?
Do Oaks arise where Acorns never grow?
Come then adjourn these unbelieving Dreams
Earth is not such a Heaven as it seems.
Do not perceive what fatal Dangers nigh
Life lies most open in a closed Eye.
Shake off these drowsy Humors and prepare
For the accounting at the Judgment Bar!
Don't think that Heaven is the Gift of Fate,
That Souls are saved as chance shall arbitrate;
But know thy Actions Good or Bad must take
That Retribution which thy Judge shall make.
Now you are Probationer for that Reward
Which God has for the Virtuous prepared.
The Elements of Glory must be wrought
On Earth, its seed must be by Grace begot,
A Gracious Frame and Disposition Here
Is the promotive of a Glorious There:
Well then be wise and busily employ
The Present Seeds-time of Eternal Joy!
But while I reason thus my Soul does mourn
And Sighs me out this sorrowful Return.
My Powers are feeble, and my strength is weak.
When I Have a Will, I want a Tongue to speak.
I look to Heaven with a longing Eye
Spreading my willing Wings but cannot fly.
I strive to rise but my Attempts are vain
Or if I do Earth tugs me down again:
Sometimes my Passions so pervert my Will
That when I know the Good I chose the Ill.
A pious Purpose seldom comes to good
Some cross Temptation nips it in the Bud.
Sometimes a sudden Flash of Sacred Heat
Inflames my Temper to a Zealous sweat
But suddenly this hasty Fit goes over
And then my Heart grows lifeless as before;
As a young Exhalation newly fled
Aspiring upwards scorns its dusty Bed
And strait means Heaven, but cooling into Rain
Becomes more pursie and drops down again;
Just so's my Love, at its first lanching out
It scorns I should its Perseverance doubt,
It Is so presumptious and so hot withal,
'Twont take Discretion for a Social;
But as it mount this short-lived Heat abates
Passion declines and Zeal degenerates.
Its hasty Proffers were too nice and young
To bear the Hardship of Attendance long;
And thus my Love unfeather'd when it fled
Wants Wings to bear it whither it decreed;
Then Carnal Thoughts to their own Center bound,
First make it Earthy, and then drag it down:
And thus my State too evidently such
Calls more for Help and Pity than Reproach.
Poor helpless Slave, to thee, O Christ I cry
Who had (...) fleshly Cage as well as I.
O give (...) set the Captive free,
And teach (...) use my Liberty;
Let no good (...) Praise, nor Will to Love,
For want of thee to help, Abortive prove.
Favor such Actions, let their Progress show
Thy kind Acceptance and Concurrence too.
First hallow my Affections, then excite
Some vigorous Energy and Appetite;
Then give a Power whose un-resisted Force,
May bear me out in a Religious Course;
First cleanse my Soul, then bid thy Spirit come
And make the Closet of my Heart its Home.
Then I shall have some previous Gusts and feel
The complacential Relishes of Zeal:
Why should I richly starve, or hungry live,
When Hopes and Promises such Plenty give?
Let me know sometimes by an Antepast
How sweet Heavens Joys in Prelibation taste.
Shed some Illapses of thy Love, impart
Some Interviews of Glory to my Heart!
Why is thy Image veiled? It Is seldom seen
So much Eclipse, but when Sins intervene:
If that is the cause let Mercy's Beams affright
These Hellish Clouds that make so black a Night.
Unmask thy Visage, not to weak-ey'd Sense
But give my better sighted Faith a Glance:
Give me some Pledge by which I may be tied
Least Carnal Scruples plead my Bargain void;
Nay I am apt to Merchandise away
A future Kingdom for a present Toy.
Feed me with Promises, when that will not do it
Let Faith be chewing on an Attribute;
Let neither Fears nor Unbelief prevent
My firm Assurance nor my full Consent.
But let Faith guide me by a skillful hand,
And guard my Passage to the Promised Land.
Keep my Soul praying, and dispose it that
Its intermittent Pulse thy Praises beat.
Give me such Courage as shall make me fit
To cope with all Discouragements I meet;
Such full Belief as shall not leave me Room
To doubt the Truth or Worth of Joys to come;
Such Patience as shall make me calmly wait
The happy time of my Exchange of State;
Till when I Will joy in hope of what shall be
Fully unbosom'd and revealed to me.
FINIS.

