A Learned COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION UPON The first CHAPTER of the Second
Epistle of S. Paul to the CORINTHIANS.

BEING The Substance of many SERMONS formerly Preached at Grayes-Inne, London,

By that Reverend and Judicious Divine, RICHARD SIBBS, D. D.

Sometimes Master of Catherine-Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher to that
Honorable Society.

Published for the Public Good and Benefit of the Church of CHRIST.

By Tho. Manton, B. D. and Preacher of the Gospel at Stoake-Newington, near
London.

-- Vivit post funera virtus. Psalm 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance. 2 Pet. 1. 15. Moreover, I will endeavor that you may
be able after my decease, to have these things always in remembrance. LONDON,
Printed by J. L. for N. B. and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at his Shop
over against the Great Conduit, at the Lower end of Cheapside. 1655.

RIC:SIBBS S:THEOL:D:AVL:KATHARINAE CANTAB:MAG:NEC NON HOSPITIO
GRAI:AS:CONCIONIBVS. Aetat: Suae 58.
The Portracture of the Late Reverend and Judicious divine Richard Sibbs D: D:
Mr. of Katharine Hall in Camb: and sometimes Preacher to that Honble: Society
of Grayes-Inn London

Printed for Nich: Bourne at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange 1655



To the Reader.
Good READER,
THere is no end of Books, and yet we seem to need more every day; there was
such a darkness brought in by the Fall, as will not thoroughly be dispelled
till we come to Heaven, where the Sun shines without either cloud or night:
for the present all should contribute their help according to the rate and
measure of their abilities; Some can only hold up a Candle, others a Torch,
but all are useful: The Press is an excellent means to scatter Knowledge,
were it not so often abused: all complain there is enough written; and think
that now there should be a stop: indeed it were well if in this scribbling age
there were some restraint; Useless Pamphlets are grown almost as great a
mischief as the erroneous and profane: Yet it is not good to shut the door upon
industry and diligence; there is yet room left to discover more (above all that
has been said) of the Wisdom of God, and the riches of his grace, in the
Gospel; yea, more of the stratagems of Satan, and the deceitfulness of man's
heart: means need to be increased every day to weaken sin, and strengthen
trust, and quicken us to holiness: Fundamentals are the same in all ages, but
the constant necessities of the Church and private Christians will continually
enforce a further explication; as the Arts and sleights of besieging and
battering increase, so does skill in fortification: if we have no other benefit
by the multitude of Books that are written, we shall have this benefit, an
opportunity to Observe the various workings of the same Spirit about the same
truths; and indeed, the speculation is neither Idle, nor unfruitful.

There is a diversity of gifts as there is of tempers, and of tempers as there
is of faces, that in all this variety God may be the more glorified: The
Penmen of Scripture that all wrote by the same Spirit, and by an infallible
Conduct, do not write in the same style: In the Old Testament there is a plain
difference between the lofty Courtly style of Isaiah, and the Priestly grave
style of Jeremiah; In Amos there are some marks of his Calling in his
Prophecy: In the New Testament you will find John sublime and Seraphicall, and
Paul rational and argumentative; it is easy to track both by their peculiar
phrases, native elegancies, and distinct manner of expression: this variety and
1 Pet. 4. 10. Ubi Vulgat. dispensatio multiformis gratiae.
manifold grace still continues, the stones that lie in the building of Gods
house are not all of a sort, there are Isai. 54. 12. Varia gemmarum genera
propter varia dona quae sunt in Ecclesia. Sanct.
Saphires, Carbuncles and Agates, all which have their peculiar use and luster,
some are doctrinall, and good for information, to clear up the truth, and
vindicate it from the Sophismes of wretched men; othets have a great force and
skill in application: Some are more Evangelical, their souls are melted out in
sweetness, others are sons of Thunder, more rouzing and stirring, gifted for a
rougher strain, which also has its use in the art of winning souls to God:
Gallica mirata est Calvinum Ecclesia nuper, Quo nemo docuit doctius. Est quoque
te nuper mirata (...) tonantem, Quo nemo (...) fortius. Et miratur adhuc
fundentem mella Viretum, Quo nemo fatur dulcius. Beza.
'twas observed of the three Ministers of Geneva, that none thundered more
loudly than Farell, none piped more sweetly than Virett, none taught more
learnedly and solidly than Calvin: so variously does the Lord dispense his
gifts, to show the liberty of the Spirit, and for the greater beauty and order
of the Church; for difference with proportion causes beauty, and to prevent
Schism, every member having his distinct excellency, so that what is wanting
in one, may be supplied by another, and all have something to commend them to
the Church, that they may not be despised; as in several Countries they have
several Commodities, to maintain traffic between them all: we are apt to
abuse the diversity of gifts to divisions and partialities, whereas God has
given them to Tunc been multiformis Dei gratia dispensatur, quando acceptum
donum (...) ejus qui hoc non habet, creditur, quando propter eum cui impenditur
sibi datum putatur. Greg^r. moral. lib. 28. cap. 6.
maintain a communion; in the Churches Vestment there is variety but no rent,
varietas sit, scissur a non sit.

All this is the rather mentioned, because of that excellent and peculiar gift,
which the Worthy and Reverend Author had in unfolding and applying the great
Mysteries of the Gospel in a sweet and mellifluous way, and therefore was by
his hearers usually termed, The sweet dropper; sweet and heavenly distillations
usually dropping from him with such a native elegancie as is not easily to be
imitated: I would not set the gifts of God on quarrelling, but of all
Ministeries, that which is most Evangelical, seems most useful, the
testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19. 10. it is spoken by the
Angel to dissuade the Apostle from worshipping him: you that preach Jesus
Christ and him crucified and risen from the dead, have a like Dignity with us
Angels that foretell things to come, your message is the Spirit of Prophecy:
As if he had said, This is the great and fundamental truth wherein runs the
life, and the heart-blood of Religion.

The same Spirit is breathing in these discourses that are now put into thy
hand, wherein thou will find much of the Comforts of the Gospel, of the sealing
of the Spirit, and the constant courses of Gods love to his people, fruitfully
and faithfully improved for thy edification.

Let it not stumble thee, that the work is posthume, and comes out so long
after the Authors death; it were to be wished, that those who excel in
public gifts, would during life publish their own labors, to prevent spurious
obtrusions upon the world, and to give them their last hand and pollishment; as
the Apostle Peter was careful to write before his decease, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13,
14. But usually the Churches treasure is most increased by Legacies; as Elijah
let fall his Mantle when he was taken up into heaven; so Gods eminent servants
when their persons could no longer remain in the World, have left behind them
some worthy pieces as a Monument of their graces and zeal for the public
welfare; whether it be out of a modest sense of their own endeavors, as being
loath upon choice, or of their own accord to venture abroad into the world, or
whether it be that being occupied and taken up with other labors, or whether
it be in a conformity to Christ, who would not leave his Spirit till his
Departure, or whether it be out of an hope that their Works would find a more
kindly reception after their death, the living being more liable to envy and
reproach; but when the Author is in heaven, the work is more esteemed upon
earth, whether for this or that cause usually it is, that not only the life,
but the death of Gods servants has been profitable to his Church, by that
means many useful Treatises being freed from that privacy and obscurenesse to
which by the modesty of the Author they were formerly confined.

Which as it has commonly fallen out, so especially in the Works of this
Reverend Author, all which (some few only excepted) saw the light after the
Authors death; which also has been the lot of this useful Comment; only it
has this advantage above the rest, that it was perused by the Author during
life, and corrected by his own hand, and has the plain signature and marks of
his own spirit; which will easily appear to those that have been any way
conversant with his former Works, this being signified, (for further
commendation it needs none,) I commend thee to God and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build thee up, and to give thee an inheritance among
the sanctified, remaining

Thy servant in the Lords work, THOMAS MANTON.

A COMMENTARY upon the first CHAPTER of the second Epistle of S. PAUL to the
CORINTHIANS.
2 Cor. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the Will of God, and Timothy
our Brother, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints
which are in all Achaia: Grace be to you, and Peace from God our Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Preface to this Epistle is the same with other Prefaces. Our blessed
Apostle had written a sharp Epistle to the Corinthians, especially reproving
their tolerating of the incestuous person: that, his first Epistle took effect,
though not so much as he desired, yet it prevailed so far with them, that they
excommunicated the incestuous person, and likewise reformed diverse abuses. Yet
notwithstanding, it being a proud, factious, rich City, where there was
confluence of many Nations, being an excellent Port, and Mart-Town; there were
many proud, insolent teachers, which thought basely of St. Paul; and thereupon
he writes this second Epistle: the scope whereof is partly Apologetical.
Exhortatorie.



Apologetical, to defend himself.

Exhortatorie, to instruct them in several duties: as we shall see in the
passages of it.

The general scope of it is this, to show, That the Ministerial labor is not
in vain in the Lord. The fruit of the first Epistle to the Corinthians is seen
in this second, the first Epistle took effect. Therefore we should not be
discouraged, neither we that are Ministers of the Church, or those that are
Ministers in their own families, as every man should be; be not discouraged at
unlikelihood, there is always some success to encourage us, though not so much
as we look for in this world: because there is a reprobate Generation that are
always set upon Cavilling, and opposing, yet some success there will be, as
there was here.

A second thing in general out of the whole scope is this: to teach us to
vindicate our credit, when the truth may be wounded through us; as the Apostle
stands here upon his reputation, and labors to free, and to clear himself from
all imputations: but especially he does this by his life; for that is the best
Apology. But because that would not serve, it would not speak loud enough,
therefore he makes an excellent apology, in this Epistle. But to come to the
particulars. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy
our Brother.


THis Chapter is Apologetical, especially after the Preface. He stands in
defense of himself against the imputations: First, that he was a man neglected
of God, he was so persecuted, and oppressed with so many afflictions. And the
second is the imputation of inconstancy, that he came not to them when he had
made a promise to come. This Chapter is especially in defense of these two.

In an excellent heavenly wisdom, he turns off the imputation of afflictions,
and inverts the imputation the clean contrary way: and he begins with
thanksgiving, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, the God of all comfort, who has comforted us in all our tribulations.
As if God had done him a great favor in them, as we shall see when we come to
those words.

For the Preface, it is common with all his Epistles, therefore we make it not
a principal part of the Chapter: yet because these Prefaces have the seeds of
the Gospel in them, the seeds of heavenly comfort, and doctrine, I will speak
something of it.

Here is An Inscription, and A Salutation.

In the Inscription, there are the parties from whom this Epistle was written,
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy our Brother.
And the persons to whom, To the Church of God at Corinth, and all the Saints in
Achaia.

The Salutation, Grace, and Peace; in the form of a blessing, Grace, and Peace.

From whom; From God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Paul an
Apostle, etc.


In this inscription he sets down his office, an Apostle, and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ. How Apostles differ from other Ministers, it is an ordinary
point. St. Paul was called to be an Apostle by Christ himself, in 1 Cor. 9. 1.
Am I not an Apostle? have I not seen Christ? It was the privilege of the
Apostles to see Christ, they were taught immediately by Christ; and they had a
general commission to teach all; and they had extraordinary gifts. All these
were in St. Paul eminently. And this was his prerogative, that he was chosen by
Christ in heaven, in glory: the other were chosen by Christ when he was in
abasement, in a state of humiliation; Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ. By the
will of God.


By the appointment of God, by the designment of Christ For every man in his
particular calling is placed in it by the will of God. St. Paul says, he was
an Apostle by the will of God, not by the will of man. This is the same word,
as is in the beginning of the Epistle to the Philippians.

In a word, it teaches us this first Observation, That we should think our
selves in our standings and callings, to be there by the will of God.

And therefore should serve him, by whose will we are placed in that standing.
Let every man consider, who placed me here? God; if a hair cannot fall from my
head without his providence, much less can the disposing of my calling which
is a greater matter: therefore I will seek his glory, and frame my self and
courses answerable to the will of him, by whose will I am in this place.

Men have not their callings, only to get riches, and to get preferment, those
are base ends of their own to serve themselves. God places us in our
particular callings, not to serve our selves, but to serve him: and he will
cast in those riches, honor, preferment, dignity, and esteem, so much as is
fit for us in the serving of him in our places.

The other party in the inscription, from whom the Epistle is, is, Timothy our
Brother.


HE sends his Epistle from Timothy as well as from himself. This he does, to
win the more acceptance among the Corinthians, by the consent of so blessed a
man as Timothy was, who was an Evangelist; Unity by consent is stronger. And
there is a natural weakness in men to regard the consent and authority of
others, more then the things themselves. And indeed, if God himself in heavenly
love and mercy condescend to help our weakness, much more should all that are
led by the Spirit of God. We are subject to call in question the truths of God,
therefore he helps us with Sacraments, and with other means and allurements:
and although that be truth that he says, yet because he would undermine our
distrustful dispositions by all means, he uses those courses. So S. Paul, that
they might respect what he wrote the more, as from a joint spirit, he writes,
Paul, and Timothy our Brother.

It was an argument of much modesty, and humility in this blessed Apostle,
that he would not of himself seem (as it were) to monopolize their respect, as
if all should look to him, but he joins Timothy with him: so great an Apostle
joins an inferior.

There is a spirit of singularity in many, they will seem to do all themselves,
and carry all themselves before them, and they will not speak the truths that
others have spoken before them without some disdain. As a proud Critic said, I
would they had never been men that spoke our things before we were, that we
might have had all the credit of it. Oh, no; those that are led with the Spirit
of God, they are content in modesty, and humility, to have others joined with
them; and they know it is available for others likewise, they will respect the
truth the more.

And thus far we yield to the Papists, when we speak of this, whether the
Church can give authority to the Word of God, or no. In regard of us, the
Church has some power, in regard of our weakness: but what is that power? It
is an inducing power, an alluring power, a propounding power, to propound the
mysteries of salvation: but the inward work, the convincing power is from the
Evidence of the Spirit of God, and from the Scripture it self. All that the
Church does, is to move, to induce, and to propound this, quoad nos, it has
some power in the hearts of men.

The Church thus far gives authority to the Scriptures in the hearts of men;
though it be an improper phrase to say it gives authority: for, as the men said
to the woman of Samaria, Now we believe it our selves, not because thou toldest
us, etc. The Church allures us to respect the Scriptures: but then there is an
inward Power, an inward Majesty in the Scriptures, and that bears down all
before it.

Again, here is a ground, why St. Paul alleged humane authority sometimes in
his Epistles, and in his dealing with men: because he was to deal with men that
would be shamed the more with them. Any thing that may strengthen the truth in
regard of the weakness of those with whom we have to deal, may be used in a
heavenly policy; One of your own Prophets, says St. Paul, Tit. 1. toward the
end. And so in the Acts of the Apostles, he quotes a saying out of an Atheist.
Timothy our Brother.


Brother, he means not only by Grace but by calling: As we know in the Law, and
other professions, those of the same profession are called before Brethren: So
Timothy was St. Paul's Brother, not only by Grace, but by calling; and two bonds
bind stronger. Here is a treble bond, Nature, Grace, Calling. They were men,
they were fellow Christians, and they were teachers of the Gospel; therefore he
says Timothy our Brother. Timothy was an Evangelist, yet notwithstanding it
was a greater honor to him to be a Brother to St. Paul, then to be an
Evangelist; an Hypocrite may be an Evangelist: but a true Brother of St. Paul
none but a true Christian can be. All Christians are Brethren: It is a word
that levels all; for it takes down the Mountains, and fills up the Valleys; the
greatest men in the World, the mountains, if they be Christians, they are
Brethren to the lowest; and it fills up the Valleys, the lowest, if they be
Christians, are Brethren to the Highest: howsoever in worldly respects they
cease in death, as personal differences, and differences in calling, they all
cease in death. All are Brethren, therefore he uses it for great respect. St
Paul was a great Apostle: Timothy an inferior man, yet both Brethren: Timothy
our Brother. To the Church of God at Corinth.


WE have seen the persons from whom; Paul and Timothy; Now here are the
persons to whom, To the Church of God at Corinth. Corinth was a very wicked
City: as where there is a great confluence of many people, there is a contagion
of many sins of the people; and yet notwithstanding in this Corinth, there was
a Church. For as Christ says, No man can come to me, except my Father draw
him: so where the Father will draw, who can draw back? Even in Corinth God has
his Church: he raises up a generation of men, a Church, which is a company of
creatures differing as much from the common, as men do from Beasts. And yet
such is the Power and Efficacy of the blessed Gospel of Salvation, having the
Spirit of God accompanying it, that even in Corinth, a wretched City, this
Word, and this Spirit, raised up a company of men, called here by the name of a
Church, and Saints. And such power indeed has the Word of God with the Spirit,
not only in wicked places, but in our wicked hearts too.

Let a man have a world of wickedness in him, and let him come, and present
himself meekly and constantly to the means of Salvation, and God in time by his
Spirit will raise a new frame of grace in his heart, he will make a new
Creation. As at the first he created all out of nothing, order out of
confusion: so, out of the heart, which is nothing but a Chaos of confusion, of
blindness, and darkness and terror: (there is a world of confusion in the
heart of man) God by his creating Word (for his Word of the Gospel is creating,
as well as his Word was at the first in the creation of the World; it has a
creating Power) he raises an excellent frame in the heart of a man, he
scatters his natural blindness, he sets in order his natural confusion, that a
man becomes a new creature, and an heir of a new World.

Let no people despair, nor no person; for God has his Church in Corinth.

But what is become of this Church now? Why alas, it is under the slavery of
the Turks, it is under miserable captivity at this day. At the first, Corinth
was overthrown by Numeus a Roman Captain, for the abusing the Roman
Ambassadors; it was ruinated for the unfit carriage to the Ambassadors, who
would not suffer themselves to be contemned, nor the Majesty of the Roman
Empire. But Augustus Caesar afterward repaired it. And now for neglecting of
Gods Ambassadors, the Preachers of the Gospel, it is under another misery, but
Spiritual, it is under the bondage (I say) of that Tyrant.

What is become of Rome, that glorious City? It is now the habitation of
Devils, a cage of unclean birds. What is become of those glorious Churches,
which St. John wrote those Epistles to in his Revelation? and which St. Paul
wrote unto? Alas they are gone, the Gospel is now come into the Western parts.
And shall we think all shall be safe with us, as the Jews did, crying, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord? Jer. 7. No, No, unless we respect
Christ's blessed Gospel of Salvation, except we bring forth fruits worthy of it,
except we maintain and defend it, and think it our honor and our crown, and be
zealous for it: if we suffer the insolent enemies of it to grow as vipers in
the very bosom of the Church, what is like to become of us? If there were no
foreign Enemies to invade us, we would let slip the glorious Gospel of
Salvation. God will not suffer this indignity, to this blessed Jewel his truth,
he will not suffer the Doctine of the Gospel to be so disrespected. You see the
fearful example of the Church of Corinth. Let those whom it may concern, that
have any advantage and authority, let them put in for Gods cause, put in for
the Gospel; labor to propagate, and to derive this blessed truth we enjoy to
posterity, by suppressing as much as they may the underminers of it. It is an
acceptable service. To the Church of God at Corinth. And all the Saints in
Achaia.


COrinth was the City, Achaia, the country wherein Corinth was. There were then
Saints, holy men in all Achaia. And St. Paul writes to (All) Saints, to weak
Saints, to strong Saints, to rich Saints, to poor Saints; because every Saint
has somewhat that is lovely, and respective in them, somewhat to be respected.
The least grace deserves respect from the greatest Apostle. And all have one
head, all have one hope of Glory, all are redeemed with the same precious blood
of Christ (and so I might run on) The many privileges agree to all. Therefore
all should have place in our respect. To (all) Saints; that the least should
not think themselves undervalued: weakness is most of all subject to
complaining if it be disrespected: Therefore in heavenly wisdom and prudence
the Apostle puts in (All) Saints. In all Achaia whatsoever. Besides the mother
City, the Metropolis of that Country, which was Corinth, there were Saints
scattered. God in heavenly wisdom scatters his Saints. As seed, when it is
scattered God scatters his Saints, why?
in the ground it does more good, then when it is on heaps in the barn: so God
scatters his Saints as Jewels, as the lights of the World: here he will have
one to shine and there another; here he will have one fruitful to condemn the
wicked world where they are, and by their good example, and their heavenly and
fruitful conversation, to draw out of the wicked estate of nature those with
whom they are; Therefore he will have them scattered here, and there, not only
at Corinth, but Saints in all Achaia, besides scattered in other places.

But we must know (by the way) that these Saints had reference to some
particular Church: for though it be sufficient to make a Christian to have
union with Christ: there is the main, the head: yet notwithstanding, he must be
a branch, he must be a member of some particular Congregation; therefore we
have it in Act. 4. God added to the Church such as should be saved. Those that
are added to salvation must be added to the Church; a man must be a member of
some particular Church. So though these were scattered, they were members of
some Church. Gods children are as stones in some building, and there is an
influence of Grace comes from Christ the Head to every particular member, as it
is in the body: God quickens not straggling members, that have no reference to
any particular Church; that I note by the way. To the Church of God at Corinth,
and all the Saints in Achaia. Saints.


The Apostle calls them Saints; all believers are called Saints. Are they Quest.
so? are all in the visible Church Saints? Yes, say some, and therefore they
say that our Church is not a true visible Church, because many of them are not
Saints, say some that went out from among us.

I Answer, all are, or should be Saints: St. Paul wrote here to those that Answ.
were sacramental Saints, and such as by outward covenant and profession were
Saints: not that they were all of them inwardly so: but all should be so done:
he calls them so to put them in mind of their duty. To clear this point a
little. Sometimes the Church of God in the Scripture has its The Church has
its name sometimes. 1. from the mixture in it.
name from the commixtion of good and bad in it, so it is called a field where
there is a mixture of good and bad seed: so it is called a house wherein there
are vessels of honor, and vessels of dishonor: because there is such a
mixture in the visible Church. Sometimes the Church has the name from the
better part, and so it is the Spouse of Christ, the love of Christ, 2. from the
better part.
a peculiar people, a holy nation, and Saints, as it is here. Not that all are
so, but it has the denomination from the better part: all should be so, and
the best are so, and it is sufficient that the denomination of a company be
from the better part. As we say of Gold Oar, though there be much earth mixed
with it, yet in regard of the better part, we call it Gold: we give it that
name: so in regard that the best are Saints, and that all should be so,
therefore he calls them all Saints: should all in the visible Church be Saints
by profession, and by Sacrament? should all that are Baptized, and receive the
Communion enter into a profession of sanctity? What say you then to a profane
atheistical Generation, that forsooth make a show of holiness; and therefore
we must look for none of them? I say all profane Profane men Hypocrites.
persons are gross Hypocrites; why? for, are you members of the Church, or no?
yes, will every one say, will you make me an Infidel? will you make me a Pagan?
Well, take your own word then, what is it to be a member of the Church but to
be a Saint? Must thou be a Saint? does not thy profession as thou art a member
bind thee to be a Saint? In Baptism, was not thy promise to renounce the
Devil, the World, and the flesh? In renewing thy covenant in the Communion,
do not thou purpose to cleave to God in all things? Thou that take liberty
therefore in the Church of God under the profession of Religion to live as a
libertine, thou art a gross Hypocrite, and this aggravates thy sin, and makes
it worse then a Pagans. Thou which art in the bosom of the Church, in the
Kingdom of Saints, as it is in Dan. 7.
Dan. 7. the people of the Saints of the most high: the people of God in the
Church wherein thou art a professed member: and yet do thou take liberty
grossly to offend God?

What does make a Saint? Quest.


In a word, to the constitution of a true Saint, there is Ans. To make a St.
there must be.


A Separation. Dedication. Qualification. Conversation.

There is a separation presently, when a man is a Saint, he is separate from 1.
a Separation.
the confused company of the world, from the Kingdom of Satan. Therefore those
that have all companies alike, that carry themselves indifferently in all
companies, as men that profess a kind of Civility, that are taken up with the
complement of the times; men that learn the language of the times, that are for
all sorts, they know not what belongs to the high profession of Christianity.

There is a due to all I confess, there is a benevolence, and a beneficence to
all: but there is a kind of complacencie, a sweet familiarity, and amity which
should be reserved to a few, only to those in whom we see the evidences, and
signs of Grace: If there be not a separation in respect of Grace, there is no
holiness at all: a Saint must be separated. Not locally, but in regard of
amity, in regard of intimate friendship. As we see it is in outward things, in
some of our houses; there is a Court where all come, poor and rich; and there
is the house where those of nearer acquaintance come: and then there is the
innermost Room, the Closet, where only our selves, and those which are
nearest to us come: So it is in the passages of the soul, there are some remote
courtesies that come from us, as men, to all, be they what they will: there are
other respects, to others, that are nearer, that we admit nearer, that are of
better quality: and there are other that are nearest of all, that we admit even
into the closet of our hearts, and those are they with whom we hope to have
communion for ever in heaven; the blessed people of God termed here Saints. It
is an evidence of our translation from a cursed estate to a better, when we
love such; hereby we know (says St. John) that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren. There must be a separation.

And withal, there must be a dedication of our selves to the service of 2.
Dedication.
God. A Christian when he knows himself by the word of truth, and by the work
of the Spirit to be Gods Child, he dedicates himself to better services then
before, he thinks himself too good, he thinks too highly of himself, to be a
base blasphemer, or swearer, to be a filthy Person: he considers himself as the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and he uses himself to better purposes, to better
studies, to do good.

And then with Dedication; there is an inward Qualification, to enable him 3.
Qualification.
with light never to forget the Image of God. Herein this Saint-ship stands
especially in this inward Qualification, whereby we resemble Christ the King of
Saints. All our sanctification comes from him: as Aarons. ointment went down
from his head to his beard, and so to his skirts: so all our sanctification is
from Christ. Every Saint is qualified from the Spirit of Christ: of his
fullness we receive this inward qualification, that we have another judgment of
things then this world has, what is good, and what is bad; what is true, and
what is false, what is comfortable, and what tends to discomfort. He has
another conceit of things, he has another light then he had before, and then
other carnal men have; he has a heavenly light. He has another Language, he
gives himself to prayer, and to thanksgiving he is given to savoury discourse.
He has other courses in his particular calling, and in his general calling
then other refuse company have, or then himself had before his calling: this is
from his qualification.

And this Qualification, and Conversation go together: he has a new 4.
Conversation.
conversation, he carries himself even like to him that has called him out of
darkness into mavelous light. So, a true Saint, (as every professor of
Religion ought to be) he is dedicate to God, and he is qualified in some degree
as Christ was, by his holy Spirit; he is a new creature, he that is in Christ
is a new creature; and he shows this by his conversation, or else he is no
Saint.

How shall we know a Saint from a mere civil man? (as there be many that live
and d ie in that estate which is to be pitied: and one main end of Quest.
our calling is not only to reduce profane men to a better fashion of life:
but to show civil men their danger.)

A mere civil man looks to the second table, he is smooth in his carriage and
conversation with men: but negligent in his service to God. A civil Answ. Civil
man, who?
man he looks to his outward carriage: but he makes no conscience of secret
sins: he is not holy in all manner of conversation, as St. Peter says, 1. Pet.
1. Be ye holy in all manner of conversation. In private, in public, in your
retired carriage: he makes no conscience of his thoughts, of his speeches, of
all.

You may know an hypocrite so that carries himself smoothly, and acceptably in
the eye of the World, but he makes no conscience of his thoughts, he makes no
conscience of his affections, of his desires, of his lusts, and such things. He
makes no conscience of lesser oaths, nor perhaps of rotten discourses: No,
they are all for this, that they may pass in the World, that they may carry
themselves with acceptance: as for what belongs to the New Creature, to Saints,
they care not: for they have vain conceits of these, and judge them as
hypocrites, because such a one knows himself should be an hypocrite, if he
should do otherwise then he does, therefore he thinks that others that are
above his pitch, are hypocrites; and and they make a show of that that is not
in them, because if he should make show of that, his heart would tell him that
he were an hypocrite.

A true Saint differs from an hypocrite in many respects; but in this one True
Saint wherein different from an hypocrite.
mainly, that a true Saint of God is altered in the inward frame and
qualification of his soul, he is a new Creature, therefore, there is a spring
of better thoughts, of better desires, of better aims in him then in other
men. And he labors more after the inward frame of his heart, then after his
outward carriage: what he is ashamed to do, he is ashamed to think he is
ashamed to lust after, what he desires to do, he desires to love in his heart,
he labors that all may be true in the inward man: because grace (as well as
nature) begins from the heart, from the inward parts.

An hypocrite never cares for that, all his care is for the outward parts, he
Simile.
is sale-work; so his carriage be acceptable to others, all his care is taken,
he lives to the view, therefore he looks not to the substance, and the truth,
but to the shadow and appearance.

Now I come to the Salutation it self.

VERSE 2. Grace be unto you, etc.
GRace does enter into the whole conversation of a Christian, and does sweeten
his very Salutations. Which I observe: because Grace sweetens all a Christians
conversation.
many men confine their Religion to places, to actions, and to times: there is
a relish of holiness in every thing that comes from a Christian, in his
Salutations and Courtesies: St. Paul salutes them, Grace, and peace from God,
etc.

And the use of holy Salutations are; use of salutations.
To Show Love. Win

To show love and respect, therefore he salutes them; and by showing love, to
gain love: for there is a Loadstone in love. And thirdly, the use of
salutations, is by them to convey some good: for these salutations are not mere
wishes, but prayers, nay blessings: Gods people are a blessed people, and they
are full of blessing, they carry a blessing in their very speeches. What is a
blessing?


A blessing is a prayer with the application of the thing prayed for, it is
Quest. Blessing what; Answ.
somewhat more then a prayer, Grace be with you, and peace. It is not only a
mere wish, I desire it: nay my desire of it is with an applying of it, grace
shall be with you, and peace, and the more, because I heartily wish it to you.
It is no light matter to have the benediction, and salutation of a holy man,
especially those that are Superiors: for the Superiors bless the Inferiors;
there is a grace goes even with the very salutations, with the common prayers
of a holy man. It is a comfortable sign when God does enlarge the heart of a
holy man to wish well to a man.

And surely the very consideration of that should move us to let them have such
encouragement from our carriage and demeanor, that they may have hearts to
think of us to the throne of Grace, to give us a good wish, to give us a good
desire: for every gracious desire, every prayer has its effect when it comes
from a favorite of God, especially from such a man as St. Paul was; from a
Minister, a holy man in a calling, a man of God: they have their efficacy with
them, they are not empty words, Grace and peace.

The Popes think it a great favor when they bestow their Apostolical
benediction and blessing: their blessing is not much worth; their curse is
better then their blessing: but surely the blessing of a man rightly called,
those that are true Ministers of Christ, they are clothed with Power and
efficacy from God: Grace be with you, and peace, it is no idle complement.

And here you see likewise what should be the manner of the salutation of
Christians, as they ought to salute, to show love, and to gain love, so all
Salutations should be holy.
their salutations should be holy. There is a takingthe name of God in vain, in
salutations often times, God save you, etc. and it must be done with a kind Gods
name taken in vain in Salutations.
of scorn, and if there be any demonstration of Religion it becomes them not,
that which should become them most. What should become a Saint, but to carry
himself Saint-like? and yet men must do it with a kind of scorn, with a kind of
graceless grace: that which in the religious use of it is a comfortable and
sweet thing, and is always with a comfortable and gracious effect in Gods
Children. Either it has effect and is made grace to them to whom it is spoken,
or returns to them that speak it: As Christ says to his Disciples, when you
come into a house, pronounce peace to them; and if the house be not worthy,
your peace shall return to you So the salutations of a good man, if they be not
effectual to the parties, if they be unworthy, rebellious creatures, they
return again to himself, they have effect one way or other. Let it not be done
therefore with a taking the Name of God in vain in a scornful manner, but with
gravity and reverence, as becomes a holy action. There is some limitation, and
exception of this. Salutations Salutations to be omitted.
in some cases may be omitted.

As in serious business, salute no man by the way, as Christ says to his
Apostles: 1. In serious business.
A neglect sometimes is good manners, when respect is swallowed up in a greater
duty. As it was good manners for David to Dance, and to carry himself (as it
were) unseemly before the Ark: because he was to neglect respect to meaner
persons, to forget the respect he was to show to men, being altogether taken up
with higher matters, it was a kind of decency, and comeliness. And overmuch
scrupulousness and niceness in lesser things, when men are called to greater,
is but unmannerly manners: in these cases, these lesser must give way and place
to the greater; Salute no man by the way, dispatch the business you are about,
that is, if it may be a hindrance in the way, salute not: this is in respect of
time.

And as for time, so for persons: a notorious, incorrigible Heretic salute
not: to salute such a one would be (as it were) a connivence, or an indulgence
2. To an Heretic
to him, salute him not. The denying of a Salutation many times has the force
of a censure: the party neglected may think there is somewhat in him for which
he is neglected in that manner. In these cases salutations may be omitted
sometimes: But I go unto the particulars. Grace be unto you and peace.


These are the good things wished. We see the Apostle, a blessed man, that had
been in the third heaven wrapped up, that had been taught of Christ, what things
were most excellent, and had himself seen excellent things which he could not
utter, when he comes to wishes, we see out of heavenly wisdom and experience
he draws them to two heads, all good things to Grace and peace. If there had
been better things to be wished, he would have wished them, but Grace and peace
are the principal things. What is meant by Grace here?


Grace in this place, is the free favor and love of God from his own Quest.
Grace what Answ.
bowels, not for any desert, or worth, or strength of love of ours: it is his
own free grace, and love, which is shed by the holy Ghost, and springs only
from his own goodness and loving nature, and not from us at all; this is
Grace: It must be distinguished from the fruits of it: as the Apostle does
distinguish them, Romans 5. 15. Grace, and the gifts of grace. There is favor,
and the gifts of favor, which is grace inherent in us. Here especially is
meant the fountain and spring of all the favor of God with the manifestation
of it, with the increase of it, with the continuance of it. He wishes these
things; the favor of God, with the manifestation of it, to their souls; that
as God would be gracious to them; so that he would show his Grace, that he
would discover it, and shine upon them: and to that end that he would give them
his holy Spirit, to shed his love into their hearts. This shining of God into
the heart, this shedding of the love of God into the heart, is the Grace here
meant: Gods favor with the manifestation of it to the soul, and with the
continuance of it, and the increase of it still. Grace unto you. As if he
should have said, I wish you the favor of God, and the report of it to your
souls: that as he loves you, through his Christ; so he would witness as much
by his holy Spirit to your souls. And I wish you likewise the continuance of
it, and the increase of it, and the fruits of it likewise: for that must not be
excluded, all particular graces, which are likewise called Graces. They have
the name of favors, because they come from favor, and favor is the chief
thing in them. What is the chief thing in joy, in faith, in love? they are
graces: they cannot be considered as qualifications, as earthly things in us:
they proceed from the grace and love of God, and have their especial value from
thence. So I wish you the manifestation, the continuance and increase of
favor, with all the fruits of Gods favor, especially such as concern a better
life. The word is easily understood, after the common sense, Grace is the
loving and free respect of a superior to an inferior: the respect of a
Magistrate to such as are under him: such a one is in grace with the Prince we
say: we mean not any inherent thing: but free grace. So in Religion, it is not
any inherent, habitual thing; Grace, but it is free favor, and whatsoever
issues from free favor. This must be the rather observed, this phrase, against
the Papists: we say, we are Justified by Grace, and so do they: what do they
mean by being justified by Grace? that is, by inherent Grace; we say, No, we
are justified by Grace, that is, by the free favor of God in Jesus Christ, so
is the acception of the word.

But to come to the point, that which I will now note, is this, that Doctr. A
Christian needs Grace, when he is in state of Grace.


A Christian, though he be in the state of Grace and favor with God, yet still
he needs the continuance of it. He stands in need of the continuance of God.
St. Paul here prays for Grace, and peace to those that were in the state of
Grace already. Why? The reason of it is, that we run into new Reas. We run
daily into new breaches.
breaches every day of our selves: as long as there is a spring of corruption
in us, a cursed issue of corruption, so long there will be some actions, and
speeches and thoughts, that will issue, that would of themselves break our
peace with God; or at least hinder the sweet sense of it: therefore we have
continual occasion to renew our desires of the sense and feeling of the favor
of God, and to renew our pardon every day, to take out a pardon of course, (as
we have now the liberty to do, so often as we confess our sins, he is merciful
to forgive us) and to win his favor, we have need every day still, still of
Grace. I list not to join in conflict here with the Papists concerning their
opinion, I will but touch it by the way, to show the danger of it. They will
not have all of mere Grace: but Christians are under Grace while they are in
this World, as St. Paul says, all is Grace, Grace still: nay, at the day of
judgment, The Lord show mercy to the house of One siphorus at that day: at the
day of judgment, Grace, and mercy, must be our plea, till we come to heaven.
They stand upon Grace to enable us to the work, and then by the work we may
merit our own salvation, and so they will not have it of Grace, of gift; but as
a stipend a thing of merit. Directly contrary to St. Paul Romans 6. ult. Eternal
life is (...), (the word comes of (...), of gift) The gift of God a free gift
through Jesus Christ our Lord. So from the first Grace, to Eternal life, which
is the complement of all, all is Grace.

As for the New Testament, it is the Covenant of Grace: the whole carriage of
our salvation is called the Covenant of Grace: because, God, of Grace does
enter into Covenant with us. He sent Christ of Grace, who is the foundation of
the Covenant. The fulfilling of it on our part, is of Grace; he gives us faith,
Faith is the gift of God, he puts his fear in our hearts that we should not
depart from him. And when he enters into Covenant with us, it is of Grace and
love. It was of Grace that he sent Christ to be the foundation of the Covenant;
that in the satisfying of his justice, he might be gracious to us, without
disparagement to his justice. Of Grace he fulfils the condition on our part: we
are no more able to believe, then we are to fulfill the law; but he inables us
by his word and spirit, (attending upon the means of Salvation) to fulfill the
Covenant. And when we have done all, he gives us of Grace, Eternal life, all is
of Grace.

There is nothing in the Gospel but Grace; therefore in the Ephesians. 1. it is
stood upon by the Apostle, To the praise of the Glory of his rich Grace. From
Ephesians. 1.
Election to Glorification, all is to the Glory of his Grace.

We ought to conceive of God as a Gracious Father, withholding his anger (which
we deserve to be poured upon us) by the intercession of How to conceive of God.
Christ, withholding that anger, and the fruits of it. And notwithstanding we
are in Grace, if we neglect to seek to God the Father; if we neglect to seek to
Christ, who makes intercession for us, then (though we be in the first Grace
still, we are not east away yet) we are filii sub ira sons under wrath, we are
under Anger, though not under hatred.

Therefore every day we should labor to maintain the Grace of God with the
assurance of it. It is a great matter to carry our selves so, as we To maintain
Gods Grace daily.
may be under the sense and feeling of the Grace of God. It is not sufficient
to be in the Grace of God, but to have the report of it to our own hearts, to
have it shine upon us.

How should we carry our selves so, that we may be in state of Grace, that is,
in such a state, as we may find the sweet evidence and comfortable Quest. how
to have continual assurance of Grace.
feeling continually, that we are Gods Children?

First of all, there must be a perpetual, daily practice of abasing our selves,
of making our selves poor; that is, every day to see the vanity of all Ans.
things in the world out of us; to see the weakness of Grace in us; to see 1.
abase our selves.
the return of our corruptions that foil us every day; that so we may see in
what need we stand of the favor of God: Considering that all comforts without
are vanity, and that all the Graces in us are stained with corruption:
considering, besides the stains of our Graces, that there is a continual
issue of corruption: these things will make our spirits poor, and make us
hunger and thirst after the sense and feeling of free pardon every day. This
will enforce us to renew our patent, to renew our portion in the Covenant of
Grace, to have daily pardon. This should be our daily practice to enter deeper,
and deeper into our selves.

This is to live by faith. As God is continually ready to show us favor in
Christ, not only at the first in acquitting us from our sins; but continually
does show us favor upon all occasions, and is justifyng and pardoning, and
speaking peace continually to us: so there must be an action answerable in us,
that is depending upon God by faith; living by faith. This we do by seeing in
what need we stand of Grace, God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the
humble.

Then again, that we may walk in the grace of God, and in the sense of it: let
us every day labor to have our souls more and more enriched Labor to be rich
in grace.
with the endowments and graces of Gods Spirit, that we may be objects of Gods
delight. Let us labor to be affected to things as he is affected, two cannot
walk together except they be agreed. Let us hate that which God hates, and
delight in that which God delights in, that we may have a kind of complacency,
and be in love with the blessed work of the Spirit of God more and more: Let us
labor to delight in them that grow in grace; as the nearer any one comes to
our likeness, the more we grow in familiarity with them. Labor also to
preserve a clear soul, that God may shine upon us. God delights not in
strangeness to us, his desire is that we may walk in the sense and assurance
of his grace and favor.

How shall we know that we are in state of Grace with God?

I Answer; (that we do not deceive our selves) we must look to the Quest.
work of Gods grace: Gods grace is a fruitful grace; his favor is fruitful;
Answ. How to know we are in Gods favor.
it is not a barren favor, it is not a Winter Sun. The Sun in the Winter, it
carries a goodly countenance, but it heats not to any purpose, it does not
quicken: but Gods grace, it carries life and heat where it comes: therefore 1.
By joy of the Spirit.
if we be in state of grace and favor with God, we may discern it.

But in times of desertion, though a person be in grace and favor with God,
yet many times he thinks he is not so.

It is true then we must not always go to our feeling at such times, and the
enlargement of our hearts by the Spirit of comfort, but go to the work of 2. By
the graces of the Spirit.
grace: for where grace and favor is, there are the graces of the Spirit. As
it is nor a bare favor in regard of comfort, so it is not a barren favor in
regard of graces: for every heart that is in favor with God, has some graces
of the Spirit. God enriches the soul where he shows favor; his love tokens
are some graces; therefore if the witness, and comfort of the Spirit cease in
case of desertion, let us go to the work of the Spirit, and by that we may know
if we be in grace with God. For Gods people are a peculiar people: and Gods
children have always some peculiar grace, some Ornaments, some Jewels the
spouse of Christ has, which others have not.

Therefore examine thy heart, what work of God there is, and what desire thou
have after better things, what inward hatred against that which is ill, what
strength thou have against it: go to some mark of Regeneration, of the new
Creature, and these will evidence that we are in a state of grace with God,
because these are peculiar favors. And though we feel not the comfort, yet
there is a work, and that work will comfort us more then the comfort it self
will do.

And this is one thing whereby we may know we are in favor with God; when we
can comfort our selves, and can go to the throne of grace through 3. By going
to God in extremity.
Christ, when we can go boldly to God, it is a sign of favor: when we can call
upon him, when we can go in any desertion to prayer; when in any affliction we
can have enlarged hearts, it is a sign of favor with God. A mere hypocrite, or
a man that has not this peculiar grace, he trusts to outward things, and when
they are gone, when he is in trouble, he has not the heart to go to God; his
heart is shut up, he sinks down, because he, relied upon common matters: he did
not rely upon the favor of God and the best fruit of it, which are graces,
but upon common favors; therefore he sinks in despair.

But a sound Christian, take him at the worst, he can sigh to God, he can go to
him, and open his soul to him: by Christ we have an entrance to the Father,
Ephesians 3. 12. We have boldness through faith. Every Christian has this in the
worst extremity, he has a Spirit of prayer: though he cannot enlarge himself,
yet he can sigh and groan to God, and God will hear the sighs of his own
Spirit, they are loud in his ears. David, at the worst, he prays to God, Saul
at the worst, he goes to the Witch, and from thence to his swords point. But
usually, the usual temper and disposition of a man in the state of grace is
joy: for as one says, Grace is the begetter of joy, for they both have one
root in the Greek Language, there is the same root for favor, and for joy: so
favor is usually and ordinarily with a sweet enlargement of heart, we may
thank our selves else, that, do not walk so warily, and so jealously as we
should.

The reward that God gives his Children that are careful, is a Spirit of joy,
Romans 5. 1. Being Justified by faith we have peace of God, and joy in
tribulation. For even as it is in humane matters, the favor and countenance of
the King, it is as a shower of rain after a drought, it comforts his subjects:
there is a wondrous joy in the favor, and grace of great persons always. And
as the favorable aspect of the heavens upon inferior bodies* promises good
things: and men promise themselves from that, favor and good: so the favor,
and grace of God enlarge the soul with joy and comfort: And there is that
measure of joy in those that are in the free favor of God, that they will
honor God freely, to cast themselves upon his mercy.

And it is with a disesteem of all things in the World besides; it is such a
joy as works in the soul a base esteem of all things else: St. Paul esteemed
all dross, in comparison of the knowledge of Christ, and the favor of God in
Christ. So in Psalm. 4. David says of some, There be many that will say, who
will show us any good? any good, it is no matter: but says the Holy Spirit in
David, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me: He goes to prayer, he
says not, who will show us any good? it is no matter what, or how we come by
it, any earthly good worldly men desire: No, says he, Lord show us the light
of thy countenance, he desires that above all things. So he says Psalm. 3. The
loving kindness of the Lord is better then life it self. Life is a sweet
thing, the sweetest thing in the World, but the grace and favor of God is
better then that: For in this when all comforts fail, the Children of God have
assurance, that neither life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor any thing can separate us from the love of God in Christ, which shows
it self better then life it self. When life fails, this favor shall never
fail, Nothing shall be able to separate us from the favor of God in Christ; it
is an everlasting favor, and therefore everlasting because it is free: if it
were Originally in us, it would fail when we fail: but it is an everlasting
favor, because it is free, God has founded the cause of love to us in
himself: so much for that; Grace be unto you. And peace.


All that I will say of peace in this place is this, to show, That True peace
issues from Grace.

It is to be had thence. Peace, we take here for that sweet peace with God and
peace of conscience, and likewise peace with all things; when all Observe.
things are peaceable to us: when there is a sweet success in all business,
with a security in a good estate. It is a blessed thing when we know that all
will be well with us. This quiet and peaceable estate issues from grace, peace
of conscience especially; I observe it the rather: It has been the error of
the world to seek peace where it is not, to seek peace in Sanctification: to
seek it in the work of Grace within a man. Not to speak of worldly men, that
seek peace in outward contentments, in recreations, in friends, and the like;
alas it is a poor peace; But I speak of Religious persons that are of a higher
strain, they have sought peace, but not high enough. True peace must be
selected from Grace: the free favor in Christ. This will quiet and still the
clamours of an accusing conscience. God reconciled in Christ will pacify the
conscience, nothing else will do it. For if our chief peace were fetched from
sanctification; (as many fetch it thence in error of judgment) alas the
conscience would be dismayed, and always doubt whether it had sanctification
enough or no. Indeed sanctication and grace within is required as a
qualification, to show that we are not Hypocrites, but are in the state and
covenant of Grace; it is not required as a foundation of comfort, but as a
qualification of the persons to whom comfort belongs. Therefore David, and St.
Paul, and the rest that knew the true power and efficacy of the Gospel, they
sought for peace in the grace and free favor of God.

Let us lay it up, to put it in practice in the time of dissolution, in the
time of spiritual conflict, in the time when our consciences shall be awakened
(and perhaps upon the rack,) and Satan will be busy to trouble our peace; that
we may shut our eyes to all things below, and see God shining on in Christ;
that we may see the favor of God in Christ, by whose death and passion he is
reconciled to us, and in the Grace and free favor of God in Ghrist we shall
see peace enough.

It is true likewise (besides peace of conscience) of all other peace, peace of
success, and peace of state; that all creatures, and all conditions are
peacable to us, whence is it? It is from Grace: for God being reconciled, he
reconciles all; when God himself is ours, all is ours, when he is turned, all
is turned with him; when he becomes our father in Christ, and is at peace with
us, all are at peace besides: so that all conditions, all estates, all
creatures, they work for our good. It is from hence, when God is turned, all
are turned with him. He being the God of the creature, that sustaines and
upholds the creature, in whom the creature has his being and working: he must
needs therefore turn it for the good of them that are in covenant with him. All
that are joined in covenant with him he fills them with peace: because they are
in Grace with him.

This should stir up our hearts, above all things in the world to pray for
Grace, to get Grace, to empty our selves of self-confidence, that we may be
vessels for Grace: to make Grace our plea, to magnify the Grace of God.

We must never look in this world for a peace altogether absolute, that is
reserved for heaven, our peace here is a troubled peace; God will have a
distinction between heaven and earth. But when our peace is interrupted, when
the waters are come into our souls, what must be our course? when we would have
peace, go to Grace, go to the free promise of Grace in Christ. Grace and Peace.
From God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.


The spring of Grace and peace are here mentioned.

After the Preface he comes to the Argument which he intends, and begins with
blessing.

One part of the scope of this blessed Apostle is, to avoid the scandal of his
sufferings; for, he was a man of sorrows, if ever man was (next Christ, who was
a true man of sorrow) the blessed Apostle was a man of miseries and sorrow.
Now, weak shallow Christians thought him to be a man diserted of God, they
thought it was impossible for God to regard a man so forlorn, so despicable as
this man was: What does he? before he comes to other matters, he wipes away
this imputation, and cleers this scandal; You lay my crosses and sufferings,
and disgraces in the world to my shame, it is your weakness, that which you
account my shame, is a matter of praise. I am so far from being disheartened
or discouraged from what I suffer, that, Blessed be God the Father of Christ,
the Father of mercies, etc.


That which to the flesh is matter of scandal and offense, that to the spirit,
and to a spiritual man is matter of glory, so contrary is the flesh and the
Spirit, and so opposite is the disposition, and the current of the fleshly man
to the spiritual man. Job was so far from cursing God for taking away, that
he says, Blessed be the name of God, not only for giving, but for taking away
too.

What ground there is in troubles and persecutions to bless God, we shall see
in the current and passages of the Chapter.

To come then to the very verse it self, where there is a blessing and
praising of God first: And in this praising consider

The Act Object. Reasons.

The Act, Blessed be God, which is a praising.

The Object is God the Father,

The Reasons are inwrapped in the Object, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: because he is the God and Father of Jesus Christ, therefore
blessed be he.

Secondly, another reason is, because he is the Father of mercies.

Another reason is, from the Act of this disposition of mercy in God, he is
the God of all comfort, and as he is comfortable, so he does comfort, Thou art
good and do good, says the Psalmist: thou art a God of comfort, and thou
do comfort; For, as he is, so he does, he shows his Nature in his working.
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and
God of comfort, of which I shall speak when I come to them. Blessed be God the
Father, etc.


We see here the heart of the blessed Apostle being warmed with the sense and
taste of the sweet mercy of God, stirrs up his tongue to bless God; a full
heart and a full tongue. We have here the exuberancie, the abundance of his
thankfulness, breaking forth in his speech, his heart had first tasted of the
sweet mercies, and comforts of God before he prayseth God: The first thing that
we will observe hence is, that,

It is the disposition of Gods Children (after they have tasted the sweet mercy
and Obser. The disposition of Gods Children to be thankful.
comfort and love of God) to break forth into the praising of God and to
thanksgiving.

It is as natural for the new creature to do so, as for the birds to sing in
the Spring; when the Sun has warmed the poor creature, it shows its
thankfulness in singing; and that little blood and spirits that it has, being
warmed after winter, it is natural for those creatures so to do, and we delight
in them.

It is as natural for the new creature (when it feels the Sun of righteousness
warming the soul, when it tastes of the mercy of God in Christ) to show forth
it self in thankfulness and praise: and it can no more be kept from it, then
fire can keep from burning, or water from cooling: it is the nature of the new
creature so to do.

The reason is, every creature must do the the work for which God has enabled
it, to the which God has framed it: the happiness of the creature is in well
doing, in working according to its nature; the heathen could see that. Now all
the creatures; the new creature especially is for the glory of God in Christ
Jesus. All the new creature, and what privileges it has, and what graces it
has, all is that God may have the glory of grace: why then, it must needs work
answerable to that which God has created it for; therefore it must show forth
the praise and glory of God. Blessed be God, says the Apostle Ephesians. 1. And
the blessed Ephesians. (...)
Apostle St. Peter begins his Epistle, Blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who has begotten us to an Inheritance Immortal and undefiled, which
fades not away, reserved for us in Heaven.

I shall not need to set down with the exposition of the word (Blessed). How
God blesses us, and how we bless God. His blessing is a conferring To bless
God, what.
of blessing; our blessing is a declaring of his goodness: it is a thing well
enough known. Our blessing of God, is a praising of God, a setting out what is
in him.

Only, one thing is to be cleared. What good can we do to God in blessing of
him? he is blessed, though we bless him not; and he is praised whether we
praise him or no: he had Glory enough before he made the world, he contented
himself in the Trinity, the blessed Trinity in it self, before there were
either Angels, or men or other creatures to bless him; and now he can be
blessed enough, though we do not bless him.

It is true, he can be so; and he can have heaven, though thou have it not but
be a damned creature, and he will be blessed whether thou bless him or no. We
add nothing to God when we bless him.


Our blessing of him is required as a duty to make us more capable of his
graces, to him that has shall be given. To him that has, (and uses 1. It is
a duty to God.
that he has to the Glory of God) shall be given more: we give nothing.

The stream gives nothing to the fountain; the beam gives nothing to the Sun,
for it issues from the Sun; our very blessing of God is a blessing of his.

It is from his Grace that we can praise his Grace; and we run still into a new
debt, when we have hearts enlarged to bless him.

We ought to have our hearts more enlarged, that we can be enlarged to praise
God.

And to others it is good; for others are stirred up by it: Gods goodness 2.
It stirs up others
and mercy is enlarged in regard of the manifestation of it to others, by our
blessing of God.

Yea, this good comes to our souls, besides the increase of Grace, we 3. It is
good for our selves.
shall find an increase of joy and comfort; that is one end why God requires it
of us, though he himself in his essence be always alike blessed, yet he requires
that we should be thankful to him always, that we should bless and praise him
even in misery and affliction: and why then? because if we can work upon our
hearts a disposition to see Gods love, and to praise and bless him, we can
never be uncomfortable; we have some comfort against all estates and
conditions, by studying to praise God, by working of our hearts to a
disposition to praise and bless God; for then crosses are light, crosses are no
crosses then: That is the reason that the Apostles and Holy men so stirred up
their hearts to praise and thansgiving, that they might feel their crosses the
less, that they might be less sensible of their discomforts; for undoubtedly
when we search for matter of praising God in any afliction, and when we see
there is some mercy yet reserved, that we are not consumed; the consideration
that there is always some mercy, that we are yet unthankful for, will enlarge
our hearts, and God when he has thanks and praise from us, he gives us still
more matter of thankfulness, and the more we thank him and praise him, the
more we have matter of praise.

This being a truth, that Gods Children, when they have tasted of his mercy,
break forth into his praise, it being the end of his favors, and nature being
inclined thereto; this should stir us up to this duty, and that we may the
better perform this holy duty, let us take notice of all Gods favors and
blessings: Knowledge stirs up the affections, blessing of God springs
immediately from an enlarged heart, but enlargement of heart is stirred up from
apprehension: for as things are reported to the knowledge, so the understanding
reports them to the heart and affections Therefore it is a duty that we ought
to take notice of Gods favors, and with taking notice of them.

To mind them, to remember them, forget not all his benefits, Psalm. 103. Praise
the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; insinuating 2. To mind
them.
that the cause why we praise not God is the forgetting of his benefits.

Let us take notice of them, let us register them, let us mind them, let us
keep diaries of his mercies and favors every day; he renews his mercies and
favors every day, and we ought to renew our blessing of him every day, we
should labor to do here, as we shall do when we are in heaven, where we shall
do nothing else but praise and bless him; we ought to be in Heaven, while we
are on the earth, as much as we may; let us register his favors and mercies.

But what favors?

Especially spiritual, nay, first spiritual favors, without which Spiritual
favors especially to give thanks for.
we cannot heartily give thanks for any outward thing; for the soul will cast
with it self, till it feel it self in Covenant with God in Christ, that a man
is the Child of God.

Indeed I have many mercies and favors, God is good to me; but perhaps all
these are but favors of the Traitor in the prison that has the liberty of
the Tower, and all things that his heart can desire; but then he looks for an
execution, he looks for a writ to draw him forth to make him a spectacle to
all; and so this trembling for fear of a future ill which the soul looks for,
it keeps the soul from thankfulness. It cannot be heartily thankful for any
mercy, till it can be thankful for spiritual favors.

Therefore first let us see that our state be good, that we are in Christ, that
we are in the covenant of Grace, that though we are weak Christians, yet we are
true, there is truth in Grace wrought in us. And then when we have tasted the
best mercies, spiritual mercies, when we see we are taken out of the state of
nature (for then all is in love to us) when we have the first mercy, pardoning
mercy, that our sins are forgiven in Christ, then the other are mercies indeed
to us, not as favors to a condemned man.

And that is the reason that a carnal man, he has his heart shut, he cannot
Why a carnal man is unthankful.
praise God, he cannot trust in God: because he staggers in his estate, because
he is not assured: he thinks, it may be God fattens me against the day of
slaughter. Therefore I know not whether I should praise him for this or no. But
he is deceived in that: for if he had his heart enlarged to bless God for
that, God would show further favor still; but the heart will not yield hearty
praise to God, till it be persuaded of Gods love. For all our love is by
reflection. We love him, because he loved us first, and we praise and bless
him, because he has blessed us first in heavenly blessings in Christ.

Let us take notice of his favors, let us mind them: let us register them,
especially favors and mercies in Christ. Let us after think how we were pulled
out of the cursed estate of nature, by what ministry, by what acquaintance, by
what speech, and how God has followed that mercy with new acquaintance, with
new comfort to our souls, with new refreshings: that by his spirit he has
repressed our corruptions, that he has sanctified us, made us more humble,
more careful, that he has made us more jealous, more watchful: these mercies,
and favors, will make others sweet unto us.

And then learn to prize and value the mercies of God, which will not be
unless we compare them with our own unworthiness: lay his mercies together
with our own unworthiness, and it will make us break forth into blessing of
God. When we consider what we are our selves, as Jacob said, less than the
least of Gods mercies.

We forget Gods mercies every day, he strives with our unthankfulness: the
comparing of his mercies with our unworthiness and our desert on the contrary,
will make us to bless God for his goodness and patience, that he will not
only be good to us, in not inflicting that which our sins have deserved;
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And (to name no more but this one) above all, beg of God his holy spirit: Beg
the spirit.
for this Blessing of God is nothing else, but a vent from the spirit. For as
Organs and wind Instruments do never sound except they be blown, they are dead
and make no music till there be breath put into them: so we are dead and dull
instruments; therefore it is said, we are filled with the Holy Ghost. All Gods
children they are filled with the spirit before they can praise God: the spirit
stirs them up to praise him, and as it gives them matter to praise him; for,
so it gives the Sacrifice of praise it self. God gives to his children, both
the benefits to bless him for, and he gives the blessing of a heart to bless
him. And we must beg both of God: beg a heart able to discern spiritual
favors, to taste and relish them, and to see our own unworthiness of them, and
beg of God his holy spirit to awaken, and quicken, and enlarge our dead and
dull hearts to praise his name. To stir up our selves to praise God.


Let us stir up our hearts to it, stir up the spirit of God in us every one
that has the spirit of God, should labor to stir up the spirit, as St. Paul
writes to Timothy, and as David stirs up himself, Praise the Lord O my soul,
and all that is within me praise his holy name; so we should raise up our
selves, and stir up our selves to this duty.

And shame our selves; what, has God freed me from so great misery? To shame
our selves for unthankfulness.
and has he advanced me to so happy an estate in this world? does he put me
in so certain a hope of glory in the world to come? have I a certain promise
to be carried to salvation? that neither things present nor things to come
shall be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ Jesus? does he
renew his mercies every day upon me? and can I be thus dead, can I be thus
dull-hearted? Let us shame our selves. And certainly if a man were to teach a
Child of God a ground of humiliation: if a Child of God that is in the state of
grace should ask how he might grow humble and be abased more and more, a man
could give no one direction better then this, to consider how God has been
good continually; how he has been patient and good, and upon what ground we
hope that he will be so: and to consider the disposition of our own drooping,
drousie souls: if this will not abase a soul that has tasted the love and
mercy of God, nothing in the world will do it. There never was a Child of God
of a dull temper and disposition, but he was ashamed, that being under such a
covenant of favor, that he should yet not have a heart more enlarged to bless
God.

To stir us up to this duty, for arguments to persuade us, what need we Motions
to thankfulness.
use many? It should be our duty in this world to be as much in heaven and
heavenly employment. Our conversation is in heaven (says the Apostle) 1. it is
the employment of heaven.
How can we be in heaven more then by practicing of that which the Saints and
Angels, and the Cherubins, and Seraphins spend all their strength in there? How
do they spend all that blessed strength with cheerfulness and joy, that are in
that place of joy? How do they spend it, but in setting forth the praise of
God, the wonderful goodness of God that has brought them to that happiness?
Certainly that which we shall do for ever in heaven, we ought to do as much as
we may do on earth. And it is (as I said before) 2. It mitigates crosses.
in all aflictions and troubles, the only special way to mitigate them, to work
our hearts to thankfulness for mercies and favors that we enjoy. We have
cause indeed at the first to be abased and humbled; but we have more cause to
rejoice, in working our hearts to comfort in blessing of God, it will ease the
cross, any cross whatsoever. I will not dwell further upon the point, I shall
have occasion often to digress upon this duty.

The Object of praise here, is God, clothed with a comfortable description;
God how considered the object of praise.
not God simply, for alas we have no hearts to praise God, take God only armed
with justice, clothed with Majesty. Consider God thus, indeed he deserves
glory and praise, but the guilty soul will not praise him thus considered, and
abstracted from mercy and goodness, and love, therefore says he, Blessed be
God God how considered, Blessed be God. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.


First, he is father of Christ, and then Father of mercies, and God of comfort.
God, so considered, be blessed. God (as he is to be prayed unto, so) he is to
be praised.


And only God, this sacrifice, this perfume, this incense it must not be
misspent upon any creature, we have all of his grace, and we should return all
to his glory, that is a duty. But consider him as he is described here, first
the father of Christ, and then the father of mercies, and God of all comfort.
And it is not to be omitted, thar first he begins with this. Blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ only as he is God, but the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ as he is man: for God being the Father of whole Christ,
being father of the person, he is father of the manhood, taken into unity with
that person; so he is Father both of God and Man, they cannot be dividedin
Christ, he being the Father of whole Christ, he is the Father God and Man. And
he is first the Father of Christ, and then the Father of us, and the Father of
mercies; for alas, unless he had been the Father of Christ, God and Man,
Mediator, he could never have been the Father of such cursed creatures as we
are: but because he is the Father of Christ, of that blessed manhood, which
Christ has taken into Unity of person with the Godhead, therefore he is the
Father of us, who by Union are one with Christ.

The point then is, that, God (thus considered) as the Father of Jesus Christ
is to be praised. Doct. God as the Fa^^^^ of Christ to be praised.



Here is the reason of blessing and praising him, in this, that he is the
Father of Jesus Christ, for thence he comes to be our Father; it is a point
that we think not often enough on, but it is the ground of all comfort, for we
have all at the second hand, Christ has all first, and we have all from him:
He is the first Son, and we are sons, he is the first beloved of God, and we
are beloved in him; he is filled first with all grace, and we are filled from
him, of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace: he was first acquitted of our
sins, as our surety, and then we are justified, because he was justified from
our sins, being our surety, he is ascended into Heaven, we shall ascend; he
sits at the right hand of God, and we sit with him in heavenly places; he
judges, we shall judge him; whatsoever we do, Christ does it first, we have
it in Christ, and through Christ, and from Christ, he is the Father of Christ,
and our Father.

Therefore we ought to bless God for Christ, that he would predestinate Use 1.
To bless God for Christ.
Christ to be our head, to be our Savior; that he would take the humane nature
of Christ, and make it one person with his Divine nature, and so predestinate
us, and elect, and choose us to salvation in him, blessed be God that he would
be the Father of Jesus Christ.

And as this should stir us up to bless God for Jesus Christ; so likewise it
should direct us to comfortable meditations, to see our Nature in Christ first,
and then in our selves: See thy Nature abased in Christ, see thy Nature
glorified in Christ, see thy Nature filled with all grace in Christ, and see
this, that thou art knit to that Nature, thou art flesh of Christ's flesh, and
bone of his bone, and thou shall be so as he is. In that Christ's nature was
first abased, and then glorified; this nature shall first be abased to death
and dust, and then be glorified. Christ died, and rose again, thou art
predestined to be conformable to Christ; for as his flesh was first humbled
and then glorious, so thine must be first humble, and then glorious. His flesh
was holy, humble, and glorious, and so must ours be: whatsoever we look for (in
our selves) that is good, we must see it in Christ first.

And when we hear in the Gospel, in the Articles of the Creed, of Christ
crucified, of Christ dying, of Christ rising, ascending, and sitting at the
right hand of God: let us see our selves in him, see our selves dying in him,
and rising in him, and sitting at the right hand of God. For the same God that
raised Christ natural, will raise Christ mystical, he will raise whole Christ:
for he is not glorified by pieces; as whole Christ natural, in his body and
members was raised, so shall whole Christ mystical be. Therefore in every
Article of the Creed bless God, bless God forabasing of Christ: bless God
for raising him up, bless God for raising us up: Blessed be God who has
raised us up to an immortal hope, by the Reserrection of Christ, says St.
Peter: bless God for the ascension of Christ, that our Head is in heaven. Let
us bless God, not for personal favors only, but go to the spring: bless God
for showing it to Christ, and to us in him.

This point the Apostle had learned well: therefore he begins with praise,
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. If the Virgin Mary thought
her self blessed, and all Generations should call her Blessed, for bearing our
Savior in her Womb, and so being his Mother; then all Generations must needs
do this duty to call God blessed, because he is the Father of Christ. So God
the Father is to be blessed as the spring of favors: for he gave Christ. All
Generations call the Virgin Mary blessed, because she was the Mother of Christ:
but that was in a lower degree, then God was his Father. This point ought to
take up our meditations; to think we have all in Christ first; to think of our
selves in Christ, it is comfortable; and Christ shall have more glory by it;
God the Father and the Son shall have glory by it, and we shall have comfort.

The second consideration of God is, not only as he is the Father of Christ;
but as he is, The Father of Mercies.


God is the Father of Christ, and our Father, and the Father of mercies, God
the Father of mercies because the Father of Christ.
but as I said before in this method, he is first the Father of Christ, and
then our Father, and then the Father of mercies. For he could never be the
Father of mercies to us, except he were the Father of Christ: For mercy must
see justice contented, one attribute in God must not devour another; all must
have satisfaction, his Justice must have no wrong: nor it has not now, it is
fully satisfied by Christ.

Therefore God is the Father of Christ, that Christ in our nature might die for
us, and so he might be our Father notwithstanding our sins, having punished our
sins in our surety Christ. So being the Father of Christ, and our Father, he is
the Father of mercies, his justice has no loss by it.

If God had not found out a way out of the bowels of his mercy, how he might
show good to us, by reconciling mercy and justice in the Mediator Christ, in
punishing him for our sins, to let us free, he had never been a Father of
mercy, if he had not been the Father of Christ first; for we being in such
contrary terms as God and we were, he being holiness, and we nothing but a
mass of sin and corruption: without sufficient satisfaction of an infinite
person there could be no reconciliation: therefore he is the Father of Christ
who died for us, he took our nature upon him to satisfy Gods justice; and then
Father of us, and so Father of mercy to us.

He may well be the Father of mercies now, being the Father of Christ; of our
nature in Christ: for (as I said) he is the Father of Christ as man, as well as
he is God: being the Father of our nature, being taken into the unity with his
own Sons Nature (for both make one Christ,) he becomes the Father of mercies;
he is a Father to him by nature; to us by Grace and Adoption; The Father of
Christ, and Father of mercies. It is a necessary method; for God out of Christ
is a fountain indeed, but he is a (...) sealed up, he is a God Merciful and
Gracious in his own nature, but there is sin that stops the fountain, that
stops the current of the mercy: there must be therefore satifaction to his
justice, and wrath, before there can be reconciliation, before there can any
mercy flow from him. He is first the Father of Christ, and then the Father of
mercies: we have all from Christ. If he were not the Father of Christ, he
should be the Father of no body; for immediately no man is able to appear before
God without a mediator. Father of Mercies.


By Father (which is a kind of Hebraisme,) is meant, he is the Original, the
spring of mercies: he is the Father of mercies. He does not say the Father of
one mercy, but the Father of mercies. His mercy is one, it is his Nature, it is
Himself, as he is one, so mercy in him is one: it is one in the fountain, but
many in the streams: it is one in him, one nature, and one mercy: but because
we have not one sin, but many sins, we have not one misery, but many, that lies
upon this frail nature of ours: therefore according to the exigences of us
wretched Creatures, according to our sins and miseries, his mercies stream out,
they are derived and run out to all kind of sin and misery whatsoever.

The Father of mercies: If all mercies were lost, they must be found in him, he
is the Father of mercies; they are his bowels (as it were) and mercy pleases
him as a man is pleased with his own natural Child The Father of mercies, he
does not say the Author of mercies, but the Father of them: he gives them the
sweetest name that can be: he does not say the Father of revenge, or of
judgment (though he be the father of them too): but to his Children the father
of mercies: A sweet name under which none should despair.

But to show some reasons, why he is so styled. There is good reason, God is
styled Father of mercies.
being the Father of Christ, his justice being fully contented, sin being taken
away that stopped the current of his mercies, he being naturally merciful, 1.
Because Christ his justice is satisfied.
his mercies run freely: Father of Christ, and Father of mercies; it follows
well, he is the father of mercies, because he is the Father of Christ, and
because his justice is satisfied in him, and he being naturally merciful, what
hinders but that mercy may run amain, freely, and abundantly upon those that
are in covenant with him in Christ, that are members of Christ: that is one
reason, because his justice is satisfied.

And because he is naturally merciful, therefore he is the Father of mercies.
2. Because he is naturally merciful.
The Sea does not more naturally flow, and is moist, and the Sun does not more
naturally shine, the fire does not more naturally burn, heavy bodies do not
more naturally sink to the center, then God does naturally show pity and mercy
where his justice is satisfied: for it is his nature, it is himself.

The Apostle does not name other attributes; for alas, other attributes All
Gods attributes without mercy terrible.
would scare us: As for example, if the guilty conscience consider him as a God
of justice, it will reason thus: what is this to me? I am a sinner, and he will
be just in punishing: if he consider he is a God of Wisdom, the conscience
considers, he is the more wise to find out my windings, and turnings from him,
and my covering of my sins; he is the more wise to find me out in my courses,
and to shame me: he does not say, he is a God of power, the Father of Power;
the guilty conscience then would reason, he is the more able to crush me, and
to send me to hell.

Indeed there is no attribute of God, but it is matter of terror, being
secluded from mercy; but considering, God the Father of mercies, then we may
consider sweetly and comfortably of all other attributes: He is merciful and
good to me; therefore his wisdom that shall serve to do me good, to devise good
things for me, his power shall serve to free me from mine enemies, his Justice
to revenge my quarrel, and so all other attributes, shall be serviceable to my
comfort: they may be thought upon sweetly, where mercy is laid claim unto
before: Therefore here he is called the Father of mercy, and not the Father of
other attributes. Of Mercies.


To unfold the word a little (mercy) is here, the same with grace Mercy, what.
to a person in misery: Mercy is but free favor showed to a miserable
person: Grace shows the freeness of it, and mercy shows the state of the
person to whom it is shown: always where mercy is, either there is present or
else possible misery.

There was mercy showed to Angels that stood, to free them, to give them grace
to stand; they might have fallen as the Devils did when they were Angels; none
are the Subjects of mercy, but such as either are in misery, or are possible
to fall into misery: now when God keeps and upholds the creature from falling
into that which he is subject to fall into, he being a creature taken out of
nothing, and therefore subject to fall to nothing without assistance, to hold
him from that whereto he would fall without being upheld; this makes him the
Object of mercy, whatsoever the misery be spiritual or outward.

Thus God is the Father of mercy, he upholds his Children from that which else
they would fall into continually, He is the Father of mercy, before Kinds of
Gods mercy.
conversion, offering and injoyning mercy to them, that as they will be good
to their souls, they would receive mercy. He joins his glory and his mercy
together, that he will be glorified in showing mercy, and he presses it upon
us. What a mercy is this, that he should press mercy upon us for our own
good? Why will ye dye, O House of Israel. And Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, there is mercy before conversion; and there is mercy
in prolonging his wrath, in not punishing, and there is mercy in pardoning
sin freely, in pardoning all sin, the punishment and the guilt, and all:
and when we are in the state of Grace, and have our sins pardoned, still it is
his mercy to forbear the punishments due to us: in mitigating his corrections,
and in seasonable corrections: for it is a mercy for God to correct his
Children seasonably: Therefore we are corrected of God, that we should not be
damned with the world.

It is a mercy to have seasonable correction; it is a mercy to have correction
mitigated, and sweetened with some comforts: It is a mercy after we are in the
state of Grace (besides this) to have the continuance of outword blessings.

God renews his mercies every day, His mercies fail not, Lament. 3. 22. his
mercies are renewed continually upon us.

So he is father of all kind of mercies; privative mercies, in freeing us from
ill, and positive mercies, in bestowing good, pardoning mercies, healing
mercies, preserving mercies, all mercies come from this Father of mercy.

I will not stand to unfold them in particular; for indeed every thing that
comes from God to his children, it is a mercy, it is as it were dipped in mercy
before it comes to us: it is a mercy, that is, there is a freedom in it, and a
pity to his creature: For the creature is always in some necessity, and in some
dependence: we are in a state of necessities in this life, in some misery or
other, and that (as I said) is the object of mercy.

Besides, we are dependant for the good we have; it is at Gods mercy to
continue or to take away any comfort that he gives us, every thing is a mercy.
And in every thing we take from God, we ought to conceive a mercy in it, and to
think this is a mercy from God, if we have health, it is a mercy, if we have
strength, it is a mercy, if we have deliverance, it is a mercy: it comes in the
respect and relation of a mercy all that comes from God. He is not said to be
the father of the thing: but the Father of mercies, there is a mercy contained
in the thing, they come from the pity and love of God, and that is the
sweetest: therefore he is said to be the Father of mercies.

What use may we make of this, that God is the Father of Mercies?

It is a point full of sweet and comfortable uses, to those that are not in the
state of grace, and to those that are in the state of grace.

To those that are not in the state of grace, they should see here a haven to
fly to, a City of refuge, to fly unto: do but consider thou wretched soul,
how God is styled a Father of mercies to thee, a God of bounty: all is to
allure thee to repentance, to allure thee to come in. He is not merciful by
accident, but he is naturally merciful in himself, he has bowels of mercy in
himself, Mercy pleases him, Micah 7.

Therefore despair not thou drooping soul, whosoever thou art that art under
the guilt of sin, come to the Father of mercies, cast thy self into this Sea of
his mercy, hide thy self in these bowels, be not an enemy to thine own mercy,
as Jonah says, refufe not thy own mercy that is offered. There is mercy
pressed upon thee, mercy with threatening if thou believe not mercy, now thou
art called to receive it. The wrath of God hangs over thee as a weight, or as a
sword ready to fall upon thee. As Christ sath Joh. 3. The wrath of God hangs
over us, if we do not receive mercy offered us.

Allege not thy sins against mercy: thy sins are the sins of a creature, God
is the Father of mercies, he is infinite: Christ thy Savior has made an
infinite satisfaction, and thy sins are finite, and in that respect there is
mercy for thee if thou will come in, if thou apprehend, and receive mercy.

One deep calls upon another deep, the depth of thy sins and misery, draws
unto it, and calls upon the depth of mercy. The mercy of God is above all his
works, Psalm. 147. It is not only above all his works to cover them all, and
under them to uphold them; but it is beyond them all, his mercy exceeds all
other attributes to the creature. It is above his works, and upon his works,
and under his works, and it is above thy works too. He is more glorious in his
mercy then in any other attribute: he does all for the glory of his mercy, both
in the Creation, and in the Gospel: his mercy therefore is above his own
works, and above thy works if thou come in.

Oil is of a Kingly nature, it swims above all other liquors: so the mercy of
God, like oil it swims above all other attributes in him, and Simile.
above all sin in thee, if thou will receive it. Father of Mercies.


In a corrupt estate the special mercy is forgiving mercy; if it were not
Forgiving mercies, the principal.
for forgiving mercies, all other gifts and mercies were to little purpose: for
it were but a reserving of us to eternal Judgment, but a feeding the Traitor
to the day of Execution, a giving him the liberty of the priison, which is
nothing unless his Treason be pardoned; so the forgiving mercy leads to all
the rest. Now these forgiving mercies, they are unlimitted mercies, there is no
bounds of them: for he being the Father of Christ, who is an infinite person,
and having received an infinite satisfaction from an infinite Person, he may
well be infinitely merciful: and himself is an infinite God, his mercies are
like himself, the satisfaction whereby he may be merciful is infinite: hereupon
it is that he may pardon, and will pardon all sin without limitation, if they
be never so great, never so many.

This I observe the rather, to appease the conscience of a sinner when it is
suppressed with terror, and fear of the greatness of his sins. Consider how
God has set down himself, and will be known and apprehended of us, not only
as merciful, but a Father of mercies, and not of one mercy, but of all mercies,
not only giving, but forgiving especially, Which forgiveth all thy sins, and
heals all thy infirmities, Psalm. 103. This I observe against a pronenesse in
us to despair: we are not now proner in the time of peace to presume, then when
conscience is awakened to despair, we are prone to Men prone to presume of Gods
mercies.
both alike: For here is the poison of man's corruption. Is God so merciful?
surely, I may go on in sin, and cry God mercy, and there is an end: God is
merciful, nay, the Father of mercies.

Now in the time of peace, sin is nothing with us, swearing is nothing, rotten
discourse is nothing, going beyond others in our dealing and commerce is
nothing, getting an estate by fraud and deceit is nothing: The bread of deceit
is sweet; loose, licentious, libertine life is nothing: and those that do not
follow the same excess, and are dissolute, it is a strange matter with us,
they are strange people; we think it strange that others do not so, and if they
be better then we, it is but hypocrisy: men measure all by themselves, so all
is nothing. Great, gross swearing is nothing, men glory in it, and to make
scruple of it; it is thus and thus: they have terms for it. And what is the
bawd for all this? Oh! God is merciful, and Christ he is wondrous merciful,
he took our nature that he might die for us, etc.

It is true indeed; but when the conscience is awakened, then the conscience
will tell thee another lesson, the conscience will set God as just, and Satan
will help conscience, with accusations and aggravations: it is true, it is too
true, the conscience will take part with God, and with his word: it is true
thou have done thus, and thus, these are thy sins, and God is just.

And especially at the hour of death, when earthly comforts fail, and there is
nothing but sin set before a man's eyes (the comforts that are set before him,
can do him no good) then the conscience will hardly receive any comfort:
especially the conscienconsciences of such as have gone on in a course of sin,
in spite of good means: a conscience of such a man as either refuses or
rejects the means, because it would favor it self in sin; or a conscience
that being under means, having had it sins discovered to it, that conscience
will hardly admit of any comfort. And there is none, but they find it another
manner of matter then they think it. Sin is a blacker thing then they imagine,
their oaths that they trifle with, and their dissolute, and their rotten
discourse (when they should be better affected) upon the sabbath, and such
like: therefore we ought to look to it.

Well; to press this point of presumption a little further now I am in it. We
are wondrous prone to abuse this mercy to presumption, and after to despair.

I consider this before hand, that however Gods mercy be unlimited, as to whom
Gods mercy is unlimitted.
indeed it is in it self; it is so unlimited to those that repent, and to those
that receive and embrace mercy, and mercy in one kind as well as another; it is
so to those that repent of their sins; for God is so the Father of Mercy, as
that He is the God of Vengeance too, he is a just God too.

The conscience will tell you this well enough, when the outward comforts (that
now you dally with, and set as Gods in the room of God, and drown your selves
in sensuality, and Idolatry, with the creature, and put them in the place of
God, when they are taken away, conscience will tell you, that God is merciful
indeed; but he is just to such that refuse mercies.

Therefore though his mercy be unlimited to such as are broken hearted, to such
as repent of their sins: (for he will glorify his Mercy, as he may glorify
his other attributs) he is wisely merciful: if he should be merciful to such as
go on in sin, he should not be wisely merciful.

Who, among men, if he be wise would be merciful to a Child, or Servant
without acknowledgement of the fault?

Was not David over merciful to Absalom? Yes, it was his fault: yet out of
wisdom, he would not admit him into his presence, till he was humbled for his
fault, and made intercession, though he doted upon him. God is infinitely wise,
as he is Merciful: therefore He will not be Merciful to him that goes on in
wickedness and sin. This cannot be too often pressed: for the most of the
auditors wheresoever we speak, the Devil has them in this snare, that God is
merciful etc. and does he not know how to use it? He is so indeed, but it is to
repentant souls, that mean to break off their course of sin.

Otherwise, if the Mercy of God work the other way, hearken to Gods Wrath to
presumtuous sinners.
thy doom, He that blesses himself (says God,) by Moses Denteronomy 29. 16
and says, these curses shall not come to me: he that blesses himself and
says: Oh, all shall be well, God is Merciful etc. My wrath shall smoke
against him, and I will not be merciful to him, that goes on in his sins. God
will wound the hairie scalp of him that goes on in Sin. As the Apostle says
Romans 2. he that abuses the bounty and patience of God, that should lead him
to repentance, he treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath. The Scripture
is never in any case more terrible then this way. In Esaias 28. you have made a
covenant with hell and death, with Gods judgments: but hell, and death has not
made a covenant with you. You make a covenant, and think you shall do well, but
God is terrible to such, his wrath shall smoke against such as make a covenant
with his judgments, and treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.

Take heed, if the proclamation of mercy, call thee not in: if thou stand out
as a Rebel, and come not in, but go on still: then justice lays hold on thee:
Gods wrath shall smoke against thee. As we see in Prove. 1. I will laugh at your
destruction, speaking of those that would not come in, Chidas, it is in Esaias.
27. 11. He that formed them and made them will have no mercy on them, nor show
them favor. He will have no delight in them. They are Ignorant sotts, and will
not labor to know God, and his will, to do, and obey it: he that made them
will have no delight in them, and he that formed them will reject them. It is a
pitiful thing, when God that made them, and formed them in their mothers womb;
whose creatures they are, shall have no delight in them, when he that made
them, his heart shall not pity them Ezekiel. 18. 18. he that goes on in a course
of sin presumptuously, and does not repent, Gods eye shall not pity him, he
that made him will have no delight in him.

Therefore the Apostle, because we are disposed, and prone, to abuse the
goodness and long suffering of God, and the mercies of Christ, he says, Be
not deceived, be not deceived, (he often presses this) for neither the covetous,
nor licentious persons shall enter into heaven.

Though God be merciful; if thou live in these sins, be not deceived, thou
shall never enter into heaven. God will not be merciful to the most of those
that even now live in the bosom of the Church; because they make mercy a band
to their sinful courses, God will harden himself; he will not bless such: he
has no mercy for such, to such he is a God of vengeance.

His mercy is to such as are weary of their sinful courses: (as I said) he is
merciful; but so, as he is wise.

What Prince will prostitute a pardon to one that is a Rebel, and yet thinks
himself a good Subject all the while? he is no Rebel, cares he for a pardon?
And shall he have a pardon, when he cares not for it? Those that are not
humbled in the sight and sense of their sins, that think themselves in a good
estate, they are Rebels, that have not sued out their pardon, there is no
mercy to them yet, He that made them will not pity them, because they are
Ignorant hardened wretches that live in blasphemy, in swearing, that in corrupt
courses, in hardness of heart, that live in sins, that their own conscience,
and the conscience of others about them, know that they are sins, devouring
sins, that devour all their comfort, and yet notwithstanding they dream of
mercy, mercy. Hell is their portion and not mercy that make an Idol of God.

Thus it is with us, we are prone to presume upon Gods mercy. I speak this,
that we should not surfeit of this sweet doctrine, that God is the father of
Mercies. He is so to repentant sinners, to those that believe, to those mercy
is sweet. We know oil is above all other liquors: Gods mercy Simile.
is above all his own works, and above our sins. But what is the vessel for
this oil? this oil of mercy it is put in broken vessels, it is kept best there,
a broken heart, a humble heart, receives and keeps mercy.

As for proud dispositions, (as all Sinners that go on in a course of sin, the
Psalmist terms them proud men: he is a proud man, that sets his own will against
Gods command) God resists the Proud: it is the humble yielding heart, that will
be led and lured by God, that is a vessel to receive mercy. It must be a deep
vessel, it must be a broken vessel: deep with humiliation, broken by
contrition, that must receive mercy. And it must be a large vessel laid open,
capable to receive mercy, and all mercy; not only pardoning mercy, but healing
mercy, as I said out of that Psalm, That forgiveth all thy sins, and heals
all thy transgressions.

Therefore those that have not grace and mercy, to heal their corruptions, to
dry up that issue in some comfortable measure, they have no pardoning mercy:
and those that desire not their corruptions to be healed, they never desired
heartily their corruptions to be pardoned: those mercies go together.

He is not the Father of mercy, but of all mercies that belong to salvation,
and he gives them every one, and he that desires the one, desires the other.

Let us consider, how the sweet descriptions of God, and how his promises work
upon us. If they work on us to make us presume, it is a fearful case, it is as
bad a sign as may be, to be ill, because God is good, to turn the Grace of God
into wantonness.

But as we are thus prone to presume; so when conscience is awaked, we are as
prone to despair: therefore if they work with us this way, there is mercy with
God, therefore I will come in; therefore I will cast down my weapons at his
feet, I will cease to resist him, I will come in, and take terms of peace with
him; I will yield him obedience for the time to come, therefore I will fear,
and love, so good a God.

If it work thus, it is a sign of an elect soul, of a gracious disposition. And
then if thou come in, never consider what thy sins have been, if thou come in,
God will embrace thee in his mercy. Thy sins are all as a spark of fire that
falls into the Ocean, that is drowned presently; so are thy sins Simile.
in the Ocean of Gods mercy.

There is not more light in the Sun, there is not more water in the Sea, then
there is mercy in the Father of mercy, whose bowels are opened to thee if thou
be weary of thy sinful courses, and come in, and embrace mercy.

In the Tabernacle (we know) there was a mercy Seat: we call it a propitiatory:
In the Ark, which this mercy Seat covered, was the Law: now in the Law, there
were curses against all sinners.

The Mercy-Seat was a Type of Christ, covering the Law, covering the curse:
though thou be guilty of the curse a thousand times, God in Christ is merciful.
Christ is the Mercy Seat, come to God in Christ, there is mercy in Israel
notwithstanding thy great sins. If we cast away a purpose of living in sin, and
cast away our weapons, and submit our selves to him, he is the Father of
mercies, that is, he is merciful from himself, he is the spring of them, and
has them from his own bowels: they are free mercies, because he is the Father
of them.

For he is just by our fault, he is severe from us, he takes occasion from our
sins, but he is merciful from his own bowels: he is good from himself, we
provoke him to be severe, and just: therefore be we never so miserable in
regard of sin, and the fruits of sin, yet he is the Father of mercy, of free
mercy, mercy from himself, mercy pleases him, Micah 7. he is delighted in it.

Now that which is natural comes easily, as water from the fountain comes
without violence, and heat from the fire comes without any violence, because it
is natural. A Mother pitties her child, because it is natural; there is a sweet
instinct of nature, that moves and pricks forward nature to that affection of
love that she bears to her child. So it is with God, it is nature in him to be
merciful to his, because they are his; Mercy is his nature: we are his, we
being his, his nature being merciful, he will be merciful to all that are his,
to such as repent of their sins, and lay hold of his mercy by a true faith.

His word shows likewise his mercy, there is not one attribute set down more
in Scripture then mercy, it is the name whereby he will be known, Exodus 34.
where he describes it, and tells us his name: what is the name of God? his long
suffering, and mercy, etc. there is a long description of of God in that place,
David in Psalm. 3. (besides that which is in every Prophet almost) has the fame
description of God, to comfort Gods people in his time, in Psalm. 86. 103. 145.
there is the same description of God as there is in Moses, he is merciful and
long suffering etc. he describes himself to be so, and his promises are
promises of mercy; At what time soever a sinner repents, and without limitation
of sins; all sins shall be forgiven, the blood of Christ purges us from all
sin.

If there be no limitation of persons whomsoever, of sins whatsoever, or of
time whenever; here is a ground that we should never despair; God is the
Father of mercies.

It is excellent that the Prophet has in Isai. 55. 7. to prevent the thoughts
of a dejected soul: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God; for he will abundantly pardon.

I, but I have abused mercy a long time, I have lived in sin, and committed
Object.
great sins, well notwithstanding that, (see how he answers it) My thoughts are
not your thoughts; you are vindictive: if a man offend you, you are ready to
aggravate the fault, and to take revenge etc. But my thoughts are not as your
thoughts, nor my ways as your ways says the Lord: for as far as the heaven
is above the earth, so are my thoughts above your thoughts, and my ways above
your ways. We have narrow poor thoughts of mercy, because we our selves are
given to revenge, and we are ready when we think of our sins to say, can God
forgive them? can God be merciful to such? etc. My thoughts are not as your
thoughts, nor my ways as your ways.

It is good to consider this, and it is a sweet meditation: for the time
undoubtedly will come, that unless Gods mercy and Gods thoughts should be as
him self is, infinite, unless his ways should be infinitely above our ways,
and his thoughts infinitely above ours in mercy: certainly the soul would
receive no comfort.

The soul of a Christian, acquainted with the word of God, knows, that Gods
mercy is, as himself is, infinite, and his thoughts this way, are, as himself
is, infinite: Therefore the Scripture sets down the mercies of God, by all
dimensions: There is the depth of Wisdom, but when he comes to speak of love
and mercy, as it is in Ephesians. 3. Oh the depth, and breadth, and height of this!

Indeed for height, it is higher then the heavens, for depth, it fetches the
soul from the nether most-deep: we have deep misery, (out of the deep Icryed
to thee) yet notwithstanding his mercy is deeper then our misery. O the depth
of his mercy! there is a depth of mercy deeper, then any misery or rebellion of
ours, though we have sunk deep in rebellion. And for the extent ofthem (as I
said before) his mercy is over all his works, it extends to the utmost parts
of the earth. The scripture does wonderfully enlarge his mercy, beyond all
dimensions whatsoever. These things are to good purpose: and it is a mercy to
us, that he sets forth himself in mercy in his word; because the soul, sometime
or other when it is awakned, (as every one that God delights in is awakened
first or last) it needs all this, it is all little enough.

God is merciful to those that are heavy laden, that feel the burden of their
sins upon their souls, such as are touched with the sense of their sins, God
still meets them half way, he is more ready to pardon, then they are to ask
mercy. As we see in the prodigal, when he had wasted all, when he was as low
as a man could be, when he was come to husks, and when he had despised his
fathers admonition: yet upon resolution to return, when he was stung with the
sense of his sins, his father meets him and entertains him; he upbraids him not
with his sin.

Take sin, with all the aggravations we can, yet if we repent, and resolve
upon new courses, there is comfort, though we relapse into sin again, and
again; if we must pardon 10. times 7. times, as Christ says; certainly there
cannot be more mercy in the Cistern, then there is in the fountain: there
cannot be more mercy in us, then there is in the Father of mercies as God is.

Take sin in the aggravations, in the greatness of it, Manasses sin, Peter's,
denying of his Master, the thief on the cross, and Paul's persecution, take sin
as great as you will, he is the father of mercies. If we consider that God is
infinite in mercy, and that the scripture reveals him as the Father of mercies,
there is no question, but there is abundance, a world of comfort to any
distressed soul that is ready to cast it self on Gods mercy.

For those that are converted that are in the state of Grace. Is God the father
of mercies. Use 2. To those that are in the state of Grace.


Let this stir us up to embrace mercy, every day to live by mercy, to plead
mercy with God in our daily breaches: to love and fear God, because there is
mercy with him that he might be feared. It is a harder matter to make a daily
sweet use of this then it is taken for. Those that are the fittest subjects for
mercy, they think themselves furthest off from mercy. Come to a broken soul,
who is catched in the snare; whose conscience is on the rack, he thinks, alas
there is no mercy for me, I have been such a sinner, God has showed me mercy
before, and now I have offended him again and again: those that are the
subjects of mercy, that are the nearest to mercy, when their conscience is
awakned they think themselves furthest off, and we have need to press
abundance of mercy, and all little enough to set the soul in frame. There is
none of us all, but we shall see a necessity of pressing this one time or
other, before we die. David when he had sinned, he knew well enough that God
was merciful, oh, but it was not a slight mercy that would satisfy him, as we
see Psalm. 51. how he presses upon God for mercy, and will a little serve him?
No, according to thy abundant mercy, he presses mercy, and abundance of mercy,
a multitude of mercies, and unless he had seen infinite mercy, abundant mercy
in God, when his conscience was awaked with the foulness of his sin: there
being such a cry for vengeance, his sin called and cried, if the blood of
Christ had not cried above it, mercy, mercy, and abundance of mercy,
multitudes of compassion, the soul of David would not have been stilled.

So other Saints of God, when they have considered the foulness of sin, how
odious it is to God, they could not be quieted and comforted, but that they saw
mercy, and abundance of mercy. As the Apostle St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy
has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
to an inheritance, immortal, etc. God is the Father of mercies.


For faith will not have sufficient footing, but in infinite mercy, in the time
of despair, in the time of torment of conscience, in the time of desertion it
must be mercy, and the Father of mercies, and multitudes of compassions, and
bowels of love, and all little enough for faith to fix on, the faith of a
conscience on the rack; but when faith considers of God set out (not as Satan
sets him forth, a God of vengeance, a consuming fire, when faith considers God)
pictured out in the Gospel, it sees him the Father of Christ, and our Father,
and the Father of mercies and God of comfort; faith seeing infinite mercy in an
infinite God; and seeing mercy triumph against Justice, and all other
attributes, here faith has some footing, and stays it self, or else the
converted, sanctified soul, seeing the odiousness of sin, and the
clamorousness of sin, such that it will not be satisfied, but with abundant
mercy, and God must be presented to it as a father of mercy and compassion
before it can have peace.

Therefore if so be at any time our conscience be awakened, and the Devil
lays hard to us, let us think of God as he has made himself known in his
Word, as a Father of mercies and God of comfort, represent him to our souls,
as he represents himself in his Word. Times of desertion, when we seem to be
forsaken of God, will enforce this: times of desertion will come, when the soul
will think God has forgotten to be merciful, and has shut up his love in
displeasure; oh no, he is the Father of mercy he never shuts up his bowels
altogether, he never stops the spring of his mercy. He does to our feeling,
but it is his mercy that he does that, it is his mercy that he hinders the
sense of mercy; he does that in mercy, it is to make us more capable of mercy
afterward.

Therefore says the Father, when he comes to us in his love, and the sense of
it, it is for our good: and when he takes the sense of his love from us, it is
for our good; for when he takes away the sense of his love from us, it is to
enlarge our souls to be more capable of mercy after, to prize it more, to
walk warily, and jealously, to look to our corruptions better: Therefore in the
time of desertion think of this, when God seems to forget us. Can a Mother
forget her Child? Isa. 49. 15. Suppose she should be so unnatural as to do it
(which can hardly be believed) that a Mother should forget her child, Yet
notwithstanding I will not forget you; you are written upon the palms of my
hands, that is, I have you always in my eye. So that if there were no mercies to
be found in nature, no bowels to be found in a Mother (where usually they are
most abundant) yet notwithstanding there is mercy to be found in the Father of
Mercies still: Therefore in such times let us make use of this.

And another thing that we ought to learn hence is this; if God be so in
Christ Jesus (for we must always put that in) for he is merciful with
satisfaction, and yet it is his mercy that he would admit of satisfaction; his
mercy devised a way to content justice; his mercy set all on work: mercy is
above justice in the work of Salvation: justice has received contentment from
mercy, (but that by the way) to make us have higher thoughts of mercy, then any
other attribute of God in the Doctrine of the Gospel, in that Kingdom of
Christ: it is a Kingdom of Grace and mercy, if we have hearts to embrace it.

Let this encourage us to come to God, and to cast our selves into the arms of
this merciful Father, If we have lived in other courses before, An
encouragement to come to God.
let the mercy of God work upon our souls. In Romans 2. it is pressed there
excellently; This mercy of God should lead us to repentance, it should
encourage us. What makes a Thief, or a Traitor come in, when there is
proclamation Simile.
out against him? If there be a pardon sent after him, it makes him come in, or
else he runs out still further and further, while the hue and cry pursues him;
but hope of mercy and pardon will bring him in again. So it is that that brings
us in again to God, the very hope of mercy and pardon; if we be never so ill,
or have been never so ill: do not put off, but take this day now, Now is the
time, now while it is called to day, take the present time. Here is our error,
if God be the Father of mercy, I will cry him mercy at the hour of death. I,
thou may go to hell with mercy in thy mouth: he is merciful to those that
truly repent; but how do thou know that thy repentance on thy deathbed will
be true? It is not sorrow for sickness, and grief for death: and fear of that:
but there must be a hatred of sin: and how shall conscience tell thee now thou
have repented, that it is a hating of thy sinful courses, rather then the fear
of damnation? that is rather from the sense of grief. Conscience will hardly be
comforted in this, for it will upbraid; I, now, now you would have mercy.

We see by many that have recovered again, that have promised great Late
Repentance seldom true.
matters in their sickness, that it is hypocritical Repentance, for they have
been worse after then they were before. It is not a sufficient matter to yield
thee comfort, that thou art much humbled in thy sickness, and at the hour of
death: for it is hard for thee to determine whether it be true Repentance, or
mere sorrow for sin as it brings judgment. Fear of damnation is not sufficient
to bring a man to heaven, thy nature must be changed before thou come to
heaven; thou must love Righteousness because it is Righteousness, thou must
love God because he is good, thou must hate sin because it is sin.

How can thou tell, when thou have been naught before affliction, whether
affliction have wrought this, that thou repentest only out of hatred of
judgment to shun that, or out of hatred of sin, because it is sin? Therefore
now a little repentance in thy health, and in the enjoying of thy prosperity; a
little hatred of ill ways now, will more comfort thee, then a thousand times
more prayer, and striving will then. Although if thou can do it truly then,
yet the gate of mercy is open, but thy heart will scarce say it is truly done,
because it is forced.

Then again, perhaps, thou shall not have the honor of it, thou shall not have
the mercy: thou that have refused mercy and lived in a loose profane course,
thou that have despised mercy all the while, God will not honor thee so much,
as to have a good word, or a sorrowful word, that even very grief shall not
extort it from thee: but as thou have forgotten God in thy life, and would
not own his admonitions, thou shall forget thy self in death, and be taken away
suddenly, or else with some violent disease, that shall take away the use of the
parts that God has given thee, as inflammation of the Spirits or the like,
that shall take away the use of sound reason. It is madness and no better to
live as the most live, to cry God is merciful, etc. thou may go to hell for
all that: repentance must be from a true hatred of sin: and that that must
comfort thee, must be a disposition for the present: for then it is unforced.

Therefore all these sweet comforts are to you that come in, and leave Mercy
the greatest terror to impenitent.
your wicked courses; if you have been swearers, to swear no more; if you have
been deceivers, to deceive no more, if you have been licentious, to be so no
more: but to break off the course of your sins as God shall enable you; or else
this one thing (think of it) that you now dawbe your conscience withal, and go
on in sin with that will be the most terror to you, even Mercy: nothing will
vex you so much as mercy afterward. Then thon shall think with thy self, I have
heard comfortable of the promises, and of the nature of God, but I put off and
despised all, I regarded my sinful courses more then the mercy of God in
Christ, they were sweeter to me then mercy. I lived in sins (out of the
abundance of profaneness) that did me no good, I lived in sins, (out of the
superfluity of profaneness) that I had neither profit nor pleasure by, and
neglected mercy. The consideration of mercy neglected, with the continuing in a
wretched course, it will more aggravate the souls torment.

Let us be encouraged to come in; such as intend to leave their sinful
courses, let them remember, that then they come to a Father of mercy. that is
more ready to pardon, then you are to ask it: As you see in the prodigal Son
(which I instanced in before) it is a notable sweet Story. I have a Father
(says he) when he had spent all, and was come to Husks. Affliction is a
notable means to make us to taste and relish mercy: I have a father, and there
is plenty in his house, and he comes and confesses his sin; he had no sooner
resolved, but his Father (he does not stay for him, but) he meets him and
kisseth him.

Let us consider of this description of God the Father of mercy; it should move
any that are in ill and lewd courses before, In my Fathers house there are good
things, and in his heart there are bowels of mercy; I have a Father, and a
Father of mercy, I will go home, and submit my self to him, and say to him, I
have been thus and thus, but I will be so no more; you shall find that God by
his Spirit will be readier to meet you, then you are to cast your selves at the
feet of his mercy, and into the arms of his mercy: he will come and meet you,
and kiss you; you shall find much comfort upon your resolution to come in, if
it be a sound resolution.

The son fears his Fathers displeasure: but says the Father, My thoughts are
not as your thoughts. Oh! I fear he will not receive me: yes, yes, he is
willing to embrace you, mercy pleases him; and why will you perish O house of
Israel.

Again, God is the Father of mercies. This should stir us up to an imitation
To imitate God in mercy.
of this our gracious Father: for every Father begets to his own likeness, and
all the sons of this Father are like the Father, they are merciful, The Kings
of Israel are merciful Kings, says the Heathen King Benhadad, and the God of
Israel is a merciful God, and all that are under God are merciful; his sons
are merciful as their heavenly father is merciful. Therefore if we would make
it good to our own hearts, and the opinion and judgment of others of us, that
we are children of this merciful Father, we must put on bowels of mercy our
selves, as in Colos. 3. 2. Now therefore as the Elect of God, as you will make
it good that God has elected you, put on the bowels of mercy. Whatsoever we
have from God, it comes in the respect of a mercy, and so it should do from
Gods Children, every thing that comes from them to them that are in misery, it
should be a mercy, they should not only bestow the thing, but a sweet mercy
with the thing, a child of God he poures out his bowels to his Brother, as Esaias
says, Pour out thy bowels, etc. There is some bowels, that is, there is an
affection in Gods Children, they give not only the thing, the relief, but
mercy with it, that has a sweet report to the soul: there is pity, that
more comforts a sanctified soul, then the thing it self: We must not do
works of mercy proudly, it is not the thing that God stands on, but the
affection in the thing, his benefits are with a fatherly pity, so should ours
be with a pitiful respect, with a tender heart. The very mercies of the
wicked are cruel. If they be merciful, there is some pride of spirit, there
is some taste of a hard heart, of an hypocritical spirit, somewhat is not as it
should be, their mercies are not mercies, we must in our mercy imitate the
Father of mercies.

Alas it is the fault of our time, there is little mercy to those that are in
misery. What a cruel thing is it, that so many (I would I could say Christian
souls, I cannot say so (but) they are a company of men that have the Image of
God upon them: men that live miserable poor, such as for ought I know) Gods
mercy has purchased with the blood of his Son, and may belong to Gods
Kingdom: They have the Image of God upon them, yet they live without laws,
without Church, without Commonwealth, irregular persons; that have no order
taken for them, or not executed at the least, to repress the sturdie of them,
and to relieve those that are to be relieved for age or impotencie.

It is a pitiful thing, and a foul blemish to this Commonwealth, and will
bring some ill upon wealth, and plague it from such irregular persons, he will
plague the Commonwealth for such enormities. How do they live? As Beasts and
worse, they submit themselves to no orders of the Church, they have none, and
submit to none. Here is an Object of mercy to those that it concerns.

And likewise mercy ought to be showed to the souls of men, as well as to
their miserable and wretched estates. Is Popery Antichristian? what mercy is
it to suffer poysoners? what a mercy were it in a common wealth to suffer men
that are incendiaries, to have liberty to do what mischief they would? or men
that should poison fountains, and all that should refresh and nourish men?
were this any policy for the body? And is it any policy to suffer those to
poison the judgments of people with heresies to God, and treason to their
Prince? to draw the affections of men from religion, and the state where is
mercy all the while?

Oh, it is a mercy to them not to restrain them. Mercy! Is it mercy to the
sheep to let the wolves at liberty. No, if you will be merciful, to show
mercy to the souls of these men is to use them hardly, that they may know their
error; they may now impute the liberty they have to the approbation of their
cause, and so they are cruel, not only to others, but to their own souls.

I speak this the rather, it may be a seasonable speech at this time, to
enforce good laws this way. It is a great mercy, mercy to the soul, it is the
greatest mercy, and so cruelty to the soul is the greatest cruelty that can
be.

What should I speak of mercy to others? oh, that we would be merciful to our
own souls. God is merciful to our souls, he sent his son to Men unmerciful to
their own souls.
visit us from on high, in bowels of compassion, he sent Christ as Zachary
says: and yet we are not merciful to our selves. How many sinful wretched
persons pierce their hearts through with covetousness, and other wicked
courses that are more dangerous to the soul then poison is to the body? They
stab their souls with cares, and lusts, and other such kind of courses. What a
mockery is this of God, to ask him mercy, when we will not be merciful to our
own souls? and to entreat others to pray for us, when we will not be merciful
to our selves? Shall we go to God for mercy, when we will not show mercy to our
selves? shall we desire him to spare us, when we will not spare ourselves? It
is a mocking of God to come and offer our devotions here, and come with an
intent yet to live in any sin. God will not hear us, if we purpose to live in
sin, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer. As we ought
to be merciful to the souls of others, and to the estates of others, so we
should to our own souls.

How can they reform evils abroad, those that are Governors, when they do not
care to refomr themselves? can they be merciful to the souls of others, that
are cruel to their own? they cannot; Let mercy begin at home.

This is that, that the scripture aims at, mercy, and the right use of it is
the way to come to salvation, and the abuse of it is that that damnes, and they
are damned most that abuse mercy. Oh the sins against the Gospel will lie upon
the conscience another day. The sins against the law, they help with the Gospel
to see mercy: but sins against mercy prefer our sins above mercy; and in
temptations to despair, to extenuate mercy, hereafter it will be the very hell
of hell, that we have sinned against mercy, that we have not embraced it with
faith, that we have not repented to be capable of it.

But to end the point with that which is the most proper use of all, which Gods
mercy should comfort us in all estates.
is an use of comfort in all estates, to go to God in all, he is the father of
mercy. And when all is taken from us in losses and crosses to think, Well; our
fathers may die, and our mothers may die, and our nearest, and dearest friends
that have most bowels of pity may die; but we have a father of mercy, that
has eternal mercy in him, his mercies are tender mercies, and everlasting
mercies, as himself is. We are everlasting, our souls are immortal; we have an
everlasting father, that is the Father of mercies. When all are taken away, God
takes not himself away, he is the father of mercy still.

Now that we may make our selves still capable of mercy, still fit for mercy,
let us take this daily course. To be fit for mercy.


Let us labor every day, to have broken, and deep souls (as I said before) I.
Get broken hearts.
it is the broken heart that is the vessel that contains mercy, a deeper heart
that holds all the mercy; we need therefore to empty our selves by confession
of our sins, and search our own thoughts and ways, and afflict our souls by
repentance, and when we shall be fit objects for God the father of mercy to
shed mercy into misery, it is the Lodestone of mercy, misery felt and
discerned, and complained of. Let us search and see our misery, our spiritual
misery especially: for God begins mercy to the soul in his children, he begins
mercy there especially. General mercy he shows to beasts, to all creatures, but
special mercy begins at the soul. Now I say, misery being the Loadstone of
mercy, let us lay before God by confession and humiliation the sores and sins
of our souls. And then make use of this mercy every day: for God is not only
merciful in pardoning mercy at the first, in forgiving our sins at the first,
but every day he is ready to pardon new sins, as it is Lament. 3. He renewes
his mercies every day, every morning. God renewes his mercies not only for
body, but for soul: there is a throne of grace and mercy every day open to go
to; and a Scepter of mercy held out every day to lay hold on, and a fountain
for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in every day: it is never stopped up, or drawn
dry, the fountain is ever open, the Scepter is ever held forth, and the throne
is ever kept.

God keeps not terms; Now the Court of Chancerie is open, and now it is shut:
but he keeps Court every day: therefore Christ in the Gospel enjoynes us to go
to God every day: every day we say the Lords prayer, forgive us our trespasses,
insinuating, that the Court of mercy is kept every day to take out our pardon
every day there is a pardon of course taken out, At what time soever a sinner
repents, etc.

How shall we improve this mercy every day? Do this, when thou have Quest.
made a breach in thy conscience, every day believe this, that God is the
Father Answ. How to improve mercy daily.
of mercies, and he may well be merciful now, because he has been sufficiently
satisfied by the death of Christ, He is the Father of Christ, and the Father of
mercies: This do every day.

And withal consider our condition and estate, is a state of dependence, In
him we live and move, and have our being; this will force us to mercy, that he
would hold us in the same estate we are in, and go on with the work of grace,
that he would uphold us in health, for that depends upon him; that he would
uphold us in peace, for that depends upon him, he is the God of peace: that he
would uphold us in comfort and strength, to do good and resist evil, we are in
a dependant state and condition in all good of body and soul. He upholds the
whole world, and every particular: let him take away his hand of merciful
protection and susteining from us, and we sink presently.

And every day consider, how we are environed with any danger, remember we have
compassing mercies, as we have compassing dangers, as it is Psalm. 32. Mercy
compasses us round about. Every day indeed we have need of mercy, that is the
way to have mercy; here is a fountain of mercy, the Father of mercy, bowels
opened: the only way to use it is to see what need we have of mercy, and to
fly to God: to see what need we have in our souls, and in regard of outward
estate, and to see that our condition is a dependant condition.

And lastly, to make a use of thanfulnesse, Blessed be God the Father of mercy,
Thankfulness for mercy
we have the mercy of public continued peace, when others have war, and their
estates are consumed; blessed be God the Father of mercy, we sit under our own
Vines, and under our own figtrees. If we have any personal mercies, blessed be
God the Father of mercies this way: if he show mercy to our souls, and pardon
our sins, blessed be God the Father of mercies in this kind; that he has taken
us and redeemed us out of that cursed estate, that others walk in that are yet
in their sins. Oh, it is a mercy, and for this we should have enlarged hearts.

And withal consider the fearful estate of others, that God does not show
mercy to, and this will make us thankful. As for instance, if a man would be
thankful, that has a pardon, let him see another executed, that is broken
upon the Wheel, or the Rack, or cut in pieces and tortured, and then he will
think, I was in the same estate as this man is, and I am pardoned. Oh what a
gracious Sovereign have I! The consideration of the fearful estate out of
mercy, what a fearful estate those are in, that live in sins against
conscience, that they are ready to drop into Hell, when God strikes them with
death; if they dye so, what a fearful estate they are in; and that God should
give me pardon and grace to enter into another course of life, that though I
have not much grace, yet I know it is true, I am the child of God; the
consideration of the misery of others, in part in this world without
repentance, and especially what they shall suffer in Hell; to consider the
torment of the souls that are not in the state of Grace, this will make us
thankful for mercies, for pardoning and forgiving mercies, for protecting
mercies, that God has left thousands in the course of nature, going on in a
wilful course of sin. This is that that the Apostle here practices. Blessed
be God the Father of mercies. The other style here is, The God of all comfort.


The life of a Christian is a mystery, as in many respects, so in this, that
whereas the flesh in him (though he be not altogether flesh) thinks him to be a
man disconsolate: the spirit finds matter of comfort and glory. From whence the
world begins discouragement, and the flesh upbraiding from thence the spirit of
God in holy Saint Paul begins matter of glory, they thought him a man neglected
of God, because he was afflicted: no, says he, Blessed be the God of all
comfort, our comforts are above our discomforts: As the wisdom of the flesh is
enmity to God, and his spirit in all things: so in this, in the judgment of
the cross, for that which is bitterest to the flesh, is sweetest to the spirit.
Saint Paul therefore opposes his comforts spiritual to his disgraces outward,
and because it is unfit to mention any comfort, any good from God, without
blessing of him, that is the spring and fountain from whence we have all, he
takes occasion, together with the mention of comfort, to bless God, The God of
all comfort.

The verse contains a wise prevention of scandal at the cross: Saint Paul was
a man of sorrows, if ever any was (next to Christ himself) and that might
prevent all scandal at his crosses, and disgraceful afflicted usage, he does
show his comforts under the cross, which he would not have wanted to have been
without his cross: therefore he begins here with praising of God.

We praise God for favors, and indeed the comforts he had in his crosses were
more then the grievance he had by them, therefore had cause to bless God,
Blessed be God, etc. The God of all comfort.


The God of comfort, and the God of (All) comfort we must give Saint Paul leave
to be thus large: for his heart was full, and a full heart, a full expression:
And he speaks not out of books, but from sense, and feeling, though he knew
well enough, that God was the Father of mercy, and God of all comfort, that
way; yet these be wordsthat come from the heart, come from feeling, rather then
from the tongue: they came not from Saint Paul's pen only, his pen was first
dipped in his heart and soul when he wrote this: God is the Father of mercy,
and God of all comfort, I feel him so, he comforts me in all tribulations. The
God of all comfort.


To explain the word a little; Comfort is either the thing it self, a
comfortable Comfort what?
outward thing, a blessing of God wherein comfort is hid, or else it is
reasons; (because a man is an understanding creature) reasons from which
comfort is grounded; or it is a real comfort inward and spiritual, by the
assistance and strength of the Spirit of God, when perhaps there is no outward
thing to comfort, and perhaps reasons and discourse are not present at that
time, yet there is a presence of the Spirit that comforts: As we see often times
a man is comforted with the very sight of his friend, without discourse; to a
man endued with reason, whose discomforts are spiritual (for the most part) in
the soul, the very presence of a man that he loves puts much delight into him
What is God then? the God of comfort: his very presence must needs comfort.
Comfort is taken many other ways, but these are the principal, to this
purpose.

First, Comfort is the thing it self, there is comfort in every creature of
God, and God is the God of that comfort: In hunger meat comforts, in 1 The
thing it self
thirst drink comforts, in cold garments comfort, in want of advice friends
comfort, and it is a sweet comfort, God is the God of all comfort, of the
comfortable things. But besides the necessary things, every sense has somewhat
to comfort it. The eye besides ordinary colors has delightful colors to
behold, and so the ear besides ordinary noise and sounds, it has music to
delight it: the smell, besides ordinary savours, it has sweet flowers to
refresh it, and so every part of the body, besides that which is ordinary, it
has somewhat to comfort it. Because God is nothing but comfort to his
creature, if it be as it should be, he is God of these comforts, the God of all
comfort, of the comfort of outward things, of friends, etc.

So he is the God of the second comfort, of comfortable reasons and 2.
Comfortable reasons.
arguments: for a man especially in inward troubles, must have grounds of
comfort from strong reasons: God ministers these, he is the God of these: for
he has given us his Scriptures, his Word, and the comforts that are fetched
from thence, are strong ones, because they are his comforts, it is his Word.
The word of a Prince comforts, though he be not there to speak it; though it
be a letter, or by a Messenger, yet he whose word it is, is one that is able to
make his word good; he is Lord and Master of his word. The Word of God is
comfortable, and all the reasons that are in it, and that are deduced from it,
upon good ground and consequence, they are comfortable, because it is Gods
word, he is the God of all. And those comforts in Gods word, and reasons from
thence, they are wonderful in the variety of them; there is comfort from the
liberty of a Christian laid out there, that he has free access to the throne
of Grace: comfort from the Prerogatives of a Christian, that he is the Child of
God, that he is justified, that he is the heir of Heaven and such like:
Comforts from the Promises of Grace, of the presence of God, of assistance by
his presence; these things out of the Word of God are wondrous plentiful:
Indeed the Word of God is a breast of comfort, as the Prophet calls it, Suck
comfort out of the breasts of comfort, Isa. 66. The books of God are breasts of
comfort, wels of comfort, Isa. 11. there are springs of comfort.

Gods word is a Paradise (as it were) in Paradise, there were sweet streams
that ran through, and in Paradise stirred the voice of God, not only calling
Adam where art thou? terrifying of him, but the voice of God promising Adam the
blessed seed.

So in the Word of God, there is God rouzing out of sin, and there is God
speaking peace to the soul: there is a sweet current of mercy runs from the
Paradise of God; and there is the Tree of life, Christ himself, and Trees of
all manner of fruit, comforts of all sorts whatsoever. And there is no Angel
there, to keep the door and gate of Paradise with a fiery flaming sword; No,
this Paradise is open for all: and they are cruel Tyrants, that stop th is
Paradise, that stop this Fountain, as the Papists do. As God is the God of
comfort, so he is the God of comfort in that respect.

But this is not enough to make him the God of comfort; we may have the Word of
God, and all the reasons from thence, from privileges and prerogatives, and
examples; and yet not be comfortable, if we have not the God of comfort, with
the Word of comfort, the Spirit of God, that 3. By the Spirit.
must apply the comfort to the soul, and be the God of comfort there.

For there must be application, and working of comfort out of Gods word upon
the soul, by the spirit, the spirit must set it on strongly and sweetly, that
the soul may be affected.

You may have a carnal man, he for fashion or custom reads the Scriptures,
and he is as dead-hearted when he has done, as when he began, he never looks
to the spirit of comfort, there must be the spirit of God, to work, and to
apply comfort to the heart, and to teach us to discourse, and to reason from
the Word; not only to show the reasons of the Word, but to teach us to draw
reasons from the Word, and to apply them to our particular state and condition;
the spirit teaches this wisdom. And therefore it is well called the
comforter, I will send you the comforter. The poor disciples had many comforts
from Christ, but because the Comforter was not come, they were not comfortable,
but heavy; what was the reason? because the Comforter was not come, when the
holy Ghost was come after the resurrection, and ascension of Christ, when he
had sent the Comforter, then they were so full of comfort, that they rejoiced,
that they were thought worthy to suffer any thing for Christ, and the more they
suffered, the more joyful, and comfortable, and glorious they were.

You see what a comfort is; it is the things themselves, and the word, and
reasons from it, and likewise the spirit of God with the reasons, and with
presence: sometimes without any reasons with present strength. God does
establish the soul together with reasons there, is a strengthening power of the
spirit, a vigor that goes with the spirit of God, that joins with the spirit
of the afflicted person. So whether it be the outward thing, as reasons and
discourse, or the presence of the spirit; God joining with our spirit; God is
the God of that comfort, the God of all comfort.

A comfort is any thing that allaies a malady, that either takes it away, or
allaies and mitigates it. A comfort is any thing that raises up the soul:
Comfort stronger then the malady.
The comforts that we have in this life, they are not such as do altogether
take away sorrow and grief, but they mitigate them. Comfort is that which is
above a malady, it is such a remedy as is stronger to support the soul, from
being cast down over much with the grievance, whether it be grievance felt,
that we are in the sense of such a grievance as is feared: when the soul
apprehends any thing, to set against the ill we fear that is stronger then it,
when the soul has somewhat that it can set against the present sense of the
grievance that is stronger then it, though it do not wholly expel it, but the
discomfort remains still in some degree, it may be said well to be a comfort.

The reason why I speak of this mittigation is, because in this life, God
never so wholly comforts his Children, but there will be flesh left in them,
Comfort not complete in this life.
and that will murmr, and there will be some resistance against comfort,
while there are remainders of sin, there will be ground of discomfort, by
reason of the conflict between the flesh and spirit.

For instance; a man has some cross on him, what says the flesh? God is mine
enemy, and I will take such and such courses, I will not endure this, this is
the voice of the flesh, of the old man. What says the spirit? Surely God is
not mine enemy, he intends my good by these things: So while these fight, here
is the flesh against the spirit, yet here is comfort, because the spirit is
predominant, but it is not fully comfort, because there is the old man in him,
that withstands comfort in the whole measure of comfort.

Therefore we must take this degree, we cannot have the full comfort till we
come to Heaven, there all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; in this world we
must be content to have comfort with some grief, the malady is not wholly
purged.

Sometimes God removes the outward grievance more fully, God helps many times
altogether, as in sickness to health perfectly, but I speak not of that:
Comfort is that which is opposite to misery, and it must be stronger, for
there is no prevailing but by a stronger, when the Agent is not above the
Patient, there is no prevailing, there is a conflict till one have got the
masterie. The God of (all) comfort.


(All) that is, of all comfortable things, and of all divine reasons; it must
be most substantial comfort. The soul in some maladies will not be comforted
by Philosophical reasons, says the Heathen, the disease is Philosophical
reasons will not comfort.
stronger then the Physic, when he considers Platoe's comforts and the like,
so we may say of the reasons of Philosophical men, Romanists and Moralists,
when they come to terror of conscience, when they come to inward grievances,
inward stings that are in a man, from a man's conscience (as all discomforts
usually, when they press hard, it is with a guilty conscience) what can al such
reasons do? to say it is the state of other men, and it is in vain to murmr,
and I know not what, such reasons as Seneca and Plato, and others have it, will
scarce still the conscience for a fit: They are ignorant of the root: alas! how
can they tell the remedy, when they know not the ground of the malady.

It must be God, it must be his Word, his truth, the conscience must know it to
be Gods truth, and then it will comfort. God is the God of comfort, of the
things, and of the reasons, they must be his reasons.

And he also is the Author of that spiritual presence, he is with his children,
when they are in the fire he goes with them into the water, as it is in Esaias
45. he is with them in the valley of death, they shall find God with them to
comfort them: so there is a kind of presence with Gods comforts, and a
banishing of all discomfort.

And this comfort is as large as the maladies, as large as the ills are, he is
a God of comfort against every particular ill: if there be diverse ills, he
has diverse comforts, if they be long ills, he has long comforts, if there be
strong ills, he has strong comforts, if there be new ills, he has new
comforts; take the ills in what extent and degree you will, God has somewhat
to set against them that is stronger then they; and that is the blessed estate
of Gods Children, he is the God of all comfort.

St. Chrysostom, an excellent preacher, yields me one observation upon this
very place. It is the wisdom of a Christian to see how God describes himself,
there being some thing in God answerable to whatsoever is ill in the world. The
spirit of God in the scripture sets forth God fitting to the particular
occasions, speaking here of the misery, and the disgraceful usage of St. Paul
(being taught by the spirit of God) he considers God as a Father of mercies,
and a God of Comfort. Speaking of the vengeance on his enemies, the Psalmist
says, thou God of vengeance, show thy self. In God there is help for every
malady.

Therefore the wisdom of a Christian is to single out of God, what is fitting
his present occasion; in crosses, and miseries think of him as a father of
Mercies: in discomforts, think of him as a God of comfort; in perplexities, and
distress, think of him as a God of wisdom, and oppression of others, and
difficulties which we cannot wade out of, think of him as a God, and father
almighty, as a God of vengeance, and so every way to think of God appliable to
the present occasion. And though many of us have no great affliction upon us
for the present: yet we should lay up store against the evil day, and
therefore it is good to treasure up these descriptions of God, The father of
mercies, and (God) of all comfort.

To explain the word a little: what does he mean by (God) in this place? (God)
of comfort.


That he is the God of comfort, that has a further comfort in it, in the very
title that is called the God of comfort. In that he is called the God of
comfort it implies two things.

First it shows that he is a Creator of it, that he can work it out of what he
will; out of nothing. 1. That he can create it out of nothing.


And then that he can raise it out of the contrary; as he raised light out of
darkness in the creation, and in the government of this world he raises his
Children out of misery. As he raised all out of nothing, order out of
confusion, so in his Church he is the God of comfort, he can raise comfort out
of nothing: out of nothing that is likely to yield comfort. Put the case that
there be neither medicine, nor meat, nor drink, nor nothing to comfort us in
this world (as we shall have none of these things in heaven) he is the God of
Comfort that shall supply all our wants. As he shall then be all in all, so in
this world, when it is by the manifestation of his glory: when Moses was 40.
days in the mountain, he wanted outward comforts; but he had the God of
comfort with him, and he supplied the want of meat and drink, and all other
comforts: because he is the God of all comfort: in him are all comforts
originally, and fundamentally, and if there be none, he can create and make
them of nothing.

God, as a God properly, makes something of nothing; that is to be God only can
make something of nothing.
a God: for nothing but God can make somewhat of nothing. Gods upon earth, call
men their creatures in a kind of imitation of God, but that is but a phrase
that puffs them up: they are but Gods in a kind of sense, and the other are but
creatures in a kind of sense: because perhaps they have nothing in them, and in
that sense, deservedly creatures: but it is proper to God, to make somewhat of
nothing: and so he is the God of Comfort: where there is no comfort at all, he
can raise comfort, as he made the World of nothing by his very Word.

And which is more, it is the property of God as God, it is peculiar to Out of
contraries.
God to make comfort out of that which is contrary: therein he shows himself
most to be a God of all; he can raise comfort out of discomfort, life out of
death. When Christ had been three days in the grave, he raised him. As it is
with the head of comfort, with the head of believers, so it is with every
particular Christian, he raises them, out of death: those that sow in sorrow,
they reap in joy. What cannot he do that can raise comfort out of discomfort?
and discomforts oftimes are the occasions of the greatest comforts. Let a
Christian go back to the former course of his life, and he shall find that the
greatest crosses that ever he suffered will yield him most comfort, and who did
this? certainly it must be God, that can raise all out of nothing, and that can
make comfort not only out of comfortable creatures that are ordained for
comfort; but he can draw honey out of the Lions belly; Out of the eater came
meat, and out of the strong come sweetness, says Sampson in his Riddle. When
a honey comb shall c^^^ out of the Lions belly, certainly this is a miracle,
this may well be a Riddle. This is the Riddle of Christianity; that God who is
the God of comfort, he raises comforts, out of our chief discomforts, he can
create it out of that which is contrary.

Therefore Luthers speech is very good, All things come from God to his In what
order God is (...) God of comfort.
Church, especially in contraries: as he is righteousness, but it is in sin
felt: he is comfort, but it is in misery, he is life, but it is in death, we
must die before we live; indeed he is all, but it is in nothing, in the soul
that feels it self to be nothing, there is the foundation for God to work on.
Therefore the God of comfort can create comfort, if none be, he can make
comfort, if the contrary be, he can raise contraries out of contraries, he is
the God of all comfort. Every word has Emphasis and strength in it.
Conclusion. Whatsoever the means of comfort be God is the spring.
The God of all Comfort.


Amongst diverse other things that flow from hence, mark the order; he is the
God and Father of Christ first, and then the Father of mercy, and the God of
comfort.

Take him out of this order, and think not of him as a God of comfort, but as a
Consuming fire; but take the method of the text, now he is the God of comfort
after he is the Father of Christ. This being laid as a ground, the text it self
as a doctrine; what subordinate truths arise hence?

First of all, if God be God of all comfort, there is this conclusion hence:
that, Whatsoever the means of Comfort be, God is the spring of it.


Christ is the Conduit next to God, for he is close to God; God is the God of
Christ, and the Holy Ghost is usually the stream: The streams of comfort come
through Christ the Conduit, from God the Father, the fountain, by the graces of
the Spirit: But I speak of outward comforts. Blessed be God the Father Son, and
Holy Ghost, all are comforters: God the father is the father of comfort: the
Holy Ghost is the comforter; Christ Jesus likewise is the God of Comfort;
whatsoever the outward means be, yet God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
the comforters, take them together, that is the conclusion hence.

I observe it the rather, to cure a disposition to Atheism in men, that look
Ground of unthankfulness in wicked men.
bruitishly to the thing, they look to the comfort, and never look, to the
comforter: even for outward comforts. Wicked men, their bellies are filled with
the comforts of God, but it is with things that are comfortable that are
abstracted from the comforter, they care not for the root, the favor and mercy
of God: so they have the thing, they care not.

Therefore they are not thankful to God, nor in their wants they go not to the
God of comfort, why? they think they have supply enough, they have friends,
they have riches, that are their strong hold, and if they have outward
necessaries to supply and comfort them, that is all they care for; as for the
God of comfort, they trouble not their hands with him.

A Christian, whatsoever the comfort be, if it be outward, he knows that
Ground of thankfulness in Christians.
the God of comfort sends it, and that is the reason he is so thankful for all
outward comforts: if they be the necessaries for this life: in meat he tastes
the comfort of God, in drink he tastes the comfort of God, in the ornaments of
this life, he tastes the comfort of God; It is God that heates him with fire, it
is God that clothes him with garments, it is God that feeds him with meat, it
is God that refreshes his senses in these comforts.

Therefore the Heathen out of their Ignorance, they made every thing a God,
that was comfortable, out of which they received comfort; they made a God of
the fire, and of the water: these are but instruments of the God of comfort,
but the Heathen made gods of them. A Christian does not so, but he sees God in
them, and drives these streams from the fountain, God is seen to be the God of
Comfort in them all.

Again, considering that God is The God of all comfort; This should teach
Ground of prayer.
us (as thankfulness to God, so) prayer in the want of any comfort, that he
would both give the thing, and the comfort of the thing. We may have the thing,
and the wrath of God with it, but thou that art the God of comfort, vouchsafe
the outward comforts to us, and vouchsafe comfort with them: thou that art the
God of every thing, and of the comfort of the thing, vouchsafe both.

Again, if God be the God of all comfort whatsoever, then here is a ground To
seek to God in the use of things comfortable.
of diverse other truths: as for instance, that if we look for any comfort
from the things, or from reasons, and discourse, or from God: we should go to
God in the use of the thing, before the use, after the use, at all times;
before the use, that God would suggest, either by reading or hearing etc.
reasons of comfort, in the use, that he would settle and seal comfort to our
souls.

Lord I hear many sweet things, I read many comfortable things, these would
affect a stone almost, yet unless thou set them on my soul, they will never
comfort me: thou art the God of comfort, the materials are from thee, but
except with revelation and discovery, thou join application, all will not
comfort unless with revelation and application (in the third place) thou open
my soul to join with these comforts. There must be a discovery, and
application, and an opening of the soul to them. As there be diverse flowers
that open and shut with the sun: so the soul by the spirit of God, it opens to
comforts: though comforts be put close to the soul, if that do not open to
them, there is no comfort given: for all is in the application. There is a
double application, of the thing to the soul, and of Double application.
the soul to the thing: God must do all.

What is the reason, that many here Sermons, and Read sweet discourses, Quest.
and yet when they come to suffer crosses and afflictions, they are to see?

They go to the stream, they cut the Conduits from the spring, they go Answ.
not to the Wellhead, they see not the derivation of comfort: it is necessary
for the deriving of comfort to the soul, to take the scales from the eye of the
soul, they see not the necessity of a divine presence to apply it, and and to
lay it close to the soul, and to open the soul, to join the soul to those
comforts; God is the God of all comfort. If any thing will stir up devotion
much to pray to God, undoubtedly this will be effectual: that whatsoever the
comfort be, whether it be outward things, or reasons, and discourses,
whatsoever, we may go to God that he would give it. Christians ground of
comfort in all estates


Well, this being so, if God be the God of all comfort, the Well of comfort,
the Father of comfort, and has remedies for every malady; Then you see here
whither to go: you see a Christian in all estates has ground of comfort, for
he is in Covenant with the God of comfort.

You will say to me, what is the reason that Christians are no more
comfortable, Quest.
having the God of comfort for their God?

I answer, it is partly from Ignorance, we have remainders of Ignorance, Answ.
Christians are uncomfortable.
that we know not our own comfort: Satan does vail the eye of the soul in the
time of trouble, that we cannot see that there is a well of comfort. Poor
Hagar, when she was almost undone for thirst, yet she had a fountain 1
Ignorance.
of water near hand, but she saw it not, she was so overtaken with grief.
Ignorance, and Passion hinder the sight of comfort, when we give way so 2.
Passion.
much to the present malady, as if there were no God of comfort in heaven; as
if there were no Scripture that has breasts of comfort, that is as full as a
breast that is willing to discharge it self of comfort: as if there were no
matter of comfort, they feed upon grief, and delight to flatter their selves in
grief, as Rachel that mourned and would not be comforted: so out of a kind of
Ignorance and Passion, and Wilfulness, they will not be comforted.

And again, as Bildad says, Job 18. are the comforts of God light to thee? 3.
Aggravating the grievance.
These are good words, but my discomforts are greater, my malady is greater; so
the comforts of the Holy Ghost, the comforts of Gods Spirit seem light to them.
Ignorance, and Passion, and dwelling too much makes us neglect comfort, it
makes us to see comfort to be no comfort in a manner. Mary, when Christ was
before her eyes, they were so blubbered with tears, with fear that her Lord was
lost, that she could not see him, even when he was before her: so grief, and
Passion hinder the soul so much from seeing Gods comforts, that we see them not
when they are before us, when they are present. So men are guilty of their own
discomfort, it is their own fault.

Again often times forgetfulness, as the Apostle says, Heb. 12. have ye
forgotten the Consolation that speaks? have ye forgotten that every Son that 4,
Forgetfulness of Gods comforts.
God chastizeth not is a bastard? have ye forgotten? insinuating that if they
had remembered this, it would have comforted them; have ye forgotten?

And then one especial cause is, that I spoke of before, the looking to 5.
Looking to the stream forgetting the spring.
things present, forgetting the spring, the wellhead of comfort God himself;
the looking too much to the means; oh! say some, (if they be in distress,) if
I had such a Book, if I had such a man to comfort me, certainly it would be
otherwise with me, I should be better then I am: put case he were with thee,
alas he is not the spring, it is the God of comfort that must comfort thee
(man) in all thy distresses whatsoever, therefore if thou attribute not more to
God, then to the creature, nay then to an Angel, if he were to comfort thee,
thou shall find no comfort. I even I am he that comforts thee. I am he that
pardons thy sins, which is the cause of all discomfort, that is comfort, that
is the sting of all, I am he that pardons thy sins

We as Criers may speak pardon to the soul, but God must give it; we may speak
comfort, but God must give it: he must say to the soul, I am thy salvation.
When men Idolize any discourse in books, or any particular man overmuch (though
we may value those that are isntrumental above others; there may be a
difference of gifts, but) the resting too much in the creature, it is an enemy
to comfort, and some grow to that wilfulness in that kind, that they will
neglect all, because they have not that they would have, whereas if they would
look to God, meaner means would serve the turn often times, if they would go
to the God of comfort. Who comfort us in all tribulation.


Afflictions and crosses, as they are irksome in suffering, so they are
likewise disgraceful, and as it was in the cross of Christ, there was two
things, torment and shame, the one he felt himself, the other he had from
others, those two; (disgrace is proper to the cross:) so it is in all the
crosses that we suffer, there is some disgrace with it, therefore Saint Paul to
prevent the scandal and disgrace of the cross (as I said before) he does here
begin with praising God, even for crosses in the midst of them. Blessed be God
the Father of mercies, the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all
tribulations, etc. Who comfort us in all tribulation.


These words contain a making good of the former title, He is the God of
comfort, and does comfort, he is good and does good: He fills up his name by his
works, he shows what he is, the Scripture does especially describe God, not in
all things as he is in himself; but as he is, and works to his poor Church;
and they are useful terms, all of them, he is the Father of mercy, because
he is so to his Church; he is the God of comfort, because he is so to his
people, therefore he says here, as he is the God of comfort, so he does
comfort us in all tribulation. He does not say, who keeps us out of misery;
blessed be the God of comfort, that never suffers us to fall into discomfort,
no, but Blessed be the God of comfort, that comforts us (in) all tribulation.
It is more to raise good out of evil, then not to suffer evil to be at all.
It shows greater power, it manifests greater goodness to triumph over ill, when
it suffered to be, and so not to keep ill from us, but to comfort us in it.

He does not say for the time past, which has comforted us, or which can
comfort us if it please him; no, he does it; it is his use, he does it always;
it springs from his love, he never at any instant or moment of time forgets his
Children, and he says not he does comfort us in one or two, or a few
tribulations, but he comfort us in all tribulations of what kind or degree
soever.

It may be Objected (to clear the sense a little) he does not always Object.
comfort; for then, there could be no time of discomfort.

I Answer, He does always comfort in some degree: for take a Christian Answ.
at the lowest, yet he has so much comfort as to keep him from sinking, when
he is at the depth of misery, there is a depth of mercy lower then he, Out of
the deep have I cried unto thee Lord, and this is a comfort that he has in the
midst of discomforts, that he has a spirit of prayer, and if not a spirit of
prayer, yet a spirit of sighing and groaning to God, and God hears the sighs
and groans of his own spirit in his children. When they cannot distinctly pray,
there is a spirit to look up to God. Though thou kill me, yet will I trust in
thee, says Job, in the midst of his miseries: So though God, more
notoriously to the view of the world, sometime does comfort before we come to
trouble, that we may bear it the better, and sometime he does comfort more
apparently after we come out: yet notwithstanding in the midst of
discomforts, he does always comfort so far, as that we sink not into despair,
there is somewhat to uphold the soul: For, when Solomon says, A wounded
spirit who can bear? that is, none can bear it, it is the greatest grief:
then I would know, what keeps a wounded spirit from sinking that it does not
despair? is it not a spirit stronger then the wounded spirit? Is it not God
that is greater then the wounded conscience? Yes, then there is comfort greater
then the discomfort of a wounded conscience that keeps it from despair; those
that finally despair, they are none of Gods: So that take the words in what
regard, or in what sense you will, yet th^re is a sweet and comfortable sense
of them, and the Apostle might well say, he is the God of all comfort, that
does comfort us in all tribulation.

It is here a ground supposed that, Gods Children are subject to tribulation.


We are subject here to tribulation of all kinds, for God comforts us in all
our tribulations; we are here in a state therefore needing comfort, because we
are in tribulation.

And the second is that God does answer our state.

God does comfort his Children in all tribulation.

And the ground is from himself, he is the God of comfort, he does but like
himself; when he does it, the God of comfort shows that he is so, by
comforting us in all tribulations.

First, It is supposed that,

In this world we are in tribulations.

Indeed, that I need not be long in; we must at one time or other, be in
tribulation some or other: For, though in regard of outward afflictions, we are
free from them sometimes, we have a few holy days (as we say) yet
notwithstanding, there is in the greatest inlargements of Gods Children in this
world, somewhat that troubles their minds* for either there is some desertion,
God withholds comfort from them in some measure, he shows himself a stranger
which humbles them much; or else they have strong temptations of Satan to sin
by prosperity, etc. which grieves them as much as the outward cross, or else
their grievance is, that they cannot serve God with that chearefulness of
spirit. Is there nothing (who ever thou art) that troubles thee as much as the
cross in the day of affliction, certainly there is somewhat or other that
troubles the soul of a Christian, he is never out of one grievance or other.

The life of a Christian, is as a web, that is woven of good and ill, he has
good days, and ill days, he has tribulations, and comforts. As St. Austin
says very well, between these two, tribulation on our part, and comfort on
Gods part, our life runs between these two, our crosses, and God comforts, they
are both mingled together.

There is no child of God, but knows what these things mean, troubles either
from friends or enemies, or both; domestical, or personal, in body, or mind,
one way or other. That is supposed, and it were not an unproper argument to the
text; for when he says in all tribulations, it is laid as a ground that every
man suffers tribulation one way or other; but I shall have fitter occasion
after to enlarge this.

Again we see here, that God comforts his children in all tribulation.
God comforts his Children in all tribulation.


And his comforts are answerable to their discomforts, and beyond them: they
are stronger to master all opposites whatsoever, and all grievances, there
could be no comfort else. Alas what are all discomforts when God sets himself
to comfort? when he will be a God of comfort, one look, one glance of his
fatherly countenance in Jesus Christ, will banish all terrors whatsoever, and
make even a very dungeon to be a paradise; he comfort us in all tribulat on.

And this he does (as you may perceive by the unfolding of the words) either by
some outward thing applied to the outward want, or cross: or by some inward
reasons, that are opposite to the inward malady, or by an inward presence. His
comforts are appliable to the tribulation, and to the strength and length, and
variety of it. We may know it by his course Comfort answerable to all miseries
in this life.
in this life; what misery are we subject to in this life, but we have comfort
fit for it? so good is God.

We may reason thus very well; if so be that in our pilgrimage here in this
life of ours, which is but the gallery as it were to heaven: if in this short
life, which is but a way or passage, we have both day and night, so many
comforts; In the very night, if we look up to heaven, we see what glorious
things there are toward the earth here, on this fide the heaven, the stars of
the light etc.

And if so be upon the earth there be such comforts, especially in the spring,
and summer time, if the very earth, the basest dreggs of the World, yield such
comfort and delights to all the senses; then a man may reason very strongly,
what comforts shall we have at home? If God by the creatures thus comfort us in
our outward wants; what are the inward comforts of his spirit here to his
Children? and what are the last comforts of all, the comforts reserved at home,
when God shall be all in all?

Now there are some drops of comfort conveyed in smells, some in garments, some
in friends, some in diet, here a drop, and there a drop; but when we shall have
immediate communion there with the God of comfort himself, what comforts shall
we have there? God comforts us here, by providing for us, and giving us things
that are comfortable.

Or by giving reasons and grounds of comfort which are stronger then the
reasons, and grounds of discomfort, reasons from the privileges and
prerogative of Christians etc. the scripture is full of them.

But likewise (which is the best of all, and most intended) the inward Inward
comfort best.
inspiring of comfort: with the reasons and grounds he inwardly conveyes
comforts to the soul, and strengthens, and supports the soul. And he does
this not only by the application of the reasons, and the things that we
understand, to the soul; but by opening the soul to embrace them; for sometime
the soul may be in such a case as it may reject comfort, that the consolation
of the Almighty may seem light to it: sometime there may be such a disposition
of soul that the chiefest comforts in scripture, yield it not comfort, they
are not embraced, the soul is shut to them. God provides reasons and grounds of
comfort; and likewise he applies these comforts by his spirit to the soul, and
he inwardly warmes, and opens the soul to embrace comfort: he opens the
understanding to understand, and the will and affections to embrace, or else
there will be no comfort.

Many are like Rachel, her Children were gone, and it is said of her, She
would not be Comforted. God is the God of Comfort; as he gives the matter, and
ground of comfort; and reasons out of his holy word above all dsscomforts; so
by his spirit, he frames and fits the heart, to entertain these, to take the
benefit of them.

He comforts us in all tribulation. To comfort is to support the soul To
comfort What.
against the grievance, past, or felt, or feared.

There may be some remainders of grief, for what is past, grief present
presses most, and grief feared. Now God comfort whatsoever the grievance
is, by supporting the soul against it, as I said before.

We are in tribulation in this life, and yet in all tribulations God does
comfort us (to add to that I said before of this point) let us therefore go
Use. To go to God in the use of means.
to God in all the means of comfort, because he is the God of it, and he must
comfort us.

Therefore when we send for divines, or read Holy books (for we must use all
means, we must not set God against his means, but join them together) to add
that caution by the way.

We may not therefore necessitate the God of comfort, that because he We must
not tempt God by neglecting means.
comforts us; therefore we will neglect reading and prayer, and conference with
them that God has exercised in the school of Christ, who should speak comfort
to the weary soul by their office.

No, No, God and his means must be joined together, we must trust God; but not
tempt him, to set God against his means is to tempt him; that because he is
the God of comfort, therefore we will use no means, no Physician for the body,
or for the soul: this is absurd, he is the God of comfort in the means, he
comforts us in all tribulation, by means, if they be to be had.

If there be no means to be had, he is the God of comfort, he can create them:
and if it be so far that there be no means but the contrary, he is a God that
can comfort out of discomfort, and can (as I said) make the greatest grounds of
comfort out of the greatest discomforts. But he is a God of the means if they
be to be had, if there be none, then let us go to him, and say, thou God of
comfort, if thou do not comfort, none can comfort, if thou help not, none can
help, and then he will help, and help strongly. It is necessary to look to God
what ever the means be; it is he that comforts by them. Therefore let him have
the praise: if we have any friend, any comfort of the outward man, or any
solace of the inward man, by seasonable speech etc. blessed be the God of
comfort who has sent this comforter; who has sent me comfort by such, and
such, let him have the praise; whatsoever the means be, the comfort is his.

And that is the cause that many have no more comfort, they trust to the means
overmuch, or neglect the means.

Again, if God comfort in all tribulation: Let Christians be ashamed to be
overmuch disconsolate that have the God of comfort for their God, who
comfort Ashame for Christians to be over much disconsolate.
in all tribulation. Why art thou so cast down? Is there no Balm in Gilead for
thee? Is there not a God in Israel? It is the fault of Christians, they pore
too much on their troubles, they look all one way; they look to the grievance,
and not to the comfort.

There is a God of comfort that answers his name every way in the exercise of
that attribute to his Church: therefore Christians must blame themselves if
they be too much cast down, and labor for faith to draw near to this God of
comfort.

It should make them ashamed of themselves that think it even a duty (as it
were) to walk drooping, and disconsolatly, and deadly; to have flat and dead
spirits. What, is this beseeming a Christian that is in Covenant with God, that
is the God of comfort, and that answers his title in dealing with his Children,
that is ready to comfort them in all tribulation? what if particular comforts
be taken from thee, is there not a God of comfort left? he has not taken away
himself. What if thou be restrained, and shut up from other comforts, can any
shut up Gods Spirit, can any shut up God, and our prayers?

Is not this a comfort that we may go to God always? and he is with us in all
estates and in all wants whatsoever? So long as we are in covenant with the God
of comfort, why should we be over much cast down? Why art thou so troubled, oh
my soul? David cheeks his soul thrice together for distrust in God, he is thy
God, the God of all comfort.

What course shall we take that we may derive to our selves comfort from this
God of comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulations? Quest.


Let us consider what our malady and grievance is, especially let us look to
our spiritual grievance and malady, sin: for sin is the cause of all other
Answ. How to derive comfort from the God of comfort.
evils, therefore it is the worst evil. And sin makes us loathed of God the
fountain of good, it drives us from him, when other evils drive us to from him;
and therefore it is the worst evil in that sense too. 1. Look to the grievance
especially sin.


Again in the third place, look to the discomforts of sin, especially in the
discomforts of conscience of those that are awakened, and Satan uses that as a
means to despair in every cross.

Therefore let us search and try our souls for our sins, for our chief
discomfort are from sin: for alas, what are all other comforts? and what are
all other discomforts? If a man's conscience be quiet, what are all discomforts?
and if conscience be on the rack, what are all comforts? the disquiet and
vexation of sin is the greatest of all: because then we have to deal with God,
when sin is presented before us, and the judgments of God, and God as an angry
judge, and conscience is awaked and on the rack, what in the world can take up
the quarrel and appease conscience, when we and God are at difference, when the
soul speaks nothing but discomfort?

In this case remember that God does so far prevent objections in this kind
Comforts against sin.
from the accusations of conscience, that he reasons that he will comfort us,
from that that conscience reasons against comfort: he does this in the hearts of
his children to whom he means to show mercy: as we see in the poor Publi-

Lord be merciful to me a sinner says he: God taught him that reasoning.

Nature would have taught him to reason as Peter did, Lord depart from me, I am
a sinful man, and therefore I have nothing to do with God.

So our Savior Christ, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden:
they think of all people they ought to run from God, they are so laden with
sin, they have nothing to do with God: Oh, come unto me says Christ. Therefore
when thy conscience is awakened with the sense of sin, remember what is said in
the Gospel, Be of good comfort, be calls thee: be thou of good comfort, thou
art one that Christ calls, Come unto me ye that are we ary and heavy laden: and
Blessed are those that mourn.

That which thou and the Devil with thy conscience would move thee to use as an
argument to run away, our Savior Christ in the Gospel uses as an argument to
draw thee forward: he comes for such, to seek, and to save the lost sinners
This is a faithful saying (says St. Paul) that Christ came to save sinners:
therefore believe not Satan: he presents God to the soul that is humbled and
terrified in the sight of sin, as cruel as a terrible judge, etc. He hides the
mercy of God from such: to men that are in a sinful course he shows nothing
but mercy. I, but now there is nothing but comfort to thee that art cast down
and afflicted in the sense of thy sins: for all the comforts in the Gospel of
forgiveness of sins, and all the comforts from Christ's Incarnation, the end of
his coming in the flesh, the end of his death, and of all, is to save sinners.

Look thou therefore to the throne of mercy and grace, when thy conscience
shall be awakened with the sense of sin, and Satan shall use that as an
argument to draw thee from God; consider the Scripture uses this as an
argument to drive me to God, to allure me to him: Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden. And Christ came to seek, and to save that which was
lost. Luther, a man much exercised in Spiritual conflicts, he confessed Luther.
this was the Balm that did most refresh his soul, God has shut up all under
sin that he might have mercy upon all. He shut up all under sin as prisoners,
to see themselves under sin, and under the curse, that he might have mercy upon
all, upon all those that are convinced with the sense and sight of their sins,
he has shut up all under sin, that he might have mercy upon all those that
belong to him.

This raised up that blessed man: therefore let us not be much discomforted,
but be of good comfort, Christ calls us.

For such as are sinners, that are given to the sins of the tongue, and of the
life, to rotten discourse, to swearing and such like, to such as mean to be No
comfort for such as go on in sin.
so, and think their case good; oh, God is the God of comfort, To such as I
said before, I can speak no comfort, nor the word of God speaks none: they must
have another Word, and another Scripture: for this word speaks no comfort to
such that are sinful and wretched, and will be so, and justify themselves to
be so.

All the judgments in the Scripture are theirs, hell, and damnation and wrath,
that is their portion to drink.

We can speak no comfort to such, nor the word of God that we unfold: it has
not a drop of comfort for them, God will not be merciful to such as go on in
wicked, rotten, scandalous courses, that because hell has not yet taken them,
they may live long, and so make a covenant with hell and death, and bless
themselves. Oh, but thou have made no covenant with God, nor he has made none
with thee, and hell, and death have made no covenant with thee: though thou
have made one with them, but there are two words go to a covenant: Death and
Hell shall seize upon thee notwithstanding thy covenant.

Those that will live in sin in despite of the ministry, in spite of
afflictions: there is no comfort to such, I speak only to the broken heart,
which are fit vessels for comfort: God is the God of comfort to such: What
shall we say then to such, as after they have had some evidence of their good
estate, that they are Christians, are fallen into sin? is there any comfort for
such?

Yes, does not St. Paul in 2 Cor. 5. desire such to be reconciled to God? we
are as Ambassadors of Christ desiring you to be reconciled if you have sinned:
so Comforts for those that are relapsed.
God has comfort for those that have sinned: Christ knew that we should every
day run into sins unawares, therefore he teaches us in the Lords prayer to say
every day forgive us our debts, our trespasses: there is Balm in Gilead, there
is mercy in Israel for such daily trespasses as we run into.

Therefore let none be discouraged, but fly presently to the God of comfort,
and Father of mercies. And think not that he is weary of pardoning as man is:
for he is infinite in mercy And though he be the party offended, yet he desires
peace with us.

But yet notwithstanding, that we shall not love to run into his Books,
Caution.
he does with giving the comfort of the pardon of sin (when we fall into it)
add such sharp crosses, as we shall wish we had not given him occasion to
correct us so sharply: we shall buy our comfort dear, we had better not have
given him occasion.

God forgave the sin of David after he had repented (though he were a good man
before) but David bought the pleasure of his sin dear; he wished a thousand
times that he had never given occasion to God, to raise good out of his evil,
to turn his sin to his comfort: yet God will do this, because God would never
have us in a state of despair.

For other grievances besides sin, the comforts that we are to apply are 2:
Comfort against other grievances. General comforts.
more easy, and they are infinite if we could reckon the particular comforts
that God comforts his Children withal.

It is good to have general comforts ready for all kind of maladies, and
grievances, and this poor wretched life of ours (in our absence from God) is
subject to. 1. The Covenant of Grace.


As for instance, that general comfort, the Covenant of grace, that is a spring
of comfort, that God is our God, and Father in Christ, what can come from a
gracious and good God in covenant with us, but that which is good? nothing but
what is favorably good I mean: For the covenant is everlasting, when God takes
once upon him to be our Father in Covenant, he is so for ever: Dum castigas
pater, etc. While he corrects he is a father, and when he smiles upon us, he is
a father.

God in the covenant of Grace takes upon him a relation that ever holds: as he
is for ever the Father of Christ, so he is for ever the Father of those that
are members of Christ, and whatsover comes from the Father of mercy, whether he
correct, or smile, whatsoever he does is in mercy.

Again, in the midst of any grievance, remember the gracious promise 2. The
promise of mitigation.
of mitigation, 1 Cor. 10. 13. God will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength, but he will give an issue to the temptation: he will give a
mitigation, and either he will raise our strength to the temptation, or he will
bring the temptation and trial to our strength, he will fit them, and this is a
comfort.

There is comfort likewise in all troubles whatsoever, of the presence of 3. In
the presence of God.
God, God will be present with us if once we be in Covenant with him: he will
be present in all trials to assist us, to strengthen us, to comfort us, to
raise our spirits. And if God be present, he will banish all discomforts: for
God is light, and where light is, darkness vanishes; Now God being the Father
of light, that is, of all comfort: where he is present, he banisheth discomfort
in what measure he is pleased to banish it. Therefore David often reasons
from the presence of God to the defiance of all troubles, Psalm. 3. If God be
with me, I will not fear ten Thousand that are against me. And in Psalm. 23.
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear, for thou
art with me. And if God be with us, who can be against us? Romans 8. And when
thou passest through the fire, I will be with thee, etc. I will be with thee,
not to keep thee out, but to uphold thee; As he did the Mariyrs, there was a
fire of comfort in them, above that fire that consumed their bodies: and as we
see he was with the Three Children; there was a fourth like the Son of God.

So in all tribulations there is another with us, that is, the Spirit of God
that comforts us in all, and is present with us in all. The Goldsmith when he
puts the wedge into the fire, he stands by till the dross be consumed: so God
is with his Children in the furnace of affliction: he brings them into
affliction, he continues with them in affliction, and he brings them at last
out of affliction. The presence of God is a main, and a Grand comfort in all
tribulation.

Besides, in all that befalls us whatsoever, consider the end, all is for a
good 4. Consider the end all work for good. Simile.
end: All things work together for the best to them that love God (says St.
Paul) Why do we endure Physic? because we know the Physician is wise, and he
is our friend, and he does it to carry away burdensome hurtful humors, we
shall be better and lighter afterward; do we do this in our common course in
the things of this life? Grace will much more certainly teach us to do it, to
reason, it is from a father, and it is for my good. Let us look whence it
comes, and what it tends to, with the promise of mitigation, and of Gods
presence in our troubles; these are main comforts, if we could think of them,
if the Devil did not take them out of our memory.

And for the first ground of comfort that God does comfort us withal, in all
tribulations, it is the promise of final deliverance, and final comfort 5.
The promise of final deliveanec.
for ever; if none will raise our souls, that will: when we shall consider that
it will not be long.

The short afflctions in this world, bring an eternal weight of glory: there
will be a final deliverance. Life it self that is the subject that receives
affliction, that is short, our life is but a moment, therefore our afflictions
must be short.

Life is longer then discomforts, there is but a piece of our life subject to
miseries; and if that be but a vapor, but a moment, and as a point between
eternity before, and eternity after, what are the miseries of this life?
certainly they are but for a moment.

Therefore the promise of final deliverance, when all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes; this should comfort us if nothing else would. This is the way
therefore whereby God usually comforts by suggesting the heads and springs of
comfort.

And indeed there is a daily method of comforting, whereby we may comfort our
selves in all crosses, if we would use that daily method, and order of comfort.
As there is a kind of diet to keep the body in temper; so there is a kind of
spiritual diet to keep the soul in temper, in a course of comfort, unless it
be when God takes liberty to cast down, for some special end, as we see in Job.

Therefore let us take this course (for God as he comfort us, so he comforts
us as understanding creatures, he uses our understanding to consider To keep a
daily course of comfort.
how we should comfort our selves, and after we are once in a state of comfort,
if we be not wanting to our selves, there is no great difficulty to keep our
comfort; there are means to keep daily comfort: God has provided them, and he
will be present to make good all his comforts. Grant it therefore that we are
in the covenant of Grace, that God is our Father in Christ, and we take him to
be our God, to be all sufficient, then to keep our selves in a daily temper for
comfort, every day keep our souls tender, that we may be capable of comfort,
keep the wound open that we 1. Keep the soul in a good temper.
may receive balm, that there grow not a deadness upon the heart, considering
that while we live here, there is always some sin in us that must be wrought out
by some course or other; let us try and search our souls, what ill is in the
wound, let us keep it open and tender, that there may be a fitness for mercy
to receive the balm of comfort, which will not be, if we slubber over.
Certainly it is an excellent course every day to search our hearts and ways,
and presently to apply the balm of comfort, the promise of pardon; take the
present, when we have searched the wound, to get pardon and forgiveness daily,
as we sin daily, Christ bids us ask it daily.

This will make us fit for comfort by discerning the estate of our souls, and
the remainders of corruption. That which sharpens appetite and makes the balm
of God to be sweet indeed, is the sense of, and the keeping open of our wound:
a daily search into our wants, and weaknesses; a daily fresh sight of the body
of sin in us: and experience how it is fruitful in ill thoughts, and desires
and actions, this will drive us to a necessity of daily comfort.

And certainly a fresh sight of our corruptions, it is never without some fresh
comfort. We see St. Paul Romans 7. he sets himself to this work, to complain of
his indisposition by reason of sin in him; and how does he end that sight and
search into his own estate? he ends in a triumphing manner, Thanks be to God
through Jesus Christ our Lord: There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus.

After he had complained, Oh miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from
this body of death. There can be no danger in a deep search into our ways and
hearts, if this be laid as a ground before, that there is more supply, and
heavenly comfort in God and the promises of God, then there can be ill in our
souls, then the more ill we find in our selves, the more we are disposed to
fetch grounds of comfort from God.

And together with this searching of our souls and asking daily pardon, let us
for the time to come renew our covenant with God, that we may 2. Renew our
resolutions.
have the comfort of a good conscience to get pardon for our sins past, and
renew our resolutions for the time to come.

And withal that we may use an orderly course of comfort: let us every Daily
feed on Christ.
day feed on Christ, the food of life, let us every day feed upon something in
Christ; consider the death of Christ, the satisfaction he has made by his
death; his intercession in Heaven; his blood runs afresh that we may every day
feed on it.

We may run every day into new offenses against the law, to new neglect of
duty, into new crosses; let us feed upon Christ, he came into the World to save
sinners, to make us happy with peace of conscience here, and with Glory
afterward. Let us feed on Christ daily; as the body is fed with cordialls; so
this feeds and comforts and strengthens the soul.

This is to live by faith, to lead our lives by faith, to feed on Christ every
day.

And likewise, if we will keep our souls in a perpetual temper of comfort, let
us every day meditate of some prerogatives of Christians, that may raise our
souls: Let us single out some or other. As for example, that excellent
prerogative to be the Sons of God: What love? says the Apostle, that we of
Rebels and Traitors, in Christ should be made the sons of God? That of slaves,
we should be made Servants, of servants sons, of sons heirs, and of heirs,
fellow-heires with Christ, what prerogative is this, that God should give his
Son, to make us that were Rebels sons, heirs and fellow heirs with Christ? And
to consider what follows upon this liberty, that we have from the curse of the
Law, to go to God boldly, to go to the throne of Grace through Christ our
elder brother by prayer, to think of eternal life as our inheritance, to think
of God above as our Father, Let us think of our prerogatives of Religion,
adoption and justification, etc.

Upon necessity we are driven to it, if we consider the grievances of this
world, together with our corruptions: our corruptions, and afflictions, and
temptations, and desertions, one thing or other will drive us to go out of our
selves for comfort, to feed on the benefits by Christ. And consider what he
has done, it is for us: the execution of his office, and all for us, what he
is, what he did, what he suffered, what procured, all is for us. The soul
delighting it self in these prerogatives, it will keep the soul in a perpetual
estate of comfort. Therefore the Scripture sets forth Christ by all terms that
may be comfortable, he is the door to let us in, He is the way, the truth and
the life, the water and the bread, etc.

In sin, he is our righteousness, in death he is our life, in our ignorance
he is our way, in spiritual hunger and thirst, he is the bread and water of
life, he is all in all: And if we cannot think of some prerogative of
Christianity, then think of some promise, (as I said before) think of the
Covenant of Grace, there is a spring of comfort in that, that God in Christ is
our God to death, and for ever, and that promise I speak of, that All things
shall work for the best.

Let us every day think of these things, and suggest them to our own souls,
that our souls may be affected with them, and digest them, that our souls and
they may be one, (as it were.)

And every day stir up our hearts to be thankful, a thankful heart can
never want comfort, for it cannot be done without some comfort and To be
thankful.
chearefulness, and when God receives any praise and glory, he answers it with
comfort; a thankful heart is always comfortable.

And let us stir up our hearts to be fruitful in the holy actions, the
reward of a fruitful life is a comfortable life, besides Heaven, God always in
6. To be fruitful.
this life gives a present reward to any good action, it is rewarded with peace
of conscience. Besides, it is a good foundation against the evil day, every
good action, as the Apostle says to Timothy, it lays up a good foundation.
The more good we do, the more we are assured, that our faith is not
hypocritical, but sound, and good, and will hold out in the time of trial. It
will be a good foundation, that we have had evidence before that we have a
sound and fruitful faith.

What do wicked men, careless, sinful creatures, that go on in a course of
profaneness, and blasphemy etc? they lay a ground of despair, a ground of
discomfort to be swallowed up in the evil day: then conscience will be awaked
at the last, and Satan will be ready to join with conscience, and conscience
will seal all the accusations that Satan lays against them, and where is the
poor soul then? As it is with them, so, on the contrary the Christian soul that
does good, besides the present comfort of a good conscience, it lays a good
foundation against the time to come: for in the worst times, it can reason with
it self, my faith is not fruitless, I am not an hypocrite; though the fruits
of it be weak, and mixed with corruptions, yet there is truth in them; this
will comfort us when nothing else will.

Therefore let us every day be setting our selves in some good way; for comfort
is in comfortable courses, and not in ill courses: in Gods ways we shall have
Gods comforts. In those ways let us exercise the spiritual strength we have:
let us pray to God and perform the exercise of Religion with strength, show
some zeal in it: let us show some zeal against sin, if occasion be, if it be in
Gods work, in Gods way. Let a man set himself upon a good work, especially
when it is in opposition; for the honor of God, and the peace of his
conscience, presently there is comfort upon it.

And that we may not be discouraged with the imperfection of our performances,
7. Labor for sin^erity.
one way of daily comfort is to consider the condition of the covenant of Grace
between God and us. In the covenant of Grace our performances if they be
sincere they are accepted, and it is the perfection of the Gospel, sincerity.
Sincerity will look God in the face with comfort, because he is with the
upright; so much truth in all our dealings, so And growth
much comfort. And with sincerity labor for growth, to grow better and better.

God in the Gospel means to bring us to perfection in heaven by little and
little. In the law there was present perfection required; but in the Gospel,
God requires that we should come to perfection by little and little, as Christ
by little and little satisfied for our sins, and not all at once. In the
condition of the covenant of Grace, we must live and grow by grace by little
and little, and not all at once. The condition of the covenant of grace is not
to him that has strength of grace in perfection; but if we believe and labor
to walk with God, if there be truth of Grace, truth goes for perfection in the
covenant of Grace. We should labor for sound knowledge of the covenant of
Grace, that now we are freed from the rigor as well as from the curse of the
law, that though we have imperfections, yet God will be our father, and in this
condition of imperfection he will be a pardoning father, and looks on our
obedience though it be feeble and weak, and imperfect: (yet being the obedience
of children in the covenant of grace) and he accepts of what is his own, and
pardons what is ours. 8. Not to grieve the spirit.


And every day labor to preserve the comforts of the spirit that we have, not
to grieve the spirit, for comfort comes with the spirit of God, as heat
accompanies the fire. As wheresoever fire is, there is heat: so wheresoever the
spirit of God is, there is comfort: because the spirit of God is God, and God
is with comfort, wheresoever comfort is, God is, and wheresoever God is, there
is comfort. If we would have comfort continually every day, let us carefully
watch that we give way to the spirit of God, by good actions, and meditations,
and exercises.

And by no means grieve the spirit, or resist the spirit, for then we resist
comfort. If we speak any thing that is ill, we lose our comfort for that time,
conscience will check us, we have grieved the spirit. If we hear any thing
with applause, and are not touched with it, we lose our comfort, conscience
will tell us we are dead-hearted, and not affected as we should be: there is a
great deal of flesh and corruption that is affected with such rotten discourse.
And so if we venture upon occasions we shall grieve the spirit, either if we
speak somewhat to satisfy others that are naught, or if we hear somewhat that
is ill from others. Want of wisdom in this kind, does make us go without
comfort many times: want of wisdom to single out our company, or else if we be
with such, to do that, that may please them, and grieve the spirit, and hinder
our own comfort.

These and such like directions if we would observe, we might walk in a course
of comfort: the God of comfort has prescribed this in the book of comfort.
These are the courses for Gods children, to walk in a comfortable way till they
come to heaven. More especially, if we would at any 9. Be conversant in the
scripture.
time take a more full measure of comfort, then take the book of God into your
hand, those are comforts, that refresh the soul: single out some special
portion of scripture, and there you shall have a world of comfort. As for
example; let a man single out the epistle to the Romans, if a man be in any
grievance whatsoever, what a world of comfort is there fitting for every
malady? there is a method how to come to comfort.

There St. Paul in the beginning, first strips all men of confidence of any
thing in themselves, and tells them that no man can be saved by works, Jews
nor Gentiles, but all by the righteousness of God in Christ: All are deprived
of the Glory of God, Jews, and Gentiles, every body: And when we are brought
to Christ, he tells us (in the later end of the third Chapter) that by Christ
we have the forgiveness of all our former sins whatsoever, he is the
propitiation for our sins. In the 4. Chapter he comforts us by the example of
Abraham, and David, that they were justified without works by faith, not by
works of their own, but by laying hold of the promises of comfort and salvation
merely by Christ: and all that says St. Paul is written for us. But in the
first Chapter especially, because all the miseries of this life come from the
first Adam, because we are Children of the first Adam, death and misery comes
from that: he opposes the comfort in the second Adam, and he shows that there
is more comfort by the second Adam, then there is discomfort by the first.
Righteousness in the second Adam reigns to life everlasting, and Glory. Sin,
and misery came by the first, but there is the pardon of all sin, by the
second Adam, he does excellently oppose them in the latter end of that Chapter.
In the beginning of the fifth Chapter he shows there the method, and descent of
joy, Being justified by faith (in Christ, we have peace with God: Considering
that by the righteousness of Christ we are freed from sin. We have peace with
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And we have boldness to the Throne of
Grace, and we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. He sets himself there
of purpose to comfort in all tribulation, and he says in these things we
rejoice, We rejoice in tribulation.

I, but for our sins after our conversion, after we are in the state of Grace,
what comfort is there for them? there is excellent comfort in the fifth of the
Romans. If when we were enemies he gave his son for us: if he saved us by the
death of Christ when we were enemies; much more Christ being alive, and in
heaven, he will keep it for us, and keep us to salvation now when we are
friends, seeing he died for us when we were enemies. I, but the remainders of
corruption in this world trouble us, that troubles our comfort, the combat
between the flesh, and the spirit; would you see comfort for that? you shall
see it in Romans 7. Oh, miserable man, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So he shows there what
way to have comfort in the combat between the flesh, and the Spirit, to search
into our corruptions, to lay them open to God by confession.

And then in the beginning of the eight Chapter says he, there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: though there be sin, yet there
is no condemnation, though there be this conflict between the flesh and the
spirit: so he comforts them. And for the afflictions that follow our
corruptions in this life, there is a treasure of comfort against them in that
Chapter: for does he not say, if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him?
And the same spirit helps our infirmities and teaches us how to pray? We can
never be uncomfortable if we can pray, but there is a promise of the spirit
that stirs up sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed, and a Christian has
always a spirit of prayer, at the least of sighs and groans, and God hears the
sighs of his own spirit.

And what a grand comfort is that, that I named before verse. 28. All things
work for the best to them that love God? And if God be with us who can be
against us? And he sends us to Christ, if Christ be dead, or rather risen
again, who shall lay any thing to our charge? Christ is ascended to heaven, and
makes intercession at the right hand of God. Though Satan lay our sins to our
charge, Christ makes intercession in heaven at the right hand of God, he makes
continual intercession for our continual breaches with God, who shall lay any
thing to our charge? I, but all that power of hell and sin, and all labor to
separate us from God, to breed division between God and us. In the later end of
that Chapter he bids defiance to all, what shall separate us from the love of
God in Christ? it shall separate his love from Christ first, Gods love is found
in Christ, he shall cease to love Christ if he cease to love us. I, but we may
afterward fall into an uncomfortable case. For that he says neither things
present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us.

What an excellent spring of comfort is there in that reasoning verse. 32. If
God spared not his own son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not
with him give us all things e^lse? How many streams may be drawn from that
spring? if God spared not his own son, but gave him to death for us all, how
shall he not with him give us all things else in this world necessar, grace,
provision, and protection, till he have brought us to heaven? If he have given
Christ, he will give all; whatsoever is written, is written for our comfort. I
mean this epistle, because I would name one instance for all. All is written
for our comfort, as he says after in the same Epistle. The written word, or
the word unfolded; the end of preaching, is especially to comfort. The
Surgeon opens a wound, and the Physician gives a purge, but all is to
restore at the last, all that the Surgeon aims at, is to close up the wound
at the last; so all our aim is to comfort. We must cast you down, and show you
your misery that you are in, and show you, that if you continue in that
course, hell, and damnation belongs to you; but this is to make you despair in
your selves, and to fly to the God of comfort; the law is for the Gospel, all
serve to bring the soul to comfort.

Therefore go to the word of God, any portion; the Psalms or any special part
of the scripture, and that by the spirit of God will be a means to raise the
soul, the spirit in the word joining with the spirit in us will make a sweet
close together, and comfort us in all tribulation.

And have recourse daily to common principles: all the principles of religion
10. To study Principles of Religion.
serve for comfort, especially the Articles of the Creed. I believe in God the
father Almighty. What a spring of comfort is in that? what can befall from a
father but it shall turn to good, and by a father Almighty, though he be never
so strongly opposed, yet he will turn it to good, he is a father Almighty, and
the Articles of Christ (every article has ground of daily comfort) of his
abasement in Christ, I see my self, he is my surety, the second Adam, I see my
sins crucified with him. This is the way to reap comfort when the conscience
is disquieted; when I look upon my sins, not in my own conscience, but take it
out there, and see it in Christ dying, and crucified, in the Articles of
abasement to see our sin, and misery, all in Christ. For he stood there as
surety, as a public person for all. What a comfort is this? When I see how
Christ was abased, I see my own comfort, for he was my surety: if my sins being
laid on him, who was my surety, could not condemn him, or keep him in the
grave, but overcame sin that was laid to his charge, surely I shall overcome my
corruptions, nothing that I have shall overcome me, because it could not
overcome Christ my surety, his victory is mine.

And so, if the soul be in any desolation, and discomfort, all the articles of
his Glorification and exaltation, his rising again acquits the soul: therefore
my sins are satisfied for, because my surety is out of prison. And his
ascending into heaven shows my triumph; he lead captivity captive: and the
enemies that are left are for the trial of my faith, and not to conquer me; for
Christ has Lead captivity captive, and is ascended into heaven, he led all in
triumph, and sits at the right hand of God to rule his Church to the end of the
World: he sits for me to overcome my enemies, as St. Paul says excellently
Romans 8. who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods people? it is Christ that
died, or rather that is risen again, who fits at the right hand of God.

And if we be troubled for the loss of a particular friend, there is comfort in
that article of the communion of Saints. There are those that have more grace,
and that is for me. If my own prayers be weak, I believe the communion of
Saints, and have the benefit of their prayers: every one that says Our Father
brings me in, if I be in the Covenant of grace, and of the Communion of Saints.
If I have weaknesses in my self, I believe in the holy Ghost the comforter of
Gods elect and my comforter. If I fear death, I believe the resurrection of the
body. If I fear the day of judgment, I believe that Christ shall be my judge:
he shall come to judge the quick, and the dead. In all the miseries of this
life, considering that they are but short, I believe the life everlasting. So
that indeed if we would dig to our selves springs of comfort, let us go to the
Articles of our Faith, and see how there are streams of comfort from every one
answerable to all our particular exigences, and necessities whatsoever.

And to close up this point, remember whatsoever means we use, what prerogative
soever we think of, whatsoever we do, remember we go to the God of comfort, and
desire him to bless his Word in the ministry, and desire him to work in the
Communion of Saints, with his Spirit to warm our hearts: always remember to
carry him along in all, that we may have comfort from the God of Comfort, who
comfort in all tribulations. Next words are, That we may be able to comfort
them which are in any trouble.


These words show the end why God does comfort us in all tribulation. One main
end is, that we should be comforted in our selves, that is the first. And then*
that we being comforted our selves, from that ability should be able to derive
comfort to others: we are comforted in all tribulations, that we should be able
to comfort them that are in any tribulation.

It is not St. Paul's case only, and great men in Religion, Ministers and the
like; it is not their lot and portion alone to be persecuted and troubled, but
We are all in this life subject to disquiets and discomforts. Observe. All are
subject to discomforts.



Every one, whosoever will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.
Therefore the Apostle says not only our tribulation: but that we may be able
to comfort them that are in any trouble. Trouble is the portion of all Gods
Children one with another: I do but touch that by the way. But that which I
shall more stand upon, it is the end, one main end why God comfort,
(especially Ministers, it is that they should be able to comfort others with
the comforts that God has comforted them withal: That we may be able etc. Now
you must conceive that this ability, it is not ability alone without will and
practice, as if he meant, God has given me comfort, that I might be able to
comfort others if I will, that is not Gods end only, that we may be able, but
that we may exercise our ability, that it may be ability in exercise.

As God does not give a rich man riches to that end that he may be able In
Comforting others there must he, Ability. Will.
to relieve others if he will: No, but if thou be a Child of God, he gives thee
ability and will too, he gives an inward strength. So the meaning here is, not
that we may be able to comfort others if we will, but that we may be both able,
and willing to comfort others.

And to comfort others not only by our example, that because we have been
comforted of God, so they shall be comforted; it is good, but it is Example.
not the full extent of the Apostles meaning, for then the dead examples should
comfort as well as the living. And indeed that is one way of comfort to
consider the examples of former times: but the Apostles meaning is, that I
should comfort them not only by my example of Gods dealing with me, that they
should look for the like comfort, that is but one degree. His meaning is
further therefore, that we should be able to comfort Sympathy.
them by Sympathizing with them: as indeed it is a sweet comfort to those that
are in distress when others compassionate their estate.

And not only so, by our example and sympathy with them, but likewise that we
may be able to comfort them by the inward support, and strength, and light that
we have found by the Spirit of God in our selves; that is that that will enable
us to comfort others, from that very support, and inward strength that we have
found from God, by those graces, and that particuliar strength and comfort that
we have had. When there is a sweet expressing of our inward comfort to them
showing something in our comfort that may raise them up in the like troubles
that we were in, then the comfort will not be a dead comfort, when it comes
from a man experienced. Personated comfort, when a man takes upon him to
comfort, that only speaks comfort, but feels not what he speaks, there is
little life in it, we are comforted that we may comfort others, with feeling,
having been comforted our selves before, with feeling and comfortable
apprehensions in our selves. The point considerable in the first place (to make
way to the rest) is this, that Gods Children they have all of them interest in
divine comforts.


St. Paul was comforted, that he might comfort others: Divine comforts Doctr.
Gods children have all of them interest in divine comforts
belong to all, they are the portion of all Gods people: the meanest have
interest as well the greatest. There is the same spiritual Physic for the
poorest subject, and the greatest Monarch: there is the same spiritual comfort
for the meanest, and for the greatest Christian in the World: St. Paul has the
same comfort as St. Paul's children in the Faith. What is the reason that they
are communicable thus to all; that they lie open to all.

God is the God and Father of all light and comfort, Christ is the Savior
Reason The privileges of religion are common to them
of all: all the privileges of Religion belong to all equally, all are Sons,
and Heirs, and all are alike Redeemed, the Brother of low degree, and the
Brother of h^gh degree: they may differ in the references, and relations of
this life: but in Christ all are alike.

Besides, it is the nature of spiritual privileges and blessings, they are
communicable to all alike without impairing, the more one has the less
another has not, all have an equal share, every one has interest entire,
every one has all without loss or hinderance to others. As for instance, the
Sun, every particular man has all the good the Sun can do, as well as 2. They
are not impaired by being communicated.
all the World has, it is peculiarly and entirely every man's own, every man in
solidu^m has the use of it, the Sun is not one man's more then another. As a
public fountain or Conduit, every man has as much right in it as another. So
in Religion, the graces and privileges, and favors, they lie open as the
prerogatives and privileges of all Gods children: and that is the excellency
of them. In the things of this life it is not so, they are not common to all
alike, there is a loss in the division, the more one has, the less another
has: and that is the reason why the things of this life breed a disposition of
pride, and envy: one envies another because, he wants that that another has;
and one despises another, because he has more then another has: but in the
comforts of Gods Spirit, and the prerogatives that are the ground of those
comforts, all have interest alike.

Only the difference is in the vessels they bring, if one man bring a large
vessel, a large faith, he caries more, and another that brings a less faith
caries less, but it lies open to all alike: As St. Cyprian says, we carry as
much from God as we bring vessels: but all have Interest alike in divine
comforts.

Therefore among Christians there is little envy, because in the best things
(which they value best) all may have alike, and that which one desires, another
may have as much as he, he knows he has never the less.

The point is comfortable to all, even to the meanest, and to them especially,
Use Comfort to weak Christians.
that howsoever there be a difference between others and them in outward things
that cease in death (for all differences shall cease ere long between us and
others) yet the best things are common. In this life those things that are
necessary, they are common; as the Light, and the Elements, Fire, and Water
etc. and those are necessary that are not common: but especially in spiritual
things, the best things are common. Let no man be discomforted, if he be Gods
Child, comfort belongs to him as well as to the greatest Apostle. The chiefest
comforts belong to him as well as to the chiefest Christian. Therefore let us
envy none, nor despise none in this respect.

In the next place we may observe here hence, that Though these comforts Doctr,
Comforts derived to men by men.
be common, yet God derives these comforts commonly by the means of men.

This is Gods order in deriving these comforts to the soul, he comforts one,
that another may be comforted; Not that the comforts themselves that join with
our spirits come from men, but that together with the speech, and presence of
men, whom we love and respect, and in whom we discern the appearance of the
Spirit of God to dwell, together with the speech of persons in whom the spirit
is strong and powerful, the Spirit of God joins, and the Spirit raises the
soul with comfort: so the Spirit comfort, by comforting others that they may
comfort us.

This is not only true of Ministers, but it is true of Christians, as
Christians: for St. Paul must be considered, in something as an Apostle, in
something Every Christian to Communicate his comfort.
as a Christian, in something as a Minister of Christ. As an Apostle, he had
the care of all the Churches, etc. As a Christian he comforted and exhorted
others: one Christian ought to comfort another; therefore he would have done it
as a Christian, if he had not been an Apostle. And in something he is to be
considered as a Minister of Christ, as a Teacher and Ambassador of Christ, a
teacher of the Gospel. He was somewhat as an Apostle, somewhat as a Minister,
somewhat as a Christian. Therefore it concerns us all to consider how to
comfort one another as Christians. We are all members of the same body whereof
Christ is the Head; therefore whatsoever comfort we feel, we ought to
communicate.

The Celestial bodies will teach us this, whatsoever light or influence the
Moon, and the Stars receive, they bestow it on these inferior bodies, they
Simile.
have their light from the Sun, and they reflect it again upon the creatures
below. In the Fabric of man's body, those official parts, (as we call them)
those parts and members of the body, the Heart and the Liver, which are both
members and official parts, that do office and service to others parts, they
convey and derive the spirits, and the blood to all other parts: they receive
strength, partly for themselves first, and then to convey it to other members
The Liver is fed it self with some part of the blood, and it conveyes the rest
to the veins, and so to the whole body. The heart is nourished it self of the
purest nourishment, the spirits are increased, and those spirits are spread
through the Arteries.

The stomach feeds it self with the meat it digests, and with the strength it
has (being an official part) it serves other parts and strengthens other
parts: and if there be a decay in it, there is a decay in all the parts of the
body. So a Christian ought to strengthen himself, and then strengthen others:
no man is for himself alone. And although whatsoever the means be, the comfort
comes from God, yet he will have comfort to be conveyed to us by men, this way.

Partly, to try our obedience, whether we will respect his Ordinance: he Reason
1. To try our obedience.
will have us go to men like our selves. Now if we will have comfort, we must
look to his Ordinance, we must have it of others, and not altogether from our
selves. And that is the reason why many go all their life time, with heavy
drooping spirits; out of pride and neglect, they scorn to seek it of others,
they smother their grief, and bleed inwardly; because they will not lay open
the state of their souls to others. Although God be the God of comfort, he has
ordained this order, that he will comfort us by them that he has appointed to
comfort us; he comfort others that they may comfort us. Though God be the
God of comfort, yet he conveyes God not tied to means.
it (for the most part) by the means of others. I say for the most part; for he
ties not himself to means, though he tie us to means, when we have means.
Occasion may be when a man is shut from all earthly comforts, as in contagious
diseases, and restraint etc. A man may be shut from all intercourse of Worldly
comforts: but even then, a Christian is never in such an estate but he has one
comfort or other; then God comforts immediately, and then he comforts more
sweetly and strongly: then the soul cleaves to him close, and says, now thou
must comfort or none, now the honor is all thine.

Now the nearer the the soul is to the fountain of comfort, the more it is
comforted, but the soul is never so near to God as in extremity of affliction:
when all means fail, then the soul goes to the fountain of comfort, and gives
all the glory to him. But I say, when there is means, God has appointed to
derive his comfort by means; when we may have the benefit, of the Communion of
Saints, of the word etc. God will not comfort us immediately in the neglect of
the means: he comfort us, that we might comfort others. And as he does it to
try our obedience;

So partly, to knit us in love one to another: For is not this a great Reason
2. To knit us in love to one another.
bond to knit us one to another, when we consider that our good is hid in
another? the good that is derived to us, it is hid in others. And this makes us
to esteem highly of others: how sweet are the looks, and sight of a friend? and
more sweet the words of a friend; especially of an experienced friend, that
has been in the Furnace himself.

Thus God to knit us one to another in love^, has ordained that the comfort
that he conveyes, it should be conveyed by the means of others. Other reasons
there may be given, but these are sufficient.

If this be so, then we ought from hence to learn, that whatsoever we Use We
are debtors of the comforts we have.
have we are debtors of it to others, whatsoever comfort we have, whether it be
outward, or inward comfort.

And even as God has disposed and dispensed his benefits and graces to us, so
let us be good stewards of it, we shall give account of it ere long. Let every
man reason with himself, why have I this comfort that another wants? I am Gods
Steward, God has not given it me to lay up, but to lay out. To speak a little
of outward comforts. It is cursed Athiesme in many rich Persons, that think
they are to live here only to scrape an estate for them and their children;
when in the mean time their Neighbor want, and Gods Children want (that are as
dear to God as themselves) and perish for want of comfort. If they were not
Athiests in this point, they would think; I am a steward, and what comfort
shall I have of scraping much? that will but increase my account. Such a
Steward were mad that would desire a great account: the more my account is, the
more I have to answer for, and the more shall be my punishment if I quit not
all well.

Now men out of Athiesme, that they do not believe a day of Judgment, a time of
account, they ingrosse comforts to them and theirs, as if there were not a
Church, as if there were not an afflicted body of Christ: they think not that
they are Stewards. Whereas the time will come, when they shall have more
comfort of that that they have bestowed, then of that that they shall leave
behind them to their children. That which is wisely dispensed for the comfort
of Gods people, it will comfort us, when all that we shall leave behind will
not, nay perhaps, it will trouble us, the ill getting of it.

And so whatsoever inward comforts we have, it is for the comfort of others, we
are debtors of it; whatsoever ability we have, as occasion is of^ered, if there
be a necessity in those that are of the same body with our selves, we ought to
regard them in pity and compassion. If we should see a poor creature cast
himself into a whirlpoole, or plunge himself into some desperate pit, were we
not accessorie to his death, if we should not help him, if we would not pull
one out of the fire? Oh yes; and is not the soul in as great danger? and is not
mercy to the soul the greatest mercy? shall we see others ready to be swallowed
up in the pit of despair, with heaviness of spirit, shall we see them dejected,
and not take it to heart? but either we are unable to Minister a word of
comfort to them, or else unwilling: as if we were of Cains disposition, that we
would look to our selves only: we are none of their keepers.

It is a miserable thing to profess our selves to be members of that body
whereof Christ is the Head, to profess the communion of Saints, and yet to be
so dead hearted in these particular Exigences and occasions. It lies upon us as
a duty, if God convey comfort to us from others: and his end in comforting us
any way, of putting any comfort in our hands outward or inward, it is to
comfort others, if we do it not, we are liable to sin, to the breach of Gods
command, and we frustrate Gods end.

But if this lie upon us as a duty to comfort others, then it concerns us to To
be able to comfort others.
know how to be able to do it.

That we may be able to comfort others, let us be ready to take notice of the
grievance of others: as Moses went to see the afflictions of his Take notice of
their grievance.
brethren, and when he saw it, laid it to heart.

It is a good way to go to the house of mourning, and not to balk and decline
our Christian brethren in adversity. God knows our souls in adversity, so
should we do the souls of others, if they be knit to us in any bond of kindred,
or Nature, or Neighborhood, or the like, that bond should provoke us; for
bonds are as the veins and Arteries to derive comfort. All bonds are to derive
good, whether bonds of Neighborhood, or acquaintance etc. A man should think
with himself, I have this bond to do my Neighbor good. It is Gods providence
that I should be acquainted with him, and do that to him that I cannot do to a
stranger. Let us consider all Bonds, and let this work upon us: let us consider
their grievance is a bond to tie us.

And withal let us labor to put upon us the bowels of a father and mother, 2.
To labor for bowels of compassion.
tender bowels, as God puts upon him bowels of compassion toward us. So St.
Paul being an excellent comforter of others, in 1 Thessalonians. 2. he shows there how
he carried himself as a Father, or Mother, or Nurse to them. Those that will
comfort others they must put upon them the affections of tender creatures as
may be; they must be patient, they must be tenderly affected, they must have
love, they must have the graces of communion.

What be the graces of communion? The graces of Christian communion Graces of
communion what.
to fit us in the communion of Saints to do good, they are a loving, meek,
patient spirit: Love makes patient; as we see Mothers and Nurses, what can they
not endure of their c^ildren, because they love them. And they must be likewise
wise, and furnished, they that will comfort others must get wisdom and
ability^ They must get Humility, they must abase themselves that they may be
comfortable to others, and not stand upon terms: these be the graces of
communion that fit us for the communion of Saints.

What is the reason that many are so untoward to this duty, and have no heart
to it, that they cannot indeed do it?

The reason is, they consider not their Bonds. they do not Consider the poor
and needy Psalm. 41. they have not the graces of communion, they want loving
spirits they want ability, they are empty, they are not furnished, they have
not knowledge laid up in store, they want humble spirits: the want of these
graces makes us so barren in this practice of the communion of Saints.
Therefore we should bewail our own barrenness when we should do such duties,
and cannot. And beg of God the spirit of love and wisdom, that we may do
things wisely, that we may speak that which is fit, a word in season is as
apples of Gold with Pictures of Silver. And let us beg a humble spirit that we
may be abased to comfort others. As Christ in love to us he abased himself, he
became man, and when he was man, he became a servant, he abased himself to wash
his Disciples feet, talk with a silly woman and such base offices: and if the
Spirit of Christ be in us, it will abase us to offices of love, to support one
another, to bear one another burdens,

Again, if we would comfort others as we should, let us labor to get
experience 3. Get experience our selves.
of comfort in our selves; God comfort us that we might be able to comfort
others. He will easily kindle others that is all on fire himself; and that is
comforted himself, he can easily comfort others with that comfort he feels
himself, those that have experience can do it best.

As we see in Physicians, if there be two Physicians, whereof the one has been
sick of the disease that he is to cure in another: the other parhaps is more
excellent then he otherwise, but he has never been sick of it: the patient
will sooner trust himself with the experienced Physician, then with the other:
for undoubtedly he is better seen in that, then the other, though perhaps the
other may be a greater booked Physician then he. As it is with the Physicians
of the body, so it is with the Physician of the soul: the experienced Physician
is the best. What is the reason that old men, and wise men, are the
mercifullest of all? because they have had experience of many crosses and
miseries: a wise man knows what crosses are, he understands them best.

The way then to comfort others is to get experience of divine comforts our
selves. And that we may get experience of Gods comforts, let us mark what was
said before of the rules of comfort, and work upon our own hearts whatsoever
may be comfortable to others. That we may not be empty Truncks to speak words
without feeling.

He that is well may speak very good things to a sick man, but the sick man
sees that he speaks without pity and compassion: those that have been sick of
the same disease when they come to comfort, they do it with a great deal of
meekness and mildness. Those that are fit to comfort others must be spiritual
themselves first: As the Apostle says Gal. 6. 1. says the wise, and holy
Apostle, if any man be overtaken (as alas we are all overtaken with some
corruption or other) ye that are spiritual restore such a one, set him in
joint, as the word is with the spirit of meekness, knowing that thou thy self
may ^e tempted

The Spirit of God is a Spirit of comfort, the more we have of the Spirit, the
fitter we are to comfort others. We see many men will speak very good things,
but they do but personate sorrow, and personate comfort, it comes from them
without feeling: as he says, if thou did believe these things that thou
speak, would thou ever say them so? He that speaks good things without
experience, he speaks as if he did never believe them. Those that speak things
with experience that have wrought them upon their hearts and spirits, there is
such a demonstration in the manner of their speaking, of a spirit of love and
meekness, and compassion, that it prevails marvailously: It is so true, that
our Savior Christ himself, that he might have the more tender bowels of
compassion toward us, he made it one end of his Incarnation, as it is pressed
again, and again in Heb. 2. and Heb. 4. the Apostle dwells upon it, It became
him to be man, to take upon him our infirmities, that he might be a merciful
Redeemer, a merciful high Priest. It was one end of his Incarnation, that he
might not only save us, but that he might be a merciful Redeemer, that he might
have experience of our infirmities: of persecution, he was persecuted himself,
of want, he wanted himself, of temptation, he was tempted himself, of wrath, he
felt it himself, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Here is the comfort of a Christian soul that Christ has begun to him in all:
therefore it became him to be mam, not only to Redeem us, but to be a merciful
high priest, a comfortable high Priest.

The way then you see how to comfort others is, to get our own hearts sensible
of spiritual comfort. Two Irons, if they be both hot do close together Simile.
presently, but unless both be hot, they do not join together handsomely: so
that that makes us join together strongly is, if two spirits meet and both be
warm; if one godly men comfort another godly man, if one holy man labor to
breed an impression of heat in another; there is a knitting of both spirits,
they join strongly together. Therefore we ought to labor to get experience,
that we may comfort others; seeing none can comfort so well as experimental
Christians.

Why is experience such an enabling to spiritual comfort? Quest.


I answer, because it brings the comfort home to our own souls. The Devil
knows comfort well enough, but he feels none. Experience Answ. Why experience
is such a help to comfort others.
helps faith, it helps all other knowledge. Our Savior Christ is said to learn
by experience, for he learned obedience in that he suffered. Experience is such
a means of the increasing of knowledge, as that it bettered the knowledge of
Christ, that had all knowledge in him: he had knowledge 1. It increases
knowledge.
by looking upon God, being the Wisdom of God, yet he learned somewhat by the
experience, he bettered himself by experience: he knew what to bear the cross
was by experience; he knew what infirmities were, by experience; he knew what
he could suffer by experience: so it added to his knowledge as man. And so the
Angels themselves are continual students in the mysteries of the Gospel, they
get experimental knowledge, to the knowledge that they have inbred, and that
knowledge that they have by the presence of God, to that they add experimental
knowledge.

So then, if it bettered the knowledge of our blessed Savior and increased it,
it was a new way increased by experience, and it adds to the knowledge of the
Angels, much more to ours.

Then again, it gains a great confidence in the speaker, for what we speak with
experience, we speak with a great deal of boldness.

Again, experimental comforts, those that we have felt our selves, and It
gains confidence in the speaker.
have felt likewise the grievance, we speak them with such expressions, as no
other can do (in the apprehension of the party whom we comfort) so well as an
experienced person: for he goes about the works tenderly, and gently, and
lovingly, because he has been in the same himself. And that is the reason that
the Apostle St. Paul in the place I named before Gal. 6. 1. presses this duty
upon spiritual men, especially because themselves have been tempted, and may be
tempted; those that have been tempted, and think they may be afterward, this
does wondrously fit them for this work of comforting others. But to add a
little in this point, to show how to comfort others by our own experience and
skill, I spoke before of an Art of comforting our How to comfort others from
our experience.
selves: there is a skill likewise in comforting others. Even as we comfor our
selves, in that method we must comfort others. When we comfort our selves: we
must first consider our need of comfort, search our wounds, our maladies, have
them fresh in our sight, that so we may be forced to seek for comfort, and as
we ought to do this daily, so when we 1. Search out their sin and misery.
are to comfort others, we ought not only to comfort them, but to search them
as much as we can what sin is in them, and what misery is upon them, and
acquaint them with their own estate, that they are in as far as we can
discern: we may judge of them partly by our selves. For we must not prostitute
comforts to persons that are indisposed till we see them fitted. God does
comfort, but it is the abject: Christ heales, but is the wounded spirit: he
came to seek, but it is to those that are lost: he came to ease, but it is
those that are heavy laden. Therefore that we may comfort them to purpose, we
ought to show, and discover to them what estate they are in, that we may force
them to comfort, if they be not enemies to comfort and to their own souls.

He is an unwise Physician, that administers cordials before he gives
preparatives to carry away the noisome humors, they will do little good, we
ought therefore to prepare them this way, if we intend to do them good.

And then when we see what need they stand in, bring them to Christ, 2. Show
them their interest in the covenant of grace.
and the Covenant of Grace, that is the best way to comfort them, to bring them
to see that God is their father, when we discern some signs of grace in them.
For this is the maine stop in all comfort, that there is none but they shall
find by experience they are ready to say, you teach wondrous comforts, that
there is an inheritance in heaven, that God has provided; and on earth, there
is an issue of all for good, and there is a presence of God in troubles: this
is true: but how shall I know this belongs to me? This is the cavil of flesh
and blood, that turns the back to the most heavenly comforts that are. The
main and principal thing therefore in dealing with others (and with our own
hearts) is to let them see that there are some signs and evidencies that they
are in the covenant of grace, that they belong to God. Unless we see that, all
the comfort we can give them is to tell them that they are not yet sunk into
hell, and that they have space to repent. But as long as men live in sinful
courses, that they are not in the state of Grace, we can tell them no comfort,
except they will devise a new Scripture, a new Bible, if they do so they may
have comfort: but this word of God, and God herein speaks no comfort to persons
that live in sin and will do so, we should labor therefore to discern some
evidence that they are in the state of Grace.

And ofttimes, those are indeed most entitled to comfort, that think it Comfort
belongs to them that think themselves furthest from it.
furthest from them: therefore we should acquaint them with the conditions of
the covenant of grace, that God looks to truth: therefore if we discern any
true, broken humble spirit, a hungring and, a thirsting after righteousness,
and a desire of comfort, Blessed are those that hunger and thirst, it belongs
to them, we may comfort them. If we see spiritual poverty that they see their
wants, and would be supplied, blessed are the poor in spirit* be of good
comfort. Christ calls such. If they see and feel the burden of their sins we
may comfort them, Christ calls them, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy
laden. If we descern spiritual and heavenly desires to grow in grace and
overcome their corruptions, if we discover and descern this in their practice
and obedience. God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him. And he
accepts the will for the deed.

There is a desire of happiness in nature, that comforts not a man, it is no
sign of grace, to desire to be free from hell, and to be in heaven, it is a
natural desire every creature wishes well to heaven: but if there be a desire
of the means that tend to heaven, a desire of Grace: these are evidences of
grace, these are the pulses that we may find grace by, when they see their
infirmities and groan under them and would be better, and complain that they
are not better, and are out of love with their own hearts, there is a combat in
their hearts, they are not friends with themselves. When we see this inward
conflict, and a desire to better, and to get victories against their
corruptions, (though there be many corruptions, and weaknesses) a man may
safely say, they are in the state of Grace, they are on the mending hand. For
Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. And where
he has begun a good work he will perfect it to the day of the Lord. He will
cherish these weak beginnings therefore we may comfort them on good ground.

Then, besides that, in our dealing with them, when we have discovered, by 3.
To comfort them from our own experience.
some evidence that they belong to the covenant, that we see by some love to
good things, and to Gods Image in his Children, and by other evidences: then we
may comfort them boldly, and then to fetch from our own experience, what a
comfort will it be to such? When we can say, my estate was as yours is; I found
those corruptions that you groan under, I allowed not my self in them as you
do not; when a man can say from his own experience, that notwithstanding these
I have evident signs of Gods spirit, that I am his; then he can comfort others
by his own experience.

And what a comfort is it to go to the experiments of scripture? it is an
excellent way. As now, let a man be deserted of God: David, will comfort 4. By
experience of Saints in scripture.
him by his experience Psalm. 77. Where he says, he found God as his enemy,
and as Job says, the terrors of God drank up his spirit, be of good comfort,
David would come and comfort thee if he were alive. If the terror of God be
against thee for sin, that thy conscience is awakned: be of good comfort,
Christ if he were on earth would show thee by his own example, that he endured
that desertion on the Cross. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? If thou
be molested, and vexed with Satan, Job will comfort thee by his example, his
book is most of it combating and comfort, and so for all other grievances, go
to the scriptures, whatsoever is written, is written for our learning.

Pray to God, and he will hear thee as he did Elias. Oh, but Elias was an
excellent man. The scripture prevents the objection Jam. 5. he Object.
was a man subject to infirmities, if God heard him, he will hear thee. Believe
Ans.
in Christ (as Abraham did, the Father of the faithful) in the promised
Messiah, and he will forgive thee all thy sins. Oh, but he had a strong faith.
What has the scripture to take away this objection? In Romans 5. Object.
This was not written for Abraham only, but for those that believe with the
Ans.
faith of Abraham.

I, but I am a wretched sinner, there is little hope of me. Yes: St. Paul.
Object.
will come, and comfort thee by his example and experience: this is a Ans.
faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of
whom I am chief, I, he came to save such sinners, as St Paul was. I, says St.
Paul and that I might be an example to all that shall believe in Christ to the
end Object.
of the world, he takes away that objection. And the Apostle is so heavenly
Ans. Wisdom of the Apostle.
wise, that where he speaks of privileges, he inlargeth it to others. There
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And what shall separate us
from the love of God? But when he speaks of matter of abasement; that we may
see that he was in regard of his corruptions as much humbled as we, then he
speaks in his own person. Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death. Therefore his comforts belong to thee. Now, as these
examples in scripture, and the experiences of Gods Children there, be appliable
to us: so, much more the experience of Gods Children that are alive. Therefore
we should be willing to do offices of comfort in this kind.

Those that are of ability, either men, or women, they will have in their
houses somewhat to comfort others, they will have strong waters, and cordials,
and medicines; and they account it a glory to have somewhat that their
neighbors may be beholding to them for; and though they bestow it freely, yet
they think and account it a sufficient recompense that they can be beneficial
to others. People do this for things of this life, and think they deserve a
great deal of respect for their goodness in this kind: surely, if we consider,
there is a life that needs comfort, more then this faing life; and there are
miseries that pinch us more then the miseries of the body. Every one should
labor to have in the house of his soul somewhat, some strong waters of
comfort; that he may be able to tell others, this refreshed my soul, this has
done me good, I give you no worse then I took my self first; this wondrously
commends the comfort in the party that gives it, and it commends it to the
party, that receives it, to take benefit by the comforts of other men. For, is
it not a strengthening to our case, when another shall say to our comfort, it
was my case? Is it not sealed by the evidence of two? surely it is a great
assurance when we have another to tell us his experience.

Again, if this be Gods order, that he will convey comfort to us by Use. To
depend on Gods ordinance.
others; then we ought to depend upon Gods Ordinance, we ought to expect
comfort one from another, especially from the ministers who are messengers of
comfort. I speak it the rather, because in what degree we neglect The ministers.
any one means that God has ordained to comfort us (though he be the God of
comfort, yet) in that measure we are sure to want comfort: and this is one
principal ordinance, the ministry, and the communion of Saints.

Some there be that will neglect the means of salvation, they have dead
spirits, and live and die so, for the most part: they have much ado to recover
comfort. Those men that retire themselves, that will work all out of the flint
themselves, they are commonly uncomfortable. God has ordained one to help
another; As in an Arch one stone strengthens another, the ministry
especially is ordained for comfort.

And likewise God has ordained one Christian to comfort another, (as Simile
well as the ministers) Let us therefore regard much the communion of 2. Common
Christians.
Saints. Let one Christian labor to comfort another, and every one labor to
be fit to receive comfort from others, labor to have humble and willing
spirits. It is so true that God does convey comfort, even by common Christians
as well as the ministers, that St. Paul himself Romans 1. 12. he desires to see
the Romans, that he might receive mutual comfort from them. For a minister may
have more knowledge and book-learning perhaps, then another Christian that may
have better experience then he, especially in some things: and there is not the
meanest Christian, but he may comfort the greatest Clerk in the world, and help
him by his experience that God has showed to him, by declaring how God showed
him comfort at such a time, and upon such an occasion, The experience of Gods
People, the meanest of them may help the best Christians; therefore he will
have none to be neglected.

There is never a member of Christ's body, but has some ability to comfort
another; for Christ has no dead members. God will have it so, because he will
have one Christian to honor another, and to honor them from the knowledge of
the use and necessity that one has of another. If God should not derive
comfort from one to another in some degree, and from the meanest to the
greatest, one would despise another, but God will not have it so, he will have
the communion of Saints valued to the end of the world. What will one Christian
regard another, what would weak Christians regard the strong, and what would
strong Christians regard the weak, if there were not a continual supply one
from another? Therefore God has ordained that by the ministry, and by the
communion of Saints we should comfort one another.

Let us not think that this does not concern us, it concerns us all: therefore
when we have any trouble in mind, let us regard the communion of Saints, let us
regard acquaintance. And let us know this, that God will hold us in heavynesse
till we have used all the means that he has appointed; if one help not,
perhaps another will, perhaps the ministry will help, perhaps acquaintance
will help; but if we find not comfort in one, let us go over all. And (would
you have more?) Christ himself, did he not take two disciples into the garden
with him when his spirit was heavy? Did not he know that God had ordained one
to comfort another? Two are better then one, if one be alone, he shall be a
cold, but if there be two, they heat one another: if there be one alone, there
can hardly be true spiritual heat. If two be together, if one fall, the other
may raise him up, but if one be alone and fall, who shall raise him up? It is
meant spiritually, as well as bodily and outwardly by Solomon.

We cannot have a better president then our blessed Savior. Solitariness in
such times in Spiritual desertion it is the hour of temptation. When did the
devil set on Christ? when he was alone; it was the fittest time to tempt him
when Christ was severed. So the Devil sets on single persons when they are
alone, and tempts them, and presses them with variety of temptations. Woe to
him that is alone. Christ sent his Disciples by two, and two, that one might
comfort another, and one might strengthen another.

Now, though in particular it belong to ministers in a more eminent sort; yet
let every one lay it to heart, you ought to have abilities to comfort others,
and to receive comfort of others. And consider it is an angelical work to
comfort others; we imitate God himself, and the most Excellent creatures the
Angels, whose office it is to comfort. Even our very Savior, they came to
comfort him in his greatest extremity. A man is a God to a man when he
comforts; when he discomforts, and directs, and withdrawes, he is a devil to a
man: men are beasts to men, Devils to men that way: but he that is an
instrument to convey comfort, he is a God to a man, God is the God of comfort.
Thou art in the place of God to a man when thou comfortest him, thou shall save
thy self and others. God honors men with his own title when they comfort; not
only ministers, but others save men: thou shall gain thy brother by thy
admonition and reproof, what greater honor can ye have then Gods own title,
to be saviors one of another? It is the office I say of Angels, they were sent
to comfort Christ; it is their duty to pitch their tents about Gods Children,
to suggest holy thoughts, as the devil suggests evil, and to be about us,
though we think not of it. Nay, it is not only an angelical work, but it is
the work of Gods spirit, the sweetest style of the Holy Ghost is to be a
Comforter.

What shall we think of cursed spirits, that insult over others misery, that
give them gall to eat, and vinegar to drink, that add affliction to the
afflicted? What shall we say to barren spirits, that have not a word of comfort
to say, but come in a profane, and dead manner, I am sorry to see you thus,
and I hope you will be better; barren soul, as the wilderness. What, a member
of Christ, of the communion of Saint, and no way furnished, no word of comfort
to a distressed soul? We may know the comfort we have our selves to be comfort
indeed, and from the grace and favor of God, when we have hearts enlarged to
do good to others with it.

How do gifts, and grace differ? (to add that useful distinction.) And
Difference in gifts and Grace.
man may have a great many gifts and be proud, and full of envy, and have a
divellish poysonful spirit to draw all to himself, and not be good, but be
carried with self-love, and die a devil notwithstanding his excellent parts.
Why? here are such gifts, and parts, but there is a bitter root of self-love
to draw all to himself, to deifie himself, to make an Idol of himself: but
grace with gifts works otherwise, that turns all by a spirit of love and
humility to the good of others.

There is no envy in a gracious heart, so far forth as it is gracious, there is
no pride, nor scorn to do good to others. How shall we distinguish men How to
distinguish men of great parts
of excellent parts whether they be Christians or not Christians? They have
both of them wit and memory, they have both courage. I, but whether of them
improve their parts and abilities most to the good of others? Whether of them
has the most humble spirit, the most loving spirit, the most discreet spirit,
to be witty, to do others to good upon all advantages? there is the Christian,
that has Gods Grace with his gifts. But for the other, Knowledge puffs up
says the Apostle; what edifies, and builds up? Love edifieth, knowledge
gathers many materials, stone, and timber etc. what builds the house, the body
of Christ? It is a loving and humble spirit.

Therefore let us think that we have nothing in Christianity, by any parts we
have, of memory or wit, or reading etc. unless we have a humble spirit, that
we can deny our selves, and abase our selves to do good to others upon all the
best advantages: or else we have not the spirit of Christ, that sweet spirit of
Christ that denied himself to do good to us.

Where grace is established once, and is in the right nature, there is a
public mind: and it is one of the best signs of a heart that is fashioned to
the image of Christ, (who denied himself, and became all in all to us) to have
a public mind, to have self-love killed, to think I have nothing to purpose as
I should have, except I can make use of it to the good of others: therefore let
us be willing to do good in this kind.

And as I said, let us make use of comfort from others: think that they are
reserved to the times, and place where thou live, that thou might make use
of them. Therefore those that need comfort should not flatter themselves in
their grief, but humbly depend upon the means that God has ordained. And let
every man think, what if God have hid my comfort in another man? what if he
have given him the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season unto me?
Let no man think to master his trouble and grief by himself; we are members of
the body, and the good that God will convey to us, must be from, and by others.
Therefore it is a mutual duty, those that have comfort ought to comfort others;
and those that do need comfort, ought to repiare to others, it is the ordinance
of God. As Job says, for one of a thousand to show a man his righteousness.
Though a man be never so wise, yet sometimes he knows not his own comfort, he
knows not that portion of comfort that belongs to him till some others
discover it to him. Physicians will have others to heal Simile.
themselves, to judge of their diseases; and certainly one reason why persons
that are excellent (in themselves) have passed their days in darkness, it
has been this, that they think to overmaster their heaviness and distraction
of spirit with their own reason etc. which will not be. God, what he will do,
he will do by his own means, and ordinance.

Let us therefore learn hence, to see the goodness of God, that besides Use.
3. To see the goodness of God in this ordinance.
the Ministry that he has ordained and the salvation that he keeps for us,
and the promises that he has given us, and the Angels that attend us etc. he
does even ordain others, that are men, and have bodies with our selves, other
Fellow Christians to be instruments to convey comfort, he trains them up that
they may be able to comfort, and do good to us: and he hides the good he
intends to us, in them, and conveyes it to us by them: it is a special
goodness of God, that every thing should tend to our good. Thus all things are
for us, the sufferings of others tend to increase our comfort, and the comfort
of others is for our comfort. There is such a sweet prudence in directing us to
heaven that God makes every thing help; not only our own troubles that we
suffer our selves, but he does sweetly turn the troubles of others, and the
comforts of others to our good.

It ministers an argument of praising and blessing of God: and that we should
answer him in the like, that as he has devised all the ways that may Ground
of praising God.
be of comforting us, of turning all to our good, that, that we suffer our
selves, and that, that others suffer; so we should study by all means and ways
to set forth his glory, and no way to grieve the spirit of so gracious a God,
that thus every way intends our comfort.

VERSE. V. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolations
also abound by Christ.
HEre the blessed Apostle shows the reason why his heart was so enlarged as we
see in verse 3. in the midst of his troubles and persecutions, to bless God,
there was good reason, for as his afflictions, so his consolations abounded. It
is a reason likewise of his ability to comfort others, the reason why he was
fitted to comfort others: because he found comfort abound in himself in his
sufferings: so they have a double reference to the words before. But to take
the words in themselves. As the Sufferings of Christ abound etc.


It is an excellent portion of scripture, and that which I should have a great
deal of encouragement to speak of, if the times and disposition of the hearers
were for it: for it is a text of comfort for those that suffer persecution,
that suffer affliction for the Gospel. Now because we do not suffer, or at
least we suffer not any great matter, (except it be a reproach or the like,
which is a matter of nothing, but a chip of the cross, a trifle,) therefore we
hear these matters of comfort against the disgrace of the cross of Christ,
with dead hearts. But we know not what we are reserved to: therefore we must
learn somewhat to store up, though we have not present use of it. The several
branches of divine truths that may be observed from these words, are first this,

That the sufferings of Christians may abound. They are many in this Doctrines.
world, and they may be more still.

Secondly, what we ought to think of those sufferings, what judgment we are to
have of them. They are the sufferings of Christ.


Thirdly that being the sufferings of Christ, he will not destitute us of
comfort, but we have our comfort increased in a proportion answerable to our
troubles.

The fourth point is by whom and in whom all this is, this strange work is by
Christ, the ballancing of these two so sweetly together, crosses and comforts,
they come both from one hand, both from one spring, the sufferings of Christ,
and the comforts of Christ, and both abound, our troubles are for him, and our
comforts are by him. So here is sufferings, and comfort, increase of suffering,
increase of comfort, sufferings for Christ, and comfort by Christ, you see them
balanced together, and you see which weighs down the balance, comfort by
Christ, weighes down sufferings for Christ; the good is greater then the ill.
It is a point of wondrous comfort. The Ark you know mounted up, as the waters
mounted up, when the waters overflowed the world: so it is here in this verse,
there is a mounting of the waters, a rising of the waters above the mountains;
afflictions increase, and grow higher and higher, but be of good comfort, here
is the Ark above the waters, here is consolation above all, as our sufferings
for Christ increase, so our consolations likewise by Christ increase.

For the first, I will be very short in it. The sufferings of Christ abound in
us: Doct. The sufferings of Christ abound in us.



There is no body in this world, but first or last, if they live any long
time, they must suffer, and as a man is in degrees of goodness, so his
sufferings must abound, the better man the more sufferings. Sufferings abounded
in St. Paul, it does not abound in all, that was personal in St. Paul, ^ll
suffer not alike.
to abound in sufferings, it does not go out of the person of St. Paul, and
such as St. Paul was. All must suffer, but not in a like measure: there are
several cups, all do not abound in sufferings, as all do not abound in grace,
and strength. Those that are of a higher rank, their sufferings abound more.
God does not use an exact proportion in afflictions, but that which we call
geometrical, a proportion appliable to the strength of the sufferer. Christ, as
he had more strength then any; so he suffered more then any; and St. Paul
having an extraordinary measure of strength, he suffered more then all the
Apostles, the sufferings of Christ abounded in him, but all must suffer.

What is the reason of it? What is the reason that troubles abound thus?
Surely, if we look, To God we shall see reasons enough. the Devil the world our
selves

If we look to God and Christ we are ordained to be conformable to Reas. 1. In
respect of God.
Christ; we must be conformable to Christ in sufferings first, before we be in
glory. It is Gods decree, we are called to sufferings as well as to be
believing: we must answer Gods call, every Christian must resolve to take up
his Cross every day, some degree of the Cross or other: reproach for Christ's
sake is a suffering, the scorn of the world is the rebuke of Christ. We are
called to suffering as well as to Glory: it is part of our effectual calling,
it is an appendix, an accessorie thing to the main, we must take grace with
suffering; and it is well we may have it so too: it is well that we have the
state of grace here, and glory hereafter with suffering, R^as. 2. In respect
of Satan.
If we look to the devil, there must be suffering; Satan is the Prince of the
world; he is the prince of an opposite Kingdom.

If we consider what place we live in when we are taken out of the world to the
blessed estate of Christians, to be members of Christ, and heirs of heaven: the
world is strange to us, and we are strangers to it. Crosses Reas. 3. In respect
of the word
and afflictions are necessary for them that are travelers, we would think
else that we were at home, and forget our country, considering the condition
we live in, we must have sufferings. If we consider the disposition of the
parties among whom we live, they are people of an opposite spirit, therefore
they malign us, because we are taken from among them. And though there be no
opposition showed to them: yet it upbraids enough their cursed estate, when
they see others taken from them that speaks loud enough that their course is
naught, that they see others mislike it. The world, that is led by the spirit
of Satan, malignes them that are better then themselves. There is opposition
between the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman: so long as there are
wicked men that are instruments, and Organs of the devil, Gods Children must be
opposed while there is a Devil suffered to be the God of the World; and so
long as he has so strong a faction in the world as he has, the Children of
disobedience in whom he rules, Gods Children shall never want suffering.

If we regard our selves, we have always in our selves, good and bad. That
which is good, we have need of sufferings to exercise it, and to Reas. 4. In
respect of our selves
know it: for if their were no sufferings, how should we know what good we
have? Is it not a great comfort to a Christian, when he knows, by 1. In
respect of the good in us.
suffering that he has more patience then he looked for, that he has more
faith then he thought he had, that he has more love to God, that he can endure
to suffer more for God then ever he thought he could, that he has more
resigning of his heart, and giving up of himself then he thought of, that he
can deny the world, which he thought he could not have done? What a comfort is
it to a Christain, when he knows by suffering what he can do, and what he
cannot do?

It is good therefore, and necessary in regard of our selves, that we may know
our strength.

In regard likewise of the evil that is in us, suffer we must: for there must
2. The evil in us.
be a daily purging, and the best instruments to scour us, are wicked men, the
Devils Instruments; It is unfit for Gods Chiidren to take that base office on
them, for one Christian to fall upon another: it is good there should be an
opposite faction in the world, that there should be wicked men, in regard of
the ill that is in us; there is somewhat to be scoured and purged out. So we
see whether we look upward, or downward, to God, or to the Devil, or to the
faction of the Devil in the World, or to our selves for good, or evil, it is
necessary that there should be some afflictions.

And to speak a little more home to us, there must be sufferings in this
regard, because the Church always has corruption and soil, especially in
Afflictions necessary to purge corruptions contracted by the peace of the
Church.
prosperity. If a man look to the Churches in Germany that have suffered much
of late, and mark what reports has been given of them, how cold, and dull they
were in the profession of the Gospel, how indifferent they were, how they
valued not that invaluable pearl, a man shall see that suffering was needful to
scour them. If a man look to the state of this City (though there be many
good people, the Lord increase the number of them, yet) if a man consider with
what cold affections the blessed truth of God is entertained, which (I say) is
above all. what is all, that we enjoy? what is our peace to the Gospel of
peace? What is our prosperity, and what is all to the blessed truth of
Salvation? If we had not that, wherein were not the Turks as good as we? for
all other things were not other nations as good as we? certainly yes; for
policy, and other beauty, and ornaments, and rarities, what have we to lift up
our excellency, but the continuance of the blessed doctrine of salvation,
whereby our souls are begotten to God, to an inheritance immortal, undefiled,
reserved in the heavens? Now the cold esteem of this, certainly will enforce in
time a national suffering* unless there be a national repentance. It is true
of every particular Christian: as we see when the rain and the heat join
together, they breed as well Weeds as Corn: so prosperity, and the blessings of
God, they have brought up in us much weeds as well as good Corn, and there
must be a time of weeding and purging in regard of our state in this world, we
are gathering soil every day, there must be a suffering one time or other.

But some will say, what do you talk of suffering? Now is a time of peace,
Object.
we live among Christians, and not Pagans, and Turks, and for our adversaries,
though they be many, yet they do not show themselves.

St. Austin answers this in himself, do but begin to live as a Christian Ans.
August. Afflictions in the most peaceable times
should, and see if thou shall not be used unchristianly of them that are
Christians in name, but not in deed. A suffering from Christians is more sharp
then that of enemies. Those that are fleshly will be ready to be injurious:
those that are carnal, formal professors, will be ready to offer some disgrace
or other to those that are more spiritual then themselves.

There is a threefold suffering in the Church since Christ's time. The
Threefold suffering in the Church.
first was of doctrine concerning the natures of Christ, there was persecution
about that: for there were Arians that denied the Godhead, and others that
denied the manhood of Christ, and such like great enemies of the Church.
Afterward in Popery, they set on Christ's offices, and divided his Kingly, and
priestly, and prophetical office, to the Pope, to Saints, to works and such
like, incroaching upon them, and persecuting with fire and faggot, all those
that gave all to Christ, and did not sacrilegiously give any thing to the
creature.

But there is a persecution as ill as any of these where the nature and offices
of Christ are well enough understood, where the power of religion is opposed by
others, when so much religion as is necessary to bring a man to heaven is
opposed: for it is not the knowledge of the nature and offices, and benefits by
Christ, but it is a knowledge that has obedience with it that must bring us to
heaven; a knowledge with self-denial, a knowledge with selling and parting
with all our lusts and wicked courses that will not stand with the Gospel.

Now where this is, this cannot be brooked by any means, and it goes under as
great disgrace, as heresies did in former times: so that it is a matter of
reproach to have so much religion as is necessarily required of a man before he
can be saved. That which the world disgraces is necessary to every man before
he can be saved, that is a strickt giving up of himself to God, and a watching
over his ways, as much as humane frailty will permit; a conscionable endeavor
in all things to please God, out of conscience and thankfulness to God; we
must not think to come to heaven without that, it will not be, without
holiness none shall see God This despised holiness, this maligned holiness
is that which is necessary to bring us to heaven, and so much as is necessary
to bring us to heaven is disgraced every where.

Those that resolve to be Christians in good earnest and would have comfort on
their death bed and in the times of persecution they must endure to be set
light by, to bear the reproach of Christ, they must resolve on this before
hand, that when these things come to pass, we be not offended. Use. How to
judge of afflicted men


Well, then to make a little use of this; since there must be troubles and
crosses, and they must increase, if we will be Christians; Let this teach us to
judge aright of those that are ill thought on in the world often times, (when we
see nothing but good in their carriage) oh what imputations are laid on them,
you may see what an indiscreet man he was, you may see that he lacked wisdom
and policy, else he might have kept himself out of this trouble. I would ask
such a party, had not Christ as much wisdom as thee? He was the wisdom of the
Father, did he keep out of reproaches? was he not reproached as a troublesome
man, as an enemy to Caesar, and taxed for base things; as a wine bibber etc.
and one that had a devil, and many other ways? Was not St. Paul as discreet
as we are, who in our understanding and conceit are ready to conceive
distastfully of men that suffer any thing for the Gospel? and yet
notwithstanding, all his wisdom kept him not from the cross, but the cross
abides me, says he, every where. The Devil and the cross follow Gods
Children wheresoever they go, all their wisdom and holiness cannot keep them
from it, because God has decreed it, and called them to it, and they must be
conformable to Christ.

Therefore let us take heed that we do not suffer men to suffer in our
conceits, when they suffer in a good cause, the cross of Christ, reproachful
things, base death, etc. Afflictions are therefore called the cross, because
there is a kind of baseness with them, and as it is so, so carnal men esteem
it, presently with the suffering there goes a taint, and an abasing in their
conceit, of those men that suffer in a good cause, there is a diminishing
conceit goes in carnal men of that which should be their glory; our crosses
abound; but what ought we to judge of these crosses. They are the sufferings of
Christ.


Why? Christ suffers nothing, he is in heaven, in glory; how can he suffer?
Doctr* The sufferings of Christians are the sufferings of Christ.
This is to disparage his Glorious estate, to make him suffer any thing.

I answer, the sufferings of Christ, they are twofold; the sufferings of
Christ's person, that which he suffered himself which were propitiatory, and
satisfactory for our redemption; and the sufferings of Christ in his mystical
body, which likewise is called Christ. For Christ in scripture is taken either
Christ three ways taken in scripture.
for Christ himself, or for the members of Christ; why persecutest thou me?
says he to Saul: or for the whole body mystical with the head 1 Cor. 12. so
is Christ, Christ head and members is called Christ. Now when he calls the
sufferings of the Church the sufferings of Christ, he means not the sufferings
of Christ in his own person; for he suffers nothing, he is out of all the
malice of persecutours, they cannot reach to heaven to Christ; but he means the
sufferings of Christ in his mystical body, these are called the sufferings of
Christ. Quest.


Why are these called the sufferings of Christ? Partly, because they are Ans.
They are the sufferings of Christ.
the sufferings of mystical Christ, the body of Christ, the Church; for the
Church the company of true belevers, are the fullness of Christ, they make up
the mystical body of Christ; therefore when they suffer he that is 1* Because
of Christ mystically
the head suffers.

Again, they are called the sufferings of Christ, those that his members and
Children suffer, because they are for Christ, they are in his quarrel, they 2.
They are for Christ's cause.
are for his truth, for his cause, and by his appointment he calls us to
suffering; it is for his cause, in our intendment we intend to suffer for
Christ, to maintain his cause, they are the sufferings of Christ likewise in
the intent of the opposites and enemies, they persecute us for some goodness
they see in us, they persecute the cause and truth of Christ in us, so they are
the sufferings of Christ both ways.

Especially, they are the sufferings of Christ by way of sympathy, because 3.
By way of sympathy
Christ does impute them to himself. The sufferings of Christ. It is a phrase
that springs from the near union that is between Christ and his members, the
Church, which is as near or nearer then any natural union between the head and
members: hereupon it comes that we are said to suffer with him, to die with
him, to be crucified with him, to ascend with him, to fit in heavenly places
with him, to judge the world with him, to do all with him by reason of this
union; and he is said to suffer with us, to be afflicted in us, to be
reproached with us, he was stoned in Stephen, he was persecuted by Saul, he was
beheaded in Paul, he was burned with the Martyrs, he was banished with the
Christians, and he suffers in all his Children: not that he does so in his own
person, but because it pleases him by reason of the near communion that is
between him and us, to take that which is done to his members, as done to
himself; therefore they are called the sufferings of Christ, he suffers when we
suffer, and we suffer when he suffers.

The difference is, all the comfort in our sufferings it comes from communion
in his sufferings, because he is our surety; for why are we encouraged to
suffer by way of sympathy and communion with him? because he in love died for
us, and was crucified for us, and abased for us, and shamed for us. And when is
the soul encouraged to suffer afflictions for Christ? when it has a little
felt the wrath of God that Christ suffered for it. Oh, how much am I beholding
to God for Christ that endured the whole wrath of God. They are the sufferings
of Christ, this is a wondrous comfortable point, and it is a notion that does
sweeten the bitterest crosses, that they are the sufferings of Christ; not
only that we are conformable to Christ in them, we suffer as he did, but they
are the sufferings of Christ, he imputes them as done to him, he suffers with
us. 4. He is present with us.


And another reason, why they are the sufferings, of Christ, it is because he
not only takes it as done to himself; but he is present with them, he was with
St. Paul in the dungeon, he was with the 3. young men in the firie-furnace,
there were 3. put in, and there was a fourth which was Christ, the son of God,
he goes with the martyrs to the prison, to the stake, he is with them till he
has brought them to heaven, he is present with them when they suffer.

Here I must (before I come to make use of it) distinguish between the crosses,
Differences between sufferings of Christ and ordinary crosses.
and sufferings of Christ, and of ordinary sufferings as men. Something in this
vale of misery we suffer as creatures; as being subject to mutability and
change, because this is a world of changes. In this sublunary world 1.
Sufferings as creatures,
there is nothing but changes, thus we suffer as creatures, all creatures are
subject to vanity, and complain, and groan under it. Somewhat we suffer as men,
it is the common condition of men, this nature of ours since 2. As men
the fall is subject to sicknesses, to crosses, and pain, and casualties, every
day brings new crosses with it, this we suffer as men.

Now the sufferings of Christians as religious holy men, those are here 3. As
holy men.
meant, those are the sufferings of Christ. Yet notwithstanding the sufferings
as men (by the Spirit of God) helps our conformity to Christ, by them the flesh
is purged, and the Spirit strengthened, and weaning from the world is wrought,
and a desire to heaven.

By the daily crosses we suffer as men, not for Religion, we are much bettered:
and those in some sort may be called the sufferings of Christ: because by them
we are conformed to Christ more in holiness, we grow more out of love with the
World, and more heavenly minded. This distinction is necessary to know which
are best, the sufferings of Christians as good men.

It is a point I say of wondrous comfort, that we should be conformable Use
encouragement to suffer for Christ.
in our sufferings with our Head Christ Jesus, our Glorified head in heaven, is
it not a wondrous comfort? Nay is it not a glory? It is a wondrous glory that
God will set us apart to do any thing, that God will take any thing of us, much
more that he will single us out to be Champions in his quarrel, and more, that
he will triumph in us that the comfort shall abound.

To give an instance; if a Monarch should redeem a slave, a Traitor from
Prison, and take him to fight in the Quarrel of his own son, to be his
Champion, were it not an honor? so the very sufferings for Christ are an
encouragement; the disgraces, and whatsoever they are that we suffer in a good
cause, they are ensigns of honor, they are badges of honor of Christian
knighthood. If a Golden Fleece, or a Garter, or such things be accounted so
highly of and glorified in, because they are favors, etc. much more should the
sufferings for Christ be glorified in as ensigns of the love God, and of our
Christian profession; when we fight under Christ's Banner, we are like to
Christ, we are conformable to him, he went before, and we follow his steps; and
if we suffer with him, we shall be Glorified with him.

Therefore be not discouraged, that which we think to be matter of
discouragement, it should be our Crown, it is our Crown to suffer reproach in a
good cause. It is a sign God favors us, when he takes our credit, our goods,
or our life to honor himself by. Is it not an honor to us? does he take any
thing from us but he gives us better? he takes our goods, but he gives us
himself: he takes our liberty, but he gives us enlargement of conscience: he
takes our life, but he gives us heaven: if he take any thing from us, for to
seal his truth, and stand out in his quarrel as Christ says, he gives an
hundred fold in this World, that is a gracious spirit of contentment and
comfort.

We have God himself: has not he more that has the spring, then he that has
twenty Cisterns? Those that have riches, and place, and friends, they have
Cisterns, but he that suffers for God, and for Christ, he has Christ, he has
God, he has the spring to go to, if all be taken from him, he has God the
spring to go to: if all particular Beams, he has the Sun. It is durable,
wondrous comfort to suffer for Christ's sake.

Therefore let it encourage us in a good course, notwithstanding all the
opposition we meet with in the World, let us here learn what is our duty, let
the malicious world judge, or say, or do what they will, if God be on our side,
who can be against us? And if we suffer any thing for Christ, he suffers with
us, and in us, and he will triumph in us over all these sufferings at last.

I will add no more, to set an edge upon that I have said then this, they are
the sufferings of Christ, we should be many ways encouraged to suffer for him.
For did not he suffer for us that, which if all the creatures in heaven and
earth had suffered, they would have sunk under it, the wrath of God? And what
good have we by his sufferings? are we not freed from Hell and Damnation, and
have we not Title to Heaven? has he suffered in his person so much for us, and
shall not we be content to suffer for him, and his mystical body, that in his
own body suffered so much for us?

Again, when we suffer in his quarrel, we suffer not only for him that suffered
for us, but we suffer for him that sits at the right hand of God, that is
glorious in heaven, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Our sufferings are
sufferings for him that has done so much for us, and for him that is so able
now to overruled all, to crush our enemies, for him that is so able now to
minister comfort by his Spirit. This is a notable encouragement, that they are
the sufferings of Christ, that is so glorious as he is, and that will reward
every suffering, and every disgrace; we shall be paid well for every suffering,
we shall lose nothing.

And will not this encourage us likewise to suffer for Christ's sake, because he
will be with us in all our sufferings, he will not leave us alone, it is his
cause, and he will stand by his own cause, he will maintain his own quarrel, he
will cause comfort to increase. Is it not an encouragement to defend a Princes
quarrel in his own sight when he stands by to abet us? it would encourage a
dull mettle. When we suffer for Christ's cause, we have Christ to defend us, he
is with us in all our sufferings to bear us up, he puts his shoulder under by
his holy Spirit to support us.

We cannot live long in this world, we owe God a death, we owe nature a death,
the sentence of death is past upon us, we cannot enjoy the comfort of this
World long: and for favor and applause of the World, we must leave it, and it
will leave us, we know not how soon: and this meditation should enforce us to
be willing, however it go with us for any thing here, for life, or goods, or
friends, or credit and reputation, or whatsoever, to be willing to seal the
cause of Christ with that which is dearest to us, If we suffer with him, we
shall be glorified with him.

The very sufferings of Christ are better then the most glorious day of the
greatest Monarch in the world that is not a Christian, it is better to suffer
with Christ, then to joy with the world. The very abasement of St. Paul was
better then the triumph of Nero. Let Moses be judge, he judged it the best end
of the balance; the very sufferings and reproach of Christ, and of Religion,
is better then the best thing in the world: the worst thing in Christianity, is
better then the best thing out of Christ. The best thing out of Christ, is the
honor of a King, the honor of a Prince, to be a Kings Son, etc. but the
reproach of Christ for a good cause is better then the best thing in the world.
I say, let Moses be judge, if we will not believe it our selves till we feel
it: the worst day of a Christian is better then the best day of a Carnal man:
for he has the presence of Gods Spirit to support him in some measure.

Therefore let us not be afraid before hand, fear nothing (says the Apostle)
that thou shall suffer. And with Moses let us not be ashamed of the rebuke of
Christ, but Let us go out of the Camp with Christ learning our reproach. And
because we know not what God may call us to, let us entertain presently a
resolution to endure whatsoever in this world, God calls us to: to pass
through thick and thin, to pass through all kind of ways to the hope of our
Glorious calling, if by any way, by any means says St. Paul I may attain the
resurrection of the dead; If by any means I may come to heaven, by fair death,
or by violent death, he scorned reproach, if by any means he might be happy.

And for others, it is a wondrous quailing to the spirits of men that offer
Christ persecuted by wicked men.
any wrong, if it be but a disgrace; a scoff is a persecution to a Christian
for a good cause: when wicked men oppose a Christian in a good cause and
course, let us learn what they do, they kick against the pricks. Do they know
what they do? when they reproach Christians, it is the reproach of Christ. What
was Ishmaels scorning? a persecution; Christ is scorned in his members, will he
endure this at their hands? When good causes are opposed, Christ is opposed,
and Christ is scoffed. This does enable our suffering, being an abasing of it
self, that Christ accounts it done to him.

Base men of the world, they think when they scoff at goodness, and wrong the
Image of God in his Children, they think they deride and despise a company of
weak creatures, that they scoff at silly persons meaner then themselves; but
they are deceived, they scoff Christ in them, and he takes it so, Saul, Saul
why persecutest thou me? The foot is trod on on the earth, and the head speaks
from heaven. It is the reproach of Christ; and it will be laid to thy charge at
the day of judgment that thou have scoffed, and persecuted, and reproached
Christ in his members: it will be a heavy indictment. Men should not regard,
what they conceive of things: but what he that must be their judge will
conceive of things ere long, and he interprets it as done to his own person. It
is true both of good and ill, whatsoever good we do to a Christian as a
Christian, to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, Christ takes it as done to
himself, Matthew. 25. In as much as you have done it to these, you have done it
to me.

It should animate us to do good offices to those that are Christ's, what
Encouragement to do good to Christians.
we do to them, we do to Christ. Let us be willing to refresh the bowels of
Christ in his members, at home, or abroad as occasion serves, to maintain the
quarrel of Christ as much as we can, to relieve Christ, he comes to us in the
poor and asks relief, he that shed his blood for us, he that dyed for us, he
that has given us all asks a little pittance for himself; that we for his sake
would be so good to him in his members, as to do thus and thus: that for
Jonathans sake we would regard poor lame Mephibosheth his son. Christ though
he be gone, he has some Mephibosheths, some poor weak members, and what
offices we do them, he accounts done to himself, it runs on his score, he will
be accountable for every good word we speak in his cause, for every defense,
for every act of bounty. It is a point of large meditation to consider, that
the Crosses and Afflictions of Christians they are the sufferings of Christ.

Do but consider the spirit of God intended in this phrase, to dignifie all
disgraces and indignities that are put upon us in a good cause and quarrel;
could he have said more in few words? he calls them not disgraces, or losses;
or death, but he puts such a comfortable title upon them that might make us in
love with suffering any thing, and set us on fire to endure any thing in a good
cause, they are the sufferings of Christ.

As the sufferings of Christ abound, so our consolations etc. The third general
point is, That our consolations are proportionable to our sufferings. Our
consolations abound. We suffer in this World, that is hard. I, but they are the
sufferings of Christ, there is sweetness. And then another degree is, our
consolations abound as our sufferings abound. Consolation, is (as I showed
before in the unfolding of the word) an inward support Consolation what.
of the soul against trouble felt or feared: and it must be stronger then the
grievance, or else the action of comfort will not follow. There is a
disproportion between the agent, and the patient, in all prevailing actions, or
else there is no prevailing: if the comfort be not above the malady it is no
comfort: And therefore no comforts, but divine comforts will stand at length,
because in all other comforts sedet medecinum morbo, the malady is above the
remedy: they may make glorious pretenses as the Philosophers do, Plutarch and
Seneca, and the rest: but they are as Apothecaries boxes they have goodly
titles, but there is nothing within.

Alas! when there is trouble in the conscience awakned with the sight of sin,
and the displeasure of God, what can all those precepts compose and frame the
soul in petty troubles? They have their place: and surely the neglect of them
many times is that, that makes the cross heavier: but alas in divine troubles,
in terror of conscience, it must be divine comfort, it must be of like nature,
or else the effect of comfort will never follow; and those be the comforts that
he means here. As our troubles and afflictions abound, so our consolations,
our divine supports they abound: the point is this, that Our comforts are
proportionable to our sufferings.


What did I say proportionable? it is above all proportion of suffering. Doctr.
Comfort proportionable to sufferings.
As it is said Romans 8. the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory
that shall be revealed. And indeed in this life, the consolations abound as the
sufferings abound. For God keeps not all for the life to come, he gives us a
taste, a grape of Canaan, before we come to Canaan; as the Israelites they sent
for grapes to taste the goodness of the land, and they had them brought to
them by the spies, by which they might guess of the fruitfulness, and
sweetness of the land it self: so the taste and relish that Gods Children have
of that fullness which is reserved in another world, it is answerable, and
proportionable to their sufferings, and in the proportion, the exceeding part
is of comfort: there is an exceeding if not for the present, yet afterward.
The Ark did rise together with the water, and comforts rise together with
matter of suffering.

But what is the reason of the proportion, why the greatest comforts follow the
greatest sufferings, what is the ground of it?

They are many, to name some. First of all this is a ground, that the Reas. 1*
Troubles enlarge the capacity of the soul.
more capable the soul is of comfort, the more comfort it receives; but great
troubles bring a capacity, and capablenesse of soul, fitting it to receive
comfort. How is that? Troubles do humble the soul, and humility is a grace, and
the vessel of all grace, and of comfort too: a low, and meek spirit Because
they humble it.
is a deep spirit, and the lower, and deeper, and the larger the spirit is, the
more capable it is to contain heavenly comfort. We know the more empty a man is
of himself, the more fit he is for comfort: but crosses and afflictions empty
us of our selves, to see that there is nothing in us, that what we are we must
be out of our selves; and the less we are in our selves, the more we are in
God. And that is the reason that St. Aust. says, that nothing is more strong
then a humble empty spirit: because it makes the creature to go out of it self
to him that is strength it self, and comfort it self; Now that which makes us
go out of our selves to strength, that is strong; but this does crosses and
afflictions: that is the main reason why the proportion holds.

Again, another reason is this, troubles, and afflictions and crosses do
exercise 2. They exercise grace.
graces, and the more grace is exercised, the more comfort is derived: for
comfort follows Graces, the comforts of the spirit follow the graces of the
spirit, as the heat follows the fire, or as the shadow follows the body. Now
the more grace, the more comfort, the more affliction the more exercise of
Grace, the more exercise of Grace, the more Grace it self. As we see the deeper
the root the higher the tree: after the sharpest winter, usually there is the
sweetest spring, and the fruitfullest summer, and Autumn: because in the
sharpest winter the ground is mellowed most, and the seed sinks the deepest;
and the ground is inwardly warmed, the soil, the earth is prepared for it, and
thereupon when the outward heat comes to draw it forth, it comes to be
abundantly fruitful. We see it in nature, that, that we call Antiperistasis,
the environing if one contrary with another increases the contrary. Whatsoever
is good is increased, being environed by the contrary ill, because they are put
to the conflict.

So it is with the soul, it is the showers of affliction that bring the sweet
flowers of comfort after: the soul is prepared, and manured for them, the soul
is exercised and enlarged, and fitted for them every way. In the multitude of
my sorrows thy comforts refreshed my soul, says David Psalm. 94. 19 answerable
to our discomforts, God comforts refresh our souls.

And God is so wise, that before we enter to suffer any great matter, he Reas.
3. From Gods wisdom.
will give us more Grace answerable to the greatness of our suffering, and
after great suffering he will give great comfort. God is so infinitely loving
and wise, that he will not call us to suffer great troubles till he give us
some grace answerable. As a Captain will not set a fresh water Soldier in a
sharp brunt, but some experienced man. Whatsoever wisdom is in man, it is but a
drop in regard of that infinite wisdom that is in God: he proportions our
strength before we suffer, and in suffering he does increase it, and after
suffering, then comfort comes following amain; indeed especially after a little
while waiting: for Gods time is the best time. And we shall have most
experience of the presence of Christ, and his holy spirit Reas. 4. We have a
nearer presence of God.
at such times. The nearer to the spring of comfort the more comfort, but in
the deepest, and sharpest afflictions, we are nearer to God, therefore the more
comfort.

How is this proved? The more we are stripped of outward comforts, the more
near we are to God, who is styled the God that comfort the abject, and the
nearer to God, the nearer to comfort it self: for all comfort springs from him,
and when outward means fail that should convey comfort to us, then he conveys
it immediately by himself. I confess he is present at all times, but when the
comfort is conveyed by the creature, by man, it is not so sweet as when God
joins with the soul immediately, as in great crosses he does. Such occasion*
and such extremity may be, that none can comfort a man but God, by his spirit.
When Christ comes to the soul immediately what abundance of comfort is there
then? As a King that does not send a messenger, but comes immediately in his
ownperson to visit one in misery. what a grace is it? So what a grace is is to
a soul afflicted and deserted to ha ve Christ immediately present? As the
Martyrs found when no other creature could comfort them, there was a fire
within, above all the outward fire, and torment, which abated, and allayed the
torments that were without: the divinest comforts are kept for the harshest and
the worst times, we shall have the presence of Christ in the absence of all
other creatures, and he will minister comfort. They may keep outward comforts
from us, they can never keep the God of comfort from us: and so long as a
Christian soul and God can close together it cannot want comfort.

Another reason why comforts increase because we pray most then: Reas. 5. Then
we pray most.
when we pray most, we are most happy; but in our greatest sufferings we pray
most, and most ardently: therefore then we feel most comfort. When God and a
christian soul can talk together, and have communion: though he cannot speak
to God with his tongue, yet he can sigh and groan to God, he can pour forth his
spirit to God, and as long as we can pray we can never be miserable, as long as
the heart can ease it self into the bosom of God, there will always be a return
of a sweet answer. Of all the exercises of Religion, that exercise, that has
most immediate communion with God is prayer; then we speak familiarly to God in
his own language and words, and call upon him by his own promises, we allege
those to him, and this cannot be, we cannot speak, and confer and converse with
the God of Comfort without a great deal, without a world of comfort: great
crosses drive us to this, and therefore then we have great comfort.

What use may we make of this? first for our selves, we would not fear nor
faint neither faint in troubles, nor fear troubles: faint not in them, we shall
have comfort proportionable, and let us not fear troubles before they come, or
any measure of them, proportionable to the measure of our afflictions shall be
our comfort. Let us not fear any thing we shall suffer in this world, in a good
cause; for as we suffer so we shall receive from God; we fear our own good. For
it is better to have the comfort we shall have in suffering any thing for a
good cause, then to be exempted from the suffering and to want the comfort;
there is no proportion, the choice is much better, to have comfort with
grievance, then to want the comfort together with the grievance. St. Paul would
not have chosen immunity from suffering, he would not have been exempted from
the cross to have wanted his comfort.

For the disproportion is wide, and great, the comforts are inward and sweet,
the crosses (for the most part) are outward. What are all the croses,
Disproportions of sufferings and comfort.
and sufferings in this world? (set aside an afflicted conscience) it is but
brushing of the garment (as it were) some outward thing in the outward man, but
the comforts are inward and deep.

But what if there be inward grievances too? Then we have deeper comforts then
they: the cross is never so deep but the comfort is deeper, Oh the depth of
the wisdom and love of God! there is the part and dimension of Gods love, the
depth of it. There is a depth in crosses. Out of the deep have I cried to thee.
But there is a deeper depth of comfort, there is a hand under to fetch us up at
the lowest, Thy right hand is upon me, and thy left hand is under me says the
Church to God: there is comfort lower, and deeper then the greivance, though it
be inward, spiritual greivance. Nay, of all grievances, (I know what I speak a
little of mine own experience, and it is true in the experience of all
Ministers, and Christians) that there is none that have more help then they
that are exercised with spiritual temptations of conscience, they are forced
to search for deep comforts, shallow comforts will not serve their turn, and
when they have them, they keep them, and make much of them, they have more
retired and deep thoughts of Christ, and of comforts then other people, who as
they are strangers to their crosses, so they are strangers to their comfort.
There is no degree of proportion between the crosses and the comforts, the
crosses are momentary, the comforts are growing, the crosses make us not aw^it
the worse, and the comforts make us better. Fear nothing therefore, but go on
in the ways of religion, and never be discouraged to suffer in a good cause
for fear of men, to think, oh this will come, and that will come. No, no, if
the sufferings grow, the comforts shall grow with it, be of good comfort.

Again, Another use may be, that we judge aright of those that are disgraced in
the world, if their cause be good, that we should not have distasteful Use 2.
To judge aright of those that are afflicted.
conceits of them (as indeed suffering breeds distaste naturally in men, they
love men in a flourishing estate, and distaste them suffering, but that is
corruption of men, but) God is the nearest to them then, nearer then ever he
was, and their comforts increase with their crosses. In the conunction between
the Sun and the Moon; (as by expaerience we see) in the space between the old
and new Moon, there is a time of conjunction, we think the Moon to be lost in
that time, because we see her not: but the Simile.
Moon is more enlightened then, then ever she was in her self, but here is the
reason, the light part of the Moon is turned to the Sun-ward, to heavenward,
and the dark part is turned toward the earth: So a Christian in crosses, and
abasement, seems to be a dark creature, but he is more enlightened then, then
ever before; why? his light part is to Godward, it is not seen of the world,
the world sees his crosses, but they do not see his comforts, and as the Moon
is nearer the Sun at that time then at other times: so the soul has to deal
with God in afflictions, it is nearer to God, and his dark side is toward the
world. As the World sees the Moons Eclipse, so the world sees our darkness,
but not our inward comforts, therefore we should judge aright of others in this
case.

Another use shall be of thankfulness to God, that besides the comforts of heaven
(which are not to be spoken of, and which we shall not know till we Use 3.
Thankfulness
come to feel them) besides the great comfort we have to be free from Hell,
that we have a measure of comfort here in this world, in our pilgrimage, and
absence from Heaven, such a measure of comfort, as may carry us with comfort
along. We ought to be thankful to God, not only for redemption, and
glorification, but that God comforts us in our pilgrimage, that he mingles
crosses with comforts, nay, that in this world our comforts are more then our
crosses.

Some may object, I, but my crosses are more then my comforts.

Are they so? do thou suffer in a good cause or no? if thou do, thy Object.
comforts are more then thy crosses, if there be not a fault in thee. Answ.


What shall I do therefore?

First, Take this direction in suffering, pull out the sting of sin, though we
suffer in never so good a cause, for in one suffering God aims at diverse What
hinders comfort in afflictions.
things. God in thy suffering aims at thy correction as well as at the exercise
of thy grace, and at thy comfort; therefore, let affliction have the correcting
and amending part first, and then the comforting part will ollow. Though the
cause be good, yet Gods Children often times want comfort till afterward. Why?
They have not renewed their repentance, and cleansed their souls, they have not
pulled out the sting, when they have repented of their personal sins that lie
upon them, and gone back to the sins of their youth, and then renewed their
Covenant with God, and their purposes for the time to come, then comes comfort
and not before; Therefore it is no disparagement to a good cause, that
sometimes Christians find not present comfort, they have personal sins that
hang on them, that are not repented of, which God intends to amend them of, as
well as to honor them by suffering in his cause.

Again, if Gods Children complain, that their sufferings are above their
strength, and above measure, and desire God to weigh their afflictions, they
are so great, as Job says; It is the speech of sense, and not of faith, it is
the speech of the fit, and not of the state (there is a fit and a state) it is
no matter what they say in their fit, then the flesh and sense speak, and not
grace and faith at that time; If they judge by sense, then they judge so, but
we know that reason corrects the errors of sense, and faith corrects the
errors of reason; but what do they say in their constant state? their comforts
are answerable to their crosses, either in suffering or afterward, though not
always at the same time. So much for that.

But this will be abused by carnal persons, we speak of abundance of comfort,
but it is to those that have interest in it: the book of God speaks No comfort
to wicked men.
no comfort to persons that live in sin, and will do so: we speak comfort to
those that are brokenhearted for their sins, that are content to endure the
reproach of religion in despite of the world, that will bear the cross of
Christ: For the other, as their jollity increases in the world, so their
crosses and troubles shall increase. As it is said Revel. 18. 17. of mystical
Babylon the Church of Rome, that has flourished in the world a great while,
and sat as a Queen and blessed her self, As she gloried herself, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. So it is true, of every
wicked man, that is in an evil course, and will be, and as the Scripture
phrase is, blesses himself in an evil course, they shall be sure of the curse
of God, and not of comfort: for in what proportion they have delighted
themselves in this world in sin, in that proportion they shall have torment of
conscience (if conscience be awaked) in this world, and in that proportion,
they shall have torment in the world to come: As sin is growing, so rods are
growing for them; wicked men, says St. Paul, they grow worse and worse, the
more they sin, the more they may, they sink in rebellion, and the more they
sink in rebellion, the more they sink in the state of damnation, they fill up
the measure of their sins, and treasure up the wrath of God against the day of
wrath. Whosoever thou art that live in a sinful course, and wilt do so in
spite of Gods Ordinance, in spite of the motions of the spirit, that have the
good motions of the spirit knocking at thy soul, and yet wilt rather refuse
comfort then take comfort together with direction: go on still in this thy
wicked course, but remember as thy comforts increase in this world, so thy
torment is increasing. And here is the disproportion between Gods children and
others, they have their sufferings first, and their comfort afterward, but
others have their pleasure first, and their torment after, theirs are for a
time, but others for ever. Thus we see what we may comfortably observe from
this, that comforts increase as crosses increase.

A Word of the fourth and last point.

How comes this to pass, that as our afflictions abound, so our consolations
abound? Doct. 4. Consolation (...) bounds by Christ.


They abound by Chrst, says the Apostle, God the Father, he is the God of
comfort. the Holy Ghost is the Comforter: but how comes this to pass, that we
that are not the Objects of comfort, but of confusion, should have God the
Father to be the God of comfort, and the Holy Ghost to be our comforter? Oh it
is that Jesus Christ the great peacemaker has satisfied God, and procured the
Holy Ghost: for the Holy Ghost is procured by the satisfaction and death of
Christ, and he was sent after the resurrection and ascension of Christ.
Therefore Christ is called, the consolation of Israel, and those that waited
for Christ, waited for the consolation of Israel. All comfort is hid in Christ,
he is the storehouse of comfort, we have it through him, and by him, and in
him: For that God is the Father of comfort, it is because Christ is our
Mediator and Intercessour in Heaven, that the Holy Ghost is the comforter, it
is because Christ sent him; and the comforts of the Holy Ghost are fetched from
Christ, from the death of Christ, or the ascension of Christ, from some
argument from Christ. Whatsoever comfort the soul, the Holy Ghost does it
by fetching some argument from Christ, from his satisfaction, from his worth,
from his intercession in Heaven, something in Christ it is: So Christ by his
Spirit does comfort, and the reasons fetched by the Spirit are from Christ,
therefore it is by Christ.

What is the reason that a Christian soul does not fear God, as a consuming
fire, but can look upon him with comfort?? It is because God has received
satisfaction by Christ. What is the reason that a Christian soul fears not
Hell, but thinks of it with comfort? Christ has conquered Hell, and Satan.
What is the reason that a Christian fears not death? Christ by death has
overcome death, and him that had the power of death, the Devil: Christ is mine
says the Christian soul, therefore I do not fear it, but think of it with
comfort, because a Christian is more then a Conqueror over all these. What is
the reason that a Christian is not afraid of his corruptions and sins? He knows
that God for Christ's sake will pardon them, and that the remainder of his
corruptions will work to his humiliation, and to his good, All shall work for
the best to them that love God. What is the reason that there is not any thing
in the world but it is comfortable to a Christian? When he thinks of God, he
thinks of him as a Father of comfort, when he thinks of the Holy Ghost, he
thinks of him as a spirit of comfort; when he thinks of Angels, he thinks of
them as his attendants; when he thinks of Heaven, he thinks of it as of his
inheritance; he thinks of Saints as a communion whereof he is partaker: whence
is all this? By Christ who has made God our Father, the Holy Ghost our
Comforter, who has made Angels ours, Saints ours, heaven ours, earth ours,
Devils ours, death ours, all ours in issue.

For God being turned in love to us, all is turned, our crosses are no curses
now, but comforts, and the bitterest crosses yield the sweetst comforts. All
this is by Christ, that has turned the course of things, and hid blessings in
the greatest crosses that ever were. And this he did in himself, before he does
it in us: for did not his greatest crosses tend to his greatest glory? who ever
in the world was abased as our head Christ Jesus was? that made him cry: My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? All the Creatures in the world would
have sunk under the sufferings that Christ endured, what abasement to the
abasement of Christ? and what glory to the glory of Christ? Phil 2. He
humbled himself to the death of the cross, wherefore God gave him a name above
all names, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. Now as it was in our
head, his greatest abasement ushered in his greatest glory; so it shall be in
us, our greatest crosses are before our greatest comforts, he is our President,
he is the exemplarie cause as well as the efficient working cause, it is by
Christ all this, that consolations abound in us, it was performed first in him,
and shall be by him, by his Spirit to the end of the world.

The use that we are to make of this, is, that in all our sufferings, before
Use. To study Christ.
we come to Heaven, we should look to Christ, he has turned all things: let us
study Christ, and fetch comfort from him: our flesh was abased in him, our
flesh is glorified in him now in Heaven, in his person. And so it must be in
our own persons, our flesh must be abased, and then as he is glorious in
Heaven, so shall we be in our selves: That very Spirit that raised and advanced
him at the lowest, that very spirit (there being but one spirit in the head and
members) in our greatest abasement shall vouchsafe us the greatest advancement,
that we can look for, to sit at the right hand of God, to reign with Christ:
for if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him.

And hence you may have a reason likewise, why Christians have no more comfort;
they do not study Christ enough, they consider not Why Christians are no more
comfortable.
Christ, and the neernesse wherein Christ is to them. and they to Christ, that
both make one Christ, they do not consider how Christ has sweetened all, he
has turned God, and turned all to us: he has made God our Father, and in him
all things favorable unto us,: so that now the fire is our friend, the Stone,
and the Gout, and all diseases, disgrace and temptation, all are at peace and
league with us: all is turned in the use and issue to good, to the help and
comfort of Gods Children: All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ
is Gods, 2 Cor. 3. ult. There is not the worst thing but it is at peace with
us: because the malignant power it has (in order to damnation) is taken away:
now it does not hurt us, but there is a sovereign curing power to turn it to
good.

I confess Gods Children are discomforted, but then they wrong their
principles, they wrong their grounds, their religion, their Savior, they wrong
all the comforts they have interest in, because they do not improve them, when
occasion serves, As Job is checked, Have thou forgot the consolations of the
Almighty? or why do thou forget them? so if we have consolations Job 15. 11.
and forget them, and dote, and pore upon our grievance, it is just with God to
leave us comfortless, not that we want any comfort, but we flatter our
grievance and forget our comfort. Let us change our object, and when we have
looked upon our grievance, and been humbled in the sight of our sins, let us
look upon the promises, let us look upon Christ in glory, and see our selves in
Heaven triumphing with him.

What can terrify a Soul? not Death it self, when it sees it self in Christ
Triumphing, Faith sees me as well Triumphing in Heaven and sitting at the Right
Hand of God, as it does Christ; for it knows I am a Member of Christ, and
whatsoever is between me and that happiness, that is reserved for me in Heaven,
I shall triumph over it.

Christ triumphed in his own person, over death, Hell, sin, the Grave, the
Devil, and she will triumph in me his mystical body, what he has done in
himself, he will do in me. This faith will overcome the world; and the Devil,
and Hell, and all that is between us and Heaven. A Christian that sees himself
sitting at the right hand of God with Christ, triumphing with him, he is
discouraged at nothing: for faith that makes things to come present, it sees
him conquering already.

Let us be exhorted to joy, Rejoice, and again I say rejoice, we have reason to
do so, if we look to our grounds; but when we yield to Satan, and our own
flesh, we robb God of his glory and our selves of comfort, but we may thank our
selves for it. But I come to the sixth verse, wherein the Apostle inlargeth
himself, by showing the end of his sufferings in regard of them, by setting
down both parts, both affliction and comfort.

VERSE. VI. Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation, and salvation,
or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.
IT is much in every thing, how the mind is prepared to receive what is spoken:
the Apostle therefore to make way for himself in their hearts, he removes
therefore scandal from his sufferings, and he shows that it was so far, that
they should take offense at it, that they ought to do as he did, to bless God
for it: for as the sufferings of Christ abounded in him, so his comfort
abounded And because they should think themselves no way hurt by his
sufferings, and base usage in the world, he tells them in the verse, that all
was for their good: no man should be offended at his own good: they had no
reason to take scandal at that which was for their good, but says he, if you
think basely of me for my sufferings, you think basely of your own comfort: for
my sufferings are for your good, and my comforts are for your good; whether I
suffer or be comforted, it is or you.

The cross is a distasteful thing to us, and likewise the cross in others is
a distastefull thing, not only distasteful, and bitter to us but shameful.
St. Paul knowing this, because he would (as I said) work himself into their
good conceit, that he might prevail with them for their good says he, you
ought not to think a whit the worse of me for this, for all is for you. So you
see the scope of the words, Whether we be afflicted, it is for your etc.

But first he speaks of affliction alone, and then of comfort alone. If we be
afflicted, it is for your good, and if we be comforted it is for your good. His
reason is; because sometimes afflictions appear without comfort: therefore he
says not, If we be comforted only it is for your good, but if we be afflicted
it is for your good. Sometimes comfort is before our afflictions, that we may
endure it the better God cheares us to it; Sometimes God sheds his Spirit in
affliction, that there is abundance of comfort in it: but for the most part it
comes after, after we have waited: but in it there is always such a measure of
comfort, that supports us that we sink not: yet the special degree of comfort
usually comes after; therefore he speaks of affliction in the first place. If I
be afflicted it is for you, etc.


The Point is easy, that The afflictions of the Saints are for the good of
others.


The afflictions of Gods Church are Gods peoples, especially the afflictions
Doct. The afflictions of the Saints for the good of others.
of Pastors, and Leaders of Gods Army, God singles out some to suffer for the
good of others; the good especially of consolation, and salvation, for these
two goods.

How can this be that the afflictions of Gods people, are for the consolation
and salvation of others?

I answer, many ways, as we shall see afterward more particularly: but only
now to make way. Afflictions are for the good and comfort of others, because we
have their example in suffering, to train us up how to suffer: Example is a
forcible kind of teaching; therefore (says the Apostle) our afflictions are
for you, to lead, and teach you the way how to suffer. Words are not enough,
especially in matter of suffering, there must be some example; therefore Christ
from Heaven came, not only to redeem us, but to teach us; not only by words
but by example, how to do, and suffer willingly, and cheerfully, and stoutly
in obedience to God as he did.

Again, Afflictions do good to others by ministering occasion to them, to
search deeper into the cause: when they they see the people of God are so used,
they take occasion hereby to enquire what is the cause, and so take occasion to
be instructed deeply in matters of Religion: for man's nature is inquisitive,
and grace takes the hint of any thing: What is the matter that such and such
endure such things? Hereupon I say they come to be better grounded in the
cause, and little occasions often times are the beginnings of great matters: by
reason that the spirit as well as wit is of a working nature, and will draw one
thing from another. We see what a great Tree rises of a little seed, how a
little thing upon report works conversion* Naaman the Assyrian had a Servant,
and she told him that there was a Prophet in Jurie that was a famous man, that
did great matters, and if he would go to him, he should be cured of his
leprosy; that little occasion being ministered Naaman comes to the Prophet, and
he was cured of a double leprosy, both of soul and body, and went home a good
man; so by way of ministering occasion of inquisition the sufferings of others
do good.

And then seeing the constant and resolute spirits of those that suffer it,
does them good and comforts them: for, first it makes them conceive we of the
cause, certainly these men that suffer constantly, and chearefully, it is a
good cause that they suffer for, when they see the cause is such a resolution
and courage in the sufferers. And it makes them in love with, and begin to
think well of the persons, when they can deny themselves, surely these men care
not for the pleasures and vanities of the world, that can endure to suffer
these. So Justin Martyr says when he saw Christians suffer, he thought they
were men that cared not for pleasures; for if they had, they would not suffer
these things.

Besides, They can gather from the presence of Gods spirit, imboldening 4. They
gather assurance of the same assistance.
the sufferers, what they may hope for themselves if they should suffer. They
may reason thus; Is God by his spirit so full and so strong in these that are
flesh and blood as we are? is he so strong in women, in young men, in aged men,
that neither their years, nor their sex, nor their tenderness, can any kind of
way hinder them from these kind of abasements, and sharp sufferings? surely the
same spirit of God will be as strong in me, if I stand out in the same cause,
and carry my self as they do; and there is good reason, for God is the same
God, the spirit is the same spirit, the cause is the same cause, therefore it
is no false reasoning: I may upon a good presumption hope for the presence, and
assistance of the Spirit of God to enable and strengthen me as he did them; for
the same Spirit of Godwill be strong in all.

And this is partly likewise in the intent of them that suffer: There is a 5.
It is Gods intent, and their intent that suffer
double intent; it is the intent of God to single them out to suffer for the
good of others; and it is their intent to suffer that others may have good.
This is one reason, why they are willing rather to suffer shame, or bodily
punishment, then they will hinder others of the good they may take by their
suffering. So it is Gods end, and their end. It is for your consolation, in
Gods intent, and in my intent and purpose, and in the event it self: Thus you
see how afflictions suffered in good cause, help for the consolation and
salvation even of others: the example of those that suffer flow into the mind,
and insinuate into the judgment and affection of the beholders many ways.

And this the Factors of Antichrist know very well: for if ever there be any
persecution again, we shall hardly have fire and fagor, that they may not give
example; they will come to Gunpowder plots and Massacres, and such violent
courses to sweep away all. They know if it come to matter of example once, the
grace of God in his children, and the presence of his Spirit, that shall
appear to others, it is of a wondrous working force, they are wise enough to
know that, the Devil teaches them that wit, when he has been put by all his
other shifts.

If it be so that the sufferings of Gods Children are for the good of others,
then to make some use of it.

Let us not take any offense at the cause of religion for suffering: we ought
not to have an ill conceit of a cause for suffering, but rather think Use 1.
the better of it. I speak it is in this regard, we have many that will honor
the Martyrs that are dead, that are recorded in the book, but if any suffer in
the present view, before their eyes, they are disgraceful to them. This should
not be. For first of all, if the cause be good, the end of good men (by the
help of the spirit of God) is for thy good. Was it not a cruel thing in Saul
to strike at David when he played on his Harp, when he sought his good and
easement? To kill a Nightingale in singing, it is a barbarous thing. Gods
Children by all that they suffer intend the good of others: now to hurt and and
malign them in doing good, to persecute them that endure ill for our good, or
that labor and do any thing for our good, it is a barbarous savage thing: All
is for the Elect, I suffer not for the Elects sake, says St. Paul in 2. Tim.
so my sufferings are for you. We may know we are elected of God, if we take
good by the sufferings of others, if we take no scandal, and offense, and do
not add affliction to the afflicted, for all is in Gods intent, and in their
intent for our good.

For instance (a little to enlighten the point, because it is not usually stood
on, and it is a notion that may help our conceits of the excellent estate of
Gods Children) Reprobation (to go as high as we may) it is for their good, to
show mercy to them, to set by, and neglect so many, and to single them out. The
creation of the World is for their sakes. Gods providence directs all for their
Good: for why does he suffer wicked men? it is that they may be instruments to
exercise them that are good; it is by reflection, or some way for the cause of
the good, that the wicked are suffered to be upon the earth. The administration
of the world, it is not for the Rebels that are in it, it is for those that are
Gods Children, and he tosseth and tumbleth Empires and Monarchies, the great
men of the world, they think they do great matters, but alas all this is for
the exercise of the Church, this is reductive to the Church, by Gods
providence. All their attempts are for the little flock, for a few that are a
despised company, that he means to save, if we had eyes to see it.

So likewise his Ordinances are to gather this Church, which he has chosen
from all the world to himself; the Ordinances of the Ministry, and of the
Sacraments; the suffering of Ministers, the doing and suffering of Christians,
all is for their good, as we see in this place; I suffer for your consolation
and comfort. Heaven and earth stands for them, the Pillars of Heaven and earth
would be taken asunder, and all would come to a Chaos, an end would be of all,
if the number of them were gathered, that are the blessed people of God, for
whom al things are. The doings and sufferings of Gods people (we do not know
indeed that are Ministers, who belong to God, and who do not) but our intent is
to do good to those that are Gods, and the issue proves so, the rest God has
his end in it to harden them, and bring them to confusion, to take excuse from
them: but the real good of all our pains and suffering is the Elects.

Let us examine, what good we take by Ordinances of God, and by To make use of
examples of (...).
the sufferings of the present Church, and the sufferings of the former Church,
do their examples animate, and quicken, and encourage us to the like courses?
It is a sign we are elected of God, there is no greater sign of a good estate
in grace, then a gracious heart, to draw good out of the examples of others,
and to draw good out of every thing that befalls us, because Gods end in
election, and his manner of providence is to guide all to their good.

Again, we learn another thing likewise, how God overrules in his providence,
the projects of carnal men, of the Devil and his instruments, and Agents and
Factors, God overrules all things, that which in it self is ill, and in the
intendment of the inflicter is ill, yet God turns it to the good of others,
and the good of them that suffer too. Satan intends no such matter, as it is
said Isa. 10. Nebuchadnezzar thinks no such thing: Ashur the rod of my wrath,
he intends no such matter, they intend not the consolation of Gods, when they
wrong the Saints of God, and so exercise their patience and Grace; No, they
intend their hurt, and confusions. It is no matter what they intend, but God at
the first, created light out of darkness, and in his providence does great
matters by small means, in his providence over his Church, he does raise
contraries out of contraries, he turns the wicked proiects of men to contrary
ends, and makes all serviceable to his own end.

In state-policie, he is accounted the wisest man, that can make his enemies
isntrumental to his own purpose, that can make others serve his own turn, to
work his own ends by others, that are his opposites, and he had need of a great
reaching head, that can do so. The great providence of Heaven does thus, God
is the wisest Politician in the world: All other policy is but a beam from
that Sun, he can make isntrumental, and serviceable to him, his very enemies.
And this is the torment of Satan, that God over shoots him in his own bow, he
over-reacheth him in his own policy, where he thinks to do most harm, he
does most good* in those afflictions whereby he thinks to quell the courage of
the Church, God does exceeding good to them, and enlarges the bounds of the
Church this way.

It is an ordinary speech, The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.
The Word of God is the seed of the Church, how then is the blood of the Martyrs
and Sufferers the seed of the Church? Thus, the Word of God is the seed of the
Church, how? As it is in the Bible, in the book? No, as it is published in
preaching, much more as it is published in confession; and much more as it is
published and sealed in Martyrdom, by suffering: the Word of God so laid open,
as not only spoken but confessed, and practiced in life, and not only so, but
sealed by enduring any thing; thus it is the seed, and works strongly.

God overrules all inferiors, though they have contrary motions in their own
intent to his, yet he brings them about to his end. As we see the Heavens have
a contrary motion to the first Heaven, that carries the rest, the primum
mobile, yet they are turned about by another motion, contrary to the bent of
themselves, they go one way and are carried another. As we see in the wheels
of the Clock, one runs one way, Simile.
another, another: all make the Clock strike, all serve the intent of
Clock-maker: so one runns one way, and another, another. Carnal men offer
disgrace and disparagement to Gods people; their intent is to overthrow all, to
disgrace and to trample on the cause of Religion, but God uses contrary
wheels, to make the Clock strike, all turns in the issue to his end. Therefore
though we say in our common speech, that the Devil is the God of this world,
it is the Scripture phrase, and it is so in regard of the wicked that are under
him, yet he is a God under a God, there is but one Monarch of the World, he is
a God that has not power over Swine, further then he is suffered. It is a
point of wondrous comfort, that though we be thus used, yet there is an active
providence, there is one Monarch, one great King that rules all.

It is a ground of patience and contentment in whatsoever we suffer; not Ground
of patience
to look to the next instrument, but look to the overruling cause, that will
turn all in the issue to our good. This Joseph comforted his Brethren with, you
sent me and of an ill mind too, but God turned it to good. It was no thank to
them, yet it was no matter, he comforted them in this, that God turned their
malice to his good, and to their good too, for he was sent as a Steward to
provide for them.

And it is one ground why to think more moderately in regard of anger,
fierceness against wicked men, it is a ground of pitying of them, for alas
poor souls what do they! though they intend it of malice, they are but
instruments and shall be overruled, to do good contrary to their meaning, as
St Paul says here, Whether I be afflicted it is for your consolation and
salvation. The worst intents, and designs of the enemies of Religion, was for
the consolation and salvation of the Corinthians. It is good to think of this
before hand, it is a ground of patience, and not only so, but of comfort, and
joy; which is a degree above patience. God overrules all thus, Therefore we
should quietly cast our selves wholly upon him, willing to do and suffer
whatsoever he will have us, knowing that he will direct all to the good of the
Church, to our comfort and his own glory.

Again a further use may be this to teach us to communicate our estate to
others, because it is for their Good. Good is diffusive, says St. Paul, Use 3.
To communicate our estate to others.
all that I do or suffer, it is for your good) to ioyn comfort, and suffering
together) If I be comforted it is for you, and if I suffer it is for you. It
must be by their taking notice of it, and that is not all that they ought to
take notice, but we ought to let them take notice as much as we can, Come
Children, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34. 11. Come and I
will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul: The righteous shall
compass me about says David. As when a man has some great matter to tell,
there will be a ring of people about him, desirous to hear what he says, so
says David the righteous shall compass me about, when David had sweet matter
of experience, to tell what God had done for him; how he had been with him in
his affliction, and delivered him, the righteous shall compass me about, I will
declare it to others. For Gods children make others case their own, they
comfort them, as they would be comforted of them again.

As they ought to do so, so we should take notice of their troubles and
deliverances, how God sanctifies them to them, these things tend to
edification. There is the same reason to one Saint of God as to all, and God is
the same to all in the like case. Experiments are made much of in other things
in Physic, and judged cases in law, and such like. Tried things in all
professions are good: so tried truths should be valued. Now when a man teaches
another his experiment, it is a judged case, a tried truth. It is not every
truth that will stay the soul in the time of a great temptation, but a truth
proved, a tried truth. Therefore it is good for Parents, and Governors, for
friends, and for all degrees of men, to make it one way to spend their time
fruitfully, to discourse with others of the blessed experiments they have had
of Gods gracious providence, in the passages of their life, Abraham will teach
his Children, I will tell it to him therefore says God. It is a means for God
to reveal many things sweetly to us: when he knows we are of a communicative
spreading disposition: God gains by that means, his glory is spread, our
grace is increased, the good of others is multiplied.

To go on. It is for your consolation and salvation.


Whether we be afflicted, or whether we be comforted, all is for your
consolation and salvation. I will not trouble you here with the diverse
readings of copies, some Greek copies want the word salvation, but the most
that the translations follow, have both consolation and salvation: some have
consolation and salvation in the first, but they repeat it not in the second.
Whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation, but because
the more current have both, therefore we will ioyn both, it is for your
consolation and salvation.

For huper in the Greek it has a double force, it signifies either to merit,
hupon, to procure, and merit salvation, and so we do not understand it, or
huper for your good, a final cause, it includes either a meritorious deserving
cause, or a final cause, Whether I be afflicted, it is for your consolation
and salvation, not by merit and desert; so Christ's suffering was, but to help
it forward, in the execution of it.

I speak this to cut the sinews of a Popish point (as I meet it) which is a
cousening point of their Religion, which indeed is not a point of religion, but
a point of Romish policy, a point of cousenage: as most of their religion is
but a trick for the belly. They have devises forsooth of the Popes treasury,
he, being the Treasurer of the Church, has a treasury; and what The Popes
treasury.
must that be filled with? with the merits of Saints, with the superabundance:
For, they can deserve and procure Heaven for themselves, and more then obey,
there is an overplus of obedience, the superabundance of that is laid in a
treasury; and who should have the benefit of that but the Treasurer of the
Church, the Pope? But how shall the Church come by this abundant satisfaction
and merit? They must buy them by pardons, and they come not to have pardons for
naught, but by purchasing of them, and hence come Popish indulgences: that is
nothing but a dispencing of the satisfaction, and merits of the Saints, which
they did (say they) for the Church; abusing such phrases as these, when they
had more then their own obedience, they did good to others, and others had
benefit by it.

A shameful opinion, bred in the dark night of popery, when the Scriptures
were hid, and when people did lie in ignorance, and it was merely to advantage
their own selves; for indeed the Scripture says that Gods Children did suffer
for the Church: but that was not for satisfaction for the Church, but for the
good of the Church. Only Christ's death was satisfactory; Christ is the only
treasury of the Church, and the satisfaction of Christ, They think they merit
by their sufferings, when they suffer for their merits: And they think they
merit not only for themselves, but for others too, which is a Diabolical
sarcasme. The Devil mocks them that way, he makes them ignorant of themselves.
Alas, that a silly sinful man, should think to do enough for himself, and more
then enough, enough for others! The wise Virgins had but oil enough for
themselves, they had none for others, but these wise Virgins, have more then
for themselves, they have for others too. It is not worth the standing on, to
hinder better and more comfortable things. The phrase runs in this sense, when
it is meant of Christ, Christ suffered for our satisfaction, for our
redemption. And Leo the Pope, one of the the best of their Popes, and in his
rank, a holy man in his time, he says excellent well for this, sanctorum
preciosamors, etc. The death of the Saints is prcious, but the death of no
Saint is a propitiation for others: their death is sanctified, but not
propitiatory to others: Therefore singularis singulis; all the Saints, their
death was for themselves. It is an excellent speech solus Christus, etc. every
other besides Christ, their death was singular, it went not out of their own
persons to do others good, otherwise then by an exemplary course (as St. Paul
speaks here) but only Christ it is, in whom all dyed, in whom all are
crucified, in whom all are raised, in whom all ascend, in whom all are
glorified: As public Adam his death was for all; he was not considerable in
his death, as one man, but as a second Adam; who by his public obedience, as
the first public person by his disobedience infected all; so he by his
obedience and satisfaction, by his passive obedience especially when he shut up
his obedience in death, all dyed in him, it was as much as if all had dyed, as
if all had been crucified, and risen in him. The meaning is therefore, Whether
we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, to help it forward,
to help forward your comfort, by way of example, and not by way of satisfaction
and merit any kind of way.

Do but consider this one reason, (and so I will end the point) there was no
Saint that ever merited heaven by his own satisfaction (therefore he could not
do good to others, by way of satisfaction) how do you prove that? By that
excellent speech, in Romans 8. The sufferings of this world are not worthy of the
glory that shall be revealed. All that they suffered, was not worthy of the
glory to be revealed: therefore they could not by any satisfaction of their
own, merit heaven for themselves: what should we speak of others then, to do
any good to others (I mean) by way of satisfaction. But he shows this in the
next words more clearly, how good is done to others, Whether we be afflicted,
it is for your consolation and salvation. Which is effectual in enduring the
same sufferings that we also suffer.


It is read in the Margin, and most go that way, and the oldest Interpreters
too: some Translators have a word as fit in the margin, as in the text often
times, and they leave it to the Readers to take which they will. It is good and
useful both ways, but the most go that way, and it is more clear. The meaning
is this, Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation,
which salvation of yours is wrought out, in enduring the same sufferings that
we also suffer. If it be read [effectual] as it is in the text, and not in the
margin, then it is thus, If we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation, the assurance whereof in you is effectual, to make you endure the
sufferings that we suffer.

Now here must be a thing cleared.

How salvation is wrought by affliction?

I answer, Salvation is wrought by Christ, by way of merit, and procurement,
and purchase, and satisfaction to divine justice; but salvation in regard of
the profession of it, is wrought by afflictions, that is, we come to have it by
this way. We may consider salvation in purchase, and title, and salvation in
possession, and investing into it: salvation in title and purchase is wrought
by the death and sufferings of Christ, who has this preminence to be called,
and styled a Savior: but though it be gotten by him, it is not possessed but
by a certain way and course. That salvation the title whereof we have by
Christ, it is not possessed or entered into, but by a course of suffering and
doing. God has measured out so many holy actions for every Christian to do,
and so many things for every Christian to suffer, so many grievances, if he be
of years of discretion (God has a way to save Children which lean to his
wisdom, but) this way God saves men, they have a cup measured to them, they
have so many afflictions to suffer before they be possessed of that which
Christ has purchased: so it is wrought in regard of possession, in suffering
the same afflictions that others suffer.

There are two ways, doing good, and suffering for good, that are the beaten
way to obtain salvation, which salvation is wrought by the satisfaction of
Christ. Mark here, he says our sufferings tend to your comfort and salvation.
How? because it helps you to endure the same suffering: by seeing others
suffer, and by enduring the like, we come to the possession of salvation in the
end, because by seeing them suffer, we are encouraged to suffer. The point
hence is this, that, Whatsoever good we take by the sufferings of any, it is by
stirring up and strengthening Doct. The good we have by others afflictions is by
stirring up grace in us.
some grace in us.


Whatsoever good we take by any, set Christ aside (from whom we take good
likewise by way of example, as well as merit; but in a singular respect by way
of merit;) but for others, whatsoever good we take it is not direct, it is not
immediate, but only by stirring up some grace by strengthening some grace in
us. There is no good derived from others to me but by confirming and
strengthening some grace: so I come to have good by them, says St. Paul here,
My sufferings increase your salvation, but it is because my sufferings stir
you up to suffer the same afflictions. You learn of me by my carriage and
example to suffer, and so by suffering that which I suffer you come to
salvation.

This is sufficient to convince (that idle opinion that I spoke of before,)
that the sufferings of the Saints are not conveyed by way of pardon to the
ignorant people, that know not what Saint, or pardon, or suffering, or merit
is: but the way of comfort by the suffering of others, is by confirming and
strengthening some grace, of patience, or comfort, etc. in them. All the good
that is in the father, cannot help the son, except he tread in his fathers
steps. If we go not the same way as others do to heaven, in the same graces,
all their sufferings will do us no good, but serve to condemn us. The point is
clear, because it serves to enlighten other points, I do but name it. But
that, which I will a little more stand on is, that salvation is wrought by
suffering. We come to the possession of salvation by Patience. Doct. We come to
the possession of salvation by patience.



Faith of salvation by Christ, stires us up to suffer, till we come to the
possession of that that we have title to. Mark how these hang together, first a
Christian knows that God will save him by the merits, and satisfaction, and
obedience of Christ, his surety, the assured persuasion of this salvation that
he has title to by Christ, because the possession of it is deferred till the
next world, and there is a distance of time, and that time is incombred with
afflictions, hereupon comes a necessity of some special grace to carry us
along till we be fully invested into that that we have title to by Christ,
there must be some grace between faith, and the possession of heaven. I am
assured of the possession of heaven, in my first conversion: but I am not
invested into it, it is deferred: there is a distance of time which is
afflictive: for, hope deferred makes the heart faint. A thing that we have
right and title to, deferred, afflicts the soul, and the deferring of good has
the respect of ill; good deferred puts upon it the consideration of ill: for it
is a grievance to want a good, I have a right unto. Now it is not only
deferred, but my life is an exercised life, with many actions and sufferings;
what grace must bear me up between me and heaven, and in the tediousness of the
time prolonged? especially the grace of enduring. Therefore faith in Christ, by
which I have a title to heaven, that stirs up hope, and hope stirs up patience;
and that helps me in the way to heaven, it helps me to bear crosses and
afflictions, and likewse to endure the tediousness, and length of time till I
come to Heaven: so salvation is wrought by suffering, we come not to the
possession of it, but by suffering and enduring, you have need of patience
says the Apostle, Heb. 10.

Give me leave to clear the point a little: How does patience enter into this
great work of helping our salvation? Patience in enduring affliction Patience
helps salvateon.
it helps many ways.

They work salvation, not by way of merit, for that were to disable the title
we have by Christ, but by way of evidence, it helps the evidence 1 It cleares
our evidence.
of the title; for I have title by Christ; but how do I know that my evidence
to that title is good? Afflictions, and the patient suffering of them; not
afflictions alone, but afflictions joined with the grace of patience to endure
them (for else they do no good, afflictions are evil in themselves) for thus
it increases my evidence, every heir is a son (for heaven is the inheritance
of Sons) and every Son must be corrected; and I am corrected, and afflicted in
this life, and God does give me grace to endure them, and to see my good in
them, these afflictions therefore mingled with patient enduring of them, do
evidence that I am not a bastard. In Heb. 12. the Apostle proves this, every
one that has not some affliction or other, he is a bastard and not a Son. It
increases my evidence, that I am the child of God (especially if I suffer for
a good cause) if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, here the evidence
is increased. By this I know I am in the way, which is strewed with crosses and
afflictions, we must enter into heaven this way, I know it for the way, so it
furthers my salvation, it gives me assurance that my evidence is good.

It is the Scriptures manner to say things are done, when the knowledge of the
thing is increased: As to say we are saved, when we know more assuredly that we
shall be saved; to say we are in the Kingdom of heaven when we know we are in
the state of the Kingdom of heaven, as in 2 Pet. 1. says he, grow in grace,
etc. for by this means, a further entrance shall be ministered unto you, into
the Kingdom of God: The knowledge of a man's estate in grace is a further
entance into the Kingdom of God, that is begun here in this life. The knowledge
that I am an heir of heaven, is to be in heaven before my time. Thus
afflictions joined with patience help salvation, because they help the evidence
of salvation, they show that we are sons, and not bastards; it is an evidence
of our adoption.

And then sufferings, joined with the grace of enduring, help forward 2 By way
of qualification Of the person.
salvation by way of qualification; there is a qualification, and disposition
of soul, which is necessary before we come to Heaven; because no unclean thing
shall ever come to Heaven.

Now suffering joynd with patience, having a mighty and blessed work this
way, to purge us of that soil, that we cannot carry to heaven with us. We
may not think to carry our unmortified pride and lusts, and base earthly
affections, and our pleasures and riches ill gotten to heaven with us: oh, no,
the presence of heaven is a more pure presence then so, and the place will not
endure such defilements, we must be cleansed thereore.

Now, because afflictions endured with patience, have a blessed power to subdue
that which by nature is powerful in us, to purge out those base affections,
that are contrary to the glorious estate we look for, therefore they help us to
heaven, they help the qualification of the person, not the merit and desert of
it.

They help likewise the qualification, by removing that which corruption feeds
on, for affliction endured removes that which corruption works on, 2 By
removing hindrances.
and strengthens it selfby: affliction is either in removing riches, or
honors, or pleasures, somewhat that corruption feeds on: for all corruption is
about those Idols, greatness, or pleasure, or profit of the world: Now
sufferings crossing us in our reputation, or estates, or body, one way or
other, they withdraw the fuel that feeds our corruptions, and so help
mortification and purgation, and so fit us for Heaven. They help our
repentance, they make the favor of God sweet, and sin bitter, it is a bitter
thing to offend God, we feel it by the afflictions that are laid on us.

Again, many positive graces are required before we come to Heaven, 3 They
strengthen graces.
affliction endured helps al graces whatsoever; the only time for grace to
thrive in is the time of affliction, for affliction endured helps our zeal, our
love, we have experience of the patience of God, and they stir up prayer, all
graces are set on work in affliction, Out of the deep have I cried, prayers are
cries in in affliction, they are not cold dull things, but set on fire, they
set the spirit on work to cry to God with earnest, frequent, and fervent in
prayer.

Then again, Afflictions endured, they work salvation and help us to Heaven,
because they whet and sharpen our desire of heaven: for when 4 They whet our
desire of heaven
we find ill usage here below in our pilgrimage, we have a great desire to be
at home at rest, and that is one maine end why God sends afflictions, to help
salvation this way, by sharpening our desires. For were it not for afflictions,
and the enduring of them, would we ever say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly?
would we not be of Peter's mind, It is good for us to be here? would we ever be
weary of the world, before we be fired out of it, and pulled out of it, as Lot
out of Sodom? No, they help our desire and earnestness. The creature groans,
Romans 8. Those that have received the first fruits of the spirit, they wait for
the adoption of the sonns of God. Those that have the beginnings of grace, they
wait for the accomplishment, what makes this but afflictions and troubles of
the world? They desire a State wherein all tears shall be wiped from their
eyes. So we see these, and many other ways (but these are the principal) how
afflictions endured as they should be, they help salvation, they work our
salvation; though they work not the title of it, yet they help us in the way.

First, Because they assure us that we are the sons of God, and so have
evidence that we are in a good state, and then they remove the hindrances, and
purge us of our sins, and then they help us in all graces, they cherish all
graces, and they sharpen and whet the edge of our desires to be out of this
world.

And all this must be in every Christian, before he come to Heaven: for God
never brings a man of years to Heaven, but he gives him cause to see why he
would be out of this world, either by long sickness, or affliction, or by one
thing or other; he makes them see that it is better to be there then here, and
if it were not for crosses, who would be of that mind.

Therefore have we not cause to suspect our selves, that we are in smooth ways
and find no crosses? God does give respit to his children, they have breathing
times, they are not always under crosses; he is merciful, perhaps they have not
strength enough he will not bring them to the lists, to the stage, because they
are not enabled, they have not strength enough. But they that have a continual
tenor of prosperity may well suspect themselves. If one have direction to such
a place, and they tell him there are such ways, deep waters, that except he
take heed, he will be drowned, and step into holes, and they are craggie ways,
and if he meet with none of these, he may well think he is not in his way. So
the way to Heaven, it is through afflictions; we must endure many afflictions,
says the Apostle here, Salvation is wrought by enduring the same afflictions,
that you see in us. Now if I suffer and endure nothing; if I cannot endure so
much as a Filip, a disgrace, a frown, a scorn for Christ: if the way be over
smooth, it is not the way to heaven certainly: the way is not strewed with
roses; we must have our Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel. They must
be well shod that go among thorns, and they had need to be well fenced, that go
the way to heaven, it is a thorny rugged way, but it is no matter what the way
be, so it bring us to Heaven: but certainly if the way be too smooth, we ought
to suspect our selves.

Now because it may be objected, many will say alas, what do we suffer, and
therefore our case is not good.

I answer, Every Christian suffers one of these ways, at one time or other,
nay at all times, either by sympathy with the Church, put the case All
Christians suffer.
we have no afflictions of our own, do we not sympathise with the Church
beyond the Seas: When thou hear ill news, if thou be glad to hear 1. By
sympathy,
it, certainly thy case is bad; there is a suffering by sympathy, and that
suffering is ours.

Then again, There are afflictions and sufferings, that arise upon scandals, 2
By scandals.
that men run into before our eyes, which is a great grief, Mine eyes gush out
with rivers of waters, because men keep not thy law, says David Is it not a
matter of suffering to a Christian soul, to see that he would not see, and to
hear blasphemies and oaths that he would not hear? to have the understanding
forced to understand that he would not, living in a world of iniquity, in the
Kingdom of the Devil? It is a great grievance, Woe is me that I am forced to
dwell in Meshech, and to have my habitation with the Tents of Kedar. It is a
pitiful affliction to the Saints of God, to him that has the life of grace
in his heart, to have the wicked as goads and thorns, as the Scripture says,
the Jebusites should be to the Israelites, to have thoughts forced upon us, and
things forced upon our souls, that we would not see, nor think, nor hear of,
that which shall never be in Heaven.

Again, Every one suffers the burden of his calling, which is a great
suffering, a man need not to whip himself as the Scottish Papists do, if he 3
The burden of of our calling.
be but faithful in his calling; it is a notable means of mortification. God
keeps a man from persecution many times, because he has burdens in his
calling to exercise him, he has many crosses in his calling. God has joined
sweat to labor, and trouble, and pains, and there is no man that is faithful
in his calling as he should be, but he shall find many crosses.

And then that which afflicts most of all, the affliction of all afflictions,
the inward combat between the flesh and the spirit, which God usually takes up
4 Combat between flesh and spirit*
in persecution, and outward troubles: Gods dear children in persecution find
little molestation from their corruptions, because God will not lay more upon
them, then he will give them strength to bear; and now when he singles them
out to outward crosses, he subdues their corruptions, that they do not vex them
as before. In the time of peace, he lets loose their corruptions, sometimes
anger, sometimes pride, sometimes one base affection, sometimes another; and
think you t his is no grief to them? Oh yes, it grie ves them, and humbles them
more then any cross would do: St. Paul was grieved more at this, then at all
his sufferings, it made him cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? He does not say, oh wretched man who shall
deliver me from crosses and afflictions; though they made him wretched in the
eye of the world, yet he rejoiced in those: but his grief was that he could
not do the good that he would, and that made him cry out, Oh wretched m^n
that I am, etc. It is God that ties up our corruptions, that they run not so
violently on the soul at one time, as they do at another, for he has the
command of them by his spirit There is no Christian, but one of these ways he
suffers in the greatest time of peace, especially this way God exercises them,
that he makes them weary of their lives, by this spiritual conflict, if they
know what the life of grace means, he makes them know what it is to be absent
from Heaven, he makes them know that this life is a place of absence, and all
this is to help our disposition to salvation, by helping mortification, and by
helping our desire to Heaven. Those that go on in a smooth course, that know
not what this inward combat means, and are carried away with their sins: they
are so far from taking scandals to heart, that if they see evil men, they
are ready to join with them, to join with blasphemers, and wicked persons. And
instead of sympathizing with the Church of God, they are ready to join with
them that censure them, and so add affliction to the afflicted.

But to proceed, Whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and
salvation.


Of comfort I spoke in the former verse. Only that note, that I will briefly
commend to you is this, that Gods Children, hap how it will, they do good.


Cast them into what estate you will, they do good, they are good, and Doct.
Gods Children do good in every Condition.
do good. If they be afflicted, they do good by that, if they have comfort,
they do good to others by that: no estate is amiss to Gods Children. And that
is the reason of their perfect resignation. The Child of God perfectly resignes
himself into Gods hands: Lord, if thou will have me suffer, I will suffer, if
thou will have me afflicted, I yield my self; if thou will have me enjoy
prosperity I will. I know it shall be for my good, and for the good of others.

There is an intercourse in the life of a Christian, he is now afflicted, and
now comforted, not for his own sake only, but for the good of others: and when
he shall be afflicted, and how long; and what comfort he shall have, how much,
he leaves it to the wisdom of God. It is a blessed estate (if we could think of
it) to be a Christian, that we need to care for nothing but to serve God, we
need to care for nothing, but study to keep a good conscience. Let God alone
with all our estate: for God will enable us to want and to abound in our own
persons, and likewise he will sanctify our estate for the good of others. And
a Christian will be willling to be tossed, and to be changed from vessel to
vessel, from state to state, for the good of others. If his afflictions may do
good to the Church, he is content that God should withdraw his blessings from
him, and humble him with crosses. If his example may be good to others, he is
likewise joyful, when God gives him rest, and causes an inward comfort, he
knows that this is good for others: he has learned in his first entrance into
Christianity, self-denial, not to live to himself, but for the glory of God,
and the good of others, as much as he may.

We should labor therefore to content our selves in all conditions, knowing
that all is for the best, not only to our selves, and Gods glory, but Use. To
be content in all conditions.
for the good of others. God when he takes things from us, and afflicts us, and
when he comforts us, he intends the comfort of others. So we should reason when
we endure any thing, and when we are comforted, certainly God intends the good
of others by this: therefore I will have a special care in suffering, to
carry it decently, and exemplarily, knowing that the eyes of many are upon me.
I will carry my self so that God may have glory, and others may have edification
and comfort, knowing that I am but Gods Steward, to convey this to others, that
are of the same body with my self. Therefore in our communion we have with
others, upon any good occasion; we ought to express the blessed experience of
the comfort of God upon us: This is the practice of holy men in their meeting
with others, to show them the comforts of God to their souls. Come, I will
show you what God has done for my soul, says the Psalmist. All are the
better for a good man, he does good to all, and therefore Solomon says, When a
righteous man is advanced, the City rejoices: They have cause, for he has a
public mind; nothing does more characterise, and is a better stamp of a true
Christian, then a public mind.

A carnal man out of self love, may grieve at his own sins, and may labor to
comfort himself, but a Christian thinks others shall take good by me. It is the
mind of Christ; and it is the mind of all the Members of Christ, when a man
thinks he has nothing, except he have it to improve for the good of others.

A dead, sullen, reserved spirit, is not a Christians spirit: if by nature we
have such, we must labor to help it with grace: for grace is a diffusive
communicating thing (not only in the Ministers of God, but) in every
Christian; grace will teach them to make savourie their conversation to others,
this way, that whatsoever they are, or whatsoever they can do, or whatsoever
they suffer, they study to improve all to the good of others.

And mark the extent of the loving wisdom and providence of God, God aims at
many things in the same affliction.
how many things he does at once: for in the same affliction often times, he
corrects some in his Children, in the same affliction he tries some grace, in
the same affliction he witnesses to his truth in them, in the same affliction
he does good to others, besides the good he does to them. In the same
affliction that others inflict, he hastneth the ruin of them that offer it; at
one time, and in one action, he hastneth the destruction of the one, by
hastening the good of the other; he ripens grace in his Children, making them
exemplary to others, and all in the same Action, so large is the wise
providence of God.

It should teach us likewise to follow that providence, and to see how many
ways any thing we suffer any kind of way may extend, that if one To obs^rve
Gods providence in our suffering.
way will not comfort, another may. When we suffer, and are grieved, let us
consider withal that he that does the wrong, he hastens his ruin and
judgment: As Pharaoh when he hastened the overthrow of the children of Israel,
he hastened his overthrow in the red Sea: so a pit is dug for the wicked,
when they digg a pit for the godly. And consider, (to comfort thy self) thou
have some sin in thee, and God intends not only to witness his truth, but
to correct some sin in thee, and thou must look to that; thou have some grace
in thee, and he intends the trial of that. Look to these things, this shows
strong heavenly mindedness, when there is self-denial. Let us consider what
God calls us to; for God looks to many things in the same act; wherefore does
God give us reason and discourse, but to be able to follow him in his dealing,
as far as we can reach to? But I go on to the next verse.

VERSE. VII. And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you are partakers
of the suffering, so you shall be also of the consolation.
THis verse is nothing but a strengthening of what he said before; he had told
them that whatsoever he suffered, it was for their comfort too; and now he
repeats it again, and sets a seal upon it, Our hope of you is steadfast, knowing
that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so you shall also be of the
consolation. In these words he shows that they shall share in the good with
him, as well as in the ill; that the Spirit of God in them, should help them to
take all the good they could, both by his sufferings, and by his comfort. For
as he by the help of the spirit of God intended the public good, intended
their good and comfort in all, whether he were afflicted or comforted; so he
says here, he was assured that as they were partakers of his sufferings, so
they should be of his comforts likewise.

Here is the truth:

And the seal of the truth.

The truth, That they were partakers of his sufferings, and should be partakers
of his consolations.

And the Seal is in the manner of affirming these truths, Our hope of you is
steadfast. And in this order I will speak of them. First, Gods Children are
partakers of the sufferings of others. Doctr. Gods Children partake of the
sufferings of others.



The Corinthians were partakers of the sufferings of S. Paul.

Gods Children are partakers of the sufferings of others many ways.

First by way of sympathy, taking to heart the estate of the Church, and
Children of God abroad. It grieved the Corinthians to hear that S. Paul 1. By
sympathy.
was afflicted: for even as it is in the natural body, so likewise in the
mystical body, there is a sympathy between the members.

Likewise they partake of the sufferings of others by way of proportion: 2. By
proportion.
they suffered in their kind and proportion as he suffered; though perhaps not
in the same very individual kind. There is a portion of suffering in the
Church, some suffer one way, and others another: but all partake of sufferings
in some degree or other.

Then again, they did partake of St Paul's sufferings, in preparation
Indisposition.
and disposition of mind, howsoever now they did not suffer as much as he, yet
(says he) I know as far as the spirit of God is in you, you are prepared to
suffer, and what we are prepared to doc, that we do. Christ says we sell all
for the Gospel, when upon serious examination of our hearts, we find we can
part with it: when we set our selves to examination; what cannot I part with
for Christ? can I part with my goods? Can I part with my life? if we can once
come to resolution it is done, as Abraham is said to sacrifiee his Son, because
he resolved to do it; and David is said to build the Temple, because he
intended to do it. God looks upon us in our resolutions and preparations; what
we resolve to do, that is done: So (says he) you are partakers of my
sufferings, not only by sympathy, and in proportion of sufferings, but you are
prepared (he speaks charitably and lovingly) to suffer whatsoever I suffer if
God call you to it.

And the ground of Christians partaking of the sufferings one of another Reas.
The communion between. Chrians.
it is the communion that is between Christians; they are all Members of one
body: if the hand suffer, the head suffers, the head thinks it self wronged
when the hand, or the foot is wronged, by reason of the sympathy between the
Members (as I said) and so it is in the mystical body of Christ.

There are these three unions which depend one upon another. 3. Unions.


The union of Christ with our nature, which is inseparable, it is an eternali
1. Of Christ and our nature.
union, he never lays that blessed mass of our flesh aside which he took,
which is the ground of all our comfort: for God is now at one with us, because
God has taken our nature on him, and satisfied the wrath of God his Father.

Next the union of Christ with our nature, is the union of Christ mystical, 2.
Of Christ myst^cal head and members.
Christ and his Members when they suffer, Christ suffers, their sufferings are
the sufferings of Christ.

The third is the union of one Member with another, that what one Member
suffers, another does suffer: therefore the Corinthians were partakers 3. Of
one member with another.
of Christ, because their sufferings were the sufferings of Christ, and they
were partakers of St. Paul's sufferings, because his sufferings were their
sufferings.

They were partakers of Christ's sufferings, because of the communion between
the head and the Members, and they were partakers of St Paul's sufferings,
because of the communion of one Member with another. And surely there is not a
heart that was ever touched with the Spirit of God, but when he hears of any
calamity of the Church, whether it be in the Palatinate, in France, in the low
Countries, or in any Country in the world, if he hear that the Church has a
blow, it strikes to the heart of any man that has the spirit of God in them,
by a sympatheticall suffering. It is one good sign to know whether a man be of
the mystical body or no, to take to heart the grievance of the Church. As good
Nehemiah did, he would not take comfort in the pleasures of a Court, in the
King of Babylons Court, when it went not well with his Country, when the Church
was in distress, he took their grievance to heart: So Moses, the very joys of
Pharaoh's Court could not please him, when he considered the abasement of his
Countrymen, he joined with them, and it is called the rebuke of Christ.

So it is with all the people of God, there is a communication of suffeings. As
you are partakers of the sufferings, so you shall be also of the consolation.

Wherein two things are observable.

First, That a necessary precedent condition of comfort is sufferings.

And then the consequent of this, that those that suffer as they should are
sure of comfort. These two things unfold the meaning of the spirit of God here.

Before there be comfort, there must be suffering, for God has established
this order, even as in nature, there must be a night before the day, and a
Winter before a Summer: so in the Kingdom of Christ, in his ruling of the
Church, there is this divine policy, there must be suffering before comfort.
God will sooner break the league and the Covenant between day and night, then
this league of suffering and comfort, the one must be before the other; it was
so in our head Christ, he suffered, and then entered into his glory: so all his
Members must be comfortable to him in suffering, 1 Reas. There is some ill to
be wrought out of us.
and then enter into their glory.

The reasons of this are diverse.

First of all, this method and order is, first suffering, and then comfort,
because God finds us in a corrupt estate,, and something must be wrought out of
us, before we can be vessels to receive comfort; therefore there must be a
purgation one way or other, either by repentance, or if not by 2 Reas. To
commend comfort to us.
repentance, by affliction, to help repentance: there must be suffering before
comfort. The soul is unfit for comfort.

Secondly, This order commends and sweetens comfort to us; for fire is sweet
after cold, and meat is sweet after hunger, so comfort is sweet after
suffering: God fits us to comfort by this, by purging out what is contrary to
comfort. And he indeares comfort by this; those that have felt the cross,
comfort is comfort indeed to them: heaven is heaven indeed to him that has had
a hell in his conscience upon earth, that has been afflicted in conscience, or
outwardly persecuted, it set a price and value upon comfort.

Partly likewise to sharpen our desire of comfort; for suffering breeds sense,
and sense that stirs up desire, and desire is eager; now suffering, it makes
comforts precious, and sets us in a wondrous strong desire after them.

And by this means likewise God comes to his own end, which is that our
comforts may be eternal, therefore we have that which is ill in the first
place. Woe to us if it should be said to us as to Dives in the Gospel, Son,
son, thou had thy good here, and now thou must have thy ill: God intends not
to deal so with his Children, but they taste the worst wine first, and better
afterward; because he intends eternal happiness to them, he observes this
method, first ill, and then good, the best at last.

If this be so, then why should we be offended at Gods order? why should we not
take it, not only gently and meekly, but joyfully, the afflictions that God
sends to prepare, and fit us for happiness, to sharpen our desire to happiness,
to make it precious to us? Certainly it is a ground not only of patience and
meekness, but of joy and comfort in all the things we suffer. Will a Patient be
angry with his Chyrurgion for searching of his wound? he knows that that is
the way to cure him? Will any man take offense at the Goldsmiths for purging
his mass? they know that is the way to purify it, and fetch out the dross.

This is the method in nature, the ground muft be plowed and prepared, and then
comes the harvest: let us be content with this method, and rejoice in any
suffering, knowing it will have a blessed issue: and not to think much at
suffering any thing for a good cause in our selves, or by way of sympathy, or
support with others, because this is the high way to a better estate,: if we
suffer with the Church, or for the Church any kind of way, we shall be
comforted with the Church. It is that which sweetens the cross, that we are
under hope of better still. Who would not endure a little grievance in the way
to have honor in the end? to have ill usage in an Inn, and to go to a
Kingdom? All our discomforts and afflictions are but by the way here, and
crosses are necessary for Travelers, and here we are but in a traveling
estate. It should I say encourage us not to take offense at any thing, that God
exercises us with in this world, nor to take scandal at the afflictions of the
Church.

And then it should strike terror to those that will not endure so much as a
scratch, a scoff, a word, a chip of the cross, that will endure nothing: Use 2
Terror to those that will not suffer.
do they know that this is Gods order? do they avoid crosses in any degree,
and do they think to have comfort? No, God will not change his order for them;
he has established this order, and heaven and earth shall fail, rather then
Gods order shall not be sure. If we will have comfort, we must suffer; if we
will avoid suffering, and think to go to heaven another way then God has
ordained, we may take our own way, but we must give him leave to take his way
in comforting and advancing whom hewil, and that will not be us, because we will
not frame our selves to his order, we must not look for hisdignitie, if we will
not suffer with him, we shall not reign with him.

The next thing observable in the order is this, that Those that suffer as they
should are sure of comfort. Doct. Those that suffer as they should are sure of
comfort.



There is a threefold conformity with Christ, in suffering. grace. glory.

Those that are not conformable to him in suffering, they cannot be conformable
to him in grace, and if they be not in grace, they shall not in glory. He took
upon him our nature abased first, and our nature purified, and our nature
glorious he has now in heaven: so our nature in us must keep this order.
First, it must be abased as our flesh was in him, and then filled with grace,
by little and little, and then glorious, as our nature is in him. If we will
not suffer our flesh to be abased, and exercised with afflictions, and let God
work his own good work as he pleases this way, we are not conformable to
Christ, who was first abased, and then advanced: what was wrought in his
blessed flesh, must be wrought in his mystical body, in all his Members by
little and little. Therefore those that are tender, and way-ward to endure any
thing, when God calls them to it, they are enemies to their own comfort: God
has set down this order, if they do not partake of the sufferings of the
Church, they shall not partake of the comfort.

Oh it is a cursed estate to be out of the condition of Gods people, and it is
a comfortable thing, to have part with those that are good, yea, even if it be
in suffering with them. It is better to have communion with Gods people in
suffering, then to have communion with the wicked in the world, in reigning and
triumphing.

And that is the reason that the spirit of God in the Prophet made him desire,
Deal with me Lord, as thou usest to deal with those that fear thy name, he
knew he deals well enough with them, visit me with the salvation of thy
children, he knew that was a special salvation: so to have God deal with us,
as he deals with his, and to visit us in mercy and love, as he visits his own,
it is a special favor. It is better to bear the cross with them, that we
may partake with them in the comfort, then to have all the comforts that the
wicked have, and to share with them in the misery afterward. Therefore let us
be content to share with Gods people in their suffering; when we hear of any
that suffer for a just cause, though we have no sufferings of our own, let us
bear a part with them, and with the bond of the communion of Saints help what
we may.

And it is as true on the contrary, if we partake with the wicked in their
Those that partake in the sins, shall in the judgment of others.
sins, we shall partake with them in their punishment. Therefore the Scripture
says, Come out of Babylon my people, lest if you partake of her sins, so you
partake of her punishments. Now Atheistical people think it nothing to enter
into league and amity, and society with profane people, that are professedly
so, not only by weakness, but those that are stigmatized, but what says the
Scripture? (and the Holy Ghost does not trifle with us) Come out of Babylon my
people, lest you partake of her plagues: which is not meant so much locally to
come out of the place, as in disposition to come out in respect of liking, and
converse, and secret intimate communion. Lots sons in law, they thought it was
but trifling, they gibed as Atheists do now, when they hear the Ministers
encourage people to make much of religion, and to set against those that are
opposite, they think they are enforced to it, and it is upon mistake, etc.
though it be as palpable as the light of the sun: they deal as Lots sons in
law, when he warned them to come out of Sodom, and he was pulled out; they
would believe nothing till fire came down from Heaven, and destroyed them all,
it was too late then. Therefore let us hearken to the counsel of the Angel,
let us not make this a matter of scorn, a light matter, but as we desire to
have no part in their confusion, so avoid their courses. The Scripture is
terrible to those that after the breaking out of the light will be such; there
is not more direct Scriptures against any kind of men, then those that
wilfully cleave to Antichrist: therefore we should not esteem it a light
matter, but think of it seriously indeed.

And not only in respect of them, but all wicked society: were it not pity
that men should be severed from them hereafter, whose company they will not be
severed from now? If thou see an Adulterer, a Blasphemer, a wicked licentious
Atheistical person, and thou runnest into the same excess of riot with him,
thou will not be drawn by any persuasions ministerial or friendly, or by thine
own light (which knows his course to be naught) to retire from his society,
do thou not think to share with him afterwa^d in his judgment? As you are all
Tares, so you shall be bound in a bundle, and cast into Hell together. As the
wheat shall be gathered into Heaven: so the tares, a cursed company, that will
cleave together though they be damned for it, as they clave together as burrs
and tares here, so they shall be cast into Hell together; that is the end of
dissolute unruly creatures, that nothing will sever them from those, who in
their own consciences they know rheir courses to be naught. Our hope of you is
steadfast.


There is a double certainty, a certainty of the truth of the thing, and a
Certainty double.
certainty of the estate of the person. The certainty of the truth is this,
Those that suffer with Christ and his Church, shall be glorified with Christ
and his Church: the certainty of the truth is more certain then Heaven and
Earth. Now besides the certainty of the truth, or thing, there is interposed a
certainty of the persons, that as they were interessed in the sufferings; so
they should be in the comforts. And this is true as well as the former: for
Gods promises are not mere Idea's wanting truths, that have no performance in
the persons: but if the thing be true, it is true in the person to whom the
truth belongs. Suffering goes before Glory: therefore if we suffer we shall be
glorified. But this is the condition, if they suffer with Christ, then St. Paul
takes it for certain that they shall be glorified with Christ. There is not the
same certainty of the persons as of the truth it self: the truth is certain by
a certainty of faith, but the certainty of the persons is the certainty of a
charitable persuasion: I am persuaded that you will suffer with me in
sympathy, and therefore I am persuaded in the certainty of charity that you
shall of a certain have the comfort. Our hope of you is steadfast.


St. Paul, you see, has a good conceit of them, that he might encourage Double
efficacy in hope.
them to sympathize and take to heart his crosses, and to take good by them. A
good hope of others has a double efficacy. It has one efficacy in the 1. In
the party that hopes of another.
party that has the good hope of another. It stirs him up to be diligent to
take all courses that may be for the good of another. As the speech is, Hope
stirs up to work, it stirs up endeavor: so it does in the husbandman, and in
every kind of trade: hope quickens endeavor. A man will never sow upon the
sands, he loses his cost: a man will never bestow his pains upon those that he
thinks are desperate. And what is it that dulls and deads endeavor? I despair
of ever doing such a man good: when those despairing thoughts enter into the
soul, there is a stop of all endeavor. And surely, Christians are much to
blame that way: when they might have ground, (if charity were in them) at least
of hope of others: upon some hard, despairing conceits they cast off hope, and
so neglect all endeavor of doing good to others. The Spirit of God is witty
in the hearts of his Children to observe all advantages of doing good:
therefore it is willing to entertain all offers of good in others: if they be
but willing to hear reproof, if they be willing to hear comfort, and to hear
good discourse, it will make a good construction of their errors (if it may
be) except it be those that are maliciously obstinate, it will impute it to
passion, or to ill company, to one thing or other; as far as possible it will
admit of a good construction: love in Gods Children will admit of it, and love
stirs up to hope, and hope stirs up to deal with them for their good.

I know that charity is not sottish; but yet it is willing to think the best,
where there is probability of good for the present, or where there is a
tractablenesse, where there is a willingness to entertain communion, where
there is any propension, we must be of our blessed Saviors disposition, who
will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised Reed: we must draw
all, and drive none away. This is one special fruit and effect that hope has
in the party that does hope toward another.

Now as it is good for the Speaker to be well conceited: so it is a good,
preparative in the Hearer, it has a winning power in the party hoped of, it
is a great attractive: for we willingly hear those that conceit good of us.
St. Paul here works upon the natural disposition in all, which is, that they
love to be well thought of, and natural dispositions are strong. It is the
natural disposition for every man to love where he is well thought of, and it
is not sinful (unless it be in vainglory) to desire to have good place in the
esteem of others. And there a man will labor to carry himself answerable to
the good conceit had of him.

There is a conflict in the worst man, where he is well conceitd of, he labors
to maintain it, except it be those that are mightily inthralled, as some
wretches are, to blasphemy, and to a cursed life that they care not; but else
if they be well thought of, it will stir them up to maintain it, he is a
dissolute man, he is not a man so far as he is careless of this, he is
brutish, and senseless. St. Paul in saying, Our hope is steadfast concerning you.
He wins himself into their good opinion, and so by that means, he hoped to
prevail with them for greater matters: So hope it stirs up men to do good; and
it makes the other willing to receive good: for it makes them willing to
content them that hope well of them. St. Paul was led with this heavenly
wisdom, and that which made him so industrious, was hope of prevailing; and
that which made him prevail with others, was the good conceit he had of them.
He would gather upon every one; when he saw Agrippa come on a little, Agrippa,
believe thou the Scriptures? I know thou believe; Almost thou perswadest me
to be a Christian, says he, and so he comes in a little. It is good as much as
may be to have hope of others.

But what is his degree of hope? Our hope of you. Is steadfast.


He had a steadfast hope, that if they were sufferers, they should be partakers
of the comfort.

The Observation may be this, that Divine truths are such as we may build a
steadfast hope on the performance Doct. We may steadfastly hope for performance
of divine truths.
of them.


Divine truths, divine comforts, they are of that nature, that though we do
not yet enjoy them, yet we may build certainly upon them. I hope steadfastly,
that if you be partakers of the sufferings, you shall be partakers of the
comforts. A man cannot say so of any thing else but divine truths: a man cannot
say of any other, or of himself, I hope steadfastly to be rich, I hope
steadfastly to be great, or I hope steadfastly to live long: the nature of the
thing is uncertain: the state of the world is vanity, and life it self, and
all things here will not admit of a certain apprehension. For the certainty in
a man's understanding, it follows the certainty of the thing, or else there is
no adequation: when there is an evenness in the apprehension to the thing, then
it is true: but if we apprehend any thing that is here, that either riches, or
life, or favor will be thus, or thus long, it is no true apprehension: we
cannot build a certain hope upon an uncertain ground. But of divine truths, we
can say, if we see the one, undoubtedly the other will follow: if we see the
signs of grace in any man, that he is strong to endure any disgrace for
religion, any discomfort, then we may say. Certainly, as you partake of the
afflictions of Christ, and of the afflictions and sufferings of his people, his
body mystical: so undoubtedly you shall be partakers of the comfort of Gods
people: heaven and earth shall fail, but this shall never fail.

Is not this a comfort to a Christian, that when he is in the state of grace,
he has something that he may build on, when all things else fail? In all the
changes and alterations of this life, he has somewhat unalterable; the
certainty of divine comforts, the certainty of his estate in grace, though he
be in an afflicted estate, as verily as he is afflicted: so verily he shall be
comforted: If we suffer with Christ, we shall be glorified with him.

Upon what ground is this certainty built, that if we suffer we shall be
glorified?

It is built upon our union with Christ, it is built upon the communion we have
with the Church of God, we are all of one body, and it is built upon his own
experience; as verily as I have been afflicted, and have comfort: so shall you
that suffer, be comforted: what I feel, you shall feel.

Because in things necessary, there is the like reason from one to all: if one
be justified by faith, all are justified by faith; if one suffer and receive
comfort, all that suffer shall receive comfort: Divine comforts are from one to
all, from the head to the body, from the body to every member. If Christ
suffered, I shall suffer, if I be of his body; if Christ was comforted, I shall
be comforted. Divine truths they agree in the head, and the Members; if it be
true in one, it is true in all St. Paul felt it in his own person, and says
he, as I have felt afflictions. increase, and comforts increase: so shall it be
with you, you shall be partakers of the comfort now, or hereafter. And it is
built likewise upon Gods promise, which is surer then heaven and earth, If we
suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him, as the Apostle says, Romans 8.
All these are grounds to found this steadfast hope on. And then the nature of
God, he is a just God, a holy God, and when we have taken the ill, we shall
find the sweet, as in 2 Thessalonians. 1. It is just with God, to render to them that
afflict you trouble, and to you comfort. God has pawned his justice upon it,
and he will observe this order; where he begins in trouble, he will end in
comfort; it is just with God, and therefore I may be persuaded.

It should be a special comfort to all that are in any sanctified cross,
whether it be for a good cause or no. If a man find that he stands out for a
good cause, then there is more matter of joy: it is matter of triumph then: but
if they be crosses common to nature, if a man find them sanctified (as they are
only to Gods Children, they learn humility by them, they learn
heavenly-mindednesse, they learn patience, they learn more carfulness by
their afflictions, if it be thus sanctified) then a man may say to such a one,
As you partake of the sufferings, so you shall partake of the comfort, though
you feel it not for the present.

Is it not a comfort, for a Patient to have his Physician come to him, Comfort
to Christians.
whom he knows to be wise, and speaks by his book, to say to him, Be of good
comfort, you shall never die of this disease; this that I give you will do you
good: there was never any that took this potion but they recovered: would not
this revive the patient? Now when the Physicians of our souls shall come and
tell a man, by discerning his state to be good, by discerning signs of grace
in his abasement, Be of good comfort, there is good intended to you; your
sufferings shall end in comfort undoubtedly: we may well be persuaded of this,
God will never vary his order. Therefore when we are in any trouble, and find
God blessing it to us, to abate our pride, to sharpen our desire, to exercise
our graces, when we find it sanctified, let it comfort us, it shall turn to our
further comfort. We find a present good that is a pledge of a further good. It
will make a bitter potion to go down, when the Physician says, it will do you
good: how many distasteful things do poor Creatures endure and take down to
cure this carcass? it were offensive to name what distasteful things they will
take to do them good.

Let us take this cup from Gods hand, let us endure the Cross patiently
whatsoever it be. It is a bitter cup, but it is out of a Fathers hand, it is
out of a sweet hand. There may be a miscarrying in other Physic, but Gods
Physic shall certainly do us good; God has said it, All things shall work for
the best to those that love him, he has said it beforehand, we may presume,
and build our persuasion upon this issue, that all things shall work for our
good. What a comfort is this in all the entercourses, and changes of this life,
when we know before that whatsoever we meet with, it has a command from God to
do us good, it is medicinable, (though it seem never so ill) to do us good, to
work ill out of us, by the blessing of God, But to proceed.

VERSE. 8, 9. For we would not, Brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble,
which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life. But we had the sentence of death in
our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises
the dead.
HEre Saint Paul comes to the particular explication of what he had generally
spoken before: he had generally said before, that he had both comfort and
affliction; but now he specifies what afflictions they were. I would not have
you ignorant of the troubles which came to us in Asia, etc.

I would not have you ignorant of.] He knew it was behofull for them to know:
therefore to insinuate into their respect the more, he tells them of it.
Indeed, to know both together is very sweet and comfortable, to know both the
afflictions of Gods people and their comforts, as here, he tells them what ill
he endured in Asia, and how God delivered him: to see how these are linked
together in Gods people, is very comfortable, therefore I would not have you
ignorant.

Now, that they might not be ignorant, he sets before their eyes the particular
grievance that he suffered in Asia. And see how he does raise himself by
degrees, and represent it to them most lively.

First of all, says he [We were pressed out of measure.] There is one degree,
we were pressed: It is a metaphor, we were pressed, as a Cart is pressed under
sheaves, as a man is pressed under a burden: as a Ship that is over-laden, is
pressed deep down with too much burden: so it was with us, we were pressed with
afflictions; afflictions are of a depressing nature, they draw down the soul,
as comfort raises it up.

[Out of measure.] There is the second degree, they were not only pressed, but
pressed out of measure.

[Above strength] Above my strength, above ordinary strength. And he rises
higher still, the waters rise higher (insomuch that we despaired of life,) we
despaired of any escaping out of trouble at the present encounter, nay, we did
not see how we should escape for the time to come.

Nay, it was so great (in the first place,) that we passed (the sentence of
death upon our selves.) It is a speech taken from malefactors that are
condemned: for even as they having the sentence pronounced upon them, we
account them dead men, they esteem themselves so, and so do others esteem them;
the sentence being passed upon them: so I even passed the sentence on my self,
seeing no evasion or escape out of the troubles I was in, the sentence of death
passed upon me. We had the sentence of death in our selves. It was not passed
by God, nor by the World: for they had not decreed to kill him, but he passed
it upon himself when he saw no way to escape. He was deceived though (as
oft-times Gods Children are) for he died not at that time.

And then afterward he sets down the end why all this was, a sweet end, a
double end, (That we should not trust in our selves:) what should we trust in
then? (But in God that raises the dead.)

First to speak of his grievance, and then of the reason why God did thus
follow him. We would not have you ignorant.


He prevents all scandal by this, I would not have you ignorant, I am so far
from caring, or fearing, or being ashamed, that you should know of any
affliction that I suffer, that I would not have you ignorant of it: for know
this, that when you know my afflictions you shall know my deliverance also. St.
Paul was wondrous scrupulous at this, left they should take any offense at his
sufferings: indeed it is the state of Gods Children, their worst Good men in
affliction censured.
cross: sometimes are censures upon them for the cross, the harsh censures of
others in their troubles; It was the last, and the greatest of Job's troubles,
that, and his wife together, when his house was overthrown, his Children
killed, his goods taken away, himsef stricken with boiles: then for his
indiscreet friends, to become miserable comforters: those that should have
comforted him, to become censurers and judges of him, as if he had been a man
deserted, and forsaken of God, as if all had been from God as a punishment for
his sins: this was his grearest cross, as it was his last, when his wife in
his bosom, she that should have comforted him most, should solicit him to ill,
and his friends by their rash and vile censures to make his cross heavier: So
it is with Gods Children in the world, they cannot endure hardness in the
World, they cannot be used otherwise then their cause deserves: but they must
also undergo hard censures, that grieves them more then the cross it self. It
was the case of this blessed Apostle, the Spirit of God in him therefore sets
him to mention his affliction with boldness and confidence, yea, with comfort
and joy, I would not have you ignorant, I am not of the mind of carnal men,
that would have it concealed, nay, I would not have you ignorant, I pray
understand it: he lays it open to their view, that they might be affected with
it, as he was: for those things that we are affected with, we are large in the
discourse of them: he shows that the misery though it were past, and were off,
yet he was affected with it: We were pressed out of measure above strength.
This seems Object.
to thwart another place of scripture in 1. Cor 10. 13. God is faithful, and
will 1. Cor 10, 13.
lay no more upon you then you shall be able to bear: and yet here he says, we
were afflicted above strength, how can these hang together?

I answer, God will not suffer his Children to endure any thing above strength,
above that they are able to bear, especially in spiritual evils, but for
sickness and persecution or such, sometimes he may lay more upon them then they
have present strength to bear.

But, put the case that St. Paul speaks of inward grievance, and outward
afflictions too, as both usually accompany one another: St. Paul's meaning is
here undoubtedly, We were pressed above strength; that is, above ordinary
natural strength, that unless God had made a supply by a new supernatural
strength, we had never been able to endure it: therefore take it so, above
ordinary natural strength: for extraordinary crosses, must have extraordinary
strength, and crosses with grievance of spirit must have more then natural
strength to bear them.

Again, Where it is said, Insomuch that we despaired of life, as if he had
cared much for his life, this seems to cross another place, Phil. 1. I Object.
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and here he seems to be very
careful in a strait, lest he should die.

I answer, We must take St. Paul in diverse considerations and respects: As St.
Paul has finished his course, and done his work, so, Henceforth is Answ.
laid up for me the crown of righteousness: so he thinks of nothing but life
and glory; he cares not for his life: but take Saint Paul in the midst of his
course. and so he had a care to his charge. Take Saint Paul as he looked to
glory, so he desired to be dissolved: take him as he was affected to edify the
Church, so he labored to live by all means, and so he says he despaired of
life, as desiring to live to do good to the Church.

Again, It may be Objected against the last, We received the sentence of death
in our selves. St. Paul dyed not now, and he had the Spirit of God in Object.
him, to know what he spoke; how does this agree then that he had the sentence
of death passed?

I answer, St. Paul spoke according to the probability of second causes, Answ.
according to the appearance of things, and so he might pronounce of himself,
without danger, (as being no sinful error) that indeed I am a dead man, I see
no hope of escaping, if I look to the probability of second causes all my
enemies are about me, I am in the Lions mouth, there is but a step between me
and death. He does not look here to the decree of God, but he looks to the
disposing of present causes: So Gods' children are often deceived in themselves
in that respect, it is no great error; for it is true what they speak in
regard of second causes, though it be not true in regard of Gods decree.

The Objections being satisfied, we may observe some points of doctrine.

And out of the first part of St. Paul's trial, which some take it to be that
in Acts 19. At Ephesus Dimetrins the Smith raised up a trouble against him,
when they cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: but those are but
conjectures. It may be it was some great sickness, it may be some other
affliction: the Scripture is silent in the particular what it was. To come then
to the points themselves. In the first part, this is considerable in the first
place, that God suffers his Children to fall into extreme perils and dangers.


And then secondly, that They are sensible of it.

For the first,

God suffers his children to fall into great extremities. This is clear here,
we see how he rises by degrees, We were pressed above measure, above Doct. God
suffers his Children to fall into great extremity.
strength, that we even despaired of life, we received the sentence of death in
our selves. He rises by five steps, to show the extremity that he was in. This
is no new thing, that God should suffer his Children thus to be exercised.

It is true in the head, it is true in the body, and it is true of every
particular member of the body.

It is true of our head Christ Jesus himself: we see to what exigences he was
brought, in what danger of his life oft-times he was, as when they would have
cast him down from the mount, Luke 4. and when in apprehension of his Fathers
wrath, he sweat water and blood in the garden, and on the Cross cried out, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? none was ever so abased as he was, he
humbled himself to the death of the Cross, nay, lower then the Cross, he was
in captivity in the grave three days. They thought they had had their will on
him there: they thought they might have trampled on Christ: and no doubt but
the Devil triumphed over the grave, and thought he had had him where he would:
but we see afterward God raised him again gloriously.

Now as the head was abased even unto extremity: So it is true of the whole
body of the Church from the beginning of the world. The Church in Egypt was in
extremity before Moses came: therefore a learned Hebrician Capne (that brought
Hebrew into these western parts) was wont to say, When the tale of brick was
doubled, then comes Moses: that is, in extremity, when there was no remedy,
then God sent them deliverance. In what a pitiful case was the poor Church and
people of God in Hesters time? there was but a hairs breadth between them and
destruction, it was decreed by Haman, and they had gotten the Kings decree too,
they were as it were between the hammer and the anvil, ready to be crushed in
pieces presently, had not God come between. And so in Babylon the Church was in
extremity, insomuch as that when deliverance was told them, they were as men
that dream, as if there had been no such matter, they wondered at it. And so in
the times of persecution God has suffered his Church to fall into extreme
danger, as now at this time the Church is in other parts. I might draw this
truth along through all Ages. It is true of the whole body of the Church. It is
true likewise of the particular members. Take the principal members of it: you
see Abraham, before God made good his promise, he was brought to a dry body,
and Sarah to a dead womb, that they despaired of all second causes. And David,
though God promised him a Kingdom, yet he was so straightened that he thought many
times he should have died, I said in my haste, All men are liars; they tell me
this and that, but there is nothing so, he was hunted as a Partridge in the
wilderness.

It was true of St. Paul, we see what extremity he was brought unto; as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 118. I was afflicted sore, but I was not delivered to
death: Even as we say, only not killed. It is and has been so, with all the
members of the Church from Abel to this day: sometime or other, if they live
any long time, they shall be like Moses at the Red Sea; we see in what a strait
he and his company was there, there was the Egyptians behind them, the
Mountains on each side of them, the Red Sea before them, what escaping was
here for Moses? so it is with the poor Church and Children of God oft-times:
there are dangers behind them, and perils before them, and troubles on all
fides. God brings them so low as deaths door; sometimes by sickness, as there
is an instance in Psalm. 107. of those that go down to the sea in ships, He
brings them to deaths door, says the Psalmist.

What is the reason, that by persecution and afflictions, by one grievance or
another, God brings his Children to such a low ebb?

The reasons are many.

The first may be, he will thus try what mettle they are made of, light Reas.
1.
afflictions, light crosses will not try them thoroughly, great ones will.
Jonas that slept in the Ship, he falls a praying in the Whales belly; he that
was pettish out of trouble, and falls a quarrelling with God himself, in trouble
he falls to praying; when he was in the bottom of hell, as he says himself.
Little afflictions may stand with murmuring, and repining: but great ones try
indeed what we are; what we are in great afflictions, he are indeed.

Again, To try the sincerity of our estate, to make us to know our selves; to
make us known to the world, and known to our selves, what Reas. 2.
good we have, and what ill we have. A man knows not what a deal of looseness he
has in his heart, and what a deal of falseness, till we come to the cross, and
to extremity: Whereas before, I thought I had had a great deal of patience, a
great deal of faith, and a great deal of heavenly mindedness: now I see I have
not that store laid up as I thought I had. And sometime a man is deceived on the
contrary: I thought I had had no goodness in me, and yet in extremity, such a
one goes to prayer, he goes to the Word of God, to the communion of Saints, he
delights in good things, and only in those: extremity makes him discern and
know himself for ill, and for good, and makes others to know him too, that is
another end.

Again, God suffers us to fall into extremity, to set an edge upon our desires,
and our prayers, to make us cry to him, Out of the deep I have cried Reas. 3.
unto thee, O Lord. When a man is in the deep, it is not an ordinary prayer
will serve, but he must cry: God loves to hear his Children speak to him; he
loves the voice of his children, it is the best music that he delights in:
therefore he will take a course, that he will be sure to hear from them; and
rather then they shall neglect prayer, he will suffer them to fall into some
rousing sin, into such a state and condition, that they may dart up prayers,
that they may force prayers out of the anguish of spirit, that their prayers
may be violent, that will take no denial, that they may be strivings with God,
that they may wrestle with God as we see in Jacob and the woman of Canaan, that
they may be importunate, and never leave him nor take any denial.

Again, God suffers his Children to fall into this extreme peril and danger,
not only to try them, what good they have in them; but when he Reas. 4.
has tried it to exercise it, to exercise their faith, and their patience. St.
Paul had a great deal of grace in him, and God would be sure to have a great
deal of trial, and exercise of it; and therefore he suffered him to fall into
extreme dangers, that so all the patience, and all the ^aith he had might be
set on work. And so it was in Job, God had furnished his Champion with a great
measure of patience, and then he singles him out to the combat; he brings him
into the lists to encounter with Satan and (...) triumph over Satan, and all
the evils he suffered whatsoever.

Again, it is to perfect the work of mortification, to let patience have her
Reas. 5.
perfect work, and ^aith, and prayer to have their p^ect work, to perfect all
graces, and so to perfect the work of mortification: for in extreme dangers, he
weanes us perfectly from the world, as much as may be, nothing will do it if
these will not. St. Paul came to many Cities, and there he thought oft-times to
have great matter of entertainment, and instead of that he was whipped and
misused: God used the matter so, to mortify pride and self-confidence in St.
Paul; he scoured him so from pride, that he should not go out of the City,
but he should be well scoured first by misusage. So rather then God will suffer
his Children to go to hell, and rather then he will suffer them to live in the
world here, without glory to their profession, without manifesting of grace, to
mortify and subdue their base earthly affections, he will scour them, to
subdue their pride, and to subdue their earthly mindedness; we might prevent
the bitterness of the Cross, if we would: we might prevent his mortifying of us
by afflictions, by the mortification of the spirit: but because we are
negligent in that work, to perfect the work of mortification, he is forced to
lay here any crosses and extreme dangers upon us.

Lastly, God does this for another end, that he might be sure by this means to
prepare us for greater blessings: for in what deep measure we Reas. 6.
are humbled by any deep afflction, in that measure we are prepared for some
blessing. Humility does empty the soul, and crosses do breed humility: the
emptiness of the soul fits it for receipt: God therefore does empty us by
crosses, that we may be fit vessels to receive some larger measure of grace and
comfort. For as it is said before, As our tribulations increase, so our
comforts increase: therefore it is a good sign, that God intends much
spiritual good to any man, when he lays some heavy load upon him in this
world: all is to prepare for some greater comfort, and some greater measure of
grace.

Why does the Husbandman fall upon his ground, and tear and rend it up with
the Plow, and the better the ground is, the more he labors to kill weeds, is
it because he has an ill mind to the ground? No, he means to sow good seed
there, and he will not plow a whit longer, then may serve to prepare the
ground. It is the Holy Ghosts comparison, Isa. 28. So likewise the Goldsmiths,
the best metal that he has, he tempers it, he labors to consume the dross
of it, and the longer it is in the fire, the more pure it comes forth: so God
keeps his Children under crosses, and does plow them, they neglect to plow
themselves, and he is feign to set plowers that will do it indeed, some ill
minded men, or some cross: if they would plow themselves, and examine
themselves, they might spare God the labor: but when they are negligent, God
takes the labor into his own hand, and sets others on work, that will do it
to purpose, but all is to prepare them for heavenly seed, for grace and
comfort, that in what measure we have been depressed (as he says here, we were
pressed above measure,) in that measure he means to lift us up by heavenly
comfort.

And (which is a clause of that) that we might set a price upon the comforts,
when they come: for when he has so prepared us for it, and then we receive it,
then comfort is comfort indeed. Comfort in it self is all one, and glory in it
self is all one, first and last: but it is not all one to the person; comfott
is indeared to a person that has been kept under and been dieted before: then
when it comes, he sets a great value upon it, when he has been without it so
long.

Our nature is so, that we value things by the want of them, rather then by the
present enjoying of them, after we have wanted it, and have been long time
prepared for it, then when it comes, it is welcome indeed. For these, and many
such like ends, we must be willing to approve of Gods holy and wise
dispensation in this, in ordering matters so with his children, in bringing
them to great dangers of body, in danger of life, sometimes to spiritual
desertions, leaving them to themselves, as if he had no care of them. But St.
Paul speaks especially here, of outward crosses; you see the reasons of it.

The Use of it, is first, that we should not pass a harsh, unadvised, rigid
censure upon our selves, or others, for these respects; for any great
affliction Use 1* Not to censure those that suffer.
or abasement in this world. The world is ready to pass their verdict
presently upon a man: Oh, such a one, you see what a kind of man he was, you
see how God follows him with crosses: so uncharitable men judge amiss of the
generation of the righteous. Whereas they should set the Court in their own
hearts, and begin to censure there, and to examine themselves, they go out and
keep their Court abroad: but I say, pass not a harsh censure upon others, or
on thy self, no, not for extreme dangers: for God now is making way for great
comfort, let God go on his way, without thy censuring of him.

Again, This should teach us, that we should not build overmuch confidence Use
2. Not to be confident of earthly things.
on earthly things, on the things of this world, neither on health of body, or
on friends, or on continuance of life: alas! it is Gods ordinary course, to
strip us of all in this world: we think of great reputation: but says God, I
will take that from you, you shall learn to trust in me. You think you have
strong, and vigorous bodies, and you shall live long, and therefore you will
venture upon such and such courses. I but God suffers his children to come to
extreme dangers and hazards, that they think the sentence of death is passed
upon them.

And since this is Gods course with the body, and with the Members, and with
our head Christ himself, shall we think to have immunitie, and to escape, and
not look to Gods order?

The Church is in great misery, and we are negligent in prayer, we think there
are many good people, and there is strong munition, etc. As if when Gods people
are in security, and forget him and his blessings, it were not his course to
strip them of all, to suffer them to fall into extreme dangers: have we not the
Church before our eyes to teach us? Let us trust therefore in nothing in this
world.

So much for that point.

The second thing in the first part is this, that As Gods Children are brought
to this estate, so they are sensible of it.


They are flesh and not steel, they have not the strength of steel, as Job
Doct. Gods children sensible of afflictions.
says, they are men, they are not stones: they are Christians, they are not
Stoics. Therefore St. Paul as he was in extremity, so he apprehended his
extremity: and with all his heart, he would have escaped if he could: he looked
about to all evasions how he might escape death. Gods children are sensible of
their crosses; especially they are sensible of death, as he speaks here of
himself, We despaired even of life it self. The word is very significant in the
original, we were in such a strait that we knew not how to escape with life,
so that we despaired of life: we would have escaped with our lives; but we saw
no way to escape. To make this clear, there are 3. things in Gods Children.

There is Grace. Nature. Corrupt nature, nature with the tang of Corruption.

Grace that looks upward, to glory and comfort. Nature looks to the present
grievance, nature looks not to things to come, to matters revealed in the Word,
to supernatural comforts: nature looks to the present cross, even nature
without sin. Corrupt nature feels, and feels with a secret murmuring and
repining, and heaviness and dullness: as indeed corrupt nature will always have
a bout in crosses, it will always play its part, first or last. There are always
these three works in the Children of God, in all extremities. Grace works, and
that carries up, up still, trust in God, it looks to heaven, it looks to the
end and issue, that all is for good. Nature it fills full of sense and pain,
and makes a man desire remedy and ease. Corrupt nature stirs a man up to fret,
and say, what does God mean to do thus? it stirs a man oft-times to use ill
means, indirect courses.

St. Paul was sensible, from a right principle of nature: and no doubt here was
some tang of corruption with it, he was sensible of the fear of death. Adam in
innocence would have been affected, and exquisitly sensible (no doubt) if his
body had been wronged: for the more pure the complexion, the more sensible of
solution (as Physicians say) when that which should be knit together: if any
thing be loosed by sickness, or by wounds, that should by nature not be hurt,
but continue together, it breeds exquisite pain. As to cut that which should
not be cut, to disjoyn that which should be together, this is in nature.

The Schoolmen say, (and the reason is good) that Christ's pains were the
greatest pains, because his senses were not dulled and stupefied with
sensuality, or indirect courses: he had a body of an excellent temper, and he
was in the perfection of his years when he died; therefore he received such an
impression of grief in his whipping: and when he was crowned with thorns, that
was it that made him so sensible of grief, that when he sweat, he sweat drops
of blood, and upon the cross it made him cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

Gods Children out of a principle of nature, are sensible of any grievance to
this outward man of theirs, to the body, especially in death, as we see here
St. Paul. And there is most patience where there is most sense, it is stupidity
and blockishnesse else.

Why are Gods Children so sensible in grief, especially in death? Quest.


Oh there is a great cause: indeed in some regards they are not afraid of it:
Ans.
for death is an enemy to nature, it is none to Grace; but when I speak Reas.
1. Death anenemy to nature, and to natural comforts.
not of Grace and Glory, but of nature: has not nature great cause to tremble
at death, when it is an enemy to nature, even to right nature? It is the King
of fears, as Job says: it is that Tyrant that makes all the Kings of the earth
to tremble at him: when death comes, it is terrible, why? because it strips us
of all the contentments of this life, of all comforts whatsoever we have here.
Nature without ^n is sensible of earthly comforts that God has appointed for
nature: and when nature sees an end of them, nature begins to give in, and to
grieve.

Again, death parts the best friends we have in this world, the body and Reas.
2. It parts the best friends.
the soul, two old friends, and they cannot be parted without exquisite grief.
If two friends that take contentment in each other, common friends cannot part
without grief, how shall these bosom-friends, these united friends, body and
soul, part without grief? This marriage between the soul and the body cannot be
disunited without exquisite pain, being old acquaintance.

Again, nature abhors death, it hinders us of all employment, it hinders of all
service of God in Church and Commonwealth. And so grace which Reas. 3. Itcuts
off all employment.
is beyond nature, does a little desire the continuance of life.

But nature, even out of no sinful principle, it sees that now I can serve God
no longer, I can do God no more service, I can do good no longer in this World:
and therefore it takes it to heart. Our Savor says, While you have light,
walk: the night comes: when no man is able to work, the night of sickness
and death. So it breeds discomfort, and is terrible that way.

Again, in death we leave those that cast their care upon us, we leave Reas. 4.
We leave those we had care of.
often times Wives and Children, without Husband or Father: those that had
dependence upon us: and this must needs work upon nature, upon a right
principle of nature: indeed the excess of it is with corruption always.

Again, in death there is great pain. They say, Births are with great Reas. 5.
Pain in death.
pangs (and so they are.) Now death is a birth, the birth of immortality, no
wonder then if it have great pangs: therefore nature fears it even for the
pangs, the concomitants that are joined with it.

And then in death, nature considers the state of the body presently after
Reas. 6. The horror of the grave.
death, that, that goodly body, that strength, and vigor I enjoyed before,
must now be wormes-meat, I must say to the worm, Thou art my brother, and to
corruption, Thou art my mother, and the like, as it is in Job. That head, that
perhaps has ruled the Commonwealth, the place where I lived, it must lie
level with others: and that body that others were inamoured with, it must now
be so forlorn, that the sight of it will not be endured of our best friends.
Nature considers what the estate will be there, that it shall turn to
rottenesse ere long: that the goodliest persons shall be turned to dust, and
lie rotting there till the day of the Resurrection.

Faith, and Grace looks higher: but because, we have nature, as long as we are
men, these and such like respects work upon nature, and make death grievous.

But besides the glass of nature, and these things here in the World, look
upon it in the Law of God, in that glass, and so nature trembles, and Reas. 7.
Death the wages of sin.
quarrels at death. Death what is it? It is the wages of sin, it is the end of
all comfort, and nature cannot see any comfort after that, it is beyond nature.
Nature teaches us not that there will be a Resurrection of the body, nature
teaches not that the soul goes to God: here must be a great deal of Grace, and
a great deal of Faith, to convince the soul of this: nature teaches it not.

Now when besides this, the Law of God comes, and faith. Death came in by sin,
and sin is the sting of death: death is armed with sin, and sin comes in with
the evidences of Gods anger: here, unless there be Faith and Grace, a man is
either as Nabal, a stone and a fot in death, or as Judas, and Cain, swallowed
up with despair. It is impossible for a man that is not a true Christian, that
is not a good man, but that either he shouldbe as a stone, or desperate in
sickness and Death; without Grace, he must be one of them. If he be a wise
man, he cannot but despair in the hour of Death: For is it a matter to be
dallied with, or to be carried bravely out, as your Roman spirits, and Atheists
think? they account it a Glory to die bravely, in a stout manner. Is it the
terrible of terribles so to be put off? when all the comforts in this world
shall end, and all employments cease, when, there is eternity before a man, and
after death, hell, and eternal damnation of body and soul? Are these matters
to be slighted? it would make a man look about him: if a man have not faith and
Grace, he must eitherr despair or die like a stone: none but a good Christian
can carry himself well in the hour of death: nay, a good Christian is sensible
of death: and till he see Gods time is come, he labors to avoid it by all
means, as St. Paul does here.

But St. Paul had another ground beyond nature to avoid Death. He Reas 8. St.
Paul desired life to serve the Church.
knew himself ordained for the service of the Church: therefore he desired to
escape that he might serve God a longer time for the good of his Church.

Are Gods Children sensible of Death, and the danger of it, and out of a
principle of nature, and Grace too? How then should carnal wretched Use 1.
Terror to wicked men.
men look about them, that have not made their accounts even with God? the
report of Death to them should be like the handwriting upon the wall to
Belteshazer, it should make their knees beat together, and make their
countenance pale, it should strike them with terror, and like Nabal make their
hearts to die as a stone within them.

But it is a Use of comfort to poor deluded Christians: they think, alas, Use.
Comfort to Christians.
can my estate be good, I am afraid of Death? I tremble and quake at the name
of Death, I cannot endure to hear of it, but it most of all affects me to see
it: therefore I fear I have no Grace in me, I fear I have no faith in me.

Be not discomforted whosoever thou art, that say so, (if thou labor to
strengthen thy faith, and to keep a good conscience) for thou may do thus
out of a principle of nature: nature trembles at Death.

A man may do two things from diverse principles, from diverse respects, and
both without sin For example, in fasting, nature without sin desires meat, or
else fasting were not an afflicting of a man's body: but Grace that has another
principle, and that desires to hold out without sustenance, to be afflicted: so
here is both a desire, and not a desire, and both good in their kind. So a man
in the time of sickness, and death, he may by all means desire to escape it,
and tremble at it out of a principle of nature: but out of a higher principle
he may triumph: O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory: and
they that believe in Christ, shall never die. We are in heavenly places
together with Christ, we are as sure of heaven as if we were there. So out of
such kind of principles we may triumph over Death by Faith and Grace.

So let none be discouraged, nature goes one way, and faith and grace another:
a man may know when it is nature, and when it is grace; when grace subdues
nature, and subordinates it to a higher principle; a man need not be much
troubled.

Christ himself our head, he was afraid of death when he looked on death as
death: but when he looked upon death as a service, as a redemption, as a sweet
sacrifice to God, so with a thirsting I have thirsted; says he, he thirsted
after death in that respect: looking to his humane nature, to the truth of his
manhood, then says he, Oh that this cup might pass from me, but in another
consideration, he willingly gave his soul a sacrifice for sin to God.

The desire is as the objects are presented, let heaven and happiness be
presented, so death is a passage to it, so death is the end of misery, and the
beginning of happiness, so Gods Children desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, as St. Paul did. But look upon death otherwise as it is an enemy to
nature; as it is a stop of all employment in this world, and of all service to
the Church, that we can do God no longer service, and so a man may desire to
live still, and be afraid of death if he look upon death in the glass of
nature, and in the glass of the Law, likewise that it comes in as a
punishment, of sin so indeed it is terrible, it is the King of fears. But look
upon it in another glass, in the glass of the Gospel, as it is sweetened, and as
it is disarmed by Christ, and so it is comfortable, Better is the day of death;
then the day of birth: for in our birth we come into misery, in death we go
from it. So upon diverse considerations we may be diversely affected, and have
diverse rspects to things: for the soul of man is framed, so to be carried to
the present object, and therefore to a good man in some respects, at sometime
death is terrible, he trembles at it, which upon higher considerations and
respects he imbraceth willingly.

Indeed it is a sign of a wise man to value life, it is the opportunity and
advantage to honor God. After death we are receivers and not doers, then we
receive our wages: but while we are here, we should desire even for the glory
that is reserved for us, to do all the good we can, because the time of life is
that blessed advantage of doing good and of taking good. It is to be in heaven
before our time, to do others good, and to get evidence of heaven for our
selves. This is the second thing, that as Gods children are suffered to fall
into extreme dangers; so they are very sensible of them, especially in matter
of death which is the last enemy, there the Devil sets upon them indeed: he
knows that that is the last enemy, and that there he must get all, or lose all:
and he labors to make death more terrible then it is or should be. The way not
to fear death, and not to let nature have overmuch scope, is to disarm death
before hand, to pluck out the sting of it by repentance; weaken it before hand,
that it may not get the better. Even as we do with our The way not to fear
death.
enemies, the way to overcome them is to weaken them, to weaken their Forces,
to starve them if we can, to intercept all their provision. What makes death
terrible and strong? we put stings into it our sins, our sins against
conscience, the time will come when conscience will awaken, and it will be
then, if ever to our comfort, and then our former sins will stare in our faces,
the sins of our youth, the sins that we have before neglected soundly to repent
for, therefore let us labor this way to make death less terrible.

Again, That we may not fear it overmuch, let us look upon it in the glass of
the Gospel, as it is now in Christ, as it is turned clean another way. Now, it
has sweet names, it is called a dissolution, a departure, a sleeping, a going
to our Fathers, and such like. God does sweeten a bitter thing, that it may
enter into us with less terror: so it must be our wisdom to sweeten the
meditation of it, by Evangelicall considerations, what it is now by Christ.

And withal to meditate the two terms, from whence, and whither, what a
blessed change it is if we be in Christ, it is a change for the better, better
company, better employment, a better place, all better. Who would be grieved
at, and afraid of death? Let us recall the promise of the presence of God, he
will be with us to death, and in death: Blessed are those that die in the Lord.
And especially faith in Christ will make us that we shall not fear death, when we
shall see him our head in heaven before us, ready to receive us when we come
there; and to see our selves in heaven already in him: as verily in faith, and
in the promise, as if we were there, We are set in heavenly places with Christ
already. Let us have these and such like considerations, to sweeten the thought
of death.

But to touch this, which is an Appendix to that formerly mentioned, that Gods
children are deceived concerning their death oft-times.


The time of death is uncertain; St. Paul thought he should have dyed Observe.
Gods children are deceived in their death.
when he did not, he was deceived. There is a double error about death:
sometimes we think we shall not dye, when indeed we are dead men: sometimes we
receive the sentence of death, we pass a censure upon our selves, that we
cannot live, when God intends our escape: so it is uncertain to us, the hour
of death: sometime we are uncertain, when it is certain, sometime we think it
certain, when it falls not out so: both ways we are deceived.

Because God will have us while we live here to be at an uncertaintie for the
very moment of death, Our times are in his hand. Our time of life is in his
hand, we came into the world when he thought good: our time of living here, is
in his hands, we live just as long as he will have us: our time of death is in
his hand. The Prophet says not only, my time is in thy hands, but my times, my
time of coming into the world, my time of living in the world, and my time of
going out of the world shall be when thou shall appoint me; therefore he will
have us uncertain of it our selves, till the moment of death come. St. Paul was
deceived, He received the sentence of death in himself, but he dyed not at that
time.

So that the manner, and circumstances of death are uncertain, whether it shall
be violent, or fair death it shall beby diseases or by casualties, whether at
home or abroad: all the circumstances of death are hidden from us, as well as
death it self and the time of it.

And this is out of heavenly wisdom, and love of God to us: that we should at
all times be provided, and prepared for our dissolution, and change. It is left
at this uncertainty, that we might make our estate certain, to be fitted to
die at all times. Let us make that use of it, to provide every day: oh, it were
a happy thing if we could make every day (as it were) another life, a several
life, and pass sentence upon our selves, a possible, and probable sentence: it
may be this day may be the last day. And let us end every day, as we would end
our lives, how would we end our lives? we would end them with repentance for
our sins past, with commending our souls into the hands of God, with resolution
and purpose to please God in all things, with disposing all things wisely in
this world: Let us end our days, every day so as much as possible may be: let
us set every thing right; let us set the state of our souls in order, set all
in order as much as may be every day; it were a blessed course if we could do
so.

And this is one part, one main branch of our corruption, wherein it shows it
self strongly, that we live in an estate, that we are ashamed to die in. Come
to some men, and ask them, how it is with you? have you repented of your sins
past? have you renewed your purposes for the time to come? Yes, we do it
solemnly at the Communion: but we should renew our repentance, and renew our
Covenants every day, to please God that day. Do you do so now? If God should
seize upon you now, are you in the exercise of faith? in the exercise of
repentance? in the exercise of holy purposes, to please God? are you in Gods
ways? do you live as you would be content to dye? But Satan and our own
corruption bewitcheth us with a vain hope of long life, we promise our selves
that that God does not promise us; we make that certain, that God does not make
certain: indeed we are certain of death, but for the time, and manner, and
circumstances we know them not, sometimes we think we shall dye when we do
not, and sometimes we dye when we think we shall not.

Oh will some say, If I knew when I should dye, I would be a prepared man, I
would be exact in my preparation. Would thou so? thou art deceived; Saul
knew exactly he should die, he took it for exact, when the Witch in the shape
of Samuel, told him that he should dye by to morrow this time, and yet he dyed
desperately upon the swords point for all that, he did not prepare himself. It
must be the Spirit of God that must prepare us for this: if we knew never so
much, that we should die never so soon, we cannot prepare our selves, our
preparation must be by the Spirit of God: let us labor continually to be
prepared for it.

And let no man resolve to take liberty a moment, a minute of an hour to
sin; God has left it uncertain the day of death; what if that moment and
minute wherein thou resolvest to sin, should be the moment of thy death and
departure hence? for it is but a minutes work to end thy days; what if God
should end thy days in that minute? Let no man take liberty and time to sin,
when God gives him no liberty in sin. If God should strike thee thou go to
Hell quick, thou must sink from sin to Hell: It is a pitiful case, when as
eternity depends upon our watchfulness in this world. But to come to the end
and issue, why he was thus dealt with by God, carrying him through these
extremities. That we might not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the
dead.


Here is the end specified that God intended, in suffering him to be brought so
low, even to deaths door, that there was but a step between him and Gods end in
St. Paul's sufferings.
death; the end is double, That we should not trust in our selves, but in God
that raises the dead. It is set down negatively and positively. First, That we
should not trust in our selves, and then that we should trust in God: And the
method is excellent: for we can never trust in God, till we distrust our
selves, till our hearts be taken off from all confidence in our selves, and in
the creature, and then when our hearts are taken off from false confidence;
they must have somewhat to rely on, and that is God or nothing: for else we
shall fall into despair. The end of all this was, that We might not trust in
our selves, but in God that raises the dead.

The wisdom of heaven does nothing without an end proportionable to that
heavenly wisdom: so all this sore affliction of the blessed Apostle, what aimed
it at? To pull down, and to build up; to pull down selfe-confidence, That we
might not trust in our selves: and to build up confidence and affiance in God:
but in God that raises the dead.

We being in a contrary state to grace, and communion with God, this order is
necessary, that God must use some way, that we shall not trust in our selves;
and then to bring us to trust in him: so these two are subordinate ends one to
another: We received the sentence of death, that we might not trust in our
selves.

From the dependence this may be observed, that The certain account of death,
is a means to weane us from our selves, Doct. Certainty of death helps
against self-confidence.
and to make us trust in God.


The sentence of death, the assured knowledge that we must dye, the certain
expectation, and looking for death, is the way to wean us from the world and to
fit us for God, to prepare us for a better life: you see it follows of
necessity, We received the sentence of death, that we should not trust in our
selves, etc.

The looking for of death therefore takes away confidence in our selves and the
creature. Alas! in death, what can all the creatures help? what can friends, or
physic, or money help? then honors, and pleasures, and all leave us then.

This the rather to note a corrupt Atheistical course in those that are to
Physician fault to flatter the sick.
deal with sick folk, that are extreme sick, that conceal their estate from
them, and feed them with false hopes of long life, they deserve ill of persons
in extremity, to put them in hope of recoverie. Physicians that are not Divines
in some measure, what do they? against their conscience, and against their
experience, and against sense: Oh, I hope you shall do well, etc. Alas! what
do they? they hurt their souls they breed a false confidence: it is a dangerous
thing to trust upon long life, when perhaps they are snatched suddenly away,
before they have made their accounts even with God, before they have set their
souls in that state they should do.

Therefore the best way is to do as good Isay did with Hezekiah, set thy house
in order for thou must dye, that is, in the disposition of second causes, thou
shall have a disease that will bring thee to death, and God had said so: God
had a reservation, but it was more then Isay knew at that time: Set thy house
in order, for thou must dye. So they should begin with God, to tell them (as we
say) the worst first: It is a pitiful thing that death should be accounted
the worst, but so it is, by reason of our fearfulness: deal plainly with them,
let them receive the sentence of death, that so they may be driven out of
themselves and the creature altogether, and be driven to trust in God that
raises the dead. Put thy soul in order, you are no man of this world: lest
they betray their souls for a little self-respect perhaps, because they would
not displease them.

It may be in some cases discreet to yield to make the means to work the
better, but where there is nothing but evident signs of death they ought to
deal directly with them, that they may receive the sentence of death. It
wrought with St. Paul this good effect: I received the sentence of death, that
we might not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead.

It is Gods just judgment upon Hypocrites, and upon many carnal wretched
persons, that are led with a false confidence all their life, that trust in the
creature, trust in friends, and riches, that will not trust in God, and will
not be taught to number their days in their life time: it is just with God to
their very death with false confidence, when they come to death, to suffer them
to perish in their false confidence, and so to sink into hell. It is just with
God to suffer them to have Atheists about them, or weak persons that shall say,
Oh, you shall do well enough, and then even out of a very desire to live, they
are willing to believe all, and so they die without all show of change: and as
they live, so they die, and are wretched in both. The life of a wicked man is
ill, his death worse, his estate after death worst of all: and this is one way
whereby God suffers men to fall into the snare of the Devil, when he suffers
not those that are about them to deal faithfully. St. Paul received the
sentence of death, that it might force him not to trust in himself, but in God
that raises the dead.

The second thing that is observable hence out of this first part, which is the
negative part, is this, that, Gods children are prone to trust in themselves.


The hearts even of Gods dear children, are prone in themselves (if they be
left to their own bent, and weight) to self-confidence, and will Doct. Gods
children are prone to self-confidence.
not hold up in faith and affiance in God, further then they are lifted, and
kept up by a Spirit of faith, which God puts into them. It was not in vain that
God used this course with blessed St. Paul, here is an end set down, that he
might not trust in himself. What, was he in peril to trust in himself? Alas! St
Paul, though he were a holy excellent man, yet he was a man, and in the best
man there is a double principle, a principle of nature, of corrupt nature, and
a principle of grace, and he works according to both principles: there is an
intermixture of both in all his actions, and in all his passions too, in his
sufferings. Corruption shows it self in his best deeds, and his best
sufferings, in every thing. That we should not trust in our selves, that is, in
any thing in our selves, or out of our selves, in the creature, it is all one.
We see by the example of S. Paul that the best are prone to trust in themselves.
All this hard usage of S. Paul that he received the sentence of death, it was
that he should not trust in himself. What was there danger in St. Paul, to
trust in himself? a man that had been so excercised with crosses and
afflictions as he had been, (no man more:) one would think that he had been
scoured enough of pride, and self-confidence; the whippings and misusings, the
stocks, the dungeons, etc. would not all this work pride, and self-confidence
out of the Apostle? No, so deeply it is invested into our base nature, our
trusting to present things, that we cannot live the life of faith, we cannot
depend upon God whom we cannot see, but withother eyes then nature ^h: it is so
deeply rooted in our nature, that the blessed Apostle himself must have this
great help, to be taught to go out of himself, and to depend upon God; we see
in what danger he was (in another place) to be lifted up with the revelations
he was fain to have a prick in the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him.

Hezekias his heart was lifted up (as the Scripture speaks) in his treasures,
that he showed to the King of Babylons Ambassadors; as if he were such a rich
Prince. And so holy David in numbering the people, to show what a mighty Prince
he was; it was his vain confidence, therefore God put him to a strange cure,
he punished him in that that he gloried in, he took away so many of his people
And so Hezekias was punished in that he sinned in, he was fain to have a purge
for it, his treasure was taken away and carried to Babylon. I said in my
prosperity (says holy David) I shall never be moved. The best are Subject to
false confidence, to trust in themselves.

One reason partly, because there is a mixture of corruption in us while we
live here: and corruption looks to this false principle in us, that will never
be wrought out with all the afflictions in the world: till death make an end of
corruption, there will be a false trust in our selves, and in the creature, we
cannot trust God perfectly as we should do.

Again, The reason is, because the things of this life are useful, and Reas.
1. The things of this life are useful.
commodious unto us, and we are nouzelled up in the use of them; and when Satan
does amplify them in our fancy, to be greater in goodness then they are, and
opinion sets a greater worth on them, if there were no Devil: but he
presenting these things in all the lusture he can, he helps the imagination,
which he has more to do with then with all the parts of the soul: and the
soul looks in the glass of opinion upon these things, and thinks they are
goodly, great matters, learning and wisdom, honor and riches; looking upon
them as they are amplified by the false fancy of others and the competition of
the world wherein we live; every man is greedy, and hasty of these things: All
men have not faith for better things, therefore they are mad of these. So the
competition of others, and the enlarging our conceits upon them, above their
worth, these make us put greater confidence in them, and then we come to trust
in our selves, and in them, and not in God.

Naturally we cannot see the nothingness of the creature, that as it came out
of nothing, so it will turn to nothing: but because it is sensible, these good
things are sensible, and present, and necessary, and useful: and naturally we
live by our senses, therefore we place our delight in them, that when they are
taken away, all the soul goes with them. As he that leans upon a crutch, or any
thing, when that is taken away, down he falls: so it is with a man by nature, he
trusts to these things, and when they go, his soul sinks together with the
things. Even as it is with those that are in a stream, when they are in a
running stream, they are carried with the stream; so all these things go away,
they are of a fleeting condition, we see them not in their passage, when they
are gone we see them past: we see not our selves vanish by little and little
out of this life, we see not the creatures present, we see not death, and other
things beyond death, as we should by the eye of faith: so things pass, and we
pass with them, the stream and we run together, it must be a great measure of
faith that must help this. We are prone to trust to sensible things naturally
we know what it is to live by sense: but to live by faith it is a remote thing,
to lead our lives by reasons drawn from things that are not seen: to live by
promises it is a hard thing, when things ^at are sensible cannot work upon us.
When we see men dye, and see the vanity of things sensible, it will not work
upon us: how then do we think that things that are supernatural (which are
remote far above sense) should work on us: it is a hard thing not to trust to
our selves, we are so adicted to live by sense: and there is some corruption in
St. Paul, in the best men, to trust to present things.

Who does not think, but he shall live one day longer? and so trusts to life.
As the Heathen man could say, There is not the oldest man but he thinks he may
live a little longer, one day longer: who makes that use of mortality, and the
uncertain fading condition of this life, as he should? and all because of a
false trust: as in other things, so in the continuance of life, we see we are
prone to trust, to put base false confidence in somewhat or other while we live
in this world.

Again, our nature being prone to outward things, and sunk deeply into Reas. 3.
Sensuality bes^ts nature.
them, it can hardly be recovered, it cannot be sober without much ado, and
brought from trusting of present things. You have some men that have things at
will in this world: they never know what faith means, all their life they live
by sense, their conscience is not awaked, and outward afflictions seize not on
them, and supply of earthly things they have: what Religion means, and what
God, and Heaven means, they have heard of them perhaps, but thoroughly, and
inwardly what it means they never came to know in this world without there be
some alteration and changes: they must have some changes, The wicked have no
changes, says the Prophet: but while they be as they are they know not God,
nor themselves, nor the vanity of earthly things. We speak the truth of God to
a company ofttimes, that are besotted with sensuality, and that have perpetual
supply of earthly things: speak to them of faith, and of things that are remote
from sense etc. they hear them as if they were in a dream; Nature is prone to
trust in present things, even in the best, in St. Paul himself.

Now our pronenesse to it does justify Gods dealing in many things. As why
does God humble great ones with great afflictions? why does he Use To justify
God* dealing.
humble great men, great and excellent Christians with great falls? that they
might not trust in themselves; no, not in their own present graces. 1. In the
falls of great Christians
God will not bring a man to salvation now, by grace in himself to give him
title to heaven; his graces must only be to help his evidence that he is not
an hypocrite, and to give evidence to others, that others may see his good
works etc. but if he come to trust in them once, to set them in Christ's stead,
God will abase his pride by suffering him to fall, that he may go out of
himself to be saved by Christ, and to seek for mercy in Christ.

And this is the reason why God in his providence does great things by 2. Doing
great things by weak means.
small means, without means, and against means sometimes, when he crosses and
curses great means, it is that we might not trust in our selves, we are prone
to self-confidence; and because God will cure it: for we must not carry it to
heaven with us, therefore he is forced to take this kind of dispensation.

Proud flesh will always devise something but that which it should do to uphold
it self withal; it will not be driven from all its holds, God has much ado to
work it out from all its holds; if it have not wealth, it will have wit, and
policy; or if it have not that, it will have Civil life, and outward works to
trust to, and to swell it with: but to come and give God the glory of Salvation
only by mercy, and to depend only on God, and to see an insufficiency in any
thing we do, it can hardly be brought to pass. Insomuch that that Article of
Justification by the obedience of Christ only, it is merely a spiritual thing,
altogether transcending nature.

No marvel if we find such opposition from the Church of Rome, and all, unless
it be the true Church, they understand not the main Article of salvation only
by mercy, because nature is so desperately prone to self confidence.

Let us take heed of false confidence in the things of this life, of confidence
Use. To take heed of false confidence. Signs of false confidence.
in any thing but in God.

But to come to some trials. You will say, how shall we know whether we put
overmuch confidence in them or no?

It is an easy matter to know it: We trust them too much when we 1 When we are
proud of these things.
grow proud upon any thing, when our spirits are lifted up. Charge rich men
that they be not high-minded, insinuating that they are in danger to be
high-minded: If riches increase set not your hearts upon them, says the
Psalmist; there is great danger when the heart is set on them, and lifted up,
when men think themselves so much the better as they are greater. Indeed if
they weigh themselves in a Civil balance it is so, but the corrupt nature of
man goes further, and thinks a man intrinsically better, and more beloved of
God for these things. It is a dangerous sign that we trust too much to them.

Again, overmuch grief if they be taken away any of them, or if we be crossed
in them: the grief in wanting betrays the love in enjoying. It is 2. Too much
grief in their loss.
a sign that Job had gotten a great measure of self-denial, not to trust in
himself or his riches, (though he were a rich man:) because when they were
taken away, Blessed be God, says he, thou gave them, and thou have taken
them away. He that can stand when his stay is taken from him, it is a sign he
trusts not too much to his stay: he that is so weak that when his stay is taken
away down he falls, it is a sign he leans hard. Those that when these things
are taken from them, when their friends are taken away, or their honors, or
riches are taken away, yet they can support themselves out of diviner grounds,
it is a sign they did not overmuch trust these things (nature will work
something but) overmuch grief betrays overmuch love always.

Again, (which is but a branch of the other) we may know that we overmuch set
by them, by fretting to be crossed in any of these things. A man Fretting at
crosses.
may know Achitophel trusted too much to his policy and wit, when he was
crossed he could not endure it, we see he made away himself for very shame.
When a man is crossed in his wit and policy, when he is crossed in those
projects he has laid: when he is crossed in his preferment, or riches, or
friends then he is all amort he frets, which is more then grieving; when he not
only greives, but with Achitophel he goes to ill courses, it is a sign he
trusted too much, and too basely to them before.

Again, when the enjoying of these things is joined with contempt and base
esteem of others it is a sign that we rest too much in them, there is 3. When
we contemn others that want them.
more trust put to them then they should bear, we should not in the enjoying of
honor, or riches, or pleasures, or any thing, think the meaner of others.

Especially security shows that we trust too much in them, when we bless our
selves, I shall do well, Soul, soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, 4.
Security.
says the fool, and he was but a fool for it, to promise certainty for
uncertainty. A man cannot stand in that which cannot stand it self: to promise
life in a dying condition, to promise any thing in this world when the very
nature of them is uncertain. Thou fool, says the Scripture. If his soul had
been so full of faith, as his Barnes were of Corn, he would never have said,
Soul, soul, take thy rest, for these things; but he would have trusted in God.
It is a sign we trust too much to these things, when we secure our selves, all
will be well, and bless our selves, as the Scripture speaks.

Again, it is a sign we trust too much to these things, when upon confidence of
these things we go to ill, and unwarrantable courses, and think to be born out
by these things. As when the younger sort shall pour forth themselves to
vanity, and are careless of swearing, and licentiousness, that they care not
what to do, they shall live long enough to repent, etc. This is a diabolical
trust, that God will give them no security in. So when men that have riches
will venture on bad causes, and think to carry it out with their purse: they
trust in matter of oppression, and think to bear out the matter with their
friends, or with their place, or with their wits, this is false trust. Thy
wisdom, has caused thee to rebel, as the Prophet says concerning Babylon:
they thought they had reaching heads, and so ventured upon rebellious courses.
When any of these outward things draw us to unwarrantable, unjustifiable
courses, it is a sign we plant too much confidence in them: and it is a sign if
we belong to God that he intends to cross us in them. The very confidence in
these things, has drawn many to ill courses, to do that that they should not
do, as good Josias, Hezechias, David and the rest.

Thus we see how we should examine our selves, whether we trust too much in
these things or no.

Now, since we are thus prone to this false confidence, and since we may thus
discern it: if we discern it in our selves, how shall we cure it? That in the
next doctrine. That we might not trust in our selves. From whence observe, It
is a dangerous state to trust in our selves.


This ill disposition, to trust in our selves, or any thing out of our selves,
Doc. It is a dangerous estate to trust in our selves.
but only in God (in whom we should trust) it is dangerous. For a man may
reason thus from the text: That which God is forced to take such desparate
courses for, as to bring such an excellent man as St. Paul to such extremity,
and all that he should not trust in himself, that he was not only prone to,
but it was a dangerous estate for him: but God brings him to deaths door, that
he received the sentence of death, that he might not trust in himself, that he
might see the nothingnesse of all things else, therefore it was a dangerous
estate for him to trust in himself. 1. In respect of God.


It is ill in respect of God. Our selves.

In respect of God: to trust to our selves, or the creature, is to Idolize 1.
It is Idolatry.
our selves, or the creature: we make an Idol of the thing we trust in, we put
God out of his place, and set up that we trust in, in Gods room, and so
provoke God to jealousy. When men shall trust their wits in matters of
Religion, (as in Popery they do, they serve God after their own inventions)
what a dishonor is it to God? as if he were not wise enough to prescribe how
he will be worshipped. Go after me, Satan, says Christ to Peter, he calls him
Devil, why, what hurt was it, he came with a good intention? That which Popery
think they please God most in, they are Devils in, and these things that they
teach are the doctrines of Devils. But the wisdom of the flesh is death, it is
not subject to the law of God nor can be subject, says the Apostle, Romans 8. So
it is dangerous, because it is offensive to God. There is a way that seems
right in a man's own eyes: the issues whereof are the issues of Death. It is
Idolatry in regard of God.

And it is spiritual Adultery: for what should take up our affections? 2. It
is Adultery
should we not place our joy, our delight, (which follows our trust always: for
trust carries the whole soul with it:) what should take up our joy, and
delight? should not God, and Heaven, and Heavenly things? should not these
things have place in our hearts, as they have in their own worth? when we take
these affections from God, and place them upon the creature, they are
Adulterous affections: when we love riches, or pleasures better then God that
gave us all, it is an Adulterous whorish Love, Oh ye Adulterer s, and
Adulteresses, says blessed St. James, know ye not that the love of this world
is enmity with God?

It is likewise falsehood: for it makes the creature to be that, that it is not,
and it makes God that which he is not: we despise him, and set up 3. It is
falsehood.
the creature in his room. There is a false witness always in false
confidence: indeed there are many sins in it.

There is Ignorance, not knowing the creature to be so vain as it is: there is
Ignorance of God, not knowing him to be All in all, as he 4. Ignorance.
is.

And there is rebellion, to trust in the Creature when God will not 5.
Rebellion.
have it trusted in. And there is impatience, when these supports are taken 6.
Impatience.
away then men grow to murmuring. There is almost all sins hidden in
self-confidence, and self-sufficiencie: you see the danger of it to God.

Besides that it is dangerous to our selves, it brings us under a curse, 2. To
our selves. It brings us under a curse Jer. 71.
Cursed is the man that makes flesh his arms, Jer. 17. that trusts in any
thing but God. It brings us under a curse, as I said, because it is Idolatry,
and spiritual Adultery. And then again, because leaning to a false prop, that
being taken away that shored us up before, down we fall with that we leaned on.

Now all things but God being vanity, we relying upon that which is vain, our
trust is vain, as the thing is vain: we can hope for no better condition then
the things we trust to, they are vain, and we are vain: so there is a curse
upon them.

Therefore we have great cause to hate that upstart Religion, that has been
devised for their own ends, for their own profit, because it would bring us
under a curse. They would have us to trust to our own works in matter of
salvation, to trust to our own satisfaction to be freed from Purgatory, etc.
They would have us to trust to creatures, to something besides God; to trust in
the mediation of Saints, to be our intercessors, etc. And what does this false
trust? it breeds despair at length.

What is the reason, that a well advised Papist, (that knows what he False
trust breeds despairs.
does) cannot but despair, or else renounce Popery? Because Popery carries the
soul to false props in matter of Justification: they renounce their own
Religion at the hour of death, as Bellarmine did: they live by one Religion and
die by another, which would not be if their Religion were good. For their
hearts tell them that they have not done so many works that they may trust in
them, and they have not been so well done that they may trust in them. It is a
dangerous thing. Cursed is he that trusts in man, or in any thing in man.

Nay, we must not trust our own graces, as they are in our selves, not by We
must not trust our own graces.
way of merit, no, not by way of strength, we must not trust our present
graces, to carry us out, without new supply to further us. It was Peter's
fault, Though all men deny thee, yet will not I: he trusted to his present
strength, he forgot that if he had not a new supply from the spring of grace,
that he should miserably miscarry, and so he died. All our righteousness to
trust to it, it is a broken reed. It is somewhat, if we place it in the due
place, to give us evidence that we are true Christians: but to trust in it by
way of merit, the Devil will pick so many holes in that kind of title, and
conscience will see so many flawes in it, if we bring no better title, then
either the holiness in us, or the works from us; the Devil and our own
conscience will spy so many flawes and cracks in it at the time of Death, that
we shall not dare to trust in it, but we must run out of our selves to Christ,
or else we die in desperation. Let us know these things: all things but God,
the more we know them, the less we trust in them: but it is clean contrary of
God, the more we know him, the more we shall trust in hm: the more we meditate,
and enlarge our hearts in the consideration of his divine essence every way,
the more we shall trust in him, They that know thy Name, will trust in thee,
Psalm. 9. Let us trust in no outward thing.

No, not in the humanity of Christ (I add that further:) we are very prone to
trust in things sensible: and the Apostles, because Christ was Not in the
humanity of Christ.
present with them, and comfortable among them: (as indeed he was sweet, and
loving; bearing with their infirmities, and encouraging them upon all
occasions) O they were loath to part with him; he tells them that he must leave
them, but they should not fare the worse, he would send them the Comforter. The
flesh it self profits nothing without the Godhead says he.

Trust not in the Sacraments above their place. It is a dangerous thing Not in
the Saements.
to put too much in any creature, (God is extremely offended at it) as not
only our adversaries the Papists, but proud persons among us, that are weary
of the doctrine of the Church, and will not submit (in their pride) to riper
judgments: they attribute too much to the Sacraments, as some others do too
little: they attribute a presence there, they make it an Idol, they give it
such reverence as they will not do to God himself: and from a false conceit.
Oh, there is I know not what presence. Therefore the Lutherans must needs in a
great degree be Idolaters, by their Consubstantiation: and the Papists by their
Transubstantiation, by their real presence. Coster says, and says truly, If
Christ be not there, we are the greatest Idolaters in the world.

But there is a more subtle kind of attributing to the Sacraments, that always
God gives grace with the Sacraments, the Sacraments convey grace always; as a
plaster it has a kind of power to eat out the dead flesh, and as Physic has
a power to carry away the ill humors: so the conveying of Grace is included in
the Sacraments: so they tie Gods Grace to these things.

Indeed, there is grace by them, though not in them. God gives grace to the
humble receiver: but otherwise, to him that comes not with an humble, believing
heart, they are seals to a blanck, there is no validity in them. All the good
use they have is to strengthen faith: and if there be not something before, to
be strengthened, and confirmed, and assured, they are but seals to a blanck. It
is in these things according to our faith, and according to our preparation,
and then God in the holy, and humble, and faithful use of them blesses his own
ordinance, for the increase, and confirming of our faith, and for the increase
and strengthening of all grace.

So that there is not any thing in the Church, but the proud, naughty heart of
man, will take hurt by it rather then submit to the pure, and powerful truth of
God: it will have by-ways to have Confidence in the flesh one way or other.

And many men rather then they will trust to sound repentance, and humiliation
for sin, they will trust to the words of absolution without it, and when are
they said, go to hell with a pardon about their necks. The false heart will
trust to outward things though it be damned for it; In their place they are
good, if they be used only as helps in their kind. We lay more weight upon
outward things, upon the Sacraments, and upon the words of the Minister then
they will bear, and never care for the inward powerful work of grace.
Everything of God is excellent in their order and kind, but our corrupt hearts
bring an ill report upon the things.

You see then, it is a dangerous disposition to trust any too much; it is to
Idolize them, and to wrong God, to take the honor from God; it is to hurt our
selves, and bring our selves under a curse; and to wrong the things themselves,
to bring an evil report upon the things. It is universally true, you shall
never see a false, bitter heart, that will not stoop to Gods plain truth, (they
will have by-ways of their own) but in some measure or other they are barren
of greater matters, and given up to some sensible bitterness, to
self-conceitednesse, and self-confidence; they are always punished in that kind
with a spiritual kind of punishment.

We must take heed therefore of trusting too much eo any thing, but God
himself: God is jealous of our trust, he will have us trust in nothing but
himself in matters of salvation; no not in matters of common life, not in
matters Politic and Civil: we must not build our trust in any creature so much
as to think our selves happy by them, or to think they connot deceive us: they
are creatures, of nothing, therefore they are prone to deceive, they are prone
to turn to nothing: therefore we must not build upon them overmuch, no not in
civil matters.

Indeed if we see the Image of God in any man, we may trust him; if we see him
faithful, and loving, and good, yet trust him as a man always, that is,
Creatures may be trusted subordinately.
as such a one as may deceive, and yet he may be a man, and a good man. So in
other creatures, in the use of Physic, and Wars, and Arms, etc. in danger we
may in some subordinate consideration trust to them; but we must use them as
means, that is, as such as God has free liberty to use to good, to help us,
and free liberty not to use: we must use them but not trust to them: Some trust
in Chariots, and some in horses, but our trust is in the Lord. And, Trust not
in Princes, as the Psalmist says, trust not in any thing.

If we trust in any thing, it mst be subordinate to our trust in God, it must
not be coordinate (as we say) that is not in the same rank, much Worldlings
trust creatures above God.
less above God: as worldlings trust in their wealth, they trust in their
friends above God: they trust not so much in heaven and happiness there, they
think not themselves so happy for that, as they do for earthly things. Nay,
they trust against God in confidence of their friends and of their purse.
Against God.
A carnal man makes riches his strong hold: he trusts them above God, and
against God. We must neither trust them with God, in a coordinate proportion
with him: nor above God, much less against God. What makes base flesh and
blood divellish in that respect, to attempt cursed means, against the truth,
and against good causes?

They bear themselves out with these things: perhaps the truth crosses them in
their designs, and shames them, and frets them. What makes them undermine good
causes, and go desperately to kick against the pricks, to dash themselves
against wrath which is stronger then they? They think to bear themselves out
with their greatness, with their friends, with some carnal support or other.
This is to trust against God, which is worst of all.

And this makes that Harlot of Rome so confident against the Church of God, I
sit as a Queen, says Babylon: not only outward Babylon, that was the type;
but spiritual Babylon, I sit as a Queen. I shall be hereafter as I am now:
therefore says God, Thy destruction shall come in one day: Thy destruction
shall come unrecoverably, and suddenly, because she blessed her self in an ill
course; as now at this day, they think all is sure.

If we trust any thing but God, we must trust them, as instruments, as helps in
their rank, and place which God has set them: so much and no more; Let a man
esteem of us, as Ministers of Christ, says St. Paul: if they esteem of us
more, it is too much; if less, it is too little, just so much; as Ministers,
but as Ministers of Christ. So there is a due to every thing; no more, for then
you wrong God; no less, for then you wrong the thing, and God too, just so
much as God would have it, and then we shall have just the grace that God
intends.

Seeing there is such a danger in false confidence, let us take heed of it by
all means. How to cure false confidence.


That we may not trust in our selves, (that is, in any earthly thing in our
selves, or out of our selves, wit, honor, riches, learning, or whatsoever, but
God and his truth and promises.)

Let us labor to have a sanctified judgment in every thing; to judge of
things in their nature, and order, and rank as we should do, and be not carried
with opinion of things. Judge of them as the Creator of things judges of them,
as God judges, and the Scripture judges.

Now of all outward things (that we are prone to trust in) how does the
Scripture judge of them? how does God judge of them? They are uncertain riches:
Riches they have wings, They are nothing, as the Prophet says, Will thou set
thy heart upon that which is nothing? They are vanity; they are of nothing, and
they tend to nothing.

When the hour of death comes, what will all these do good.? they are
uncertain, and weak, and inefficacious for that for which we trust them; they
will not make us happy, they commend us not a whit to God, he hates us no more
if we want them; he loves us no more if we have them. They make us not the
better in our selves, but the worse, they make us more indisposed to good
things.

We say of those that are intoxicate with any kind of phrenzie, or lunacie,
twice as much Physic will not serve their turn, as will serve another; because
of the distemper of their brain, and the inflammation of their blood and
spirits: certainly, it is true of those that are spiritually drunk with the
conceit of the creature, with honor, with riches, etc. three times, many times
so much means will not serve the turn to bring them to goodness, as will serve
meaner men.

What is the reason the poor receive the Gospel?

Because there is a lesser distance between them and the blessed truths of God
then in others (though perhaps they belong to God too,) for the things of this
life will work a little.

We say of weak brains, that strong drink does much weaken them, and so weak
stomachs, hard meat will not digest in them, it will overcome them. And weak
brains, though strong water overcome them not, yet it will weaken them: so in
these things, great parts, and great place, set a man further off from the
Gospel. A great deal of coruption cannot be overcome and digested without a
great measure of grace: the proportion of grace it must be great, it must be
treble to men that have great matters in this world, it must be greater then to
poorer men, who in a less distance from heaven.

Hence, we may see the reasons of Gods dispensation, why God does Why God
seldom works by great means.
seldom work by great means (I say seldom, sometimes he does, to show that
they are good means.) As it is said and observed by an ancient Father, that
seldom he saw any good come by general counsels: why? they are good in
themselves, but men trust too much upon them, and therefore God disappoints
them of that they trust to. Because the naughty nature of man puts too much
trust in these things, therefore God will not give that issue that we look for,
but on the contrary a curse.

Why does not God bless great preparations (many times) to war, etc? because
we put too much trust in them: here are too many, says God to Gideon; take
away some, here are too many to go to war. What is the reason that God where
the greatest excellencies are, adds some imperfection to balance them? Because
they should not trust in themselves.

What is the reason that in the Church, God chooses men of meaner parts, and
sufficiencies, the Disciples, Fishermen? If they had been great men, men would
have said, place had carried it, if they had been Scholars, men would have
said, that their learning had carried it: if they had been witty men, they
would have said, their wit had carried it: it had been no marvel, if they
should win the world: but when they saw they were mean men, fishermen, sitters
at the receipt of custom (and perhaps their parts were not great, then they
might attribute it to the divinenesse of the Gospel, to the divinenesse of Gods
truth, and to Gods blessing upon it.

What is the reason that God suffers excellent men to fall foully sometimes?
St. Peter himself, and David, etc. because they should not trust in themselves,
not trust in their grace, not trust in any thing, no not in the best things in
themselves.

What is the reason that God goes by contraries in all the carriage of our
salvation? That we should not trust in our selves. In our calling, he calls Why
God carries our salvation by contraries.
men out of nothing, He calls things that are not as if they were. In
Justification, he justifies a sinner, he that despaires of his own
righteousness; that no man should trust in any thing he has, or despair if he
want any perfection: God justifies a sinner that despairs of himself. In
sanctification, God sanctifies a man when he sees no goodness in himself: most
of all then he is a vessel fit to receive grace: And he does sanctify him
sometimes by his falls; he makes him good by his slips, which is a strange
course to make a man better by: Says St. Austin, I dare say and stand to it,
that it is profitable for some men to fall, they grow more holy by their slips.
As Peter, he grew stronger by his infirmity: this strange course God takes.
Why so? That we should not trust in our selves: In our calling, in our
justification from our sins, that we should not trust in our selves, nor
despair.

In Sanctification: nay, he takes a course that we shall grow better by our
falls: that we may be ashamed of them, and be more cautelous, and humble, and
more watchful for the time to come. In glorification he will glorify us but it
shall be when we have been rotten in our graves before, we must come to
nothing. So in every passage of salvation, he goes by contraries, and all to
beat down confidence in our selves, and that we should not distrust him in any
extremity: for then is the time for God to work his work most of all. That we
might not trust in our selves.


To help us further against this self-confidence, let us labor to know Learn
to know our selves.
our selves well, what we are distinct from the new creature, distinct from
grace and glory. Indeed in that respect we are something in God. If we go out
of our selves, and see what we are in Christ we are some body: for we are
heirs of heaven, we are Kings and Rulers over all, all things are subject to
us, hell, and sin, and death, we are some body there. But in that wherein our
nature is prone to put overmuch confidence, what are we? what are we as we are
strong, as we are rich, as we are noble, as we are in favor with great ones?
alas, all is nothing, because ere long it will be nothing. What will all be in
the hour of death, when we must receive the sentence of death? what will all
favors do us good? they will be gone. What will all relations, that we are
styled by this, and that title, what good will it do? alas! these end in death,
all earthly relations shall be laid in the dust. All the honors in the earth,
all riches, and contentments, all the friends that we have, what can they do?
nothing, all shall leave us there. And for us to trust in that which will fail
us ere long, and which being taken away, we receive a great foil, (for he that
leans to a thing, if that be taken away, down he falls) what a shame will it be?

As the Heathen man said, that great Emperor, I have been all things, and
nothing does me good now, when he was to die, indeed nothing could do him good.
Let not the rich man glory in his riches, nor the wise man glory in his
wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, says the Prophet, Jer. 9. 22. but
let him that glories, glory in the Lord.

Consider what the best thing is that we have of inward things, our wisdom;
wisdom if it be not spiritual, it is only a thing for the things of this
life, and we are often times deceived in it. It makes God to disappont us often
times, to make us go out of our selves; an excellent place for this we have in
Isa. 50. the last verse, Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, and compass your
selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your own fire, etc. (It is a
kind of Ironia) and the sparks that you have kindled; this you shall have of my
hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. Walk in the light of your own fire, walk
according to your own devises, and projects, this ye shall have at my hand, ye
shall lie down in sorrow. God catches the wise in the imagination of their own
hearts, he disappoints the counsel and the projects of Achitophel. God takes a
glory in it, to shame the policies and projects of those, that will be witty
in a distinct way against God, the best policy is to serve God, and to walk
uprightly; That we should not trust in our selves. But in God who raises the
dead.


This is the other branch, what we should trust in, In God, all this humbling
of the blessed Apostle even to deaths door, that he received the sentence of
death; it was first to subdue carnal confidence in himself, he was prone to
think himself stronger then he was, or that he should be upheld, that something
or other should keep him from death, that he might subdue carnal confidence,
and then that he might trust in God, it was all for these two ends: That we
might not trust in our selves, (or in any means) but in God that raises the
dead.

Was St. Paul to learn to trust in God, that had been so long a Scholar in
Christ's School, nay, a Master in Israel, was he to learn to trust in God? St.
Paul to learn to trust in God.


Yes, doubtless he was: it is a lesson that is hardly learned: and it is a
lesson that we shall be learning all our life, to go out of our selves, and out
of the creature, and to go further into God, to rely more and more upon him;
it is a lesson that we can never learn as we ought. Therefore weak Comfort for
weak Christians
Christians ought not to be discouraged, when they find defects, and weakness
in their trust: (our hearts are false and prone to trust outward things) but do
they groan under their corruptions? do they complain of themselves? do they go
out of themselves? their estate is good. The estate of a Christian it is a
growing, it is a conflicting estate: he comes not to full trust and confidence
in God, till he have gathered many experiments, till God have exercised him to
the proof thoroughly: therefore let them not be discouraged. A Christian is not
always like himself, he is in a growing estate. There is a weak faith, and a
strong faith, Oh ye of little faith. The Disciples had a little faith, as well
as Abraham, that was strong in faith. As long as we are on the complaining
hand, and on thestriving hand, and growing hand, all is hopeful. St. Paul
himself still strived against self-confidence, and still learned to trust in
God more and more.

But mark the order; first, God does all this, that we should not trust in our
selves: but that is not the thing he does mainly aim at, but another thing,
that we should trust in God who raises the dead: whence we may observe, that
God to make us trust in himself, is feign to cast us out of our selves.


His proper work is not to drive us out of our selves, that is a work
subordinate Doct. God to make us trust in him casts us out of our selves.
to a higher; but the furthest and last work is, that we should trust in him,
as the Prophet says, God does a strange work, he does a work strange to
himself, that he may do his own work: he does a work that does not concern him
so properly, that he may do his own work, as he is God, that is, to confirm and
settle us upon himself. But that he may do this, he must set us out of our
selves by crosses and afflictions; that is not his own proper work, to afflict
us, and to bring us low: for he is the Father of mercies; but that he may do
his own work, to bring us to him, and then do good to us, he must take this in
his way, and do this first. To make it clear. A Carpenter, Simile.
he pulls down a house; he takes it in pieces, his Art is not to pull down
houses, but to build them up: but he does that which does not belong to him
properly, that he may do that which does belong to him: for he will not build
upon a rotten foundation. So neither will God build upon a rotten foundation,
he will not build upon carnal confidence, upon carnal trust, upon pride, and
covetousness, but he will demolish that rotten foundation with afflictions and
crosses; he will use such means that we shall have small joy to trust in sin,
he will by crosses and afflictions force us to go from our sins, he will
demolish that rotten foundation, that he may raise up an excellent edifice, and
frame of the new creature, that shall endure to everlasting; the work of a
Physician is to cure nature, and not to weaken it, it is not his work to make
people sick, but to make them sound, if the body be distempered, it must be
weakened, he must carry the burden of ill, and noysom humors, before it be
strengthened; to make people sound, he must give them strong purgations, that
shall afflict them, and affect them, as much as the disease for a while, but
all is to make them lighter and stronger after, when they are eased of the
burden of noisome humors: and so it is in every other trade. So God shows his
skill in this great matter in bringing us to Heaven this way; he does that work
which does not properly concern him, to work at last his own blessed good
work: he afflicts us to drive us out of our selves, that we may come at last to
trust in him, in whom is all our happiness and good.

The reason of it is clear; for in a succession of contraries, there must be a
removing of one contrary, before another can be brought in. If a vessel be to
be filled with a contrary liquor, the first must have a vent, it must be
emptied of the worse that the better may come. So it is with us, Reas. One
contrary must be removed to make way for another.
we are full of self-confidence, as a vessel of naughty liquor, out must that
go, that better things may come in. So it is in plowing and in every thing
else, this is taken as a principle in nature; the order generally is this: that
we should not trust in our selves, that we might be brought to trust in God; he
brings us low, to receive the sentence of death, to drive us out of our selves,
that he may bring us to rely on him

The Use we should make of it, among many others is this, That we should not
take offense at God, when he is about his strange work (as we think) when he is
making us sick with Physic, with afflictions, and troubles. Let Use. Not to
murmr at Gods work.
us not think that he hates us; does the Physician hate the Patient when he
makes him sick? perhaps he stays a good while from him, till his Physic have
wrought thoroughly, but he does not hate him, but gives it time, and suffers it
to have its work, that so he may recover himself. Does the goldsmiths hate his
precious metal, when he puts it into the fire, and suffers the fire to work
upon it? what is lost? nothing but the dross: What is lost in the body by
sickness? the ill humors that load the body, and distemper the actions, and
functions of it, that it cannot work as it should, there is nothing lost, but
that that may well be spared: so when God goes about his work, he afflicts
thee, and follows thee with losses and crosses, he takes away friends and
credit, this outward thing, and that: all this is to give thee a purge, he
works a strange work, that he may work his own work, that he may bring thee to
himself.

Therefore let us be far from murmuring at this blessed work of God: let us
rather bless God for his care this way, that he will not suffer us to perish
with the world God might have suffered us to rot upon our dregs, that we should
have no changes, as the world has not: but he has more care of us then so.
The Husbandman will not plow in the Wilderness, the heathy ground shall go
unplowed long enough, he loves it not so well, as to sow good seed there: so
when God takes pains, and is at cost with any man, when he purges him, and
plows him, and hammers him, all this is to consume that which is naught, to
plow up the weeds, to fit him for the blessed seed of grace, to fit him for
comfort here, and glory in another world: why then should we murmur against
God? let us rather be thankful, especially when we see the blessed issue of
this, when we see our earthly mindedness abated, when we see our selves more
heavenly-minded, when we see our selves weaned from the world, when we see our
selves take more delight in communion with God: then, Blessed be God for
crosses and afflictions, that he has taken the pains, and would be at the
cost with us to exercise us. It is a ground not only of patience, but of
thankfulness, when God humbles us: be not discontent man, grudge not, murmur
not, God does a work that seems strange to thee, and which is not his own
proper work, that he may do his own work; that he may bring thee nearer to
himself, why do thou murmur at thy own good?

The Patient cries out of the Physician, that he torments him, he hears him
well enough, but he will not be advised by his patient, he means to advise him,
and to rule him: he would feign have comfort, he is in pain, and cries for
ease: but his time is not yet come. So let us wait, and not murmur under
crosses, God is doing one work, to bring to pass another: he brings us out of
our selves, that he may bring us nearer to himself.

And another Use that we may make of it, let us examine our selves, whether our
afflictions and crosses have had this effect in us, to bring us to trust Use 2.
To examine what effect afflictions work.
in him more; if they have, all is well: but if they make us worse, that we
fret and murmur, and feel no good by them, it is an ill sign: for God does
bring us low that we may not trust in our selves, but in him; Quem praesentia
mala non corrigunt, etc. Whom the presence of ill, and grievance amends not,
they bring to eternal grievance. This is Ahaz, says the Scripture: a strange
man, a wicked King, that notwithstanding God followed him with judgments, yet
he grew worse, and worse: This is Ahaz, he might well be branded. When a man
belongs to God, every thing brings him nearer to God: when a man is brought to
be more humble, and more careful, and more watchful every way, to be more
zealous, more heavenly minded: it is a blessed sign that God then is working a
blessed work, to force him out of himself, and to bring him nearer himself, to
trust in him. This we cannot too much consider of.

It should teach us likewise this, that we judge not amiss of the generation
of the righteous, when we see God much humbling them, when we see Use 3. Not to
judge amiss of the afflicted.
him follow them with sickness, with troubles and disgraces in the world,
perhaps with terror of consience, with descertions, be not discouraged: if he
be thy friend censure him not, add not affliction to his affliction; is not his
affliction enough? thou need not to add thy unjust censure, as Job said to
his friends. The more we are afflicted of God, the more good he intends to work
to us, the end is to bring us from our selves to trust in him.

It is a wicked disposition in men that know not the ways of God, they are
ignorant of the ways that he takes with his children: when they see men that
are Christians, that they are humbled and cast down and troubled, they think
they are men forsaken of God, etc. alas, they do not know Gods manner of
dealing, he casts them down that he may raise them up: they receive the
sentence of death against themselves that he may comfort them after, that he
may do them good in their latter end. Let this therefore keep us from censuring
of other men in our thoughts, for this hard course which God seems to take with
them.

And let us make this Use of it, when we are in any grievance, and God follows
us still, let us mourn and lament the stubbornsse of our hearts, Use 4. To
lament our stubbornness of heart.
that will not yield. God intends to draw us near to him, to trust in him: if
we would do this, the affliction would cease, except it be for trial, and for
the exercise of Grace, and for witness to the truth. When God afflicts
sometime for trial, and for witness, there is a spirit of Glory in such a
case, that a man is never afflicted in mind: but, I say, when God follows us
with sickness, with crosses, with loss of friends, and we are not wrought
upon, let us censure our hard hearts that force God to take this course.

And justice God in all this, Lord thou know I could not be good without
this, thou know I would not be drawn without this: bring me near to thy self
that thou may take away this heavy hand from me. The intemperate man that is
sick makes the Physician seem cruel. It is because I set my affections too
much on earthly things, that thou followest me with these troubles: we force
God to do this. A Physician is forced to bring his Patient even to skin and
bone; an intemperate Patienr sometimes, that has surfetted upon a long
distemper, he must bring him to Deaths door, even almost to death, because his
distemper is so settled upon him, that he cannot otherwise cure him: So it is
with God the Physician of our souls, he must bring us wondrous low, we are so
prone, so desperately addicted to present things, to trust to them, and to be
proud of them, and confident in them, that God must deal as a sharp Physician:
he must bring us so low, or else we should never be recovered of our perfect
health again, and all is that we might trust in God.

Observe we from hence another point, that God in all outward things that are
ill, intends the good of the Doct. God in all outward things that are ill in
tends the good of the soul.
soul.


He takes liberty to take away health, and liberty, and friends, to take away
comforts: but whatsoever he takes away, he intends the good of the soul in the
first place. And all the ills that he inflicts upon us they are to cure a worse
ill, the ill of the soul, to cure an unbelieving heart, a worldly, proud,
carnal heart, which is too much addicted to earthly things. We see here how God
dealt with St, Paul: all was to build up his soul in trust and confidence in
God, all was for the soul.

The reason is, other things are vanishing, the soul is the better part, the
eternal part: if all be well with the soul, all shall be Reas. The soul the
better part.
well otherwise at last. If it be well with the soul, the body shall do well:
though God take liberty to humble us with sickness, and with death it self:
yet God will riase the body and make it glorious: a good soul will draw it
after it at last, and move God to make the body glorious. But if the soul be
naught, let us cherish and do what we will with the body, both will be naught
at last.

This life is not a life to regard the body: we are dead in that while we live,
the sentence of death is passed, we must die, we are dying every day, The body
is dead because of sin, we are going to our grave; every day takes away a part
of our life.

This is not a life for this body of ours, it is a respite to get assurance of
an eternal estate in heaven. God takes our wealth, and liberty, and strength,
etc. That he may help our souls, that he may work his own blessed work in our
souls, that he may lay a foundation of eternal happiness in our souls.

Therefore hence we should learn to resign our bodies, and estates to God,
Lord, do with me what thou will, only cure my soul, only strengthen my faith,
I give thee liberty with all my heart to take what thou will, so thou save my
soul, give me not up to an unbelieving heart, to an hypocritical, false heart,
to false confidence, to trust in false grounds, and to perish eternally: for my
estate and body, do what thou will. We should be brought to this, why? because
indeed the state of the soul is the true state either in good or ill, if all be
naught with that, all will be naught at last, we shall try it to our cost.

And therefore let us even rather thank God, and desire God to go on with his
work; Lord, rather then thou should give me up to a hard heart, to a
stubborn heart, and perish and have no sound change, rather then suffer me to
perish thus, use me as thou will.

And thank him when we find any degree of goodness or faith. Lord, thou
might have followed me with outward blessings, and so have given me up in my
soul to hypocrisy, and to pride, that I should never have felt the power of
grace, that I should never have known thee, or my self thoroughly, or the vanity
of outward things: but this thou have not done, thou have not given me liberty
in outward things, that thou might do good to my soul, blessed be thy
Name: Let us not only take it well, but thankfully at Gods hands. To proceed,
That we might trust in God that raises the dead.
The soul must have somewhat to trust to. Obser. The soul must have somewhat to
trust to.



The foundation must be laid: for the soul is a creature, and a dependant
creature, somewhat it must have to rely on: as all weak dependant things have
somewhat to depend on. The Vine is a weak plant, it must have the Elm or
somewhat to rely on, it will sink else, it will become unfruitful, and
unprofitable. All things that are weak, are supported by somewhat that is
stronger. It is an inclination, and instinct in things that are weak to look
for supply from things that are stronger then themselves to support them: and
it is their happiness to be so. The creatures that are unreasonable are guided
by those that have reason, by men; and the creatures that are reasonable are
guided by Superiors, by God, and by Angels that are above them, and have the
care and charge over them. It is the happiness of weaker things to be under
the supportation of that which is stronger. And some support it will have, good
or bad.

The soul, if it have not God, it will have pleasures, it will have profit. The
worst of men that think there is little for them in heaven, by reason of their
blasphemy, and filthy courses, they will have base pleasures to go to, that
they will trust to, and carnal acquaintance to solace themselves withal. The
worst of men will have some dirty thing or other, to give their souls to, to
support themselves withal, something the soul will have.

God loves the soul, and has made it for himself, and as he has made The soul
made for God.
it for himself, to join with himself, to solace himself in it (My son, give me
thy heart:) so when he takes it from outward things, he will not have it empty,
to rely upon nothing, but he takes it to himself. All this is to take our
hearts from our selves, and from felfconfidence, that we may trust in him. God
is for the heart, and that is for him, as I said, he calls for it, My son, give
me thy heart, give me thy affection of trust, of joy, of delight; all the
affections they are made for God, and for heaven, and heavenly things. Our
affections that we have, they are not made for riches. Our Souls are not made
for them; the soul is larger then they, they will not content the soul. The
soul is a spiritual substance, and they are outward things: the soul is large,
they are scanty in their extent: they are uncertain, and momentanie, the soul
is an eternal thing, it out-lives those things: and thereupon the soul is not
made for them, and they are not made for the soul.

They are to give contentment to the outward man for a while here, they are
made for our pilgrimage, to comfort us in the way to heaven: but the soul is
not for them.

The soul is the Chamber, and the Bed, and as it were the Cabinet for God
himself, and Christ to rest in only.

All outward things must be kept out of the heart: we may use them: but we must
keep them out of the heart, it is not for them. We must not joy in them, and
solace our selves, and delight in them overmuch, further then we seek God in
them, and enjoy God in them: but as they are sensible things, the heart is not
for them: therefore God takes the heart from self-confidence, and from other
things: he suffers it not to wander, but he takes it to himself, that we may
trust in him.

The next thing then that we may observe is, that when we go out of our selves,
we must have somewhat to rely on, which is better then all things else; we lose
not by the change, but when we are stripped of our selves, and of all earthly
things we have God to go to. God is the object of trust.


God is the proper object of trust of the Christian soul: he is the object
Doct. God is the object of trust.
of trust as well as the author of it, he is the cause and worker of it by his
Spirit, and he is the object of it. If we trust to other things, it must be as
they are Gods Instruments, as they are Gods means: but if we trust any thing,
either wealth, or friends, or any thing, to neglect the worship of God or to
please our selves in it, to put our hands to ill courses in confidence of the
creature, in confidence of men, or any thing else, to take any false cause in
hand, this is to trust them above their respect. We must trust to them as
Instruments, as voluntary Instruments which God may use when he pleases, or
not use when he pleases. When we use them otherwise, we forget their nature,
then we use them not as Instruments, but as the chief, we forget the order.

God is the object of trust, we must rest on him for Grace, and glory: for the
best things, and for the things of this life as far as they are good.

So far as we trust to any thing else, to move us to security, to rest in them,
or to sin for them, it is a sinful trust. Other things we may trust: but in the
nature of vain Instruments, changeable Instruments, that God may alter and
change: he that is rich to day, may be poor to morrow: he that has a friend
to day, may have him taken away to morrow: and so all outward things, they are
changeable and mutable: but we may trust God all times alike, he is eternal, he
is infinitely able, and infinitely wise to know all our grievances. We may
trust him with our Souls, with our Hearts, he is faithful, and loving, and
eter nall as our souls are. He gives eternity to the soul: Therefore at all
times we may trust in him, in all places, every where, he knows our hearts, he
knows our grievance every where, he has all grounds of one that may be
trusted to, he has power, and goodness, and mercy, and wisdom, he is the
object of trust.

But how considered is he the object of trust, God out of Christ Mediator? God
in Christ the object of trust.


Oh no, God in covenant with us in Christ, he is the object of trust: or else
there is such a distance, and contrariety between man's nature, and God, that
he'is a consuming fire. Since the fall from the covenant of works, we cannot be
saved by that, but he has vouchsafed to be ours in a better covenant in
Christ, in whom all the promises are Yea, and Amen. This good comes from God to
us by Christ, Christ first receives it, and he derives it to us, as our elder
brother, and as our head. All the promises are made in him, and through him: he
receives it for us, we receive it at the second hand. God has filled him
first, And of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace.

Without him we can do nothing: with him we can do all things. So we trust in
God reconciled, God made ours in the Covenant of Grace in Jesus Christ, who
has made our peace. Else God is a sealed fountain: he is a fountain of good,
but a sealed fountain. Christ has opened this fountain, his love is open to
Christ, and derived to Christ, in whom our flesh is, he is bone of our bone,
and flesh of our flesh, that we might be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh by being united with him. So now we trust in him, as God the Father of
Christ, reconciled. I believe in God the Father Almighty, as it is in the
Creed, God thus considered is the object of trust. There are two objects of
trust; God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and Christ Mediator.

If this be so that God reconciled now is the object of trust, for all things
Use. To see the vanity of all other confidence.
that are good, not only for salvation, but for Grace, and for all comforts, to
bring us to heaven, then we see the vanity of all other confidence whatsoever,
as I touched before.

And is it not a blessed thing that God will be trusted, that he has made A
great favor that God will be trusted by us.
himself such a one as we may trust him? Now blessed be God for Christ, that he
having received satisfaction to his justice by him he may be trusted, and
desires that we should trust him: that now in Christ he has made himself a
Father, that we shoud not fear him, nor run away from him: It is a great favor
that God will be trusted of us, that he will honor us so much.

He accounts it an honor when we trust him, but indeed it is an honor to us
that we have a throne of grace through Christ to go to, that he has devised a
way that we might trust him, and not run from him: that we may go to him in
Christ, who sits at his right hand, who is our intercessor, who has redeemed
us with his precious Blood. It is our happiness that he has made himself a
gracious, and loving Father, that he calls us to him, and thinks himself
honored by our trusting in him.

Again, we see here that, Doct. Trust in God is a main duty.
Trust in God is a main duty.


He is the object of trust, and it is a main duty, it is a spring of duty out
of which all comes: for we see here, all does aim at this: afflictions they
come to mortify our self-confidence: self-confidence is subdued that we may
trust in God: our trust must be carried to him, he is the object of it: and
this trust in God is a main duty which in this world we ought to labor for. It
is that that God does aim at, and it is that that we should aim at. God does
aim at it in exercising of us; and we should aim at it on our part, in our
hearing, in our receiving the Sacrament, in every thing, that our trust and
affiance and confidence may be in God, and that we may grow more and more in it.

Well, since God is the object of trust, and trust is such a necessary grace,
that God does all to bring us to trust in him: Let us come to search our
selves, how shall we know whether we trust in God, or no. And then to direct
us, how to come to trust in him, to give some means and helps.

He trusts in God reconciled in Jesus Christ that flies to him in extremity:
Trials of trust in God.
that a man trusts unto, that when he is pinched he flies unto. How shall a man
know that he is a covetous worldling? if he be in extremity, he 1. Seeking to
him in extremity.
goes to his purse, he makes a friend of that. How shall a man know that he
trusts to the arm of flesh, that he trusts his friend too much? in extremity
he runs to him, presently he goes to a friend he has: what we run to, that our
trust is in. A Christian he runs to his God: and happy is that Christian that
is in Covenant, that he has a God to run to in all extremities, in sickness,
in death, at all times: he is happy that he has a God when all fails to
trust in.

Will thou know therefore whether thou trustest in God or no? whither go
thou? A carnal man he goes to one earthly prop or other: if God answer him not
presently, then he goes with Saul to the witch, to the Devil himself perhaps:
if God do not send him present help, he goes to one carnal help or other, to
fetches of his wit, to policy, to crack his Conscience, to bear out things with
Impudence: he has not learned to trust in God, and he runs not to him, but to
some wicked course or other.

All that go not to God in the use of good means (for we must put that in, we
must go to God in the use of his means, in the use of good means only) they
trust not God; for God will not be tempted, but trusted, we must go to him by
prayer, and in the use of lawful means, and only of lawful means; or else if
we trust him and do not use the means, we tempt him: we must serve Gods
providence in using the means.

Therefore secondly, he that trusts in God uses his means, he that trusts 2.
To use the means.
God for a harvest must plow, and sow, and do all that belongs to the
providence of God.

So a Merchant that will increase hisestate, he must get a ship, and other
provision to do it with: for we must serve Gods providence as well as trust
Gods providence. When we neglect good and lawful means, and run into ill
courses, and use ill means, we serve not God, nor trust him. Those that grow
rich by calling Evil good, and good Evil, they have not learned to trust in
God. Those that think except they leave their posterity great they shall not be
happy, and therefore they will neglect the Sabbath, and neglect all to scrape
an estate. Is this to trust in God? have they learned to trust in God, when
sacrilegiously they take away the time dedicated for the salvation of their
souls, and the service of God? Is this one means that God has ordained to
trust him in? They that flatter, and serve men's humors when they know them to
be in a naughty and ill way, is this to trust God, when they go out of his
means and way, and make an Idol of flesh and blood to serve their own turn?

Alas! we need not name these things, if men had learned what it is to trust in
God, and depend upon him in the use of lawful means, and would rather be
content to want in this world then to have any thing with a cracked conscience.

I befeech you, let us examine our own hearts in this; there are many that
think they trust in God when they do not: they trust their policy, they trust
flesh and blood, and by consequence they trust the Devil, if they trust not in
God. 3. To be quiet upon use of mea^s.


In the next place he that trusts in God, his mind will be quieted in some
comfortable measure when he has used the means that are lawful, and cast
himself upon God, he will be quiet, and let God work then. When he has taken
pains in his calling, lawfully, and desired Gods blessing, if God send wealth,
so it is: if not, he is not much troubled, he knows that all shall be for the
best to them that trust in God; when he cannot have it in the use of lawful
means, he is quiet. He that trusts a Physician, when he has used the
direction of the Physician he is quiet, he thinks he is a wise man, an
experienced Physician, and now he will not trouble his mind any longer: if a
man vex himself, and think all will not be well, he does not trust his
Physician. And so in other professions we trust to a man's Counsel, if we think
him wise, and honest, we follow his direction, and then we will be quiet.

Now God is infinitely wise: when we have used lawful means, and commended
the means to God (for as he will be trusted in, so he will be sought unto. I
will be sought to by the house of Israel for this: for except we pray to him,
he is not trusted: but when we have prayed to him, in the use of lawful means,
let us be quiet, let us not be distracted with dividing cares obout this and
that, as if there were not a God in heaven that had care of us, that had a
providence over things below; certainly he has, do thou do thy work, and let
him alone with his work. The care of duty belongs to thee; when thou have done
thy duty, rest thou quiet, or else thou honor him not as a God, thou
trustest him not, thou do not make a God of him: it is a great dishonor to
God.

A man thinks himself dishonored, when he is not trusted, when we see he has
always been faithful to us, and is so reputed, and yet we call his credit in
question, and will not be quiet. We should do as Children do, they follow their
books, and let their Father take care for all provision, for meat and drink,
and clothes and such things: they beat not their heads about it, they know they
have a Father that will take care for that. If we were true Children of God,
and have the disposition of heavenly Children, we will do so; if we trouble our
selves, and beat our heads, it is a sign, that we fear that God is not our
Father: therefore I add that to other signs, a resting of ourselves quiet. When
we are quiet, God will do more, then when we vex our selves. Be still, and see
the salvation of the Lord, says Moses at the Red Sea: so let us be still, and
quiet, and see the Salvation of God: he will work wonders.

Again, it is a sign that we trust in God, when there are no means: yet 4. Not
to despair in want of means.
notwithstanding we will not despair: but hope and trust in God: when we see
nothing in the eye of flesh and blood, no means of recovery: yet we trust in
God: he can work his way though we see not how, he can make a passage for us.
When God is thus honored, he works wonders. This is to make a God of him, when
there is no means, to believe that he can work against means. If my life
shall be for his glory and my good, he can recover my life, though the
Physician say I am a dead man: if he have employment for me in this world, he
can do it: he can work with means, or against means, or without means. And so
in desperate troubles: if God see it good for me, he can deliver me though
there be no means: he is the Creator of means, do not tie him to his own
creature; if all be taken away, he can make new.

Again, he trusts in God that labors to make God his friend continually: 5. To
keep God our friend.
for he whom we trust unto we will not provoke: certainly we will not provoke a
man whom we mean to make our friend. Those that live in swearing, in defiled
courses, in contempt of God, and of holy things, of the ordinances of God, of
the day appointed to holy and religious uses, those that wax stubborn against
God, as the Scripture speaks; do we trust him against whom we walk stubbornly?
Will a man trust him that he makes his enemy by wicked courses? Thou make
God thy enemy, and provokest him to his face, to try whether he will pour
vengeance upon this or no. He tells thee thou shall not be upunished if thou
take his Name in vain; yet thou will be stubborn, and not make conscience of
these things. Do thou trust him? No, thou provokest him; thou may trust
him, but it must be to damn thee, to give thee thy reward with rebels, thou
may trust him for that: but for good things thou do not, thou can not
trust him in wicked courses.

Who will trust his enemy, especially he that he has made his enemy by his
ill course of life? A man that goes on in an evil course, he cannot, he does
not trust in God.

He that trusts in Gods promise, will trust in his threatening: where there is
an Evangelical faith, there is a legal faith always. He that believes 6. To
trust threatenings as well as promises.
that God will save him if he trust in Christ, he believes that if he do not
believe in Christ he will damn him, if he live in his natural course without
repentance.

There is a legal faith of the curse as well as an Evangelical of the promise,
they are both together: if thou do not believe Gods curse in wicked courses,
thou will never believe him for the other. Therefore I will add this to make up
the evidences of trust in God: True trust looks to Gods truth, and promise,
and Word in one part of it as well as another. Thou trusts God for thy
salvation, and the promises of that: but thou must trust him for the direction
of thy life too. Faith does not single out some objects, I will believe this,
and not that: faith is carried to all the objects, it believes all Gods truths:
therefo if I believe not the threatenings, and the directions, to be ruled by
them, I believe not the promises: in what measure thou believe the promise of
mercy to save thy soul, in that measure thou believe the directions of Gods
Word to guide thy soul. He that receives Christ as a Priest to save him, he
must receive him as a King to rule him.

All the directions, and all the threatenings, and all the promises must be
received and believed.

A man has no more faith, and trust in God then he has care to follow Gods
direction: for faith is carried to all divine truths, all come from the same
God. Thousands go to hell, and think, O, God is a merciful God, and I will
trust in him, but how is thy life, is it carried by Gods directions? thou art a
rebel, thou live in sins against conscience: thou will trust in God in one
part of his Word, and not in another, thou must not be a chooser.

Again, the last that I will name at this time, if thou trust God for one 7. To
trust God for all things.
thing, undoubtedly thou will trust him for all: if thou trust him with thy
Soul, certainly thou will trust him with thy Children. Some men hope to be
saved by Christ: O, he will be merciful to their souls, and yet even to their
Death they use corrupt courses, to get an estate, and to make their Children
rich, and except they have so much, they will not trust in God. If they have
nothing to leave them, they think not that there is a God in heaven who is a
better Father then they. Put cafe thou have nothing, have thou not Gods
blessing? can thou trust thy soul with God, and can thou not trust him with
thy family? Is he not the God of thy seed? has he not made the promise to thy
posterity, as well as to thy self? If thou trust him for one thing thou will
trust him for all. Will thou trust him for Heaven, and will thou not trust him
for provision, for daily bread? Will thou not trust him for this or that: but
thou must use unlawful means? He that trusts God, he trusts him for all
truths, and for all things needful, with his Family, with his Body, with his
Soul, with all. And so much for the trials, whether we trust in God or no.

Let us not deceive our selves, it is a point of infinite consequence, as much
as the salvation of our souls. What brings men to hell, in the Church? false
confidence: they trust to false things, or they think they trust in God when
indeed they do not.

The fault of a ship is seen in a tempest: and the fault of a house is seen
when winter comes. Thy trust that is thy house that thou go to, and restest
in, the fault of that will be seen when thou come to extremity; in the hour
of death, then thou have not a God to go to, then thy conscience upbraids thee,
thou have lived by thy shifts in carnal confidence, and rebellion against God,
and how can thou then willingly trust God whom thou have made thine enemy all
thy lifetime?

To go then to some helps. If upon search we find that we do not so trust in
God as we should: Let us lament our unbelieving hearts, complain Helps to
trust in God.
to God of it: desire God, whatsoever he does, that he would honor us so much
as that we may honor him by trusting in him: for it is his glory, and our
salvation.

But, because (I will not go out of the text;) the best way is (that which
follows) to know God as he is.

How come we to trust a man? When we know his Honesty, his Fidelity, his
Wisdom, and his sufficiency, then we trust him: therefore St. Paul adds here,
that we should Trust in God that raises the dead, that is, in God Almighty.
From whence I raise this general, that The best way to trust in God is to know
him as he is.


We know his attributes by his principal works, we know his nature by his
works, as here is one of the principal set down, he is God that raises the
dead. A sound sanctified trust in God is by knowing of him, They that know thy
Name, will trust in thee, Psalm, 9.

There are three ways of the knowledge of God.

His Nature. Promises. Works.

To know what he has engaged himself in, in all the promises that concern us:
and then to know his strength, how able he is to make good them promises

And then to know his works, how his nature has enabled him to make good those
promises: Especially his nature, as to consider his goodness, and his wisdom:
every attribute indeed does enforce trust: for he is good freely, he is good to
us, of his own bowels. We may trust him that has made himself a Father, out
of hiw own mercy in Christ when we were enemies. His goodness and wisdom is
infinite as himself, and his power and his truth. As the scripture says
oft-times, Faithful is God that has promised,

St. Bernard a good man in Evil times, says he, I consider three things in
which I pitch my hope and trust, Charitatem adoptionis, the love of God in
making me his Child: and Veritatem promissionis, the truth of God in performing
his promise: his Love is such to make me his Child: his truth is such to
perform his promise.

Thirdly, I consider his power that is able to make good that, that he has
promised. This threefold cable is a strong one: his love in adoption, his truth
in performing his promise, and his power in making good all this. This
threefold cable will not easily be broken. Let my Sottish flesh murmur against
me as long as it will: as the flesh will murmur, who art thou that thou dare
trust in God? What is thy merit that thou hopest for such great glory? No, no,
says he, I know whom I have believed, as Saint Paul says. I answer with great
confidence against my Sottish murmuring flesh, I know whom I have trusted. He
is able, he is good, he is true. This that Holy man had to exercise his faith.

I name it, because it is the temper, of all believing souls that are so in
truth. The believing heart considers the nature of God, the promise of God, and
though the murmuring rebellious flesh say, what art thou? how dare thou that
art flesh and blood look to God? O, he is faithful he is good, and gracious in
Christ, he has made himself a Father, I know whom I have believed, God is
all-sufficient.

Trust and confidence does grow in the soul, in what measure and proportion the
knowledge of him whom we trust in grows, and as his strength grows: the more
rich and strong a man grows in whom I trust, and the more gracious and good he
grows, and the more my knowledge of him is increased with it too, that I see
he is so able, so true, so loving a man, a man so affected to me: the more he
grows, and my knowledge of him, the more my trust is carried to him. So a
Christian the more he considers the infiniteness of Gods love, of his wisdom
and goodness, the more he is carried in trust, and confidence to it.

Not to trouble you with many places, the 62. Psalm. is an excellent Psalm. for
trust and confidence in God; the whole Psalm. is to that purpose, to stir up
himself to trust in God: for that follows knowledge, when upon knowledge we
rouse up our hearts, God is my rock, and my salvation, and defense. Is he so?
then, my soul, trust in God: he charge it upon his soul, Therefore I will
trust in God. And then he blames his soul, Is God so? Why art thou so
disquieted, O my soul?

This is the exercise of a Christian heart, when upon sound knowledge he can
charge his soul to trust in God, and check his soul, Why art thou cast down?
still trust in God. Why do thou not trust in him? Is he not true? Is he not
wise? He is The God of my salvation. And in verse 8. Trust in God at all times,
in prosperity, in adversity: why? God is my refuge.

There he sets forth his nature. If our troubles be never so many, there is
somewhat in God that is answerable: as in Psalm. 18. He is a rock, and a shield:
he has somewhat in him that is opposite to every ill.

And withal, Pour out thy heart to God: for where there is trust, there is
prayer. Trust in God at all times, and pour out thy heart before him; for he is
our refuge.

And so, Trust not in oppresion, and Robbery: If-riches increase, set not your
hearts upon them: for God has spoken once, and twice, that power belongs to
God. Trust not any other thing but God. Power and Mercy belong to him. This is
a notable way to trust in God, to know that power and mercy belong to him. If
another man love me, has not God another man's heart in his hand? The Kings
heart is in his hand: therefore trust in God for the favor of men. Has he not
all the power? that that another man has that affects me, it is but a derived
power from him: he has inclined him to do good to me. All Mercy, and Love, it
is from God, and he turns and disposes it as it pleases him; as it is the
Scripture Phrase, the language of Canaan, the heart is in Gods hands, he
inclined the heart of such a man. The knowledge of God, with prayer, and
stirring up our selves to trust in God, and checking our souls for the
contrary, it is a notable means to trust in God.

And though we feel no present comfort from God, trust him for his word, trust
him for his promise; though he seem now to be a God hidden. As a Child in the
dark he holds his Father fast by the hand, he sees not his Father, but he
knows his Fathers hand is strong: and though he see him not, yet he believes
it is his Father, and holds him though it be in the dark.

Men they cast anchor in the dark, at midnight, though they cannot see, yet
they know that the anchor will hold fast. Cast anchor upon God, in darkness
and temptation, hold God fast in the dark night, although we see nothing: we
shall always find this, that he is a God able to fulfill his promise, that he is
a true, and faithful, and able God; cast anchor in him therefore, though thou
feel, or see nothing, be sure in all extremities to trust in God.

Besides other things, trust in God is properly, and primarily wrought 3. The
promises of God.
by the promises; trust in God so far as he has discovered himself to be
trusted. I can trust a man no further then I have a writing or a word of mouth
from him, or a message from him.

Now what have we from God to trust him for? we have his Word written, and that
is sealed by the Sacrament. The way to trust in God therefore is to know the
promises.

The general promises that do concern all Christians, and all conditions, and
estates of men. God will be a Sun and a Shield: a Sun for all 1. General.
good, and a Shield to keep away all evil: and no good thing shall be wanting
to him that lives a godly life. Again, general promises for issue, All things
shall work for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. And, he will give his
Spirit to them that ask him. It is a general promise to all askers whatsoever,
that they shall have the Spirit of God, which is a promise that has all
particular graces in it: for the Spirit is the Fountain of all grace, it is the
Spirit of Love, of Faith, of Hope, all are in the promise of the Spirit, and
God has promised this. Let us trust in God for these general things.

And for particular promises, he has made a promise to be a Husband to 2.
Particular.
the Widow, and a Father to the Fatherless. He will regard the cause of the
Widow, and he is a God that comfort he Abject. He has made promises to
those that are afflicted, to all estates, and conditions of men; trust in God
for these. Outward things promised with condition.


But how? he has made these with conditions in regard of outward things: Let
us trust him so far forth as he has promised, that is, he will either
protect us from dangers or give us patience in dangers: he will give us all
outward things, or else contentment which is better: take him in that latitude:
trust in him as he will be trusted to: for outward things' he will either give
the things, or give the grace which is better; he will either remove the
grievance, or he will plant the grace which is better. If he remove not the
evil he will give patience to bear it, and what do I lose if he give me not
the good thing; if he give me contentment? I have grace to supply it which
makes me a better man.

If he give me the thing without the Grace what am I the better? a carnal
Reprobate may have that.

So let us trust him, as he will be trusted: for Grace and spiritual things,
all shall be for our good without fail; but for the things of this life, either
he will give them, or else graces.

Let us trust God therefore, as he will be trusted in his word and promises.

Now this trusting of God, (to speak a little to the present purpose, because
Saint Paul was now in great affliction, when he learned to trust Trust how
exercised in great afflictions.
in God: he was in fear of Death.) Let us see how we are to exercise this trust
in great crosses, and in the hour of Death. St. Paul was in these two.

The point is very large, and I will take it only according to the present
scope.

How does a Christian exercise trust in extremity, in extreme crosses? for then
he must go to God, he has none else to go to: he is beaten, from We are beaten
from all other help.
the creature, and as I said before, the soul will have somewhat to go to. The
poor creatures, the silly conies they have the rocks to go to, as Solomon
says: the Soul that has greater understanding, it is necessitated to trust in
God in afflictions. Then the soul must say to God, Lord, if thou help not, none
can: as Jehosaphat said in 2. Chron. 20. We know not what to do, but our eyes
are to thee. In great afflictions we exercise trust, because we are forced.

And because then we are put to this, we put the promises in suit, the promises
2. Put the promises in suit.
made to us for extremity. In Isay 43. 2. he has promised to be with us in the
fire, and in the water. There is a promise of Gods presence: 1. The promises of
presence.
and the soul improves that: Lord, thou have promised to be present in great
perils and dangers, as there are two of the greatest specified, fire, and
water. Thou have promised thou will be present, with us in the fire, and in the
water: now, Lord, make good thy promise, be thou present. And when God makes
good this promise of presence, then the Soul triumphs, as in Psalm. 23. Though I
walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear, because thou art
with me, Lord. So in Psalm, 27. he begins triumphantly: The Lord is my shield,
whom shall I fear? of whom shall I be afraid. Let us exercise our trust this
way in extremity. God is with us, and who can be against us, says the Apostle?
Thus the Christian soul lives by trusting in God, in all extremity of crosses
whatsoever: the soul is forced to God, and claims the promises of presence.

And not only the promise of his presence, but the promise of support and
comfort, and of mitigation. There is a promise in 1. Cor. 2. Of mitigotion.
10. 13. God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our
strength. Here faith is exercised, Lord, I am in a great cross now, I am in
afflictions, thou have promised that thou will not suffer me to be tempted
above that I am able to bear.

Now make good this promise of thine, be present, and be present by way of
mitigation, either pull down the cross, and make it less: or raise up my
strength, and make that greater: for thou have promised that thou will not
suffer us to be tempted above our strength.

And then the soul lives by faith of the issue in great extremities; I am in
great extremity, but I know all shall end well, Thus we trust in God in all
extremity of afflictions whatsoever: in the hour of Death, when we receive the
Sentence of Death, how do we then exercise trust in God?

In Psalm, 16. My flesh shall rest in hope: because thou will not suffer thy
Holy one to see corruption: Because God did nor suffer Christ to see corruption
Trust how exercised in the hour of death.
(who is our head) therefore my flesh likewise shall rest in hope, when I die.
Our head triumphed over Death, and is in Heaven, and I die in Faith, I trust in
God that raised him from the Dead, who was my surety. I know my debts are paid,
my surety is out of prison; Christ, who took upon him to discharge my debts, he
is out of the prison of the grave, he is in heaven: therefore my flesh shall
rest in hope.

If it were not for this, that Christ were risen: when we have the sentence of
Death, we overlook the grave, we see our selves in Heaven: as David says, I
should utterly have failed, but that I looked to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living. Then faith looks beyond Death, and beyond the
grave, it looks up, and with Stephen it sees Christ at the right hand of God:
we see Christ ready to receive our souls.

Then we trust in God that raises the dead: nay, we see our selves as it were
raised already.

Thus we see how we should trust in God, in great crosses, and in the sentence
of Death. This in a word should be another ground of Patience, Use. Ground of
patience and content.
and not only of patience, but of contentment, in extrream crosses, in the hour
of Death, that all that God does is for this, that we may exercise trust in
him. And if the Soul clasp to him, who is the Fountain of life, the chief good,
it cannot be miserable: but this it does by trust; our trust makes us one with
him, it is that which brings us to God: and afflictions, and Death it self
force us to exercise faith in the promises, and drive us to him. So God has
overpowered all crosses, extreme crosses, even Death it self, that he has
sanctified them to fit us to trust in him, and who can be miserable that trusts
in God?

What construction should we make of crosses, and afflictions? Surely, this is
to take away false confidence: this is to drive me to God: shall I be impatient
and murmur at that which God has ordained to bring me nearer to himself, to
trust in him, to take away all false confidence in the creature?

No, this should cut the sinews of all carnal confidence, and make us
patient, and thankful in all crosses: Because God now is seeking our good, he
is drawing good out of these crosses: he labors by this to bring us nearer to
himself. Blessed is that cross, blessed is that sickness, or loss of friends
whatsoever, that brings us nearer to God. Why does God take away our dear
friends? that we might clinge nearer to him: because he will have us to see
that he is all-sufficient.

What does a man lose when he trusts in God, though he lose all the world?
has he not him that made the world at the first, and can make another if he
please? If a man lose all, and have God (as he has that trusts in him, and in
his Word, for God will not deny his Word and truth: he that trusts in God, has
him, and if he have him) what if he be stripped of all? he can make another
world with a Word of his mouth. Other things are but a beam to him: what need
a man care for a beam that has the Sun?

All the afflictions of this world are to draw or to drive us to God, whether
Effect of afflictions. To Gods children. To the wicked.
we will or no. As the Messengers in the Gospel, to force the guests to the
banquet with violence: so afflictions they are to force us to God, this blessed
effect they have in all Gods Children.

But those that do not belong to God, what do they in the hour of death, and in
extremity? they are either blocks, as Nabal was, senseless creatures; or
raging, as Cain, Achitophel, and Judas, either sots or desperate in extremity.
Saul in extremity goes to the Witch, to ill means: David in all extremity he
goes to prayer, he goes to his rock and shield; to God who was his all in all.
He knew all this was done, to drive him to trust in God. Why art thou
disquieted, O my soul? why art thou vexed in me? trust in God; all this is to
make thee trust in God, he checks, and chides his own soul. A Child of God does
check himself, when his base heart would have him sink and fall down, and go
to false means, then he raises himself up, trust in God, O my soul.

But such as Saul, proud confident hypocrites, when all outward things are
taken away, they go to the Witch, to the Devil, to one unlawful means or
other, and at the last to desperate conclusions, to the sword it self.

As we desire to have evidence of a good estate in grace, that we belong To
desire God to draw us near him by crosses.
to God: so let us desire God that we may find him drawing us so near to him
by all crosses whatsoever, that we may see in him a supply of whatsoever is
taken from us. If we lose our friends, that we may trust God the more. As St.
Paul speaks of the widow, 1 Timothy 5. when her Husband was alive, she trusted to
him: but now she wants her former help to go to, she gives her self to prayer,
she goes to God, she trusts in God. So it should be with all, when friends are
taken away, we should go to God, he will supply that which is wanting. Those
that are berest of any comfort, now they should go to God. What do we lose by
that? we had the stream before, now we have the fountain, we shall have it in a
more excellent manner in God then we had before.

And that makes a Christian at a point in this world, he is not much
discouraged, whatsoever he lose, if he lose all to his life, he knows he shall
have a better supply from God then he can lose in the world: therefore he is
never much cast down, he knows that all shall drive him nearer to God, to
trust in God. As St. Paul says here, We received the sentence of Death, that
we might not trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead.

One means to settle our trust the better in God reconciled to us in the
Covenant of grace through Christ, his beloved, and our beloved, is the blessed
Sacrament: and therefore come to it as to a seal sanctified by God for that
very purpose, to strengthen our trust in God. How many ways does God
condescend to strengthen our trust? because it is such an honor to him: for by
trusting in him, we give him the honor of all his attributes, we make him a
God, we set him in his throne, which we do not when we trust not in him: how
many ways does he condescend to strengthen our trust?

We have his promise, If we believe in him, we shall not perish, but have God
to strengthen our trust has given us.
everlasting life. We have a seal of that promise, the Sacrament: and is not a
broad seal a great confirmation? If a man have a grant from the 1. His promise.
King; if he have his broad seal, it is a great confirmation: though the other
were good, yet the seal is stronger. So we have Gods promise, and 2. His seal.
in regard of our weakness, there is a seal added to it.

If that be not enough we have more, we have his oath; he has pawned his life,
As I live, says the Lord, etc. he has pawned his being, as he 3. His oath.
is God, he will forgive us if we repent. We have his promise, seal, and oath;
whatsoever among men may strengthen trust, and faith; God condescends unto, to
strengthen our faith, because he would not have us perish in unbelief.

Besides that, he has given us earnest: a man's trust is strengthened when he
has earnest. Every true Christian has a blessed earnest, that is, 4. Earnest.
the Comforter; he has the Spirit in him, the first fruits; where God gives
and an earnest, he will make good the bargain at the last; where he gives the
first fruits, he will add the harvest. God never repents of his earnest, where
he has begun a good work, he will finish it to the day of the Lord. An earnest
is not taken away, but the rest is added.

And the same Spirit that is an earnest, is also a pawn and pledge: we will
trust any runnagate, if we have a pawn sufficient; now God has given 5. A
pawn.
us this pawn of his Spirit. Christ has given us his Spirit, and has taken
our flesh to heaven; our flesh is there, and his Spirit is in our hearts;
besides many evidences that we have in this life as pawns.

Indeed in extremity sometimes we must trust God without a pawn, upon his bare
word, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, says Job; but God ordinarily
gives us many pawns of his love.

The Sacrament is not only a Seal of the promise, but likewise it has another
relation to strengthen our faith; it is a seizon, as a piece of earth 6. Seizon.
that is given to assure possession of the whole: as a man says, Take, here is
a piece of earth, here is my land: here are the keys of my house: so in the
promises sealed by the Sacrament, here is life, here is favor, here is
forgiveness of sins, here is life everlasting: what can we have more to
strengthen our faith? God has condescended every way to strengthen us, if we
will come in, and honor him so much as to trust him with our souls, and our
salvation. Therefore let us come to the Sacrament with undoubted confidence, God
will keep his credit, he will not deceive his credit, he will never forsake
those that trust in him, Psalm. 9. But to answer an Objection.

Oh! all these are confirmations indeed, if I did believe and trust in God,
Object.
but my heart is full of unbelief: Indeed all these are made to some that
believe already in some measure, they have this seal, and oath, and earnest,
and pawnes, and first fruits, and all, if they believe, but I cannot bring my
heart to trust in God.

What hinders thee?

I am a wretched creature, a sinful creature. Answ.


Do thou mean to be so still? It is no matter what thou have been, but what
thou will be. The greater the sickness, the more is the honor of the Physician
in curing it: the greater thy sins, the more honor to God in forgiving such
sins. Retort the temptation thus upon Satan: God works by contraries, and whom
he will make righteous, he will make them to see their sins; and before he will
raise us up, he will make us rotten in our graves; before he will make us
glorious, he will make us miserable. I know that God by this intends that I
should despair in my self: God intends that I should despair indeed, but it
is that I should despair in my self, as the text says here, that we should not
trust in our selves, when we have a sight of the vileness of our sins: but in
God that raises the dead, that raises the dead soul, the despairing soul,
that it should trust in him. Therefore retort the temptation upon Satan,
because I see my sins, and despair in my self, therefore I trust in God. He
that is in darkness and sees no light, let him trust in the Lord his God.

Mark for thy comfort, the Gospel calls men who in their own sense, and feeling
think themselves furthest off: he that is poor, and sees his want, Blessed are
the poor in Spirit. But I have no Grace, Oh that I had grace Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst. If thou mourn for thy sins, Blessed are they that mourn.

Thou find a heavy load of thy sins, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and
heavy laden, and I will ease you. The Gospel takes away all the objections and
misdoubtings of the unbelieving heart, God is so willing to come to him.
Therefore stand not cavilling, interpret all to the best. God will have us to
despair in our selves, that we may trust in him; and then we are fittest to
trust in God, when we despair in our selves, then we make God all in all; he
has righteousness enough, holiness enough, satisfaction enough, he has all
enough for thee.

And for men that are not yet believers, how wondrously does God labor to
bring such men to a good hope? If they yield themselves and come in, Means of
trust to unbelievers.
there is an offer to every one that will come in and take the water of life.

There is a command: he that has commanded, Thou shall not murder, Thou shall
not steal: he lays a charge on thee that thou believe, 1 John 3. This is his
c^mmand, that we believe in the Son of God. And think with thy self, thou
committest a sin against the Gospel, which is worse then a sin against the law:
for if a man sin against the law, he may have help in the Gospel: but if he sin
against the Gospel, there is not another Gospel to help him. God offers thee
comfor, the commands thee to trust in him, and thou rebellest, thou offendest
him, if thou do not believe.

Is not here encouragement, if thou be not more wedded to thy sinful course,
then to the good of thy soul? If thou will still live in thy sins, and wilt
not trust in God, then thou shall be damned, there is no help for thee if thou
believe not, the wrath of God hangs over thy head. Thou art condemned already
by nature: if thou believe not, thou need no further condemnation, but only
the execution of Gods justice.

Naturally thou art born the Child of wrath, and God threateneth thee to stir
thee up, and to make thee come in: he uses sweet allurements, (besides the
commands and threatenings) Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will ease you. And, Why will ye perish, O house of Israel? And, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often, etc? God complains of thee, he allures thee, he
sends his Ambassadors. We are Ministers in Christ's Name to beseech you to be
reconciled: to come in to cast down your weapons, your sins, to believe in God,
and trust in his mercy, and to hope for all good from him. What should keep
thee off, he is willing to have thee believe? Oh, if I were elected, etc.
Object^



Trouble not thy self with dark scruples of his eternal decree, obey the
command, obey the threaning, and put that out of doubt: if thou yield to the
command, if thou obey the threatening, if thou be drawn by that, undoubtedly
thou art the child of God. Put not in these doubts and janglings, things that
are too high for thee till thou believe. Indeed when thou believe, then thou
may comfort thy self, I believe, therefore I know I shall be saved: Whom he
has chosen, them he calls, and whom he calls, he justifies. I find my self
freed from the sentence of condemnation in my heart, therefore I know I am
called, I know I am elected: then with comfort thou may go to those
disputes. But not before a man obeys: put those cavils out, and obey the
Gospel, (when salvation is offered, when Satan puts these things to thee) when
thou art threatened, and commanded.

How shall this justify God at the day of judgment against damned wretches,
that have lived in the bosom of the Church, and yet would not believe? They
will believe after their own fashion, if God will save them, and let them live
in their sinful courses: but they will rather be damned then they will part
with them. Are they not worthy to be damned? (judge thy self) that rather then
they will alter their course, and receive mercy with it, rather then they will
receive Christ, whole Christ, as a King and a Priest, to rule them as well as
to satisfy for them: they will gild over their wicked courses and will have
none of him at all: they will rather be damned then take another course, their
damnation is just.

If thou take whole Christ, and yield to his government, he uses all means to
strengthen thy faith after thou believe, and he uses all means to allure
thee to believe. It is a point of much consequence, and all depends upon it, it
is the sum of the Gospel, to trust in God, in Christ (therefore I have been a
little the longer in it,) till we can bring our hearts to this we have nothing.

When we have this, then when all shall be taken from us, as it will ere long,
all the friends we have, and all our comforts: yet our trust shall not be taken
from us, nor our God in whom we trust shall be taken from us: we shall have God
left, and a heart to trust in God that will stand us in stead when all other
things shall fail. That we might not trust in our selves, but in God Which
raises the dead.


These words have a double force in this place.

First, St. Paul might reason thus, I am brought to death, as low as I can be,
even to receive the sentence of death, but I trust in God who will raise me
when I am dead: therefote he can raise me out of sickness, though there be no
means, no physic, he can do it himself. Or if it were persecution, he might
reason, I am now persecuted: but God will raise me out of the grave: therefore
he can raise me out of this trouble if it be for my good: It has the force of
a strong argument that way.

And it has another force, that is, put case the worst, I received the
sentence of death, that is, if I die, as I look for no other, yet I trust that
God that raises the dead, he will raise me: the confidence of the resurrection
makes Prayer to God.
me die comfortably. As we sleep quietly, because we hope to rise again, and we
put our seed into the ground, with comfort, why? we hope to receive it in a
more glorious manner in the harvest: so though my body be sown in the earth,
it shall rise a glorious body; I trust in God, though I receive the sentence of
death, yet I shall sleep in the Lord, as when I go to sleep, I hope to rise
again: so I trust when the resurrection shall come, that my body shall waken,
and arise. I trust in God that raises the dead; because he raises the dead,
he can recover me if he will: if not, he will make this body, a glorious body
afterward: so every way it was a strong argument with Saint Paul, I trust in
God that raises the dead.

The Apostle draws an argument of comfort from Gods power in raising the dead.
And it is a true reason, a good argument: he that will raise the dead body out
of the grave, he can raise out of misery, out of captivity: the argument is
strong. Thus God comforts his people in Ezekiel. 37. in that parable of the dry
bones, that he put life in. So the blessed Apostle St. Paul, he speaks of
Abraham, Romans 4. 17. He looked to God who quickneth the dead, who calls
things that are not, as though they were. What made Abraham to trust in God,
that he would give him Isaac again? he considered if God can raise Isaac from
the dead, if he please he can give me Isaac back again: and though Isaac were
the son of promise, yet he trusted Gods Word, more then Isaac the son of
his love. Why? he knew that God could raise him from the dead, though he had
sacrificed him: he trusted in God, who quickneth the dead. Doct. The
resurrection an argument to strengthen faith.
The resurrection (then) is an argument to stengthen our faith in all miseries
whatsoever.


It strengthens our faith before death, and in death. I will not enter into the
common place of that point concerning the resurrection, it would be tedious and
unjust, beause it is not intended here, but only it is used as a special
argument. Therefore I will but touch that point. Doct. God will raise from the
dead.
God will raise us from the dead.


Nature is more offended at this, then any other thing: But St. Paul makes it
clear, that it is not against nature, that God should raise the dead, 1 Cor.
15. To speak a little of it, and then to speak of the use the Apostle made of
it, and of the use that we may make of it. Says the Apostle in that place,
speaking to witty Atheists that thought to have cavilled out the resurrection
from the dead: Thou fool, thou speak against nature, if thou think it
altogether impossible.

Look to the seed, do we not see that God every spring raises things that were
dead? We see in the silkworm, what an alteration there is from a fly to a
worm, etc? We see what men can do by Art, they make glasses, of what? of
Ashes. We see what nature can do, which is the ordinary providence of God, we
see what it can do in the bowels of the earth: What is gold, and silver, and
pearl? is it not water and earth, excellently digested, exquisitely concocted
and digested? That there should be such excellent things of so base a creature.
We see what Art and nature can do. If Art, and nature can do so great things,
why do we call in question the power of God? if God have revealed his Will to
do so, why do we doubt of this great point of Gods raising the dead?

The Ancients had much ado with the Pagans about this point, they handled it
excellently, as they were excellent in those points which they were forced to
by the adversaries, and indeed they were especially sound in those points. I
say they were excellent and large in the handling of this: but I will not stand
upon that; it is an Article of our Creed, I believe the resurrection of the
body: Indeed, he that believes the first Article of the Creed, he will easily
believe the last: he that believes in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven
and earth, he will easily believe the resurrection of the body.

But, I will rather come to show the Use of it. God will raise the dead;
Therefore Gods manner of working is, when there is no hope, in extremity, Gods
manner to work when there is no hope.
(as I touched before;) he raises us, but it is when we are dead: he does his
greatest works when there is least hope. So it is in the resurrection out of
troubles, as in the resurrection of the body, when there is no hope at all, no
ground in nature, but it must be his power altogether that must do it, then he
falls to work to raise the dead.

Therefore our faith must follow his working, he raises the dead; he Use. To
answer Gods work with our faith.
justifies a sinner: but it is when he is furthest from grace, a sinner
despairing of all mercy: then he has the most need of justification. He
raises the dead, but it is then when they are nothing but dust, then it is
time for him to work to raise the dead. He restores, but it is that which is
lost. God never forgets his old work, this was his old manner of working at the
first, (and still every day he uses it) he made all of nothing, order out of
confusion, light out of darkness: This was in the creation, and the like he
does still, he never forgets his old work. This St. Paul being acquainted with
he fastneth his hope, and trust upon such a God as will raise the dead.
Therefore make that use of it that the Apostle does, when the Church is in any
calamity, which is as it were a death, when it is as in that 37. of Ezekiel,
dry bones, Comfort your selves: God comforted the Church there, that he would
raise the Church out of Babylon, as he raised those dead bones, the one is as
easy as the other. So in the government of the Church continually he brings
order out of confusion, light out of darkness, and life out of death, that is,
out of extreme troubles, when men think themselves dead, when they think the
Church dead, past all hope, then he will quicken, and raise it: so that he will
never forget this course, till he have raised our dead bodies, and then he will
finish that manner of dispensation. This is Gods manner of working.

We must answer it with our faith, that is, in the greatest dejection that can
be, to trust in God that raises the dead: Faith if it be true, it will answer
the ground of it; but when it is carried to God, it is carried to him that
raises the dead: therefore though it be desperate every way, yet
notwithstanding I hope above hope, I hope in him whose course is to raise the
dead; who at the last will raise the dead, and still delights in a proportion
to raise men from death, out of all troubles and miseries.

Well, this God does, and therefore carry it along in all miseries whatsoever,
in soul, in body, or estate, or in the Church, etc.

God raises from the dead, therefore we must feel our selves dead before we
can be raised by his grace. What is the reason that a Papist cannot be a good
Christian? he opposes his own conversion; what is conversion? It is the first
resurrection, the resurrection of the soul: but that which is raised must be
dead first: they account not themselves dead, and therefore oppose this
resurrection. And so when we are dead in grace, or comfort, let us trust in God
that raises the dead; And so for outward condition in this life, and the
estate of the Church.

The conversion of the Jews, which seems a thing so strange: when a man thinks
how they are dispersed, and thinks of their poverty and disgrace, he thinks, Is
this a likely matter? Remember what God has said, he will raise the dead. And
because this is a work that seems as hard as the raising of the dead, therefore
their calling and conversion is called a kind of resurrection, Romans 11. Let us
hope for that: He that raises the body, will raise that people, (as despicable
as they are,) to be a glorious people, and Church.

And so for the confusion of the man of sin, The revelation of the Gospel, when
it came out of the grave of darkness, out of the Egyptian darkness of Popery,
was it not a raising of the dead?

When Luther arose for the defense of the truth, a man might have said Luther.
to him, What? do thou set thy self against the whole World? go to thy
cloister and say, Lord, have mercy upon us. Do thou hope to reform the World
against all the World? Alas, he trusted in God that raises the dead, that
raises men to conversion when he pleases, and that raises the Church when he
pleases, even from death. He raised the Church out of Babylon, And he will
raise the Jews that now are in a dead state: why should we doubt of these
things, when we believe, or profess to believe the main, the resurrection from
the dead?

And every day in the Church, God is raising the dead spiritually: the dead
hear the voice of Christ every day, when the Ministry is in power, when there
is a blessing upon it, conveying it to the heart, then he is raising the dead.
So, Wisdom is justified of her children; the Gospel is justified to be a
powerful doctrine, having the Spirit of God clothing it, to raise people from
the dead, those that are dead in sin.

There are none that ever are spiritually raised, but those that see themselves
dead. And that is the reason why we are to abhor Popery, because it teaches us
that we are not dead in our selves, and then there can be no resurrection to
grace; for the resurrection is of the dead: the more we see a contrariety in
Nature to Grace, the more fit objects we are for the divine power of God to
raise, He raises the dead.

Thus we see how to go along with this, in all troubles, God will raise How to
argue in extremity.
the dead, therefore he will bring me out of this trouble, if he see it good:
Therefore in extremity, let us thus reason with our selves: Now I know not
which way to turn me; there is but a step between me and death: if God have any
purpose to use my service furthet, he that raises the dead, will raise me from
the grave, to him belong the issues of death, Psalm. 67. he can give an evasion
and escape if he will: if not if he will not deliver me, then I die in this
faith that he will raise me from the dead.

This is that that upholds a Christian in extremity: This made the Martyrs so
confident: this made those three young men so resolute that were cast into the
fiery Furnace: what was their comfort? Surely this, God can deliver us if he
will (say they) he is able to deliver us now: but if he will not do this for
us, he will raise our bodies, if he will not deliver them here, there will be a
final deliverance at the resurrection.

So in Heb. 11. those blessed men, they hoped for a better resurrection, and
this made them confident.

This makes us confident to stand out against all the threatenings and all the
crosses of the world, that we may hold our peace with God notwithstanding all
the inticements, and allurements to the contrary, because we trust in God that
raises the dead.

Again, let us learn to extract contrary principles to Satan, out of Gods To
extract contrary principles to Satan.
proceedings. What does he reason, when we are dead, either in sin, or in
misery? What have thou to do with God? God has forsaken thee: No, says faith,
God is a God raising the dead; the more dead I am in the eye of the world, and
in my own sense, the nearer I am to Gods help. I am a despairing sinner, a
great sinner: but the more God will magnify his merey, that where sin has
abounded, grace may abound much more. Retort home the argument, draw contrary
principles to him, this is a divine Art which faith has.

Oh, but then you may presume, and do what you list.

Not so, (retort the argument again upon him) if I do so, God will bring me to
death, he will bring me to despair; and who is it that delights to have that
course taken with him, to be brought so low? So every way we may retort
temptations from this dealing of God. If I be careless, he will bring me as
low as hell, I shall have little joy to try conclusions with him.

And if thou be low, despair not, thou art the fitter object, God raises the
dead, therefore I will not add to my sins legal, I will not add this
Evangelical sin, this destroying sin of despair, and unbelief; but I will cast
my self upon the mercy of God, and believe in him that raises the dead; and
desire him to speak to my dead soul, which is as rotten as Lazaru's body which
had been so long in the grave; that he would say to it, Come forth of that
cursed estate; it is but for him to speak the word, to bless his word, and
then it will come out by faith. It is the Art of faith to draw contrary
arguments to Satan, and those that belong to God do so in all temptations: but
those that do not, they sink lower and lower, having nothing to uphold their
souls: they have not learned to trust in God that raises the dead.

God is the God that raises the dead: Therefore let us often think of this, To
carry our selves as expecting the resurrection.
think what God means to do with us, that we may carry out selves answerably, I
trust in God that raises the dead: Therefore let us honor God while we live,
with that body that he will raise: let us be fruitful in our place. Saint Paul
draws this conclusion, 1 Cor. 15. from the resurrection, Finally, my brethren,
be constant, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that
your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Especially considering that he will
raise the dead bodies after a more glorious manner then they are now, he will
make a more glorious body. For always Gods second works are better then his
first: he raises the dead, and will make our bodies, like the glorious body of
Christ.

But the point of the resurrection is very large, and perhaps I shall have
better occasion to speak of it afterward. I only apply it to the present
purpose, how it strengthens faith in misery, and in the hour of death.

A man is strengthened in his faith when he thinks, now I am going the way of
all flesh, I am to yield my soul to God, and death is to close up mine eyes:
yet I have trusted in God, and do trust in God that will raise my body from the
grave. This comforts the soul against the horror of the grave, against that
confusion and darkness that is after death.

Faith sees things to come as present, it sees the body (after it has a long
time been in the dust) clothed with flesh, and made like the glorious body of
Christ: faith sees this, and so a Christian soul dies in faith, and sowes the
body as good seed in the ground in hope of a glorious resurrection.

And that comforts a Christian soul, in the loss of children, of wife, of
friends, that have been dearest, and nearest to me, I trust in God that raises
the dead, that he will raise them again, and then we shall all be for ever with
the Lord: it is a point of singular comfort: for the maine Articles of our
faith, they have a wondrous working upon us, in all the passages of our lives;
it is good to think often upon the pillars of our faith, as this is one, That
God will raise us from the dead. But I go on to the next verse.

VERSE. 10. Who delivered us from so great a death, who does deliver us, in whom
we trust that he will yet deliver us.
SAint Paul sets down his troubles to the life, that he might make himself and
others more sensible of his comforts, and of Gods grace, and goodness in his
deliverance. These words contain his deliverance out of that trouble, his
particular deliverance out of a particular trouble: And this deliverance is set
down by a triple distinction of time, as time is either past, present, or to
come; so God who is the deliverer for all times, he has delivered us for the
time past, he does deliver us for the present, in whom we trust that he will
deliver us for the time to come. Who delivered us from so great a death.


After St. Paul had learned to rrust in God, after he had taken forth that
lesson, a hard lesson to learn, that must be learned by bringing a man to such
extremity; I say, after he had learned to trust in God that raises the dead,
God gave him this reward of his diligence in the blessed school of afflictions,
he delivered him, who has delivered us, and who does deliver us continually,
he will not take his hand from the work, and for the time to come I hope he
will do so still.

St. Paul here calls his trouble a death. It was not a death properly, it is
but his aggravation of the trouble that calls it a death: because Gods mercy
only hindered it from being a death, it was only not a death, it was some
desperate trouble, some desperate sickness, the particular is not set down in
the Scripture. We know what a tumult there was about Diana of Ephesus, Acts 19.
and in 1. Cor. 15. He fought with beasts at Ephesus, (which is in Asia) after
the manner of men. Whether it were that, or some other we know not; whatsoever
it was, he calls it a death: he does not call it an affliction, but a death,
and a great death, to make himself the more sensible.

Wherefore have we souls, and understandings, but to exercise them in setting
forth our dangers, and the deliverances of God? to consider of things, to
affect us deeply? The Apostle here to affect himself deeply, he sets it down
here by a death.

And oft-times in the Psalms, the Psalmist in Psalm 18. and Psalm. 11. he
calls his afflictions death and hell, and so they had been indeed except God
had delivered him. But to come to the points that are considerable hence. First
of all we may observe this, that God till he have wrought his own work he does
not deliver; he brings men to a low ebb, to a very low estate before he will
deliver.


Secondly, After God has wrought his own work, then he delivers hischildren.

Thirdly, he continues the work still, he does deliver me.

Fourthly, That upon experience of Gods former deliverance, Gods children have
founded a blessed argument for the time to come, He has, and he will deliver
me. God is always like himself, he is never at a loss, what he has done, he
does, and will do, reserving the limitations, as we shall see afterward. God
does not at the first deliver his children.


He delivered St. Paul, but it was after he had brought him to receive Doct. 1.
God does not at the first deliver his children.
the sentence of death, and after he had learned not to trust in himself, but
in God that raises the dead. God deferres his deliverance for many reasons: To
name a few.

God does defer his deliverance, when we are in dangers, partly (as Reason. 1.
you see here) to perfect the work of mortification, of self-confidence, to
subdue trust in any earthly thing. St. Paul by this learned not to trust in
himself.

And then to strengthen our faith and confidence in God, when we are 2.
drawn from all creatures to learn to trust in him.

And to sweeten his deliverance when it comes, to indear his favors, 3.
for then they are sweet indeed after God has beat us out of our selves.
Summer and Spring are sweet after Winter: so it is in this vicissitude, and
intercourse that God uses; favor after affliction and crosses, is favor
indeed. That makes heaven so sweet to Gods Children when they come there
because they go to Heaven out of a great deal of misery in this world.

And partly likewise God defers it for his own glory, that it may be 4.
known for his mere work: for when we are at a loss, and the soul can reason
thus, God must help or none can help, then God has the glory: therefore in
love to his own glory he defers it so long.

Again, he uses to defer long, that he might the more shame the enemies at
length: for if the affliction be from the insolency and pride of the enemies,
5.
he deferres deliverance, till they be come to the highest pitch, and then he
arises as a Giant refreshed with wine, and smites his enemies in the hinder
parts: he is as it were refreshed on the sudden. And as it is his greatest
glory to raise his children when they are at the lowest: so it is his glory to
confound the pride of the enemies when it is at the highest: if he should do it
before, his glory would not shine so much in the confusion of them, and their
enterprises against his children. One would think he should not have let
Pharaoh alone so long; but he got him glory the more at the last, in
confounding him in the Red Sea: So Haman came very far, almost to the
execution of the decree; he had gotten by his policy and malice, and then God
delivered his Church, and confounded Haman. These and the like reasons may be
given to show that God in heavenly and deep wisdom does not presently deliver
his children.

The proper use of it is, that we should learn not to be hasty, and
shortspirited in Gods dealing, but learn to practice that which we are often
enjoined, to wait on God, to wait his good leisure.

Especially considering that which is the second point, let that satisfy us,
that Doct. 2. God delivers after he has done his work.
After God has done his work, he will deliver.


Let us wait, for he will deliver at length: perhaps his time is not yet that
he will deliver; but usually when all is desperate, when he may have all the
glory then he delivers. He delivered the three young men, but they were put
into the fire first, and the Furnace was made seven times hotter, that he might
have the glory in consuming their enemies: so he delivered Hezekias in his
time, but it was when the enemy was even ready to seize upon the City. He
promised St. Paul that not one man should perish in the ship, but yet they
suffered shipwreck, they went away only with their lives. God does so deliver
his, that he does not suffer them to perish in the danger.

Therefore let us stay his time, and wait, it may be it is not Gods time yet.
Use. To wait Gods time. Gods time to deliver is.


When shall we know that it is Gods time to deliver? that we may wait with
comfort.

God knows his own time best, but usually it is when we are brought very low,
and when our spirits are low: when we are brought very 1. When we are low.
low, both in regard of humane support, and in regard of our spirits, when we
are humble, when our souls cleave to the dust: help, Lord, for we are brought
very low: Help Lord, for vain is the help of man.

When the Church can plead so, it is a good plea, when we are at the lowest,
and the malice of the enemy is at the highest, when the waters swell, Help,
Lord, for the waters are come into my very soul, when we are very low, and the
enemies very high, as we see in Pharaoh. And so in Herod when he was in the
height of his pride, when he was in all his glory, God takes him there.

Thus God delivers his, and confounds his enemies; I join them both together,
for the one is not commonly without the other: the annoyance of Gods Children
is from their enemies: therefore when he delivers the one he confounds the
other. When the malice of the one is at the highest, and the state of the other
is at the lowest, and their spirits are afflicted and cast down with their
estate, then is the time when God will deliver.

Again, when our hearts are enlarged to pray, when we can pray from a broken
heart: as you see here, he joins them together, God will deliver 2. When we
are enlarged to pray.
me, but it must be by your prayers: when we have hearts to pray, and when
others have hearts to pray for us, that is the time of deliverance. Usually
there goes before deliverance an enlarged heart to pray to God; as we see in
Daniel, Dan. 9. a little before they came out of Babylon, he had a large heart
to pray to God. And when we can plead with God his promise, Remember, Lord, thy
promise wherein thou have caused us to trust: when we can cast our selves upon
Gods mercy with prayer, and plead with God to remember his promise, it is a
sign God means to deliver us. When the heart is shut and closed up, that it
cannot speak to God: when there is some sin or other that does stifle the
spirit, that it cannot vent it self with that liberty to God, it is a sign
that it is not the time yet of Gods deliverance.

God will at the length deliver: therefore from both these (that he does
defer deliverance, and that he will deliver at length) let us infer this
lesson of waiting, let us wait therefore, and wait with comfort. Let us
remember these principles. Grounds of waiting.


First, God has a time (as for all things) so for our deliverance.

Secondly that Gods time is the best time, he is the best discerner of
opportunities.

Thirdly, remember that this shall be when he has wrought his work upon our
souls, specially when he has made us to trust in him. As here, when Saint Paul
had learnd to trust in God, then he delivered him. And why should we desire to
do our bodies good, or our estates good, till God has wrought his cure on our
souls? for God intends our souls in the first place: our souls they are the
whole man in a manner. The welfare of the soul draws the welfare of the body,
and the welfare of the estate after it; the body shall do well if the soul do
well.

Therefore we should desire rather that the Lord would let the affliction stay,
then that it should part without the message for which God sends it. Every
affliction is Gods messenger: we should desire the Lord to let it stay for the
answer for which he has sent it.

And indeed, it will never part without the answer for which God sends it, till
it have humbled us, till it have brought us to trust in God, till we be such as
we should be. And a Christian soul rather desires to be in the Furnace, to be
under the affliction, to be purged better yet, then to have the cross, and
affliction removed, and not to be a whit the better for it. Therefore
considering that there will be a time, and that Gods time is the best time: and
that this time will be when he has fitted us, we should learn to wait in any
cross, and not to be over hasty.

Again, consider, though the time be long: yet he will deliver at length by
death, death will end all miseries.

And consider, that how long soever we endure any thing, yet what is that that
we endure here, to that that we are freed from by Christ? We are freed from
misery, from all misery, from the wrath of God, from damnation. And what is
that that we can suffer here, to the glory and joy that remains for us in
heaven? What is all that we can suffer here, to that that Christ has endured
for us? what is all that we can endure here, to that that we have deserved?
Considering then what we are delivered from, what God has reserved for us,
what Christ has endured, and what we deserve, it will make us wait, and wait
with patience. Especially considering (as I said before) that God is working
his good work for our good: though we at the first perhaps for a while do not
see the meaning of the affliction, the meaning of the cross, we cannot read it
perfectly; yet in general we may know, it is for our good: God of his infinite
wisdom will not suffer a hair to fall from our heads without his providence,
And all shall work together for the best to those that love him, Romans 8.

It is long then we see ere God deliver, and why? and at the last he will
deliver one way or other: and therefore let us wait quietly, and this the
Saints of God have practiced in all ages, Psalm. 62. Yet, my soul, keep silence
to the Lord. He had a shrewd conflict with himself when he saw how good causes
were trampled on, and he saw the insolence of wicked persons, how they lift up
their heads, Yet, my soul, keep silence to the Lord. So he begins, Psalm. 73.
Yet God is good to Israel, for all this. And God charge it upon his people
that they should wait, If I tarry, wait thou, Hab. 2. 2. And the blessing is
promised to those that can wait and not murmur, as in Psalm. 147. 11. It is a
duty that we are much urged to, and very hardly brought to the practice of:
therefore we are to hear it pressed the more, Psalm. 147. The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy: in those that
trust in his mercy. The like you have in many places, Isay, 30. 18. Therefore
will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious to you: therefore he will be
exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: he is a God of judgment, Blessed are
all that wait for him. So in Lament. 3. The Church still waits upon God.

How often does David charge himself, Wait, and trust in God, O my soul? Let us
learn this upon these grounds, that God is long ere he deliver, but at last he
will deliver, and that is sufficient to force this, to wait still upon God with
patience and silence.

Well, thus we see God does deliver, Who dilivered us, etc. What will he do for
the time present? he has delivered, and does deliver, and he will deliver.
From all jointly together you see, that Gods people in this World stand in need
of Doct. Gods Children always need deliverance.
deliverance always.


They have always troubles, when one is past another is present; deliverance
supposes dangers.

There have been dangers, there are dangers, and there will be dangers. Our
life is a warfare, a temptation, we are absent from God, we are always exposed
to dangers. We live in the midst of Devils, and of Divellish-minded men: we
have corruptions in us that expose us to sin, and sin draws on judgments, we
are always in danger one way or other while we live in this World. But our
comfort is, that as there have been dangers, and are dangers, and will be
dangers; so there has been deliverance, there is deliverance, and there will
be deliverance. It is a trade that God uses, it is his Art, God knows how to
deliver his, as Saint Peter says; he has always exercised it, he is excellent
at it: he has delivered his Church, he does deliver his Church, and he will
deliver his Church: and so every particular member, he has, and does and will
diliver them.

VVonderfull is the intercourse that God uses with his people, and their
estate. Even as in nature there is a change and intercourse of day and night,
of light and darkness, of morning and evening, of summer and winter, of hot
and cold: so in the life of a Christian there are changes, dangers, and
deliverance. There is a sowing in tears, and a reaping in joy; there is a night
of affliction, and a morning of joy and prosperity, Heaviness may be in the
evening, but joy comes in the morning.

And thus we go on till we end our days, till we be taken to Heaven, where
there shall be no Change, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes.

If we had spiritual eyes, eyes to see our danger, to see how full the World
is of Devils, and then to consider how many dangers this weak life is subject
to, how many casualties: we cannot go out of doors, we cannot take a journey,
but how many dangers are we subject to? we are environed with perpetual
dangers, the snares of death compass us almost every where, abroad, and at
home, in our greatest security.

But our comfort, is that God does compass us with mercy, as it is, Psalm. 32.
As dangers are round about us, so God is a Wall of fire about us: we have
dangers about us, Devils about us, we have a guard about us, we have God about
us, we have his Angels about us, we have all his creatures about us, All things
are yours, says the Apostle, etc.

It is God that has delivered us, that does deliver us. Who restraines the
devils from having their wills of us? they are enemies not only to our souls,
and to our salvation, but to our bodies: they are enemies to our health, as we
see in Job: we live in the midst of Lions, oft-times, in the midst of
enemies; who restraines their malice? we are preserved from dangers day and
night: who shuts in the doors, who watches over us, but he that keeps Israel?
It is God that delivers us. Without his deliverance all deliverances were to
little purpose: all shutting in were to little purpose, except he shut us in
that shut Noah into the Ark: he must watch over us. It is God that delivers
us.

But does he deliver us only outwardly?

No, he has delivered, and he does deliver us spiritually. He has 2.
Spiritually.
delivered us from the power of hell, and damnation, he does deliver us from
many sins that we should commit: and when we have sinned, he delivers us from
despair, he delivers us from presuming, by touching our hearts with saving
grief for sin; if we belong to him, one of the two ways he delivers, either
from the sin or from the danger of the sin, either from the committing of the
sin or from despairing for the sin, or presuming in a course of sin.

Who delivers us from our inbred corruptions? Should we not run every day
into the sins that we see others commit? Who cuts short our lusts, and
suppresseth them, that we are not swearers, that we are not licentious persons,
that we are not Godless persons? are we not hewn out of the same rock? Who
keeps us from sin? Is it any inbred goodness? Are we not all a like tainted
with original fin? Children of wrath? Who puts a difference between us and
others? It is God that has delivered us, and that does deliver us.

It is his mercy that we do not commit sin, it is his preventing deliverance;
and when we have committed sin, it is his mercy to pardon it, there is his
preserving deliverance from despair after the committing of sin.

All are beholding to God for deliverance, those that have committed sin, that
he delivers them from the wrath to come, from the damnation that they deserve;
and those that have the grace not to commit sin, they are beholding to him,
that he delivers them from that which their corruptions else would carry them
to, if he should take his government from their hearts.

We have an inward guard as well as an outward, an invisible guard, We are kept
by the Spirit of God through Faith to salvation. We have a guard An inward
guard. God delivers us from our selves.
that keeps us from despair, from sinking. God delivers us from our selves by
this inward guard. There is not the vilest Atheist that lives, but let God open
his conscience, and let loose himself upon himself, to see what he deserves, to
see what he is ready to sink into, if he see not Gods mercy to deliver him: if
he see not an Intercessor, a Mediator to come between God and him, what would
become of him? Therefore says Saint Paul in Philip. 4. The peace of God which
passes all understanding shall (guard) your hearts and minds; for so the word
is in the Original, shall guard your hearts and minds.

We have not only a guard outward, but we have a peace in us, the Spirit of
God, the strengthening power of God, the sight of the love of God. God delivers
us as from all others, so from our selves. Judas had no enemies, God let him
loose to himself, what became of him? Achitophel had no enemy, God let him
loose to himself too, and then we see what a desperate conclusion he came to.

So, whosoever thou art that contemnest Religion, that make any thing of
greater moment and respect then that, if thou had not an enemy in the world,
but all were thy friends: as Judas had all to be his friends, the Pharisees
were his friends, he had money of them: but God opened his conscience, and he
could not endure the sight of it, it spoke bitter things to him, when God
opened an inward hell in his conscience. So God does deliver us outwardly and
inwardly, and the inward is double, partly from despair, partly from the rage
of corruptions, (as I said before) Is it not God that ties up our corruptions?
There is such a world of sin in the heart of a man, as often he finds the
experience of it, when he meets with a fit temptation to his disposition, that
Gods Children complain of themselves that the sins of their hearts have
deceived them: so God delivers men from the rage of lusts, he ties up their
corruptions, and delivers them from them. And when we fall, and are ready to
despair for them, he delivers us from despair. He does deliver, he is
perpetually delivering, it implies that we always stand in need of deliverance.

Therefore we should always look up to God, he is the breath of our nostrils, In
him we live, and move, and have our being, in him we stand, and in him we are
delivered in the midst of all our enemies, it should stir up our hearts
thankfully to depend upon God; he that has delivered us, he does deliver us:
if he should not continue his deliverance we should be continually in extreme
danger. Who has delivered us, and does deliver us, etc. Christians have
deliverance in troubles.



A Christian is never in so great perplexity but God is delivering of him, even
in trouble: So the Church says Lamentations 3. It is Gods mercy that we are
not all consumed.

The Church was in a pitiful estate then, one would have thought they were as
low as almost they might be: yet notwithstanding the Spirit of God in those
blessed men that lived in those times, they saw that they might have been worse
then they were: and they saw that there was some danger from which they were
delivered, It is thy mercy that we are not all consumed. God delivered them
from extremity.

Nay, in troubles God does deliver so, as there may be a distinction for the
most part between his and others. When I gather my Jewels it shall be known who
serves me, and who serves me not. Mal. 3. God continually delivers, more
especially at sometimes.

As we say of providence, providence is nothing but a continued act of
creation. And it is true, the same power that created all things of nothing,
Providnce what.
the same power sustains all things. God upholds all things with his right hand.

For even as it is with a stone which is upheld by a man's hand, let him
withdraw his hand, and down it falls: so naturally all things as they are
raised out of nothing, so they will fall to their first principles, except they
be sustained by that continual act of creation which we call providence, to
maintain them in the order wherein they were set at the first. So there is a
continual act of deliverance, till we be delivered out of all troubles, and
set in a place where there shall be no more annoyance at all either from within
us, or without us. God does still deliver.

O, let this move us to a reverence of the eye and Majesty of the great Use. To
carry our selves reverently to God.
God, of the presence of God. Who will willingly provoke him, of whom he stands
in need to deliver him?

Let God withdraw his deliverance, his preventing deliverance, or his rescuing
deliverance: for (as I said) there is a double deliverance: he prevents us from
trouble, he delivers us that we do not fall into it: and when we are fallen
into it, he rescues us. If God should not thus deliver us, there is no mischief
that any others fall into, but we should fall into the like, were it not for
his preventing deliverance.

As St. Austin says well; A man that is freed from sin ought to thank God as
well for the sins that he has not committed, as for the sins that he has had
forgiven: for it is an equal mercy that a man fall not into sin as for his sin
to be pardoned. And so for troubles too, it is Gods mercy to prevent troubles
as well as to deliver out of trouble when we are fallen into it.

Who would not reverence this great God? what miscreant wretches are they that
inure their tongues to swearing to tear that Majesty, that if he should
withdraw his deliverance and protection from them, what would become of them?

Where there is perpetual dependence upon any man, how does it enforce
reverence and respect even amongst men? Itis Athiesm therefore for men to inure
their tongues to speak cursed language, to inure their hearts to entertain
profane thoughts of God, and to neglect the consideration of his Majesty. Holy
men in Scripture are said to walk with God, that is, to have God in their eye,
in all times, in all places, as he had them in his eye, to delight in them, to
prevent troubles, and to deliver them from troubles when they were in them.

We should take notice of Gods special providence in this kind, that God by
deliverance often gives us our lives, and it should teach us to consecrate our
lives to God. Who does deliver us: In whom we hope, or trust, or have
affiance that he will yet deliver us.


The holy Apostle does take in trust here the time to come, he speaks as if he
were assured of that as of any thing past; and he does found his hope for the
time to come upon that which was past and present. As he says in Romans 5.
Experience breeds hope, so it does here in the Blessed Apostle, He has
delivered, and he does deliver, and why should I not trust in so good a God for
the time to come, I hope he will deliver me? And surely so may we do. A
Christian may rely on God for Doct. A Christian may rely on God for time to
come.
the time to come.


Upon what ground, upon what Pillars is this confidence built of the holy
Apostle?

Upon the Name of God, the Name of his nature, Jehovah, I am, which signifies a
constant being, I was, I am, and am to come. 1. Upon the Name of God.


There was danger, there is danger, and there will come danger: there was a
God, there is a God, and there will be a God, Jehovah, I am. If there be a
flux, a perpetual succession of ill, there is a perpetual being, and living of
the living Jehovah. So Christ is proved to be Jehovah, because he calls himself
Revelations 1. he that was, and is, and is to come, Jehovah, always like himself.

Now if God be Jehovah, always like himself, then if he have delivered, if he
does deliver, he will deliver, he is I am in himself.

Now as his Name is, so is his nature and properties, he is I am in his love to
his Church, he is always in the present tense: Whom he loves, he loves 2. His
properties.
to the end: he is unchangeable. I the Lord your God change not, therefore you
are not consumed, Mal. 3. The reason why notwithstanding our many provocations
of him, that we are not consumed, it is because his love to us is unchangeable:
though we are up and down, He cannot deny himself; and there is the foundation
of our comfort, that though we change often, yet he never changes. There is no
outward thing can change him, for then that were God, and not he; there is no
inward thing can change him, for then he were not perfectly wise; so there is
nothing either in himself or in the creatures that can change God, he is always
like himself: therefore this is a ground of confidence for the time to come.

Likewise his Covenant and promise, the Covenant that he has made 3. His
covenant.
with his Children is an everlasting Covenant, that he will be their God to
death, and for ever: and the gifts, and graces of God, his inward love, they
are without repentance: and their union with Christ, is an everlasting union.

And also experience built upon these grounds, that God is Jehovah, what 4.
Experience of Gods Children.
he has done he will do, and his properties are answerable to his Name, he is
unchangeable, and his promise and Covenant are unchangeable: therefore
experience from the time past comes to be a good argument from these 3.
grounds: because he is Jehovah, I am, and because he is unchangeable, being
Jehovah, and because his Covenant is everlasting, because he is unchangeable.

For the foundation of all comfort is the Name and being of God Jehovah: from
his being issue and flow his properties, and they are like him unchangeable,
and eternal: and from his properties comes that to be unchangeable that comes
from him, his Word and promise and Covenant; considering then that his Name and
being is such, that his properties are such, that his Covenant is such, issuing
from his nature and properties, experience then of trust in the love and mercy
of God, is an unanswerable argument against all temptations: he has loved, he
does love, and he will love: he has delivered, he does deliver, and he will
deliver, and will preserve 1. Tim 4. 18.
us to his heavenly Kingdom.

It is a good argument, that God that is Jehovah, that God that is
unchangeable, that God that is in Covenant with me, that is my God, and I his,
that God of whom I have had experience for the time past, that he has been my
God, why should I doubt for the time to come? Unless I will call in question
the very being of God, the very properties of God, and the truth of God in his
Covenant, and overturn all, I may as well trust him for the time to come, as
for the time present, He has delivered me, he does deliver me, and he will
deliver me.

But it may be objected, God does not deliver always, and therefore it Objct.
Gods Children miscarry in afflictions.
seems not to be a current truth; how does God deliver his Children, when we
see how they miscarrie in troubles, and persecutions, both the Church in
general and particular Christians, as there be many instances, it seems God
does not deliver his, they die Martyrs, St. Paul himself died a bloody death:
therefore how is this true that we may build a certain confidence upon it, he
has delivered, he does deliver, and he will deliver? Answ. God delivers them.


I answer, we must take it in the latitude, this deliverance. God delivers them
so as stands with their desires to be delivered: for there may cases 1. So as
they desire.
come wherein Gods Children will not be delivered: as we see the three young
men when they were cast into the fire, they would not be delivered out of the
fire, but they were delivered in it. And so in Heb. 11. 35. there is a notable
example: Tender women, received their dead again raised to life, and others
likewise were tortured, and would not except of deliverance: they would have
none upon ill terms. So sometimes God does not deliver his Children, no, nor
they will not be delivered, because perhaps their deliverance is promised upon
ill terms, that they may redeem their lives if they will by denying God and
Religion: an ill bargin.

Again, I answer that howsoever God does not deliver his from trouble, yet he
delivers them in trouble, as in Isay 43. he promises to be with 2. He delivers
them in afflictions.
them and to deliver them in the fire, and in the water.

God did not keep the Martyrs out of the fire, but God was with them in the
fire, and in the water, to support them by the inward fire of his Spirit, that
they might not be overcome of the outward fire and flame: so God delivers them
in trouble, though not out of trouble.

There is, an open deliverance visible to the world, and a secret, inward
Deliverance open secret.
invisible inward deliverance. There is an open glorious deliverance, as we see
in the deliverance of the three young men, and many other examples. And there
is an invisible, which is only felt of them, and of God who delivers them: he
delivers them in the inward man, he delivers them from the ill of troubles,
from sin and despair: that they put not their hands to sinful courses, he
supports them inwardly with comfort, and supports them inwardly in a course of
obedience: and that spiritual, inward deliverance is the best, and that which
Gods people more value then deliverance out of trouble: he does not deliver
them from fuffering ill, he delivers them from doing ill: as in that notable
place 2 Timothy 4. 18. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord
shall deliver me from every evil work. He does not say, God shall deliver me
from death, and from suffering evil works of Tyrants, no, but he shall deliver
me from carrying my self unseemly, and unbefitting such a man as I am, that I
may not disgrace my profession, He shall deliver me from every evil work, and
that is that which the Saints and Martyrs and all good people desire, that God
would deliver them, that they may not sink in their minds, that they despair
not, that they carry not themselves uncomely in troubles, but so as is meet for
the credit of the truth which they seal with their blood, he has delivered me,
and he will deliver me from every evil work; and what says he afterward? He
shall preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom.

He does not say he shall preserve me from death, he knew he should die; but he
shall preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. So put the case that God do not
deliver from death, yet he delivers by death.

There is a partial deliverance, and a total deliverance, there is a
deliverance from this, and that trouble, and there is a deliverance from all
troubles. Deliverance partial to all.
God delivers us most when we think he delivers least: for we think how does he
deliver his Children when we see them taken away by death, and oftimes are
massacreed?

That is one way of delivering them, God by death takes them from all
Deliverance by death.
miseries, they are out of the reach of their enemies; death delivers them from
all miseries of this life, both inward of sin, and outward of trouble, all are
determined in death: therefore God when he does not deliver them from death, he
delivers them by death, and takes them to his heavenly Kingdom.

God oft-times delivers his, by not delivering them out of trouble: for when he
sees us in danger of some sin, he delivers us into trouble to deliver us from
some corruption. Of all evils Gods Children desire to avoid the delivering up
to themselves, and to their own lusts, to their own base earthly hearts, to a
dead heart: he delivers them into trouble therefore to deliver them from
themselves.

God will deliver us for the time to come, so that we depend upon him, and
humble our selves, and be like our selves. When God delivers us, at the first
it may be we are like our selves, but perhaps afterward we grow prouder, and
self-confident, and will not do that we formerly did: therefore God sometimes
though he put us in hope of deliverance, yet he will not deliver us, because we
are not prepared, we are not thoroughly humbled. As we see in Judges 20. there
the Israelites were to set on the Benjamits: they go the first time, and had
the foil: they go the second time, and are foiled: the third time they set on
them with fasting and prayer, and then they had the victory.

What was the reason they had it not at the first time? they were not humbled
enough, they did not flee to God, with fasting and prayer. It may be there is
some sin, some affection unmortified, of revenge and anger, when God has
subdued that, and brought it under, and brought us to fasting and prayer, then
God will deliver us; as at the third encounter they carried away the victory.
When we have not made our peace with God, we may come the first and second
time, and not be delivered: but when we are thoroughly humbled, and brought low,
then God will deliver us.

And then, we must know, that always these outward promises have a reservation
to Gods glory, and our eternal good; God has delivered me, and he does, and
will deliver me, if it may stand with his glory and my good; Promises of
outward things with reservation.
and therefore the soul says to God (with that reserved speech of him in the
Gospel) Lord, If thou will, thou can heal me: if thou will, thou can
deliver me: if it be for thy glory and my eternal good, or for the Churches
good, thou will do it, and neither the Church nor the particular members of the
Church desire deliverance upon any other terms; but when it may be for the
glory of God, and for the Churches good: when they may be instrumental by long
life to serve God, and to serve the Church, and when it is for their own
advantage to gather further assurance of their salvation, then he has, and
does, and will deliver still. This is enough to build the confidence of Gods
children upon, for their deliverance for the time to come.

God will deliver his Church and Children, and he will deliver them out of all,
he will deliver Israel out of all his troubles, he will not leave a horn or a
hoof (as Moses said) he will not leave one trouble, he will deliver us at the
last out of all, and advance us to his heavenly Kingdom. His bowels will melt
over his Church and Children: he is a Father, and he has the bowels of a
Mother. This may serve to answer all objections that will arise in our hearts,
as indeed we are ready to cavil against divine truths and comforts, especially
in the time of trouble and temptation, our hearts are full of complaints, and
disputes, therefore I thought good to answer this.

But what is the argument of the Apostle here? Especially experience: he has
delivered, he does deliver, and he will deliver me.

As God will deliver his Church for the time to come, so this is one maine
argument that he will do it, experience of former favors and deliverances.
Doct: It is a good argument from former experience to future deliverance.


This Saint Paul uses familiarly, 2 Timothy 4. 18. I was delivered out of the
mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom: A blessed arguing. So David argues, God
delivered me from the Bear, and the Lion, and therefore he will deliver me from
this uncircumcised Philistine.

So Jacob pleads, that God would deliver him from Esau: he had had experience
of Gods mercy till then, and therefore he trusted that God would deliver him
from Esau.

It is a good argument, to plead experience to move God to care for us for the
time to come. It was used by the head of the Church,
By the body, the Church, and by every member of the Church.


It was used by the head, Psalm 22. which is a Psalm made of Christ, I was
cast on thee from my Mothers womb, therefore be not far from me. Used by the
head of the Church.


It was Tipycally true of David, and it was true of the Son of David.

So the Church pleads with God in diverse places, in Isay 51. 2. God Of the
Church.
calls to his people to make use of former experience: Look to Abraham your
Father, and to Sarah that bare you, etc. Look to former times, to the rock
whence you were hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence you were dug: he
that was your God then, is your God now; Look to Abraham your Father, and from
thence reason till now. So in Isay 63. 7. I will mention the loving kindness
of the Lord, and the praise of the Lord, according to the great goodness of
the Lord bestowed upon us. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, etc he
speaks of former experience; In love he bare them, and carried them all the
days of old. So in Psalm 44. Our Fathers have told us this and this. So both
the head of the Church, and the Church it self plead with God from former
experience, and God calls them to former experience, Remember the rock whence
you were hewn. And he upbraids them because they forgot the works done to
their fathers, in Psalm. 105. and diverse others, he objects to them that they
did not make use of Gods former favors, Psalm. 106. 12. They forgot their
Savior that had done great things in Egypt, etc. they forgate his former
favors. And in the 13. verse of that Psalm. They soon forgate his works, and
waited not sor his counsel.

And so it is with every particular St. of God, they have reasoned from
experience of Gods favors from the time past to the time to come: the Psalms
are full of it, among the rest Psalm. 143. 5. I remembered the days of old, and
meditated on all thy works, I mused on the works of thy hands. And in Psalm
116. 3. The sorrows of death (as the Apostle says here, I was delivered from
so great a Death) The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of Hell took
hold on me. I found sorrow and trouble, I cried unto the Lord, O Lord, I
beseech thee deliver my soul: The Lord preserves the simple, I was brought
low, and he helped me. What does he build on that? Return unto thy rest, O my
soul: the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: thou have delivered my soul
from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. What will he do for
the time to come? I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Thus
we see how we may plead with God as the same Psalmist does excellently in Psalm
71. he goes along with God there from the beginning of his days, in verse 5.
Thou have been my hope, Lord, and my trust from my youth, by thee I have been
held from the womb, thou tookest me out of my Mothers bowels, my praise shall
be continually of thee. What does he plead from this now when he was old? In
verse nine, Cast me not off in the time of my old age, for sake me not when my
strength fails.

Why? Thou have been my God from my youth, thou have held me from the womb:
therefore cast me not off in my old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. So he pleads with God, verse 17. Lord, thou have taught me from my
youth, now when I am old and gray headed for sake me not, till I have showed
thy strength to this Generation, and thy power to every one that is to come.

Thus we see how the Spirit of God in his Children makes a blessed use of
former experience to reason with God for the time to come, and it will afford
us arguments in all kinds. We may reason from former spiritual favors to
spiritual favors: as for instance, God has begun a good work in us,
therefore He will finish it to the day of the Lord, Phil. 1. His gifts and
graces are without repentance. And we may reason from spiritual favors past
to all favors to come that are of a lower nature, Romans 8. He that spared not
his own Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not with him give
us all things? It is a strong reason, he has done the great, rtherefor ^he
may well do the less. We may reason from one favor to another, thus, from
temporal to temporal: he has delivered me, therefore if it be for his glory
and my good, he will deliver me. We may reason from once to all of the like,
Psalm. 23. God is my shepherd, etc. He has been with me in the valley of death;
he has showed himself to be my shepherd in all my troubles: what does he build
on that for the time to come? Doubtless the loving kindness of the Lord shall
follow me all the days of my life. This should teach us then this holy Use. To
lay up observations of Gods dealing.
practice, to lay up observations of Gods dealing, and to take them as so many
pawnes and pledges to move God for the time to come to regard us; it is
wondrous pleasing to him. It is no argument to prevail if we come to men, to
say, you have done this for me, therefore you will: because man has a finite
power which is soon drawn dry: but God is infinite, he is a spring, he can
create new: what he has done he can do, and more too: he is where he was at
the fitst, and will be to the end of the world, he is never at a loss.
Therefore it is a strong argument to go to God, and say, Lord, thou art my God
from the womb, thou have delivered me from such a danger, and such an exigence,
when I knew not what to do, thou made open a way. I see by evident signs it
was thy goodness, thou art always like thy self, to be the same God now.
Therefore we should treasure up observations of Gods dealing with us. And
consider with them the promises, and see 2. Consider the promises.
how God has made good his promise by experience, and then join both together,
and we may wrestle with God: Lord, thou have promised thus and thus, nay, I
have had the performance of this promise in former times. And now I stand in
need of the performance of that promise which before I have had experience of.

And desire God by his Spirit to sanctify our memories, that we may remember
fit deliverances, and fit favors, that when the time shall come we 3: To have
sanctified memories, to remember deliverances.
may have arguments from experience. What is the reason that we sink in
temptation? That we are to seek when troubles come? It is from baseness of
Heart, that though God have manifested his Care and Love to us by thousands of
experiments, yet we are ready upon every new trouble to call all into
question, as if he had never been a good God to us: this is base in fidelity of
heart, and our neglecting to treasure up blessed experiments of Gods former
favor.

It should be the wisdom of every Christian to be well read in the story of his
own life, and to return back in his thoughts what God has done for him, how
God has dealt with him for the time past, what he has wrought in him by his
holy Spirit. Let us make use of it both in outward, and in inward troubles, in
disconsolations of spirit, and in inward desertions: let us call to mind what
good soever has been wrought in us, by such a means, by such an Ordinance, by
such a Book, by such an occasion.

Let us call to mind how effectually God has wrought in us in former times,
and make use of this in the midst of the hour of darkness when God seems to
hide his face from us.

I see not the Sun in a cloudy day, yet notwithstanding the Sun is in the sky
still. At midnight we hope for the morning, the morning will undoubtedly How to
argue in spiritual troubles.
come, though it be midnight for the present. So David comforted himself in
Psalm. 77. 11. I will remember the works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy
wonders of old, I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings, etc.
See his infirmity: when he was in trouble of mind, his sins began to upbraid
him that God had left him: I said in my infirmity, God has forgotten me, etc.
and has God forgotten to be gracioue? has he shut up his tender mercies in
displeasure? then says he, this was my infirmity, but I will remember the
years of the right hand of the most high, etc. And the same he has in many
other places, as Psalm. 143. 4, 5.

It argues the great weakness of our nature, which is ready to distrust God
upon every temptation of Satan, as if God had never dealt graciously with us,
as if God were changeable like our selves. Let us labor to support our selves
in the time of temptation with the former experience of Gods gracious
goodness, and his blessed work upon our souls: he that delivered us from the
power of Satan, and keeps us from him still that we sink not into despair, he
will keep us for the time to come, so that Neither things present, nor things
to come, as the Apostle says, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God in Christ. And let us as it were make diaries of Gods dealing to us: this
is to be acquainted with God, as Job speaks: this is to walk with God, to
observe his steps to us, and ours to him: it is a thing that will wondrously
strengthen our faith, especially in old years, in gray hairs. What a
comfortable thing is it when an aged man can look back to the former part of
his life, and can reckon how God has given him his life again and again? how
God has comforted him in distress, how God has raised him up in the midst
of perplexity, when he knew not which way to turn him, how God comforted him
when he was disconsolate? all these meeting together, in our last conflict,
when all comfort will be little enough, what a comfort will it be?

And those that disfurnish themselves by their negligence, and carelessness of
such blessed helps, what enemies are they to their own comfort?

Therefore consider Gods dealing, remember it, observe it, think of it, and
desire Gods Spirit to help your minds and memories herein, that nothing may be
lost: for, I say, all will be little enough, the comfort of others, our own
experience, the promises of Scripture.

Our Hearts are so ready to sink, and to call in question Gods truth, and
Satan will ply us so in the time of temptation.

Especially those that are old and grow into years, they should be rich in
these experiments, and able even to have a story of them: we should be able to
make a book of experiments from our Childhood. Gods care to every man in
particular, it is as if there were none but he: and there is no man that is a
Christian, but he observes Gods ways to him, that he can say, God cares for me
as if he cared for none but me: let us therefore treasure up experiments. We
see one notable example in David, how he pleads with God, Psalm 71. 3. from
his former experience, Be thou my habitation wherein I may continually rest,
thou have given command to save me: for thou art my rock and my fortress.
Whatsoever is comfortable in the creature, God has taken the name of it to
himself, that in all troubles we might fly to him as the grand deliverer; for
it is he that delivers, whatsoever the means be, whether it be Angels or men,
it is he that sets all on work: therefore he is called a rock, and a fortress,
etc. Thou have given command to save me, that is, God has the command of all
creatures: he can command the fish to give up Jonas; he can command the Devils
to go out, Christ did it when he was on earth in the days of his flesh.
Therefore much more now he is in heaven, he can command winds and storms, and
devils and all troubles. He has the command of all, as he says to Elias,
Behold, I have commanded a widow to feed thee: The hearts of Kings are in his
hand, as the rivers of waters: he that commands the creatures, can command
deliverance, Thou have commanded to save me, for the time past. What does he
say for the time to come? Deliver me, oh God, from the wicked: thou art my hope
and trust from my youth, etc. Cast me not off in mine old age, when my strength
fails me for sake me not. It is a good argument, Thou have been my God from
my Mothers womb, therefore cast me not off in my old age.

Well, we see here the practice of Gods Children in all times: Let it be a
pattern for our imitation, that we do not forsake our own mercy, as Jonas says.

When God has provided mercy, and provided promises to help us with
experience, let us not betray all through unbelief, through base despair in the
time of trouble. If we had but only Gods promise that he will be our God, that
he will forgive our sins, were not that enough? Is it not the promise of God,
of Jehovah, that is truth it self? but when he has sweetened his promise by
experience, and every experience is a pledge and an earnest of a benefit to
come, what a good God have we, that is content, not only to reserve the joys
of heaven for us, but to give us a taste, to give us the assurance and earnest
of the time to come, and besides his promise to give us comfortable experience,
and all to support our weak faith?

But remember withal, that this belongs only to Gods Children, and in a good
cause: for wicked men to reason thus, He has, and therefore he will, Wicked
men cannot argue from former experience of deliverance.
it is a dangerous argument, they must not trust former experience. We must
hope that God will continue as he has been, upon this ground that we are his;
Or else the ground of the ruin of wicked men is presumption that God will bear
with them as he has done. The King of Sodom, and his People were rescued out
of trouble by Abraham, and the army that he raised: yet they were pitifully
consumed not long after by fire from Heaven. Pharaoh was delivered by Moses
prayer, God delivered him from ten plagues, they made not a good use of it, and
they perished after miserably in the Red Sea. Rabshakeh comes and tells of the
former prosperity of Sennacherib, Where are the gods of Hamath, and Arpad,
etc. Has not my Lord overcome all? I but it was immediately before his reign.
Herod, he prospered, and had good success in the beheading of James, and
therefore he would set upon Peter; he thought to trust to his former success,
he was flushed in the execution of James, he thought God has given me
success, and blessed me in this. He thought God was of his mind, as it is
Psalm 50. Thou think me to be like thy self, thou think I hate those that
thou hate, that are my dear Children: therefore Herod presumed to go on and
lay hold on Peter: but the Church falls a praying and God smites Herod with a
fearful death, he was eaten up with lice, with worms bred in his body.

So I say, it is no good argument to say, I have prospered in wicked courses, I
do prosper, and therefore I shall prosper. I have gotten a great deal of goods
by ill means, and I have kept such ill company, and though some mislike my
courses: yet I hope to morrow shall be as to day, etc. Take heed, bless not
thy self, Gods wrath will smoke against such; Treasure not up wrath unto thy
self against the day of wrath; argue not so upon Gods patience. It is an
argument for Gods Children, he has been my God, he is my God, and he will be
my God, it is a Sophisme else for others, and as the Prophet Amos says, He
that has escaped the Lion, shall fall into the hands of the Bear, so the
wicked that escape one danger shall fall into another at length; it is no good
argument for them to hope for the like of that they have had.

Nay, rather it is the worst outward sign in this world of a man in the state
of reprobation, of a man hated of God, to prosper and have security in ill
courses; God blesses him, and lets him go on in smooth courses, as the
streams of Jordan go on smooth and still, and then enter into the dead sea: so
many men live and go on in smooth, easy courses, and we see at length they
either end in despair, as Judas, or in deadness of heart, as Nabal. So that of
all estates it is the most miserable, when a man lives in a naughty course,
and God interrupts him not in his course with some outward judgment. It is a
reason only for the Children of God to support; themselves with in a good
cause wherein they walk with a good conscience then they may say truly, God
that has been my God till now, will be my God to the end of my days.

Is God so constant to his Children in his love, and in his fatherly care and
providence, that whom he has delivered he does deliver and will deliver, let
us be constant in our service and love back again, let us return the echo Use.
To be constant in our service to God.
back again, and say, I have served God, I do serve God, and I will serve God,
because he has loved me, he does love me, and he will love me: he has
delivered me, he does deliver me, and he will deliver me: as he is constant in
love to me, so will I be constant in respect, in reverence and obedience to him.

Therefore we see the Saints of God, as God loves them from everlasting to
everlasting, being Jehovah: as he never alters in his nature, so not in his
love to them, so they never alter in their love to him: therefore it is a
clause in Scripture expressed by holy men, To whom be praise for ever; as they
knew that he was their God for ever and for ever, so they purposed to be his
people and to praise him for ever and for ever. And because they cannot live
here always themselves, they desire that there may be a Generation to praise him
for ever and for ever, and they lay a plot and ground so much as they can, that
Gods Name may be known, that Religion may be propagated for ever: They know God
is their God for ever, they know he is constant in love to them, and they are
constant in their love to him, and for his glory: To whom be glory for ever.

See here the happiness of a true Christian that is in Covenant with God; he
can say, I have had my happiness, and my portion, I have it, and I The
happiness of a Christian.
shall have it for ever. Take a worldling, can he say so? he cannot, (God will
confound his insolence if he should say so,) I have been rich, I have prospered
in my course, I have attained to this and that means, I yet thrive and I shall
thrive: I, is it so? No, thou buildest upon the sands, howsoever God has done,
and howsoever he does, thou can not secure thy self for the time to come.
Only the Christian that makes God his rock, and his fortress, his shield and
strong tower of defense, he may say he has had that which is certain, he
enjoyes that which is immutable, and constant, God is his portion, his eternal
portion, he has been good, he is good, and he will be good to eternity; no man
else that has a severed happiness out of God can say so.

A sound Christian, take him in all references of time, he is a happy man: if
he look back, God has delivered him from Satan, from hell, and damnation, and
many dangers. If he look to the present, he is compassed about with a guard of
Angels, and with the providence of God, God does deliver him; he has a guard
about him that cannot be seen but with the eye of faith. The Devil sees it well
enough, as we see in Job, Thou have hedged him about, how can I come to him? He
looked about to see if he could come into Job, to see if the hedge had any
breach, but there was none: Gods providence compassed him about, God has and
does deliver. And if he look to the time to come, he will deliver, he sees
that neither things present, nor things to come shall be able to separate him
from the love of God.

And this is not only true of outward dangers, but especially in spiritual,
God has been gracious; he has given Christ, How shall he not with him give us
all things? A Christian is in the favor of God now, how shall he not be so for
ever? He has eternity world without end to comfort himself in that God as long
as he is God, he has comfort: as long as he has a soul, so long Jehovah, the
living God will be his God, both of his body and soul: he is the God of
Abraham, therefore he will raise his body: he is the God that raises the dead,
and he will for ever glorify both body and soul in heaven.

Look which way he will, a Christian has cause of much comfort: why should he
be dismayed with any thing in the world? why should he not serve God with all
the encouragement that may be, when he has nothing to care for but to serve
him? As for matter of deliverance and protection, it belongs not to us, but to
him: let us do that that belongs to us, and he will do that belongs to him, if
we commit our souls to him as to a faithful Creator in weldoing, he has
delivered us, he does deliver us, and he will deliver us, and preserve us to
his heavenly Kingdom.

VERSE. 11. You also helping together by prayer for us.
IN these words the holy Apostle sets down the subordinate means that God has
sanctified to continue deliverance to his children: He has delivered, he does
deliver, and he will deliver us for the time to come. Was this confidence of
St, Paul a presumption without the use of means? he will deliver us, you also
helping together by prayer for us. The chief cause does not take away the
subordinate, but does establish it. And though God be the great deliverer, and
salvation belong to the Lord (as the Scripture speaks,) salvation and
deliverance it is his work, yet notwithstanding he has (not for defect of
power, but) for the multiplication and manifestation of his goodness, ordained
the subordinate means of deliverance: and as he will deliver, so he will
deliver in his own manner, and by his own means: He will deliver, but yet
notwithstanding you must pray, you also helping together by prayer for us.

The words have no difficulty in them [you helping together] that is, you
together joining in prayer with me: I pray for my self, and you together
helping me by prayer, God will deliver me.

The points considerable in the words are these.

First of all, that in the time of peril, or in the want of any benefit, the
means to be delivered from the one, and to convey the other, it is prayer; God
will do this, you praying.

The second is this, that Gods children can pray for themselves.

The third is, that notwithstanding, though they can pray for themselves, yet
they require the joint help of others, and they need the help of others.

The fourth is, that our own prayers, and the prayers of others joining all
together, is a mighty prevailing means, for the conveying of all good, and for
the removing of any ill; God will deliver me, you helping by your prayers.
Prayer is a means to convey all good, and to deliver from all ill.


Because God has stablished this order, Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50. he joins deliverance to calling upon him.
Doct. Prayer a means to convey all good and deliver from all ill.
So in Psalm. 91. 15. a notable place besides others: indeed the Psalms are
wondrous full in this kind, He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I
will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him: mark it, He
shall call upon me, and I will deliver him: and more then so, (for Gods
benefits are complete) he does not only deliver, but he honors, I will
deliver him, and advance him. God does not only deliver his Children by
prayer, but he delivers them from evil works, and preserves them to his
heavenly Kingdom: he delivers them, and advances them together: he does not do
his work by halves, Psalm. 34. The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and
his ears are open to their cry: his eyes are upon them to see their miseries
and wants: I, but though his eyes be open, his ears must be open too, to hear
their cry; if his eyes were open to see their wants, if his ears be not open to
hear their cry, his children might be miserable still.

Sometimes God delivers wicked men, he preserves them: but the preservation of
a wicked man is but a reservation of him for future judgment, to feed him for
the slaughter; and that deliverance is not worth the speaking of. But for his
children, his eyes are open on them, and his ears to hear their cry: as they be
in misery that he sees them, so they must cry that he may hear them. God has
stablished this order, he will deliver, but prayer is the means.

Now the reason that he has established this order, It is for his Glory, our
own good.



It is for his own glory: because prayer gives him the glory of all his Reason
1. It is for Gods glory.
attributes: for when we go to him, do we not give him the glory of his
omniscience, that he knows our hearts, and knows our wants? Do we not give
him the glory of his omnipotence, that he can help us? Do we not give him the
glory of his omnipresence, that he is every where? do we not give him the glory
of his truth, that he will make good his promise which we allege to him, and
press him with? what a world of glory has God by prayer?

And then for our sakes he has established this order to convey all by Reason
2. For our good.
prayer, to show our dependence on him: for we being in such a low distance
under God, it is good that we should know from whom we have 1. To show our
dependence on him.
all; therefore he will have us to pray to him, he commands it. Prayer is an
act of self-denial, it makes us to look out of our selves higher: Prayer
acknowledges that we have that which we have not of our selves, but from him:
Prayer argues a necessary dependence upon him to whom we pray; for if we had
it at home, we would not go abroad.

And then again it does us good, because as it gives God all the glory, so 2.
It exercises our graces.
likewise it exercises all the graces in a man: There is not a grace, but it
is put into the fire, it is quickened and kindled by prayer. For it sets faith
on work to believe the promise: it sets hope on work to expect the things
prayed for: it sets love on work, because we pray for others that are members
of the Church: it sets obedience on work, because we do it with respect to Gods
command: prayer sets humility on work, we prostrate our selves before God, and
acknowledge that there is no goodness or desert in us: there is not a grace in
the heart but it is exercised in prayer.

The Devil knows it well enough, and therefore of all exercises he labors to
hinder the exercise of prayer: for he thinks then we fetch help against him,
and indeed so we do: for in one prayer God is honored, the Church is
benefited, grace is exercised, the Devil is vanquished: what a world of good is
by prayer? So that God has established this order upon great reasons fetched
from our own comfort and good, and from his glory.

Since God has established this order, away with idle suggestions partly
carnal, and partly divellish: God knows what we want, and God knew We must
pray, though God know our wants.
before all time what we have need of, and he may grant it if he will. I but
that God that decreed, at the same time that he decreed to convey good, at the
same time he decreed to convey it this way by prayer: therefore let us not
disjoyn that which God has joined: Christ knew that God decreed all, and yet
he spent whole nights in prayer; and who knew Gods love more then he? Yet
because as he was man he was a creature, because as he was man he received good
from his Father, to show his dependence he continually prayed, he sanctified
every thing by prayer: And all holy men of God from the beginning, the more
certain they were of any thing by promise, the more eager, and earnest, and
fervent they were in prayer: it was a ground of prayer, they knew that this was
Gods order: therefore if they had a promise, they turned it into prayer
presently.

The means of the execution of Gods decree, and the decree it self of the
thing, they fall under the same decree; when God has decreed to do any thing,
he has decreed to do it by these means; so prayer comes as well within the
decree, as the thing prayed for. In Ezekiel. 36. I will do this, but I will be
inquired of by the house of Judah; I will do it, but they shall ask me, they
shall seek to me first. So there is a notable place, Phil. 1. 19. I know that
this shall turn to my salvation through your prayers. We must not then so
reason as to make the chief cause to take away the subordinate means; but let
us serve Gods purpose and providence; let us serve Gods order: he has
stablished this order and course, let us serve it; this is the obedience of
faith, the obedience of a Christian.

The second thing is, that Doct. 2. Gods Children can pray for themselves.


Gods childrn are enabled to pray for themselves, I observe this the rather,
because the vilest men that live when they are in trouble, as Pharaoh, O go to
Moses, let him pray for me: he could not pray for himself, he was such a
desperate wretched creature, he knew that God would not regard him, therefore
he says, Go to Moses. And so Simon Magus who was a wretch, yet when Peter
denounced a judgment against him, Pray thou, that none of these things light
upon me; you are accepted of God, my conscience is so full of terror and
horror, and so full of sin, that I dare not pray. A wicked man may desire
others to pray for him, but alas, his conscience is surprised with horror for
his sins, and his purposes are so cruel, so earthly, and so base, that he
knows he cannot pray with acceptance for himself. Gods Children as they desire
the prayers of others, so they can pray themselves; they do not desire that
others should do all, but that they would help together with their prayers.

Now the reason of this, that Gods Children can pray for themselves, and must
pray for themselves, it is because they are children, and as soon as Reason
Because they are Children.
ever they are new born, they are known by their voice, by crying. A Child as
soon as he is born he cries: a new born Child cries as soon as he is new born,
he cries, Abba, Father: he goes to his Father presently. In Act. 9. as soon as
Paul was converted, he cries, he goes to God by prayer: therefore God when he
directs Ananias to him, says he, Go to such a place, and there thou shall find
Paul, he is praying: as soon as he is converted he is praying.

Gods children have the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of sons, God is their
Father, and they exercise the prerogative, and privilege they have, they go to
their Father, and cry to him. In Zech. 12. you have there a promise, that God
would pour the spirit of supplication upon his children, they cannot pray of
themselves, but God poures a Spirit of supplication into their hearts; and his
Spirit being poured into them, they can pour forth their prayers to him again.

The use of this is, not to content our selves to turn over this duty of Use.
Not to put off prayer only to others.
prayer to the Minister, and to good people, O pray you for us: I, we do so,
but pray for thy self. If thou will have another man's prayers do thee good,
thou must help with thy own prayers, be good thy self.

Men turn it off with slight phrases, and speeches, You must pray for us, etc.

Alas, what will our prays do thee good, if thou be a graceless, blasphemous,
carnal, brutish person, if thy conscience tell thee by the light of nature (for
the Word of God it may be thou do not care for) that thou art so, what can
our prayers do thee good? If thou mean to be so: Though Noah, Daniel and Job,
(says God) should stand before me for this people, I would regard them for
themselves, I would not hear them for this people. Let us be able and willing
to help our selves, and then we shall pray to some purpose.

God loves to hear the cries of his Children; the very broken cries of a Child
are more pleasing then the eloquent speech of a Servant. Sometimes the Children
of God have not the Spirit of prayer as at other times; and then they must do
as Ezechias did, they must mourn as a Dove, and chatter as a Swallow: and as
Moses at the Red Sea, he cried, and the Lord heard his prayer, though he spoke
never a word: so in Romans 8. The Spirit teaches us to sigh and groan.

When we cannot pray, we must strive with our selves against unbelief, and
deadness of heart, by all means possible. Sighs and groans are prayers to
God, My groans and my sighs are not hid from thee, says the Prophet David.
And so in Lament. 3. 56. The Church being in distress, says she, Thou have
heard my voice, hide not thine ear at my breathing. Sometime the Children of
God can only sigh, and breath, and groan to God; for there is such a
confusion in their thoughts, they are so amazed at their troubles, they are so
surprised that they cannot utter a distinct prayer, and then they sigh, and
breath, and groan, they help themselves one way or other. If thou be a Child
of God, though thou be oppressed with grief, yet cry, and groan to God, strive
against thy grief all thou can: and though thou can not cry distinctly,
yet mourn as well as thou can, and God knows the groans of his own Spirit,
and those cries are eloquent in his ears, they pierce Heaven. But this being
but supposed as a ground, The third Observation is, As God conveys all
blessings by prayer,
And Gods Children have a Spirit of prayer:


So Gods Children desire the prayers of others, and it is the duty of others to
pray for them. You also helping by your prayer for us. Christians ought to help
one another by prayer.


The holy and Blessed Apostle was sure of Gods love to him, and of his Doct.
Christians ought to help one another by prayer.
care of him; yet notwithstanding he was as sure that God would use both the
prayers of himself and others to continue this his goodness to him, and
therefore the greater faith, the greater care of prayer; and where there is no
care of prayer either of our own or of others for us, there is no faith at all.

There is an article of our faith which I think is little believed, thought it
be said overmuch, and heard often, yet it is little practiced, I believe the
communion of Saints. Is there a Communion of Saints? wherein does this
Communion stand? among many other things in this, that one St. prays for
another.

This is one branch of the Communion of Saints, as they communicate in
privileges: for they are all the sons of God, they are all heirs of heaven,
they are all members of Christ, they are all redeemed by the blood of Christ;
and so all other priviledge^ belong to all alike: as there is a communion in
privileges, so there is a communion in duties one to another, one prays for
another, there is a mutual intercourse of duty: and those that truly believe
the communion of Saints, do truly practice the duties belonging to that blessed
society, that is, they one pray for another. I mean here on earth: here we
have a command, here we have a promise, here we have mutual necessities, I
have need of them, and they have need of me, we have need one of another.

In heaven there is no such necessity; yet there may be (as Divines grant) a
general wish for the Church; because the Saints want their bodies, and A
general desire in Heaven.
because they want the accomplishment of the elect.

Where there is want of happiness, there will be a general desire that God
would accomplish these days of sin; but for any particular necessities of
ours, they cannot know them. Abraham has forgotten us, and Israel knows us
not. There is a communion of Saints, and this blessed communion and society
trade this way in praying for one another. God commands that we should pray one
for another.

Every Christian is a Priest, and a Prophet: now the Priests duty was to pray,
and the Prophets duty was to pray. Now as the Priest carried the tribes on his
breast, only to signify that he had them in his heart, and that he was a type
of Christ who has us in his heart always in heaven to make intercession for us;
so in some sense every true Christian is a Priest, he must carry the Church
and people of God in his heart, he must have a care of others, he must not
only pray for himself, but for others, as he himself would have interest in
the Common prayer, Our Father, as Christ teaches us. Not that a Christan may
not say, My Father, when we have particular ground and occasion to go to God;
but Chrst being to direct the Church of God, he teaches us to say, Our Father:
there is therefore a regard to be had by every true Christian of the estate of
others.

The reason is, Gods Children sometimes cannot so well pray, though Reason.
Gods children cannot so well pray for themselves sometimes.
they have always a spirit of prayer, that they can groan to God, yet in some
cases they cannot so well pray for themselves; as in sickness. Affliction is a
better time to pray in then sickness: for affliction gathers and unites the
spirits together, it makes a man more strong to pray to God; but sickness
distempers the powers of the soul: it distempers the instruments that the soul
works by, it distempers the animal spirits which the understanding As in
sickness.
uses: they are inflamed, and distempered, and confused. Now the spirits that
are the instruments of the soul being troubled with sickness, sickness is not
so fit a time for a man to pray for himself (though God hear the groans of his
Spirit, as David says, My sighs are not hid from thee: yet notwithstanding it
is good at this time to send for those that can make a more distinct prayer,
(though it may be they be great Christians) therefore saith-Saint James James,
5. 13, 14. Is any man afflicted, let him pray: is any man sick, let him send
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him; not that he is not
able to pray for himself, but let them help by joining together with him to
God, And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up.

Nay, I add more, (for the illustration of the point) it is so true that God
regards the prayers of one for another, that he regards the prayer of weak
ones, for grand ones, great Christians are helped by mean ones: yea, Pastors
are helped by the people, St. Paul a man eminent in grace and place, a grand
Christian, and for place an Apostle, yet he was helped by the prayers of the
weak Corinthians: so that a weak Christian in grace and place, may help a
greater Christian then himself both in grace and in place. Parents are helped
by the prayers of their Children: Magistrates by those that are under them, the
rich are helped by those that are poor, the Ministers by the prayers of the
people, You helping by your prayers. The prayers of the people prevail for the
Ministers: for though there be a civil difference which shall all end in
Death, yet notwithstanding in the Communion of Saints, there is no difference.
A poor man may be rich in faith, as St James says, and one may have as much
credit in the Court of heaven as another. As St. Austin says well, God has
made the rich for the poor, and the poor for the rich: the rich to relieve the
poor, and the poor to pray for the rich: for herein one is accepted for another.

St. Paul stands much upon the virtue, and efficacy of the prayers of the
People to pray for the Ministers.
Corinthians, for himself a great Apostle. And so in Romans 15. I beseech you for
the love of Christ, and for the blessed work of the Spirit, strive by Prayer
together with us. As ever you felt Christ do good to you, and as ever you felt
the efficacy of the Spirit, strive with God, wrestle by prayer for me; and so
in every Epistle he begs their prayers.

And Ministers need the prayers of people to God, as well as any other, or
rather more; for as God conveys much good to others by them, so Satan malignes
them more then other men: Aim not at small nor great, but at the King of
Israel, pick out him: so the Devil aims not at small nor great, but at the
Guides of Gods people, at the Leaders of his army. I will smite the Shepherd,
and the sheep shall be scattered.

Therefore pray for them, that they may have abilities, that they may have
parts and gifts, and that they may have a willing mind, a large For what to
pray for them.
heart to use them, that they may have success in using them, that they may
have strength of the outward man, that they may have protection from
unreasonable men; Pray for us, that we may be delivered from unreasonable, and
absurd men, 2 Thessalonians 3. Absurd men; for none but absurd men will wrong
those that God conveys so much good by, as he does by the Ministry: it is
their lot to be vexed with such men oft-times, and therefore pray for us.

What is the reason of this, that mean Christians may help great Christians by
their prayers?

God will have it thus: great Christians have not the Spirit of prayer alike at
all times (though it be supposed they have it, yet) the more help Reason.
Christians (...) not the Spirit of prayer all times a like.
there is, the more hands are put to the work, the sooner it is dispatched. As
in the removing of a burden, the more join together, the sooner it is remoed;
and so in the drawing of any thing, the more hands, the speedier dispatch.

So when we would draw blessings from heaven, the more prayers there be that
offer violence to God, the more we draw from him. If it be a judgment that
hangs over our heads, the more there be that labor to put away the judgment by
prayer, and to remove the cloud that hangs over our heads, the sooner it
passes by: many help much, as many brands make a great fire; and many little
rivers running into a common channel, they make the river swell greater: so
prayer is strong when it is carried by the spirits of many: yea, those that are
not (perhaps) so well experienced.

But, as I said, sometimes men not only great in place, but great in grace,
need the help of others; the Spirit of prayer is not in a like measure in them,
sometime they are too secure, sometime they are too presumptious, sometime too
negligent and careless in stirring up the Grace of God in them, sometime they
are prone to be lifted up too much, sometime to be cast down too much.

If this be so, what a benefit is this then to have the help of others? when
oft-times a man meaner in gifts may have as great a measure of the Spirit of
prayer as another.

Prayer it is not a work of gifts, but of grace: it is a work of a broken
heart, of a believing heart. Prayer not a work of gifts, but of Grace.


And in prayer there be diverse gifts which are far more eminent in one then in
another, yet all excellent good in their kind: some have the gift to be fluent,
to be large in words, in explication of themselves: some men have not so much
in that, but they have a broken heart: some again Diverse gifts in Prayer.
have it in zeal, and earnestness of affections: so that there is something in
the very action of prayer which helps in many: one helps with his ability, with
his large gift of Speech: another with his humble and broken spirit: another
with his zeal and ardencie to wrestle, and strive with God to get a blessing.

Moses was a man of a stammering tongue, and yet Moses was a man for prayer:
Aaron and Hur were silent, and were fain to hold up his hands, but Moses must
pray, and yet Moses was no man of eloquence, and he pretends that for his
excuse when he was to go to Pharaoh.

Therefore it is a matter of the heart, a matter of grace, of humility, of
strong faith, and not a matter of words, though that be a special gift too.

God will have it thus in his wise dispensation, because he will have every man
esteemed, and because he will have no man to be proud, he will Reason. To
humble great Christians.
humble his own to let them know that they stand in need of the prayers of the
weakest. Every man in the Church of God has some gifts, that none should be
despised: and none have all gifts, that none should presume overmuch and be
proud. In the Church of God, in the Body of Christ there is no idle member: in
the communion of Saints there is none unprofitable, every one can do good in
his kind.

God will have this, because he will have none despised. It was a fault in St.
James' time, The brother of high degree did despise the brother of low Reason.
To raise up we^ Christians
degree, that is, the rich Christians despised the poor Christians: but says
Saint James, Has not God chosen the poor in the World, rich in faith? Now
faith is the ground of prayer. It is a fault in all times, men have swelling
conceits against the meaner sort, and undervalue them. God will not have it so,
he will have us see that we stand in need of the meanest Christians, and by
this he will raise up the dejected spirit of weak Christians.

What a comfort is it then, that I should be able to help the greatest man in
the World? that he should be beholding to me for that duty? So it abaseth the
greatest, that they stand in need of the meanest and it raises the meanest,
that the greatest are helped by them, and it knits all into a sweet communion.
For when a great Christian shall think, yonder poor Christian, he is gracious
in the Court of heaven, howsoever he be neglected in the world, he may do me
good by his prayers; It will make him esteem and value him the more, and it
will make him value his friendship; he will not disparage him, he will not
grieve the spirit of such a one whose prayer may prevail with God, and draw
down a blessing for him. We see here the Corinthians help the Apostle by their
prayers.

You see the reason of it, that God will knit Christians together: and humble
them that think themselves great, and that he might comfort every mean
Christian.

Therefore let no Christian slight his own prayers, no not those that Use. Let
no man slight his own prayers.
are young ones. That great divine Paulus Phagius, who was a great Hebrecian in
his time, and one that helped to restore the Gospel in England: it was a good
speech of him, he was wont to say: I wish the prayers of younger Scholars; for
their souls are not tainted with sin, and God often hears the poor young ones
(that are not tainted, and soiled with the sins of the World, as others are)
sooner then others, a weak Christian that has not a politic head, and a
divellish spirit; meaner persons that are but young ones, they have more
acquaintance (many times) with God then others; despise not the prayer of any.
And let none despise his own prayer. Shall I pray to God (will some say?) I
pray do you pray for me. Why do thou not pray for thy self? I am unworthy.
Unworthy? do thou so basely esteem of it, when God is not only willing that
thou should pray for thy self, but requires thee to pray for others? have
thou so base an esteem of this incense? Let my prayers be directed in thy sight
as incense, says David. God esteems this as odor, and will thou say, I am
not worthy? abase not that which he has vouchsafed so to honor. God esteems
so highly of it, that he will not only hear thy prayers for thy self, but for
others.

Again, there is no pretense for any man to be idle in the profession of
Religion. Thou have not riches, thou can not give, thou have not place, Use
2. None to be idle in the profession of religion.
thou can not show countenance to others; but if thou be a Child of God, thou
have the Spirit of prayer, the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of a son in thee,
which enables thee to pray for thy self and others: there is no Christian but
he may do this; you also helping together by your prayers for me.

The fourth and last observation out of these words is, that

Prayer is a prevailing course with God.

It prevails for the removing of ill, or for the preventing of ill, or for the
Doct. 4. Prayer prevails with God.
obtaining of good; I shall be delivered, I shall be continued in the state of
deliverance, but yet you must pray, your prayers will obtain and beg this of
God.

Prayer is a prevailing course, because, as I said, it is obedience to Gods
order: he bids us call upon him, and he will hear us; prayer binds him with
Reas. 1. It is obedience to Gods order,
his own promise: Lord, thou can not deny thy self, thou can not deny thy
promise, thou have promised to be near all those that call upon thee in truth:
and though with much weakness, yet we call upon thee in truth, therefore we
cannot but be persuaded of thy goodness that thou will be near us: so it is a
prevailing course, because it is obedience to Gods order.

And it is a prevailing course, because likewise it sets God on work. Reason 2.
It sets God on work.
Faith, that is in the heart, and that sets prayer on work (for prayer is
nothing but the voice of faith, the flame of faith, the fire is in the heart
and spirit, but the voice, the flame, the expression of faith, is prayer, faith
in the heart sets prayer on work) what does prayer? that goes into heaven, it
pierces heaven, and that sets God on work: because it brings him his promise,
it brings him his nature. Thy nature is to be Jehovah, good and gracious, and
merciful to thine, thy promise is answerable to thy nature, and thou have made
rich and precious promises. As faith sets prayer on work, so prayer sets God on
work, and when God is set on work by prayer (as prayer must needs bind him,
bringing himself to himself, bringing his word to him: every man is as his
work, and his word is as himself) God being set on work, he sets all on work,
he sets heaven and earth on work, when he is set on work by prayer, therefore
it is a prevailing course; he sets all his attributes on work for the
deliverance and rescue of his Church from danger, and for the doing of any
good, he sets his mercy and goodness on work, and his Love, and whatsoever is
in him.

You see then why it is a prevailing course, because it is obedience to God,
and because it sets God on work, it overcomes him which overcomes all, it
overcomes him that is omnipotent. We see the woman of Canaan, she overcame
Christ by the strength that she had from Christ. And Moses he overcame God, Let
me alone, why do thou press me? Let me alone. It offers violence to God, it
prevails with him, and that which prevails with God, prevails with all things
else: the prayer of faith has the promise: The prayer of a righteous man (in
faith) it prevails much, says St. James. Consider now, if the prayer of one
righteous man prevail much, what shall the prayer of many righteous men do? as
St. Paul says here, my prayers and your prayers being joined together must
needs prevail.

For instances, the Scripture is full of them, how God has vouchsafed
Instances of prevalencie of prayer.
deliverance by the help of prayer. I will give but a few instances of former
time, and some considerations of later time.

For former times, in Exodus 17. you see when Amaleck set upon the people, Moses
did more good by prayer then all the army by fighting; as long as Moses hands
were held up by Aaron and Hur, the people of God prevailed, a notable instance
to show the power of prayer. In 2. Chron. 14. Asa prayed to God, and presses
God with arguments, and the people of God prevail. In 2. Chron. 20. there you
have good King Jehosaphat, he prays to God, and he brings to God his former
experience, he presses God with his covenant, with his nature, and the like
arguments spoken of before: and then he complains of their necessity, Lord, we
know not what to do, our eyes are toward thee. And Gods opportunity is when we
are at the worst, and at the lowest, then he is near to help, We know not what
to do, but our eyes are toward thee, says that blessed King, and then he
prevailed.

So the Prophet Isay and Hezechias, they both join together in prayer to God,
and God heard the Prophet, and the prayer of the King, they spread the letter
before the Lord, and prayed to God when Rabshakeh rayled against God, and they
prevailed mightily.

Hester was but a woman, and a good woman she was, the Church was in extremity
in her time, she takes this course, she fasted and prayed, she and her people,
and we see what an excellent issue came of it the confusion of proud Haman, and
the deliverance of the Church. In Act. 12. Herod having good success in the
beheading of James, being flushed with the blood of James, he would needs set
upon Peter too: the Church fearing the loss of so worthy a pillar, falls to
praying; see the issue of it, God struck him presently. Woe be to the birds of
prey, when Gods Turtle mourns! when Gods Turtle, the Church mourns, and prays
to God, woe be to those birds that violently prey on the poor Church! Woe be to
Herod, and all bloody persecuting Tyrants! woe be to all malignant despisers of
the Church, when the Church begins to pray! For though she direct not her
prayers against them in particular, yet it is enough that she prays for her
self, and her self cannot be delivered without the confusion of her enemies:
you see these instances of old.

I will name but some of later times, what has not prayer done? Let us not be
discouraged: prayer can scatter the enemies, and move God to command the winds,
and the waters, and all against his enemies. What cannot prayer do, when the
people of God have their hearts quickened, and raised to pray? Prayer can open
heaven, prayer can open the womb; prayer can open the Prison, and strike off
the fetters, it is a pick-lock. We see in Act. 16. when St. Paul was cast in
Prison, he prayed to God at midnight, and God shakes the foundations of the
Prison, and all flies open. So St. Peter was in Prison, he prays, and the
Angel delivers him. What cannot prayer do? it is of an omnipotent power,
because it prevails with an omnipotent and almighty God.

Oh that we were persuaded of this! but our hearts are so full of Atheism
naturally, that we think not of it: we think not that there is such efficacy in
prayer: but we cherish base conceits, God may if he will, etc. and put all upon
him, and never serve his providence and command, who commands us to call upon
him, and who will do things in his providence, but he will do them in this
order; we must pray first to acknowledge our dependence upon him. If we were
thoroughly convinced of the prevailing power of prayer, what good might be done
by it, as there has been in former times? certainly, we would beg of God above
all things the spirit of supplication. And if we have the spirit of prayer, we
can never be miserable: if a man have the spirit of prayer, whatsoever he want
he causes it from heaven, he can beg it by prayer: and if he want the thing he
can beg contentation, he can beg patience, he can beg grace, and beg
acquaintance with God: and acquaintance with God it will put a glory upon him.

It is such a thing as all the world cannot take from us, they cannot take God
from us, they cannot take prayer from us: if we were convinced of this we would
be much in prayer, in private prayer, in public prayer, for our selves, for
the Church of God.

The Church of God now abroad, you see, is in combustion: if the To pray for
the Church abroad.
Spirit of God in any measure and degree be in our breasts, we will sympathize
with the state of the Church. We wish them well it may be: but wishes are one
thing, and prayer is another: do thou pray for the Church? if we could pray
for the Church it would be better: we should do more good with our prayers at
home, then they shall do by fighting abroad: as Moses did more good in the
mount by prayer, then they did in the valley by fighting: undoubtedly it would
be so.

We may fear the less success the spirits of men are so flat and so dead this
way. The time has been not long since that we have been stirred up more to
pray, upon the apprehension of some fears, to pray with earnestness and
feeling, expressing some desire in wishing their welfare: but now a man can
hardly converse with any that have so deep an apprehension as they have had in
former times.

Now therefore, as we desire to have interest in the good of the Church, How to
present the Church in our prayers to God.
so let us remember to present the estate of the Church to God. And let us
present the Church of God to him as his own, as his Turtle, as his Love.

You know when they would move Christ, they tell him, Him whom thou love, is
sick: Lazarus whom thou love. So, Lord, her whom thou love, the Church,
whom thou gave thy Son to redeem with his blood; the Church to whom thou have
given thy Spirit to dwell in: the Church wherein thou have thy habitation
amongst men: the Church that only glorifieth thee, and in whom thou will be
eternally glorified in heaven, that Church is sick, it is weak, it is in
distress, it is in hazard.

Let us make conscience of this duty, let us help the Church with our prayers.
Saint Paul says, I shall be delivered, together with the help of your prayers.
Without doubt the Church should be delivered, if we had the grace to help them
with our prayers. And God will so glorify the blessed exercise of calling upon
him, that we (I say) shall do more good at home, then they shall do abroad: let
us believe this, it is Gods manner of dealing.

In the book of Judges, in that story of the Benjamites, concerning the wrong
done to the Priests concubine: the rest of the Tribes of Israel, when they set
on the Benjamites, they asked counsel of God twice, and went against them, and
were discomfited: but the third time they come to God, Judge. 20. 26. Then all
the Children of Israel came to the house of the Lord, and wept, and sat there
before the Lord: and fasted that day till the evening. They thought because
they had a good cause, they might without fasting and prayer, and without
seeking to the Lord prevail, and therefore they went against them twice, and
were shamefully foiled to their great loss: but when at the last they came and
humbled themselves before God, and fasted, end enquired of God the cause of
that ill, after that they had a glorious victory.

Christ tells his Disciples, that there were some kind of Devils that will not
be cast out but by fasting and prayer: so there are some kind of miseries, some
kind of calamities, some kind of sins, that will not be overcome, and which God
will not deliver the Church from but by fasting and prayer.

And so for private Christians, they have some sins that are master-sins,
personal sins; it is not a slight prayer, and a wish that will mortify them,
there must be fasting and prayer, and humiliation, and that way those devils
are cast out. I would we were persuaded of it that it is such a prevailing
thing, holy prayer, to help our selves in sin; and to help us in misery, to
help the Church of God.

Well, since the prayers even of the meanest Christians are so prevailing, Use.
Not to grieve the spirit in any.
let us learn to respect them; for, as they can pray, so their prayers will
prevail. And take heed we grieve not the Spirit of God in any poor Saint, that
so they may pray for us with willingness and cheerfulness. do but consider
what a blessing it is to have a stock going, to have our part in the common
stock, as there is a common stock of prayer in the Church, every Christian can
pray, and pray prevailingly. What a blessing is it to be a good Christian, to
have a portion in the prevailing prayers of others? That when a man is dead and
dull, and unfit himself, this may comfort him that others have the spirit of
zeal, and will supply his want, it is a blessed thing. Let us consider the
excellency of this duty of prayer, from the prevalency of it, to whet us on to
the exercise of it. It is a happiness to have a part in it, it is a blessing
whereby we can do good to others, we can reach them that are many hundred miles
off, those that be at the farthest end of the world: when we cannot reach them
otherways we can reach them by prayer: we cannot speak to them, they are far
off, but we can speak to God for them, and he can convey that good to them that
we desire, what a blessed condition is this?

But some man may say, How shall I know that I can pray, that I am Quest. How
to know whether our prayers help the Church.
in a state to help the Church of God, and to prevail for it by my prayers?

I answer, First of all thou shall know it if thou be as willing to help
otherwise if thou can, as well as by prayer. St. James speaks in his time
Answ. 1. When we help them otherwise as we are able.
of certain men that would feed the poor people of God with good words; Now
good words are good cheap, but they will do nothing, they will buy nothing,
they will not cloth, nor feed. So Saint James tells them, that that is but a
dead faith.

So there are a company that will only pray for the Church when they are able
to do otherways, when they have countenance, and estate, and riches, and
friends, and place, and many things that they might improve for the good of
others, and for the good of the Church. Some will be ready to say, I pray for
the Church, and I will pray: I, but art thou not able to do somewhat else? St.
Paul when he wishes them to pray for him, he means not only prayer, but that
duty implies to do all that they pray for, to help their prayers, or else it is
a mocking of God. If thou pray aright for the Church, thou art willing to
relieve them; if thou pray for thy friend, thou art willing to help him, and
succor him: if thou pray for any, thou art willing to countenance them. That
is one trial; which discovers many to be hypocrites: if their prayers were
worth any thing, and the times stood in need of them, it is likely they should
not have them, because they only give good words, and nothing else.

Again, he that is in a state of prayer, he must be such a one as must
relinquish in his purpose all wicked, blasphemous, scandalous, unthrifty To
leave evit courses.
courses whatsoever, he that purposes to please God, and to have his prayer
accepted of God, he must leave all. For, as the Psalmist says, If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. For a man to come with
a petition to God, with a purpose to offend him, is to come to practice treason
in the presence Chamber. To come into the presence of God, and to have a
purpose to stab him with his sins. Do thou purpose to live in thy filthy
courses, in thy scandalous evil course of life, to be a blasphemer, a swearer,
and yet do thou think that God will hear and regard thy prayer? If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. That is another thing
that thou may know it by, whether thou be in such an estate as that thou
may pray successefully for thy self, and for others.

In Prove. 28. there is a third discovery, He that turns his ear from hearing
3. To hearken to Gods Word.
the law, even his prayer shall be abominable. Thou may know it by this, if
thou be in such an estate as that God will regard thy prayers for thy self or
for others, that they may be prevailing prayers; how stand thou affected to
Gods Truth, and Word? how art thou acquainted with the reading of the
Scriptures, and with hearing the blessed Word of God unfolded and broken open
by the blessed Ordinance of God? How do thou attend upon God? Would thou
have him who is the great God of heaven and earth to hear thee, and to regard
thee, when thou will not hear, and regard him? thou would have him to regard
thy prayers, and thou regardest not him speaking by the Ministry of his Word:
thou despisest his ordinance which he has left with thee: he has left thee
the mysteries of his Word, and thou regardest them not, but spendest thy time
altogether either about thy calling, or about some trifling studies, and
neglectest the main, the soul-saving truth: will he hear thy prayer? No, says
the Wise man, He that turns his ear from hearing the Law, that man's prayer
shall be abominable.

Since prayer is so prevailing a thing, so pleasing to God, so helpful to the
Church, and so helpful to our selves, who would be in such a case An ill
condition not to be able to pray.
that he cannot pray, or if he does pray, that his prayer should be abominable,
that God should turn his prayer into sin? It is a miserable case, that a man
lives in that is in league with sin, that allows himself in any wicked course,
in rebellion to Gods Ordinance: such men are in such a state that God does not
regard their prayers for themselves or for others. Some do so exalt and lift up
their pride against God, that they do not regard the very Ordinance of God: no
not while they are hearing it, but set themselves to be otherwise disposed at
that very time. How can such expect that God will regard them. This shall be
sufficient to press that point: says Saint Paul, I shall be delivered by your
prayers. God will deliver the Ministers by the peoples prayers.


God will be good to the Ministers for the prayers of the people. This concerns
us that are Ministers; Prayer is prevailing even for us. And as it is our duty
to give our selves to Preaching and Prayer, so it is the peoples duty to pray
for us likewise, and for these particulars, as I named.

To pray for ability. What to pray for for the Ministers.


To pray for a willing mind to discharge that ability.

To pray for success of that discharge: for we must be able to Preach to the
people of God, and we must be willing, and there must be success. It does much
discourage Gods people, and those that are Ministers, when they find no
success of their labors. Isai. 49. says the Prophet, I have labored in
vain: Elias was much discouraged in his time, and Isaiah and Elias were good
men, yet they were much discouraged; they saw little fruit of their labor.
Therefore let us help the Ministers with our prayers in this respect, that God
would enable them: that God would enlarge their hearts with willingness. For
there are many that are of ability, but they are so proud, and so idle, that
they think themselves too good to Preach to them, whom God and the Church has
called them to bestow their labors on: they have ability, but they want a
large heart. And those that have both ability and a large heart, they want
success, they see little fruit: because the people pray not for them, and they
perhaps are negligent in the duty themselves, their labors are not steeped in
prayers.

Again, a fourth thing that we ought to pray for for them, is strength and
ability of the outward man, and all that fear God, and have felt the benefit of
the Ministry, they do this, and God does answer it.

Likewise to pray for protection and deliverance from unreasonable men, to pray
for strength of spirit, and likewise for protection: For, as St. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 3. All men have not faith. Pray for us, that we may be delivered from
unreasonable, absurd men: All have not Faith. Men that believe not Gods truth,
that believe not Gods Word, that are full of Atheism, full of contempt and
scorn, they are absurd men; though they think themselves the witty men of the
world, yet they are unreasonable, and absurd men; pray for us, that we may be
delivered from unreasonable men.

Likewise from him that is the head of wicked men, the Devil. He sees that the
Ministers they are the Standard-bearers, they are the Captains of Gods Army,
they stand not alone, and they fall not alone, many others fall with them.
There is no calling under heaven by which God conveyes so much good, as by the
dispensation of his Ordinance in the Ministry, therefore we should help them
by our prayers. There are no men better if they be good, nor none more hurtful
if they be bad, none worse; As Christ says, They are the salt of the earth, to
season the unsavory world, and if the salt have lost the savor, it is good for
nothing but to be cast on the dunghill. Therefore pray that God would deliver
them from the Devil, who malignes them, they are the Butt of his malice, by his
instruments.

There are many that come to hear the Word to carpe, and to cavil, and to sit
as Judges to examine, but how few are there that pray for the Ministers? and
surely, because they pray not, they profit not: If we could pray more, we
should profit more: I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, put up your
petitions to God, that God would teach us (that are inferior to you in other
respects, setting aside our calling) that we may teach you, that we may
instruct his people. As John Baptist says, The friends of the Bride learn of
the Bridegroom, what to speak to the Spouse: so we learn from prayer, and from
reading, we learn from Christ what to teach you. If you pray to God to teach us
that we may teach you, you shall never go away without a blessing.

And therefore, as I said, we see how the Apostle desires the Romans to strive
and contend with him in prayer: he uses all protestations, and obtestations,
For the love of Christ and of his Spirit, etc. And, pray for us, that the Word
may have a free passage, and be glorified. In every Epistle still he urges,
pray for us. The blessed Apostle was so heavenly-minded, that he would neglect
no help that might further him in the Ministry. So if we have Christian
hearts, we will neglect no helps, not the help of the meanest Christian that we
are acquainted with; when he that was a great Apostle says, Pray for us,
strive in prayer for us, he prays for the help of others prayer. So, the more
gracious we are, and the nearer to God, the more we understand the things of
God, the more careful we shall be of this Christian duty of prayer, for the
Ministers, and for our selves, and others. Upon this ground, that it is Gods
Ordinance, and there is nothing established by God that shall want a blessing.
Therefore if we have faith, we will pray, the more faith, the more prayer: the
greater faith, the greater prayer; Christ had the greatest faith, and he prayed
whole nights together. St. Paul was mighty in faith, he was mighty in prayer:
where there is little faith, there will be little prayer: and where there is no
faith, there will be no prayer. You also helping together by prayer for us.

Mark the heavenly Art of the Apostle, he does here insinuate, and inwrap an
exhortation by taking it for granted that they would pray for him. It is the
most cunning way to convey an exhortation, by way of taking it for granted, and
by way of encouragement. The Lord will deliver me: he does not say, therefore I
pray help me by your prayers; but the Lord will deliver me if you help me, and
I know I shall not want your prayers: he takes it for granted that they would
pray for him: and granted truths are the strongest truths. It is the best way
to encourage any man, if we know any good in him, to take it for granted that
he will do so: and so I shall be delivered, you helping together by your
prayers. That for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons,
thanks may be given by many on our behalf.


After he had set down the means that God would convey the blessing by (which
was prayer) then he shows the end, why God would deliver him by prayer; For
the gift of health and deliverance bestowed upon me, by the means of many
prayers of many persons: Likewise thanks shall be given by many on our behalf:
that is, on my behalf yea, as many shall be ready to thank God for my
deliverance and health, as before many prayed to God for it: so that in this
regard, God in love to his own praise and glory will deliver me by your
prayers, because he shall gain praise, and praise of many. That for the gift
bestowed, etc.


And first, for the words somewhat.

(For the gift bestowed on us.) Deliverance and health is a gift, Charisma, a
Health a gift.
free gift. If health be a gift, what are greater things? they are much more a
free gift, if daily bread be a gift, certainly eternal life is much more a
gift, The gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. ult.

Away with conceit of merit: if we merit not daily bread, if we merit Against
merit.
not outward deliverance, if we merit not health, what can we do for eternal
life? It is a doting conceit, a mere foolish conceit then to think that the
beggar merits his Alms by begging (prayer being the chief work we do) what
does the beggar merit by begging? begging it is a disavowing of merit. Health
you see here it is a gift bestowed by prayer, that for the gift bestowed upon
us, etc.

Things come to be ours, either by contract, or by gift; if it be by contract,
then we know what we have to do: if it be by gift, the only way to get a thing
by gift, is prayer: so that which is gotten here by prayer, it is called a
gift, not only a gift for the freeness of it, but because health and
deliverance out of trouble, is a great and special gift. For, as it seems, St
Paul here was desperately sick, (I rather incline to that then any other
deliverance) I received the sentence of death, etc.

Is not health a gift? Is it not the foundation of all the comforts of this All
other blessings uncomfortable without health.
life? what would riches comfort us? what would friends comfort us? bring all
to a sick man, alas, he has no relish in any thing, because he wants the
ground of all earthly comforts, he wants health. Therefore you know the
Grecians accounted that a chief blessing; if they had health they were
contented with any estate. A poor man in a mean estate with a little
competency, is more happy, then the greatest Monarch in the world that is
under sickness and pain of body.

Health it is comfort it self, and it sweetens all other comforts.

Therefore it is a matter that especially we should bless God for, both To
bless God for health.
for preventing health, God keeps us out of sickness, and likewise for
delivering us out of it: for both are like favors: and they that have a
constant enjoyment of their health, should as well praise God as they that are
delivered out of sickness. It is Gods goodness that they do not fall into
sickness. There is the ground of sickness in every man: though he had no
outward enemy in the world, yet God can distemper the humors, and when there
is a jar and disproportion in the humors, then follows a hurting of the
powers, and a hindering of the actions, etc. We should bless God for the
continuance of health, it is a special gift. For the gift bestowed.

(By the means of many persons.) God bestowed health on Saint Paul, but it was
by the means of many prayers of many persons. Would not God have bestowed
health upon Saint Paul, if he had not had their prayers? Quest.
Yes doubtless: but yet notwitstanding when there are many prayers they Answ.
prevail much more; many streams make a river run more strongly, and so many
prayers prevail strongly. Health is such a blessing as may be begged by others.

Therefore it is a good thing in sickness, and in any trouble, to beg the To
beg the prayers of others in sickness.
the prayers of others, that they may beg health and deliverance of God for us.
The good Corinthians here, they pray Saint Paul out of his trouble. And God so
far honors his Children, even the meanest, that they are a means to beg
health and deliverance for others, even to pray them out of this or that
trouble.

And what a comfort and encouragement is this, that a Christian has so many
factors for him? he has all the Saints in the world that say, Our Father,
praying for him. He must needs be rich that has a world of factors, Comfort
from the prayers of others.
that has a stock going in every part of the world. A Christien has factors
all the world over, he is a member of the mystical body, and many prayers are
made for him, it is a great comfort.

And it is a great encouragement for us to pray for one another, considering
that God will so far honor us. St. Paul's health here it was a gift by the
prayers of many.

But thou will object, I am a weak Christian, a sinful creature, what Object.
should God regard my prayers? Alas, my prayers will do you little good.

Yes, they will do much, not only for thy self, but for others: what are Sol.
prayers? are they not incense kindled by the fire of the blessed Spirit of
God? Are they not in themselves good motions, stirred up by the Spirit?
themselves in their nature are good, though they be imperfect, and stained. The
Spirir that stirs them up is good, the good Spirit of God. We know not how to
pray, but the Spirit teaches us. The Mediator through whom they are offered,
who mingles his odor with them, Revel. 8. 3. He is the Angel, that mingleth
odours with the prayers of the Saints, and makes them acceptable to God. The
person likewise that offers them is good: what is he? (...)? is he not Gods
Child? do not parents love tohear the voice of their Children? if therefore the
person be good (though weak) and the prayer be good, and the Spirit good, and
the Mediator so good, then let no man be discouraged, not only to pray for
himself, but to pray for others. God would hear the Corinthians, (though they
were stained with Schism, and with other weaknesses,) they were none of the
most refined Churches that Saint Paul wrote to, as we may see in the first
Epistle, yet says Saint Paul, my health and deliverance is a gift, and a gift,
by the prayers of many, weak and strong joining together.

It is the subtilty of Satan, and our own hearts join with him in Object.
the temptation: What should I pray? my conscience tells me this and that.

Do thou mean to be so still, then indeed, as it is, Psalm. 66. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer: but if thou have
repented Answ.
thee of thy sins, and intenedst to lead a new life for the time to come, God
will hear thy prayers, not only for thy self, but for others: God will bestow
gifts upon others, by means of thy prayers.

To go on, Thanks may be given by many persons.


Gods end in delivering St. Paul by prayer, was that he might have many thanks
for many prayers, when they were heard once, that thanks may be given by many
[on our behalf,] that is, because we are delivered, and restored to health,
and strength again, to serve the Church as we did before: you see here how
Praise follows prayer.


Many prayers, and then many praises, these follow one another; Indeed Obser.
Praise follows prayer.
this is Gods order; and we see in nature, where there is a receiving there is
a giving. We see, the earth, it receives fruit, it yields fruit, as Christ
says of the good ground, sixty-fold, many-fold. You see bodies that receive
the Sun, they reflect their beams back to the Sun again.

The streams as they come from the Sea: so by an unwearied motion they return
back again to the Sea. And men do eat the fruit of their own flocks, they reap
the fruit of their own Orchards and Gardens. In nature, whatsoever receives, it
returns it back again. The influence and light that those heavenly bodies, the
stars, and the Planets, etc. have from the Sun, who is the chief light of all,
they bestow it upon the inferior bodies: you see it in nature, much more is it
in grace: what we receive from God by gift, obtained by prayer, he must have
the praise for it, many prayers, many praises. As soon as ever a benefit is
received, presently there is an obligation, a natural obligation, and a
religious obligation, upon the receipt of a benefit, there must be some thought
of returning something presently.

It teaches us, what a horrible sin ingratitude is: It is the grave of all
Gods blessings, it receives all, and never returns any thing back again.
Ingratitude a horrible sin.
As those Lepers, they never came back again to thank Christ, but only the
tenth, a poor Samaritan. Men are eager to sue to God, restless till they have
that they would have, but then they are barren and unfruitful, they yield
nothing back again. After prayer there must be praise and thanksgiving. It
condemns our backwardness, and untowardnesse in this kind; like little
Children, they are ready to beg favors, but when they come to thanksgiving,
they look another way, as if it were irksome to them: So it is with our nature,
when we go about this heavenly duty, we give God a formal word or two, Thanks
be to God, etc. But we never work our hearts to thankfulness. That thanks may
be given By many.


As the prayers of many are mighty with God to prevail, so likewise Praise of
many acceptable.
the praises of many are very grateful and acceptable to God. Even as it is
with instruments; the sweetness of music arises from many instruments, and
from the concord of all the strings in every instrument: when every instrument
has many strings, and all are in tune, it makes sweet harmony, it makes sweet
concord. So when many give God thanks, and every one has a good heart set in
tune, when they are good Christians all, it is wondrous acceptable music to
God, it is sweet incense, more acceptable to God then any sweet favor, and
odor can be to us. That is one reason why God will have many to pray to him,
that he may have many praises.

God does wondrously honor concord, especially when it is concord in praising
of him. It is a comely thing for Brethren to live in unity, as it is, Psalm
131. If to praise God be a comely thing, and if concord be a comely thing, then
when both meet together, it must needs be wondrous beautiful, and wondrous
acceptable to God, when many brethren meet and join to praise God. Therefore it
is said, Act. 2. in the Churches new conversion, they met all together as one
man, they were of one heart and one soul, and they were given to prayer, and to
praising of God; a blessed estate of that beginning Church, they were all as
one man, of one heart, of one spirit, of one soul.

As the blessed Angels, and blessed spirits in heaven, they all join together,
as it is in Revel. 14. The blessed man heard a voice in heaven as the voice of
many waters, and of great thunder, and he heard the voice of harpers, and they
sang a new song: there were many harps, but one song, one thanksgiving, one
Heart, one spirit in all, wondrous acceptable to God.

This should make us in love with public meetings. Severed thanksgiving is not
so acceptable a thanksgiving. God does bestow all good upon us in the body, as
we knit our selves not only in thanksgiving to him, but in To be in love with
public meetings.
love to the Church, as all things are derived from God to us in the body, so
let our praise return to God in the body as much as we may.

It shows what a hateful thing Schism and division is in the Church, besides
many other inconveniences God wants glory by it. God loves to be praised by
many joining together. As the Apostle says here, Thanks shall be given by
many, etc. Many, not as they are many persons, but as they are many godly
persons that are led by the Spirit of God.

Therefore if the praise of many be so acceptable, it should first be an
encouragement Use. Encouragement to union.
to union. In John 17. says our Savior Christ there, I pray, that they may be
one, as we are one. It was the sum of that heavenly prayer, the unity of the
Church to the end of the world, That they may be one, as we are one: the
Trinity should be the pattern of our unity. Because, I say, all good is in
union, and all that comes from us that is accepted of God, it must be in peace
and union.

God so loves peace, and a quiet disposition inclinable to peace, that he
neglects his own service till we have made peace one with another, Mat. 5. If
thou have any offense with thy brother, if thou have done him any wrong, or he
thee, go and be reconciled to him, and then come and bring thy offering. God
will stay for his own offering, he is content to stay for his own service till
we be at peace one with another, whether it be prayer or praise, if we be not
at peace it is not acceptable. Again, this should teach us to stir To stir up
others to praise God,
up others when we praise God, (and others have cause as well as we) that
thanks may be given by many. When we are in trouble call upon others, and as it
is the common and commendable fashion, desire others to pray for us, that
prayer may be made by many: and when we receive any favor, any deliverance
from any great danger, acquaint others with it, that thanks may be given by
many. It was the practice of David in Psalm 66. Come, I will tell you what the
Lord has done for my soul. And in Psalm. 34. and in Psalm. 142. ult. Bring my
soul out of trouble, that I may praise thy Name, and what shall others do? Then
the righteous shall compass me about, for thou have dealt bountifully with me.
Showing that it is the fashion of righteous men, when God has dealt graciously
with any of his Children, they compass him about, to be acquainted with the
passages of divine providence, and Gods goodness toward them, The righteous
shall compass me about, for thou have dealt bountifully with me.

Holy David in Psalm 103. he stirs up every creature to praise God, even the
creatures of hail, of storms, and winds, and every thing, even the Blessed
Angels, as we see in the latter end of that Psalm: as if thanksgiving were an
employment fit for Angels (and indeed so it is,) and as if all his own praise
were not enough except all the creatures in heaven and earth should join with
him in that blessed Melody to praise God, the Angels, and all creatures praise
God. Let us stir up one another to this exercise.

How do the creatures praise God? They do praise God by thy tongue: (although
they have a kind of secret praise which God hears well enough, for they do
their duty in their place willinglly and chearfuly, but) they praise God in our
tongues: every creature gives us occasion of praising God. That thanks may be
given by many, etc.


Many give thanks here for one Saint Paul, for the Minister. We see To praise
God for others.
here Gods end, that many should praise God not only for themselves, but for
others, especially for those by whom God conveys, and derives good unto them,
whether outward or spiritual good. The Apostle exhorts us to pray for all men,
1 Timothy 2. For Kings, yea, though they were persecuting Kings at that time. And
surely if we ought to pray to God for all mankind, we ought to praise God for
all sorts of men, especially for Governors and Ministers, etc. because God by
them bestows his greatest blessings. Obey the Magistrate: Let every soul be
subject to the higher Powers: for the powers that are, are ordained of God, and
he is the Minister of God for thy good; so the Governors and Ministers of God
are for our good. We ought therefore (as to pray for them, that they may
execute their office for our good, so) to praise God for the good we have by
them. You know David stirred up the people to mourn for Saul (though a Tyrant:)
He clothed you, and your Daughters (says he) with skarlet. If they should
praise God for a persecuting King, and mourn for him when he was gone, much
more should we for those that are good.

And so likewise for Pastors, we ought to praise God for them, and all that
have good by them will pray to God, and praise God for them. And undoubtedly it
is a sign of a man that has no good by them, that prays not for them, and
that praises not God by them; we ought to praise God in that proportion, as
well as to pray to God one for another. To be good to many, that many may give
thanks for us.


And this should stir us up to be good to many, that many may praise God, not
only for themselves, but for us. If it be our duty to pray for those that we
derive good by, and to praise God for them, then let us labor to be such as
may communicate to others. Good is diffusive, and good men are like the box in
the Gospel, that when it was opened all the house smelled of it.

The heathen Philosopher said, that a just man, a good man is a common good,
like a public stream, like a public Conduit, that every man has a share in.
Therefore as the Wise man says, When good men are exalted, the City rejoices,
many rejoice. Who would not therefore labor in this respect to be good, to
have a public disposition, to have a large heart, to do all the good we can?
That so we may not only have more prayers to God for us, but we may have more
praise to God for us, that God may gain by it. That thanks may be given by
many on our behalf.

Let us take notice of our negligence in this kind, and be stirred up to this
blessed duty. And therefore consider wherein it consists. Praise wherein it
consists.


It consists in our taking notice of the favors of God to our selves, and
others, and in valuing the good things that we praise God for, to esteem 1.
Taking notice of blessings.
them. The Children of Israel, they did not bless God for the mannah, they did
not value it, This Mannah, this Mannah, in scorn. So in Psalm 106. They
neglected Gods pleasant things, they set light by them. Hosea 8. 12. He gave
them the great things of his law, and they accounted them 2. Remembering them.
as slight, as strange things, not worthy to be regarded. Praise consists in
taking notice; and not only in taking notice, but in remembering and minding
them, as in Psalm. 103. My soul, praise the Lord, and forget not all his
benefits.

And likewise in an estimation of them, and likewise in expressing this
thankfulness in words, Awake my glory, our tongues are our glory: especially
3. Estimation.
as they are instruments to praise and glorify God: we cannot use our language
better then to speak the language of Canaan in praising of 4. In words.
God.

Likewise, praise consists in doing good, which is real praise, though we say
nothing. Moses cried to God, though he spoke not a word. Evil 5. In doing good.
works have a cry, although they say nothing. Abels blood cried against Cain:
and as evil works, so good works have a cry: though a man praise not God with
his tongue, his works praise God. Job says, The sides of the poor blessed
him. What could their sides speak? No, but there was a real thanksgiving to
God, their sides blessed God: so our good works may praise God as well as our
tongues and hearts. The heavens and the earth they praise God, though they say
nothing, because they stir us up to say something. Let men see your good
works, that they may take occasion from thence to bless God, says Christ. Or
else your praising of God is but a mere complementing with God: to give him
thanks with the tongue, and after to dishonor him with your lives, Psalm. 50.
What have thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth, since thou hate to be
reformed? what have thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth either in prayer
or in praise, when thou hate to be reformed? High words are unseemly for a
fool says the Wise man) and what higher words then praise? Therefore praise
for a man that lives in a blasphemous course of life, in a filthy course of
life, praise is too high a word for a fool: we must praise God in our lives, or
else not at all: God will not accept of it. It consists in these things.
Directions to thanksgiving.


Now some directions how to perform it for our selves and others.

If we would praise God for our selves, or for any, then let us look about us,
let us look above us, and beneath us, let us look backward, look to To look
what we have cause to be thankful for.
the present, look forward: every thing puts songs of praise into our mouth.
Have we not matter enough of our own to praise God for? let us look about us,
to the prosperity of others: let us praise God for the Ministry, praise God
for the Magistracy, praise God for the government wherein we live. There are
many grievances in the best government, but a Christian heart considers what
good he has by that government, what good he has by that ordinance, and does
not only delight to feed on the blemishes, as flies do upon sores: it is a
sign of a naughty heart to do so. Although a man should not be insensible of
the ills of the times: (for else how should we pray against them?) yet he is
not so sensible as to forget the good he has by them. If we would praise God,
let us look to the good, and not so much upon the ill.

Look up to heaven, look to the earth, to the sea. David occasions praise from
every creature, every creature ministers matter of praise, from the stars to
the dust, from heaven to earth, from the Cedar to the Hisop that grows by the
wall. Is there not a beam of Gods goodness in every creature? have we not use
of every creature? we must praise God not only for the Majesty, and order that
shines in them, but for the use of them in respect of us.

And so let us look to the works of Providence, as well as to the works of
Creation. Look to Gods work in his Church, his confounding of his enemies, his
deliverance of his Church, the Churches abroad, our own Church, our own
persons, our friends: thus we should feed our selves, that we may have matter
of praising God. God gives us matter every day; he renewes his favors upon the
place wherein we live, and upon us, as itis, Lam. 3. It is his mercy that we
are not all consumed. Let us look back to the favors that we have enjoyed: let
us look for the present, what does he do for us? The Apostle says here, God
does deliver us: does he not give deliverance, and favor, and grace? inward
grace for the time to come? has he not reserved an inheritance, immortal, and
undefiled in the heavens for us? Wherefore does he bestow things present: and
wherefore does he reveal things laid up for us for the time to come, but that
we should praise him, but that we should praise him for that which he means to
do afterward? Blessed be God the Father, who has begotten us to an
inheritance immortal, and undefiled, etc. says St. Peter. God reveals good
things that are to come, that we are heirs apparent to the Crown of glory;
this is revealed, that we might praise him now, that we might begin the
employment of heaven upon earth. Let us look upward and downward, let us look
about us, look inward, look backward, look to the present, look forward, every
thing ministers matter of praise to God.

Yea, our very crosses: happy is he whom God vouchsafes to be angry with,
that he does not give him over to a Reprobate sense to fill up his sins, but
that he will correct him to pull him from ill courses: happy is he that God
vouchsafes to be angry with in evil courses. There is a blessing hid in ill,
in the Cross. In all things give thanks, says the Apostle: what, in
afflictions? I, not for the affliction it self, but for the issue of it. There
is an effect in afflictions to draw us from the world, to draw us to God, to
make us more heavenly-minded, to make us see better into these earthly things,
to make us in love with heavenly things: In all things give thanks. When we
want matter in our selves, let us look abroad, and give thanks to God for the
prosperity of others.

And with all (in the second place,) when we look about us, let us 2. Dwell on
them in meditation.
dwell in the meditation of the usefulness of these things, of the goodness
of God in them, till our Hearts be warmed. It is not a slight God be thanked
that will serve, but we must dwell upon it, let our hearts dwell so long on the
favors and blessings of God till there be a blessed fire kindled in us. The
best bone-fire of all is to have our hearts kindled with love to God in the
consideration of his mercy. Let us dwell so long upon it till a flame be
kindled in us. A slight praise is neither acceptable to God nor man.

And then let us consider our own unworthiness, let us dwell upon that; I am
less then the least of all thy favors, says good Jacob, Genesis 32. If we be 3.
Consider our unworthiness.
less then the least, then we must be thankful for the least. Humility is
always thankful, a humble man thinks himself unworthy of any thing, and
therefore he is thankful for any thing.

A proud man praises himself above the common rate, he over-values, and
over-prizeth himself, and therefore he thinks he never has enough: when he
has a great deal, he thinks he has less then he deserves, and therefore he
is an unthankful person. And that makes a proud man so intolerable to God, he
is always an unthankful person, a murmuring person. A humble man, because he
undervalues himself, he thinks he has more then he deserves, and he is
thankful for every thing; he knows he deserves nothing of himself, it is the
mere goodness of God whatsoever he has.

The best direction to thansgiving is to have a humble and low heart, rherefore
David, 1. Chron. 29. 14. when he would exercise his heart to thankfuluesse,
when the people had given liberally, says he, Who am I, or what is this
people, that we should be able to offer willingly after this sort? all comes of
thee, and all is thine own that we give. What am I, or what is this people,
that we should have hearts to give liberally to the Temple? see how he abaseth
himself. And Abraham, I am dust and ashes, shall I speak to my Lord? And Job, I
abhor my self in dust and ashes, when he considered Gods excellency, and his
own baseness. A humble heart is always thankful, and the way to thankfulness
is to consider our humility. What am I? says David, he had a heart to be
thankful, of thine own I give thee, not only the matter to be thankful for,
but of thine own I give thee: when I give thee thanks, thou give me a
thankful heart.

As the Sacrifice that Abraham offered was found by God, so God must find the
sacrifice that we offer, even a thankful heart: of thine own, Lord, I give
thee, even when I give thee thanks.

Therefore you may make that a means to have a thankful heart, to pray for a
thankful heart. And when we have it, bless God for it, that we may be more
thankful. God must vouchsafe the portion of a thankful heart with other
blessings: he that gives matter to be thankful, must give a heart to be
thankful.

Again, to make us more thankful, do but consider the misery of our selves if
we wanted the blessings we are thankful for, and the 4. Consider the misery of
our selves and others in want of blessings.
misery of others that have them not. Thou that have health, if thou would
be thankful for it, look abroad, look into hospitalls, look on thy sick
friends that cannot come abroad. Thou that would be thankful for the
liberty of the Gospel, look beyond the seas, look into the Palatinate, and
other Countries, and certainly this will make thee thankful, if any thing
will. If we would be thankful for spiritual blessings, consider the misery
of those that are under the bondage of Satan, how there is but a little step
between them and hell, that they are ready to sink into it, there is but the
short thread of this life to be cut, and they are for ever miserable. If we
would be thankful for any blessing, let us consider the misery to be without
it. If we would be thankful for our wits, let us consider distracted persons.
What an excellent Engine to all things in this life, and the life to come, is
this spark of reason? If we want reason what can we do in civil things? What
can we do in matters of grace? Grace presupposes nature: if we would be
thankful for health, for strength, and for reason, if we would be thankful for
common favors, consider the misery of those that want these things.

Would we be thankful for the blessed ordinance, consider but the misery of
those that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, how they are led by
Satan, and want the means of salvation. Those that would be thankful for the
government we have, let them consider those that live in Anarchie, where every
man lives as he lists, where a man cannot enjoy his own. The consideration of
these things it should quicken us to thankfulness, the consideration of our
own misery if we should want them, and the misery of those that do want them.

And let us keep a Catalogue of Gods blessings, it will serve us, as in regard
of God to bless him the more, so in regard of our selves, 5. Keep a Catalogue
of Gods mercies.
to establish our faith the more: for God is Jehovah, always like himself: whom
he has done good unto, he will do good to: he is constant in his love, Whom he
loves, he loves to the end: God shall have more thanks, and we shall have more
comfort.

Again, to add some encouragements and motives to thankfulness, which may be a
forcible means to make us thankful, do but consider Motives to thankfulness.
it is Gods tribute, it is Gods custom; do but deny the King his custom, and
what will come of it? deny him tribute, and you forfeit all; so you forfeit 1.
It is Gods tribute.
all for want of thankfulness.

What is the reason that God has taken away the Gospel from countries abroad,
(and may do from us if we be not more thankful?) because they were not
thankful: it is all the tribute, all the impost he sets upon his blessings, I
will give you this, but you shall glorify me with thanksgiving. It is all the
honor he looks for, He that praises me honors me. And now, O Israel, what
does the Lord require of thee, for all his favors, but to serve him with a
cheerful and good heart? to be thankful.

What is the reason that the earth denies her own to us, that sometimes we have
unseasonable years? We deny God his own, he stops the due of the creature,
because we stop his due.

When we are not thankful he is forced to make the heavens as Iron, and the
Earth as Brass; we force him to make the creature otherwise then it is,
because we deny him thankfulness.

The running of favors from heaven cease, when there is not a recourse back
again of thankfulness to him. For unthankfulness is a drying wind, it dryes
up the fountain of Gods favors; it binds God, it will not suffer him to be as
good as his word. If ever God give us up to public judgments, it will be
because we are not thankful to God for favors, and deliverances, as that in
88. by Sea, and from the Gunpowder treason by land. Was it not a sick State
after Queen Mary, when Queen Elisabeth received the Crown? The Church and
Commonwealth were sick. Now if we be to praise God for our particular persons,
when we have recovered our health, much more should we praise God, when the
State, when the Church is delivered, as it was at the coming in of Queen
Elizabeth, and afterward in 88. and of late time, and continually he does
deliver us. And if we look that he should deliver us, not only our persons,
but the State wherein we live: let us pray to God that he would do so, and
praise God for his former deliverance.

Again, this is another motive, the praising of God for formet deliverances, 2.
It invites God to bestow new blessings.
it invites him to bestow new blessings. Upon what ground does the Husbandman
bestow more seed? upon that which has yielded most in time past. Will any man
sow in the barren wilderness where it is lost? No, but where he looks to reap
most, and has done formerly. Where he sees a soil that is fruitful, he will
sow it the more; and where the heart is a barren wilderness, that it yields
nothing back again, he takes that away that he gave before.

You know there is a debt in giving, there must be a returning of thanksgiving
always, and kindness requires kindness, there is an obligation. And where
benefits are taken, and men are thankful, that is the way to get more, to be
thankful for that we have. For God minds his own glory above all things, and
he will especially be bountiful to those from whom he sees he has most glory:
therefore always those that have been richest in grace, and in comfort, they
were most in thankfulness, as we see in David a man after Gods own heart and
in diverse others. Let this encourage us.

First, if we be not thankful it stops the current of benefits.

Secondly, if we be thankful God will give us more mercies and deliverances:
when we praise him in our hearts, in our lives, in our bounty to others, in
real thankfulness, when we are ready to good works, then he is ready to
bestow new still.

Again, to stir us up to this duty of praising God for our selves and others,
3. It is the beginning of heaven.
Consider, it is the beginning of heaven upon earth; what a happiness is it,
that when our persons cannot go to heaven till we die, till our bodies be
raised, yet we can send our Ambassadors, we can send our prayers, and
thanksgivings to heaven, and God accepts them, as if we came in our own
persons. Let your conversation be in heaven, says the Apostle. How is that? by
praising God much. I pray, what is the employment of heaven, of the Angels,
and blessed Spirits? They praise God continually for the work of Creation, and
for the work of Redemption, that is their especial task in heaven. Our duty is
to be much this way, in praising God. Self-love forces prayer oft-times: but
to praise God comes from a more heavenly affection.

Again, do but consider, that no creature in the world is unthankful, but 4.
None unthankful but devils.
devils only, and divellish men, and good men only so far as they are
corrupt and hold correspondencie with their corruptions: for every creature
praises God in his kind, set the devil aside, who is full of envy and pride
and malice against God; therefore except we will be like the Devils let us be
thankful. God has made all creatures to praise him, and to serve us, that we
may praise him; and when they praise him, shall we blaspheme him? May not the
swearer think with himself, every creature blesses God, even the senseless
creatures, and shall I dishonor God by my tongue which should be my glory, to
glorify him? shall I blaspheme him, and be like to the devil? shall I be more
base then the senseless creatures? What glory has God by many men that live
in the Church, that blaspheme God, and their whole life is a witness against
God, as the whole life of a Christian after he is in the state of Grace, is a
witness for God, and a praising of him, his whole life is a thanksgiving: so
the whole life of wicked, and careless creatures, is a dishonor of God, it is
a witness against God: There are none but devils, divellish-minded men but
they praise God, even the very dumb creatures. Let us labor to have a part in
that blessed music and harmony, to praise God: if we do not praise God here,
we shall never do it in heaven.

But we must remember by the way, that this thankfulness it must be a fruitful
thanksgiving. As for us to pray to God to bless us, and then to do Real
thanksgiving.
nothing, it is a barren prayer: so to thank God, and then to do nothing, it is
a barren thanksgiving. Our deeds have words, our deeds have a voice to God,
they speak, they pray, there is a kind of prayer, a kind of thanks in our
works. Works pray to God, they have a kind of cry to God, both ill works and
good works: and if good works have a cry to God in prayer, they will have a
voice in thanksgiving: this fruitful, this real thanks, is that which God
stands upon.

And therefore it is always joined with a study how to improve the things that
we thank God for to the best advantage. If we thank God for health, and
recovery, and deliverance, we will labor to improve it to Gods glory: if we
be thankful to God for riches, for peace, we will improve that to grow in
grace, to do good to others. There is never a thankful heart, but it studies to
improve that which it is thankful for really, that God may have the Glory, and
it the comfort, and benefit by it, or else it is but a lip-labor, but a lost
labor.

Let us shame our selves, and condemn our selves for our unthankfulness; To
shame our selves for our unthankfulness.
and that will be done by comparing our carriage to men with our carriage to
God. If so be that a man do us a little courtesy, how are we confounded if we
have not returned some thanks? and yet notwithstanding from God we have all
that we have, all that we are, all that we hope to have, and yet how many
benefits do we devour, and do not re turn God thanks?

This disproportion will shame the best Christian, that he is not so quick in
his devotion to God to be thankful there, as he is sensible of small kindnesses
done by men: this is a good way to make us more thankful.

And now when we come to the Sacrament, let us bless God. The Eucharist is a
thanksgiving: where there are many, there should be thanksgiving; where there
is a communion there is many, and thanksgiving should be especially of many met
together to thank God for Christ, and for the good we have by him; for if many
joined together in praise for St. Paul that was but a Minister, that was but an
instrument to set out the praise and the Doctrine of Christ, much more should
we be thankful to God for Christ himself, which is the gift of all gifts, and
for which he gives us all other gifts; if he give us him, can he deny us any
thing? If we be thankful for the health of our bodies (as indeed we should,) if
we be thankful for the peace of our humors, much more should we be thankful
for the peace of our consciences, when our souls are set in tune, when God and
we are friends, when the soul by the Spirit of God is set at peace, and is fit
for the praise of God, and is fit to do good, when it is a healthful soul.

As in the body, it is a sign it is sick when the actions are hindered: so it
is likewise with the soul.

We should bless God for ability to do good, for any health in our souls, more
then for health of body. Do but consider, if hwe are to thank God for the
instruments of good, much more are we to thank him for the good things
themselves. If we should thank God for the Ministers (for now I stand upon
that, many prayers, and praises were given to God for Saint Paul) much more
should we be thankful for that which we have by the Ministry that is, for all
the blessings of God, for grace and glory, for life and salvation. It is the
Ministry of life, And the power of God to salvation. We should be thankful to
God for peace, We are the messengers of peace. We should be thankful to God for
grace, and for his holy Spirit: the Spirit is given with it. We should be
thankful especially for spiritual favors. A man cannot be thankful to God
for health, and liberty unless first he know God to be his, that he can
bless God for spiritual favors. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.
We should be thankful for Christ, and all the benefits we have by Christ, much
more then for any other blessings whatsoever.

Therefore now seeing we are a Communion, let praise be given by many. We have
greater matters then the health of a Minister, (or any particular It was a
Sacrament day.
person, either our selves or others) to be thankful for; we have greater
cause, being to bless God for the greatest gift that ever he gave, even for
Christ. The disposition in a feast is to be joyful, and cheerful, to praise
God; now we are to feast with God, and with Jesus Christ. Christ is not only
the food, but he invites us, he is with us. What will we do for Christ if we
will not feast with him? What a degree of unthankfulness is it, when we will
not so much as feast with him? when we will not willingly receive him? What
will he do for Christ that will not feast with him? how unfit will he be to
praise God, and praise Christ, that when Christ makes a feast of himself, and
gives himself together with the bread and wine, representing the benefit of his
body and blood, broken, and shed for us, and all his benefits? if we will not
feed upon himself, when he stoopes so low as to give himself for us, and to
feed us with himself, what will we do? How can we be thankful for other
blessings, when we are not thankful for himself? And how can we be thankful for
himself, when we will not come and partake of him?

Let us stir up our hearts, and think now, to take the Communion: As for matter
of repentance and sorrow; it should be dispatched before. It is the Eucharist,
a matter of thanksgiving: we should raise our hearts above earthly things. We
should consider that we are to deal with Christ; and these are but
representations.

When the bread is broken, think of the body of Christ, and when the wine is
poured out, think of the blood of Christ: and when our bodies are cheared by
these elements, think how our souls are refreshed by the blood of Christ by
faith. If we should be thankful to God for bodily deliverance, how much more
should we thank him for our souls, being delivered from hell by the blood of
Christ, which is the grand deliverance? Let us dispose our hearts to
thankfulness, it is a fit disposition for a feast.

And (as I said) take heed of sin, it choaks thankfulness, therefore examine
thy purposes, how thou come; if thou come with a purpose to live in sin, thou
art an unfit receiver. The place we stand in is holy, the business is holy, we
have to deal with a holy God; and therefore if we purpose not to relinquish
wicked courses, and to enter into Covenant with God, to abstain from fin, we
come not aright; When thou come into the house of God, take heed to thy
feet, says the Wise man: take heed to thy affections, consider with whom thou
have to deal: but if thou have renewed thy repentance, and thy purposes with
God for the time to come, come with chearefulness, with a thankful
disposition; thankfulness is a disposition for a feast: if it be a disposition
for bodily deliverance, it is much more for the deliverance of the soul, and
much more for Christ, and the blessings we have by him, who is all in all. That
thanks may be given by many on our behalf.

VERSE. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc.
SAINT Paul in these words does diverse things at once.

First, He shows a reason why many should pray for him, and give thanks on his
behalf; you have cause, says he, for our rejoicing is this, the testimony of
our conscience, etc. therefore if many of you give thanks to God for me, it is
your duty, my conscience bears me witness that I have carried my self well
toward you, you have cause to pray for us, and to praise God for our
deliverance, for you have received much good by us. God conveys much good by
public persons to those that are under rhem, therefore there ought to be many
prayers, and many thanks for them.

And again, they ought to pray, and give thanks for him, because they should
not lose their labor, they should not lose their prayers, their incense,
because it should be for a man that was gracious with God, that had the
testimony of his conscience that he walked in simplicity, and godly sincerity,
as he says, Heb. 13. Pray for us, for we are assured that we have a good
conscience: so they are a reason of the former.

Another thing that he aims at is, the preventing of some imputations: he was
accused in their thoughts at least, and by the words of some false teachers,
that were his worst enemies, as you have no enemy (next to the devil) to a
Minister, like a Minister. If a man would see the spirit of the devil, let him
look to some of them. Saint Paul had many enemies, many false brethren, that
laid false imputations upon him to disparage him in the thoughts of others, in
the thoughts of his hearers. They accounted him an inconstant man, that he came
not to them when he promised, and that he suffered affliction, and it was like
enough for some desert: they accounted him a despicable man, he suffered
afflictions in the World, he wanted discretion to keep himself out of the
cross. Nay, says he, whatsoever you impute to me, and lay upon me, Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience etc.

Again, he aims at this, to lay the blame upon those false brethren, who
deserved it: they think I am a deceiver: they think I am wilely: no, I do not
walk so, I do not walk in fleshly wisdom as they do that seek themselves, and
not you. So I say, Saint Paul aims at diverse things in bringing in these words.

We see here first of all, that Doct. The more eminent men are, the more to be
prayed for.
The more eminent a man is for place and gifts, the more he should be prayed
for, and the more thanks should be given for him.


You have cause (says Saint Paul) to do it for me: for our rejoicing is this,
that we have walked in simplicity and sincerity, etc. and more abundantly to
you-ward. Saint Paul was a brother as he was a Christian; he was a Father in
regard he had called them to the faith: and he was an Apostle. In all regards
they ought to praise God for him: because he was a Father, because he was the
father of them, (you have not many Fathers, says he) and because he was an
Apostle, a man eminent, by whose means God conveyed a world of good to the
Church.

To make way to the main thing, Observe this in general, that Christians are
often driven to their Apology.


Especially Ministers the Fathers of Christians: holy men in the Church Doct.
Christians driven to make apologies.
are driven to their Apology, and defense: because those that shine in their
own consciences, wicked men labor to darken them in their reputation, that
their own wickedness may be the less seen, and observed. It has always been
the policy of Satan, and of wicked men, (that so all might seem alike) to lay
aspersion s upon those that were better men then themselves. Saint Paul is
forced to make his Apology, to retire to the testimony of his conscience, Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc. Use. Not to think
strange if we be driven to it.


Therefore make this use of it, not to think it strange if we be driven to our
Apology.

But some may say, is not the life the best Apology? as St. Peter says, that
you may stop the mouths of gainsayers. Quest.


Yes, of all Apologies life is the best, to oppose to all imputations: but
notwithstanding it is not enough. Answ. Life the best Apology, but not enough
sometimes.


A man is cruel, if he make not his Apology and defense sometimes: because his
imputations tend to the hurt of others, being public persons, especially
Ministers, who have so much authority in the hearts of people, as they can
gain by their good life and desert: and if any imputation lie upon them, they
are to clear it in words, their life will not serve the turn, but they must
otherwise make their Apology (if it be needful) for themselves, as Saint Paul
does here. It is not only lawful, but expedient sometimes to speak by way of
commendation of our selves.

In what cases? A man may speak in commendations of himself.


Not only in case of thankfulness to God, to praise God for his graces in us.

And likewise in case of example to others, a man may speak of Gods 1. For
thankfulness.
work in him, he may tell what God has done for his soul, and in his soul,
that God may have glory, and others may have benefit. 2. For example.


But likewise in the third place (and it was Saint Paul's case here) a man may
speak of himself, by way of Apology and defense, that the truth 3. For defense.
suffer not. It is a kind of betraying the cause, for a man to be silent when
he is so accused. Though (as I said) a good life be the best Apology, and
except there be a good life the verbal apology is to little purpose, yet the
apology of life oft-times in public persons is too little: In these cases we
must speak of our selves, and of the good things of God in us.

But, another quere may be here, May a man glory in that which is in him, of
the grace of God that is in him? Our glorying should be in Christ, in Question.
the obedience, and righteousness of Christ, and in God reconciled through
Christ: can a Christian glory in any thing that is in him, which is imperfect?

I answer briefly, Saint Paul does not here glory in the Court of
Justification, but in the Court of a Christian conversation: therein a man may
Answ. How a man may glory of the graces in him.
glory in the work of grace in him, in those inward works, and the works that
flow from them. When a man is to deal with men he may set forth his life, nay,
when a man is to deal with God he may set forth his sincerity, not, I say, in
the Court of Justification, but in the Court of Sanctification, and a holy
life. There good works are the ornament of the spouse, they are her Jewels: but
come to the Court of Justification, all are dung, as the Apostle says, Philip.
3. All are dung and dross, not worthy to be named, they are not able, they are
not strong enough; all that comes from us, and all that is in us it is not able
to bear us out in glorying in the Court of Justification, All are stained as
menstruous clothes.

But mark, Saint Paul speaks of glorying before men, of a sanctified life. He
glories not in his conversation and sincerity as a title; but he glories in it
as an evidence that his title is good. That whereby he has his title is only
by the righteousness of Christ, that he has heaven, and is free from hell,
that is the title: but what evidence have you that Christ and his
righteousness is yours? there must be somewhat wrought in you, and that is
sincere walking. So he alleges it as an evidence of his state in grace, that
that was good. So we see in what case he gloried in his sincerity.

To come to the words.

For the words themselves, they contein the blessed temper of Saint Paul's
spirit in the midst of disgraces, in the midst of imputations, the temper
of his spirit it was joyful, glorying. Our rejoicing is this.


The ground of it is, The testimony of our conscience.

The matter whereof conscience does witness and testify, it is conver^
sation, that is the thing testified of.

And the manner positively, In simplicity, and godly sincerity. In simplicity:
you would think this to be a simple commendation, to commend himself for
simplicity: but it is a godly simplicity whereby we are like to God, to be
simple without mixture of sin and hypocrisy, without mixture of error and
falsehood: that simplicity that is despised by carnal wretches that stain and
defile their consciences, and call them what you will, so you account them not
simple they; despise the term of an honest simple man.

Simplicity is not here taken for a defect of knowledge, (as the word is
commonly used) but for an excellency whereby we resemble God that is free from
all mixture of sin and Ignorance. In simplicity, and godly sincerity.

And then negatively, Not in fleshly wisdom.

And then, because this setting out of himself might seem to be ostentation, to
set down his glorying in his conscience, and in his simplicity, here is a
qualification of it likewise, indeed I glory in my simplicity, and sincerity,
that is, in my conversation: but it is by the grace of God. By the grace of God
my conversation has been in godly sincerity, and not in fleshly wisdom: For
St. Paul was wondrous jealous of his heart, for fear of pride, not I (says he)
1. Cor. 15. I labored more then they all: O, not I, but the Grace of God that
was in me: he was afraid of the least insinuation of spiritual pride, and so
he says here, Our rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and sincerity, by the grace of God.

And then the extent of this conversation, (thus in simplicity, and sincerity)
in regard of the object, it has been thus, In the world, toward all men that
I have conversed with, they can say as much, wheresoever I have lived. And more
abundantly to you-ward, my care and Conscience has been to carry my self as I
should, more abundantly to you-ward, with whom I have lived longest. This is an
excellent evidence of a good man, that he is best liked where he is best known.
Now St. Paul had lived long amongst them, and he was their father in Christ,
and therefore says he my conversation is known, especially to you-ward.

Many men are best trusted where they are least known, their public
conversation is good and plausible, but their secret courses are vile and
naught, as those know that are acquainted with their retired courses: but you
(says the Apostle) with whom I have lived longest, with whom I have been most,
you can bear witness of my conversation, that I have lived so and so in the
world, and more abundantly to you-ward. This is our rejoicing, etc.


We see here the temper and disposition that St. Paul was in, he was in a
glorying, in a rejoicing estate. We see then that,

A Christian (take him at the worst) his estate is a rejoicing estate.

Our rejoicing is this. The word in the original is more then joy: for it is
((...)) a glorying, our glorying is this, which is a joy manifesting Doct.
Christians have their joy.
it self in the outward man, when the heart and the spirit seem as it were to
go outward, and (as it were) to meet the thing joyed in. A Christian has his
joy, his glorying, and a glorying that is proper to himself: it is a spiritual
joy, as it follows after, Our rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience.

So goodis God, that in the worst estate he gives his Children matter of
rejoicing in this world: he gives them a taste of heaven, before they come
there. He gives them a grape of Canaan, as Israel, they tasted of Canaan what a
good land it was before they came thither: so Gods Children, they have their
rejoicing. St. Paul swears and protests it, 1. Cor 15. By our rejoicing in
Christ Jesus I die daily: as verily as we joy in all our afflictions; so this
is true that I say, that I die daily.

Therefore we should labor to be of such a temper, as that we may glory, Use.
To labor for a temper that we may glory.
and rejoice. A Christian has his rejoicing, but it is a spiritual rejoicing,
like his estate. Every creature has his joy, as St. Chrysostom speaks: we do
all for joy, all that we do is that we may joy at length, it is the center of
the soul. As rest is to motion, so the desire of all is to joy, to rest in
joy. So that heaven it self is termed by the name of joy, happiness it self,
Enter into thy masters joy. Every creature has his joy proper to him, every
man has his joy: a carnal man has a carnal joy, a spiritual man has a holy
joy.

First, he joys in his election which was before all worlds, that his name A
Christians joy.
is written in heaven, as it is, Luke 11. Rejoice in this, that your names are
1. In Election.
written in heaven, and not that the devils are subject unto you.

And then, he joys in his justification, that he is freed from his sins, Romans
8. Being justified by faith we have peace with God through Christ, and we
rejoice 2. In justification.
in afflictions: being justified first, there is the way how this joy comes in.
A Christian being justified by faith, and freed from the guilt of his sin, it
works joy.

And then, there is a joy of sanctification, of a good conscience, of a holy 3.
In sanctification.
life led, as we see here, our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, etc.

And then, there is a joy of glory to come, We rejoice under the hope of glory,
4. In the hope of glory.
says the Apostle, Romans 5 so a Christians joy is suitable to himself.

There is no other man that can glory, and be wise, because all men but a
Christian, they glory in their shame, or they glory in vanishing things. A A
Christian only can stand to his joy.
Christian is not ashamed of his joy, of his glorying, because he glories not
in his shame. Therefore the Apostle here justifies his joy, our rejoicing is
this, I care not if all the World know my joy, it is the testimony of my
conscience. As if he should say, Let others rejoice in base pleasures which
they will not stand to a vow, let others rejoice in riches, in honors, in the
favor of men, let them rejoice in what they please, my joy is another kind of
joy, I rejoice in the testimony of my conscience. A Christian as he has a joy,
so he has a joy that he will stand to, and make it good. There is no other man
but he will blush, and have shame in his forehead, that joys in any thing that
is baser then himself, that joys in outward things, he cannot stand to it, and
say, This is my joy: but a Christian has the warrant of his conscience for
that which he joys in, and therefore he is not ashamed of it. Another man
dares not reveal his joy.

All the subtlety of the world, is to have the pleasures that sin will Wicked
men labor to hide the ground of their joy.
afford, and yet withal they study to cover it, that it may not appear. Where
is the joy of the ambitious?

His study, his thought, and his joy is to have respect Haman-like, and yet he
studies to conceal this, he dares not have it known, he dares not avow it, This
is my rejoicing, for then all the world would laugh at him for a vain person.

Again, the joy of the base-minded man, is in his pleasure, but he dares not
avow this, he dares not say, my rejoicing is this; for then every man would
scorn him as a beast. The rich man, he joys in his riches, but he dares not be
known of this; for he would then be accounted a base earthly-minded man. Every
man would scorn him. He studies to have all the pleasure, and all the comfort
that these things will afford, and yet to cover them.

Because he thinks, that there is a higher matter that he should joy in, if he
were not an atheist.

A Christian is not ashamed of his joy, and rejoicing, I rejoice in this, says
he. For it is well bred, it is bred from the Spirit of God witnessing A
Christian not ashamed of his joy.
that his name is written in the Book of Life, witnessing that his sins are
forgiven, witnessing that he lives as a Christian should do, witnessing that 1.
It is well bred.
he has the evidences of his justification, that he has a holy life, the
pledge likewise of future glory: his joy is well bred.

Likewise it is permanent. Other men's joy, and rejoicing is but 2. It is
permanent.
as a flash of thorns, as the Wise man calls it, (as it were) a flame in
thorns, as the crackling of thorns, which is sooner gone. And it is an
unseemly glorying and rejoicing, for a man to glory in that which is worse then
himself, and in that which is out of himself: as all other things are out of a
man's self, and worse, and meaner then a man's self: therefore a man cannot
rejoice in them, and be wise. It is a disparagement to the wisdom of a man, to
glory in things that are meaner then himself, and that are out of himself. A
holy Christian has that in himself, and that which is more excellent then
himself to glory in. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience.

All other rejoicing it is vain glory, and vain rejoicing: therefore in Jerem.
9. says he, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, let not the strong man
glory in his strength, let not the rich man glory in his riches: but if a man
will glory, let him glory that he knows the Lord to be his, and that he
knows himself to be the Lords. When he knows the Lord to be his, and himself
to be Gods by faith, and a good conscience, then there is matter of glorying.

Of all kind of men, God does hate proud boasters most of all; for glory, is
the froth of pride, and God hates pride, he opposes pride, and sets himself in
battle array against it, and who can thrive that has God for his enemy?
boasting and pride in any earthly thing it is against all the Pride against all
the commandments.
commandments almost. It is Idolatry, it makes that we boast, and glory in,
an Idol; whereas we should glory in God that gives it.

And it is spiritual adultery, when we cleave in our affections to some
outward thing more then to God. It is false witness: pride is a false glass,
it makes the things, and the men themselves that enjoy them to seem greater
then they are. The devil amplifies earthly things to a carnal man in a false
glass, that they seem big to him: whereas if he could see them in their true
colors, they are false things, they are snares, and hindrances in the way to
heaven, and many such names they have. The Scripture gives an ill report of
them, They are vanity and vexation of spirit: because we should be discouraged
from setting our affections on these things, and from glorying in them.

Therefore let us take heed of false glorying; if we will glory, we see here
what we are to glory in, This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
conscience, etc. And this we may justify, and stand by that it is good. It is
the Testimony of conscience. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
conscience.


The testimony of conscience, it is a matter and ground of joy to a true
Christian; here we are to consider these things.

First, to consider a little the nature of conscience.

And then, that conscience bears witness, that there is a testimony of
conscience.

And that this conscience bearing witness is a ground of comfort.

For the first,

Every man feels, and knows what conscience means. There be many Conscience
what
rigid disputes of it among the School men that had leisure enough, and of all
men knew as little, and felt what it was, as any sort of men, living under the
darkness of Popery, and superstition, and being in thraldom to the Pope, and
to the corruptions of the times they lived in. They have much jangling about
the description of it, whether it be the soul it self, or a faculty, or an
act?

In a word, Conscience is all these in some sort, in diverse respects:
therefore I will not wrangle with any particular opinion.

For what is conscience, but the soul it self reflecting upon it self? It 1.
The soulit self.
is the property of the reasonable soul and the excellency of it, that it
can return upon it self. The beast cannot; for it runs right forward: it knows
it is carried to the object: but it cannot return, and recoile upon it self:
but the soul of the reasonable creature, of all even from men to God himself,
who understands in the highest degree, though he do not discourse as man does,
yet he knows himself, he knows and understands his own excellency. And
wheresoever there is understanding, there is a reflect act whereby the soul
returns upon it self, and knows what it does: it knows what it wills, it
knows what it affects, it knows what it speaks, it knows all in it, and all
out of it. It is the property of the soul. Therefore the original word in
the Old Testament that signifies the heart, it is taken for conscience.
Conscience and heart are all one, I am persuaded in my soul, that is, in my
conscience: and the Spirit witnesses to our spirit, that is, to our
conscience. Conscience is called the spirit, the Heart, the soul: because it is
nothing but the soul, reflecting and returning upon it self.

Therefore it is called conscience, that is, one knowing joined with another:
because conscience knows it self, and it knows what it knows, it knows what
the heart is, it not only knows it self, but it is a knowledge of the heart
with God. It is called conscience, because it knows with God; for what
conscience knows, God knows that is above conscience. It is a knowledge with
God, and a knowledge of a man's self.

And so it may be the soul it self endued with that excellent faculty of
reflecting and returning upon it self, therefore it judges of its own acts,
because it can return upon it self.

Conscience likewise in some sort may be called a faculty; the common stream
runs that way, that it is a power. It is not one power, but conscience 2. A
faculty.
is in all the powers of the soul; for it is in the understanding, and there
it rules; conscience is it by which it is ruled and guided. Conscience is
nothing but an application of it to some particular, to some thing it knows,
to some rules it knows before. Conscience is in the will, in the affections,
the joy of conscience, and the peace of conscience, and so it runs through the
whole soul. It is not one faculty, or two, but it is placed in all the
faculties.

And some will needs have it an act, a particular act, and not a power. When it
does exercise, conscience it is an act: when it accuses, or excuses, 3. an
Act.
or when it witnesses, it is an act, at that time it is a faculty in act. So
that we need not to wrangle whether it be this, or that? let us comprehend as
much in our notions as we can: that it is the soul, the heart, the spirit of a
man returning upon it self, and it has something to do in all the powers; and
it is an act it self, when it is stirred up to accuse, or to excuse: to punish
a man with fears and terrors, or to comfort him with joy, and the like.

Now Conscience it is a most excellent thing, it is above reason, and sense:
for conscience is under God, and has an eye to God always. An Atheist can have
no conscience therefore, because he takes a way the ground of conscience which
is an eye to God, Conscience looks An Atheist can have no conscience.
Conscience above reason:
to God, it is placed as Gods Deputy, and vicegerent in man. Now it is above
reason in this respect: Reason says, you ought to do this, it is a comely
thing, it is a thing acceptable with men amongst whom you live and converse, it
becomes your condition as you are a man to carry your self thus, it agrees
with the rules, and principles of nature in you. Thus says reason, and they
are good motives from reason. But conscience goes higher; There is a God to
whom I must answer, there is a judgment, therefore I do this, and therefore I
do not this. It is a more divine, a more excellent power in man then any thing
else, then sense or reason, or whatsoever. As it is planted by God for special
use, so it looks to God in all.

Therefore the name for conscience in the Greek and Latin, signifies a
knowledge with another, because it is a knowledge with God; God and my own
heart knows this, God and my conscience, as we use to say. Three things joined
with conscience:


There are three things joined with conscience.

It is a knowledge with a rule, with a general rule, that is always the
foundation of conscience in a man, For there is a general rule, Whosoever
commits 1. It is a knowledge with a general rule:
murder, whosoever commits adultery, whosoever is a blasphemer, a swearer, a
covetous, corrupt person, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as
the Apostle says. Here is the general rule, now conscience applies it, but I
am such a one, therefore I shall not enter into heaven: so here the conscience
it practices with a rule. It is a knowledge of those particulars with a
general rule. And then it is a knowledge of me, of my own heart, I know what I
have done, I know what I do, and in what manner, whether in hypocrisy, or
sincerity: I know 2. Of our own actions.
what I think. And then it is a knowledge with God: for God knows what
conscience knows, he knows what is thought or done, Conscience is 3. A
knowledge with God
above me, and God is above conscience. Conscience is above me and above all
men in the world; for it is immediately subjugated to God; conscience knows
more then the world, and God knows a thousand times more then Conscience or
the world. It is a knowledge with a general rule; for where there is no
general rule, there is no conscience. To make this a little clearer, all have
a rule: those that have not the Word which is the best rule of all, yet they
have the Word written in their hearts; they have a natural Judicature in their
souls; their conscience excusing, or accusing one another, they have a general
rule, you must do no wrong, you must do that which is right.

In the soul there is a treasury of rules by nature; (the Word does add more
rules, the Law and the Gospel) and that part of the soul that preserves rules
is called intellectual, because it preserves rules; all men by nature have
these graven in the soul. And therefore the Heathen were exact in the rules of
justice, in the principles which they had by nature, grafted and planted in
them.

Now because the copy of the Image of God, the Law of God written in nature,
was much blurred since the fall, God gave a new copy of his law which was more
exact; therefore the Jews which had the Word of God, should have had more
conscience then the Heathen, because they had a better general rule. And now
we having the Gospel too which is a more Evangelicall rule, we should be more
exact in our lives then they.

But every man in the world has a rule. If men sin without the Law, they shall
be judged without the law, by the principles of nature: if they sin under the
Gospel, they shall be judged by the Word and Gospel. So that conscience, it
is a knowledge with a rule, and with the particular actions that I have done,
and a knowledge with God.

In a word, to clear this further concerning the nature of conscience, know
that God has set up in man a Court, and there is in man all that are in a God
has set up in man a Court, wherein conscience is
Court. There is a Register to take notice of what we have done: besides the
general rule (for that is the ground and foundation of all) there is
conscience which is a Register to set down whatsoever we have done, exactly; 1.
Register.
the conscience keeps diaries, it sets down every thing, it is not forgotten
(though we think it is) when conscience is once awaked. As in Jer. 17. The sins
of Judah are written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, upon
their souls: all their wit and craft will not raze it out. It may be forgotten
a while, by the rage of lusts, or one thing or other; but there is a Register
that writes it down, conscience is the Register.

And then there are Witnesses, The testimony of conscience: conscience does 2.
Witness.
witness, this I have done, this I have not done.

There is an Accuser with the witness, the conscience it accuses, or excuses.
3 Accuser.


And then there is the Judge, conscience is the Judge there: it does judge,
this is well done, this is ill done. 4. Judge.


Then there is an Executioner, and conscience is that too, upon accusation, and
judgment there is punishment. The first punishment is within a 5. Executioner.
man always before he come to hell. The punishment of conscience it is a
prejudice of future judgment: there is a flash of hell presently after an ill
act, The Heathen could observe, that God has framed the heart and the brain
so, as there is a sympathic between them, that whatsoever is in the
understanding that is well and comfortable, the understanding in the brain
Sympathy between heart and brain.
sends it to the heart, and raises some comfort. If the understanding
apprehend dolorous things, ill matters, then the heart smites, as David's heart
smote him: the heart smites with grief for the present, and with fear for the
time to come.

In good things, it brings joy presently: and hope for the time to come, that
follows a good excusing conscience.

God has set, and planted in man this Court of conscience, and it is Gods Hall
(as it were) wherein he keeps his first judgment wherein he keeps his
Conscience Gods Hall.
Assizes. And conscience does all the parts, it registreth, it witnesses, it
accuses, it judges, it executes, it does all.

Now you see in general, what the nature of conscience is, and why it is
planted in us by God.

One maine end among the rest, (besides his love to us to keep us from sin, and
then by smiting us to drive us to conversion and repentance, to Judgment of
conscience a forerunner ofthe great judgment.
turn from our sins to God, another maine end) is to be a prejudice, to make
way to Gods eternal judgment: for therein things are judged before: when God
lays open the Book of conscience, when it is written there by this Register,
we shall have much to do to excuse our selves, or to plead that we need many
witnesses, for our conscience will accuse us, we shall be self-accusers,
self-condemners, as the Apostle says. Conscience will take Gods part, and God
will take part with conscience. And God has planted it for this main end, that
he might be justified in the damnation of wicked men at the day of judgment.

Now I come to the second particular, that conscience gives evidence, or
Conscience bears witness.
witness. This is the evidence, or testimony of our conscience. The witness of
conscience it comes in this order. Upon some general rules, that the
conscience has laid up in the soul, out of nature, and out of the Book of
God, the Conscience does apply those Generals to particulars.

First, in directing, this is such a truth in general, you ought to carry your
self thus and thus, to do this, says conscience: so it directs, and is a
Joseph's Brethren:
monitor before it be a witness. Well, if the monitions of conscience be
regarded and heard, from thence comes conscience to witness, that the general
rule that directs in particulars, has been obeyed, and so after it has done
its duty in directing, it comes to judge, and to witness, this I have done, or
this I have not done; so the witness of conscience comes in that manner.
Conscience (...) witness.


Now if you would know, what manner of witness conscience is, It is a witness
that there is no exception against: it is a witness that will say 1. Faithful.
all the truth, and will say nothing but the truth: It is a witness that will
not be bribed, it will not be corrupted long. For a time we may silence it, but
it will not be so long, nor in all things. Some sins may be slubbered over, but
there are some sins that by the general light in nature are so known to be
naught that conscience will accuse: therefore it is a faithful Judge and
Witness, especially in great sins, it is an incorrupt witness. It is a true
Register, it is always writing, and setting down; though we know not what it
writes for the present, (being carried away with vanities and lusts:) yet we
shall know afterward when the book of conscience shall be laid open.

It is a witness that we cannot impeach, no man can say, I had no body to tell
me. Alas, a man's own conscience will tell him well enough at the day of
judgment, and say to him when he is in hell, as Reuben said to his Brethren
when they were in Egypt in prison, Did not I tell you, hurt not the boy? meddle
not with him: so conscience will say, Did not I witness? did not I give you
warning? Yes, I did, but you regarded it not. It is a faithful witness, there
is no exception against it.

And then it is, an inward witness, it is a domestcik witness, a Chaplain in
ordinary, a domestical divine, it is always telling us, and always ready 2.
Inward.
to put good things into us. It is an eyewitness, and an eare-witnesse; for
it is as deep in man as any sin can be. If it be but in thought, conscience
tells me what I think; and conscience tells me what I desire, as well as what I
speak, and what I do. It is an inward, and an eyewitness of every thing. As
God sees all, and knows all, who is all eye, so conscience is all eye, it sees
every thing, it hears every thing: it is privy to our thoughts.

As we cannot escape Gods eye, so we cannot escape the eye of conscience,
Whether shall I flee from thy presence? says David, If I go to heaven, thou
art there: if I go down into hell, thou art there So a man may say of
conscience, Whither shall I flee from conscience? If a man could flee from
himself it were somewhat: conscience is such a thing as that a man cannot flee
from it, nor he cannot bid it, Be gone: it is as inward as his soul. Nay, the
soul will leave the body, but conscience will not leave the soul. What it
writes, it writes for eternity except it be wiped out by repentance. As Saint
Chrysostom says, Whatsoever is written there may be wiped out by daily
repentance.

You see then, it is a witness, and how and what manner of witness conscience
is.

Therefore we should not sin, in hope of concealment: what if thou conceal it
from all others, can thou conceal thy own conscience? As one Use. Not to sin
in hope of secrecy,
says well, What good is it for thee that none knows what is done, when thou
know it thy felf? what profit is it for him that has a conscience that will
accuse him, that he has no man to accuse him but himself? he is a thousand
witnesses to himself. Conscience is not a private witness, it is a thousand
witnesses: therefore never sin in hope to have it concealed. It were better
that all men should know it, then that thy self should know it: all will be
one day written in thy forehead, conscience will be a blab: if it cannot speak
the truth now, though it be bribed in this life, it will have power and
efficacy in the life to come. Never sin therefore in hope of concealment,
conscience is a witness, we have the witness in us: and as Esaias says, Our
sins witness against us. It is in vain to look for secrecy, conscience will
discover all.

Again, considering that conscience does witness and will witness, let us
Use. To labor that conscience may witness well.
labor that it may witness well, let us labor to furnish it with a good
testimony. Let us carry our selves so in all our demeanor to God and men,
that conscience may give a good testimony, a good witness, it will witness
either for us, or against us.

Therefore first of all, labor to have good rules to guide it. And then,
labor to obey those rules: knowledge and obedience are necessary, that
conscience may give a good witness. Now a good witness of conscience is
twofold. A true and honest witness, and then a peaceable witness follows on
it: that it may witness truth, and then that it may witness peace Good
witness of conscience twofold.
for us.

That conscience may witness truly, and excuse us, conscience must be rightly
instructed: for naturally conscience can tell us many things. The 1. Labor for
good rules,
Heathen men, Philosophers (we may read it to our shame) they made conscience
of things, which Christians that are instructed by a further rule then
conscience, (that have the Book of God to rectify the inward Book of
conscience) yet they make no conscience of. How many cases did they make
scruple of? to discover faults to the buyer in their selling, and to deal
truly, and honestly, (for the second table especially;) it should make
Christians ashamed.

But besides that rule, we have the rule of the Scriptures: because men are
ready to trample upon, and to raze out the writing of conscience, but the Book
of God they cannot: therefore that is added to help conscience. And God adds
his Spirit to his Word to convince conscience, and to make the witness of the
Word more effectual; for although the Word say thus and thus, yet till the
Spirit convince the soul, and set it down that it is thus; till it convince it
with a heavenly light, conscience will not be fully convict. That conscience
therefore may be able to witness well, Let us regard the notions of nature,
preserve them: if we do not, God will give us up to gross sins. Let us labor
to have right principles, and grounds, to cherish principles of nature common
with the Heathens: and to lay up principles out of the Word of God, to preserve
the admonitions, and directions, and rules of the Word.

And especially the sweet motions of Gods blessed Spirit. For conscience always
supposes a rule, the rule of nature, the rule of the Word, and the suggestions
of the blessed Spirit with the Word.

Therefore (to note by the way) an Ignorant man can never have a An Ignorant
man cannot have a good Conscience,
good conscience, especially a man that affects Ignorance; because he has no
rule: he labors to have none. It is not merely ignorance, but likewise
obstinacy with ignorance.

He will not know what he should, lest conscience force him to do what he
knows. What a sottish thing is this? It will be the heaviest sin that can be
laid to our charge at the day of judgment, not that we were Ignorant, but that
we refused to know, we refused to have our conscience rectified, and instructed.

And those that avoid knowledge, because they will not do what they know: they
shall know one day that their wilful Ignorance will be laid to their charge as
a heavy sin.

Labor to have right principles and grounds. What is the reason that commonly
men have such bad consciences? They have false principles, they Why men have
bad consciences.
conclude, may I not do what I list? may I not make of my own what I will? and
every man for himself, and God for us all: diabolical principles. And so
commonly if a man examine men that live in wickedness, they have false
principles, God sees not, God regards not: and it is time enough to repent. The
cause that men live wickedly is false principles: therefore they have so vile
consciences as they have, their hearts deceive them, and they deceive their
hearts. They have false principles put into them by others, they are deceived,
and they deceive their hearts, they force false principles upon themselves.
Many study for false grounds to live by for their advantage.

There are many that are Atheistical, that live even under the Gospel, and
what rule have they? the example of them by whom they hope to rife: they study
their manners, they square their lives by them, that is all the rule they have.

And again, the multitude: they do as the most do, and custom, and other false
rules. These rules will not comfort us, to say, I did it by such an example, I
did as others among whom I live did: or I did it because it was the custom of
the times: these things being alleged will comfort nothing. For who gave you
these rules? does God say any where in his Word, you shall be judged by the
example of others? you shall be judged by the custom of the times you live in?

No, you shall be judged by my Word: The Word that Moses spoke, and the Word
that I speak shall judge you at the last day. They that have not the Word,
shall be judged by the Word written in their hearts: Those that have sinned
without the Law, shall be judged by that, without the Law of Moses.

God has acquainted us with other rules. We must take heed of this therefore,
thatwe get good rules: take heed that they be not false rules: for the want of
these directions, men come to have ill consciences. Where there is no good
rule, there is a blind conscience. where there is no application of the rule,
there is a profane conscience. And where there is a false rule, there is an
erroneous, a scrupulous, a wicked conscience.

A Papist, because he has a false rule, he cannot have a good conscience. The
abomination of Popery is, that they sin against conscience, and Papists cannot
have a good conscience, why?
conscience indeed is even with them, for it overthrowes the most of their
principles: They sin against conscience many ways, (I mean not against their
own conscience, but) they sin against the conscience of others. For what do
they? That they may rule in the consciences of men (for that is the end of
their great Prelate the Tyrant of souls) they have false rules, that the Pope
cannot err: their rule is the authority, and judgment of him that cannot
err: and he (for the most part) is an unlearned man in Divinity that never
read over the Scriptures in all his life; and he must judge all controversies.
Where this is granted, that the Pope cannot err, he fits in the conscience to
do what he list. And he makes divine Laws, and cursed is he, says the Council
of Trent, that does not equalize those traditions with the Word of God.

From this false rule comes all, even rebellion it self: If he give
dispensation from the oath of Allegiance, because he cannot err; therefore
they ought to obey him, and rebel against their Governors. All rebellion is
from that rebellious rebellion that comes from false principles. These men talk
of conscience, and they come not to Church for conscience sake; what conscience
can they have, when they have false rules? To equivocate and lie, sins against
nature. And other rules that give liberty against the Word: that children may
disobey their Parents, and get into a Cloister, etc.

The most of Popery (though there were no Word of God) it is against nature,
against conscience, which God has planted in man as his deputy, his tenant.

And as they sin against conscience. so (as I said) conscience is even with
them. For let a man trust to his conscience, and he can never be a sound
Papist: except he leave that, and go upon base false grounds, because other
great men do it, and because his predecessors have done it, etc. I appeal to
their own consciences, if any man at the day of death think to be saved by his
merits, does not Bellarmine (after long dispute of salvation by merits)
disclaim it? does he not put away merits, for the uncertainty of his own
righteousness? So their own consciences do wring away the testimony of
trusting to merits.

Again, that Original sin is no great sin, it is but the cause of sin, and it
is less then any venial sin: Oh, but when conscience is awaked to know what a
corrupt estate it is, it will draw from them that which it drew from Saint
Paul, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Conscience when it is awaked will tell them that it is another manner of sin,
and that it is the fountain of all sin.

And so for Justification by works, conscience it self (if there were no Book
of God) would say it is a false point. And then they plead for Ignorance; they
have blind consciences: their Clergy being a subtle generation, that have
abused the world a long time: because they would sit in the conscience where
God should sit: they sit in the Temple of God, and would be respected above
that which is due to them; they would be accounted as petty gods in the world;
therefore they keep the people from the knowledge of the true rule, and make
what they speak equal with Gods word. Now if the people did discern this they
would not be Papists long; for no man would willingly be cozened. Let us labor
therefore for a true rule.

And when we have gotten rules, apply them: for what are rules without 2. To
apply them.
application? Rules are instrumental things; and instruments without use are
nothing. If a Carpenter have a rule, and hang it up by him, and work by
conceit, what is it good for? So to get a company of rules by the word of God,
(to refine natural knowledge as much as we can) and then to make no use of it
in our lives, it is to no purpose; therefore when we have rules, let us apply
them.

In this those that have the true rule, and apply it not, are better then they
that refuse to have the rule, because (as has been said) an Ignorant man that
has not the rule, he cannot be good. But a man that has the rule, and yet
squares not his life by it, yet he can bring the rule to his life; there is a
near converse between the heart and the brain, such a man, he has the rule in
his memory, he has it in his understanding: and therefore there is a thousand
times more hope of him that cares to know, that cares to hear the word of God,
and cares for the means, then of sottish persons that care not to hear,
because they would not do that they know, and because they would not have their
sleepy, dull, and drowsy conscience awaked: there is no hope of such a one. It
should be our care to have right rules, and in the application of them to make
much of conscience, that it may apply aright in directing, and then in comfort.
If we obey it in directing, it will witness, and excuse; and upon witness and
excuse, there will come a sweet Paradise to the soul, of joy and peace
unspeakable, and glorious.

The last thing I observe from these words is this, that The testimony and
witness of conscience is a ground of Doctrine The witness of a good
conscience a ground of joy.
comfort, and joy.


The reason of the joining these two, the witness of a good conscience, and
joy; it is that which I said before in the description of conscience: 1. From
the office of conscience.
for conscience first admonishes, and then witnesses, and then it excuses,
or accuses, and then it judges, and executes. Now the inward execution of
conscience is joy, if it be good: for God has so planted it in the heart and
soul, that where conscience does accuse, or excuse, there is always execution;
there is always joy, or fear; the affections of joy or fear always follow. If a
man's conscience excuse him, that he has done well, then conscience comes to be
enlarged, to be a Paradise to the soul, to be a Jubilee, a refreshing, to speak
peace and comfort to a man. For rewards are not kept altogether for the life to
come; hell is begun in an ill conscience, and heaven is begun in a good
conscience; an ill conscience is a hell upon earth, a good conscience is a
heaven upon earth; therefore the testimony of a good conscience breeds
glorying, and rejoicing.

Again, conscience when it witnesses, it comforts, because when it witnesses,
2. It witnesses with God.
it witnesses with God, and where God is, there is his Spirit, and where the
holy Spirit is, there is joy: for even as heat follows the fire, so joy and
glorying accompany the Spirit of God, The Spirit of glory. Now when conscience
witnesses aright, it witnesses with God; and God is always clothed with joy,
he brings joy and glory into the heart. Conscience witnesses with God that I
am his.

And it witnesses with my self that I have led my life thus, Our 3. Without
selves.
rejoicing is the witness of [our] conscience. It is not the witness of
another man's conscience, but my own: other men may witness, and say I am thus
and thus, but all is to no purpose, if my own conscience tell me I am another
man then they take me to be: But when a man's own conscience witnesses for him,
there follows rejoicing. A man cannot rejoice with the testimony of another
man's conscience, because another man says, I am a good man, etc. unless there
be the testimony of my own conscience.

Now it is a sweet benefit, an excusing conscience, when it witnesses well:
Let us see it in all the passages of life, that a good conscience in excusing
breeds glorying and joy.

It does breed joy in Life, in Death, A good conscience breeds joy.
at the day of judgment.

In life, in all the passages of life; in all estates, both good, and ill. 1.
In life.


In good, the testimony of conscience breeds joy, for it enjoyes the pleasures
of this life, and the comforts of it with the favor of God; conscience In good
estate.
tells the man that he has gotten the things well that he enjoyes, that he
has gotten the place, and advancement that he has well: that he enjoyes the
comforts of this life with a good conscience, and all things are pure to the
pure. If he have gotten them ill, conscience upbraids him always, and therefore
he cannot joy in the good estate he has. If a man had all the contentments in
the world, if he had not the testimony of a good conscience, what were all?
What contentment had Adam in Paradise, after once by sin he had fallen from the
peace of conscience? none at all. A little that the righteous has, is better
then great riches of the ungodly; because they have not peace of conscience.

And so for ill estate, when conscience witnesses well, it breeds rejoicing.
2. In cvil estate.
In false imputations, and slanders, and disgraces, as here, it was insinuated
into the Corinthians by false teachers, and those that followed them, that 1.
In false imputations.
St. Paul was so and so: says St. Paul, You may say what you will of me, My
rejoicing is this, the testimony of my conscience, that I am not the man which
they make me to be in your hearts by their false reports. The witness of
conscience is a good and sufficient ground of rejoicing in this case. Therefore
holy men have retired to their conscience in all times, as Saint Paul you see
does here.

So Job, his conscience bare him out in all the false imputations of his
comfortless friends that were miserable comforters, they labored to take away
his sincerity from him, the chief cause of his joy, Yeu shall not take away my
sincerity, says he: you would make me an hypocrite, and thus and thus, but my
conscience tells me I am otherwise, therefore you shall not take away my
innocence from me. And in Job 31. 35. Behold, it is my desire, that the
Almighty would answer me, and that my adversaries would write a Book against
me, I would take it upon my shoulder, I would take it as a crown unto me. Here
was the force of a good conscience in Jobs troubles, that if his adversaries
should write a book against him, yet he would bind it as a crown about him: And
so David, in all imputations this was his joy, when they laid things to his
charge that he had never done: he takes this for his joy, the comfort of his
conscience. So St. Paul, he retires to his conscience, and being raised up with
the worthiness of a good conscience, he despises all imputations whatsoever;
he sets Conscience up as a flag of defiance, to all false slanders and
imputations that were laid against him, as we see in the story of the Acts,
and in this place and others: says he in one place, I pass not for man's
sentence, I pass not for man's day; man has his day, man will have his
Judgment Seat, and will get upon the Bench, and judge me that I am such and
such, I care not for man's day, there is another Judgment Seat that I look
unto, and to the testimony of my Conscience, My rejoicing is the witness of my
Conscience.

Holy men have cause to retire to their own Consciences, when they would
rejoice against false imputations: so holy Saint Austin, what says he to a
Donatist that wronged him in his reputation? Think of Austin what you please,
as long as my Conscience accuses me not with God, I will give you leave to
think what you will.

If so be that a man's Conscience cleares him, he cares not a whit for reports:
because a good man looks more to Conscience then to fame; A good man looks more
to Conscience then to fame.
therefore if Conscience tell him truth, though fame lie he cares not much: for
he squares not his life by report, but by Conscience. Indeed he looks to a
good name, but that is in the last place.

For a good man looks first to God, who is above conscience; and then he
looks to Conscience which is under God: and then in the third place he looks
to report amongst men. And if God and his Conscience excuse him, though men
accuse him, and lay imputations upon him, this or that, he passes little for
man's judgment: so the witness of conscience, it comforts in all imputations
whatsoever.

Again, it comforts in sickness, Ezechias was sick, what does he retire unto?
Remember, Lord, how I have walked uprightly before thee; he goes to 2. In
sickness
his Conscience.

In sickness when a man can eat nothing a good Conscience is a continual
feast. In sorrow it is a Musician. A good Conscience does not only Counsel,
and advise, but it is a Musician to delight. It is a Physician to heal. It is
the best Cordial, the best Physic: all other are Physicians of no value,
Comforts of no value. If a man's Conscience be wounded, if it be not quieted by
faith in the blood of Christ: if he have not the Spirit to witness the
forgiveness of his sins, and to sanctify and enable him to lead a good life,
all is to no purpose, if there be an evil Conscience: the unsound body while
it is sick, it is in a kind of hell already.

Again, take a man in any cross whatsoever, a good conscience does bear 3. In
Crosses and losses.
out the Cross, it bears a man up always: because a good Conscience, being a
witness with God, it raises a man obove all earthly things whatsoever: there
is no Earthly discouragement that can dismay a good Conscience, because there
is a kind of Divinity in Conscience put in by God, and it witnesses together
with God; so that in all crosses it comforts.

So likewise in losses, in want, in want of friends, in want of comforts, in
want of liberty: what does the witness of a good Conscience in all these? In
want of friends, it is a friend indeed: it is an inward friend, a near friend
to us. Put the case that a man have never a friend in the world, yet he has
God and his own conscience: where there is a good conscience, there is God and
his holy Spirit always. In want of liberty, in want of outward comforts, he has
the comfort of a good conscience.

A man on his deathbed, he sees he wants all outward comforts, but he has a
good conscience. And so in want of liberty, when a man is restrained, his
heart is at liberty.

A wicked man that has a bad conscience, is imprisoned in his own Heart,
though he have never such liberty, though he be a Monarch, a bad Conscience
imprisons him at home, he is in fetters, his thoughts make him afraid of
Thunder, afraid of every thing, afraid of himself: and though there be no body
else to awe him, yet his conscience awes him. Where there is a conscience under
the guilt of sin unrepented, there is the greatest liberty in the world, there
is restraint; for Conscience is the worst prison. Where there is a good
conscience, there is an inward enlargement. A good man in the greatest
restraint has liberty. Paul and Silas, Act. 16. in the dungeon, in the hell of
the dungeon, in the worst place of the dungeon, in the stocks, and at the worst
time of the day (of the natural day I mean) at midnight, and in the worst
usage, when they were misused, and whipped with all, they had all the
discouragements that could be; and yet they sang at midnight these blessed men
Paul, and Silas, because their hearts were enlarged, there was a Paradise in
the very Dungeon.

As where the King is, there is his Court, so it is where God is. God in the
prison, in the noysom dungeon by his Spirit so enlarged their hearts that they
sang at midnight. Where as if conscience be ill, if it were in Paradise,
Conscience would fear, as we see in Adam. Saint Paul in prison was better then
Adam in Paradise, when he had offended God. Adam had outward comforts enough;
but when he had sinned, his conscience made him afraid, of him from whom he
should have all comfort, it made him afraid of God and hide himself among the
leaves; alas, a poor shift. We see then, conscience does witness, and the
witness of it when it is good, does cause the soul to glory and rejoice, not
only in positive ills, in slanders, and crosses, but in losses, in want of
friends, in want of comforts, in want of liberty.

And so for the time to come, in evils threatened a good conscience is bold, It
fears no ill tidings, Psalm 112. My heart is fixed, my heart is fixed says
David; wicked men are like the trees of the forest, Isay 7. Wicked Ahaz, his
heart did tremble, and shake, as the leaves with the wind. The noise of fear is
always in their ears; an ill Conscience when it is mingled with ill news, when
there are two fears together, it must needs be a great fear.

And a good conscience when it has laid up grounds of joy in life in the worst
estate, and condition of life, then it makes use of joy in death: for when all
comforts are taken from a man, when his friends cannot comfort him, and all
earthly things leave him, then that conscience that has gone along with him,
that has been a Monitor, and a witness all his lifetime, now it comes to
speak good things to him, now it comforts him, now conscience is some body; at
the hour of death, when nothing else will be regarded, when nothing will
comfort, then conscience does, The righteous has hope in his death, as the
Wise man says. Death is called the King of fears; because it makes all
afraid. It is the terrible of terribles, says he Philosopher; but here is a
King above the King of fears; a good conscience is above the King of fears,
death. A good conscience is fo far from being discouraged by this King of
fears, that it is joyful even in death: because it knows that then it is
near to the place where conscience shall be fully enlarged, where there shall
be no annoyance, nor no grievance whatsoever.

Death is the end of misery; and the beginning of happiness, therefore a good
conscience is joyful in death.

And after death, at the day of judgment, there the witness of conscience is a
wondrous cause of joy: for there a man that has a good conscience, 3. At the
day of judgment.
he looks upon the Judge his Brother: he looks on him with whom he has made
his peace in his lifetime before, and now he receives that which he had the
beginnings of before, then he lifts up his head with joy and comfort. So you
see how the witness of conscience causes glory, and joy in all estates
whatsoever, in life, in death, after death: it speaks for a man there, it never
leaves him till it have brought him to heaven it self, where all things else
leave a man.

Therefore how much should we prize, and value the testimony and witness of a
good conscience? And what madness is it for a man to humor men, and displease
conscience his best friend? Of all persons and all things in the world, we
should reverence our own conscience most of all. Wretched men despise the
inward witness of this inward friend, this inward divine, this inward
Physician, this inward Comforter, this inward Counselor. It is no better then
madness that men should regard that every thing else be good, and clean, and
yet notwithstanding in the midst of all to have foul consciences.

But to answer an objection, and to unloose some knots. It may be Objection.
said, that when the Hearts of people are good, yet there a good conscience
concludes not always for comfort. Where there is faith in Christ, and an honest
life, conscience should conclude comfort; here is the Rule, this I have obeyed,
therefore I should have comfort.

Now this we see crossed oft-times, that Christians that live exact lives are
often troubled in conscience: how can trouble of conscience stand with joy upon
the witness of conscience?

I answer, the witness of Conscience, when it is a good conscience, it does
not always breed joy. Answer. Why a good conscience does not always witness
Comfort.


It is because our estate is imperfect here, and Conscience does not always
witness out of the goodness of it, sometimee conscience is misled, and so
sometimes good Christians take the error of conscience for the witness of
Conscience.

These things should be distinguished. Conscience sometime in the best erres,
as well as gives a true witness.

If we take the error of conscience for the witness of conscience, there will
come trouble of conscience, and that deservedly, through our own folly.

Now conscience does err in good men, sometimes when they regard Rules which
they should not, or when they mistake the matter and do not argue aright. As
for instance, when they gather thus, I have not grace in such a measure, and
therefore I have none, I am not the Child of God.

What a rule is this? This is the error of conscience: and therefore it must
needs breed perplexity of conscience. A good conscience when it is right
cannot witness thus, because the Word does not say thus. Is a nullitie, and an
imperfection all one? No, there is much difference in the whole kind. A
nullitie is nothing; an imperfection, though it be but a little degree, yet it
is something. This is the error of conscience, and from thence comes trouble
of conscience which makes men reason ill many ways. As for instance, I have
not so much grace as such a one has, and therefore I have no grace. Now that
is a false reasoning: for every one has his due measure. If thou be not so
great a rich man as the richest in the Town, yet thou may be rich in thy
kind.

Again, when conscience looks to the humor: you are to live by faith, and not
by the humor of Melancholy. When the Instrument of reason that should judge is
distempered by melancholy, it reasons from thence falsely. Because melancholy
persuades me that I am so, therefore conscience being led by the humor of the
body, says I am so. Who bid thee live by humor? thou must live by rule.
Melancholy may tell thee sometime when it is in strength, that thou art made of
glass, as it has done some: it will deceive thee in bodily things, wherein
sense can confute melancholy, much more will it if we yield to it in matters of
the soul, it will persuade us that we are not the Children of God, that we
have not Grace and goodness when we have.

Again, hence it is that conscience does not conclude comfort in Gods Children,
because it looks to the ill, and not to the good that is in them: for there are
those two things in Gods Children, there is good, and ill, now in the time of
temptation they look to the ill, and think they have no good, because they will
not see any thing but ill. They fix their eyes on the remainders of their
rebellious lusts (which are not fully subdued in them,) and they look wholly on
them. Whereas they should have two eyes, one to look on that which is good,
that God may have glory, and they comfort.

Now they fixing their eyes altogether on that which is naught, and because
they do not, or will not see that which is good, therefore they have no
comfort, because they suffer conscience to be ill led, that it does not its
duty.

And conscience in good men, it looks sometimes to that that it should not in
others, in regard of others. It looks to the flourishing of wicked men, and
therefore it concludes, Certainly I have washed my hands in vain, since such
men thrive and prosper in the world, Psalm 37. and Psalm 73. Who bade thee
look to this, and to be uncomfortable from thence, that thy estate is not good,
because it is not such an estate? So foolish, and as a beast was I before thee,
says David, because I regarded such things. No marvel if men be uncomfortable
that are led away by scandals. Look to faith, go to the Word, to the
Sanctuary; I went to the Sanctuary, says he, and there I saw the end of these
men. So conscience must be suffered to have its work, to be led by a true rule.

Again, conscience sometimes concludes not comfort, when there is ground of
comfort, from the remainders of corruptions, and infirmities; whereas we should
be driven by our infirmities to Christ. And conscisence sometimes in good men
does not exercise its work in good men, it is drawn away with vain delights,
even in the best men.

And conscience of its own unworthiness and of the greatness of the things
it looks for being joined together, it makes a man that he joys not when he
has cause. As for instance, when the soul sees that God in Christ has
pardoned all my sins, and has vouchsafed his Spirit to me, and will give me
heaven in the world to come, to such a wretch as I am: here being a conflict
between the conscience and sense of its own unworthiness, and the greatness
of (...) good promised, the heart begins to stagger, and to doubt for want of
sound faith.

Indeed, if we look on our own unworthiness, and the greatness of the good
things promised we may wonder: but alas, God is infinite in goodness, he
transcends our unworthiness: and in the Gospel the glory of Gods mercy it
triumphs over our unworthiness, and over our sins: whatsoever our sin and
unworthiness is, his goodness in the Gospel triumphs over all.

In Innocence God should have advanced an innocent man; but the Gospel is more
glorious; for he comes to sinners, to condemned persons by nature, and yet God
triumphs over their sins, and unworthiness; he regards not what we deserve,
but what may stand with the glory of his mercy; therefore we should banish
those thoughts, and enjoy our own privilege, the promises of heaven and
happiness and all comforts whatsoever; so much for the answer of that
objection.

Now if we would joy in the witness of a good conscience, we must Directions
to joy in the witness of conscience.
especially in the time of temptation live by faith, and not by feeling, not by
what we feel for the present; but as we see Christ in his greatest horror, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he goes to my God still. We must live
by faith and not by sense.

And then if we would rejoice in extremities, remember that God works by
contraries. God will bring us to heaven, but it must be by hell. God will bring
us to comfort, but it must be by sense of our own unworthiness. He will
forgive our sins, but it must be by sight and sense of our sins: he will bring
us to life, but it must be by death; he will bring us to glory, but it must be
by shame, God works by contraries; therefore in contraries believe contraries.
When we are in a state that has no comfort, yet we may joy in it if we believe
in Christ, he works by contraries.

As in the Creation he made all out of nothing, order out of confusion: So in
the work of the new creation, in the new creature, he does so likewise,
therefore be not dismayed.

Remember this rule likewise, that in the covenant of Grace God requires truth,
and not measure, (thou art not under the law, but under the covenant of Grace.)
A little fire is true fire as well as the whole element of fire. A drop of
water is water as well as the whole Ocean; so if it be true faith, true grief
for sins, true hatred of them, true desire of the favor of God, and to grow
better: truth is respected in the covenant of Grace, and not any set measure.

What says the Covenant of Grace? He that believes, and repents shall be
saved, not he that has a strong faith, or he that has perfect repentance. So
Saint Paul says (as we shall see after) This is our rejoicing, that in
simplicity, and sincerity we have had our conversation among you; he does not
say, that our conversation has been perfect. So if we would have joy in the
testimony of conscience, we must not abridge our selves of joy, because we have
not a perfect measure of Grace: but rejoice that God has wrought any measure
of Grace in such unclean and polluted hearts as ours are: for he least measure
of Grace is a pledge of perfection in the world to come. This is our rejoicing,
the testimony of our conscience, etc.


Hence we may gather clearly, that

A man may know his own estate in Grace. Obser. A man may know his estate in
Grace.


I gather it from the place thus, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, etc.

Where there is joy, and the ground of joy, there is a knowledge of the estate;
but a Christian has glorying, and a ground of glorying in himself, and he
knows it, he has that in him that witnesses that estate, he has the
witness of conscience, therefore he may know and be assured of it. If this
testimony were not a true testimony it were something: but all men naturally
have a conscience: and a Christian has a sanctified conscience, and where that
is there is a true testimony, and true joy from that testimony; therefore he
may be assured of his salvation, and have true joy and comfort, a Heaven upon
Earth before he come to Heaven it self.

If conscience testify of it self, and from witnessing give cause of joy, much
more the Spirit of God coming into the conscience, The Spirit bears witness
with our spirits. If our spirit, and conscience bear witness to us of our
conversation in simplicity, and sincerity, and from thence of our estate in
grace, much more by the witness of two: By the witness of two, or three every
thing shall be confirmed; but our spirits, and conscience, and the Spirit of
God (which every Child of God has) witnesses that we are the Children of God,
Romans 8. The Spirit witnesses with our spirits that we are the sons of God.
Therefore a Christian may know his estate in Grace.

The spirit of a man knows himself, and the Spirit of God knows him likewise,
and it knows what is in the heart of God: and when these two meet, the Spirit
of God that knows the secrets of God, and that knows our secrets, and our
spirit that knows our heart likewise, what should hinder but that we may know
our own estate? It is the nature of conscience (as I told you) to reflect upon
it self and upon the person in whom it is, to know what is known by it, and to
judge, and condemn, and execute it self, by inward fear, and terror, in ill,
and in good, by comfort and joy in a man's self. It is the property that the
soul has above all creatures to return and recoyle upon it self. If this be
natural to man much more to the spirit of a man: For if a man know what is in
himself naturally, his own wit, and understanding, which is always with him,
bred up with him, much more he knows by his spirit the things that are
adventitious, that come from without him, that is the work of Grace.

If a man by a reflect knowledge, know what naturally is in him, in what part
he has it, and how he exercises it; if he know and remember what he has
done, and the manner of it, whether well or ill, then he may know the work of
the Spirit that comes from without him, that works a change in him.

We say of light, that it discovers it self and all other things: so the soul
it is lightsome, and therefore knows it self and knows other things.

The Spirit of God is much more lightsome: where it is it discovers it self,
and lighteneth the soul, it discovers the party in whom it is. As the
Apostle says, 1, Cor. 2. 12. We have the Spirit, whereby we know the things
that we receive of God. It not only works in us, but it teaches us what it
has wrought. Therefore a Christian knows that he is in the state of grace, he
knows his virtues, and his disposition; except it be in the time of
temptation, and upon those grounds named before.

Therefore we should labor to know our estate, to examine our selves whether
we be in the faith or no, except we be reprobates, and cast awayes, as the
Apostle speaks. A Christan should aim at this, to understand his own estate
in grace upon good grounds.

But it may be objected: how can we know our estate in Grace, Object.
our virtues are so imperfect, our abilities are so weak and feeble?

I answer, the ground of judging aright of our estate, it is not worthiness or
perfection, but sincerity. We must not look for perfection: For that Answer.
makes the Papists to teach that there may be doubting, because they look to
false grounds: but we must look to the ground in the covenant of grace, to
grace it self, and not to the measure. Where there is truth and sincerity,
there is the condition of the covenant of grace, and there is a ground for a
man to build his estate in grace on.

The perfect righteousness of Christ is that, that gives us title to heaven:
but to know that we have right in that title, is the simplicity, and sincerity
in our walking, in our conversation, as the Apostle says here, This is our
reoycing, etc. Therefore Christians, when they are set upon by temptations of
their own misdoubting hearts, and by Satan they must not go to the great
measure of grace that is in others, that they have not so much as others, and
therefore they have none; nor to the great measure of grace that they want
themselves, but to the truth of their grace, the truth of their desires and
endeavors, the truth of their affections. Hereby we know that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren.

This should stir us up to have a good conscience, that we may rejoice. Why
should we labor that we may rejoice? Why? what is our life Use. To labor for
a good conscience that we may have joy.
without joy? and what is joy without a good conscience?

What is our life with out joy? without joy we can do nothing, we are like an
instrument out of tune; an instrument out of tune it yiels but harsh music.
Without joy we are as a member out of joint: we can do nothing well without
joy, and a good conscience, which is the ground of joy. A man without joy is a
palsie-member that moves it self unfitly, and uncomely, he goes not about
things as he should,. A good conscience breeds joy and comfort, it inables a
man to do all things comely in the sight of God, and comfortably to himself, it
makes him go cheerfully through his business. A good Conscience is a
continual feast: without joy we cannot suffer afflictions; we cannot die well
without it. Simeon died comfortably, because he died in peace, when he had
embraced Christ in his heart, and in his arms. Without joy and the ground of
joy we can neither do nor suffer any thing. Therefore in Psalm. 51. David when
he had lost the peace and comfort of a good conscience, he prays for the free
Spirit of God. Alas, till God had enlarged his heart with the sense of a good
conscience in the pardon of his sins, and given him the power of his Spirit to
lead a better life for the time to come, his spirit was not free before: he
could not praise God with a large spirit; he wanted freedom of spirit, his
conscience was bound, his lips were sealed up, Open my lips, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise. His heart was bound, and therefore he prays to have it
enlarged. Restore to me thy joy and salvation, intimating that we cannot have a
free spirit without joy, and we cannot have joy without a good conscience
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, in the pardon of our sins.

If it be so, that we cannot do any thing, nor suffer any thing as we should,
that we cannot praise God, that we cannot live nor die without joy, and the
ground of it the testimony of a good conscience: let us labor then that
conscience may witness well unto us.

Especially considering that an ill conscience, it is the worst thing in the
world; there is no friend so good as a good conscience, there is no foe so
Nothing worse then an ill conscience.
ill as a bad conscience; it makes us either Kings or slaves. A man that has a
good conscience that witnesses well for him, it raises his heart in a
Princely manner above all things in the world: a man that has a bad
conscience, though he be a Monarch it makes him a slave: a bad conscience
imbitters all things in the world to him, though they be never so comfortable
in themselves. What is so comfortable as the presence of God? What is so
comfortable as the light? yet a bad conscience that will not be ruled, it hates
the light, and hates the presence of God, as we see Adam, when he had sinned he
fled from God.

A bad conscience cannot joy in the midst of joy, it is like a goutie foot,
or a goutie toe covered with a velvet shoe: alas, what does it ease it? what
does glorious apparel ease the diseased body? nothing at all, the ill is
within, there the arrow sticks.

And so in the comforts of the Word, if the conscience be bad, we that are the
messengers of comfort we may apply comfort to you: but if there be one within
that says thus, it is true: but I regarded not the Word before, I regarded not
the checks of conscience, conscience will speak more terror then we can speak
peace. And after long and wilful rebellion conscience will admit of no comfort
for the most part. Regard it therefore in time: labor in time that it may
witness well. An ill conscience when it should be most comforted then it is
most terrible; at the hour of death we should have most comfort, (if we had any
wisdom) when earthly comforts shall be taken from us, and at the day of
judgment: then an ill conscience, look where it will it has matter of terror.
If it look up, there is the Judge armed with vengeance; if it look beneath,
there is hell ready to swallow it; if it look on the one side, there is the
devil accusing, and helping conscience; if it look round about, there is
heaven, and earth, and all on a fire, and within there is a hell: where shall
the sinner, and ungodly appear? If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the sinner and ungodly appear, at that time?

O let us labor to have a good conscience, and to exercise the reflect power
of conscience in this world, that is, let us examine our selves, admonish our
selves, judge our selves, condemn our selves, do all in our selves. Let us keep
court at home first, let us keep the assizes there, and then we shall have
comfort at the great assizes.

Therefore God out of his love has put conscience into the soul, that we
might keep a court at home. Let conscience therefore do its worst now, let it
accuse, let it judge: and when it has judged, let it smite us, and do
execution upon us, that having judged our selves we may not be condemned with
the world.

If we suffer not conscience to have its full work now, it will have it one
day: a sleepy conscience will not always sleep; if we do not suffer conscience
to awake here, it will awaken in hell where there is no remedy.

Therefore give conscience leave to speak what it will; perhaps it will tell
thee a tale in thine ear, which thou would be loath to hear: it will pursue
thee with terrors like a blood-hound, and will not suffer thee to rest:
therefore as a bankrupt thou art loath to look in thy books, because there is
nothing but matter of terror. This is but a folly, for at the last conscience
will do its duty; it will awaken either here, or in hell. Therefore we are to
hope the best of them that have their consciences opened here, there is hope
that they will make their peace with God: that they will agree with their
adversary while they are in the way. If thou suffer conscience to be sleepy and
drowsy till it be awaked in hell, woe unto thee: for then thy estate is
determined of, it will be a barren repentance. Now thy repentance may be
fruitful, it may force theeto make thy peace with God: do thou think it will
always be thus with thee? Thou besottest thy conscience with sensuality, and
say, Go thy way, and come another time, as he said to St. Paul: I will tell
thee, this peace will prove a tempest in the end.

Conscience of all things in the world deserves the greatest reverence; more
then any Monarch in the world: for it is above all men, it is next unto God:
and yet what do many men? regard the honor (...) their friends more then
conscience, that inward friend that shall accompany them to heaven, that will
go with them to death, and to judgment, and make them lift up their heads with
joy when other friends cannot help them, but must needs leave them in death.
Now for a man to follow the humors of men, to follow the multitude, and to
stain conscience, what a foolish wretch is he? though such men think themselves
never so wise, it is the greatest folly in the world to stain conscience to
please any man, because conscience is above all men.

Again, those that follow their own humors, their own dispositions, and are
carried away with their own lusts, it is a folly and madness: for the time
will come, that that which their covetous base lust has carried them to, that
shall be taken away, as honors, riches, pleasures, which is the fuel of that
lust, which makes them now neglect conscience, all shall be taken away in
sickness, or in the time of despair when conscience shall be awaked. Now what
folly is it to please thy own lust which thou should mortify, and subdue,
and to displease conscience thy best friend? and then when thy lust is fully
satisfied, all that has been fuel to it, that has fed it, shall be taken away
at the hour of death, or some special judgment, and conscience shall be
awaked, and shall torment thee, for giving liberty to thy base lusts, and to
thy self. And those eyes of thy soul that thy offense delighted to shut up,
there shall some punishment come either in this life, or in that to come that
shall open those eyes. As Adams eyes were opened after his sin; why? were they
not open before? he had such a strong desire to the apple, he did not regard
them; but his punishment afterward opened those eyes, which his inordinate
desire shut. So it shall be with every sinner: therefore regard no man in the
world more then thy conscience. Regard nothing, no pleasure, no profit, more
then conscience, reverence it more then any thing in the world. Happy is that
man that carries with him a good conscience that can witness that he has
said, nor done nothing that may vex, or grieve conscience: if it be otherwise,
whatsoever a man gains, he loses in conscience, and there is no comparison
between those two. One crack, one flaw in conscience will prove more
disadvantagious, then the rest will be profitable. Thou must cast up the rest
again, they are sweet bits downward, but they shall be gravel in the belly.

We think, when we have gained any thing, when we have done any thing, we shall
hear no more of it, as David said to Joab, when he set him to make away Uriah,
Let not this trouble thee: So let not this ill gain, let not this ill speech,
or this ill carriage trouble thee, thou shall hear no more of this. We take
order to stop and silence conscience, thinking never to hear more of it: oh,
but remember, conscience will have its work, and the longer we defer the
witness and work of conscience, the more it will terrify and accuse us
afterward.

Therefore of all men (be they never so great) they are most miserable that
follow their wills and their lusts most, that never have any outward check, or
inward check of conscience, but drown it with sensual pleasures. As Charles the
9th. who at night (when conscience has the fittest time to work, a man being
retired, then he) would have his singing boys, after he had betreyed them in
that horrible Massacre, after which he never had peace and quiet. And as Saul
sent for David's Harp when the evil spirit was upon him. So wicked men they
look for foreign helps, but it will not be: for the greatest men with their
foreign helps are most miserable.

The reason is, because the more they sink in rebellion, and sin against
conscience, the more they sink in terrors: it shall be the greatest torment to
those that have had their wills most in the world, the more their conscience is
silenced and violenced in this world, the more vocal it shall be at the hour of
death, and the day of judgment. Therefore judge who are the most miserable men
in the world, (although they have never so much regard in the world besides)
those that have consciences, but will not suffer them to work; but with
sensuality within them, and by pleasing flattering speech of those without
them, they keep it down, and take order that neither conscience within, nor
none other without shall disturb them; if they do, they shall be served as
Ahab dealt with Micaia. These men that are thus at peace in sinful courses, of
all men they are most miserable: they enjoy their pleasure here for a little
time, but their conscience shall torment them for ever, and shall say to them
as Reuben said to his Brethren. I told you this before, but you would not
hearken to me, and now you shall be tormented.

Conscience is an evil beast, it makes a man rise against himself: therefore of
all men, those that be disordered in their courses, that neglect conscience,
and neglect the means of salvation, that should awaken conscience, they are the
most miserable: for the longer they go on, the more they sink in sin, and the
more they sink in sin, the more they sink in terror of conscience, if not now,
yet they shall hereafter.

If we desire therefore to have joy and comfort at all times, let us labor to
have a good conscience that may witness well: And therefore let us every day
keep an audite within doors; every day cast up our accounts, every day draw the
blood of Christ over our accounts, every day beg forgiveness of sins, and the
Spirit of Christ to lead us, that so we may keep account every day, that we may
make our reckonings even every day, that we may have the less to do in the
time of sickness, in the time of temptation, and in the time of death, when we
have discharged our Consciences before by keeping session at home in our own
hearts.

This should be the daily practice of a Christian, and then he may lay himself
down in peace.

He that sleeps with a conscience defiled, is as he that sleeps among wild
beasts, among adders, and toades, that if his eyes were open to see them, he
would be out of his wits. He that sleeps without a good conscience he is an
unadvised man, God may make his bed his grave, he may smite him suddenly;
therefore let us every day labor to have a good conscience, that so we may
have matter of perpetual joy.

A good conscience (especially) is an Evangelicall conscience: for a legal
good conscience none have, that is, such a conscience as acquits a man that he
has obeyed the law in all things exactly. A legal complete good conscience
none have, except in some particular fact: there is a good Conscience in fact.
As the Heathen could excuse themselves, they were Evangelical conscience*
thus, and thus: and God ministers much joy in that. But an Evangelical good
Conscience is that we must trust to, that is, such a Conscience, that though it
knows it self guilty of sin, yet it knows that Christ has shed his blood for
sinners: and such a Conscience as by means of faith is sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, and is cleared from the accusations of sin.

There is an Evangelicall Conscience, when by faith wrought by the Spirit of
God, in the hearing of the Gospel, we lay hold upon the obedience and
righteousness of Christ. And such is the obedience and righteousness of
Christ, that it pacifieth the conscience which nothing else in the world will
do; the conscience without a full obedience it will always stagger.

And that is the reason that Conscience confounds and confutes the Popish way
of salvation by works, etc. Because the conscience always staggers, and fears,
I have not done works enough, I have not done them well enough: those that I
have done they have been corrupt, and mixed, and therefore I dare not bring
them to the Judgment Seat of God, to plead them meritorious. Therefore they do
well to hold uncertainty of salvation; because holding merit they must needs be
uncertaiu of their salvation. A true Christian is certain of his salvation,
because his conscience lays hold on the blood of Christ; because the obedience
whereby he claims heaven is a superabundant obedience, it is the satisfaction
of Christ; as the Apostle says in that excellent place, Heb. 9. 24. The blood
of Christ which offered himself by the eternal Spirit, that is, by the
Godhead, shall cleanse your consciences from dead works to serve the living
God. The blood of Christ that offered himself, his humane nature by his divine,
to God as a sacrifice, it shall purge your consciences from dead works. The
blood of Christ, that is, the Sacrifice, the obedience of Christ, in offering
himself, fully pacified God, and answered the punishment which we should have
endured: for he was our surety. The blood of Christ speaks better then the
blood of Abel. It speaks better then our sins. Our sins cry vengeance, but the
blood of Christ cries mercy.

The blood of Christ outcries our sins: the guilty conscience for sin cries,
Guilty, guilty, hell, Damnation, wrath and anguish: but the blood of Christ
cries, (I say mercy) because it was shed by our surety in our behalf, his
obedience is a full satisfaction to God.

Now the way to have a good conscience is upon the accusations of an evil
conscience by the law to come to Christ our surety, and to get our The way to
have a good Conscience.
consciences sprinked by faith in his blood, to get a persuasion that he shed
his blood for us, and upon that to labor to be purged by the Spirit. There are
two purgers, the blood of Christ from the guilt of sin, and the Spirit of
Christ from the stain of sin: and upon that comes a complete good conscience;
being justified by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ.
Therefore Christ came not by blood alone, or by water alone, but by water and
blood; by blood, in justification; by water, in sanctification, and holiness
of life.

Why do we allege this now for the Sacrament? Question.


We speak of a good conscience, which is a continual feast. How comes a good
conscience to be such a continual feast? Answer.


An Evangelicall conscience is a feast indeed, because it feeds on a higher
feast, it feeds on Christ: he is the Passover Lamb, as the Apostle applies
it, 1. Cor. 5. he is the Passover slain for us: and there is represented in
the Sacrament, his body broken, and his blood poured out for our sins; he came
to feast us, and we shall feast with him.

Hereupon if we bring repentance for our sins past, and faith whereby we are
incorporate into Christ, then our consciences speak peace: and as it is in 1
Pet. 5. the conscience makes a good demand, It is not baptism, but the demand
of a good conscience. When the conscience has fed on Christ, it demands boldly
(as it is, Romans 8.) of Satan, and all enemies, Who shall lay any thing to our
charge? it is God that justifies, it is Christ that died, or rather that is
risen again. It boldly demands of God who has given his Son: the bold demand
of conscience prevails with God, and this comes by faith in Christ. Now this is
strengthened by the Sacrament: here are the visible representations and seals,
that we are incorporate more and more into Christ: and so feeding upon Christ
once, our conscience is pacified and purged from all dead works, and we come to
have a continual feast.

Christ is first the Prince of righteousness, the righteous King, and then
Prince of peace: first he gives righteonsnesse, and then he speaks peace to the
conscience. The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost.

So that all our feast and joy and comfort that we have in our consciences, it
must be from righteousness. A double righteousness; the righteousness of
Christ which has satisfied, and appeased the wrath of God fully: and then we
must have the righteousness of a good conscience sanctified by the Spirit of
Christ; we must put them together always; we can never have communion with
Christ, and have forgiveness of sins, but we must have a Spirit of
sanctification. There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared. Where
there is mercy in the forgiveness of sin, there is a disposition to fear it
ever after. Therefore if for the present you would have a good conscience,
desire God to strengthen your faith in the blood of Christ poured out for you:
desire God to strengthen your faith in the crucified body of Christ broken for
you: that so feeding on Christ who is your surety, who himself is yours, and
all is yours, you may ever have the feast of a good conscience, that will
comfort you in false imputations, that will comfort you in life, and in death,,
and at the day of judgment. This is our rejoicing in all things, the testimony
of our conscience: first purged by the blood of Christ, and then purged, and
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, that we have had our Conversation in
simplicity and sincerity, etc. Our rejoicing is this, that in simplicity, and
sincerity.


This is the matter of this testimony of Conscience, that is simplicity, and
sincerity. Saint Paul glories in his simplieity, and sincerity. And (mark that
by the way) it is no vain glorying, but lawful upon such cautions as I named
before: but to add a little. A man in some cases Cautions for glorying in grace.
may glory in the Graces of God that are in him; but with these cautions.

First, if so be that he look on them as the gifts of God.

Secondly, if he look on them as stained with his own defects, and so in that
respect be humbled.

Thirdly if he look upon them, as fruits of his justification, and as fruits
of his assurance of his salvation, and not as causes.

And then if it be before men that he glories: not when he is to deal with
God. When men lay this, and that imputation upon a man he may rejoice (as Saint
Paul does here) in the testimony of his conscience, in simplicity and sincerity.

The matter of the testimony of Conscience, wherein he glories is simplicity,
and godly sincerity, or as the words may well be read, in the simplicity, and
sincerity of God; such as proceeds from God, and such as aims at, and looks to
God, and resembles God. For both simplicity, and sincerity come from God, they
are wrought by God: and therein we resemble God, and both of them have an eye
to God, a respect to God: so it is in the original, in the simplicity and
sincerity of God.

There is not much difference between simplicity and sincerity, the one
expresses the other: if you will have the difference, simplicity especially
respects men, our conversation amongst men. Simplicity has an eye to
Difference of simplicity and sincerity.
God in all things in Religion opposite to hypocrisy in Religion. Simplicity
that is opposed to doubleness; where doubleness is there is always hypocrisy,
opposed to sincerity, and where simplicity is there is always sincerity, truth
to God. But it is not good to be very exact and punctual in the distinction of
these things, they may one express the other very well. Simplicity.


Saint Paul's rejoicing was that his conscience witnessed to him his simplicity
in his whole conversation in the world, his whole course of life, which the
Scripture calls in other places a walking. Saint Paul means this first of
himself, and then he propoundes himself an example to us.

How was St. Paul's conversation in simplicity.

Not only if we consider Saint Paul as a Christian, but consider Question.
him as an Apostle, his conversarion was in simplicity. It was without guile,
without seeking himself, without seeking his own: for Answer. Saint Paul's
conversation in simplicity.
rather then he would be grievous to the Corinthians, the man of God, he
wrought himself; because he would not give any the least scandal to them being
a rich people, he had rather live by his own labor then to open his mouth, he
did not seek himself. In a word, he did not serve himself of the Gospel: he
served Christ, he did not serve himself of Christ.

There are many that serve themselves of the Gospel, that serve themselves of
religion: they care no more for religion then will serve their own turn.
Saint Paul's conversation was in simplicity, he had no such aim, he did not
preach of envy, orof malice, or for gain, as he taxes some of the Philippian
teachers, Some preach Christ, not of simplicity, and sincerity, but of envy,
etc.

Then again, as an Apostle, and a teacher, his conversation was in simplicity:
because he mingled nothing with the Word of God in teaching, his doctrine is
pure. What should the chafe do with the wheat? Jer. 20. What should the dross
do with the Gold? he did not mingle his own conceits and devices with the Word:
for he taught the pure Word of God, the simple Word of God, simple without any
mixture of any by-aimes. So the blessed Apostle was simple both in his Doctrine
and in his intentions. Propounding himself herein exemplary to all us, that as
we look to hold up our heads with comfort, and to glory in all estat es
whatsoever; so our consciences must bear us witness that we carry our selves
in the simplicity, and sincerity of God.

Now simplicity is, when there is a conformity of pretention, and intention,
Simplicity what.
when there is nothing double, when there is not a contradiction in the spirit
of a man, and in his words and carriage outwardly. That is simplicty, when
there is an exact conformity, and correspondence in a man's judgment and
speech, in his affections and actions. When a man judges simply as the truth
of the thing is; and when he affects as he judges, when he loves and hates as
he judges, and he speaks as he affects and judges, and he does as he speaks,
then a man is a simple man.

Simple that is properly, that has no mixture of the contrary: as we say,
Simple without mixture.
light is a simple thing, it cannot endure darkness: fire is a simple body: it
cannot endure the contrary with it: so the pure Majesty of God cannot endure
the least stain whatsoever. So it is with the holy disposition of a Christian,
when he is once a new creature there is a simplicity in him: though there be a
mixture, yet he studies simplicity, he studies to have nothing opposite to the
Spirit of God: he studies not to have any contradiction in him, he labors that
his heart may not go one way, and his carriage another, that his pretentions be
not one, and his intentions another. He bears the Image of Christ: you know
Christ is compared to a Lamb, a simple creature, fruitful to men, innocent in
himself. So the holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove, a simple creature,
that has no way to avoid danger but by flight, a harmless creature.

The Devil takes on him the shape of a Serpent, a subtle wild Creature. The
Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove. You see then what simplicity is: it
is a frame of soul without mixture of the contrary.

We must not take simplicity for a defect, when a man is simple because he
knows not how to be witty; simplicity is sometimes Simplicity.
taken in that sense, for a defect of nature, when a man is easily 1. Not
defect.
deluded: but here it is taken for a grace. A man that knows how to double
with the world, how to run counterfeit, how to be false in all kinds, but he
will not: he knows the world, but he will not use the fashions of the World;
so simplicity here is a strength of grace.

Likewise, simplicity, and plainness, it must not be taken for rudeness, and
unnecessary opening of our selves: for that is simplicity in an evil sense,
profane rudeness.

You shall have some that will lay about them, they care not what they speak,
they care not whom they smite; but as Solomon's fool, they 2. Not rudeness.
throw firebrarnds; they speak what they list, of whom they list, against whom
they list. Here simplicity and plainness is no grace, this is no virtue: this
is but an easing of their rotten, corrupt, and vile heart,

We know there are two kind of Sepulchers, open, and shut sepulchers: they are
both naught; but yet notwithstanding, your hidden sepulcher is less offensive;
that which is open stinks that none can come nigh, that is very offensive. An
hypocrite that is a hidden sepulcher, a painted sepulcher without, and nothing
but bones within, he has a naughty, rotten heart: yet notwithstanding he is
not so offensive as the open sepulcher, which offends all that come near it. So
these men that say they cannot dissemble; and they have a plain heart, though
they will swear, and dissemble, and detract, and throw firebrarnds against any
man, Is this a plain heart? it is an open sepulcher, that sends a stench to all
that are near.

Again, let us take heed, that we do not for simplicity take credulity: 3.
Not credulity.
The simple man (says Solomon) will believe every thing. This is simple
credulity. A man must not believe every thing, for there is much danger comes
by credulity. Jeremiah, and Gedaliah, and others, they were much harmed by
credulity. It is a good fence not to be too hasty to believe; for incredulity,
and hardness to believe is a good preservative; and he is a wise man that will
not believe every thing. So you see there are some things that come near this
simplicity, as defect, rudeness, and credulity, which yet are not that
simplicity that Saint Paul says he walked in.

And this simplicity may well be called the simplicity of God; because Why
called the simplicity of God.
God is simple, He is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. There is
no mixture of fraud, or contrariety, he is pure, simple, and sincere. And as he
is in his nature, so he is in his carriage to men every way. There is a
simplicity that he does in his Word testify. And indeed he has showed that he
loves us; would we have a better evidence of it then his own Son? there is no
doubling in Gods dealing to men. And therefore as it comes from God; so this
simplicity it resembles God.

For alas, if God had had by-respects, what could the creature yield him? does
he stand in need of us, or does he need any thing we have? All counterfeiting,
and insincerity, and doubling, is for hope of gain, or for fear of danger. Now
what can God have of the creature? what cause has he in us of his dealing
toward us? In his giving, in his forgiving, in all his dealing he is simple.

So every one that is the Child of God he has the virtue of simplicity.
Simplicity is such a Grace as extends to all the parts of our conversation. As
the Apostle says here, My conversation in the world has been in simplicity.

By nature man is contrary to this simplicity, since the fall. God made him
right and straight, and simple, but as the Wise man says, he sought Manby
nature prone to double.
out many inventions. So that a man without Grace is double in his carriage.
And that from Self-Love, from Self Ends, and aims.

And hereupon he must be double: for there must be something that is The ground
of it.
good in him, for else evil is destructive of it self: if there were not some
thing good, men could never continue, nor the place could never continue. And
if all were good, and all were plain, and honest, that would destroy the ill
which men labor to nourish. Men have carnal projects to raise themselves, to
get riches, and this must be by ill means: there is an Idol in their hearts
which they serve, which they sacrifice to, their self-love, either in honor,
or in riches, or in pleasure, they set up something. Therefore a man without
grace, he studies to be strongly ill: and because he cannot be ill except he be
good, for then all the World would see it: hereupon comes doubling. Good there
must be to carry the ill he intends the more close: ill there must be, or else
he cannot have his aim. And hence comes dissimulation and simulation, the
Ground of dissimulation.
vices of these times, (both opposite to simplicity) and such vices as proceed
from want of worth and want of strength.

For when men have no worth to trust to, and yet would have the profit of sin,
and the pleasure of sin, and would have reputation, then they carry all
dissemblingly. Where there is strength of worth, and of parts, and reputation,
there is less dissembling always. It is a vice usually of those that have
little or no virtue in them. A man of strength carries things open and fair.

This dissimulation it comes from the want of this grace of simplicity, both,
Before the project. In After

Before, as you see in Herod, he intends mischief, when he pretends he would be
a worshipper of Christ: and so Absalom he pretends he had a vow to make, when
he intends murder: a dissimulation, pretending good when there is an intention
of ill before.

So there is a dissimulation in the project for the present, which comes from
this doubling, when men carry things fairly outwardly to those with whom they
live, and yet notwithstanding have false and treacherous hearts. As Judas had
all the while he conversed with Christ, he covered his ill with good pretexts,
a care for the poor, etc.

So after, when the ill is done what a world of doubling is there to cover ill,
to extenuate it, and excuses, and translations? This is the simplicity that
reigns among men where there is no strength of grace: where there is want of
simplicity there is this dissembling.

And with dissimulation there is simulation, that is, when we make our selves
sometimes worse then we are: when we are better then we seem Of simulation.
to be: sometimes that wins on us too: then we carry not our selvee simply.

For if we were good, we would be good every where. But a man that uses
simulation, if he be in evil company he fashioneth himself to the company, he
speaks that which his Conscience checks him for, he carries himself vainly, and
lightly, he holds correspondence with the company. So that by dissimulation,
and simulation, there is a fault committed against simplicity, which yields
the Testimony of a good conscience.

It is a base fault this simulation, which we think to be a lesser fault then
the other, which is dissimulation: for whom do we serve? are we not Aggravation
of this sin.
the sons of God? are we not the sons of our heavenly Father? the sons of the
great King? and for us to carry our selves not to be such as we are in the
midst of the wicked world, it is a great want of discretion. Saint Paul would
discover who he was, even before the bar: David would speak of Gods righteous
testimonies even before Princes, and not be ashamed.

And this is that which Christ says, He that is ashamed of me before men, of
him will I be ashamed before my heavenly Father. Let us take heed of
dissimulation, and simulation, which are opposite to this simplicity.

Again, this simplicity is opposite to curiosity, and finenesse. And thus the
Apostle both in his calling, and conversation, St. Paul conversed Simplicity
opposite to curiosity.
in simplicity, as a Christian, and as an Apostle.

As an Apostle he was not overcurious in words: he reproves those foolish
vain glorious spirits, that were so among the Corinthians. He delivered the
Word plainly, and plainness is best in handling the Word of God: for who will
enamell a precious stone? we use to enamell that that has not a native
excellency in it self, but that which has an excellency from something
without. True Religion has this with it always, that it is simple; because it
has state enough of its own.

The whore of Babylon has need of a gilded cup, and pictures, (and what not?)
to set her out; but the true Religion is in Simplicity.

Christ himself when he was born, he was laid in a Cratch, he was simple in his
carriage, and his speeches. It was a common speech in ancient time, when the
Chalices were gold, the Priests were wood. In Religion finenesse, and curiosity
carry suspicion of falsehood with them.

Those that overmuch affect finenesse of speech, they are either deceived, or
will deceive. That which is not native, and comes not from within it will
deceive. Some falsehoods carry a better color then some truths: because men
set their wits on work to set some color upon falsehood always.

And here take notice of the duty of Ministers, that they should utter divine
truth in the native simplicity of it. Saint Paul as a Minister delivered the
plain Word plainly.

And as a Christian in our common course of life: as we should take heed of
doubling, so of too much curiosity: for too much curiosity in diet or apparel,
it implies too much care of these things, which hinders our care of better
things, as our Savor Christ says to Martha, Martha, thou art troubled about
many things. The soul is finite, and cannot be set about many things at once;
therefore when there is overmuch curiosity in smaller things, it implies little
or no care in the main. What is morethen for decency of place? it argues
carelessenesse in the main. Therefore the Apostle laboring to take off that,
he bids women that they should not be decked with Gold, and broydered hair,
etc. But to look to the hidden man of the heart. And therefore Christ took off
Martha from outward things, because he knew it could not be without the neglect
of better things. Seriousness in heavenly things it carries a carelessenesse in
other things. And a Christian cannot choose but discover a mind that is not
earthly and vain; when he is a true believer, he regards other things as poor
petty things that are not worthy estimation.

A Christian when he has fixed his end, to be like to God, to be simple as God
is, he still draws toward his end, and therefore he moderates his carriage in
all things. What is unnecessarie, he leaves out: his end is to be like God, and
like Christ, with whom he shall live hereafter. Now the best things are the
most simple, as the Heavens, the Sun and the stars, etc. There is diversity,
but no contrariety: there is diversity in the magnitude of the stars, but they
are of the same nature; so in a Christian there are many Graces, but they are
not contrary one to another. So that a Christian has his maine care for better
things, he cares not for the world nor the things thereof: and therefore he
accounts them in comparison of better things as nothing; and that is the reason
that he is careless and negligent of those things that he did formerly regard,
as having better things to take up his thoughts.

We see then that simplicity, as it is opposed to doubling, so it is opposed
to finenesse, and curiosity.

And usually where there is a finenesse, and curiosity, there is hypocrisy; for
it is not for naught when men affect any thing. Affectation usually is a strain
above nature, when a man will do that which he is not disposed to by nature,
but for some forced end, it is hypocrisy. So the Corinthian teachers argued the
falsenesse of their hearts by the finenesse of their teaching, they had another
aim then to please God and convert souls. Usually affectation to the world is
joined with hypocrisy toward God.

Again, this simplicity is contrary to that corruption in Popery, namely
Simplicity opposed to lying and equivocation.
equivocation; what simplicity is that, when they speak one thing, and mean
another? when there is a mental reservation, and such a reservation, that if
that were set down that is reserved, it were absurd?

Or else there may be a reservation: a man may reserve his meaning. A man may
not speak all the truth at all times, except he be called to it, in judgment,
etc. Otherwise truth (as all good actions) it is never good but when it is
seasonable: and then it is seasonable when there is convenient furniture of
circumstances, when a man is called to it. For there may be a reservation; a
man is not bound to speak all things at all times, but to wait for a fit time.
One word in a fit time is worth a thousand out of time; but mental
reservation, to speak one thing, and to reserve another, it is absurd and
inconsequent, and so is dissimulation; there is a lie in fact, a man's life is a
lie that is a dissembler, dissimulation is naught.

A man may sometimes make some show to do something that he intends not. Christ
made as though he would have gone further when he did not mean it: but
dissimulation is that which is intrinsically naught.

But some man will say, Except I dissemble, I shall run into danger. Object.


Well, it is not necessary for thee to live, but it is necessary for thee to
Answ.
live like an honest man, and keep a good conscience, that is necessary. For
come what will upon true dealing, we ought to deal truly, and not dissemble.
Those that pretend a necessity, they must do it, they cannot live else, they
cannot avoid danger else, unless they dissemble: says Tertullian very well,
There is no necessity of sin to them, upon whom there lies no other necessity
but not to sin. Christians they are men that have no necessity lies upon them
but not to sin. It is not necessary they should be rich, it is not necessary
they should be poor, it is not necessary they should have their freedom, and
liberty, there is no necessity lies upon them, but that they be good, that they
do not sin. Can he pretend I must sin upon necessity, who has no necessity
imposed upon him by God, but to avoid all sin?

As for lying (which is against this simplicity that should be in speech,) All
sorts of lies unlawful.
all kinds of lies, officious lies, or pernicious lies: officious lies, to do a
good turn to help our selves or others with a lie, it is a giosse sin; It is
condemned by St. Austin in a whole Book which he wrote against lying: therefore
I pass it, I shall have occasion to speak somewhat of it afterward. It is
intrinsically ill every lie, because it is contrary to the hint of speech. God
has made our reason, and understanding to frame speech; and speech to be the
Messenger, and Interpreter of reason, and of the conceit: now when speech shall
be a false Messenger, it is contrary to the gift of speech: speech should be
the stream of understanding and reason: now when the fountain is one, and the
spring is another, there is a contradiction, it is against nature, so it is
intrinsically ill. It is not only against the will of God, but it is against
the Image of God which is in truth. It is ill, not by inconvenience, or by
inconsequence, but a pernicious lie is inwardly ill; jesting lies, pernicious
lies, officious lies, all lies let them be what they will, they come from the
father of lies the Devil, and are hated of God, who is truth it self.

Besides that it is a sin opposite to society, and therefore by Gods just Lying
opposite to society.
judgment it is punished by society; all men hate a liar, a false dissembler,
as an enemy to society, as a man that offends against that bond whereby God
has knit men together,

Now to move us the better to this simplicity, this direct course of life, that
there may be a conformity, and harmony between the outward and inward man, in
the thoughts, speeches, and actions, that they may be one. Motives to
simplicity.


Consider first of all, that this simplicity, it is a comely thing:
comeliness, 1 It is comely's
and seemlinesse it is a thing that is delightful to the eyes of God, and to a
man's own conscience: and it stands in oneness, and proportion: for you know
where there is a comely proportion, there all things suite in one. As in a
comely body, the head, and all the rest of the members are suitable, there is
not a young green head upon an old body, or a fair face on a deformed body, for
then there is two, the body is one, and the complexion another. Beauty, and
comeliness is in one, when there is a correspondency, a proportion, and
harmony in the parts.

In Revel. 13. you have a cruel beast there with the horns of a Lamb; there is
two, there is a goodly pretention and show, but there is a beast that is hid
within. Dissimulation is double; and where there is singleness, and
doubleness, there is deformity always. It is an ugly thing in the eyes of God,
it is a misshapen thing; it is a Monster, Jacob's voice, and Esau's hands: words
as smooth as oil, and war in the heart. It is a monstrous thing. Even as there
be Monsters in nature, so there be in disposition. Where there is such a gross
mixture, the Devil and an Angel of light, outwardly an Angel of light, and
inwardly a Devil, to hide a Devil in the shape of an Angel of light, there is a
horrible deformity.

It is a comely thing therefore when all things hold conformity, and
correspondence in our lives, when they are even amongst men, when we labor to
have sanctified judgments of things, and speak what is our judgment, and have
outward expressions answerable to the inward impressions wrought by the Spirit
of God every way; then a man is like himself, he is one, there is not a heart
and a heart. Adam at the first was every way like himself, but after falling
from God to the creature, the changeable, corruptible creature, to have his
corruptible end, he fell to this doubleness.

And as S. James says, A double-minded man is unconstant in all his ways:
That is another reason to move us to simplicity of disposition: for where 2.
Doubling inconstant.
doubling is, a man is unconstant in all his ways. What does S. James mean by
this, where he says, A double-minded man is unsettled? Because a double-minded
man he looks with one eye to Religion, and to those things that are good, and
with another part of his heart to the world: and hereupon he can never be
settled any way. Why? Because having unsettled intentions, having false aims,
double aims, he will be crossed continually. Please God he would, he would be
Religious; that is one intention: but now comes the world, and Religion to dash
one against another, and then he must be inconstant, because he has not
simplicity, he has not a single eye, as Christ says, If the eye be single,
then the body is light. He has not a right intention, a right judgment of
things; he judges too high of the world, and not high enough of grace and
goodness. And hereupon it comes, that when the world comes to cross his good
intentions, having his mind on earthly things, because it is cross to
Religion, his mind is unsettled.

Again, by terrors of conscience, a double-minded man (that will please God,
and yet be a worldling) is unconstant in all his ways. If his eye were single,
then all his body would be light, that is, if a man had a single judgment to
know what is right, to know what in life, and in death to stick to; all would
be single, the judgment and intentions go together: when a man's judgment is
convinced of the goodness of spiritual things, upon judgment follows
intention. When a man desires and resolves to serve God, and to please him in
all things, then all the body, and his affections are lightsome; his
affections, and his outward man goes with a single eye. A man that has a
false, weak judgment, and thereupon a false weak, double intention, his body is
dark, he has a darksome conversation. A double-minded man is unconstant in all
his ways, Therefore we should labor for this simplicity in all our
conversation.

Again, we should the rather labor for this simplicity, because it is part 3.
It is part of Gods Image.
of the Image of God, therein we resemble God in whom is no mixture at all of
contraries: but all is alike.

And as it resembles God, so it bears us out in the presence of God, and 4. It
brings comforts.
our own conscience; as he says here, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of
our conscience, that in simplicity, etc. Now God is greater then conscience. A
man that carries himself in simplicity, and in an uniform, even manner to God,
and to men, that man has comfort in his conscience, and comfort before God.

And of all other sins, the time will come that none will lie heavier on us
Doubling a great sin.
then doubling both with men, and with God, when it will appear that we have
not been the men that we carried our selves to be.

The reason is, the more will there is in a sin, and the more advisednesse, the
greater is the sin: and the greater the sin is, the greater the terror The
more will and advisedness in sin, the greater sin.
of conscience; and the greater that is, the more fear and trembling before God
that knows conscience better then we do.

Now where there is doubling, (where a man is not one in his outward and inward
man, in his conversation to men, when there is a covering of hatred, and of ill
affections with contrary pretenses) there is advisement, there is much will,
and little passion to bear a man out, to excuse him; but he does it (as we say)
in cool blood, and that makes dissimulation so gross, hecause it is in cold
blood. The more will and advisement is in any sin, the greater it is, (so the
aggravation of sin is to be considered) and where temptations are strong, and
the less a man is himself, so there is a diminution, and a less aggravation;
as when a man is carried with passion, with infirmity or the like. But usually
when men double they plot.

David he plotted before, and after his sin, he doubled before, and after his
sin: that was laid to his charge more then all that ever he did in his life; He
was a man after Gods own heart, except in the matter of Uriah. Why? Because in
that he plotted. We see before what many shifts, and windings, and turnings he
had to accomplish it. He sends Uriah to Joab, and gives him a letter to place
him in the fore front, and uses many projects.

And after it was committed, how did he cover it? and when it was hid from men,
he would have hid it from God a great while, till God pulled him from his
hiding place, and made him confess roundly, Psalm 32. till he dealt directly
with God, My bones were consumed, and my moisture was turned into the drought
of summer. He did it from men, and would have hid it from God. Therefore
because there was much plotting in that sin, that is set down as the only
blemish in all his life. He was a man after Gods own heart, except in the
matter of Uriah. Many other faults are recorded in the Book of God of David:
but because there might be some excuse, they were from infirmity, or out of
passion, or oversight, etc. they are not so charged on him. But this was with
plotting, it was in cold blood, there was much will and advice in it; therefore
this is doted for a great sin.

And if it be in our dealing amongst men, we should consider who it is we
deceive, who it is we go beyond in doubling, who it is that we circumvent,
Doubling with men.
and who it is that does it. Are we not all Christians? we are or should be all
new creatures. And who do we do it to? to our fellowmembers, and to our
brethren. Therefore in 1 Thessalonians. 4. when the Apostle disswades the
Thessalonians from this, from double dealing, and double carriage to men, says
he, You are members one of another. Let us consider who we are and whom we deal
with.

Now there be some persons, and some courses, that are likelier and more prone
to this doubling then others, for want of this grace of simplicity.

Wherethere is strength of parts, there is oft-times a turning of them Some
persons more prone to doubling then others.
against God, and against our brethren: where Grace has not subdued strong
Imaginations, strong thoughts, and brought all under it, there is a turning of
those parts against God, and against our brethren. And as it is in particular
persons; So some callings are more prone to double-dealing, to this Some
Callings.
carriage that is not fair, and commendable before God, nor comfortable to the
conscience. As we see now adays it reigns every where, in every street.

We see amongst men of Trade, Merchants and the like, there is not that
Merchants.
direct dealing, they know one thing, and pretend another.

So likewise in the Laws there are many imputations, (I would they Lawyers.
were false) that men set false colors upon ill causes; to gild a rotten post
(as we say,) to call white black, and black white. There is a woe in Esaias
pronounced against such as justify hard causes, such as call evil good, and
good evil: it is a greater sin then it is usually taken for.

So, go to any rank of men; they have learned the Art of dissimulation in their
course: they have learned to sell wind, to sell words, to sell nothing, to sell
pretexts: to overthrow a man by way of commendations, and flattery; such tricks
there are, which are contrary to this simplicity. To cover hatred with fair
words, to kill with kindness (as we say,) to overthrow a man with
commendations: To commend a man before another, who is jealous of the virtues
he commends him for. To commend a man for valor before a coward; to commend a
man, and thereby to take occasion to send him out of the way. To commend a man,
and then to come in with an exception, to mar all. To cover revenge and
hatred with fair carriage, thereby to get opportunity to revenge; such tricks
there are abroad, which oft-times discover themselves at length. For God is
just, he will discover all these hidden windings and turnings: for plotting
makes it more odious; of all men doublers are most hateful.

How shall we come to attain this Grace, to converse in the world in simplicity?

First of all, take it for a rule, (though many think it no great matter to be
a dissembler) our nature is full of dissimulation since the fall: the heart of
Man naturally prone to dissemble.
man is unsearchable, there is deep deceit in man. Take a Child, and see what
dissimulation he learns; it is one of the first things he learns, to dissemble,
to double, to be false. We see the weakest creatures, what shifts, what
windings and turnings they have to save themselves?

It is a virtue to be downright: for therein a man must cross himself. It is
no thanks for a man to shuffle, and to shift in the world: nature teaches
this, to dissemble, to turn and wind, etc. A man need not to plough to have
weeds: the ground it self is a mother to them, though it be a stepmother Simile.
to good seed. So we need not teach men to dissemble, every man has it by
nature: but it must be strength of grace that makes a man downright: Take that
for a ground.

There are a company of sottish men, that take it for a great commendation to
dissemble: and rather then they will be known not to dissemble in business,
they will puzzle clear business: when a thing is fair, and clear, they will
have projects beyond the Moon, and so carry themselves in it as if they desired
to be accounted couzeners, and dissemblers. Alas, poor souls; nature teaches
men to be naught in this kind well enough. Know therefore whosoever thou art
that studiest this Art of dissembling, and doubling; thy own nature is prone
enough to this, and the devil is apt to lead thee into it. This being laid for
a ground, how may we carry our selves in the world in holy simplicity, that may
yield comfort to our How to get simplicity.
conciences in life, and in death?

First consider, that the time will come, that we shall deal with that 1. To
consider one day all will be laid open.
that will not dissemble with us. Let the cunningest dissembler hold out as
long as he can, he shall meet with sickness, or with terror of conscience, he
shall meet with death it self, and with the judgment of God, and hell torment;
although now he carry himself smoothly, and dance in a net (as we say) and
double with the world, though he make a fair show: yet ere long thou shall meet
with that that will deal simply with thee, that will deal plain enough with
thee. Thou shall be uncased, and laid open to the world ere long; let us
consider this.

We see a Snake, or Serpent, it doubles, and winds, and turns when it is alive,
till it be killed, and then it is stretched forth at length. As one said,
Simile.
seeing a Snake dead, and stretched out: so (says he) it behoved you to have
lived. So the Devil that great Serpent, that ancient old Serpent, he gets into
the Snake, into the wilely wit, and makes it wind and turn, and shift and
shuffle in the world: but then some great cross comes, or death comes, and
then a man is stretched out at length to the view of the world, and then he
confesses all, (and perhaps that confession is sincere when it is wrung out by
terror of conscience) then he confesses that he has deceived the world, and
deceived himself, and labored to deceive God also.

If we would have comfort in the hour of death, labor we to deal plainly, and
directly; and of all other sins (as I said before) remember, this is that which
will lie the heaviest on us, as coming nearest the sin against the holy Ghost.
For what is the sin against the holy Ghost? when men rush against their
knowledge in malice to the truth known. Where there is most knowledge, and most
will, there is the greatest sin. Now in lying and dissembling, and
double-dealing, a man comes near to the sin against the holy Ghost: for he
knows that he does ill, he plots the ill that he knows; and when there is
plotting, there is time to deliberate; a man is not carried away by passion.

Consider, the time will come when you will be uncased, when you will be laid
open and naked: and then at that time, of all sins, this will lie heavy on
thee, thy dissembling in the world. Therefore every one in his calling, take
heed of the sins of his calling, among the rest of this one, of double-dealing.

And therefore that we may avoid it the better, labor for faith, to live 2.
Labor for faith
by faith: What is the reason that men live by shifts, and by doubling in the
world? They have not faith to depend upon God, in good, and plain downright
courses. Men are ready to say, If I should not dissemble, and double, and carry
things after that manner, hwo should I live? why, where is thy faith? The
righteous man lives by his faith, and not by his shifts, not by his wits. God
will provide for us: are we not in Covenant with God? Do we not profess to be
Gods Children? Do children use to shift? No, a child goes about to do his
fathers will and pleasure, and he knows that he will maintain him. It is
against the nature of the Child of God (as far as he knows himself to be a
Child of God) to use any indirect course, any windings, and turnings in his
calling: let us depend upon God as a Child depends on his father; and of all
others God will provide most for them that in simple honesty, in plain
downright dealing depend on him in doing good.

For God accounts it a prerogative, to defend and maintain them that cast
themselves on him; he will be their wisdom that can deny their own wisdom, and
their own shifts by nature, and in conscience labor to deal directly; he will
be wise for them and provide for them. It is his prerogative to do so, and not
to suffer his Children to be deserted. A little faith therefore would help all
this, and would make us walk in simplicity. If we could make God our
alsufficiencie once, then we should walk uprightly before God and men.

For what makes men to double?

This certainly makes men to double: they think they shall be undone, if they
be direct: for if they deal directly, they shall lose their liberty, or their
lives, or their opportunity of gaining, etc. Well, come what will, deal thou
directly, and know this for a rule, thou shall have more good in Gods favor
(if thou be a Christian) then thou can lose in the World, if upon grounds of
conscience thou deal directly in what estate so ever thou art.

If thou be a Judge, if thou be a Witness, deal directly, speak the truth.
If thou be a divine, speak directly in Gods cause, deal out the Word of God as
in Gods presence, come what will, whatsoever thou losest in thy wealth, or
liberty, etc. thou shall gain in God. Is not all good in him? what is all the
good we have, is it not from him? And the nearer you come to him, the more your
happiness is increased: the more you are striped of earthly things, the more
you have in God. Has not he men's hearts in his hands? when you think you shall
endanger your selves thus and thusby plain direct dealing without doubling, if
you be called to the profession of the truth, etc. Has not he the hearts of
men in his hands to make them favor you when he pleases? In Pro. 10. He that
walks uprightly, walks boldly. He that walks uprightly, not doubling in
his courses, he walks safely, God will procure his safety. God that has the
hearts of men in his hand as the rivers of water, he can turn them to favor
such a man.

A man's nature is inclined to favor downright dealing men, and to hate the
contrary. You see the three young men, when they were threatened with fire,
come what will, O King, we will not worship the Image of Gold which thou have
set up. They would be burned first. What lost they by it?

Howsoever, if we should lose, as it is not to be granted that we canlose any
thing by direct dealing; For the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof,
and the hearts of men are his. But suppose they do; yet they gain in better
things, in comfort of conscience, and expectation and hope of better things.
Faith is the ground of courage, and the ground of all other Graces that carry
a man's courage in a course of simplicity in this World.

Therefore if we would walk simply, and have our conversation in the world in
this grace, let us labor especially for faith to depend upon Gods promises, to
approve our selves to him, to make him our last and chief end, and our
communion with him, and to direct all our courses to that end. This is indeed
to set him up a Throne in our hearts, and to make him a god, when rather then
we will displease him, or his Vicegerent, his Vicar in us which is conscience,
that he has placed in us as a monitor, and as a witness, we will venture the
loss of the creature, of any thing in the world, rather then we will displease
that Vicar which he has set in our hearts. This I say is to make him a god;
and he will take the care and protection of such a man. S. Paul here in all the
imputations, in all crosses in the world, he retires home to himself to his own
house, to conscience, and that did bear him out, that in simplicity he had had
his conversation in the world. The next particular is, In Sincerity.


The Apostle adds to simplicity, this Godly sincerity; and he may well join
these two together: for plainness and truth go together: a plain heart is
usually a true heart. Doubleness, and hypocrisy which are contrary they
always go together: he that is not plain to men, will not be sincere to God.
Simplicity respects our whole course with men: sincerity has an eye to God;
though perhaps, in matters and actions toward men. Sincerity is always with a
respect to God; and so it is opposed to hypocrisy, a vice in Religion opposite
to God.

Now this Sincerity that the Apostle speaks of, it is A blessed frame of the
soul wrought by the Spirit of God, whereby the soul is set Sincerity what.
straight, and right in a purpose to please God in all things, (and in
endeavors answerable to that purpose) and to offend him in nothing.


I make a plain description, because I intend practice: there may be some nicer
descriptions.

But I say, It is a blessed frame of the soul, wrought by the sincere Spirit of
God, whereby the soul is set straight, and right, to purpose, and to endeavor
all that is pleasing in Gods sight; and that with an intention to please God,
with an eye to God, or else it is not sincerity. It is such a disposition and
frame of soul, that does all good, that hates all ill, with a purpose to please
God in all, with an eye to God.

And therefore it is called sincerity of God, or godly sincerity, and it is
called Sincerity of God.
so fitly: because God is not only the author of it, but God is the aim of
it, and the pattern of it: for he is the first thing that is sincere, that is
simple, and unmixed. God is the pattern of it, it makes us like to God, and he
is the aim of it. A man that is sincere aims at God in all his courses;
wherein he aims not at God he is not sincere. It comes from God, and it looks
to God. For naturally we are all hypocrites, we look to shows, therefore
sincerity is from God.

And it is the sincerity of God especially, because where this sincerity is, it
makes us aim at God in all things; it makes us have respect to him in all
things, as the creature should have respect to the Creator, the servant to the
Master, the son to the Father, the Subject to the Prince. The relations we
stand in to God should make us aim at him in all things.

The Observation from hence is this, A Christian that hopes for joy, must have
his conscience witness to him, that Doctr. A Christian that looks for joy must
have his conversation in sincerity.
his conversation is in the sincerity of God.


As the Apostle says here, This is the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity we have had our conversation, etc.

Now to go on with this sincerity, and lay it open a little. Sincerity it is
not so much a distinct thing, as that which goes with every good thing. Truth,
and sincerity, it is not so much a distinct virtue, and grace, as a truth
joined to all graces. As, sincere hope, sincere faith, sincere love, sincere
repentance, sincere confession. It is a grace annexed to every grace: it is the
life, and soul of every grace; and all is nothing without it.

Therefore it behooves us to consider of it, (I say) not so much a distinct
thing from other graces; as that which makes other graces to be graces, without
which they are nothing at all: so much sincerity, so much reality. So much as
we have not in sincerity, we have nothing to God, it is but an empty show, and
will be so accounted.

In Philosophy you know, that which is true only has a being and consistence:
all truth has a being, all falsehood is nothing, it is a counterfeit thing; it
is nothing to that it is pretended to be. An Image is something, but S. Paul
calls it nothing: because it is not that which it should be, and which the
Idolater would have it to be; he would have it to be a God, but it is nothing
less. All is nothing without sincerity: Therefore let us consider of it. And
that we may the better consider of it, let us look upon it in every action.

All actions are either Good. Ill. Indifferent.

How is Sincerity discovered in good actions? Sincerity in good actions.


Sincerity is tried in good actions many ways.

First of all, a man that is sincere in the doing that which is good: he 1. To
know all that is good.
will have a mind prepared to know all that is good; to know the good he stands
disposed to: to know good, and to learn by all good means: therefore he has a
heart prepared with diligence to be informed in the use of means. So far as a
man is careless, and negligent in coming to the means of knowledge, and to be
put in mind of good duties, so far a man is an hypocrite, and insincere.

Again, in regard of good duties, a true sincere Christian has an universal 2.
Universal obedience.
respect to all that is good. He desires to know all, and when any thing is
manifested to him he intends to practice all. We are here in the presence of
God (says Cornelius) to practice all things that shall be taught us by God,
Act. 10. I will have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. one and
another.

The ground of it is this, Sincerity looks at God: now God he commands one
thing as well as another: and therefore if a man do any thing Sincerity looks
at God that commands all.
that is good, in conscience to God, he must do one as well as another. As S.
James says excellently to this purpose, He that offends in one is guilty of
all. Because abstaining from one sin, and doing one good for conscience, he
will do all for conscience, if he be sincere.

Therefore it is true in Divinity, a man that repents of one sin, he repents of
all; if he repent of any sin as it is a sin: because all sins are of one
nature. We must not single out what pleases us, and leave what does not please
us: this is to make our selves Gods. The servant must not choose his work, but
take that work that his Master commands him: therefore sincerity is tried in
universal obedience.

Partial obedience is insincere obedience; when a man says, This sin I must
keep still, Herein God be merciful to me. This stands with my profit, I must
not leave this: this sin I am affected to, as we see in Saul. This is
insincerity, it is as good as nothing to Godward. It may keep a man from shame
in the world, etc. but to God it is nothing. A man must have respect to all
Gods Commandments, it is not done to God else.

More particularly, he that is sincere, he will have regard of the main duties,
and he will have regard likewise of the lesser duties, and especially 3.
Performance of less duties.
of the lesser, such as are not liable to the censure of men, or to the censure
and punishment of the Law: for there a man's sincerity is most tried. In great
duties, there are great rewards, great encouragements; but for lesser duties,
there are lesser encouragements; but if a man do them, he must do them for
conscience sake.

Therefore this is sincerity, to practice good duties though they be lesser
duties, and though they be less esteemed in the world, and less countenanced;
to practice them though they be discountenanced, by the Devil, and by great
ones, yet to practice them, because they be good. And to love good things that
the World cares not for, because they be good.

The practice of private prayer morning and evening, it is a thing we are not
expressly bound to, but as conscience binds us; therefore if a man be sincere he
will make conscience of that, as well as any other duty, because God bids us
pray always. So, to fear an oath for conscience sake, not to swear common or
lighter oaths (for I count him not worthy the name of a Christian, that is an
ordinary swearer; but) lighter oaths a Christian makes conscience of; because
he looks to God. Now God looks to little sins as well as to great: and there is
no sin little indeed that touches the Majesty of God.

The practice of all duties (therefore) is a notable evidence of sincerity:
Herod did many things, but he had a Herodias, that spoiled all. And so if thou
obey in many things, and not in all, thou have a Herodias, a main sin; alas,
all is to no purpose, thou art an hypocrite.

Again, for good things, one that is sincere in respect to God, he is uniform
in his obedience, that is, he does all that is good, 2nd he does 4. Uniformity.
it in one place as well as another, and at one time as well as another, he
does it not by starts.

Therefore there is constancy required in sincerity: where sincerity is, there
is constancy to do it in all times, in all places. Or else it is but a humor;
it is not sincerity when a man does it but in good moods (as we say.) Therefore
a man that is sincere, he makes conscience of private duties as well as of
public; of personal duties between God and his own soul, as well as of the
duties that the world takes notice of: in one place as well as another. He is
holy not only in the Church, but in his closet; not only in his calling as he
is a Christian, but when he is about his particular business. He considers he
is in the presence of God in every place, at all times.

Saint Paul every where labored to have a good conversation: when he was at
the Bar, he remembered where he was, and he labored to convert others: in the
prison he converted Onesimus: when he had his liberty he spread the Gospel
every where.

So in all places he was uniform like himself, which showed that he had a good
conscience. And therefore he does not say, I do now and then a good action,
but my course of life, My conversation is in sincerity. So there must be
sincerity in our walking, our whole conversation. Thus we see in good actions
how to try our sincerity.

A sincere man in the very performance of good duties, he is humble: 5. Humble
in performance.
because he does all things in the eye of God, he does it in sincerity with
humility; he does all good with reverence, because he does it to God.

Humility, and reverence it is a qualification of sincerity: because whatsoever
we do, we do it in the eye of God: therefore we are reverent in our very secret
devotions in our closets. We carry our selves reverently; because when no eye
sees us, the eye of heaven sees us, in one place as well as another. A
sincere Christian, is a reverent, and humble Christian, and this reverence
accompanies all his good actions.

And when he has done all, a sincere Christian that does them to God, 6.
Humble and thankful after:
he is humble, and then he is thankful; for he knows that he has not done it
by his own strength, but by God, and therefore God has the glory. He is
humble, because they are mixed with some infirmities of his. A sincere
Christian is always humble, having an eye to God: though to the eye of the world
he has done excellent well: yet he knows that God sees as he sees, he sees
some defects, God sees more, and that humbles him. As we see David, 1. Chron.
29. 14. says he, Who am I? or who is this people, that we should be able to
offer willingly after this sort? All things come of thee, of thiue own I have
given thee. So he humbled himself in thankfulness to God. For ill actions, a
true sincere Christian beforehand 2. In ill actions. 1. He intends none.
he intends none, he regards none in his heart, Psalm. 66. If I regard iniquity
in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayers. His disposition is to regard
none, he is in league with none: if he were, his heart were false, his
conscience would tell him he were an hypocrite. He is subject to infirmities,
but he does not respect them, he does not regard them; he intends not in his
heart to live in them.

Again, if he fall into any sin, he is sincerely grieved for them, (his heart
2. He is grieved for them.
is tender) and he sincerely confesses them, without guile, Psalm. 32. Blessed
is the man in whose spirit there is no guile, who when he sees he has sinned,
he does not guilefully cloak, and extenuate his sin. As we see Saul he had many
evasions, and excuses for himself. A true Christian will lay open his sin with
all the aggravations that his conscience tells him of. As David says, what a
fool? and what a beast was I? what an unthankful creature was I to sin against
so many benefits, and favors? he will be ashamed, and confounded in himself.

And of all sins, a sincere Christian is most careful to avoid his personal
sins: you may know sincerity by that. He that takes not heed to that 3.
Careful to avoid personal sins.
which he is most inclined unto, he shall be tripped in it.

An hypocrite and false-hearted man, he does good, but it is with a purpose to
be favored in some sin wherein he strengthens himself; he will do
something, that God may be favorable to him in other things.

But a true sincere Christian, though he be inclined by temper of body, or by
his calling, or by the former custom of his unregenerate life, to some sin
more then another, and he has not shaken some sin wholly off, he has not
purged himself wholly of the dregs of it, but he finds still a propensenesse
in his nature to it: yet as far as he is sincere, he gets strength, especially
against that. A false-hearted man favors himself, especially in those sins:
and will swell if he be found out in them; he will not bear a reproof. But a
Christian that is sincere, that intends amendment, that intends to be better;
he would reform his heart if it be amiss, and is willing to be discovered in
his most particular, and personal sins that he is prone to.

We may try our selves by this, not only by hating sin in general and at
large, but how we stand affected, especially to those particular sins we are
most prone to: sincerity as it hates all wicked ways, so it hates those sins
that are most sweet, that we are most prone to, as well as any other, nay, more
then any other: because those especially endanger the soul. A Child of God will
abstain from all evil; he will be careful, not only that others abstain from
sin, but he will abstain from sin himself most of all. Noisome things we hate
them always, but we hate them most when they are nearest us. As a Toade, we
hate it a far off, much more when it is near: so a sincere Christian hates
sin most in his own breast.

Now because sincerity has an eye to God, I must hate all sin as well as any,
or else I am not sincere. 4. Hatred of all sin.


A man that has the point of his soul to Godward, he will hate all manner of
ill, little ills as well as great: because all sin agrees in this, all sin is
against God, it is contrary to the mind of God, and all sin is pernicious to
the soul, all sin is against the pure Word of God, and considering it is so,
therefore I must hate all sin, if I hate any: because God hates all, and all
sin is contrary to the Image of God: and not only contrary to the Image of
God, but contrary to the revealed will of God, contrary to my souls comfort,
contrary to communion with God, and contrary to the peace of my conscience;
those regards come in every sin, every sin hinders that.

Again, where the soul and conscience is sincere, there will be a special care
for the time to come of the sins we have been overtaken with all. So 5. Care to
avoid sinfor the future.
we see how this sincerity may be tried, in abstaining from evil, as well as
in the good we do.

For actions that are of a more common nature, that in themselves are 3,
Sincerity in actions indifferent.
neither good nor ill, but as the doer is, and as the doer stands affected; a
true Christian may be tried by them thus. For the actions of his calling,
(though they be good in their kind, yet they be not religious) thus he stands
affected if he be sincere, he does them as Gods work. Common Actions of calling:
actions are as the doer is affected. A sincere man considers what he does as
Gods work: he is eommanded to serve God in his calling as well as in the
Church, and therefore he will not do it negligently: For cursed is he that
does the work of the Lord negligently.

He will not do it falsely, he will not profane his calling. I will not
prostitute my calling to serve my lust, or to serve my gain, does not God see
it? is not he the author of my calling? is it not his work, says conscience?
Yes, and therefore he does common actions with an eye to God, and so he makes
them good, and religious actions. For the Grace of God is a blessed Alcumist,
where it touches it makes good, and religious; though the actions be not so in
their own nature, it raises the actions, it elevates them higher then
themselves.

It makes the actions of our calling, that are ordinary actions to be holy,
when they are done with an eye of sincerity to God. As Saint Paul says, the
very servant serves God in serving his master.

And so for actions that we account most indifferent, as recreations, and
liberty to refresh our selves; a sincere man considers of them as a liberty 2.
Recreations.
bought to him by the blood of Christ, and considers himself in the presence of
God. And therefore whatsoever he does, whether he eat or drink, etc. he still
uses his refreshings as in the presence of God, and does all as in the sight
of God. His conversation, that is, his whole course, whatsoever he does is
sincere with an eye to God. He knows his corruption is such that it most
watches him in his liberties; for the more lawful a thing is, the more we are
in danger to be entangled in it.

In excess, in open ills, there is not so much danger, as in things that seem
indifferent, lawful recreations, etc. Recreations, and such things are
lawful: but to spend whole nights unthriftily, basely, scandalously this way,
it is not only against Religion, but against civility, in a civil man's
judgment, it is a scandal to the place and person. Therefore he that has any
truth of grace in him, he will look to himself, and look to God in the most
free actions of all. You see then how we may judge of our sincerity whatsoever
we do. A sincere Christian stands thus affected in some measure, in some
degree, in the good he does, in the ill he abstaines from, whatsoever it be, he
thinks he has to deal with God.

Now to stir us up to this blessed state, to labor for this frame of soul,
Motives to sincerity.
to be sincere, to have our conversation in sincerity; what needs be added more
then this, that without it all is nothing; all our glorious performances 1. All
else is nothing.
are mere abominations without sincerity. God will say, you did it not to me,
you did it for vainglory, you did it for custom or out of education, for
vain, and by-respects, and not to me, and do you look for a reward of me? you
did it not for conscience: for conscience always looks to God: and what we do
not in conscience, and obedience to God, in our general, or particular
calling, it stands not on our reckoning with God, it is as good as if it were
not done, in regard of God, and of the life to come, You have your reward,
says Christ. It is no matter what your respects be here; if you carry your
selves carefully in your place, to have the credit of men, to gain the favor
of men, you have your reward. Will you look for a reward from God, when what
you did, you did it to the world?

What a pitiful thing is this, that a man should do many things, many years
together, and yet do nothing that may further his day of account? because it
was not done out of conscience of his duty, his conversation was not in
sincerity to God. Now if we have not truth we have nothing in Religion. Saint
Paul says, as I said before, Of an Idol, It is nothing, why, it is a piece of
wood, or a piece of Gold, the materials of it is something. But it is nothing
to that which it should be. If a man be not true in Religion, he is nothing in
that: he is a true hypocrite, but a false Christian. He is nothing in
Christianity, he is something in hypocrisy, but that something is nothing.

All the shows in the World, and all the flourishes they are nothing. Why many
men of parts die uncomfortably.
What is the reason that excellent Clerks, men of excellent parts die
comfortless many times? Why, God is not beholding to them for all that they
did: they sought their own praise. As the Prophet Isay says, When you fasted,
did you fast to me? When you did good works, did you do them to me, may God
say? there was no truth in it: so much simplicity, so much comfort: sincerity
is all that we can come to in this world, perfection we cannot attain to,
Christ is perfection for us. Truth is all that we can reach to, and without
that all is nothing: therefore we ought to regard it especially.

Again, on the other side, this is a great encouragement to be sincere, to be
true-hearted in all our courses and actions; because it gives acceptance 2. It
gives acceptance to all we do.
to whatsoever we do; and it is that by which God values us. God values us not
by perfection, not by glorious shows, but by what we have in truth. So much
truth, so much worth. A little pearl is worth a great deal of rubbish.

A little sincerity because it is Gods own creature, (it is the sincerity of
God) it is wrought by him, it is his stuff. There is an almighty power to work
truth in us: for by nature we are all false. God gives to some men to carry
themselves more civilly then others, but it is nothing worth except God change
a man by grace: because God accepts us according to sincerity. God values us by
truth, so much truth, so much esteem of the God of truth.

And where this sincerity is, God bears with many infirmities. As in marriage,
the husband that is discreet, that knows what belongs to marriage, if the
heart of the wife be true, though she have many women like infirmities, he
passes by them, as long as the conjugall knot is kept unviolate. So a
Christian if his heart be true that he looks to God in all things, though he
have many infirmities, God passes by them. As we see in Asa, how many faults
had he committed? he trusted in the Physicians; he used the Prophet hardly, and
many other faults, and yet it is said that his heart was upright all his days;
because he had truth in him. It was in passion, that he did this or that
otherwise. So Hezechias, although he had many infirmities: yet he could say
that he had walked uprightly before God, and God did well esteem him for it.
And when he speaks of those that were to come to the Passover, Be merciful
to those that prepare their hearts, those that have true hearts, though they
have many weaknesses.

Now if the heart be false; though a woman have many virtues, yet if she want
the main, if she have a false heart to her husband, what is all the rest? So
the soul that is married to God, that has sweet communion with God, if the
heart and soul be naught what are all the shows in the world? they are
nothing. Let us take it to heart therefore, and labor to approve our hearts
and souls to God, (in all that we do) more then our lives, and outward
conversations to the world. Let them think what they will, so God approve of
our hearts, and intentions, and purposes, we are not to pass what the world
judges, as Saint Paul says of himself.

Again, this should encourage us to labor for sincerity, and truth, because 3.
It makes us grow to perfection.
wheresoever that is, there is a growing to perfection, To him that has shall
be given. If we order our conversation aright (as the Psalmist says) and
labor to please God in all things, the more we do, the more we shall have
grace to do; and the more we have, the more we shall have, to him that has
shall be given, that is, he that truly has, and does not seem to have, but
has not indeed: that seems to have goodness, and has none indeed, that
which he has shall be taken from him.

A true Christian is always on the mending hand, it is a blessed prerogative: he
is always mending, and bettering by Gods blessing. For where God gives in truth,
if it be but a little, if it be but a grain of mustard seed, if it be true, he
will cherish it, till it come to be a tree: he will add grace to grace, one
degree of grace to another. Where there is truth it is always honored with
growth. It is not only a sign of truth, but where truth is, there will be an
endeavor of growth: it is a prerogative; where God bestows truth, he will
always add the grace of growth, though not at all times alike: yet if
Christians sometimes do not grow, their not growing, and their failings shame
them, and makes them grow more afterward, and recover their former
backwardness. A true Christian is always on the mending hand. An hypocrite
grows worse and worse always, till he be uncased altogether, and turned into
hell. These and such like considerations may stir us up to labor to have a
conversation in simplicity, and godly sincerity.

Now how shall we come to carry our selves in sincerity, that we may Use 2.
Direction. Means to get sincerity.
have comfort in all estates?

That we may carry our selves in sincerity: First, we must get a change of
heart; our nature must be changed: for by nature a man aims at himself 1. Get
our hearts changed.
in all things, and not at God. A man makes himself his last end; he makes
something in the world, either profits, or pleasures, etc. the term that he
looks unto: therefore there must be a change of heart: a man must be a good
man, or else he cannot be a sincere man. Such as we are, such our actions will
be: therefore we cannot be sincere till we have our hearts changed.

No man can aim at Gods glory, but he that has felt Gods love in himself,
therefore (as a particular branch of that,) labor to get assurance of 2. Get
assurance of Gods love.
the love of God in Jesus Christ: for how can we endeavor to please him
unless we love him? and how can we love him unless we be persuaded that he
loves us in Christ? Therefore let us stablish our hearts more and more in the
Evidences of his love to us, and then knowing that he loves us, we shall love
him, and labor to please him in all things. These are grounds that must be
laid before we can be sincere: to get assurance of Gods love to us in the
pardon of our sins. Our conscience must be purged from dead works to serve the
living God; as the Apostle says, that is, we cannot serve God to our comfort
till our consciences are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, which assures us
of the pardon of our sins. Therefore says Zachary, We are redeemed, that we
might serve him in righteousness and holiness before him all the days of our
life. So that unless a man be redeemed, he cannot serve him in righteousness,
and holiness (before him) all the days of his life; that is, he cannot serve
God in sincerity.

For who will labor to please his enemy? Therefore the Papists maintain
hypocrisy, when they say we ought not to be persuaded of the love of God; for
then we ought to be hypocrites: for how shall we seek him with the loss of
favor, and of credit, and of life it self, if we know not that his favor will
stand us in stead, if we lose these things for him?

Again, that we may be sincere, let us labor to mortify all our earthly
affections to the world: for how can we be sincere when we seek for honors, 3.
Labor to mortify our earthly affections.
and pleasures, and riches, and not for better things? Therefore we must know
that there is more good to be had in truth, in a downright Christian
profession, then in all worldly good whatsoever. And if we be hypocrites in our
profession, there is more ill in that then in any thing in the world. This will
make us sincere, when we can be persuaded that we shall get better things by
being sincere in Religion then the world can give us, or take away from us. For
why are men insincere, and false-hearted? Because they think not Religion to be
the true good: they think it is better to have riches then to have a good mind:
these things therefore must be mortified, and a man must know that the life of
a Christian is incomparably the best life, though it be with loss of liberty,
yea, with the loss of life it self.

Simon Magus grew to false affections in Religion, because he thought to have
profit by it. So the Pharisees, they had naughty hearts, and therefore they had
no good by Religion. No man can profit by Religion, so long as his heart is
naught, so long as there is some Idol in his heart. A good Christian had rather
have a large heart to serve God, and rather grow in the Image of God, to be
like him, then to grow in any thing in the world, and that makes him sincere
out of a good judgment: because Christian excellency is the best excellency
incomparably. For he knows well what all else will be ere long; what will all
do good? riches, honors, friends, what good will they do in the hour of death?
There is nothing but grace, and the expression of it in the whole conversation
that will comfort us, therefore he undervalues all things in the world to
sincerity and a good conscience.

Again, that we may have our conversation in sincerity, let us labor 4. Do all
things as in Gods eye.
in every thing we do to approve our selves to the eye of God. We see the
Scripture every where shows, that this has made Gods Children conscientious
in all their courses: even when they might have sinned not only securely, but
with advantage. What kept Joseph from committing folly with his Mistress?
Shall I do this and sin against God? Genesis 39. And so Job in chap 31. he shows
what awed, and kept him from ill doing, in verse. 3. Does not he see my ways,
and account all my steps? this was it that kept him in awe. So the Church of
God, Psalm. 44. being in great distress, they kept themselves from Idolatry,
and from the contagion of the times wherein they lived: upon what ground? you
shall see in verse. 21. If we had done thus and thus, shall not God search it
out? for he knows the very secrets of the heart. So a Christian being
persuaded of the eye of God upon him, it makes him sincere. The eye of God
being Ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, he being light it self: he made
the heart, and he knows all the turnings of the heart. The consideration of
this will make us sincere in our closets, in our very thoughts: for they all
lie naked and open to his view.

What is the reason that men practice secret villainy, secret wickedness, and
give themselves to speculative filthiness? because they are atheists, they
forget that they are in the eye of God, who sees the plots and projects of
their hearts, and the nets that they have laid for their brethren. Therefore
David brings them in saying, Tush, God sees us not. And that is the reason they
are unconscionable in their desires, in their hearts, in their secret thoughts.
It is from a hidden Atheism: For if we did consider, that the eye of God sees
us in all our intents, and actions, and sees us in what manner we do all, and
to what end; that he sees every action with the circumstances, the aims, and
ends, if the heart did well ponder this, it would prevent a great deal of evil.

Conscience is the witness of our conversation, a witness that will keep us
from offending. If there were a witness by, and that witness were a great
person, a Judge, etc. it would keep us in our good behavior. Now when a man
shall consider, I have a witness within me, my conscience; and a witness
without, which is God, who is my Judge, who can strike me dead in the
committing of a sin if he please: this would make men, if they were not
atheists, to fear to sin.

Let us labor therefore to approve our hearts to God, as well as our
conversations to men: set our selves in the presence of God who is a discerner
of our thoughts as well as of our actions; and that which we should be ashamed
to do before men, let us be afraid to think before God: that is another means
to come to sincerity.

Another Direction, to help us to walk sincerely is: especially to look to the
heart, look to the beginning, to the spring of all our desires, thoughts, 5.
Look to the heart the spring of all our actions.
affections and actions, that is, the heart: the qualification of that is the
qualification of the man. If the heart be naught, the man is naught; if that be
sincere, the man is sincere. Therefore look to the heart, see what springs out
thence: if there spring out naughty thoughts and desires, suppress them in the
beginning. Let us examine every thought: if we find that we do but think an
evil thought, execute it presently, crush it: for all that is naught comes from
a thought, and desire at the first: therefore let us look to our thoughts, and
desires; see if we have not false desires, and intents, and thoughts answerable.

God is a Spirit, and he looks to our very spirits: and what we are in our
spirits, in our hearts, and affections, that we are to him. Therefore (as a
branch of this) what ill we shun, let us do it from the heart, by hating it
first. A man may avoid an evil action from fear, or out of other respects; but
that is not sincerity. Therefore look to thy heart, see that thou hate evil,
and let it come from sincere looking to God. Ye that love the Lord, hate the
thing that is evil, says David: not only avoid it, but hate it; and not only
hate it, but hate it out of love to God. And that which is good, not only to do
it, but to labor to delight and joy in it. For the outward action is not the
thing that is regarded, but when there is a resolution, a desire and delight in
it, then God accounts it as done. And so it is in evil, if we delight in evil
it is as if it were done already. Therefore in doing good, look to the heart,
joy in the good you do, and then do it: and in evil look to the heart, judge it
to be evil, and then abstain from it.

This is the reason of all the errors in our lives; because we have bad
hearts, we look not to God in sincerity. Judas had a naughty heart, he loved
not the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore he had a naughty conclusion. What the
heart does not is not done in Religion. Thus we see how we may come to have our
conversation in sincerity, that we may rejoice in the testimony of our
conscience.

Therefore now (to make an Use of Exhortation) we should labor for sincerity,
and esteem highly of it, because God so esteems of it. Truth is Use.
Exhortation to labor for sincerity.
all that we can allege to God: we cannot allege perfection. St. Paul himself
says not, I have walked exactly, or perfectly: no, but he says, This is our
rejoicing, that we have walked in sincerity. So, if a man's conscience can
excuse him of hypocrisy and doubling, though it cannot free him from
imperfections, God in the Covenant of Grace looks not so much at perfection, as
at truth.

Here I might answer an Objection of some Christians: Oh, but I Object.
cannot pray without distraction, I cannot delight so in good things, etc.

Though a Christians heart cannot free him from this, yet his heart desires to
approve it self to God in all things: and his heart is ready to say to Answ.
the Lord as David said, Lord try me, if there be any way of wickedness in me.
And therefore he will attend upon all means to get this sincerity. He will be
diligent in the Word of God, for therein the mind of God is manifestly seen.
The Word of God it is a begetting Word, it makes us immortal, it makes us new
creatures: it is truth, and the instrument of truth. Truth will make truth. The
true sincere Word of God, not mingled with devices, it will make what it is.
The Word of God, being his Word who is Almighty, it has an Almighty
transforming power from him: It is accompanied, and clothed with his Almighty
Spirit. Truth will cause truth; such as it is in it self it will work in our
hearts.

In that mungrel, false Religion Popery, they have traditions, and false
devices of men, and so they make false Christians, such as they are, they make:
strain them to the quintessence, and they cannot make a true Christian. Truth
makes true Christians; therefore attend upon Gods Ordinance with all reverence,
and it will make thee a sound heart: it is a transforming Word. Those that
desire to hear the Word of God, and to have their consciences to be informed by
the hearing of it, they are sincere Christians: and those that labor to shut
up the Word of God, that it may not work upon the conscience, they are
false-hearted.

A heart that is sincere, it prizeth the Word of God that makes us sincere: the
Word of God has this effect, especially being unfolded in the Ministry of it,
that a man may say as Jacob did, Doubtless God is in this place. It is all
that is ours; nothing runs upon our reckoning but sincerity. For what I
Sincerity all that we can plead.
have not done truly, Conscience says I have not done to God, and therefore I
can expect no comfort for it: but what I have done to God, I look to have with
comfort: for I know that God regards not perfection, but sincerity; he requires
not so much a great faith, as a true faith; not so much perfect love, as true
love, and that I have in truth, as S. Peter said, Lord thou know that I love
thee.

This will make us look God, who is the Judge, in the face. It gives us not
title to heaven, for that is only by Christ: but it is a qualification
required of us in the Gospel; nothing is ours but what we do in truth.

And again, consider, That it will comfort us against Satan at the hour of It
will comfort against Temptations at death.
death: when Satan shall tempt us to despair for our sins (as that he will do)
we may comfort our selves with this, that we have been sincere. We may send him
to Christ (for that must be the way) who has fulfilled Gods will, and
satisfied his Fathers wrath: Satan will say, This is true, it is the Gospel,
and therefore it cannot be denied; but it is for them that have walked
according to the Spirit, and not according to the flesh; for those that have
obeyed God in all things. Now when our Conscience shall join with Satan, and
say, we did nothing to God, we have not obeyed him; how can we answer him? we
must needs yield to the tempter. But when we can say with Peter, Lord, thou
know that I love thee; thou know I have labored to approve my heart to
thee; and that I have prosecuted this desire with endeavors: this will comfort
a man in the time of temptation: therefore let us labor to have our
conversation in sincerity.

It will afford us much comfort in this life, as it did S. Paul: S. Paul here
was in some grievous sickness, even to death, and he was disgraced It comforts
in life.
as a person that regarded not his promise of coming to them. Now what does he
do in all this sickness and disgrace? what does he answer to them? he comforts
himself in this, My rejoicing is, that my conscience does testify my
sincerity. He runs to God, and to his sincerity as his strong hold; he approves
himself to God. Some thing we shall have in this life first or last,
afflictions, or disgraces, and troubles will come. What is then the strong hold
of a Christian? Then he runs to his sincerity. What would Hezekias have done
when he received the sentence of death, that he had walked before God in
uprightness, and sincerity? Sincerity then is worth more then the world. And
he that will not labor for that which is worth more then all the world, it is
a sign he is ignorant of the worth of it. A man at the hour of death he would
lose all the world if he had it, for sincerity.

Therefore let us not part with our sincerity. Let us not offend against
sincerity and truth by falsehood in our carriage, and in our tongues, or
conversations Not offend against sincerity.
any manner of way, since it will yield us so much comfort in temptations, and
afflictions, and at the Tribunal, and Judgment Seat of Christ.

Let us not have false aims and ends, and do things in a false manner. It is
not action only that God requires, but the manner. If we regard not the
manner, God will not regard the matter. The matter of the Pharisees
performances was very good for stuff; but their hearts being naught, God
regarded it not. Let us look to the manner of doing all that we do, that we do
them to God, that we do them in sincerity in a holy manner. The Scripture
requires this, receive the Sacrament, but thus, Examine your selves; Take heed
how you hear. Let your conversation be in the world, but thus, in simplicity,
and godly sincerity. S. Paul does not say, that he rejoiced in miracles, or in
the great works that he had done, in converting of Nations, etc. which yet were
matters of joy: but when he comes to joy indeed, here is his joy, that his
Conversation had been in simplicity and godly sincerity.

And Christians must take heed that they reason not against sincerity Sinning
against sincerity by pleading corruptions.
another way, that is, to conclude they have no goodness, because they see a
great deal of corruption, and imperfections; for imperfections may stand with
truth. Asa (as I said) had many infirmities in his life, yet notwithstanding it
is said, that he walked in sincerity. So Hezekias, it is said he walked before
God uprightly, yet he had many infirmities and imperfections. Nay a man may
well retort this upon such poor souls, (that are witnesses with Satan against
themselves, in the sight of their sins) that their sins being known by them,
especially with hatred of them, it is a sign of sincerity.

Again, others are ready to say, I am not sincere, because God follows me with
afflictions, and distresses. Reason not so, for he therefore follows By
pleading afflictions.
thee with afflictions, because he would have nothing but sincerity in thee, he
would make thee wholly sincere, and purge thee as metal is purged in the fire
from the dross. Therefore take heed thus of sinning against sincerity. Do
nothing in hypocrisy: and when we are once sincere, let us not sin against it
by yielding to the Devil. This comforted Job, when his friends alleged his
corruptions: Well, (says he) you shall not take away my sincerity from me. He
looked to the eye of God, that saw him, to whom he approved his heart; and that
consideration made him sincere, and thence he comforted himself: So let us
comfort our selves in our sincerity against Satan's allegations; as a condition
of the Covenant of grace which respects not perfection, but truth.

To add one thing more: As there is an order of other graces; so there Order
in sincerity,
is an order in this sincerity which we should labor for. There is this order
to be kept.

We must digg deep: we must lay a sincere foundation. What is that? 1. A deep
foundation.
A deep search into our own hearts and ways by sound humilition. We say of
digestions, if the first be naught, all are naught: if the first concoction in
the body be naught, there can never be good assimulation, there can never be
good blood: so if there be not a good, a sincere foundation, there can never be
a sincere fabric. Therefore many mistake, and build Castles in the Air, comb
Downs (as we say) they build a frame of profession that comes to nothing in
the end; because it is not sincere in this order, they were never truly
humbled, they had a guilefull heart, in the cnofession of their sins: they
never knew what sin was thoroughly, and feelingly. Blessed is the man in whose
spirit there is no guile, Psalm. 32. The Psalmist especially means and intends
there, in regard of downright dealing with God in the confession of sins. For
he himself when he did not deal roundly, and uprightly with God in the
confession of his sins, with detestation, and with resolution never to commit
the same again, he was in a pitiful plight both of soul and body: his moisture
was turned into the drought of Summer.

But when without guile he laid open his soul to God, then he came 2. Faith.
from sincere humiliation, and sincere confession, to sincere faith. Therefore
(for the order) let us first labor to be sincere in the sight of that which is
ill in us, in the confession of our sins, and then we shall be sincere, the
better to depend upon Gods mercy in Christ by faith.

And from thence we shall come to sincere Love, when we believe that 3. Love.
God is reconciled in Christ, we shall love him. Our love is but a reflection of
his love to us: when once we know that he loves us, we shall love him again.

The Spring of all duty is sincere love, coming from sincere faith: as sincere
faith is forced out of the sincere sight of our sins, of the ill, and miserable
estate we are in. A man will not go out of himself, so long as he sees any hope
in himself: and therefore sound knowledge of the evil condition we are in, it
forces the grace of faith, which forces a man to go out of himself. And then
when he is persuaded of Gods love in Christ, he loves him again.

Love is that which animates, and quickens, and enlivens all duties, What are
all duties, but love? Christ reduces all to love. It is a sweet affection that
stirs up and quickneth to all duties; it carries us along to all duties: all
are love. What need I stand on sincere patience, sincere temperance, sincere
sobriety, etc? If a man have sincere love to God, it will carry him to all
duties, remember this order.

Especially every day, enter into your own souls, and search impartially, what
sin there is there unconfessed, and unrepented of, and make your peace with God
by confession. And then go to sincere dependence on God by faith in the
Promises. And then stir up your hearts to love him; and from the love of him
to love one another in sincerity, not in hypocrific. Thus we have the manner of
the blessed Apostle's Carriage in the world, whereupon his rejoicing was
founded, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, We have had our conversation in the world.


I will speak a little of those words, before I come to the negative part, Not
in fieshly wisdom. [Our Conversation,]


By Conversation, Anastrophe, he means the several turnings of his life, in
what relation soever he stood to God, to men, as a Minister, as a Christian, as
a friend, as a neighbor, at home or abroad, in all estates, in all places, and
at all times, his Conversation was in simplicity, and sincerity.

In the world] That is, wheresoever he had lived. And mark how he joins them
together; his conversation in the world amongst men, it was with sincerity to
God. It was that that did rule his conversation in the world. And so it should
be with us wheresoever we are, or whatsoever we do in the world, our carriage
here must be directed by a higher aspect. The Ship while it is tossed in the
Sea, it is ruled by the Pole-starre; that Simile.
must guide it: so in our conversation in the world, the stuff of our
conversation may be the business we have in the world, but the rule, the
regiment of all must be from heaven, with an eye to God. I touch that from the
knitting of these together.

Now where he says, That his Conversation was in simplicity and sinceriy, you
may see here then that all the frame, all the passages of his life were good.
This makes good that which I touched before (which has its proper place here,)
That Sincerity extends it self to all the frame of a man's life.


He that is sincere, is sincere in all places, and at all times, in all the
turnings, Sincerity extends to all a man's life.
and windings, and passages of his life, or else he is not sincere at all. His
conversation must be sincere, wheresoever he lives, or whatsoever he does, in
prosperity, or adversity, at home, or abroad.

The veriest hypocrite in the world has he not pangs sometimes? Take an
oppressor, he thinks that he should not die so, he thinks, I must be Wicked
men have fits of goodness.
called to an account if I do thus. Does not Ahab lie upon his sick bed
sometimes? Is not Herod sometimes troubled in conscience? has not a wicked man
sometimes twitches of conscience which the world sees not, secret checks of
conscience? Oh, yes, there is not the vilest man living, but he has his good
fits, he has pangs of goodness: but what is this to a conversation? Our
conversation must be in sincerity in all the turnings and passages of it.

God judges us by the tenor of our life, and not by single particular acts: a
good man may be ill in a particular act; and an evil man may be good God
judges by the tenor of our life.
in a particular act: but I say, God does not judge us by a distinct severed
passage, but by the tenor of our life. Uniformity, equability, and evennesse
of life it is an undoubted evidence of a good man.

Because he is a new creature, and being a new creature, he has a new nature;
and nature works uniformly. Art works differently, and enforcedly. Teach a
creature some what that is against nature, it will do something, but a Lion
will have a Lions trick; and a Wolf will have a Wolfes trick: teach them never
so much, a Lion will be a Lion in all places, a Wolf will be a Wolf, and an
Eagle will be an Eagle. Every creature will observe its own nature, and be like
it self.

A Christian as far as he is good, as far as he is a Christian, is uniform: his
conversation is good, he is like himself, in all places, in all times, upon all
occasions, in prosperity, in adversity. The very Word shows, that the
universality of a man's course must be in sincerity, wheresoever he is. God is
every where, and sincerity has an eye to God, it makes a man good every where:
or else it does nothing to God. Does not God see every where, abroad, and at
home, in our closets? If we plot villainy, there ses he it as well as abroad:
therefore if I do it any where, I regard not the eye of God.

Again, where he says, Our Conversation, it implies constancy, as well as
uniformity, he was so in all places, and in all times: but that I noted before,
therefore I pass it. Our Conversation. In the world.


That is, amongst other men wheresoever I was, and have lived: whence we see,
That Christianity may stand with conversing abroad in the world.


Men need not be mued up in a cloister, as the foolish Monks in former Observe.
Christianity may stand with converse in the world.
times, they thought that Religion was a thing confined to solitariness.
Whereas oft-times it requires greater strength of grace to be alone, then to be
in company: we know the proverb, Woe to him that is alone. A good Christian
converses in the world, and that in simplicity, and sincerity. We need not (I
say) cloister our selves up to be good men, to be sincere Christians. We may
converse in the world in sincerity if we have Saint Paul's spirit.

But that which I will press more, is this, that True Religion where it is in
strength does carry a man in the world, and yet he Observe. Religion makes a man
converse in the world untainted.
is not tainted with the world.


Saint Paul conversed in the world in sincerity. The world is an hypocrite, as
he said of old: the whole world acts a part, it is an hypocrite, and a cruel
opposer of sincerity, and truth. Saint Paul lived abroad in the world amongst
men that had aims of their own, and abused themselves in the world, and yet he
walked in simplicity, and sincerity, he was a good man for all that. A man that
is not of the world, but begotten to be a member of a higher world: he may
carry himself in the world without the corruptions of the world, he may carry
himself so in the world that he may not be carried away of the world: we see S.
Paul did so.

Noah was a good man in evil times, a good man in his Generation. Henoch, in
evil times walked with God. In Act. 13. David in his Generation served the
purpose of God: and his Generation was none of the best: for you know there was
Achitophel, and Doeg, which were bad companions, yet in his Generation he
served the purpose of God. So every man in his time may live and converse in
the world, and yet not be carried away with the corruptions of the times.

What is the reason?

The reason is, That a true Christian has a spirit in him above the world. As
Saint John says, The Spirit that is in you is stronger then he that Reason. A
Christian has a spirit above the world.
is in the world. The Child of God has a Spirit in him, a new nature, that
sets him in a rank above the world. Christians are an order of men that are
above the world, they are men of another world: and therefore having a
principel of grace that raises them above the base condition of the world,
they can live in the world, without the blemishes and corruptions of the world,
they are men of a higher disposition.

Even as sickness in the body hurts not the reasonable life; so any thing that
a Christian meets with in the world it hurts not his Christian life which is
his best life; because it is a life of a higher respect, of a higher nature:
Saint Paul's conversation was in heaven, it was above the snares here below. He
was crucified to the world, he was a dead man to all that was evil in the
world, and to that which was good and indifferent in the world For pleasures,
for honors, for meat and drink, and such necessaries: the counsel that he gave
to others, he practiced it himself, for worldly callings, and refreshings, and
the like, 1 Cor. 7. The time is short, let us use the world as though we used
it not. He used indifferent things in the world (which are good or evil as they
be used) as if he had not used them. He lived in the world, as a traveller or
passenger, he knew he was not at home; he knew he had another home to go to:
Here we have no continuing City, and therefore he used the world as though he
used it not. As a Traveller uses things in his way as far as they may further
him; but let his very staff trouble him, he throws it away. So, a Christian
uses indifferent things in the world (which are good or evil according as
himself is,) he uses them well; because all things are pure, to the pure: he
uses them so as that he does not delight in them because he has better things
to solace himself in: he does not drown himself in these as worldlings do.

And for the ills of the world, a Christian in a good measure is crucified to
the world, and the world to him. And he has his conversation in heaven,
Philip. 3. 20. But our conversation is in heaven. Many serve their bellies,
whose end is damnation: but our conversation is in heaven: Now his conversation
being heavenly, that is the reason that he can converse in the world in
sincerity, though the world be of another strain.

So you see then, that a Christian is of a higher nature, of a higher condition
then the world: and he is crucified to the world; and he knows himself to be a
passenger, and a traveller in the world, and therefore he uses the world as
though he used it not. And withal he has his employment above the world. The
birds that have the air, as long as they are there, they are not catched with
snares below: and Christians that have their conversation above, they are not
ensnared with the things of the world as other men are. We see Saint Paul
conversed in the world in sincerity.

I observe it the rather, because it is the common exception of weak, and false
spirits. We must do as the world does, or else we cannot live. He that knows
not how to dissemble, knows not how to live. And the times are naught: so that
which is naught and grounded in themselves, they lay all the blame of it upon
the times.

Indeed the times are naught, like themselves. As he said, There is a circle of
humane things; the times are but even as they were: things come again upon the
stage, the same things are acted: the persons indeed are changed, but the same
things are acted in the world to the end of the world. The times were naught
before, they are naught, and they will be so. Villainy is acted upon the stage
of the world continually. The former actors are gone, but others are instructed
with the same devices, with the same plots: The Corruption of nature shows it
self in all. Only now we have the advantage for the acting of wickedness in
the end of the world: because besides the old wickedness in former times, we
have the new wickednesses of these times; all the streams running into one make
the Channel greater.

Men say, alas, alas, the times are ill; were they not so in Noah's time? were
they not so in David's time? were they not so in S. Paul's time? Men pretend
conformity to the world upon a kind of necessity, they must do as others do.

If they were true Christians it would not be so: for Noah was good in evil
times. Nehemiah was good in the Court of the King of Babel. Joseph was good
even in Egypt in Pharaoh's Court, this can be no plea. For a Christian has a
spirit to raise him above the corruption of the times he lives in: he has such
a spirit likewise as is above prosperity, or adversity, which will teach him to
manage both, and to govern himself in all occasions and occurrents of the
world. I can do all things (says S. Paul) through Christ that strengthens me.

As we say, the Planets have one course whereby they are carried with the first
mover every twenty four hours from East to West; as the Sun is, whereby he
makes the day: but the Sun has a course of his own back again; and so by
creeping back again he makes the year in his own course. So the Moon has one
course of her own: but yet she is carried every day another course by the first
mover.

So, a good Christian that lives in the world, he is carried with the world in
common things, he companies and traffiques, and trades, and deals with the
world: but has he not a motion of his own contrary to all this at the same
time? yes, though he converse in the world, yet notwithstanding he is thinking
of heaven, he is framing his course another way then the world does. He goes a
contrary course, he swimmes against the stream of the world.

There are some kind of Rivers (they say) that pass through the Sea, and yet
notwithstanding, they retain their freshness. It seems as an emblem to show
the condition of a Christian: he passes through the salt waters; and yet keeps
his freshness, he preserves himself. Therefore (I say) it is no plea to say
that times are naught, and company is naught, etc. A man is not to fashion
himself to the times. An hypocrite (Camelion like) can turn himself into all
colors but white.

And as the water which we say has no figure of its own, but it is figured by
the vessels that it is in: if the vessel be round, the water is round; if the
vessel be four-corner'd, the water is so, it being a thin airy moist body: it
has no compass of its own, but is confined by the body it is kept in.

So some men they have no Religion, they have no consistence, no standing, no
strength or goodness of their own, but such as their company is, such they
are, and they think this will serve for all. I must do as others do, it is the
fashion of the world: If they be among Swearers, they will swear: if they be
among those that ate unclean, they will pollute themselves, they frame
themselves to all companies: they will be all, but that which they should be.
This will not serve the turn.

A Christian may pray for the assistance of God to keep him in the world; and
he may know that God will. What ground has he? Our Savior Christ, Joh. 17.
says he, Father, I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
but that thou keep them in the world. He prays for his Apostles, and
Disciples, that God would keep them in the world from the contagion of sin, and
from the destruction of the world. S. Paul you see lived and conversed in the
world, wheresoever he was, in sincerity, and simplicity: he was not carried
away with the stream, and errors of the times wherein he lived.

Nay, to add more, it does unite the power of grace together, and make Grace
increased by opposition.
a man the better, the worse the company, or the place is where he lives. We
know in nature, the environing of contraries, increases the contrary: and holy
men have been better often times in the midst of temptation, and have gathered
their forces, and strength of grace together, more then when they have been
more secure. The envy and malice of the world is quicksighted, and the more
they live amongst those that are observers of them, the more cautelous they are
of their carriage. You know it is the Apostles reason, Redeem the time, because
the days are evil: be you the better, because the days are evil; witness
for God in an evil Generation, in evil times: he does not say, Do you sin,
because the days are evil. Gods people do always witness for him.

Let me add this likewise (to give farther light) that we must not take
occasion hence, to conform and fashion our selves to any company, to cast Not
to tempt God by rushing into ill company.
our selves into evil company when we need not. We must not tempt God: for then
it is just with God to suffer us to be soyled with the company. And by our
carelessness in this kind, we offend the godly, that easily hereupon take us to
be worse then we are: and as we grieve the Spirit of God in them, so in our
selves; and we build up and strengthen wicked persons. And therefore this
living in the world in simplicity, and sincerity, it must be when our calling
is such, that we live in the world, that we need not any local separation to
sever our selves: but when in the world we are cast on men without grace, by
our callings, and occasions, we may presume that God will keep us by his Spirit.

Let us not be weary of hearing of this point: For ere long we must all appear
before God, and then what an honor will it be for us, that we have witnessed
for God in this world? that we have stood for God and good causes in the
midst of the world, and shined as lights in the midst of a crooked
Generation? That we have managed the cause of God, and stood for Religion, and
held our own in the midst of Papists, and Atheists, and profane persons, and
witnessed for the best things in spite of all, when we have been called to it.
We are not to thrust our selves into unnecessary troubles, no, not for the best
things, unless we be called to it: but when we are called, and can witness
for the best things, what an honor will it be for us?

And on the contrary, says Christ, He that denies me, and is ashamed of me
before men, of him will I be ashamed before my heavenly Father. What a fearful
thing is this? Let us look to God in simplicity, and sincerity, and God will
keep us that the world shall not hurt us.

What will become of us? (will some say) this trouble we shall come Object.
into, and that persecution will befall us.

It is not so, Christ was opposed when he was here upon earth; but till Answ.
Times appointed by God.
his hour was come they could not do any thing. Every man has his hour, every
man has his time allotted to serve God in here: God has measured out his
life; and till his hour be come, that God will take him out of the world, God
will bind up the endeavors of men, their plots shall be to no purpose, God
will keep them, and watch over them that are downright. Because thou have kept
my Word, I will keep thee, says God. Let us keep the Word of God in evil
times, and God will keep us: let us stand for God, and he will stand for us.

It is no plea to say, I shall run into this danger, and that danger: God will
be thy buckler and thy shield, if thou stand for him. And that which brings
danger is too much correspondence with the world: when men forsake Halting in
Religion brings danger.
their sincerity in the world, when men will be on both sides they carry things
unhappily, and unsuccessefully. A downright atheist will carry things with
better success then a halting Christian. For his policy, and subtilty will
carry him to actions inconvenient; but then comes his conscience after, when he
is in the midst of them, and damps him that he cannot go forward nor
backward. Therefore the only way is to resolve to live in the world in
simplicity, and sincerity. If we do so, we may carry holy businesses strongly.
God will assist us therein, he will increase our light, and make our way plain,
and clear to us.

But if a man be not sincere, but double, and carnal, and pretend love of
Religion, and yet take courses, and do actions that are not suitable to
Religion, it will not succeed well, God will curse it: he will strike him with
amazement, he will strike his brain with errors in judgment, etc. There is no
pretense therefore to make us live falsely, and doubly in the world: but we
ought to live as S. Paul did (let the world be as bad as it will, or as it can
be) in simplicity and sincerity: God will show himself strong for those that
walk uprightly; he will be wisdom to such: but if we walk doubly, and falsely,
and make Religion our pretense, God will show himself our enemy.

Where be your newters then? where be your Politicians in Religion that will
keep their Religion to themselves? S. Paul conversed in the world, wheresoever
he was, in sincerity, he made show what he was; he walked not according to
carnal wisdom: (as he says afterward) where be your Nullifidians then that
are of all beliefs, and yet are of no belief? that fashion themselves to all
Religions. And if they be of the true Religion, yet it is their wisdom to
conceal it. S. Paul did not so: But I shall have occasion to touch that in the
negative part afterward, not in fleshly wisdom, etc.

Again, where he says, My conversation has been thus, in the world. He means,
in this life my conversation here has been sincere. I will give you a touch on
that; though it be not the main aim here: yet notwithstanding it may well be
touched, That We must while we live here in this world converse in simplicity,
and sincerity. Observe. We must have our conversation in sincerity while we live
here.



We must not turn it off to live as we list subtly, politickly, and carnally,
and then think to die well. No, we must live soberly, righteously, and justly
in this present world, Tit. 2. Do you think to begin to live well when you are
gone hence? No, that is a time of reward, and not a time of work. This world is
Gods Workhouse, here you must work. This is Gods field, here you must labor.
This is Gods Sea, here we must sail, here we must take pains, we must sweat at
it, here we must plow, and sow, if ever we will reap.

Do thou think to carry thy self subtly, to have thy own ends in every
thing here, and then when death comes a Lord have mercy upon me shall serve for
all? No, thou must converse as a Christian while thou live here in this world
in simplicity, and sincerity: God must have honor here by thee; thou must have
a care of thy salvation here. Do thou think to have that in another world
which thou do not care for here? Do thou think to have glory in another
world, which thou did not think of here? Do thou think to reap in another
world that which thou did not sow here? Let us in this world stand for the
glory of God, openly, and boldly, and for the example of others, for the
exercise of our own graces. A true Christian has his conversation in sincerity
in this world. The more too blame the world then to deprave their dealing. Why?
Because they are lights in the world, and they serve the world to good purpose,
if the Depravers of goodness blamed.
world would take benefit by them: they shine in the world to lead them the way
to heaven. But the world is willing to let them go to heaven alone if they will.

But if the carriage of Gods Children be like S. Paul's, (as it is true: for
they are all of one disposition) they converse in simplicity, and sincerity
wheresoever they are: wicked, slanderous, malicious, depraving persons are to
blame, that lay to their charge, hypocrisy, and this and that; when it is
nothing so. They deserve well of the wicked unthankful world, and God upholds
the World for their sakes. When the righteous are exalted, the City rejoices,
says Solomon. Because wheresoever they live, they live not only in
simplicity, and sincerity, but they live fruitfully: the City, the whole
community, all the people are the better. They make the times, and the places
the better wherein they live.

Because a good man is a public good. The Spirit of God when it makes a good
man, it puts him out of himself, and gives him a public affection: it teaches
him to deny himself, it teaches him to love others; it teaches him to employ
and improve all that is in him (that is good) for the service of God, and of
men; to serve God in serving men in the place he lives in. Therefore malicious,
and devilish is the world to deprave such kind of men as live in the world in
simplicity, and sincerity, that serve God and the world by all the means they
can. Our Conversation has been in simplicity, and sincerity in the world. But
more abundantly to you-ward.


Why? was it in hypocrisy to others, and in sincerity to them only? No, that
is not the meaning: but thus, that wheresoever he had lived in the world, in
what estate soever he was, he carried himself in simplicity, and sincerity: but
to you I have made it more evident, then to any other. Why? because he had
lived longer with them; and they were such as he was a Father unto in Christ:
therefore, says he, I have evidenced my simplicity, and sincerity more
abundantly to you then to any other. Whence we may observe, That A sincere
Christian is best where he is best known. Observe. A true Christian best where
he is best known.



It is a note of a truly good, and sincere man to be best where he is best
known, (as I touched when I opened the words.) It is otherwise with many, their
carriage abroad is very plausible: but follow them home, what are they in their
families? they are Lions in their houses. What are they in their retired
courses, and carriage? they do not answer the expectation that is raised of
them abroad, they never pray to God, etc. those that know them best will trust
them least. It is not so with a Christian, my conversation in the world has
been good wheresoever it has been; but among you with whom I have conversed
more familiarly, who have seen my daily carriage, and course of life; among you
my conversation was best of all. It is a note of a man that is sincere, that
the more he is seen into, the more he shines. The godly are substantially good,
and therefore where they are best known, they are best approved.

For Christians they are not painted creatures, that a little discovery will
Christians substantial, not painted.
search them to the bottom, and then shame them: they are not gilded, but gold;
and therefore the more you enter into them, the more metal you shall find
still. They have a hidden treasury, the more you search them, the more stuff
you shall have still: their tongues are as fined silver, and their heart is a
rich treasury within them. A Christian he labors for a broken heart still; he
labors to get new grace, and new knowledge of the Word of God still; and the
more you converse with him, the more you see him; the more you shall approve
and love him, if you be good as he is: therefore says the Apostle, I have
carried my self well to all, but especially to you with whom I have lived
longer.

Therefore as we would have an evidence of our sincerity (which is the best
evidence that we can have in this world) that we may be able to say that we
Use. To approve our selves most where we are best known.
are sincere and true Christians, (which is better then if a man could say he
were a Monarch, that he were the greatest man in the World,) let us labor to
carry our selves in our courses to those that know us best, and in our most
retired courses like to Christians. And not to put on the fashion of Simile.
Religion as men put on their garments; their best garments when they go
abroad, and so to make good things serviceable to our purpose: but to be so
indeed at home amongst our friends, among those that know us, when we are not
awed; (as there is a great deal of liberty amongst friends,) wheresoever we
are, let us remember we are always in the eye of God; and labor to approve our
selves most to them that know our courses most.

God knows more then men, therefore let us chiefly labor to approve our
selves to him. And next to God, let us approve our selves to conscience, fear
conscience more then all the Monarchs in the World; because that knows most,
and will be most against us.

And then again, for others that know our conversations, good men that converse
with us, let us approve our selves to them most that have the best and the
sharpest judgments.

A true Christian, as he loves goodness, so he loves it most that it should be
in his own heart. He lives more to God, and to conscience, then to same, and
report: he had rather be, then seem to be. And as he hates all ill, so he hates
even secret ill; the nearer corruption is, the more he hates it. As a man hates
Toads and venomous creatures; and the nearer they are, the more he hates them.
The most retired carriage of a Christian is most holy, and best of all.

Again, where he says, My Conversation has been in simplicity, etc. to
you-ward. Here is a good note for Preachers, that if they look to convert
Ministers win by Life as well as Doctrine.
any by their Doctrine, they must win them by their conversation likewise in
simplicity and sincerity. Saint Paul being to gain the Philippians to Christ;
he does it not by words only, by arguments of Logic, and by persuasions only
to convince the understanding of the truth of that which he taught: but he
demonstrates to them how they should live, Walk as you have me for an ensample.
I show you, that that which I teach is possible, by my practice. I show to high
and low, how I carry my self; My conversation has been in simplicity, and
sincerity. Those that I would convert by my Doctrine, I labor by my
Conversation to gain them. So I say, Ministers have here a special direction,
how to carry themselves.

And others likewise that have a gaining disposition (as indeed we should not
stand upon terms of this and that, but every one labor to gain others) would
you work upon others, and gain them from Popery, etc? Then not only show them
arguments to convince their judgments, (which must be done, that is certain)
but likewise let them see that the things that you speak are possible things,
things that you are persuaded of. And if you be not good, and press them to
goodness, you cannot persuade them of the truth of that you speak: they will
think it is not possible; for then you would act it your selves. But when they
see one go before them, and demonstrate it to their eyes, how they should carry
themselves; this is the way to teach them to be sound Christians indeed. But I
hasten to the negative part. Not in fleshly wisdom, etc.


Here is a secret wipe, a secret taxing of the false Apostles, and Teachers. My
Conversation has been in simplicity, and sincerity, whatsoever you think of
me, Not in fleshly wisdom, as theirs is.

Not in fleshly wisdom.] To distinguish it a little.

There is a natural wisdom planted in the soul of man, even as there is Wisdom
either, 1. Natural.
a natural light in the eye, to see both things that are hurtful, and that are
good for the outward man. So in the soul of man, (which is his eye) there is an
inbred light of natural wisdom, a common light to discern of things, and of
creatures: a natural kind of wisdom, which may be polished, and advanced to a
higher degree by experience, and Art: As the eye of the body, it sees better,
when it is helped with an outward, with a foreign light. Simile.
This is natural wisdom.

There is likewise a Politic or Civil wisdom, gotten by observation, and
increased by observation; and withal, it is a gift of God (though it be
Politic wisdom.
a common gift;) As Achitophel's, it was not merely carnal wisdom that was in
him, but he had a gift of policy. So some men, though they be not truly
Religious, yet God gives them a gift of politic wisdom, to be able to discern
the difference of things, to lay States and Commonwealths together, to be able
to judge, and resolve, and to execute wisely, and politickly, and prudently. It
is an especial gift of God. This the Apostle does not aim at; neither natural,
nor civil wisdom, though it be a gift of God (I say) which is increased by
observation, and by other means.

Besides this, there is a spiritual, a heavenly wisdom, whereby the soul 3.
Spiritual.
having a right end and aim set and prefixed to it, it directs all its courses
to that end: whereby the soul is able to deliberate, to consult, and to resolve
on heavenly things, and what hinders heavenly comfort; and to resolve upon good
duties, and to resolve against that which is ill, to resolve upon all
advantages of doing good to the Church, and of all hindrances of our selves,
and the Church, and of the places we live in. It is a heavenly kind of prudence
to guide our own ways, yea, and to guide others too.

But besides all these, there is another wisdom which is here the wisdom 4.
Fleshly wisdom.
of the flesh: which because the flesh has correspondency with Satan, it is
also a divellish wisdom, for the most part. For the Devil plowes with our
Heifer: the most mischief that he does in the world, it is by the
correspondency that he has with our flesh, our enemy within. The flesh and
Satan do join together, and work all strongly with the mischievous policy of
the world: and therefore it is called likewise worldly wisdom.

And hereupon Christians that are mere professors and not Christians soundly,
some are called flesh, because they are ruled of the flesh: and they are called
the world: because they frame themselves to the wisdom, and to the courses of
the world; and if you would annatomize them, there is nothing but the world in
them, worldly pride, and worldly ends. And they are called Devils too, as
Judas was called a devil; they plot with Satan by carnal wisdom, they yield
to Satan; they savor not the things of God.

Men have their name and denomination in the Scripture, by that which they are
ruled by: when they are ruled by the flesh, they are called flesh: when they
are ruled by the world, and the evil examples thereof, they are called the
world. And when they are ruled by Satan, so far as they are ruled by him, they
are called Satan. One of you is a Devil, says Christ. Not in fleshly wisdom.


What is meant here by fleshly wisdom? If it be fleshly, why is it wisdom?
wisdom is but one; there is but one wisdom. Wisdom we know in it self, it is
a knowledge of principles and grounds; and deductions, Wisdom what.
and conclusions from principles. A wise man knows both the grounds and
principles, and he knows what may be raised from thence: and likewise a man
that is truly wise, he not only knows them, but he knows how to act them, how
to work, and act his principles, and conclusions to an end. He has principles,
and conclusions, and workings out of his brain; and when he has done all in
the brain, when he has framed the aim of his principles, and the manner how
to act them, then he goes about to work; and a wise man can work answerable to
his end, and rules.

Now there is a carnal wisdom that initiated this: for Carnal Wisdom Carnal
wisdom what.
has aims, and ends, and principles, and it has conclusions from those
principles, and it acts to an end. A true Christian he has his ends; his aim
is supernatural; to please God in all things, to be happy in another world, to
enjoy God, to have nearer acquaintance with him while he lives here: many such
subordinate ends, (besides the main end) he has. And some principles likewise
he has out of the Word of God concerning this end: and then he has directions
out of the Word of God suitable to those principles. And then he sets on
working, and all that he works is in order to his end, and in virtue of the end
he propounds. As a man that travels, every step that he goes in his journey,
every stepp is in virtue, and strength of his first intention, and the end that
he propounds, (though he think not of his end in every step) and he consults
and asks about the way; and all to that end.

So it is with a Carnal man too, he that walks after carnal wisdom, Carnal
wisdom has its end, and that is a man's self: for a carnal man, himself is the
Idol, and the Idolater: his end is himself, either in his honors, or in his
pleasures, or riches, etc. himself is the Center into which all the lines of
his life fall. And he has rules, seek thy self in all things; love thy self
above all: And what then? If thou love others, love them for thy self, as far
as they may serve thy turn: care for no man further then thou can make use of
him for thy self, respect him so far, and no further.

But it may be there are many that stand in the way. Then again he has
principles: undermine them, ruin them, make way to thine own ends by the ruin
of as many as thou can. And if another man's light over-shine thine, that
thou art no body to him, Carnal wisdom bids thee deprave him, slander him,
back-bite him: the more he seems to be vile, the less thy nakedness shall
appear: Here is Carnal wisdom.

There is no envy in goodness, in strength and ability; they would have all to
be so: but baseness is joined with much envy; when it sees another overshadow
it, it labors to eclipse him with slanders, and base reports: This is a
principle of Carnal wisdom. And hence comes all that working and undermining,
secret conveyances, and laying nets for others, as the Prophet speaks.

All carnal wisdom has carnal ends, and carnal rules, and carnal courses
answerable. It consults upon the attaining of its end, it deliberates and
consults, and shrewdly too: for it is whetted by Satan. And then it goes with
the stream of the world, and therefore it is carried very strongly toward its
end. And then it resolves strongly: because fleshly wisdom usually is with the
times. And then it executes: God suffers it oft-times to come to execution, and
to enjoy its plots, and projects. And therefore in regard that it has the same
passages (though in a contrary kind) with other wisdom: it is called wisdom,
though indeed it be not wisdom; and thereupon it has a diminishing term here,
it is fleshly wisdom.

Now this wisdom is called fleshly, because it is led with reasons from Why
fleshly wisdom.
the flesh, and it tends to the maintenance of the flesh; it comes from it, and
it tends to it.

I take not flesh here, for one part of a man, his body: but for the
unregenerate Flesh what.
part, which is carried to changeable things, to the creature, and sets up some
creature (to be an Idol) instead of the Creator Blessed for evermore.

And that from this reason, because the creature, the things below are near to
us, and pleasant to us: and because we are brought up in these delights of the
creature that are sensible; and therefore the flesh, the baser part is ready to
draw away the soul to the delights of it; because the delights of it are
pleasant, and we are trained up in them from the beginning of our life to the
end of it. Now these things below, the profits, and pleasures, and honors,
they work first upon the senses, upon the outward man: and from the senses they
ascend to the fancy, and imagination, and that being carnal by nature esteems
more highly of them then there is cause. And esteems of the contrary to these
as the greatest ills: Oh, poverty is worse then hell to a carnal man; and he
had rather be dead, then be disgraced; he had rather damn his soul, then to be
denied of his pleasure: Imagination makes them such great things, and the Devil
helps Imagination, he has much affinity with that part, with the Imagination:
and Imagination (when men have strong conceits of these things) that labors to
draw the will and affections to it self, to sway that part: so that the will,
the commanding part of the soul, for the most part it yields to these
Imaginations of base things: it conceives of them highly, and the contrary to
be vile, and base. And hereupon the will comes to approve of these things, and
to choose these things: yea, and the understanding part it self, that blessed
spark of wisdom that is left in us, capable of better things, and fit for the
Image of God: yet that, by our corruption, being stripped of the grace it had
in the creation, and now being under original corruption, being under the Law
of sin; it is led by a carnal will and Imagination, and by sense, and is ruled
by them. So that that which should rule all, is ruled by base, earthly things.

The soul of man while we live here is between things better then it self, The
Soul placed between good and evil.
and worse then it self, meaner then it self. Now by corruption it cleaves to
things meaner then it self, it is witty to devise them, it is willing to choose
them, it delights in them, it bathes it self in them: so that whereas it should
rule the body, the body and the lower parts rule the soul. When it yields to
that which is better then it self, to the sanctifying Spirit of God, and to the
Word of God, and is clothed with the Image of God, when it yields to better
things, then they raise it to a degree of excellency even above it self when it
was at the best: for a man that is in Christ, that has the Image of Christ
upon him (in some sort) is better then Adam was in innocence; his estate is
more sure: and the dignity he is advanced to by Christ is greater then he
should have had if he had stood still in Adam. This is the condition of the
soul: an excellent creature, it is capable of the Image and likeness of
Christ, and of God, capable of all grace.

Again, if it submit it self to base creatures, it becomes even as them; and
therefore men are called the world, they are called flesh, they are called
after that which leads them: the very soul it self (as it were) is flesh. For
as the very body of a holy man in some sort is spirit; and every thing in him
is spirit: as it shall be at the day of Judgment (as S. Paul says, it shall be
raised a spiritual body: because it shall be subject to the motions of the
Spirit of God in all things: and it shall not be supported by bodily means.
Now the very soul is bodily and carnal: such a degeneration is wrought in man
since the fall: he makes his soul that was given to guide him in this world,
and which is made apprehensive of better things; of the things of another
world: this soul he makes it the bawd to serve his base lusts and pleasures.
Not in fleshly wisdom.


Now wisdom is a middle word, it may be either spiritual, or carnal, as the
man is in whom it is. If a man have moral honesty in him, and good Wisdom
according as the man in whom it is.
things in him that way, it makes him a good Politician, a wise man, useful in
his place: Though he be not a sound Christian, yet he may be a wise man in his
place: and God uses such kind of men in the world, and they have their reward
here, they are advanced, etc.

But if it light in a divellish nature, in a crooked oblique nature, then it is
malicious divellish wisdom.

And, note this by the way. All men that have flesh in them, have All carnal
men have not fleshly wisdom.
not fleshly wisdom: for some are carried with the flesh, with the rage of
fleshly lusts, as the swine in the Gospel were carried headlong into the Sea,
they are carried by their lusts to hell, as your common swaggerers, and
roarers: that so they may escape the danger of the Laws, they care not for God
nor man; irregular wild persons. These have flesh, they are ruled by the flesh,
but they have not so much as fleshly wisdom: for they take courses to
overthrow themselves in the world, to overthrow their names, and their bodies
and all. They have not so much as policy in them, their lusts so reign in them.
Such wretches we have oft-times amongst us that think themselves some body, but
they have not so much as Carnal wisdom in them to carry themselves better then
a Devil.

Now, in other men the flesh has a wisdom that carries them not after this
fashion; but it whets their wits, and they are as bad in another kind. As, take
the same man, when he is young he is carried by his brutish lusts, without any
wisdom at all, even as the hurry of his lusts carry him, and transport him:
when he grows old he is carried subtly with the wisdom of the world. He is
always under lusts, always under the flesh: when he is young he is carried with
base lusts; and when he is old he is under the flesh, and fleshly wisdom
still; he is carried with slavish covetousness to the world, as formerly he
was subject to base lusts in his youth: all this is naught.

Where these differ in the subject, in the person usually the base lust serves
the witty: those that are carried with base lusts, they are subject, and
inthralled, and overruled by those that are carried with the wisdom of the
flesh. As your subtle men, your Usurers, and subtle oppressors, great witty
men, they make other men serviceable to their turn, other men are slaves to
them.

But to come nearer that that I mean to stand on. My Conversation has not been
in fleshly wisdom.


You may see by the Coherence (which I will not dwell on) what to judge of
fleshly wisdom.

Fleshly wisdom is, where there is no simplicity nor sincerity: because he
opposes them here. Where fleshly wisdom is, there is neither simplicity nor
Observe. Fleshly wisdom where there is not sincerity.
sincerity. For take a subtle wise man, he is all outside, and there is no
simplicity in him. He that is not wise to God, but to the world, he wraps
himself in ceremonies in matters of Religion, and studies the outside of
things to approve himself to the world, and to attain his own ends; but there
is no simplicity or sincerity: he that is wise to the world has no respect to
God.

Sincerity has an eye to God; and a sincere man as far as he is sincere has
an eye to God, and he does this and that because God sees him, and because God
is leased with it: but he that works according to fleshly wisdom, he has
aims contrary and distinct to that: therefore the Apostle says, We walk in
the sincerity of God, (as it is in the original) and not according to fleshly
wisdom.

So you may know from the opposition, that fleshly wisdom is where there is no
sincerity. Where there is no love to God or to men, There is no simplicity, all
is for show; and where there is all for show, there is double carriage, not in
simplicity aiming at Gods glory; there is fleshly wisdom. That for the
Connection.

But the point of Doctrine proper to the place is this, That Gods Children have
another manner of rule to live by then the world: the rule Doctr. Gods Children
no^ ruled by fleshly wisdom.
that a godly wise man goes by, is not fleshly wisdom.


A man that looks for any joy, that looks to be in the blessed estate that
Saint Paul here was in, he must not be ruled by fleshly wisdom. Our
Conversation (says he) in the World has not been in fleshly wisdom. Saint
Paul no question but he had flesh in him, and likewise he had fleshly wisdom:
because flesh is in all parts, and it mingles it self with all graces. In the
understanding there is light and darkness, in the will there is rebellion and
pliablenesse to God: So Saint Paul had the stirrings of fleshly wisdom in him.
When he was in danger, no doubt but the flesh would stir in him, you may avoid
it by shifts if you will. And when he was before great ones, you may flatter
and betray the truth if you will.

No doubt but Saint Paul, as he expresses him himself, Romans 7. as he had a
conflict in himself in other regards: so there was a conflict between wisdom,
and wisdom: the wisdom of the flesh did stir against the wisdom of the
Spirit. I but it is one thing to have fleshly wisdom in us, and it is another
thing to make it our rule. It is one thing to have flesh in us, and another
thing to be in the flesh, as the Scripture Phrase is. This conflict wondrously
afflicted Saint Paul, no doubt but it was one sharp conflict.

No question but carnal wisdom set S Paul to shift for himself many times, but
by the power of the Spirit he checked it and kept it under; it was not his rule.

Now the reasons of this Doctrine (That the godly guide not themselves by
fleshly wisdom, which has worldly aims, and carnal means to bring those
aims to pass,) they are:

First, Because Gods Children will not cherish that in them, and make Reason 1.
It is Gods enemy.
that their rule which is contrary to God, which is enmity to God: but this
carnal wisdom which proules for the world, and looks for ease, and profit, and
pleasure, it is enmity to God, Romans 8 6, 7, 8. the Apostle proves it at large.
They being subject to God, Children of God; being under him in all kind of
subjection, as servants, as Children, as spouses, they will not cherish that
which is rebellion to God, which is not subject to God, neither can be: as we
may say, a Papist that is Jesuited, he is neither a good Subject, nor can be:
so the wisdom of the flesh neither is it subject to God, nor can be subject;
in the nature of it, it is rebellion. It is Gods enemy, it withstands all the
Articles that he has given us to believe: fleshly wisdom has some opposition
against all truth; it opposes every command that God gives us to obey: there
is something in flesh and blood to withstand every command: it is the greatest
enemy that God has.

And as it is an enemy to God, so it is to us; it is contrary to our good; 2.
It is our enemy.
It is death, the wisdom of the flesh, Romans 8. Says the Apostle, Romans 7. The
flesh deceived me, and slew me. There is no wise man will cherish that which is
death, and which is Gods enemy, and his own too. The wisdom of the flesh as it
is opposite to Gods Spirit, a rebel, and an enemy to him: so it is death to a
Christian, and therefore be will not frame his course of life by it.

It brings us to eternal death, it betrays us to Satan. Sampson could have had
no harm, had not Dalilah betrayed him: so the Devil could not hurt us, unless
it were for fleshly widome: the Devil is not such an enemy to a man as his own
fleshly wisdom.

Again, a Christian knows that as it is contrary to God, and contrary to his
good; so it is base and unworthy as well as dangerous. It is base Reason 2. It
is base.
and unworthy for a Christian, that is an heir of heaven, that is raised to be
a Child of God, to abase his wits, to proule for the world; how base and
unworthy is it for him to seek the things below that is born again to an
inheritance immortal, and undefiled, that is reserved for him in Heaven?

How unworthy is it for him that has his understanding, and all his inward
parts and powers dedicated and consecrated to God, to make his understanding a
bawd for the base purposes of the flesh? The high indignity of the thing makes
the Child of God ashamed to be ruled by the flesh, to prostitute the strength
of his soul to the flesh: to make his soul that should carry the Image of God,
to carry the Image of the Devil: to make his wit and understanding a bawd to
accomplish earthly things which God has sanctified to attain grace and comfort
in this world, and to live as a Christian should do, that he may die with
comfort, and enjoy heaven.

Again, Gods Children will not be ruled by that which they should mortify and
subdue; but this wisdom of the flesh is the object of mortification: Reason 3.
They must mortify it.
they are redeemed from it.

A Christian as he is redeemed from hell, and damnation, so he is redeemed from
himself; he is redeemed and set at liberty from the slavery of his soul to
Satan, to the world, and worldly projects: he is redeemed from the base
conversation he was in before. What has he to do to be ruled by him from whom
he is redeemed? These things might be amplified at large: but you see the truth
evident, what ground a Christian has not to be ruled by fleshly wisdom.

But to make it a little clearer. A Christian has no reason to be ruled by
earthly wisdom: for the yielding to it does all the mischief in Reas. 4. It
does all the mischief in the world.
the world; it is the cause of all the misery in the world, unto Christians
especially. God catches the wise in their own (...) (though they be politic
and wise) especially if a Christian give way to carnal politic wisdom, God
will universally shame him. I never knew a Christian thrive in politic
courses. When he has secret conveyances for the world, God crosses him every
way in his reputation, in his projects and purposes.

But consider, (to amplify that which I gave in a branch before) what It
hinders from good.
reason has a Christian to be ruled by fleshly wisdom, when it hinders him
from all that is good, if he yield unto it, and keeps him in imperfect good?

I speak especially now to those that are not in the state of grace. What
reason has any one of you to be ruled by fleshly wisdom, when it keeps you in
the state of unregeneracy? It keeps you perhaps in some good, but it is
imperfect good. You think you are good enough, and that all is sure, and God
will be merciful, etc. when as a Reprobate may go beyond you.

It hinders from good actions with pretenses: for fleshly wisdom will tell us
there will be danger: you shall be reproached if you do this and that; you
shall be accounted thus and thus, and run into obloquie.

It hinders from doing good, There is a Lion in the way; it forecasts this and
that danger, it keeps us in imperfect good that will never save us: it objects
dangers: the sluggard that will not set on his spirit to labor; he thinks
himself wondrous wise in forecasting dangers; Oh, I shall want my self, etc.

It dulls and distracts us in good: he that has a carnal projecting head, it
eats up his soul, that when he comes to pray, or to hear, or to meddle with
spiritual matters, the marrow and strength of his soul is eaten up with carnal
projects, and he does things by halves.

Nay, Carnal Wisdom as far as it is in us unmortified, it sets it self against
good by depraving good, that we may seem to be mischievous, and It sets it self
against good.
ill, and wicked with reason. Men are loath to go to hell without reason: there
was none that ever went to hell yet without wisdom; a great deal of wisdom.
And how does their wisdom bring them to hell? as in other respects, (which I
named before) so in this, it whets the poysonfulnesse of their nature to
invent, and to raise scandals, or to be willing to take scandals when they are
offered.

A carnal wise man when he knows that such a degree of Religion is contrary to
his carnal projects, he fastneth all the disgrace on it that he can, that he
may be the less observed. Religious he would be, but with a limitation, with a
reservation and restraint; as far as may stand with his carnal projects, and
purposes: and so much Religion as goes beyond that, and discovers him to be
false, and halting, so much he opposes. The wisdom of the flesh is bitter and
sharp against all the opposers of it, and stirs the cursed nature of man to
the opposing of that which is contrary to it.

Take a carnal man, either in Magistracy, or Ministry; if he be not humbled
with pains in his calling, and with the Word that he teaches: what does he
most hate in the world? what does he oppose? is there any thing but saving
grace? is there any thing but that which God loves most, and which is best for
his soul that is the object of his spite, and of his poison and malice?

To be led by this is even as if a man should be led by a Pirate, by a thief,
by an enemy: and what can become of that man? to be led as the fool to the
stocks, as Solomon says: he is in the way of death: There is a way that
seems good to a man in his own eyes, but the issues of it are death, says
Solomon; and that is the way that carnal wisdom dictates to men.

It hinders also from the reforming of ill: Policy overthrowes policy, as we
say. Policy overthrowes Commonwealths. Tell a man that is It hinders from
reforming of ill.
in place, You ought to reform this abuse, and that abuse: he is ready to
think, Oh, if I be not wary, others will enquire into my life too, and find me
out.

So this cursed policy, this carnal wisdom, it makes men unfruitful in their
places, by forecasting dangers, and so it hinders from doing good, and from
reforming gross abominations and abuses.

So, it hinders from suffering when God calls to it: it forecasts; if you be
Religious, you must suffer, it will bring your good name in question, it It
hinders from suffering.
will bring your life in question, it will hazard your estate: Whereas indeed
all the world is not worth the truth of God, and a man loves not his life that
will not hate it in such a case; if it come to case of confession, and standing
for the truth in a good quarrel.

But here fleshly wisdom objects this and that danger: as we see in Spira and
others. And thus man yielding to fleshly wisdom, he grows desperate at length.

There are two men in a man (as it were) there is the flesh and the spirit. The
flesh says as Job's Wife said, Curse God and die, or Bless God and die, read
it whether you will: there is the murmuring part in the cross, that bids us
curse God: and as Peter said unto Christ, Oh save your selves, this shall not
befall you: pity your self, have regard of your self. The flesh when we are to
suffer says as Eve to Adam, as Job's wife to him, or as Peter to Christ, Oh
spare your self, be wise, be wise: And to color the matter the more, there
must be a pretense of wisdom: when as it is the greatest folly in the world to
redeem any earthly commodity, even life it self, with the cracking of
conscience, with the breach of that peace which passes understanding, and
perhaps with the loss of our souls. It is the greatest folly in the world: it
is to be penny wise, and pound foolish. So we see whenever we are about to
suffer, carnal wisdom hinders us. As it hinders us from good, and in good, and
hinders us from reforming evil; and in suffering when we are called to it:

So it provokes us to evil: and that we may swallow down the evil with the
greater pleasure, and more deeply, it colors ill with good. We may It provokes
to evil.
thank this politic carnal wisdom, that truth and goodness ever goes with a
scratched face, that it goes under disgrace, that it goes in a contrary habit:
and that hypocrisy goes in its ruff, in its colors. I say we may thank
carnal wisdom: for if truth were presented in its own view, it would stir up
approbation from all. And if men could see vice, and wickedness uncased, if
they could see it in its own hue, they would all detest it. Carnal wisdom sees
that this is not for the advancing of the projects it has, and therefore it
disgraceth that which is good, and sets false colors on that which is ill.

I say, it stirs up to ill, and it keeps us in ill. Carnal wisdom says, You
may do this, you may continue thus long. It deceives us with vain hopes It
keeps in ill.
of long life.

I might enlarge the point. You see then what reason Gods Children have, not to
be ruled by fleshly carnal wisdom.

By the way, let me give this caution, That oftentimes that is accounted carnal
wisdom that is not. The weaker sort, they are too blame oft-times Carnal
wisdom mistaken.
to lay imputations upon those that God has given greater gifts to; and they
account that carnal wisdom, that is not so, but is spiritual prudence. I must
needs add that caution by the way: As for a man to keep his mind, and not to
speak against evil in all places: The prudent man shall keep silent, says the
Prophet. The times, and the place may be such, that the prudent man may keep
silence, it is best to do so.

And likewise to be cautelous to prevent danger so far as it may be without
breach of a good conscience. Saint Paul, you know, when he was called before
the Sadduces, and the Pharisees, he escaped by a shift, it was not a sinful
shift; he said he was a Pharisee, and so he set them together, and they falling
into contention, Saint Paul in the mean time escaped. Many things might be
done, if we would take heed of carnal wisdom, and that with a great deal of
wisdom and approbation too.

Jeroboam might have settled his Kingdom, and yet he need not have set up the
two Calves in that cursed policy: it was foretold that he should have those
Tribes, but he would be wiser then God, and he would devise a way of his own.

David might have escaped from Achish the King of Gath, he need not have made
himself a fool. Achitophel might have provided well for himself under David his
old Master, he need not have proved a Rebel. There is nothing that Carnal
wisdom does, but Heavenly wisdom will do it better if men could light on it;
and God would give them better success in their carriage: but there is a way
for heavenly prudence (I say,) and that must not be accounted carnal wisdom.

It is for want of this that people are too credulous. Gedaliah, he trusted
Ground of Credulity.
too much, he was too credulous to trust, considering that men are subject to
infirmities, and subject to falsenesse: it is good to be doubtful, to be
suspicious sometimes: and it is no carnal wisdom neither. The very loadstone
of a lie is credulity. What imboldens people to deal falsely with men? they know
them to be credulous, and weak, they will believe any thing.

But for the most part the error is on the contrary, over much jealousy.
Jealousy:
Your carnal Politicians are over-jealous: Jealousy is good, suspicion is
good, considering that we live in a false world: but not to be over-jealous. We
see Herod he thought, Oh, Christ is born; and out of Jealousy he kills a
number of poor Infants, and his own among the rest. Alas, Christ came not to
take away his Kingdom, but to give a heavenly Kingdom. So the Jews they were
very jealous that if Christ were not condemned, the Romans would come and take
away their Kingdom: but that which wicked men fear, out of such jealousy,
shall come upon them. And so the subtilest, and most divellish men in late
times that grounded the persecution of the poor Protestants, upon Jealousy,
absurd Jealousy: for they by the rules of their Religion walk in sincerity, it
ties them from plotting: and yet out of fear and jealousy, they excercised a
world of cruelty against them.

And if any man shall but consider and read Stephen Gardiner's letters (a man
of a divellish jealousy,) to see out of his wit he projected what hurt would
come by suffering the Gospel to remain, it will seem strange. Alas poor man,
the Commonwealths beyond the Seas, and our own Nation never prospered better
then by entertaining the Gospel: yet this devilish witted man, whose wit was
set, and sharpened by the Devil, was in fear and jealousy of the Gospel. And
God usually punishes it this way, that those subtle heads that are jealous of
those that mean them no harm, but all the good that may be, usually, they are
over-credulous in another kind; they trust those that deceive their trust: they
trust those that the weakest, the very dreggs of the people will not trust:
they trust those that are notoriously false. God strikes their brains, and
besots them, that they trust men that all the world know to be underminers:
notwithstanding where they should trust, and cast themselves into the bosom of
their true-hearted friends, there they are all full of fear and jealousy. But
this caution by the way.

You see the thing proved, that Godly men when they give their names to God,
they ought to be ruled by God, and not by carnal policy, or fleshly wisdom;
you see the reasons of it.

The Use that we will make of it shall be to stir us up to imitation of the
blessed Apostle S. Paul. I speak to them that their breeding and parts Use. To
disclaim fleshly wisdom.
have raised many of them I hope from base filthy lusts: so that the danger is
now of fleshly wisdom. The Devil is more in the brain then in the heart, as he
said of a Cursed Politician. Many men have the Devil in their head: he is not
altogether in the heart and affections, but in the brain, and there he works
his engines; and politic subtle men, they are the great Engineers of Satan,
and that which he cannot do by himself, he does it by them.

Therefore, I beseech you, let us not be instrumental to Satan, who was the
first author of this carnal wisdom: for by his temptation we offended God,
and then came all shifts upon it. You see what shifts came presently upon
Satan's temptation.

Man did naturally affect wisdom; to know good and evil: what wisdom did he
get after he had fallen? he had wisdom to fly from God: there was his
wisdom, to run from God: so all the wisdom of a man that has not grace, it
is to shift, to run away from God, and to have helps, and supports against God.
A foolish thing it is; as if he could do it! And then another shift of Adam was
to cover himself with fig leaves, a silly shift. And then to translate his
fault upon another. So, this shifting of carnal wit it came presently upon the
fall. Take heed therefore of carnal wisdom, it is divellish: presently upon
yielding to the temptation of the Devil it came in.

And that you may not make it your rule, and live by carnal wisdom; Consider
seriously what I said before, how it hinders you from all that is good; how it
hinders you from reforming that which is ill in your places and callings. How
it stirs up to all that is ill. How it stirs you up to cover ill: it
teaches you wit to do ill, and to cover ill when it is done. As we see in
David's adultery, what a deal of wit there was to practice it: And then what a
many windings and turnings there were to cover it: but God laid him open, and
brought him to shame in this world, being a good man.

And as I said, Who will be ruled by his enemy? If a man be on the land, and be
ruled by a thief that will lead him out of his way, it is extremity of
sottishness. Or if he be on the Sea, and be guided by a Pirate, what good can
come to that man that is ruled by those that seek his ruin? Now if a man be
ruled by carnal wisdom, he is ruled by his enemy: and if all the enemies in
the world should plot to do a man that mischief, that his own head and carnal
wit does him; he would cry out of them. In Jer. 47. Thy wisdom has made thee
to rebel. It is wisdom that makes men to rebel against God; too much trusting
to tricks and shifts of carnal wisdom, it makes men take contrary courses to
God, and so provoke him. Are we wiser then he? are we stronger then he? Does he
not daily, and continually make those the butts of his displeasure and wrath,
that adventure their wisdom and policy against his wisdom? Yes surely, God
delights to catch the wise in their own craftiness: he delights to overturn
the builders of Babel: It is but a building of Babel to rear any thing by
politic wisdom contrary to the rules of religion, and contrary to the
practice of piety; to do any thing against conscience and honesty: to do any
thing against the truth by politic shifts, it is to build a Babel that will
fall upon our own heads. It is like the foolish fire that leads a man out of
his way. This foolish fire of carnal wisdom, it leads men to hellish
strength: it makes them forsake Gods light and the light of his Spirit and
Word, and follow a false light of their own Imagination and invention. And
therefore you see what the Prophet Isay says of the people that were in those
times, Isay 50. that did much plod in tricks of policy, Behold, all ye that
kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks: walk in the light
of your fire and in the sparks that ye have kindled: this ye shall have of my
hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow, So, consider this, it falls out oft-times,
that God suffers a man to walk in the light of his own fire that he has
kindled, and in his own comforts: he will have comforts and a distinct way from
Gods ways: and he will have distinct rules from Gods rule: well, well, you
have kindled a fire, walk in the light of your own fire, but be sure you shall
lie down in sorrow.

It is the greatest judgment that God can show in this world, to give us A
great Judgment to begiven up to our selves.
up to our own wits, to our own devices: for we shall wind and turn, and work
our own ruin. And that is the hell of Hell in hell, when the soul there shall
think with it self, I brought my self hither; God will be exceedingly justified
when men by their own wit shall damn themselves. When God has revealed to
man, and taught them, this is the way, O man, I have showed thee what is good,
and what does the Lord require of thee; he has revealed it in his Word, do
this, and do that, and he has given conscience to help; and yet out of
policy to contrive thy own pleasures, and profits, and advantages in the
world, thou have done the contrary. When a man's soul shall reason thus: My own
wit brought me hither, I am damned by wit, I am damned by policy: a poor
policy it is that brings a man to damnation.

Therefore we should beg of God above all things, that he would not deliver us
up to our selves. As Saint Austin has a good speech, Lord, August.
free me from my self, from my own devices and policy. The devil himself is
not such an enemy (as I said) as our own carnal wit: for it is that that
betrays us to Satan: Satan could do us no harm, unless he had a friend within
us. Therefore beg of God above all things, Lord, give me not up to my own
brain, to my own devices: (for man is a beast by his own knowledge) but let thy
wisdom, and thy will be my rule.

Again, if so be that we ought not to make this carnal fleshly wisdom Use 2.
the rule of our life, then let us have a negative voice ready presently for
it: whenever we find any carnal suggestion in our hearts, say nay to it
presently, deny it presently: have a jealousy presently when any plot arises
that is not warrantable by the Word of God, and that is contrary to conscience,
and to simplicity and sincerity, presently deny it; consult not with flesh and
blood, as Saint Paul says of himself, Gal. 1. I consulted not with flesh and
blood.

And when you have any thing to do, (Considering that this is not the rule you
are to live by,) or when you have any thing to resist; when you have any thing
to suffer. Consider what God requires; consider what is for the peace of
conscience: consider what is for the good of your selves, and for the good of
the Church: consult with these advisers, with these intelligencers, and not
with flesh and blood. Consider not what is for your profit, for your pleasure,
for your ease: but resolve against them. Get the truth of God so planted in
your hearts, that it may carry you through all these impediments, and all these
suggestions whatsoever.

And because we cannot do this without a change, we cannot have a disposition
contrary to carnal wisdom without a change: (for except a To get our hearts
changed.
man be born anew, except he be a new creature, he cannot have holy aims:) you
must labor therefore more and more to have the spirit of your mind renewed,
and to grow in assurance of a better estate: for what makes men carnally to
project for this world? they are not sure of a better. They reason thus with
themselves, It may be I may have heaven, it may be not; I am sure of the
pleasures present, of the profits present, (although alas, it be but for a
short time:) whereas if thy soul were enlightened with heavenly light, and thou
were convinced of the excellent estate of Gods Children in this world in the
state of grace; That a Christian is incomparably above all men in the
first fruits of heaven, in the peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost:
which is above all prosperity, and all profit whatsoever. And that in heaven
(which is above our capacity and reach) every way they shall be happy: if men
were convinced of this, certainly they would not prostitute their pates to work
so worldly. If they were sure of heaven, they would not so plod for the earth.

Let us therefore labor to grow daily in the assurance of salvation, beg Get
assurance of salvation.
of God his Spirit to have your minds enlightened.

And withal (to join both together) to see the vanity of all earthly things,
which set carnal wisdom on work. For first, outward things they work See the
vanity of earthly thingse
upon the sense, upon the outward man: profits and pleasures are outward
things, and therefore they work upon sense, they work upon opinion: in opinion
they be so (as indeed worldly things are more in opinion then in truth). A
carnal worldly man, he thinks poverty a hell, he thinks it is such a misery: it
is not so.

Labor to have a right judgmenr of the things of the earth that set carnal
wisdom on work, to avoid poverty, to avoid suffering for a good cause. The
Devil inflames fancy; fancy thinks it is a great hurt to be in poverty; fancy
thinks it is a great good to be in honor, to be in credit, to have great
place, that other men may be beholding to us. Alas, get a sanctified judgment
to see what these things be that set our wits on work. What are all these
things? Vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Let our meditations walk between these two; often think of the excellent
estate of a Christian in this world, and in the world to come; and that will
set heavenly wisdom on work, it will make you plot, and be politic for
heaven. And then withal see the vanity of all other things, of pleasures, and
honors, and profits, and whatsoever, that we may not prostitute our souls to
them which are worse then our selves; that our souls may not set themselves on
work to project and proule for these things that are worse then themselves.

Let this be your daily practice; the meditation of these two things is worthy
to take up your cogitations every day: To consider the vanity, the vexation,
and uncertainty that accompanies all these things, when you have got them: as
we see in Ahab, when he had gotten the Vineyard. Besides the vanity of the,
consider how you have gotten them, and how miserable will you judge your selves
presently? How does God meet with the carnal wits of men in the attaining of
things? The wicked man shall not roast that which he took in hunting. He hunted
after preferment, he hunted after riches, to scrape a great deal for his
posterity: how does God deal with such? he overthrowes them utterly: and his
posterity perhaps they spoil all: Himself roasted not that which he took in
hunting. Ahab got much by yielding to the carnal wisdom of Jezabel, Have thou
gotten, and also taken possession? What became of Ahab with all his plots and
devices?

Achitophel and others God may give them success for a while, but afterward he
gives them the overthrow. Herod, he had success a while in killing of James,
and therefore he thought to work wisely and get Peter too; God struck him with
Worms. Pharaoh in the overthrow of Gods people, says he, Let us work wisely.
How wisely? they were overthrown and drowned themselves: their wisdom brought
them into the midst of the Sea: Consider the vanity of earthly things. And
then consider how just it is with God to cross them either in their own time;
as the rich fool in the Gospel, when he had riches for many years, This night
shall they take away thy soul. That we may not walk according to the false
rules of fleshly wisdom, let us often think of these things.

And to add another thing out of the Text; You see here that S. Paul Not to
walk by fleshly wisdom breeds joy.
rejoiced in this, That his conscience could witness that he had not walked in
fleshly wisdom: so if you do not walk according to the rules of fleshly
wisdom, you shall have this benefit, your conscience shall glory in it.

To make it clear to you: Take in your thoughts, a Politician upon his
Deathbed that has striven so much for riches, that has striven to root
himself by policy, to attain to such and such places, to obtain his pleasure
and delights in the world: what glory, what comfort has he in this? There is
nothing more opposite to comfort then plotting: for, as I said before when I
spoke of simplicity, the more will there is, the more deliberation and plotting
there is in sin, the more is the sin; because it is done cooly, as we say: so
of all persons usually (if their wits be their own) the greatest plotters die
most desperately. For then their conscience tells them, that they have set
their wits on the rack, to do this mischief, and that mischief, and here his
comfort is cooled, his peace of conscience is broken. What comfort can there
be, when that which he sinned for, that which he broke the peace of his
conscience for, that is gone, and he must be taken and hurried away from that;
but the wound of conscience, the crack of conscience that remains for ever:
when he shall think, That for which I sinned is vanished, but my terror abides
for ever?

A man therefore that walks after the rules of fleshly wisdom, he can never
say with S. Paul, I rejoice. But on the contrary, let a man be able to witness
to himself, as S. Paul could: At such a time my fleshly subtle wisdom would
have discouraged me from doing good: and the wisdom of flesh and blood in
others would have discouraged me from reforming such and such abuses; but I
knew it was my duty, and I did it; here now is comfort. At such a time I was
moved to such evil by flesh and blood in my self, or perhaps in others (as a
man shall never want the Devil in his friends: the Devil comes to us in our
nearest friends,) but I had the grace to withstand it: I was not led by such,
and such rule^ by my acquaintance, or by my own devices; but I had grace to
resist such motions: What a wondrous comfort is this?

There is nothing so sharp in conflict as this, To resist Carnal wisdom, it is
the shrewdest temptation that is from carnal wisdom: and as the Temptation is
the strongest, so the comfort is answerable. When Jezabel shall be offered with
her inticements, with her colors, with her paint; and a man can dash her in
pieces, and cast her out of the window, when a man can maintain sincerity and
honesty, what a comfort is this? The greater, and stronger the temptation is
that is resisted, the more is the comfort, when we come to yield our souls to
God, when we come to our account. Therefore be not discouraged, when you are
set upon by Carnal wisdom, by strong reasons of others, or subtle reasons of
your own: is it against the rule? is it against Conscience? is it against the
Word? withstand it: that which is sharpest in the conflict, will be sweetest in
the comfort.

Again, if so be that Carnal, fleshly, worldly wisdom (for it is all one, To
repent of carnal devices.
for the flesh is led by the world, and both conspire together, and hold
correspondence to betray the soul, if it) be such an enemy, that it hinders our
joy, and comfort, and that it ever we will jo^ we must not be led by carnal
wisdom: Then we ought in our daily courses to repent, not only of gross
sins, but to repent even of carnal devices, and carnal designs. Why? It is the
motion, and the counsel of Gods enem^, and of our enemy: therefore as Davia,
Psalr 37. and Psalm 7^. when fleshly wisdom did suggest to him carnal motions
o^ doubting of the providence of God, that he began to think well of the ways
of the wicked, that they prospered that were led altogether by fleshly wisdom;
he censures himself, (it is the drift of both Psalms) So foolish was I, and as
a beast before thee. As indeed, Man is a beast by his own knowledge, as Jeremy
says. For all carnal men sympathize either with beasts in base lusts, or else
with Devils in politic lusts; either they are like Devils, subtle, or like
beasts, brutish in all their courses.

Therefore when any base thought, opposite to the Majesty of God, and his
Truth, and to the Spirit of God moving our hearts, arises in our hearts,
think, This is the motion of mine enemy, of an enemy that lurks in my bosom,
of Godsenemy, of a Traitor: let us renounce it, and be abased, and censure our
selves for it, as holy David did, So foolish was I, etc. Crush all thoughts,
and devices of carnal wisdom in the beginning.

We see that the Godly, they ought not, nor do not lead their lives by fleshly
wisdom: nay, take it in the best sense; take it for the rules of reason: they
do not lead their lives altogether by the light of nature, but only Gods
Children not led only by the rules of reason.
in those things wherein the light of nature, and reason may be a Judge. For
the light of reason, the principle of reason, is given us as a candle in the
dark night of this world, to lead us in Civil, and in common actions, and it
has its use: but yet natural reason it becomes carnal reason in a man that is
carnal; All things are impure to him that is impure, even his very light is
darkness. Not that the light of nature, and that reason (which is a part of
the Image of God) is in it self evil; it is good in it self, but the vessel
taints it. Those that have great parts of learning, that have great wits, and
helps of learning as much as may be, what do they? they trust in them, and so
they stain them. Therefore Luther was wont to say, Good works are good, but to
trust in good works is damnable. So nature, and reason, and learning they are
good in themselves; but trusting in them they become carnal, when a man
neglects better rules for them; when men scorn Religion (as your Politicians
usually do,) then natural reason in regard of this tainture it becomes Carnal.
Not with fleshly wisdom, or not with natural wisdom, as it is a higher rule of
life.

What then shall become of a Christian when he has renounced that Christians
renouncing fleshly wisdom, have a better guide.
which is in him by nature? when he has denied his wit, and his will? when he
has renounced a bad guide, shall he have no guide at all? Yes; For a man is
never lawless, he is always under some guide or other: a man is always under
one Kingdom or other: when he cease to be under the Kingdom of Satan, he
comes under the Kingdom of Christ; and when he is not led by the flesh, he is
led by the Spirit. Gods Children when they have renounced natural, carnal
wisdom, they have not renounced all wisdom; they are wise still: but they are
wise by a supernatural light, they are wise in supernatural things; yea, and in
natural things after a supernatural manner: They are new creatures, advanced to
a higher rank and order of creatures: so their wisdom is a gracious wisdom
when they are Christians.

When a Christian has renounced carnal wisdom, God leaves him not in the
storm in the world as a ship without a stearn, he leaves him not as having no
pole star to guide his course by, but he gives him better direction, he has
the Word of God, he has the Spirit of God, he has the Grace of God to guide
him. Therefore after the negative here Not in fleshly wisdom, the holy Apostle
tells us how the Child of God is led in his own person, but By the Grace of God.


It is good for Inferiors always to be under the Government of Superiors, and
so God has framed the world: for beasts, because they have no wisdom of their
own, they are led, and guided by men: and man because he is (as I said before)
a beast by his own knowledge, and has but a finite, a limited understanding;
he is guided by a larger understanding, he is guided by God, if he be good. And
it is the happiness of the creature to be under the guidance of a better
wisdom. All things in the world are guided to their end; things without life
are guided to their end without their privity. We see there is an end in every
thing: there is nothing in nature but it has its end; whereupon comes that
saying of the Philosophers, (which is good) That the work of nature is a work
of deep understanding: not so much as the leaves but they serve to shelter, and
cover the fruit from the Sun, and the storms, that it may thrive the better:
there is nothing in nature but it is of great use, the work of nature is a work
of deep understanding. Now man, because he has a principle of understanding in
himself, he is so guided by the wisdom of God to his end, as that he
understands his own end himself: he is so led by the wisdom of God, as that
God has created a work of wisdom in himself, that he together with God is
carried to his end. Now, as I said, when we are out of the regiment, and
government of the flesh, we come under the gracious Government of God.
Therefore the Apostle says here, Not in fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God.

The holy Apostle means here especially the particular grace opposite to Quest.
Why t^ Apostle names Grace, not Wisdom?
fleshly wisdom, that is, spiritual wisdom. But why should the Apostle here
not say thus, Not with fleshly wisdom, but with spiritual wifdome? why should
he not say so, rather then thus, Not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God? why should he put Grace, instead of Wisdom?

I answer, he does it for heavenly ends. Answ. Wisdom not from our selves, but
Gods Grace.


First, to show that that wisdom whereby we are governed, it is not from our
selves, but it is a grace: he considers wisdom, not so much as it is in our
selves, in the Conduit; but as it is in the Spring, in the free love of God. It
is a Divine consideration, to consider all habitual graces in us, not as they
are streams derived to us, and resting in us, but as they are knit to a Spring
which is never drawn dry: which besides is a free Spring, therefore they are
graces.

And that is the reason of the comfort of a Christian, he knows he shall never
be destitute of necessary strength, of necessary comfort, of necessary
direction, and grace, to lead him to heaven: because those things that are
necessary in him, he considers them as graces, not as habits, as it was the
proud term of the Philosophers to call them.

We must consider them not as things in us invested in our nature, but as
things that have their Original from the free, constant, and eternal love of
God: as, what is so free as Grace? So a Christian looks on his disposition
wrought by Grace, and on every particular grace he has; as Love, Wisdom,
Patience; he looks to all as Graces, as they come from the free love of God
that is constant: for whom he loves, he loves to the end. And his joy is more
in the spring then in the stream: it is more in the Sun, in Christ himself,
then in grace from him: therefore the Apostle instead of the abstracted,
distinct grace of wisdom, or any such thing, he says, Grace. There is a
savor in the very terms of Scripture, a sweet taste in the very language of
the Holy Ghost.

And then to show that we are not only governed by wisdom, but by other
graces, to show the connection of it with other graces: therefore he 2. We are
guided not only by wisdom, but other Graces.
says, We have had our Conversation, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace
of God.

To show likewise, that where wisdom fails in us, it is supplied by Grace:
for the wisdom of God for us, is larger then the wisdom of God 3. Our want of
wisdom supplied by grace.
in us. The wisdom that God works in us by his Spirit, it teaches us to avoid
dangers, and teaches us how to lead our lives: but we are led by a higher
wisdom; the Grace of God for us it is higher then that which is in Gods
wisdom for us, more then in us.
us.

The wisdom of God for us it watches over us, it keeps us from more evil, and
does more for us, then that which is in us, although that be spiritual and
heavenly. Therefore the Apostle here, he names not distinctly gracious wisdom,
which he mainly intends, as we see by the opposition, Not by fleshly wisdom,
but by gracious wisdom: why does he not say so, but by Grace? Because our
Christian conversation it is not only by wisdom in us, but by grace and love,
partly in us, and partly for us.

For indeed, there is a watchful providence, there is a waking love about the
guiding of a Christian in his course to heaven, that keeps him him in, more
then any Grace that is in him. And a Christian at the hour of death, and at the
day of Judgment will be able to say with experience, That the wisdom of God
for me has been more then any wisdom he wrought in me: though by the wisdom
in me, he enabled me to discover many discouragements, to see many wants, and
to take many good courses that he blessed for me.

But his wisdom for me was greater in preventing occasions above my strength,
in offering means that I never dreamed of, in fitting occasions, and
opportunities to me.

The wisdom of God about and toward a Christian is more then any wisdom that
is in him: For alas, having to do with the devil and with malicious spirits,
and with the world, the stream whereofis against grace; it is hard for that
beam of wisdom in us, that little wisdom we have, though it be an excellent,
spiritual, divine thing: yet notwithstanding there is a heavenly wisdom that
watches for us, and gives issue, and success to all the good we do, and
turns away all evil that is above the proportion of Grace, and strength in
us: therefore says he, Our conversation is in the Grace, and favor of God,
not only in me, but for me. I find experience of grace, not only the grace
that is in me, but of Grace every way for me in all my courses.

And that is the reason why weaker Christians are sometimes the safer
Christians. Another Christian that is wiser, he meets with tronbles perhaps.
Why weaker christiani are sometimes safer.


I but God knows that he has but a little proportion in him, and therefore
Gods Wisdom is more for him without him. God does wondrously for infants and
weak persons; the lack in them is supplied by his heavenly wisdom.

And that makes Christians confident, not to take thought what they shall
speak, or how to carry themselves (more then is meet) not to have distracted
thoughts (I mean) to be discouraged in a good cause: he thinks I have not only
a promise of grace to direct and guide me, but likewise the wisdom of heaven
for me, to discourage others, to take away occasions of discouragment from me,
to offer me encouragments, and to lift up my spirit when occasion serves.

This is the comfort of a Christian, that God is his strength: He has wrought
all our works for us, says the Prophet: he not only works gracious works in
us; but he works all our works for us.

In that the Apostle mentions grace: when his meaning is of the particular
grace of wisdom, as the opposition shows: The first thing that I will observe
from it is this, That A Christian stands in need of wisdom.


When he is out of the fleshly government of fleshly wisdom, he stands Obser. A
Christian needs wisdom,
in need of another wisdom and that is Grace, the Wisdom of God.

We stand in need of wisdom: for alas, what can we do in this world without
wisdom? what can we do without light? For bodily inconveniences 1. To avoid
dangers.
we have a bodily light, an outward light to show us what is noisome; for
reasonable inconveniences that our common wits apprehend, we have the light of
reason: but there be many inconveniences, many dangers to the soul: now there
must be a light of wisdom answerable; we need a heavenly wisdom to avoid
devilish inconveniences, and dangers to the soul, which without wisdom we
cannot avoid.

Again, there is a necessity of wisdom that is heavenly, when we have 2.
Because of the likeness between good and evil.
renounced carnal wisdom; there is such a likeness between that which is
good, and that which is evil, between truth and falsehood. Likeness is the
mother of error. Falsehood is wondrous like truth; evil is wondrous like good
oft-times, in show, when a Sophister has the handling, and the propounding of
it. Though there be as much distance between them as between light and
darkness: yet to the appearance of man, to his shallow judgment they are
wondrous like one another: here is need of wisdom to discern, and distinguish
between these.

Again, there is wondrous need of wisdom, because there are a great many
hindrances from the doing of that which is good; it is good to have wisdom 3.
In regard of hindrances, and helps to good.
to see how to remove those hindrances. There are a great many advantages to
help us to do good, there is much wisdom requisite to take all the helps and
advantages to do that which is good: and unless we have wisdom we cannot take
the advantages to do good, as we should.

Again, good is not good without wisdom; virtue is not virtue without
discretion, when to speak, and when not to speak. A fool speaks all his 4. Good
is not good without it.
mind at all times, says the Wise man. Now to do things in season, to be trees
of righteousness to bring forth fruit in season; To speak a word in season it
is like apples of Gold with pictures of silver. One word in season is worth ten
thousand out of season. Good is such a thing, that it is never good indeed
except it be clothed with all convenient circumstances; one inconvenience in
the circumstance marres the good things. And a world of wisdom there needs, to
see the things that are about good actions to help them, or to hinder them; and
if there be helps, and advantages, to know how to use them, there needs a great
deal of heavenly light. So we stand in need of wisdom. As we stand in need of
our eyes to walk in our common ways, so much we need a heavenly eye in our
souls, a heavenly light of wisdom.

Again, we see (by the policy of Satan) that that which is good, the best good,
it is hid under evil: the best wisdom goes under the name of folly, 5. Good is
hid under evil.
and unnecessary niceness; and the vilest courses go under policy and wisdom.
Now there is need of much wisdom to discover things, and to see them in their
right colors, when things are thus carried. In a word, such difference there
is of things, that there needs a great deal of discerning, and heavenly
wisdom, and a greater light then a man has by nature, to guide him to heaven.
I need not stand to multiply reasons: you see a man has need of a great deal
of wisdom. And, which is the second branch, as he needs it, So he may have
wisdom.


He may have this heavenly wisdom: As S. Paul says here, I walk not Wisdom
may be bad.
according to fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God; the grace of wisdom he
means, according to heavenly wisdom: as he needed it, so he had it. Saint
James tells you how you may have it, If any man lack wisdom, to guide his life
either in prosperity, or adversity, how to abound without pride, and how to
bear afflictions: how to make his prosperity that it be not a snare to him, If
any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who is the Fountain of wisdom;
let him light his candle at Gods light. Carnal wisdom lights its candle at
hellfire: a Carnal man, rather then he will miss of his ends, he will go to
hell, he, and his riches, and policy, and all: it is otherwise with heavenly
wisdom. We have need of wisdom, and wisdom we may have.

The vessel that we must fetch it in is faith, and the vent of faith is prayer:
faith sends its Ambassador prayer to God. If any man lack wisdom, let him go
to God.

And surely thus Solomon did, he is an example of that. He saw he lacked
wisdom, to govern so great a people as was committed to his charge; God was so
well pleased with his petition, that he gave him wisdom, and wealth, and
honor too.

Make this Use of it: Let us consider what relation we stand in; in what Use.
To go to God for wisdom.
rank God has set us; let us consider what good we are advantaged to do by
the place we are in; what helps we have to do it, and what mischiefs, and
inconveniences may come: and let every man in his place and standing consider
what good he may do, and what evil he may avoid, and let us go to God for
wisdom.

He that is a Magistrate, let him do as Solomon did, desire God above all
things to give him wisdom to rule as he should; that God would give him a
public heart for a public place, and he will do it. And those that in their
families would have wisdom to go in and out before them; let them go to God
for wisdom, that they may avoid the snares that are incident to
family-government, distrustfulnesse, worldliness, unfaithfulness in their
particular calling. And so for personal wisdom, to guide and manage our own
persons: let us desire wisdom of God, to know the hidden abominations of our
own hearts, the deceits and subtilties of our own hearts, which is out of
measure deceitful. To know our particular sins, to know what hurts us, and to
know how to avoid it, and how to carry our selves in our particular ways, to
order our conversation aright every way. We see here S. Paul led his life and
conversation by that wisdom: as it was needful for him, so he had it: and we
must go all to the same spring for it, we must go to God.

And we must know, that God will not only make us wise to salvation, that he
will not only give us wisdom in things that merely concern God gives wisdom
for the things of this life.
heaven: but the same love, the same care that gives us wisdom that way, will
give us wisdom in our particular callings to take every step to heaven; the
same Spirit of God does all. He gives us grace necessary to salvation, and he
gives us grace likewise for the leading of a Christian life.

Therefore it is an abominable conceit, to distinguish Religion from Policy and
Government, as if the reasons of Religion were one, and the reasons of State
were another; and as if these were distinguished one against another; it is an
abominable Atheistical conceit: for the same heavenly Spirit of God that
reveals the mysteries of salvation, reaveales likewise to men the mysteries of
State.

Christ has the keys of heaven, of the mysteries of God; and he has the
keys of all earthly policy whatsoever. He has the greater, has he not the
less? Does he guide us by his Spirit in heavenly mysteries; and then for
matters of Policy, and Government of States, and Commonwealths, are we to be
guided by the Devil, by devilish, carnal wisdom? No, he gives all wisdom in
its due place, even wisdom for common things.

Therefore consider, when men will not be ruled by God, by wisdom from above,
in the regiment and government of their lives, how fearfully, Men leaving Gods
wisdom* miscarry.
and shamefully they miscarry; Partly by reason of the accidents of this life,
and the variety of business. You know wisdom as it governs our life about the
things of this world, it deals with things unstable, uncertain and vain, as
Solomon says, they continue not long in the same state; therefore if a man
have not a better wisdom then his own, he shall be mightily to seek. Partly
because of the imperfection of his wisdom: the things are imperfect, and the
wisdom without it be guided from heaven is much to seek oft-times.

Take the wisest man when he leaves heavenly wisdom once, as we see in
Solomon, he thinks to strengthen himself by combination with Idolaters that
were near to him, did he not miscarry foully? And has not God made the wisest
man that ever were in the world exemplary for gross miscarriages, because they
had too much confidence in their parts, and neglected the guidance of God in
the course of their lives? Who was more fool then Achitophel? who was a greater
fool then Saul, and then He^od?

The Emperors had great conceits: Constantine the Great, a good Christian
Emperor, he had a conceit, if he could stablish a new Seat at Bizantium,
Constantinople it was called afterward; He would seat the Empire there: he
would rule Rome by a Vice Roy, by another, and he would be there himself, and
rule all the Eastern parts of the world. A goodly conceit he had of it: but
this proved the ruin both of East and West. For hereupon when he was absent
from Rome, the Pope of Rome he came up and grew by little and little. The
Emperors they thought they did a great matter to advance the Pope, who was
Christ's Vicar, a spiritual man: they consulted with Carnal wisdom, and he came
and over-topped them, and eat them out, and out-grew them: as the Ivy does the
tree that nourishes it. The Pope never left growing till he had over-topped
them. So men, when they go to carnal wisdom, and neglect prayer, and neglect
the counsel of God, and the wisdom of God to guide them in the matters of this
life as well as for the life to come, they come to miscarry grossly.

Therefore let us take S. James his counsel: We all lack wisdom, let us every
day beg it of God; desire God every day that he would Make our way plain before
u, in our particular goings in and out: that he would discover to us what is
best.

And here I might take occasion to reprove sharply the Atheism of many, that
would be accounted great States men, that bring all Religion to Use. Reproo^ of
those that subordinate Religion to State Policy.
reasons of State. They bring Heaven under earth, and clean subvert, and
overthrow the order of things: and therefore no wonder if they miscarry. They
care not what Religion it be, so it may stand with Peace; whether it be false
or true, if it may stand with the peace of the State, all is well. Give me
leave to touch it but in a word: It is a most abominable conceit. Religion is
not a thing so alterable: Religion is a commanding thing, it is to command all
other things, and all other things serve that. And it is not a matter of fancy
and opinion (as they think out of their atheism) to keep men in awe. It is
stablished upon the same ground as that there is a God: that upon the same
ground that we say God is, upon the same ground we may say Religion is. It
teaches us that that God is to be observed: and that Christ is equal to him as
God, and inferior to him in regard of his humanity, etc. So that there is the
same ground that there is a God, and that there is a Religion.

And so again, by the same reason that there is one God, by the same reason
there is but one Religion. And it is not any Religion that will serve the turn:
For that one God will be worshipped his own way. There is one God, one Truth.
And that one Religion must needs be that in which that one God discovers and
reveals himself, and not that which man devises: For will any Master be
served with the device of his servant? And will God suffer his creature to
devise a Religion to serve him? Therefore there is of necessity, as one God, so
one Religion, and that one Religion must be that which that God has left in
his Word.

Therefore those that are to govern States, as they will answer to that one
God; they are to establish that Religion that he has left to the world in his
Word, and not any Religion: not that which men have devised. To go a little
further.

In that one Religion that is left by him, there must be a care had that the
people live by the rules of that one: For this is a rule in nature, nothing in
Religion will help him, that will not live according to the rules of it:
therefore it concerns all that are not atheists, to labor to stablish one
Religion, and obedience to that one.

And every particular man as he looks for good by his Religion, is not to live
by the rules of fleshly wisdom; but by the rules of Religion.

And here a man might deplore the misery of poor Religion above all other
things, above all other Arts, and Trades: In other Arts and Trades he is
accounted no body, that works not according to his Trade: and that has not
(besides some speculative skill, and rules in his head, that has not) skill to
work, he is accounted no body, but a talker except he does: But in Religion men
think it is enough to know: practice it goes under base names. Any common
conscience, any common care, and obedience to the rules we must be saved by is
reproached, and rejected. Religion will not do a man good, except he be ruled
by it. Wherefore serves the rule but to bring things to it? But I will not
stand on this point longer.

There is a necessity of wisdom. And this wisdom may be had; and this wisdom
it leads not only to salvation, but it reaches to the State, and it leads
every man in his calling. Well, we may see (to touch that by the way) In the
third place, True Wisdom touches Conversation.


My Conversation has been by the Grace of God, that is, in wisdom; he Observe.
True wisdom touches Conversation.
puts the general for the particular: there was other graces besides; but
together with them there was this wisdom: So, wisdom tends to conversation.

Mark what I said, wisdom is not in word, but in work: A man that will be
Master of his Trade must work; when a man can work well, he is Master of his
Trade, and not till then: Religion tends to practice. You know what Christ
says, If you know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: He intailes
happiness to doing, If you know these things, he says not you are happy if
you know them: no, If you know these things, happy are you if you do them: For
indeed true wisdom is not only speculative. This wisdom, understanding and
knowledge when it is true, and spiritual, it always tends to practice; and
practice is never sound but when it springs from wisdom; from things known:
Every Article in the Creed it tends to practice in a Christians life, and
quickens practice every Article: so wisdom tends to conversation.

Now, besides that main wisdom which properly concerns salvation, there is
another wisdom which is more particular, that tends to conversation: which is
called Spiritual Prudence for particular actions. This comes from the Spirit of
God, I Wisdom dwell with Prudence. Wheresoever there is wisdom to salvation,
there is prudence to the guidance of a Christian's life.

But in a word, if so be that wisdom tend to conversation, and is joined with
it, You may see that all naughty livers are no bodies in Religion, they Use.
Bad livers no bodies in Religion.
are fools in Religion: wherefore serves knowledge? wherefore serves light,
but to walk by? wherefore serves an instrument, but to work by? wherefore
serves wisdom, but to guide our lives by? Is it to be matter of discourse and
talk? Therefore this does demonstrate clearly (to any man that thinks there is
any Religion, or any heaven,) who be the best Christians, even those that by
the Spirit know the wisdom that God has revealed in his Word, and apply it in
their lives and conversations to be ruled by it, to work to that end. Wisdom
prefixeth an end always, and those that work to that end they are wise men: he
is a wise man that works to attain his end. Now there is no man that can attain
his end by mere knowledge, he attains his end by working, by doing: therefore
the wisest Christian he sets himself to converse wisely, and holily: and he
shows his religion in his particular calling, in every thing: If any man be
Religious, let him show it in holy Conversation: let him be unspotted of the
world. So much for that. But by the Grace of God.


To give a little further light to the words. Grace is either the free favor
of God in himself, issuing from his goodness, whereupon we have Grace
twofold. 1. The favor of God.
forgiveness of sins, and acceptance through Jesus Christ to life
everlasting: This is grace resting in the breast of God, but is only
entertained of us, and works no change in us of it self.

Or else grace is something from that favor, from that free grace of God, 2.
Something wrought in us.
wrought in us. And thar grace wrought in us, is,

First the grace of a whole, universal change: for whomsoever God accepts
graciously to life everlasting, he gives them the gifts of grace, with 1. A
Change.
his favor: he changes their nature, that they may be fit to entertain
fellowship with him: For when by grace he accepts us to favor, if he should
not alter our natures, alas, what a case were we in? were we fit for communion
with God? No; therefore that we may have communion with God, he alters our
dispositions, that we may be holy as he is holy: this change is the first
change in Christianity.

Now in this gracious change (which is a work of the gracious Spirit derived 2.
Particular graces.
to us by Christ, in whom our nature is filled with all grace, and in whom we
receive grace for grace) there are graces wrought: as,

First, a heavenly light to see a further end then ever we saw before: a
heavenly convincing light to see the love of God, to see life everlasting, to
1. Heavenly light.
see glorious things.

And withal comes the grace of Love to carry the whole inward man to 2. Love.
the things that we see.

Then there is the grace of Hope to expect, and Patience to endure 3. Hope,
Patience.
all till we be possessed of that which our understandings are enlightened to see.

And Faith persuades the soul where to have it, and relies on the Promise; 4.
Faith.
so particular graces are wrought. Therefore that is one reason why the Apostle
names not wisdom in particular, when he says, We have not led our
conversation according to carnal fleshly wisdom, but by Grace: his meaning is,
that a Christian when he has heavenly wisdom, he has all graces, and wisdom
together. There is a connection, a combination of graces, as I said: so he leads
his life by all graces: for all graces are necessary to a Christian life:
therefore instead of wisdom, he puts the word grace.

Now besides these, besides the favor of God accepting us in Christ: 3.
Exciting, applying, strengthening Grace.
And besides the working of these graces in us, in, and after our conversion,
there is another degree of grace requisite, which is a particular exciting,
applying, strengthening grace, which is required to every good act, to act
every good work, and to resist every evil, and to enjoy good things as we ought
to enjoy them. I say, there is a grace necessary to withstand temptations in
all evil, besides graces habitual that are wrought in us, of Faith, and Love,
and Hope, etc. These except they be actuated, and enlivened by the continual
work of the Spirit; except they be brought to act, and a new strength put into
them, they are not sufficient for a Christian life. Therefore S. Paul here by
Grace, means not only the graces of the Spirit, habitual graces; but the
power of the Spirit acting, enlivening, quickening and strengthening him
against every evil in particular, and to every good work in particular. But by
the Grace of God.


In that the Apostle here, though he principally mean wisdom, yet he names
Grace, the next point I will observe is this, That All the Wisdom that we have
it comes from Grace. Doctr. All our wisdom from Grace.



All the wisdom we have comes from Grace, merely from Grace. And this Grace is
not wanting to us when we have renounced our fleshly wisdom. Heavenly wisdom
comes altogether from Grace. To make this a little clear: Whatsoever is
spiritual it comes from Christ: since the fall we have nothing but by especial
grace. God being reconciled by Jesus Christ, he has placed all fullness of
grace in him: he has enriched our nature in him with wisdom, and all graces
whatsoever. All the treasures of wisdom are in him, and all other graces. God
the Father, and our Savior Christ, they send the Spirit, they communicate the
Spirit, which takes of Christ, and does enlighten, and quicken, and guide all
those that are members of Christ. All in particular, all inward things come
from Grace; Grace comes from the Spirit, the Spirit from Christ, and this is
the descent of Grace and Wisdom.

Thereupon they are taken indefinitely in Scripture, sometimes to walk wisely,
to walk graciously, sometimes to walk in the Spirit, sometimes to walk in
Christ, it is all one; sometimes to be in Christ, Whosoever is in Christ, etc.
And to walk in the Spirit, and by the Spirit, to pray in the Spirit, and in
wisdom, and in faith, or to live by faith, or to live by Grace, or in Grace;
they are all one, because they are subordinate. For Christ is the treasure of
the Church: all that is Good for the Church is laid up in him, Wisdom, and
whatsoever: Of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Grace, answerable to
the grace that is in him: he vouchsafes us his Spirit.

Now the Spirit guides us not immediately, but it works a habit in us (as we
call it,) it works somewhat in us to dispose us to that which is good. And when
that is wrought, the Spirit guides us to every particular action. These things
that the Spirit works in us are called Graces: because they come from out of
our selves by the Spirit. so wisdom is called Grace, because it comes from the
Spirit: the Spirit comes from Christ, and Christ has grace, not only grace in
himself, but he infuseth Grace into us: he has not only abundance, but
redundance; not only Grace flowing in himself, but redundant, overflowing to
all his members. This Saint Paul means, when he says, We have had our
Conversation by the Grace of God, that is, by such blessed habits of Wisdom,
Faith, Love, etc. as are wrought by the Spirit of God, which Spirit is given us
by Jesus Christ our head.

Hence we learn, that every thing that is necessary to bring us to heaven, it
is a grace; that is, it comes from without us. Adam had it within him, Every
thing necessary to heaven, a grace.
he was trusted with his riches himself: but now in Jesus Christ we have all of
Grace: we have all out of our selves. Christ is the Sun, we have all our beams
from him, all our light, all our life from him: he is the head, all our motion
is from him. And this is not only true of habits (as we call them) that is, a
constant work, or disposition wrought in Gods Children, which for the most part
they carry about with them: but likewise in all the particular passages of
their life, they have need of grace for every particular action. And herein the
soul is like to the air: the air stands in need of light, and if it be not
enlightened by the Sun, it is presently dark: so a man is no wiser in particular
actions, then God will make him on the sudden: put case he be a man of a wise
spirit for the most part, that he passes for an understanding man, and is so:
yet except he have the grace of Gods Spirit, except he have wisdom to guide
him in particular, he is no wiser then God at that time will make him to be.
You see all motion in the body it comes from the head: let the spirits in the
head be obstructed never so little, and there follows an apoplexy, there will
be no motion: so all our wisdom, all the direction that we have to lead our
lives as becomes Christians, it comes from Christ, it comes from Grace: not
only the disposition, but likewise every particular action: for we need Grace
continually to assist us, to excite, and stir up our powers, and to
strengthen them against oppositions: and if the opposition be strong, we have
need of a stronger Grace.

There is never a good work that we do but it is opposed from within us, from
without us. From within us, by Carnal wisdom (as I said before,) and by carnal
passions, and affections. From without us, by Satan, by the world, and by men
that are led with the spirit of the Devil: therefore there is need of a
strength above our own. Besides the Grace that is in us ordinarily, there needs
a new particular strength and light, to particular actions.

Does all come from God, and from his Grace? Let us take heed (when we have any
thing) of sacrilegious affections, of attributing any thing to Use. Not to
ascribe any thing to our selves.
our selves, to our own wisdom, and let us give all presently to Grace. Mark
the phrase of S. Paul here, Not by fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God: he
does not say, by any habit in my self; he does not say, by any wisdom that is
in me, but he chooses that which is in God, Grace, and favor; because he
would not rob God of any honor. It was a proud term the Philosophers had, as I
said, sometimes they called their moral virtues habits: and if we consider them
merely as they are in the person, they are habits; but indeed they are graces:
the Scripture gives them a more heavenly term, Grace; those things that we
guide our lives by, as Wisdom, Love, Temperance, Sobriety. Grace is a fitter
word then habit, because then we consider them as they come from God freely:
they are graces, they come from grace and favor. And when men differ one from
another in wisdom, they differ in grace and favor; he gives more light, he
opens the understanding of one more then another. Therefore S. Paul was wise,
and careful this way, when he speaks of that he had done himself, lest he
should rob God, Not I, oh not I, 1 Cor. 15. but the Grace of God that was in
me; that was all in all: For indeed we are what we are, and we do what we do by
Grace. Even as by our selves we are men; we are what we are, and we do what we
do, by our souls, by our reason and understanding: so it is with spiritual
grace, we are what we are out of our selves by spiritual grace, and we do what
we do by spiritual grace. And when that cease, when God suspends the blessed
motions of his Spirit to humble us, alas, we are dark; a man is a confused
creature, he is at a loss, he is in darkness for the particular managing of
his life; he knows not what to do, he knows not what to speak, he is puzzled
in every particular action. And therefore when he has spoken, or done that
which is fit, he should consider it is a grace.

My Conversation has been in the Grace of God, says the Apostle. Therefore
let us sanctify God in our hearts this way. And when we stand in need of any
direction, desire God of his grace to give us wisdom, and to give us the grace
that we stand in need of. That is for the phrase. The point as I told you was
this, That All wisdom comes from Grace;
And
God is ready to give us his Grace. God ready to give Grace.



For says S. Paul, My Conversation has been in Grace, which God did minister
to me, and has ministered to me to lead my life by.

The Reason is this; Christ has undertaken to give us grace if we be Reason.
Christ has undertaken it.
his. Men under grace shall never want grace to lead a Christian life. For
Christ has undertaken to be our Head, to be our Husband, to be our guide in
our way to heaven. As our head he is to give us motion, to move us as his
members. As he is our Shepherd, as he says, I am the good Shepherd; so he is
to lead us in our ways and passages, in his paths, to conduct us to
happiness. And as he is our husband, so he is to be the head of his wife, to
guide us, it is his office. And he works according to his own office. He is a
King to subdue in us whatsoever is contrary to his good Spirit, to subdue our
rebellions, and to bring all our Imaginations under his Spirit: as well as to
be a Priest to make peace between God and us. He is a King to rule us, and to
overruled in us whatsoever is ill. And he is a Prophet to teach us and to guide
us. He is the Angel of the Covenant, the great Counselor, that has the
Spirit of Counsel in him, Esaias 9. 6. not for himself only, but for his Church.

Therefore as all the things that we need, come from grace, and from the favor
of God; so we need not doubt of the grace of God in Christ; being reconciled,
he is willing to give us grace.

This I observe, to cut off all cavils of flesh and blood, and to arm us
against all discouragements.

There are two things that greatly hinder us from a Christian course,
Presumption, and Despair.

Presumption, to set upon things, without asking grace of God, without
Presumption.
depending upon his direction by the strength of natural parts, of natural
wit.

And then Despair: when a man says, What should I go about these Against
Despair. Consider our parts and duty.
things? I shall never bring them to pass. No: First consider thy standing,
thy place, and calling; and then consider the abilities that God has given
thee: consider thy parts, consider thy duty that thou art to do. And beg of God
assistance, and strength; and if it be a thing that belong to thee, Beg
assistance of God.
go on, set on all the duties that belong to thy place, in this confidence that
thou shall have grace.

Go to the Fountain, to Christ for grace for the direction of thy life; Go to
Christ.
he is the light of life, he is the Way, he is all in all to bring us to heaven.

Wherefore serves all the Promises, not only of life everlasting, but even of
grace? but to encourage us to set on holy duties in confidence, that Go to the
Promises.
if we have a will to be out of Satan's Kingdom, and if we have a will to be
out of fleshly wisdom, God will take us into his Kingdom, and into his
Government. He will give the Spirit to them that ask him Now the Spirit is a
Spirit of direction, a Spirit of assistance, a Spirit of strength and comfort,
it serves all turns. How many Promises are wrapped in that promise of the
Spirit? In want of direction he shall be our Counselor; in want of strength,
to assist us. In perplexities, when we know not which way to turn us, to advise
us. In extremities, when we are ready to sink, to comfort us. He will give us
his holy Spirit to supply all our defects in a fit time if we ask him: If we
find our need, and if we will renounce our carnal wisdom. Therefore set on
those duties that God calls you to.

And withal, do as S. Paul does here, (he sets the negative before the
Renounce Carnal Wisdom.
affirmative,) renounce carnal wisdom, be not guided by that: trust perfectly
to the Word of Grace, and to the Spirit of Grace: (for the Word of Grace, and
the Spirit of Grace go together) and then you shall find that God will do
abundantly above all that you are able to ask or think. Luther when he set on
the work of Reformation, those that saw him at the first might have said, Get
thee into thy Cloister, and say, Lord have mercy upon thee, for thou set on
a work impossible. But he saw the parts that God had given him, that he had wit
to understand the abuses of the times: and he had given him courage: he saw by
his profession he was called to be a Divine, his conscience was awaked to see
the abominations of the times, and he set on to discover these things. Did
Christ leave him? No, he did not, but gave success to him to be admired of
all. When all the world was set against one man, yet he prevailed against them
all: even because he walked as S. Paul did here, in sincerity, and simplicity;
that is, he looked to the truth of the cause, and not to his own honor, or
profit, or pleasure: he was content to be no wiser then the Book of God would
have him to be; to be no richer or greater in the world then God would have
him; but committed himself to God in simplicity, and sincerity: how did God
maintain him? wondrously, to admiration. I instance in him, to show how base
distrust causes things to be no better carried then they are.

Now to encourage you to go to the grace of God, to go to the Fountain, and not
to be held under carnal wisdom, under these pretexts, Oh, if I do
Encouragements to be guided by Grace.
not hearken to carnal wisdom, I shall be a beggar, I shall never rise, I
shall never do this or that in the world, I shall never escape this and that
danger. Fie upon those base conceits: S. Paul here renounceth the regiment of
carnal wisdom: what became of him? did he want a guide? Grace took him up, Not
by carnal wisdom, but by the Grace of God. When we come under the government
of God, we come under the government of grace. And we shall want nothing either
for heaven or earth that is for our good.

Whatsoever we had that was good, before we were gracious, that we keep still,
and it is under a better guide. Were we learned before? were we wise before?
had we authority before? were we noble before? we lose none of these when we
come under Christ; but he advances and elevates these, he makes them better.
If we were wise, he makes us graciously wise; if we were learned, if we were
noble, he makes us doubly noble: we lose nothing, but we are under a sweeter
government, the government of grace, which is a mild government, a government
that tends to the advancing of us above our selves; that advances us to be the
Spouse of Christ, and the heirs of heaven.

Those that are in Christ Jesus, and are led by his Spirit, they are his. In
Romans 8. there is excellently set down the prerogatives that they have: those
that lead their conversation in simplicity and sincerity, those that are in
Christ, and in the Spirit, and in Grace, there is no Damnation to them. And
then again, if they suffer any thing; says he, The afflictions of this world
are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed. If they have any
infirmities, says he, The Spirit helps our infirmities. The Spirit teaches us
how to pray, when we know not how to pray. If we suffer any evil, God turns all
to good: All things shall work together for the best to them that fear God. For
infirmities in other things we have Christ, and he makes intercession in
heaven: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods people that are in
Christ, that are in Grace, that are in the Spirit? such as S. Paul was here, it
is Christ that is dead, or rather that is risen again, and makes intercession
for us. And if he have given us Christ, shall he not with him give us all
things else? If he have given us Christ, he will give us grace to bring us to
heaven. See the excellent estate of a Christian that is under the regiment of
Christ, that is led by the Spirit, That Chapter may serve instead of all.

And see the sweet combination here, how he knits these things together, My
rejoicing is this, that I have not had my Conversation in fleshly wisdom, but
by the Grace of God. Here is a knitting together of diverse things that seem to
differ: as, here is wisdom, and simplicity, I have had my conversation by the
grace of God, by wisdom, and yet in simplicity. For it is wisdom to be
simple: when a man has strength of parts, it is wisdom to bring them parts to
simplicity.

It is wisdom to be simple concerning that which is evil; for a man to be
simple there, is his best way; there is wisdom joined with his simplicity.
Then again, besides Wisdom, and Simplicity, here is Our Conversation, and Gods
Grace, both joined together. S. Paul by grace guided his conversation. So God
stirs us to do all that we do: we see, but he opens our eyes to see: we hear,
but he opens our ears: we believe, but he opens our hearts to believe.

This I speak, to reconcile some seeming difference: Does Gods Spirit do all,
and we do nothing? We do all subordinately, we move as we are moved; we see as
we are enlightened: we hear as we are made to hear. We are wise as far as he
makes us wise: we do, but it is he that makes us do.

Saint Paul here led his conversation, but it was grace that moved him to lead
it graciously. Well then, he that joins simplicity and wisdom together, the
wisdom of the Serpent, and the simplicity of the Dove: he that trusts in God,
and grace, and yet in trusting to grace, does all that he can, and goes on in a
Christian course, he shall rejoice: Our rejoicing is this, that we have had our
Conversation in simplicity, and according to the rule of Grace, not by fleshly
wisdom.

Consider seriously of it, what a joy will this be, that we have led our lives
by a rule different from the world? that we have led our lives and courses,
according to the motion of Gods blessed Spirit: this must needs bring joy and
rejoicing with it in what estate soever.

The world join these together, simplicity, and sincerity of life where they
see them, that they may slander them, that they may lay imputations upon them:
they see they are courses opposite to theirs, and they lay load on them. But
what does God? where there is simplicity and wisdom, and a holy Conversation,
he adds his Spirit, he joins the Spirit of grace, which is a Spirit of joy
always. As light and comfort go with the Sun; so the Spirit of joy and comfort
go always with the Spirit of grace. Saint Paul here in regard of the world was
afflicted, he received the sentence of death, he was slandered and misused; yet
to Godward says he, Our rejoicing is this, that we have led our Conversation
according to Grace, according to the motion of Gods blessed Spirit, and not
with fleshly wisdom.

If this be so, that the joy of Gods Spirit goes with the grace of Gods Spirit;
and that those that lead their conversation by grace have a rejoicing above all
imputations, and slanders whatsoever: Let this be an encouragement to us to
lead a godly life: we all seek for joy; every creature seeks for joy: if we
would have joy within us, if we would have a spring of joy, let us labor to
lead a conversation by this rule, by grace, by the motion of Gods Spirit, which
is ready to guide us if we commit our selves to his guidance. But by the Grace
of God.


To come then to make an Use of trial, whether we lead our lives by this
gracious wisdom or no, and not by carnal wisdom. And then to come to direct
us how to lead our lives by the grace of God, which is the ground of all joy
and comfort, as S. Paul says here.

How shall a man know whether he lead his life by this spiritual, gracious
wisdom, or no? Quest.


I answer, mark the opposition here, Not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace
of God. He then does lead his life by the Grace of God, that does renounce
Answ. Signs of being led by Grace.
carnal, and fleshly wisdom. Carnal wisdom is a false rule, and it cannot
stand together with grace, they one expel another. A doubleminded 1. To
renounce carnal wisdom.
man, says S. James, is unconstant in all his ways; that is, he that has two
strings to his bow: he that will be content to be led by the grace of God, and
by the Word of God, which is the Word of his Grace, and yet notwithstanding he
will have carnal policies, he will have shifts too, he is a double minded man:
he is not now under the government of grace, he halteth, as the Prophet tells
the Israelites, Why do you halt? so he halteth between carnal, and heavenly
wisdom. He is loath to renounce carnal wisdom: no, he thinks if he do, he
shall be a fool, he shall lose this way of getting, and that way of rising.

But he that is under the Spirit of God; that is under Grace, and is guided by
it, he will renounce the motions, and stirrings of carnal wisdom: When Carnal
Wisdom, like to Eve, or like Job's Wife, or like Peter shall suggest, Oh,
spare your self, why will you do this? why will you go on in these courses? yet
notwithstanding he is able to renounce it.

The most of Gods Judgments in this world, on his Children, it is for this
halting: they have much carnal wisdom in them; and God to work it out of them
is forced to cross them sharply in their projects and courses; and all to
bring them to rely on Grace, to rely on his Government in the use of good
means: For we must serve Gods providence in the use of good means.

A man may know by Gods afflicting of his Children, that they deal too much in
carnal wisdom: for if it were not for carnal wisdom, if we would submit our
selves to his sweet, and easy guidance, and use the lawful means that he has
discovered in a lawful calling; if we would observe lawful courses: alas, we
should see a clear light, and an easy passage, we need not to use these
shifts: but because we cannot do so, we are loath to trust him; but we are
double-minded, we will be ruled by him a little, but we will be politic and
subtle; therefore he sends crosses upon crosses upon our carnal ends and
projects: especially those that are his Children, he will not suffer them to
prosper in ill courses.

That is one sign, those that are led by the grace of God, they will not be led
by Gods enemy, and the enemy of their own souls: now God, and our own souls
have not a worse enemy then carnal fleshly wisdom; that is evident from the
opposition.

Those that deny carnal wisdom, that deny themselves, and put themselves upon
God, it is a good Evidence. And as it is a sign, so it is a cause. You see in
holy Abraham, when he had put himself on God, and left his Country, and his
fathers house, God guided him, God took him into his government. I am God
All-sufficient, walk before me, and be perfect. God means this, That by leaving
all other things, and cleaving to me, thou shall lose nothing, thou shall have
all in me, I will be all-sufficient; therefore walk before me, and be perfect,
be sincere. A man shall never know what God will do for him till he put himself
upon him, and cease to try him, and begin to trust him: trust him once, honor
him of his Word; have not a double eye, partly to carnal means, and partly to
him, but have a single eye to his wisdom, and know that he will reward thee and
keep promise. It is an excellent thing to deny carnal wisdom.

How many Cavils might blessed Noah have had, before he built the Ark? The
world would scorn him as an old doting man, that would go about to be wiser
then all the world besides. But he denies all carnal reason, and rejects the
scorns of sinful persons, and obeyes God: and we see how God protected him,
and went on with him. And so in David, and S. Paul.

And to add a little to that I touched before, God usually strangely crosses
carnal wisdom, because men will not deny their carnal will, and their carnal
wit. There was never any Politician in the world that ever was, but complained
of it, if he lived any time in the world, that God went beyond him. Says the
Heathen man Tully, I thought my self wise, but I never was so: and so they may
all take up the same complaint. God dashes the Imaginations of the proud. They
build a Babel, a confusion to themselves and others, that are led by carnal
wisdom, that will not trust to the grace of God.

Let no man flatter himself, but trust in God, and not rely upon carnal
wisdom, and such courses. Those that will bring Religion to reasons of State,
and policy: and subject the highest thing in the world to the basest thing,
which is carnal wit, (as I said before) we see what they do. The nature of man
infinitely desires the accomplishment of their will. We see that where
corruption may have the greatest advantage in greatness; let them have their
will, they will overthrow a world to have it: their wit is bent to serve their
will.

All witty men that account it a heaven upon earth to have their will, instead
of law, and conscience and all, they set their wits on the strain to serve
their will, and so set themselves against God. Is it not Gods honor to set
himself against them? Was there ever any fierce against God and prospered?
says Job. Denial of fleshly wit, and will, and wisdom, it is both a sign and
evidence of grace: and it is a means likewise why Gods grace will lead us:
when we deny that which is strong in us, God will make a supply by his Grace;
we are no losers by it.

Again, you see here in the Text, where the life is led by the Grace of Sign 2.
Simplicity.
God, by the Spirit of God stirring us, acting us, leading, moving, and
strengthening of us; there a man's courses are in simplicity and sincerity: the
soul that is under grace will put it self simply upon God; that soul will be no
wiser then the Word of God makes it to be; it will be no happier, no richer
then God makes it, it will use no other means then what God allows: this is
plainness, and singleness, and simplicity of heart.

Again, it will be in sincerity: where a man leads his life graciously, his
Sincerity.
actions are sincere: this grace as it comes from God, so it tends to God,
sincerity looks to God, it does things as to God. So that where Grace is, it
carries a man above himself, to seek the glory of God, and life everlasting, to
have spiritual and heavenly ends, to seek God in all things. The grace of God
in S. Paul guided him to lead his life in the simplicity and sincerity of God;
that is sincerity that looks to, and aims at God in all things.

And indeed, a gracious man, and only a gracious man, can look out of himself
to an end above himself: only a gracious man can aim at Gods glory, at the
pleasing of God; why? because only a gracious man knows that he has better
things in God then in the world. A worldly man makes himself his term; he makes
himself his last end: because he knows not better out of himself then in
himself: he dares not venture upon Gods ^avour, to put all upon that, he knows
not whether he be his friend or no; he thinks he is his enemy, as he may well
enough, by his ill courses: only the gracious man can put himself upon God; he
knows he is redeemed out of a miserable condition into a glorious-estate: and
if he should be denied of all the world, yet he knows he has more happiness
in him, then he can look for here: he knows he would be Al sufficient for him:
he is assured of his salvation, therefore he has higher ends, he is sincere in
all things.

God when he is honored by trusting of him, when in sincerity we make him our
wisdom, and make his Word our rule, and the happiness that he has promised
our chief happiness that we aim at, and rest in him; when we honor him so
far, then he makes a supply of all other things. But I spoke of sincerity to
the full before, only I bring it now, to show how it is a note of a man that
makes the Grace of God his guide, he walks sincerely; he seeks the glory of God.

Thirdly, he that walks by the Grace of God, and in the grace of God, Sign 3.
The strength of Grace.
by it as a rule, and in it as a principle, he that walks in it, and by it, and
through it: you shall see it by the ability that is in him above nature, by the
things that he does, that other men cannot do that walk not by grace: therefore
you have a trial of a man that converseth by grace, from hence; he can cross
the common corruptions of the place, and of the time he lives in: he is not a
slave, he is not inthralled to common fears, to common hopes, to the common
joys and delights that the world is carried withal: but as Grace is a thing
that is mighty, and strong, and powerful of it self, it is a Spirit: the Spirit
is like the wind as Christ tells Nicodemus; it is a mighty, powerful, strong
thing: so it makes him strong, it inables a man's spirit to do above himself,
above that which he could do if he had not grace. It makes him deny himself in
matter of pleasure, in matter of profit, it will make him cross himself in
matter of revenge, as David spared Saul when he had him in his power. It will
make him triumph over all estates, he can abound, and he can want, as S. Paul
says.

Other men are changeable with their condition; they are cast down in
adversity, they are puffed up in prosperity, they can deny themselves in
nothing: they are always inthralled to their base pleasures, and profits, and
honors, they are always swayed with some carnal end or other. Grace it
raises a man above nature, he can do that which another cannot do, he can
endure that which another man cannot endure: he can dye, he can endure shame,
he can resist that which another man cannot resist.

In a word, you may know Grace in a man that has great parts of nature: Sign
4. In men of great parts. By abasing his gifts and parts.
How shall we distinguish grace from nature in him? Thus, you shall have him
subdue his parts unto grace, and to the rules of Religion: If he have a strong
wit, he will not make show of the strength of it, as though he would break
through business with his wit; but he will consult with conscience. You may
know a man that is led by grace, especially where there are great parts; he can
deny not only his corruptions, but other things if they stand not at that time
with the will of God: he forbeares ostentation of learning when he sees it is
hurtful, when it is rather to show himself, then to get glory to God, or to
win souls. When a man sees that such and such courses might crush another, and
advance himself: yet if it touch upon conscience he will not do: here is a
conflict between parts, and the Grace of God, and goodness: now when a man in
this can deny himself, it is a sign that a man makes grace his guide.

It is not so easy in weaker dispositions: for men seem sometimes to be good,
when it is defect of parts: but in men of ability it proceeds not from defect,
or want of parts, but it is the power of Grace only whereby they are swayed;
such a man dares not do it: he wants not ability or skill, but he dares not
offend God, he dares not seek himself, he dares not give scope to his wit, and
to his vain mind, he knows what spirit in him moves such things, and he
suppresseth them presently, and yields to the motions of Gods blessed Spirit.

But yet in weaker men a man may know when such a one is ruled by grace: thus;
when a man sees something in him that strengthens nature, as, Grace In men of
weaker parts.
takes not away nature, but betters it. When you see a man, that otherwise is
simple, yet he is wondrous skilful in resisting a temptation, skillful in
giving advice, skilful in keeping the peace of his conscience, skilful in
giving reproof, even above himself: a man may know that he has a better
Schoolmaster, that the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Grace is his Schoolmaster.

So that whether a man have strong, or weak parts, a man may know whether he be
led by grace or no. In the weaker it raises him above himself: in the
stronger, when the exercise of his parts of nature, and grace cannot stand
together, it makes him deny himself: that he may be led by the one, he denies
the other altogether: this is gracious wisdom.

Again, a man may know that he leads his life in gracious wisdom, or by
gracious wisdom, when he fetches reasons for his actions, not from Sign 5.
From the ground of his actions.
things below, but from Religion, from conscience, from spiritual things: he
does not fetch the reason of his actions from this, that this will profit me,
or I shall advantage my self thus and thus: but he fetches the reasons and
ground of his actions higher; this is pleasing to God, this is according to the
peace of my conscience, this is for the good of the Church, for the good of the
State I live in; this is for the good of my Christian brethren. The strongest
reason of a Christian is that that makes for Religion, and for conscience: if
he may gain in his own particular one way, and gain to the State, or Religion
another, he considers not, what will it advantage me? but, what is it for
Religion? It is the chief prevailing reason, how he may gain to Religion, and
the glory of God: he will not redeem his life to impeach the glory of God, and
Religion. This is a man that leads his life by grace.

Again, where grace is, there graces are together: there is a sweet linking
Sign 6. Graces are together.
of them: therefore S. Paul instead of wisdom, names Grace of God, all grace.
A man therefore may know that he is led by grace, when there is no solitary
grace: for where grace is solitary, it is not at all, it is but a shadow.

For there is not one grace but it is of special use in the managing of a
Christians life and conversation: therefore S Panl instead of wisdom, puts
Every Grace of use to a Christian.
grace here. For instance, there is a great necessity of seeing by a light
above nature, things above nature. If a man lead a life above nature, there is
a necessity of heavenly illumination and conviction, that there is a better
happiness then the world affords. And then there is a need of love to carry
the soul to that happiness that is discovered. But then there are a world of
impediments between us, and heaven, and happiness that is discovered to us in
the Gospel by Christ Jesus: there must be heavenly wisdom therefore to
discover the impediments, and to remove them. And there are many advantages how
to attain our end, we must use this, and this means, these and these helps
that God has ordained: here must be heavenly wisdom to use the advantages,
and to avoid the hindrances. But there are a world of troubles between our end
and us, between heaven that is discovered, and us: therefore says the Apostle,
Ye have need of Patience. And patience that is sustained by hope, hope casts
anchor in heaven, and assures us of happiness there, and then patience
sustains us in whatsoever befalls us in this world. Therefore the Apostle says
not, I lead my life by wisdom, but by grace; by wisdom, as it has a
connection with all other graces.

Therefore a man that out of hearing of the Word, or reading, etc. has it
discovered, that there is a better way then he takes, and yet notwithstanding
has not love to carry him to it, nor wisdom to remove the impediments, he
works not toward his end; there is no grace at all: there is illumination, but
it is not sanctified illumination, but a mere common work of the Spirit:
because where true wisdom is, there is love, and patience, and hope, and all
other graces to carry the whole soul to that happiness that is discovered.

Therefore by this you may know a gracious wise man, he works to his end
always: another man hears and wishes, Oh, it were well if I could attain
heaven: but carnal policy, and base affections hold him in a beastly course of
life, that he works not to that end: only he hears such things, and thinks God
will be merciful, and Christ has dyed, and when he cannot enjoy the world
longer, he will have good words that way: but that will not serve the turn, a
man must lead a life in grace, that will dye, and be saved by grace; he must
work, and carry the whole man with it: and not only have knowledge, but faith,
and love, and all, a man must work with it.

Who is a wise man in outward matters? is he a wise man that only talks of
States matters, out of Books he has read? No, but he that when he comes to a
business to negotiate in the world, can remove hindrances, and attain his end,
and overthrow the plots of his enemies when it comes to particular actions:
here is a wise man, that can attain his end by working; that does work to his
end till he have attained it. So he proves graciously wise in Religion that
works to his end; or else he is a foolish man, a foolish builder. As Christ
says, If ye know these things, and do them not; you are as a man that builds
on the sands, your profession will come to nothing.

Again, a man may know that he is guided by Grace, that he does every Sign 7.
When a man provides for his best good.
thing by gracious wisdom, when he does provide for himself best in the best
things, out of a sanctified judgment, when he does judge aright of differences:
when he considers that there is a difference between the soul and the body;
between this life and eternal life: there is a main difference between the
glorious eternal life in the world to come, and this fading life which the soul
communicates to the body in this world; when a man judges the difference
between true riches, and these things that we are so set upon, that are but
lent us for a little while. When he judges between the true honor to be the
Child of God, and the fading honors of this world that shall lie down in the
dust with us, and shall all depart and be gone, it appears then he has a
sanctified judgment, he discerns of things that differ.

And according to this, (if he lead his life in gracious wisdom) he makes his
provision; he makes his provision as his judgment leads him: his judgment leads
him to the best things, therefore he provides for the best things. As Christ
says of the Children of this world, they are wise in their courses, in their
Generation: they provide against beggary, they make friends beforehand, as we
see in that unjust steward. So a Christian provides for his soul, he looks to
that, he makes him friends of his unrighteous Mammon: he makes him friends of
his earthly things, that is, he does deserve well of men that they pray for
him, and so help him to heaven. He daily makes his account ready, he cuts off
impediments that he meets with in the way, he troubles not himself with
impertinencies, he spends not more time then needs about worldly things: he
uses them as they may help his work to be better and better in grace, to be
fitter and fitter for glory. As he discerns differences, so he makes his
provision answerable: he provides for the best in the first place. Or else he
were a foolish Merchant, a foolish builder, a foolish man every way; the
Scripture says he is no better that cannot discern the difference, and provide
well for himself when other things fail.

The Scripture does well call wicked men fools, they have no judgment, they
do not provide for themselves: they prefer these things (say what they will)
before better things: they are fools in their provision. Achitophel, he made
provision, he set his house in order, and what became of him after? he hanged
himself. He made much provision for the world, and at last he knew not how to
forecast and provide for his soul. The Scripture calls the rich man in the
Gospel, a fool: he was wise enough to contrive for himself, yet he was but a
rich fool. The fool, as the Wise man says, knows not the way to the City: so
a wicked man he knows not the way to heaven, he discerns not the difference,
he provides not, he knows not the way thither, he cannot do one thing that is
gracious, not one action that may further his account.

I might be very large in the point; it is profitable, because we do infinitely
deceive our selves in that point, which is of more consequence then the whole
world: for the man is, as the rule that he is led by is; carnal men are led by
carnal rules; gracious, and holy men guide their lives by heavenly wisdom, by
a gracious rule.

Now if you find your selves defective (for a good Christian may be defective
in this: but if he have hearkened to carnal wisdom, if he have forgotten
himself, if he have troubled himself too much about the world, he will come to
his Center again, he will come to his old way again, he will not be long out of
it: his way and course is by grace. Sometimes he may have a policy that is not
good, as David had, yet his way is gracious. I say, if you find your selves
defective) I will show some helps how we may guide our selves, not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the Grace of God; that is, by gracious wisdom, by the Spirit.

Now the Spirit leads us not immediately, but works Graces in us, and stirs
up those Graces in us. The Spirit guides a godly man, by working grace in him
by making him better, by using those graces in him. Sometimes the Spirit of God
moves a wicked man, but it makes him not better; he puts conceits into his
head, and makes him do that which otherwise he would not: but he is not
bettered. The Spirit guides a good man by making him better, he works a
gracious disposition, a gracious bent in him, that his judgment concurres with
Gods, his affections concur with the holy Spirit, and make him holy and pure.
There is a disposition wrought in a good man like to the Spirit that sanctifies
him, and like to the disposition of Christ to whose Image he is renewed.

Now that we may guide our lives by the Spirit working in us spiritual and
gracious wisdom.

First of all, consider what I said before of fleshly wisdom: there are none
but they have one of these two guides, either the flesh, and by consequent the
devil: for the devil dwells in our carnal reason, that is his Fort, that is
his Tower, his Castle. Carnal, fleshly Imagination is the Devils forge, there
he works all his tools, all his Instruments: For the Devil works not so
much immediately, as by carnal men that are led with him.

Our wit and policy, and carnal wisdom, it is the shop, the forge of the
devil wherein he works all his mischief to overthow us. It is the Help.
Devils Worke-house where he engines with all his tools and Instruments.

Then considering that there are but two guides; the flesh, the world, and
Satan (which always go together in one) or Gods Spirit and Grace; 1. Submit all
to the Spirit of Grace.
let us be willing to submit our thoughts and desires, to submit our projects
and our aims and all to the Spirit of Grace: submit to the Word of grace, and
to the motions of the Word: the Word of God having the Spirit of God
accompanying of it, the Word of grace accompanied by the Spirit of Grace, is
forcible as the Apostle says, 1. Cor, 10. It beats down strong holds, strong
Imaginations. Satan fortifies himself in strong holds, as the Scripture calls
them, in high thoughts, working discoursive thoughts. Now when we come to hear
the Word which teaches the simple, sincere truth of God, that teaches us how
we should be saved, and how we should guide our lives: if we will be guided by
grace, if we will yield to Gods simple truth, let him erect a throne in us, let
us lay down all. When we come to hear the Word, let us think, I come to hear
the wisdom of heaven it self, I come to hear that Word that shall make me wise
to salvation: I will not entertain projects. I will not entertain a wisdom that
is contrary to it; when they rise in my soul contrary to the direction of the
Spirit, and of the Word, down they shall, I will not own them: this is the
wisdom of a man that intends to make grace his rule.

Now a carnal hearer, a carnal reader, a common Christian, he brings his
naughty proud heart, he brings his high conceits to the hearing and reading of
the Word, he comes as a Censurer, as a Judge, he comes to talk of what was said
in this passage, and in that passage, he comes not as to hear God speak in his
Ordinance, he comes not as a humble man: he comes not to hear it as the
Ordinance of God with reverence, and that makes him come and go out again as a
beast. As the beasts that went our of Noah's Ark, they went out as they came
in: so many come into the Church and go out again as beasts, they go our worse
then they came in: because they bring not hearts to submit themselves to God
and to his Word: O, a spirit of subjection, it is a blessed thing.

Self-denial is some help to this, be content in the guiding of your common
Self-denial.
life, and in the guiding your way to salvation to be no wiser then Gods
Spirit, and Gods Word will make you, to have no will nor no wisdom contrary to
his will and wisdom: but you will live as men that have nothing of their own,
nothing different from God; no distinct will, no contrary will, and wit to God,
but you will let God take the guidance of you himself: and whom he guides must
needs come to a happy end, as the Psalmist says excellent well, The wilt
guide me by thy counsel, and after bring me to glory. Those that submit
themselves to be guided by Gods counsel, he will bring them to glory.

Serviceable to this is that which is pressed every where in the Scripture,
(...) Humility.
Humility: God gives Grace to the humble; that is, he gives them not only
forgiveness of sins, and acceptance to life, but he gives them grace for the
regiment of their lives: he gives Grace to the humble. Those that humble their
wits to God, (for there is a humiliation of the wit as well as of the
affections) that they care not for the depths of Satan, they care not for
School-tricks: they care to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, as S.
Paul says. Gods Word is of Power and Majesty enough to save me, I need not
bring my wit for my acceptance to God: it is truth that is accepted, not a
strong brain to cavil, God gives Grace to the humble. Those that bring their
understandings to be led and taught by God, he gives grace to them.

Again, in the third place, If we would have our thoughts guided by counsel,
let us have a high esteem of wisdom, above all precious stones 3. High esteem
of wisdom.
and pearls. Solomon presses it: have a high estimation of wisdom, of the
government of Gods Spirit as the best government. And be out of love with
carnal reason, with carnal affections and their guidance: account them as base
things, not worthy to come into the esteem of a Christian heart. Those that
highly prize wisdom, God will lead them by it: those that sell all for the
pearl, shall have it. There must be a high price set on the guidance of Gods
Spirit, and on grace, (as indeed it is worthy of it) and then we shall have it.

Again, if we would lead our lives according to spiritual and heavenly wisdom,
according to grace, and gracious wisdom; let us learn, as it is, 4. To
acquaint our selves with God.
Job 22. to be more and more acquainted with God by prayer: for grace comes not
from within us. Grace is in Christ as in the root, as in the spring, as in the
Sun; we have it but as the beam, as the stream: therefore let us learn to be
acquainted with God, and with Christ by prayer and meditation, and search into
his Word by reading, and by hearing him speak to us, and let us often speak to
him.

Let us acquaint our selves with him by prayer, and by hearing his Word, and
then we shall have his grace to guide us. For grace is a fruit of his peculiar
love; he gives grace to his own peculiar people. How do you think, shall he
have a peculiar delight in us, if we labor not to be more and more acquainted
with him? by often speaking to him, by often hearing of him, by coming into his
presence, and attending as much as we can upon his holy Ordinances, by
conversing as much as we can in the holy things of God. Those that will be
warm, they come under the beams of the Sun: those that would have the Spirit
work effectually, they must come where the Spirit is effectual, where the
Spirit works. Now the Spirit is effectual in the Word preached: the Spirit fell
upon Cornelius and the rest when they were hearing of S. Peter. And the Spirit
is where there is conversing in good company; Where two or three are met
together, I will be in the midst of them, says Christ. If we walk with the
wise, we shall be wiser.

It must be the heavenly wisdom of a Christian, if he would lead his life by
grace, to attend upon all the means of grace: because the Spirit of God is
effectual by his own means, he works by his own means; therefore use the means
that the Spirit has sanctified for the working of grace. I do wonder at a
company of vain sottish creatures, that carry themselves according to their
vain conceits, according to the whirling of their own brain, in toys and
baubles that come into their heads; they care not for the hearing of Gods
blessed truth: either they abstain altogether, or else they hear it carelessly,
as if it were a thing that concerned them not: Oh, but those that will lead
their lives by grace, they come to it by the Spirit, and the Spirit is only
effectual in holy Ordinances. It must be our wisdom therefore to bring our
selves under some means or other, that the Spirit may be effectual.

The wisest, and the best men in the world are no longer gracious then they are
wise this way: if they neglect good company, good acquaintance, if they neglect
the hearing of the Word, if they neglect prayer, they will grow dead, and dull,
and carnal-minded; they will be possessed with base thoughts. How do men differ
one from another? not so much by any habitual grace that is in them, as by
avoiding all that might prejudice them in a Christian course, and by using all
means whereby the Spirit of God may be effectual.

Again, the way to be under the grace of Gods Spirit is often to meditate 5. To
meditate on the free love and Grace of God.
of the grace of God, the free love of God in Jesus Christ: for so it comes
first. The first grace of all is Gods free love in the forgiving of our sins,
and accepting us to life everlasting, and then he does alter and change our
natures more and more, he transforms us more and more: when we find therefore
any defect of grace in our hearts, when we find coldness, and deadness, and
dullness, go to the first fire, to the first Sun, to the free grace of God in
Christ, pardoning all our sins, and accepting us to life everlasting, and
promising us grace to lead our lives in the mean time. If you have fallen into
any sin by the temptation of Satan, or your own weakness, beg not first grace
to alter your course, to sanctify your life; but renew every day your interest
in the first grace, in the forgiveness of sins, and your acceptance to
everlasting life. For till God have pardoned your sins, and have witnessed to
your souls that you stand reconciled, he will not give the best fruit of
reconciliation, which is grace.

Therefore every day examine your lives, if you have offended God, in what
terms you stand with God, and if you stand in ill terms, that there is any
sin against conscience, the best way is not presently to amend that: for that
will not be, except the heart be warmed with Gods love and favor in the pardon
of your sins first, and in the acceptance of you in Christ notwithstanding
your sins: as, he justifies us every day, not only in the first act of
conversion, but daily, he acquits our consciences daily from our sins: and
therefore in the Lords Prayer, Christ teaches us every day to say, Forgive us
our sins. And then after forgiveness of sins, to beg the particular graces for
our lives that we want. I would this were better thought on.

Challenge likewise the Covenant of grace, we have a promise of all 6.
Challenge the Covenant of Grace.
grace; and the spring of all grace. We have a Promise of Love, God will teach
us to Love one another. We have a promise of Fear, he has promised, that He
will put his fear into our hearts that we shall never depart from him. We have
a promise of the holy Spirit, Let us challenge these Promises every day. So
much for the Directions how to lead our lives by Grace. But by the Grace of God.


Saint Paul here makes it the ground of his rejoicing, that he led not his life
by fleshly wisdom, but in simplicity and sincerity, and by the Grace of God;
and all that are led by S. Paul's spirit, live thus.

There is a Religion in the world that bears it self very big, on high terms,
of Universality, Succession, Antiquity, etc. and they will have it thought to
be a spiritual, and holy Religion. Well, if a man be a carnal man that is led
with fleshly wisdom, and not by the grace of God, that Religion must needs be
a naughty Religion, that has only the support and the foundation of it in
fleshly wisdom, which is an enemy, and opposite to the grace of God, and to
simplicity and sincerity.

But Popery is this; Take it in the regiment, and government of it: Take it in
the worship: Take it in the opinions, you may draw all to one of those Popery
founded on carnal wisdom.
three heads.

For the government of it: There is a wisdom, a wondrous wisdom, a fine
subordination to one Head, the Pope, to hear all controversies, and 1. In the
Government.
under him the Cardinals, and under them the Generals, and all at Rome; and
they have th eir Provincials under them: here is a wondrous fine subordination:
butall this is by fleshly wisdom. For this beast riset out of the earth, and
out of the Sea, out of the Tumult of the people, out of base earthly respects.
Therefore it is said in the Revelation; when the Bishop of Rome became Pope,
and was at the highest, that a Star fell: he fell when he rose: when he was at
the highest, he was at the lowest; why? because his rising was carnal, and
earthly: or lower if you will, it was hellish, and devilish.

Their government is opposite to Christ's Government, and being so, it must
needs be mightily opposed by him again: and therefore it must needs down, the
fabric of it being opposite to the frame of Christ's Government; though it be
wondrous witty. Therefore in the Revelation, 666. is the Number of a man. If
you mark the frame of the Romish policy, it is wondrous accurate, it goes
smoothly, by tens, and by hundreds, 666. This Babylon is the number of a man; a
fine policy: but it is but the number of a man, it is the device of carnal
wisdom it self: therefore it is divellish wisdom. Thus it is in the
government of it.

And their Worship is according to the wisdom of the flesh: some wisdom there
is in not going to God immediately, but by Saints and Angels. 2. In their
Worship.
What! is it not wisdom in the Princes Court, first to go to the Favorite,
and by him to the Prince? So, is it not wisdom not to go directly to God* it
is bold rashness to come immediately to God, but by Saints and Angels: This is
the wisdom of a man, this is the wisdom of the flesh, Colos. 2. this is
carnal wisdom, it is opposite against the truth.

Does not Christ bid us come all to him? do Angels love us better then he? Is
not he the great Favorite of heaven? I will not enter into controversy, but
only show how they work by fleshly wisdom. Here is wisdom, when we cannot
raise our selves up to God, to bring him down to us. As in the Sacrament, they
show carnal wisdom, Oh, it is a fine thing, that Christ's body and ours should
be joined together; it seems to be a fine point, that Christ should be hid in
the bread, etc. But here is no spiritual wisdom.

The union that the Scripture speaks of is by faith, ascending into heaven,
laying hold on Christ there: and going back to the cross, and seeing Christ
crucified there, and so he is meat indeed, and drink indeed, as we see him
crucified, and satisfying Gods wrath for us, for our sins.

And so again, is it not a pretty wisdom to draw men by pictures, and
likenesses? are not men delighted with the Images of their friends and of their
parents? and therefore is it not a good religious policy to have pictures of
Christ, and pictures of God the Father? Here is wisdom correspondent to the
dealing and affairs of men, but all this is fleshly wisdom. The Scripture
speaks mightily against making of Images, the Word of God is directly against
it: this is fleshly wisdom: Grace does not rule here.

So, that the souls when they go out of this world being very unclean, that
they should be purged, that there should be some satisfaction, some Purgatory,
etc. here seems to be wisdom: but wherefore serves the blood of Christ then?
that is the only Purgatory that purges from all sins, mortal sins, venial
sins, all sins.

Again, is it not a seeming wisdom to come to heaven by our own works, by our
own merits, that so we may set the people on to good works? or else we dull
their spirits, and endeavors. I but this is fleshly wisdom, this is devilish
wit, and so it will prove in the end: for the Scripture goes only to Christ,
only Christ. We are saved by faith, only by Christ. I will not enter into the
point, I only show you what a seeming wisdom they have, but it is not
heavenly, but merely carnal.

And that their Religion is carnal, do but consider that all the points 3.
Opinions:
wherein they differ from us, may be resolved either to belly-policy, or to
State Policy: either to ambition, and riches, or the belly. Wherefore is their
Monarchy, all their great preferments, but to increase their ambition?
Wherefore are their pardons, and indulgences, but to get money basely, as some
of their own Writers confess? And their Purgatory, etc. these things be for
carnal ends: it is a Religion fitted for their own ends. They make what they
list to serve them; Religion, Nature, Reason, Conscience, whatsoever is good,
they make all stoop to interest their own cause in. Their orders, that is,
their spiritual good, must be their advancement, it is but a color put
uponcarnal ends. The spiritual good is their own advancement, they aim at
their own peculiar interest in all their villainies: As if God stood in need of
our lie; as if Gods glory were advanced by the Devil.

As well their Government as their Religion is lies, it is defended by lies, by
equivocation, and rebellion, by withdrawing the allegiance of Subjects, and
murdering of Princes: Laws, and Religion, and all must stoop to their
wisdom, under pretense of bonum spirituale. These things are known. I do but
touch them, to breed a deeper hatred of this Religion which is altogether
fleshly and carnal. And so far as they are led by carnal wisdom, they are not
led by the grace of God. Wherefore is their lying for advantage? their
dispensations, and horrible allowing of any thing? is it not merely carnal
wisdom?

In a word, their Religion is merely policy, if it be not too good a word for
it; it is merely carnal policy, it came not from heaven but from the
bottomless pit.

Then they fell from heaven when they grew to their highest, when they were in
their top. This I thought good to touch collaterally from the Text, which does
characterize a true Christian indeed in his temper, that he is joyful when he
is as he should be; and the ground of it is from a good conscience; and that
good conscience arises out of a course of life and conversation led in
simplicity and sincerity to God. (For Religion has majesty enough in it self,
without far fetches and devices.) And the principle from whence, By the grace
of God; in the evidence of the Spirit, and not according to fleshly, and carnal
wisdom.

In a word therefore, labor that from the evidence of the Spirit, having your
souls sanctified by the Spirit, you may reflect on your selves, and look into
your lives, and say truly, as S. Paul does here; My care in my course of life
and conversation has been in Simplicity, I have cast my self upon God and his
government, and not looked to the world: and in sincerity I have aimed at God
in all things, I have had no false, and by aims, I have not spared even my
life by any carnal end. I have not served my self either in Religion, or in my
course of life, but I have labored to serve God in serving my brethren, and
have led my life by the grace of God, and by the Word of grace, which I
labored to know that I might follow. Let us be able in some measure, in truth
to say thus. And then we may say further with S. Paul, That this is our
rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience; We shall never want joy. And then
let the world judge of us as it will, there is such a strength and power, such
a prerogative, and majesty in Christian comfort, when a man can (as I said)
reflect thus on himself, that though in a weak measure, yet in truth, his
conversation and course of life has been (though his slidings have been
something) in simplicity, and sincerity, that nothing can daunt it in this
world.

It is above all discouragement, above all eclipse of good name, the testimony
of Conscience, which has Gods testimony with it.

The witness of two is a strong witness: the witness of God, and conscience
it will so settle our souls, that neither ill reports nor any usage in the
world shall daunt us: we shall have comfort in all the passages of our lives be
they what they will. Whereas other men that lead not their lives in a constant
course of holy simplicity and sincerity, they are as the Prophet says, like
the leaves of the Forest, shaken with every alteration, with every rumor of
ill news. But a sound Christian in the worst alteration, there may be
combustions, there may be alteration of State, yet his heart is fixed, he is
not moved.

Likewise, in the hour of death he can say with Hezekias, Thou know, Lord, I
have led my life in simplicity, that I have served thee with a perfect heart;
that is, in sincerity. I have desired, and endeavored to grow better; which is
all the perfection we have in this world: sincerity witnessed by growth, and
strength against the contrary, this will comfort us in all the alterations, and
changes in this world, (which is as a Sea, full of trouble,) and at the hour of
death likewise, and at the day of Judgment; this is that only that will make
us able to look Christ in the face.

Truth has a Divinity in it (this simplicity and sincerity) more then any
earthly thing; it has that in it that is real, and spiritual.

A man that has the Grace of God in the truth of it, there is a great deal of
majesty in it. There is the greatest majesty in heavenly things when they
appear most simple, because of their excellency. There is some thing of Gods in
sincerity: so much as a man has in truth, so much of Gods: He partakes of the
Divine nature, as S. Peter says, so much as he has in truth, though it be
never so little: and being a branch of God, it will make him look upon God in
the day of Judgment. Why? because he knows he is in the Covenant of Grace,
that he has title to heaven by Christ.

When a man's conscience can tell him that he has led his life, not by carnal
wisdom, but in the truth of Grace, it will make him out-look Satan, and all
the troubles of the world, and look unto Christ with comfort. Who would not be
in such a state? Thus we see a Christian leads his life, Not in fleshly
wisdom, but by the Grace of God. I will add one thing more, and so finish the
verse.

We may see hence, That the most Religious men are the best Statesmen. Best
Statesmen, who.


I know, proud carnal Machivillian dispositions make a scorn at these
positions, they think them to be austere, and poor principles, till they come
to death: As that Wretch said himself when he came to dye, That he had provided
for all things but for death: but while they are in their ruff, they think
they can manage States, and do all. When indeed they bring the vengeance of God
upon their own persons, and upon the State they live in: For God is neither in
them, nor with them. He is not in them: for they want Grace, they are led by
carnal wisdom altogether. And he is not with them: God will not give them
good success, unless it be to increase their Judgment. He will not give good
success to those projects that they take up contrary to his rule.

Therefore those that will be guided by reasons of Religion, and submit
themselves to the guidance of Gods blessed Spirit, they are best for the state
of their own souls, and best for the public estate. For, does not God know
the mysteries of State better then any man? Is not he a better Politician then
any Achitophel in the world. If they have any State Policy that is worth the
naming, is it not from him? Is it not a beam from that Sun? Yes, why then who
is the better? (the difference of parts excepted,) but take them alike, a
gracious man, and another that is not so: let the one fetch his counsel from
hell, from darkness, and the other be ruled by reasons of conscience, and
Religion, there is no comparison.

God will cross and curse their projects that are for their own ends, both in
themselves, and in the State too.

As for the other that are under Grace, and the government of Grace, God will
be wise in them by his Spirit, and he will be wise for them, Psalm. 1.
Whatsoever a good man does, it shall prosper: it is a large promise. How
wondrous happy, and wise were the Children of Israel when they kept the
Covenant of God? This is your wisdom, to keep the Commandments of God,
Deuteron. 4. and their wisdom made them happy. How happy were they in David's
time, who made the Statutes of God, the Man of his Counsel? How happy was the
State in Solomon's time? till Solomon did warp, and bend to Carnal counsel, to
strengthen himself? How happy was his Government till that time? but never
after that; they were environed with enemies round about: but alas, who could
hurt the people of God, so long as they submitted themselves to the government
of grace? they were always happy.

Therefore it is an idle thing to suppose that there will be any good success
by carnal projects: no, the only good Statesman is the religious man. And it
was never better with the Church of God before or since the time of Christ,
then when those were in the stern. Do but think of this often, as S. Jude says,
God only wise: we must all of us light our candle at that fire.

All wisdom, even this poor spark of reason, that God enlightneth every man
that comes into the world withal, it comes from Christ Jesus: In him are all
the treasures of wisdom, God, and God-man, only wise. There is no wisdom
without him, therefore let us submit our selves to his Government; let us pray
to him, and seek for wisdom of him in all things. But I go on to the next
Verse.

VERSE XIII. For we write none other things unto you then what you read, or
acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end.
HEre S. Paul strengthens himself by another course: First, he retires to his
own heart, and conscience; My rejoicing is this, the testimony of my
conscience, etc. and he sets this as a Bulwark against all the slanders and
detractions of his opposers whatsoever: he sets it as a flag of defiance, the
testimony of his own conscience.

But to set himself the more upright in their hearts whom he was to deal
withal, knowing what a great advantage it was to have the good opinion of
them, and to wipe away all imputation, he passes from his conscience to their
conscience. For my own conscience my rejoicing is this, that you cannot accuse
me that I have led my life by carnal false principles, but by reasons of
Religion, and by the blessed motions of Gods Spirit. Nay, I can go further then
so: for what I say of mine own conscience, I dare say you can say too: for I
write no other things then what you read or acknowledge.

What you read] Some take it, What you know, or acknowledge, because these are
distinct things. The word, Anaginoskein, signifies to know, or to read; but
usually to read. We may well therefore take it so as most translate it here, I
write no other thing, concerning my simplicity, but what you read, or
acknowledge. I write of my simplicity, simply; I speak not of my sincerity
insincerely, but what I write, you read or acknowledge: because S. Paul knew he
had a place in their conscience, they could not but acknowledge what a man he
was: for the Spirit was wondrous effectual by his Ministry in their hearts;
and they were his Epistle, as he says in another place: and therefore he
appeals to their acknowledgment, to their conscience, We write no other thing,
etc. And for the time to come, I trust you shall acknowledge to the end.

So he does appeal to their conscience for the present, and he does take in
trust the time to come, what their thoughts shall be of him, and what his
estate shall be. You shall have Grace to think well of me to the end, because
you shall have ground to think well of me from my constancy. I hope you shall
acknowledge to the end; and you shall have wisdom, and experience of my
goodness to acknowledge to the end.

I will give a touch on these things, because they be useful; and but a touch,
because I stood somewhat on them before, and shall have fit occasion for them
severally after. We write no other things then what you read. Observe. A
Christian uniform.



This seems strange; why, how could they read other things then what he
wrote? Yes, if he had written falsely, if he had not expressed his thoughts in
his writings, then they had read one thing, and he had been another. As a woman
that is painted, there is Prosopon, and Prosopeia; there is the visage, and the
true natural countenance: she is not the woman she appears to be; her face is
one, and her self is another: but I am as I express my self. His meaning is, I
speak of my simplicity, and sincerity, simply, and sincerely. I speak not of my
virtues to go beyond you, but I speak sincerely; what I speak, you read: for I
think not that he means his former Epistle, but what he wrote concerning
himself, and the leading of his life, that which I speak concerning my self,
that you read; and what you read, that I speak. It yields me this Observation,
(which though I had occasion to speak of when I handled Simplicity, yet I shall
now touch it,) That A Christian man is one man, he does act one man's part.


He has not a heart and a heart, he is not a man and a man; there is a harmony
between his thoughts and resolutions, between his speeches and his actions,
they all sweetly accord together: what he thinks and resolves on, that he
speaks; what he speaks, that he writes; what he writes and speaks, that he
does: he is one man in all, he does not deal doubly.

It is the easiest thing in the world to be politic, to be naught, to double:
the nature of man teaches a man to be false: man's heart is full of
naughtiness; it is a hard thing for a man to be one: and till a man be a
gracious man, he shall be a double man.

Therefore you must take heed of a fault, which is called the abuse of Abuse of
signs.
signs, of such signs as serve to express what a man is inwardly. Let your
inward disposition, and the signs that express it accord. The signs of
expression that come from one man to another, are speech, writing, countenance,
and the like.

A man should not be one thing within, and his speech another; he should not be
one thing, and his writing another: he should not be one thing, and any other
expression another.

This abuse of signs, and expressions when they are one way, and the heart
another: besides the odiousness of it to God, (as being contrary both to his
Nature, and to his Word: it is contrary to his nature; for he is simple and
sincere, he is one in all, there is no shadow of change in him, there is no
mixture. As it is contrary to his Nature, so it is contrary to his Word, that
bids us not dissemble nor lie one to another,) It makes a man most like the
Devil, who never appears in his own shape, but always in another. He comes in
our friends as an Angel of light, he never discovers himself in his own
colors. Besides all these, and such like respects, it is the overthrow, it
cuts the sinews of humane society: for what is the band of humane society, but
the intercourse by speech and writing, and the like? Now if there be abuse of
these signs, that they are one thing, and we another, that we do not express
what is the true thought, and impression of our hearts, all society is
dissolved.

Therefore we cannot too much hate Popish principles, of not keeping fidelity
with Heretics (as they call them): it is the custom of them to deal so. As
you know in a War of theirs with the Turks; the story is well known: when the
Cardinals had broken their promise after they had in a manner gotten the
Victory, the Turks even cried to Christ that he would revenge their treachery;
and the Turks came again upon them, and overcame them, and gave them a mighty
overthrow. Their gross principle of equivocation, and the like, which stands
in the abuse of expressions, and signs. Yea, their abuse of the blessed sign
and seal, an oath, which is the sign of all truth between man and man. Their
abuse of the Sacrament too: they have abused all Gods signs, and all to ill
purposes, to swear with private reservations: whereas the old principle of
Isidore is constantly and everlastingly true; Conceive the oath as you will, it
must be understood, as he to whom it is sworn understands it, and not as he
that swears. Therefore undoubtedly Popery must fall every day: and judicious
men, though they be not gracious, they see it must fall. It should make us hate
them deeply; because the courses they take are the overthrow of society: this
abuse of expressions, of that excellent gift that God has given, namely the
tongue, whereby what is in my heart another man may understand: and also
writing, whereby a man may convey his mind many hundred miles. Now these
excellent gifts that God has given for society, for men to turn them against
God, and against Society, it must needs provoke the Majesty of God.

And as it is a sin against Society, so it is a sin that is punished by
society. All men must needs hate them that do so: those that have no other
argument against Popery, they have argument enough from their equivocation.
Those that are not subtile-headed to see other things, when they look to the
Gunpowder Treason, and to their equivocation, there is argument enough for any
plain simple man to hate Popery.

Therefore let us be like our selves in all that we do to God, or to men. I had
occasion to press the Point when I spoke of simplicity; therefore I will not
dwell further on it. I write no other thing then what you read or acknowledge.


He means, they acknowledged it in their heart and conscience. What I write of
my conversation, that which you have heard, it is no other then that you read,
and you acknowledge it too: for they had felt the power of his Ministry.
Whence first of all observe, That Where the Minister converseth by the Grace of
God, and not by carnal wisdom, Observe. God is wise for those that walk by
Grace.
God is not only wise in him, but for him.


He is gracious and good for him, he gives him success in the hearts of
others. When a man is led by the Spirit of God, the same Spirit that guides him
in speaking, guides his auditors in hearing, and gives a sweet, and a strong
report in their hearts of what he says, What I write of my self you
acknowledge, that my Conversation has been in sincerity; and not only my
conversation, but my Doctrine; every way you have acknowledged me: the same
Spirit that guided me to do so, wrought in you an acknowledgment of it in your
conscience.

Therefore if you would have the speeches of the Ministers to take effect, you
should desire God not only to guide them in what they are to say, but likewise
with the same Spirit to work in the hearers; and when the same Spirit works in
both, what a glorious success is there? As we see here, S. Paul carried
himself in his own person, and in his Ministry graciously: in simplicity, and
sincerity; for it is meant of both: he taught simple doctrine without any
glozing, without any far-fetched beauty, from wit, or eloquence, or the like:
and he looked to God in his life and conversation; and as God guided him, so he
stirred them up to pray for him: as the Word and Prayer they are always joined
together: the Word had a report in their hearts, as it had in his own: What I
speak, you acknowledge, etc.

It is not for us to deliver our minds, and there an end: but when we are to
speak, we ought beforehand to look up to God, and desire his Spirit to be
effectual in us, that we may speak in the wisdom and grace of the Spirit; and
likewise that it may be effectual to them, that they may acknowledge it, that
they may feel in their souls and consciences the power of what we speak and
feel in our selves. So you see the truth of what I said before, That God was
not only wise in S. Paul, but he was gracious and good for him in those that
he was to deal with.

And there is the glory of a good Minister, that is a humble man, and denies
carnal wisdom, That God will delight to honor himself by using him as an
instrument to do good to others. God usually will give report of what he says
to the hearts of others.

Proud men that speak what they speak by carnal projects, and carnal wisdom,
and seek themselves, usually the hearts and consciences of other men give no
report to them. For man naturally is proud, and when he sees that the most
excellent man in the world has by-aimes, he will not be gone beyond by him,
say what he will: If a man set up sails for himself, he does not win upon
others. But he that discovers himself, that he seeks the glory of God, and the
good of the souls that he deals with, and denies himself in that which
otherwise he could do, that uses not the strength of parts which he has,
because he would discover the simple Word, which is most Majestical in
simplicity; God seeing this simple and sincere desire, he honors and crowns
the Ministry of such a man with success in the hearts of the people.
Therefore says S. Paul here, I write no other thing concerning my self, but
God has honored me with the issue of it in your hearts likewise, that you
acknowledge what I say. You acknowledge.


Acknowledge is a deep word, it is more then to know; it is more then a
conviction of the judgment: it is when the heart and affections yield, when the
inward Spirit upon experience yields, I feel and acknowledge this is true; it
is more I say then knowledge. The next point then that I observe is this, That
God does give his Children that love him in simplicity and sincerity, a place
in the conscience of men. Observe. Gods Children have place in the conscience of
others.



He gives them place in the consciences of those that have conscience: for
there are some that have no science, and therefore they have no conscience: as
Popish superstitious persons, etc. But those that deal faithfully, that live in
the Church, and see the glory of God, God gives them a place in the conscience
of those that they live amongst, and deal with. And they seek more to have
place in their conscience, then in their fancy, then in their opinion, and
Imagination, and humor. A carnal man, so he may have the humor, the fancy,
and Imagination of his hearers delighted, he regards not what inwardly they may
feel from him: he regards not how he warms their hearts, and conscience, and
how they acknowledge him within: and therefore perhaps, if he have a good word
for the present, Oh, a glorious man, etc. it is all he cares for; but he has
no place in their conscience, because they feel him not working there, and he
has no aim to be there. A good man seeks to edify, and build up the
conscience in sound principles, in good courses, in the faith of Christ, in
holy obedience: things that will hold out in life, and death. If I were to
speak to Ministers, I would enlarge the point further.

Let us all in our Conversations labor rather to approve our selves to the
consciences of men, that they may acknowledge us to be honest, downright, Use.
To approve our selves to men's consciences.
faithful men, rather then to please their humors, and fancies: for as Solomon
says, he that tells a man the truth, shall have more favor at the last, then
he that dissembleth: for his conscience will witness that he has dealt
rightly, and faithfully with him, that he is an honest man, and goes on in the
same principles still.

Let us therefore first look to our own conscience, and then to the conscience
of others: and if we cannot approve our selves to our own conscience, and to
the conscience of others, alas, what will become of us? how shall we approve
our selves to God, and to Jesus Christ at the day of Judgment? There is no man
but a sound Christian that approves himself to the conscience of another man:
For any other man, it is just with God in his Judgment to find him out first or
last: he may wind himself into the conscience for a time, as the superstitious
Papists do, but first or last he is found out to be a dissembler, and to bring
false wares.

And so for Civil conversation, there is none that will have place in the
conscience of other men, to think them and their courses good, but those that
are sound Christians: For the most, those that are not led by the grace of Gods
Spirit; all men's consciences condemn them, they are smitten, and censured
there, and judged there. Besides, their own conscience which perhaps they will
not give leave to tell them somewhat in their ear that they would be loath to
hear, This you are, this you did, and this you spoke amiss: they will not
suffer conscience to speak, but drown it in sensuality, and stifle it; they
take this course, they think they are well enough, and they would never be
themselves. A carnal man will hardly give conscience leave to speak, till it
will whether he will or no; at the hour of death, and the day of Judgment, when
God lets it loose upon him: but let them take this course as long as they will,
yet in the conscience of other men they have no place: for they live not as S.
Paul says here, in simplicity, and sincerity, not by carnal wisdom, but by
the Grace of God.

This is the benefit that a good man has in this life, that howsoever he have
the ill words of carnal men sometimes, and their humor is against him: yet
notwithstanding if they be in the Church, and have any illumination, any
judgment, he has their conscience for him. Nay, I say more, they cannot but
think reverently of a man of God, of a good Christian (I speak not of Ministers
only) they cannot but think reverently of them, and reverence them in their
consciences do what they can: for it is not in men's power to frame what
conceits they will, to frame what opinions they will of men: but as there is a
necessity of reason, as the principles we say are so strong, rhat a man cannot
say they are false, do what he can; because the light is visible to the
understanding: as a man cannot say the Sun shines when it is night, when it is
dark, because it is a sensible falsehood: so a man cannot deny the principles of
any Art, if they be principles: because there is such a light of truth that
over-powers him, and as it were compells the inward man. So it is here, there
is such a majesty in grace, and good courses of a Christian, that another man
that lives a wicked life he cannot think of him what he would. He may force
himself to speak what he list, and force odd opinions of him, but when he is
him sober self, he must needs if he have any relics of conscience in him, if
he be not altogether a sot, he must needs think well in his conscience of such
a man's courses. This is the majesty, and honor of good things, that however
they may have the humor, and passion, and fancy of men against them, yet they
have their conscience for them; yea, of wicked men when they are themselves.

Take the wickedest man at the hour of death, if he have himself at command,
that his spirits be not disturbed, and ask him whether he justify the courses
of such and such men? he will answer, Oh yes, I would I had led them my self.
What is that that besots them? Sensuality, and such courses: for men that are
not led by the Grace of God, are led with outward things which besot the
judgment for a time: but when that dullness is past, when a wicked man is
stripped of all, and is best able to judge, then he likes such courses.

If the worst men shall in their conscience acknowledge the best persons, and
the best things one day, nay, they do now, if they will suffer themselves to be
themselves; then let us take such courses as our own consciences may justify,
as S. Paul says here, This is my glorying, the testimony of my conscience, and
likewise the conscience of those I live with, I write no other thing, but what
you acknowledge in your consciences your selves. And I trust you shall
acknowledge to the end.


This word, Trust, does not imply as usually it does in common speech, Trust
what;
an uncertainty of a thing, a moral conjecture, I trust, or hope it may be so:
it may be otherwise, but I hope well: it is not an uncertain conceit with the
fear of the contrary: but the word implies a gracious dependant disposition
upon God, I trust in God, as it is so expressed in some other places. Now you
acknowledge me, and I trust in God you shall acknowledge me to the end. So here
Saint Paul sets down what he resolved to be by the Grace of God, and what in
the issue he should be: because holy resolutions are seconded with gracious
assistance.

And likewise he sets down what they should judge of him to the end: I trust,
as you acknowledge me now, so to the end you shall have grace so to do, and I
shall have grace so to be; I shall be as I am, and have been: I have led my
life in simplicity, and sincerity: and as you have acknowledged me to be such a
one, so you shall have grace still to acknowledge me: I hope, or trust. I will
not enter into any common place, only I will speak that which the Text puts to
me. I trust you shall acknowledge to the end.


Here he begins with his hope of their judging of him, to continue so to the
end.

Saint Paul here takes a good conceit, a good opinion of his children S. Paul's
good conceit of the Corinthians.
whom he had begotten to the faith in Corinth; I hope as you are, and as you do
judge of me, so you will judge of me to the end.

Why has S. Paul such a trust of them as of himself?

Among many reasons this is one: He knew that where God had begun Reason 1.
a good work, he would finish it: he saw that he had begun a good work in them,
and therefore he knew that he would go on with it.

And then again, God planted in him a good hope and trust of them; Reason 2.
because hope and trust stir up endeavor to the thing hoped for. Desperation
does quell all courage, and cool all endeavor: Now God, because he would have
us constant in our carriage, and in the expressions of our love to other men,
he stirs up in us a trust that all shall be well with them.

Likewise S. Paul sets down his hope that God had put into his heart of Reas. 3.
them for his own comfort: for it is a great comfort to a Minister, or to a
Christian, when he is to deal with such as he trusts are good, and will be
good: it is a heaven upon earth, and therefore God does plant good conceits of
other men in us for this end: partly, to stir up our endeavor to do all good
to them; and partly, to comfort us. For if the final estate of any man were
discovered to us, that God had no delight in them concerning their salvation,
who would do any service of love for them? or who would have comfort in
conversing with them? But when God stirs up in our hearts a good opinion of
them, partly it is good for them to stir up our endeavor to do all good for
them; and it is good for us, it is a great comfort.

And again, it was an encouragement to them when they heard of Saint Paul's
trust of them to the end, that they should continue as they were: For to have a
good conceit and opinion of another man, especially, the good conceit of a
Pastor, it is a great encouragement. And the best Christians in the world have
need of it oft-times. Besides the judgment of themselves, which is sometimes
shaken by Satan, that they give a false witness of their own estate: Oh it is
comfortable that a man have the judgment of a man that looks without passion,
and temptation on him: you have been thus, and my trust and confidence is in
God, and the promise of God, looking to your former course, that you will be so
to the end: he gives not a false witness.

Saint Paul speaks thus to stir up his own endeavor to do good to them: and
to comfort them, that so great an Apostle should have so good an opinion of
them.

Therefore let us labor (I say) to entertain as good a conceit of them To
entertain good conceits of others.
among whom we live, as their carriage will bear. Two things usually are the
object of our hope and trust; while men are here, before their estate be
determined of in hell, God may have mercy on them, and deliver them out of the
snares of Satan: that hope should stir up some endeavor to pray for them,
seeing their estates are not desperate, they are not yet sunk into Hell. Or
else if we see them in the state of grace, we should express our love in the
services, and offices of love, because God has already set his stamp on them.

There is no man living but we may trust, and hope of him one way or other.
Those that we see no grace in, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. we may have
patience toward them, seeing if at any time God will have mercy on them to
deliver them out of the snare of the Devil.

It is not good to cast off all conceit, and all hope of any man living: the
worst sign is, when we see men malicious, and oppose known truths, because it
comes near the sin against the Holy Ghost: but because we may err in that, it
is good to take the safest way. But where we see evidences of grace, though in
never so little a measure, let us entertain and cherish a good hope; because it
will cherish that which we are all bound to, to love one another. We are bound
to love one another, and to show all the offices of love: now that which
stirs up love and all the offices of love, is Hope. Faith works by Hope, as
well as by Love. Faith works by Love in all duties: and it works by Hope in
this duty; if we hope that God will have mercy on them, that will stir up our
endeavor: but we are not much in this error, we are rather ready to conceit
over-well, then too ill of men. I trust you shall acknowledge to the end.


Saint Paul here, besides his good conceit of them to the end, does imply Saint
Paul's resolution to hold to the end.
his own resolution and purpose to hold on in good courses to the end. My trust
in Gods grace is, that you shall acknowledge to the end what I have written to
you of mine own courses. As if he had said, I am Paul now, and you shall find
me Paul hereafter: you shall find me always an honest man like my self; for as
he whom I have trusted is yesterday, to day, to morrow, and the same for ever:
so likewise by Gods grace I hope to be the same that I have been, I hope I
shall be like my self.

The grounds of S. Paul's trust that he should be so, is partly the act it
self, together with the endeavor, I trust I shall be so to the end: because I
trust in God to the end, and God is good to them that trust in him: how often
is it repeated in the Psalms? He is the God of them that trust in him: he is a
Sun and a shield: he is all that is good, and he keeps away all evil. All the
promises are entailed to trusting in God. Now because I have confidence in it
that God will do so, I stir up my endeavor to show, that it is not a
presumptuous trust. I trust in him that will perform the conditions of the
Covenant which is made to them that honor him by trusting in him.

Saint Paul knew what God had done; he knew that he that had bestowed the first
fruits, he would make up the harvest: he knew that he that had laid the first
stone, he would set up the roof: he knew that God had begun a good work in him
by experience, and that he would finish his own work, that he knew by former
experience.

And then he knew the promises of God, the promises of the Covenant. Many such
grounds Saint Paul had to bear him up that he should continue to the end in a
course of simplicity, and sincerity, and in the grace of God,

But withal Saint Paul did add a holy and heavenly course to come S. Paul's
sourse to persevere.
to this end, together with his trust. What course did Saint Paul take.

Saint Paul that he might hold out constantly in holy resolutions to the end,

First, he did judiciously consider what might hinder him, between that and the
end of his race and course: he balanced all things that he possibly could
fuffer; and he laid in the other balance the things that he had in hope and
promise: and he resolves, all that I can suffer that should shake me off from
my course, it is not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed: says he, if
you balance both, you will conclude this.

There are many things that may shake us in our Christian course, St. Paul
thought of all Satan's snares, I am not ignorant of his enterprises, says he.
And then for the world that might cast trumperie in his way, says he, I am
crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me. And for any thing
that might happen to him, he knew that the issue of all things should work for
the best to them that love God; he includes himself, Romans 8. says he, We know
it beforehand, we believe before troubles or evils come: come what will the
issue of all things is in the regiment and power of God, and as he pleases all
shall work for the best to those that love God, and therefore as I am, so I
will be. What should hinder? if all things help me, nothing can hinder me.

And then Saint Paul took this course, he looked forward still, Philip 3. I
press forward to the price of the high calling; he forgot that which was
behind, and he resolved to go forward, he had a mind to grow better and better
always, and this comforted him that he should hold out to the end. For it is the
reward of a growing Christian, to have a sweet sense of his present state of
Grace, in Gods favor, and to hold out to the end. Such a man is like the Sun
that grows up still till he come to high noonday, as Solomon says. Saint
Paul took this course, he strove for perfection, he had a crown in his eye, a
crown of righteousness and glory, and that will not suffer a man to be idle
and cold that has such a thing in his eye. Saint Paul to whet his endeavor
not only looked forward, but to glory; for as Christ looked to the glory, and
despised the shame: so Saint Paul looked to the crown, and despised all his
sufferings.

Then besides, Saint Paul was conscious of his own sincerity; for grace carries
its own witness with it self, as he says here, I know my conversation; This
is the testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity I have
walked before you. He knew that sincerity is accompanied with constancy and
perseverance. It is a rule, that always constancy and perseverance are
companions with simplicity and sincerity: I have begun in sincerity hitherto,
now I am sincere, and have expressed to you the truth of my heart, and of my
courses: and as I am, so I mean to be: therefore having begun in sincerity, I
know I shall end in perseverance and constancy.

Truth of grace is accompanied with constancy; all other things are but How the
Corinthians were S. Paul's rejoicing.
grass, they are but shows, they will vanish; but sincerity, the truth of
grace, is a Divine thing: The Word of the Lord; that is, grace wrought by the
Word of the Lord, that endures for ever. Where there is truth of grace, though
it be but as a grain of mustard seed, there is perseverance to the end. S. Paul
knew this well, and therefore he builds his trust on these things, on these
courses that he took.

We should all take the like course, look to S. Paul's grounds, and take To
imitate S. Paul in this.
his courses; those be they that will hold out to the end. Judicious
consideration of all the difficulties, to put into the balance what impediments
we shall have from the world, and what will be great to us when it is balanced
with the glory to come. And withal, to aim forward still, as S. Paul did. And
take another course that he took likewise, to depend upon grace continually: he
knew there was a Throne of grace open to him always for the time to come, as
well as for the time past, and present. He knew that Christ in heaven was always
full of grace: he knew he should not want in any exigent when he should go to
him: he knew that God would not destitute or forsake any of his Children, them
that he has called to see the necessity of wisdom, and of courage and
comfort. Let us do therefore as S. Paul was answered from heaven, say, His
Grace is sufficient for us; if not to keep us from all sin, yet to keep us in
comfortable courses, to keep us in sincerity, and simplicity: the Grace of God
is sufficient to bring us to heaven.

Let us persuade our selves, that if we go on in Christian courses, in that
confidence God will give us grace to bring us to heaven. This was S. Paul's
confidence, therefore he says, I trust you shall acknowledge to the end,
because I know that I shall continue in simplicity and sincerity to the end:
God will keep me, I shall have grace to beg, and he will give me grace: for his
gifts in this kind can never be repented of.

Let us take from S. Paul this course, and this comfort. This course to trust
in God for the time to come; to have constant resolutions for the time to come,
to cleave to God, and to good courses.

Let us every day renew our Covenants in this kind, and our resolutions to do
nothing against conscience, to go on in Christian courses; let it be our
constant course: For as Gods Children know they shall continue to Resolution.
the end, so it is wrought from resolution so to do: and this resolution
stirs them up to depend upon God by prayer, that he would knit their hearts
to him, that they may fear his Name; that he would give them Grace sufficient,
etc. that he would establish their hearts, as David prays.

This resolution it drives them to prayer, and to all good courses, that God
would stablish them in every good work, in every good thought and desire, and
that he would knit their hearts nearer to him. Resolve therefore every day in
dependence upon God, to take good courses, that so whenever any Judgment of
God shall come, or when the hour of death shall light on us, it may not come as
a snare, that it may take us in good resolutions; it is no matter how we dye in
outward respects, if we dye in good resolutions.

As we resolve, so we are: for our resolutions are full of will: wishes and
resolutions they carry the whole man with them; and God esteems a man by his
will. For if there be impediments that are not impossible to man, resolution
will break through all: God judges men by their resolutions: Teach me, O Lord,
thy Statutes, and I will keep them even to the end. I have sworn, and I will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments: every day take we these
promises to our selves, and bind our selves with them to God.

In vows be chary, I do not speak of them now, I speak of purposes and
resolutions, always take in God with them; I trust in God, depend upon God in
good courses, (that God do not punish us, and give us into desertion for our
presumption,) and then we may know that our state is good: Look to S. Paul, and
see the property of a good conscience, it looks back, it looks to the present,
and to the time to come. Our rejoicing is this, that we have had our
conversation hitherto well: Is that enough for a good conscience? No; you have
acknowledged me to be as I have written, to have a good conscience in my
Ministerial course, and in my conversation; and you shall acknowledge me still.

This is the glory of a good life, that whether a man look above him, The glory
of a good life.
he has God to witness for him; or whether he look to the world, to right
judging persons, he has them to judge for him, he dares appeal to their
conscience; or whether he look within him, he has a good witness from his own
conscience: which way soever he looks he has comfort. You have acknowledged
me, and you shall acknowledge: I know God will not leave me for the time to
come. So that which makes up a complete good conscience, is the looking to the
time to come, as well as to the time past, and present. A good conscience that
is purged by the blood of Christ from the guilt of former sins, shall always
have grace to stablish the heart in good resolutions. For where there is a
cleansing from the guilt, where there is pardon of sin, there is always given a
power against sin for the time to come.

We usually say in Divinity, That the grace of God, and a purpose to live in
any sin cannot dwell in one heart; and it is true, if there be not a purpose to
obey God in all things, to leave every wicked way, if there be an inclination
to any iniquity, the heart and conscience is not good. A good conscience gives
testimony of the time past, present, and to come.

And always (as I said) remember to take God in all your resolutions, or else
you are liable to S. James his exception in a higher degree: Go to To take God
in our resolutions.
n^w ye that say, We will do this, to day and tomorrow, and that in strength
and confidence of your own, not remembering the uncertainty of humane events,
how many things may fall out that God may cross it. If it be a presumptuous
speech in matters of this life, how much more in matters of grace for the time
to come, which God only has in his keeping, and gives the will and the deed
according to his good pleasure? Therefore we should make an end of our
salvation with fear and trembling.

Let us do as S. Paul did, trust in God; my trust and dependence on God is
this, that I shall do so: because I have a constant resolution to be so to my
lives end.

Therefore join them both together, every day renew our dependence on God, and
his Promises: The life of a Christian is a life dependant. Salvation is wrought
out of us by Christ, procured by him; and our carriage to salvation is wrought
out of us by Grace coming from Christ. He keeps the Fountain, and he lets out
the streams more or less as we humbly depend on him: so that both salvation is
out of us, and the carriage to salvation is of Grace, all is out of us. How
should this make us carry ourselves humbly, in a dependence on Christ for
salvation, and the carriage of it? And therefore resolve not to offend God in
any thing, but to trust in God, and to look to his Word; to trust in God and
his Word, is all one, Psalm. 130. Thus we should take S. Paul's course, to trust
in God, and renew our purposes every day.

And then take S. Paul's comfort to your selves, persuade your selves, Saint
Paul's comfort.
that neither things present, nor things to come, as S. Paul says, Romans 8.
nothing shall intercept your crown. For what he said here beforehand, that he
experimentally says of himself, 2 Timothy 4. a little before he dyed, (which was
the last Epistle that ever he wrote) he says here, they should acknowledge him
to the end; and there when his end was come, what says he of himself? I have
fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, I have run my race; now henceforth
is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, etc. Before this time I depended
upon God that he would carry me to my end, as he has done; and now I am to
close up my days, and my Sun is to set: this all I have done, God that was
with me from the beginning is with me to the end: I have done all this, and
what remains now, but a crown of righteousness?

Therefore I beseech you, take in trust the time to come as well as any time
past: resolve well, and trust with your resolution; live by faith and
obedience, join them both together, the one to be the evidence of the truth of
the other: then take in trust for the time to come all the good that you can
promise your selves from God, you cannot honor him more. I trust you shall
acknowledge to the end.


Saint Paul says of himself, That the grace of God should lead him to his
Things of the world uncertain.
end, and that they should acknowledge it: you shall not acknowledge me to the
end to be rich, or to be in favor, etc. but this you shall acknowledge, that I
shall be the like man. It is uncertain for any thing in the world, we cannot
promise our selves, nor others cannot promise for us: but you shall acknowledge
this, that I will be, as I have been, to the end. You have acknowledged, and
you shall acknowledge, etc.

Seeing acknowledging is repeated twice as an evidence of a good Christian, to
approve of the Image of God in another, and to acknowledge it, Therefore often
examine your hearts, what you acknowledge: do you acknowledge, To examine what
we acknowledge.
that the abstaining from evil courses, from fraud, and cunning in your
callings; that the abstaining from sensual living, from carnal policy, is good?
why then take that course, resolve upon it. Are the courses of Gods Children
good, why will you oppose them? Saint Paul gives an excellent rule, Romans 14.
22. we should not condemn our selves in that which we allow. Do you allow in
your judgment, and in your conscience the best courses? (as indeed you will do
one day,) then do not condemn your selves in the present for them, Happy is
that man that condemns not himself in that which he allows, says the
Apostle.

Examine oft-times seriously, how your judgment stands in the ways of God, how
it is built, whether upon humane fancy to please any man, or upon Divine
directions, the Word of God; If it be so, take heed that you do not condemn
your selves in those courses, and those persons that you allow. Do you in your
soul justify such persons? why do you not join with them? why do you not walk
their ways? are such courses good? why do you not take them? Your justifying
them in the end will be little to your comfort, if you condemn them all your
life against your conscience: for afterward it is not so much a work of Grace
for you to justify good courses, and to acknowledge good things: in most men
it is not so much a work of Grace as it is the evidence of the thing: and when
the cloud of sensuallity, and the fume that rises out of worldly pomp is taken
away, then the natural conscience comes to see clearly better things, not from
the love of them, not that it is changed, and transformed with the love of
them; but God so discovers it to them, to make them justify his sentence of
Damnation the more: he discovered to them better courses then they took: it
shall justify their damnation.

We are deceived oft-times in men's ends; they acknowledge good ways, Men
deceived in the death of others.
and good courses: and on the other side some of Gods good Children they
pronounce the contrary: but let none trust to that, good courses are so
evident, and clear, that if men be not Atheists they must acknowledge them,
especially when the impediment that hindered them before is taken away. You must
acknowledge, therefore acknowledge now; not in your hearts only, but
acknowledge them in laying aside your opposition, in casting away your weapons,
and by joining with them in good courses: set not your hands against good
courses, and good persons; set your tongues to speak for their good. Take Gods
part, stand on Gods side, it is the best side; if you allow it only hereafter
it will be a barren allowance, it will be no comfort to you, it often falls out
to be so.

O beloved, whatsoever courses else you take they will sink, and fall; they
will sink first in your own souls, and none will be readier to condemn you
then your own conscience: when God shall make you wiser, you will censure your
selves, What folly was it? how was I deluded with Danger of ill company.
this ill company, and with that? as wicked company is wondrous powerful to
infuse ill conceits: as the Spies they infused discouragement by the Oration
they made of the Giants in the Land, etc. they altered the mind of the whole
people. It is a dangerous thing to converse with naughty persons; the Devil
slides together into the soul with their carnal reasoning, and alters the
judgment for the time, that they are not so wise as conscience would make
them, and as they might be, if they did not hearken to the hissing of the
Serpent.

First, if you take any conrse but good, your own conscience is by, and will be
the first that will find you out: For sin is a base thing, a work of darkness,
it must be discovered, it is a madness, it must be manifest to all men. Popery
and all their slights must be discovered, and the Whore must lie naked, and
stink; nothing shall be so abominable as Popery, and Popish persons ere long.

Truth will get the victory in the consciences of people; and good courses will
get approbation. Therefore if you approve them not, first you shall be unhappy
in this life, and everlastingly hereafter: this shall be the Aggravation of
Hell Torments.
principal torment in hell, that you saw better courses then you lived in, and
you would not give your judgments leave to lead you. There was something
better, Conscience told you, but you gave way to your lusts, and to the
insinuations of wicked men, instruments of the Devil, rather then to the
motions of conscience, and of Gods Spirit that awakened conscience.

This I say will more ease your torment in hell that you might have done
otherwise if you had had Grace: but you willingly betrayed your selves, you
silenced conscience, you willingly condemned your selves in the things that you
acknowledged were naught, you did that which you condemned, and you did not
practice that which your judgment did allow.

God will have little to do at the day of Judgment, with most men in the Church
to condemn them: for alas, their own consciences will condemn them, the
consciences of all will condemn them that their courses were naught.

And that makes wicked men so cruel, especially, if they get into place Ground
of ill men's cruelty.
of authority, they know they are not allowed, they are not acknowledged in the
consciences of those that are judicious, they know they are condemned there,
and they fret and fume, and think to force another opinion of themselves upon
others, but it will not be; and that makes them that they cannot endure the
sight of them that are of a contrary judgment: they think themselves condemned
in the hearts of such men, and that makes them cruel: Especially those that
have some illumination, they cannot abide their own conscience to take its
course, they cannot abide to see themselves. They think themselves condemned in
the judgment of others: and those that think they have the prejudice of others
that their courses are naught, they carry an implacable hatred, it is a
desperate case.

Have thou knowledge that they think thy courses naught, and on good ground,
and do thou hate them* and hate to be reformed thy self? will this always
hold out? No, as I said before, truth is eternal, that which thou acknowledgest
must continue, it will be acknowledge, it will get the victory at the day of
Judgment by Men and Angels: truth will have the victory, it is eternal. Take
that course for the present, that thou may be good for the present, and hold
out to the end, as we see the Corinthians here, You do acknowledge me, and you
shall acknowledge me to the end, and testify to the world that you acknowledge
the best things; and the best persons, that you may be one with them by love
here, and in heaven for ever hereafter. I trust you shall acknowledge to the
end.


To shut up this point; Let me seal it up with this, Make this Quaere To be
constant in good courses.
to your selves, what estate you are in, when you come to the Communion,
whether it be well with you, or no? if not, why will you live any whit at all
(in the uncertainty of our lives, and the shortness of them, and the danger of
the wrath of God, when there is so little between you and eternal Damnation,)
in a doubtful, in a dangerous estate? Are you resolved to be naught then? No,
if you be not Atheists you will not say so. Do you intend to be good, and come
and make your Covenant with God? Yes: why then resolve to be so.

A good conscience looks not only back to sins past, to repent of them: but
for the time to come it resolves to please God in all things, and to hold out
to the end.

Some make a mockery of the holy things of God: one part of the year they will
be holy; a rotten foolish affection of people that are Popish. In Lent they
will use a little austerity, O they will please God wondrously; but before and
after they are devils incarnate: so they make that part of the year as a good
parenthesis, in an unlearned, and unwitty speech. A good parenthesis is
unseemly in a wicked speech, and a good piece is unseemly in a ragged garment:
so their lives that make a good show then, (and there are few that do so, they
are scarce among us, men are such Atheists, that there is not outward
reformation; but if there be,) if they give themselves leave to be Civil, and
to respect holy things a little time, afterward they return to their looseness
again. Does this patching out of a holy life please God? No, no; I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Statutes, says David.
And S. Paul, I have resolved to be so to the end; I will be my self still. So
where grace is, there is a resolution against all sin for the time to come. If
you entertain not this resolution, to walk in holiness and righteousness all
the days of your life, acknowledge no benefit by Christ's redemption, and come
not near the holy things of God.

This is the honest heart that the Scripture speaks of, that receives the seed
deep into it; that hates sin above all miseries, and ills, and that loves grace
above all other good things: therefore if any infirmity come, he can say it is
against his resolution: I purposed not this, I plotted it not, I do not allow
my self in it, here is an honest heart: the Word is fixed deeply in such a
heart; it comes with an honest resolution. If you come to the Sacrament, and
purpose to live in sin, you profane the holy things of God, the Word of God
will do you no good, it will never take deep root to save you. So much for S.
Paul's resolution for the time to come, I trust (...) shall acknowledge to the
end.

VERSE XIV. As also you have acknowledged us in part, that we are your
rejoicing, even (...) ye are ours in the Day of the Lord Jesus.
YOu have acknowledged us in part, now since you have repented: for when he
wrote the former Epistle to them, they had many corruptions among them in
Doctrine, and in conversation, about the Sacrament; many corrupt opinions they
had: and in conversation, they endured the incestuous man among them without
casting of him out, and many of them doubted of the Resurrection. Now when he
wrote the first Epistle, it took a blessed effect in their hearts, they
repented, and began to acknowledge S. Paul; notwithstanding they were disasted
of him by reason of the bad information of some presumptuous. Teachers: says
he now again, You have acknowledged us in part that now we are your rejoicing,
etc. Observe this, which I touch by way of coherence, It is a sign of a
repentant man, of a man that has repented of his sins, and is in a good
estate, to acknowledge him that has told him of his sins, to acknowledge
Observe. A sign of a good estate, to acknowledge him that has told us of our
sins.
his Pastor.


For a false heart swells against the reproof: if the Corinthians had not been
sound hearted, they would never have endured S. Paul's sharp Epistle: but now
he tells them their own plainly; as indeed it is a very sharp Epistle in many
passages: yet now they acknowledged him to be a good, and gracious man, a
faithful Teacher.

Let it be a Trial of your estate: can you endure a plain, a powerful, an Use.
Trial.
effectual Ministry? More particularly, can you endure a plain, effectual
friend, that brings that which is spoken by the Minister more particularly home
to your hearts? It is a sign of a good heart, of a repentant heart that would
be better. But if not, it is a sign you have a reserved love to some special
sin that will be your bane: it is a sign your souls have not repented. As you
see after in another Chapter of this Epistle, where he sets down the fruits of
repentance. And here is one sign, T^ have acknowledged us in part, etc.

In the words,

First, There is the thing it self, acknowledgment.

Secondly, the object matter of it, That we are your rejoicing, and you are
ours: There is a mutual intercourse of rejoicing.

And then the time is set down, The Day of the Lord Jesus, The second coming of
Christ.

To speak a little of Acknowledgment.

Acknowledgment is more then Knowledge: for knowledge is a bare naked
Acknowledgment, what.
apprehension; and acknowledgment is when the will and affections yield to the
entertaining, and the owning of the thing known. As a father not only knows
his son, but acknowledges him: a King acknowledges his Subjects, and the
Subjects their Prince. It is not only a knowledge of such men, but an
acknowledging of them, acknowledging a relation to them. So, you acknowledge
us, that is, in the relation we stand to you, to be faithful, and good
Ministers, and good men too.

What does S. Paul mean by saying, You have acknowledged us? does he mean
himself?

No, not altogether; but you have acknowledged me in my faithful preaching of
Christ to you. Wheresoever the Minister is acknowledged as a Christ
acknowledged in the Minister.
Minister, Christ is acknowledged. For what are we? We are but the Ministers of
Christ, no more, nor no less. Says S. Paul, Let a man esteem of us as of the
Ministers of Christ. If they think of us more then Ministers, that we can make,
and coin things of our own; they think too much of us: If they think meanly and
basely of us, they think too little of us. Let a man think of us as of the
Ministers of Christ; no more, nor no less: it is enough, that they acknowledge
us so as the Ministers of Christ. So they are never acknowledged, but Christ is
acknowledged by them: for they have a relative office; they are the Ministers
of Christ.

How shall we know then, whether we acknowledge the Minister, or no?

If we acknowledge Christ first by him.

How shall we know that we acknowledge Christ?

To acknowledge Christ, God-man in his natures, that we have a great
Acknowledge Christ, what
deal of love to him, that he would be born for us: and a great deal of
reverence, in that he is God. We must not think-of him but-with a great deal of
reverence, and meddle with nothing of him but with much love; he is God-man,
God incarnate. He acknowledges Christ in his Priestly Office, that does not
despair, that does believe his full satisfaction to God; and does not mingle
other things, Popish satisfaction, and Purgatory for venial sins. He
acknowledges Christ's Priestly Office, that goes boldly to God through Christ's
intercession-in heaven, and boldly trusts in the satisfaction of Christ in the
clamours of conscience, and the accusations of Satan. This is to acknowledge
Christ a Priest in our boldness and liberty to God, and confidence in our
conscience of the forgiveness of sins. To acknowledge Christ as a King, is to
yield subjection to his Word, and to suffer him to rule us. To acknowledge him
as a Prophet, to be instructed, and guided by him.

But now such as are ruled by their own lusts, and by the examples of Who
acknowledges not Christ.
others, and care not for the spiritual leading of Christ, they do not
acknowledge him: Let not this man reign over us: they shake off his bands; they
are sons of Belial, without yoke: and they shall be reckoned at the day of
Judgment among them that know not Christ: because to know him, and not to
acknowledge him, is to no purpose. As God knows us well enough; but if he
know us not, and acknowledge us to be his, what will. become of us at the day
of Judgment? I know you not, says he, that is, he acknowledges them not to be
his. So, if our knowledge be to know Christ generally, so as not to give up our
selves to be ruled by him, to be directed by him; this is not to acknowledge
him. and to know him, and not to acknowledge him, will be no comfort for us; As
it will be no comfort to us for him to know us, and not to acknowledge us. They
that acknowledge Paul, or any Minister, they are brought to acknowledge Christ
by him.

And then (to give you a familiar taste of these things,) they do acknowledge
To acknowledge the Word.
the Minister, that acknowledge the Word to be the Word of God, to be from him.
What is that? when they are cast into the form and mould of the Word, and are
willing to be framed, to be such as the Word would have them, to be pliable to
it: if it threaten, to be terrified; if it comfort, to be raised up: to be
fashioned every way to the Word, then they acknowledge the Word, then they feel
it to be Gods Word: why? For they feel it leavening the soul, making all the
powers holy, and comfortable. As leaven changes the whole lump, so the Word of
God, when we are cast into it, and embrace it, it frames and fashions the whole
man to be holy, as the Word is holy.

This is to acknowledge the Word of God, to hear it as the Word of God, to hear
it with reverence, as we would hear something from a great Potentate, from a
Judge, from a man that has to do with us: We know the Word of God, and
acknowledge him in the Minister, when we tremble at it, and hear it with
obedience. As Cornelius says, We are all here in the presence of God, to hear
whatsoever shall be commanded us of God: whatsoever, without distinction, and
turning over, and declining the Word, and shifting. When there is a willing
yielding to every thing that is told us, and a meaning to obey it, this is to
acknowledge the Word of God, or else we do not.

S Paul says comfortably to the Thessalonians, That they received the Word of
God, as the Word of God: that is, they acknowledged the Word of God, because
they heard it with such reverence, and obedience, and respect.

So you may know that you acknowledge the Minister, if you acknowledge Christ,
if you acknowledge the Preacher, and the Word that he To acknowledge the
Minister.
preaches: and you acknowledge him when you will be directed by him; when he
speaks in the Name of Christ, to esteem highly of the Consolations of the
Almighty in his mouth, to suffer the strong holds of sin to be beaten down by
his Ministry. This is to acknowledge the Minister: there is no good taken by
Gods Ordinance, where it is not only known, but acknowledged.

Christ comes to us in his Ministers as well as by the poor, and it shall be
known one day that we have rejected, not poor men like our selves, but Jesus
Christ: For we are joined with Christ in acceptance, or in neglect Ministers
joined with Christ in acceptance, and neglect.
and contempt. What we do in our Ministry faithfully, we are joined with
Christ in our acceptance: we accept Christ, when we accept, and esteem of the
Minister: or we reject Christ, when we reject, and refuse, and set light by the
Ministers of Christ.

The hypocrisy of man's heart is not discerned almost so much in any thing as
in this. Let any command come from great men that have power of our bodies or
estates to advance us, or debase us; Oh there is much astonishment, and much
heed taken: wondrous heed of penal Laws and Statutes, that we run not into the
dint of them. Now God by his Ministers threatens hell, and damnation, hardness
of heart, and to throw us from one sin to another: we hear these things as
Judges, (forsooth) as if they concerned us not. It shall one day be known that
they are Gods Ministers, and that it is Gods Word; If we have Grace to
acknowledge them as speaking from God. This is to acknowledge the Minister, to
be directed by him, and to hear that that he speaks in the Name of God. We are
Ambassadors of God, says S. Paul, and entreat you, as if Christ himself were
on earth would entreat you, to be reconciled to God. Therefore when you refuse
our entreaty, you refuse Christ, that comes with us. Those that will not hear
him here, shall hear that sentence hereafter; they must not think to be
regarded of him then: but of that I shall speak hereafter.

As ye have acknowledged us in part: You acknowledge us Ministers, you
acknowledge our doctrine, you acknowledge Christ by us.

How do these Corinthians acknowledge S. Paul in part? That we are your
rejoicing, even as ye are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus.


You have acknowledged us, that [we are your rejoicing;] What is the meaning of
that? You have acknowledged us, that you have cause to rejoice much to the day
of Judgment, and then you shall rejoice to purpose, that ever I was your
Apostle, that ever you had Grace to hearken to me; that ever you had such a
sincere downright Apostle that would tell you the truth, and gain you to
Christ. That we are your rejoicing.


Whence we may observe, That A faithful Minister is the rejoicing of the
people. Doctr. A faithful Minister the joy of the people.



Those people that are good, and have any grace in them, and not only here,
but they will be so at the day of Judgment.

Why?

Because a faithful Minister brings to them him that is the cause of all joy;
Reason. He brings Christ the cause of joy.
him that is Isaac, laughter, Christ Jesus, at whose very birth there was a
message of joy from heaven.

For all joy, and all glory, is originally, and fundamentally in God
reconciled; Original of our joy.
that is certain: there is our joy in God reconciled. For naturally, before God
be reconciled, our hearts are full of confusion: they are so far from joy and
glory, that they are full of horror. Now God is reconciled, by Christ's
satisfaction, and obedience, his full satisfaction, witnessed by his
resurrection; and thereupon comes our glorying, to be in Christ, who has
brought us to be at one with God, with the God of glory: Blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, says St. Peter, that has begotten us to a
lively hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, etc. Now we have a lively
hope, we have a glorious hope, we may glory in it, in the resurrection of
Christ: considering that his resurrection is an evidence that the debt is paid,
our surety being out of prison: he being risen again.

But all this must be opened to us, and offered to us, and applied to us Christ
must be opened by the Ministry.
by the Ministry what Christ has done, and what he will do, it must be opend
to us, and offered to us: to receive Christ thus graciously bringing us to God.
And faith must be wrought in us, to join us to Christ: and this is by the
Ministry.

Now in the next place, when the Ministry does this, it does teach us that God
is reconciled by the satisfaction of Christ, and teaches the nature Use of the
Ministry.
and offices of Christ, and the benefits we have by Christ, it unfolds the
unsearchable riches of Christ. The Ministry offers Christ: and God by his
Spirit works Grace in the Ministry, to believe, and to walk worthy of Christ.
Hereupon comes glorying in the Ministry, in the preaching of Christ
faithfully, crucified, and risen, and teaching us to walk worthy of Christ.

So it is not that any man should glory in the Minister for himself: but in
that he brings us to Christ which Christ brings us to God, in whom is all our
glory. So, we see the ground of it, how S. Paul was the rejoicing of the
Corinthians, because he brought them to Christ.

The Office of the Ministers is to be wooers, to make up the marriage between
Christ, and Christians souls: now herein is the rejoicing in a good Ministers
wooers for Christ.
Minister, when we are brought to Christ, and then see the riches of our
husband unfolded by the Ministry; here is matter of joy: especially at the day
of Judgment; then we shall joy indeed that ever we knew such a Minister, that
ever we knew such a holy man, that was a means to bring us to Christ, and to
God.

Hereupon it is that the Ministers are said to be a special gift of God, Ephesians.
4. Christ when he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to
men: Ministers a gift of God.
What gifts? Some Apostles; some Prophets, some Pastors, some Teachers to the
end of the world, for the building of his Church. Christ when he went in
triumph, after his Resurrection; when in his Ascension he went triumphantly to
heaven: (as the great Emperors, on the day of their Triumph, they scattered
money, so) he scattered gifts, and they were not mean gifts, money, and such
trifling things: but when he went in his Triumphant Chariot to heaven, he had
no better gifts to leave to the world, then to give such kind of gifts as
these; he left Ministers, Apostles, to found a Church; he left Pastors and
Teachers to the end of the world. These were the gifts that Christ gave when he
went in Triumph to heaven; therefore well may they joy in the Ministers as a
special gift of God.

So, there is a notable place, Jer. 3. 14, 15. there is a Promise, if they
would turn to God, and be a gracious people, what he would do, I will giveyou
Pastors, according to my own heart, and feed you with knowledge and
understanding The Ministry a great blessing.
insinuating that it is a special blessing, it is a blessing above all
blessings in this world; indeed, none comparable. To live in a place where all
solaces are, where all worldly contentments, yet to be there where the sound of
the Gospel is not, where the best things are not, it is but a dead place. What
is it to be fatted to destruction? what life to the life of Grace? and how is
the life of grace begun and strengthened, but by the means of salvation? When
God gives Pastors according to his own heart, to feed his people, with
understanding and judgment, it is a great blessing; and so it is matter of
rejoicing and glorying. For may not the soul reason thus? Who am I? that when
thousands sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, God should send his
Ambassadors to me, to offer Christ Jesus with all his riches to me: and by his
holy Spirit effect it, by such and such a Ministry working grace in me, to
give me the first fruits of glory, the pledge of salvation, the beginning of
grace here, when millions of other people sit in darkness? Thus a Christian
rejoices in God first, and then rejoices in the Minister, he rejoices in
every thing that is an occasion to bring him to heaven.

What is the reason God brings us to heaven by the Ministry of men, and Why
God brings men to heaven by men.
does not send Angels? or do all by his Spirit without help?

Amongst the rest this is one, he would have one to glory in another, he would
tie one to another: therefore it ties one man to another this relation to see
the need of Gods Ordinance. And that people might rejoice one in another as the
gift of God: Therefore he calls man by man, to knit man to man: And that they
may see Gods love to them in men. They saw Christ's love to them in S. Paul:
Saint Paul saw Christ's love to him in them, in their obedience: this is the
reason that God uses men to call men.

Therefore those that neglect the Ordinance of God; let them never think of
glory by Christ, that glory not in the Minister that brings them to Christ.
Therefore, 2 Cor. 5. 19. they are excellently joined together, God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself. What then? what need the Ministry? if
God be reconciled to the world in Christ, God is merciful, and Christ dyed;
and there is an end: No, he has put, to us Apostles, and after us, to Pastors
and Teachers, the Word of reconciliation: and we as Ambassadors entreat you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. So there is no word of reconciliation
effectual to any, but we must have the efficacy of it by Embassage, it must be
offered by the Ministry.

This Ministry contemned by the world must be the means to bring Gods
benefits come by the Ministry.
us to Christ; we have no benefit brought to us from God unless it be by the
Word of reconciliation. Neglect the Word, neglect reconciliation it self:
Therefore it is called The Word of the Kingdom, the Word of Grace, the Word of
life, insinuating, that if we neglect the Word unfolded by Gods Ordinance in
the Church, we neglect Grace, we neglect life, we neglect Kingdom and all,
because we see they are joined together. I will not be long in this point in
this place.

Only this, when God does vouchsafe any abroad wheresoever, or to any of us to
partake of his Ordinance in an effectual holy manner, to joy in Use. To rejoice
in enjoying Gids Ordinance.
it. As Solomon says, Prove. 19. 14. Inheritance comes by parents, but a good
Wife is the gift of God: So a good Minister or a true Christian friend is the
gift of God that he bestows on men, a special gift, because it is in order to
eternal happiness, it is such a gift as Christ gave when he ascended into
heaven. So much for that point, We are your rejoicing. As also ye are ours.


There is an intercourse of joy, we are your rejoicing, and ye are ours in the
day of the Lord.

How were they S. Paul's rejoicing?

They were St. Readiness rejoicing, as they were gained to God, and to Christ by
his Ministry; when he looked on them, he looked on them as people given him by
God. As God said to him of them in the ship when they suffered shipwreck, I
have given thee all their lives.

It was a great honor to Saint Paul, that God should give him the lives of all
that were in the ship: but more honor that God gave him so many souls: Thou
shall have the honor of saving so many souls. Therefore they were his
rejoicing (in the day of the Lord especially, but) now they were his rejoicing,
because by faith he apprehended that they should be his special rejoicing, when
he and they should stand together before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For
faith makes things to come present: Ye are our rejoicing; because you shall be
our rejoicing then more especially. This is the nature of faith to present
things absent. For Blessed St. Paul now in heaven, when at the day of judgment
he shall stand before Christ withal the rank about him, of Corinthians,
Ephesians, Philippians, etc. and all the Churches he converted; when he shall
be environed with them, as so many brought in triumph under the Kingdom of
Christ, and pulled from the bondage of Satan: as what a world of people did he
bring to God, what triumph did he make over Satan and the corruption of men
bringing men into captivity to Christ? When all these shall be set before him;
what a glory will this be for holy St. Paul, when he shall look on all these
blessed people as conquered and brought under Christ's government by him? And so
for all the Apostles, St. Peter and the rest. And so for every Minister, when
he shall say, Here I am and the souls that thou have given me; thou have
honored me so much as to be an instrument to gain them to Christ to bring them
to Heaven, a special glory. The point of Doctrine, or truth I observe hence is
this, That The Peoples proficiencie in Grace, is the Ministers joy.


The peoples good estate in Grace is the Ministers joy and will be, especially
Doct. The peoples good is the Ministers joy.
after at the day of judgment: ye are our rejoicing. As he says, Philip. 4. Ye
are our crown, and our glory. And so, 2 Thessalonians. 2. What is our crown, and
rejoicing? is it not you?

In every Epistle almost, those good and gracious people, he makes them his
hope, and joy, and crown, and rejoicing.

In what sense? 1. The matter of his joy.


Because they were the objective matter of his joy: when he looked on them, he
looked on such as yielded him comfort; he could not present them to his
thoughts, but he thought of them as matter of joy; here be the people that God
has honored me to do much good unto. He could not think of them but as the
object of his rejoicing; the word is Canchema, our rejoicing, that God had
given them to him to bring to heaven.

Love descends we know, and the workman looks upon his work with a kind of
complacencie. Saint Paul could not look upon those that he was used as a
blessed Instrument to doc good upon without a special kind of delight. They
were the object matter of his joy.

Then again, they were not only the matter of his joy and rejoicing,
presenting to his soul comfortable considerations: but also they 2. A means
to increase his joy.
were some means to increase his joy in Heaven: for Those that convert souls,
shall shine as the stars in the Firmament, Dan. 12. Those that are honored
of God so far as to bring souls to God, they shall shine as the stars in the
Firmament: especially those that convert souls shall have a degree of honor
above others: though the substantial glory be by Christ. It is not to be
denied, that the accidental increased glory comes by the increase of the fruit
of the Ministry: and so Christians, those that are fruitful Christians, that
do much good, they shall have much glory. Saint Paul shall have more rejoicing
then others that did not so much good as he, Ye are our rejoicing; because you
shall be a means of my greater rejoicing: they were the object of his joy, and
the means of his joy.

Then in the third place, they were his rejoicing, because they were the seal
of his Ministry, that he was a sound Minister. How was it known 3. The seal of
his Ministry.
whether Saint Paul were a good Minister or no? Behold his works: see how he
wrought on such, and such people, how many he gained to God. When he looked on
them, he looked on them as a seal of his Ministry, that he was a good
Minister, and in that regard they were his rejoicing.

And in some regard likewise in the fourth place, that their gaining was 4. To
evidence that he was a good man.
an evidence to his soul that he was a good man. Ordinarily (though God convert
men by ill men, as Judas no question might convert some, yet) for the most part
God honors his servants; and he that is heat himself can kindle another. Those
that are not heat with grace, they cannot speak of the efficacy and power of
the things they feel not in their own hearts, as others do: therefore no
question but it comforted him in the state of Christianity, that God honored
him to be a means to bring others in to Christ. So in many respects the peoples
goodness is the Ministers joy.

If this be so; Let those that are under the Ministry not deny themselves Use.
To be good under the Ministry.
that comfort, or the Ministers that joy, to be good. There are many poysonful,
spightful spirits that are in love with damnation, that will cherish the
corruptions of their naughty nature, in spite of God and all. Rather then they
will acknowledge to be wrought on by such and such, to be their children, they
will be as they are; they will be broken in a thousand pieces before they will
bend to any Minister, upon such weak resolutions to yield to a poor Ordinance
of man: here is the devilish pride and poison of man's corrupt nature: Can we
set light by that, but that at the same time we must set light by our own
comfort, and salvation?

How were the Corinthians Saint Paul's joy? were they not their own joy first?
they were matter of joy to S. Paul, because he saw he had gained them to
Christ: the good was especially theirs; it reflected on him only by
consideration. When he looked on them he was comforted; but they were more
comforted a great deal: they had more comfort in his rejoicing then he: his was
but by reflection of their goodness, a comfort that came by consideration; they
had the main comfort of their goodness.

It is little comfort for any to carry themselves so, as that those that are
over them in Christ Jesus, when they think of them, can but sigh, when they
hear their blasphemies, when they cannot so much as gain of them to leave
courses that the very light of nature condemns: the filthy discoveries of a
rotten heart, their vile words, and their offensive carriage, can this be a
grief to the Minister, and not for the damnation of their souls together? And
they shall find it a heavy, and bitter thing to grieve the Spirit of God in
others, as well as they wound their own conscience; both are joined together.

What a happiness is this, that the more a man is interessed in the good of
another man, the more glory, if he be a means of any good in him? he shall
have good, and you shall have glory.

The best things in nature are communicative, and diffusive: the Sun gives
light to the whole world: so the best man is most fruitful, and communicative,
Good communicative.
he labors to gain all men by his acquaintance: He knows this, that he is not
for himself, he is reedeemed for the honor of Christ: And then he knows that
another good will be my glory, it will increase my glory, and be the object of
my glory.

On the contrary, we see a company of wretched, despicable creatures, (let
their outward estate be as glorious as it will: but I speak of them as Wicked
men draw others to sin.
Christian eyes judge and esteem of them,) that draw others on to the same
course with them: if they be blasphemers themselves, they glory to make others
so: if they be given to sensuality, they labor to make others sottish as
themselves: if they be given to filthiness, they draw others to communion with
themselves. Well, will these people be much for their rejoicing in the day of
the Lord, think you? what will they do when they think of others, such as they
have neglected altogether, that God gave them charge of? The very thought of
them instead of making them rejoice, it will make them astonished. I betrayed
his soul, he was my friend, or my servant, I let him live in such sins. Good
neglected will torment us hereafter.

But then ill infused; by example, and by word, I poisoned him: suppose I have
repented my self, but perhaps the person that I have drawn to communion in my
sin, has not repented: what a torment will this consideration be? Good
neglected will be matter of torment, much more evil infused, poison infused.
When we shall see at the day of Judgment, instead of a company that we have
gained to God, and been a means to further their salvation, we shall see a
company that we have infected with our ill example, and our evil persuasions;
this will be in hell an increase of torment.

One will curse another, and say, You brought me hither. The father will curse
the son; To get riches for you I cracked my conscience, and lost my soul: And
the son shall curse the father; By your riches that you lost me, I lived a
base, and sensual life, whereas perhaps I might have trusted to my good
endeavors otherwise: so here shall be cursing. The friend shall curse his
friend; You might have told me of this, you strengthened me in evil courses.

As it will be our glory when we shall see such and such, as God has used as
instruments to do good unto; so it will be a torment indeed to think, Such and
such I neglected, and betrayed; such and such I corrupted. I beseech you
therefore take heed of it.

And would you have matter of joy in this world, that should joy you when
nothing else will joy you? (as Saine Paul was in affliction often,) what
comforted Saint Paul? First, his own conscience, that he was a good Christian,
an heir of heaven, a good Apostle: but when he wanted joy, what would he do?
when he had no liberty, but was imprisoned, when he had nothing; then; he
considered. How has Christ dignified me to do good to others? this honoring
of him to do this, it comforted him more then all his imprisonment, and
abasement, and reproaches could discourage him; the conceit that God did use
him as an honorable instrument for his honor and service, to do good to
others.

So the testimony of our Conscience, that God has used us to do good to
others; not only to make me to gain heaven, but to be an instrument to gain
others, this will comfort us in the world, come what will.

This should stir up those that have to deal with the souls of others, Use.
To labor to make others good.
(not only Ministers, but all others,) that have any committed to them, that
they should labor to make them good, to work upon them for the good of their
souls, that they may have them as matter, and objects of their joy at that
day. If they do not (as I said) when they are presented to them as persons whom
they have neglected and betrayed negligently for want of instruction, and
reformation of their lives; and as persons whom they have infected with their
ill example, which is worse: alas, what matter of horror will they be? They
will not say of them as S. Paul says here, You are my joy, and my crown, and
my glory; but they will be matter of horror: these be they that I havs
betrayed, and neglected, and infected, and brought to hell, to this cursed
condition with my self. It will be an increase of the torments of hell at that
day, all those whom we have hurt any kind of way.

But what shall it be then of those that have opposed goodness? that The
misery of opposers of goodness.
have not only betrayed others by neglect; but have maligned good where they
have seen it? what will become of them, that are so far from making others
good, that they have despighted the Image of God in others, and have exercised
their bitterness upon Christ in his members and Ministers?.

To add one thing more:

What! these Corinthians, that had so many abuses, and such weaknesses, were
they the matter of S. Paul's joy?

Yes; why, therefore people must take heed how they leave Churches Not to leave
Churches for some corruptions.
that have corruptions in them. Schism oft-times is a greater fault, then the
fault upon which they pretend separation: the things for which they pretend a
rent, are not so great a fault in the Church, as the want of Charity in them to
do so. If Saint Paul would have taken occasion to leave them, what good
occasion had he? alas, how many corruptions had they in doctrine, and in
manners too? but yet notwithstanding as ill as they were, he saw what good was
in them, and looked not to the evil: he knew that God would perfect the good
things that were in them; and, says he, (notwithstanding all their
infirmities,) I see you were ready to reform when I wrote an Epistle to you,
therefore I doubt not but you will be our rejoicing. In the day of the Lord
Jesus.


This is the time; it must be taken inclusively, I am your rejoicing, and you
are mine, to the day of the Lord Jesus, and in the day of the Lord, so he means
here. It is laid as a ground here, That Jesus Christ has a Day. Observe. Christ
has a Day.



It is his day by way of eminency, and excellency. Jesus Christ has many
days, two especially: The day of his first coming, and the day of his second
coming. The first coming of Christ was the day of the Gospel, when he came to
work our salvation: His second coming is to accomplish our salvation. In his
first day he came to be humbled, and to be judged, to be a sacrifice for us: In
his second, he is to come gloriously to judge the quick and the dead. In the
first, he came to gain a Church to himself; by his second he shall come to
accomplish the Marriage: now is the contract. There is the Sabbath, after the
six days of this life the day of the Lord shall appear, the Sabbath day, the
day of Jubilee, the solemnization of the marriage, the solemn triumph over all
enemies. The first day was to save our souls, especially from the thraldom of
sin and Satan: The second day, this that we speak of here, shall be to save our
bodies from the rottenness and corruption in which they have lien rotting in
the grave till that day of Christ. As he raised his own body, so at that day he
shall raise our bodies, and make them like his glorious body. That is the main
Day, the Day of all days: for then he will come to accomplish all: that day
shall never have a night, it shall be day for ever.

As the Cloud that went before the Israelites to Canaan, that side toward the
Egyptians was dark, but the other side was lightsome toward the Israelites:
Simile.
so this day, it shall be a dark day; it shall be both a day of vengeance, and
a day of glory.

Saint Paul says here, You shall be my rejoicing, and I yours at that day: but
those that do not believe the Gospel, and obey the Ministry of it, it shall
not be a day of rejoicing to them. It shall be a glorious day when all other
glory shall vanish, all other glory in the world shall be eclipsed; even as the
Stars are not seen when the Sun appears in the firmament. All the glory at
that day shall be the glory of Christ, and of his Church. To omit other things
that may be spoken out of other places of Scripture, the Point I will observe
hence is this, That The measure of a Christians rejoicing in this world in any
thing, it is the Consideration of what it will be at the great Day of Judgment.
Doctr. Christians rejoicing as it will be at the last day.



I say, the rule whereby a Christian judges things, and that measure whereby a
Christian measures things, to be thus, or thus in their excellency, and worth,
it is as they will be esteemed at that day of the Lord Jesus Christ. Here S.
Paul says, I am your rejoicing, and you are ours at the day of the Lord Jesus:
What? is this a vain glorying to commend him, Oh he is a worthy learned Rabbi,
a great learned Apostle: and then that they were such, and such people? No, no,
They had grace wrought in them; and S. Paul saw such evidences of grace in
them, that at that day they should look upon Christ with boldness, because
they were sincerely gained to the Gospel. So then this must be the rule of the
worth of any thing, to esteem it as it will be then at that day; which is a day
when all our estates will be determined of for eternal happiness, or eternal
misery.

To explain it a little.

We do not value things of short continuance, because they are short, as
flowers that are fresh in the morning, and cast away at night; but we esteem
things that will hold out: so our rejoicing, and glory, and comfort, we should
consider of it how it will hold out, Riches avail not in the day of wrath.
Things have that degree of goodness or evil in them, they have that degree of
vanity, or seriousness, as they will stand out at that day. What are riches in
the day of wrath, even in this world? what will riches be then at the day of
the Lord Jesus? Therefore a Christian values them not, they are not the good of
a Christian; he esteems not the applause of men: and pleasures are nothing,
they are momentany, they avail not when conscience is awaked: They leave a man,
and not only so, but they leave a sting behind them.

If all the good things in the world will stand us in no stead then, then what
will the sins do that thou have made so much of? what will the sins do that
thou have betrayed and damned thy soul for? thy filthiness, and thy betraying
of goodness, what will that do? How will thou look the Judge in the face, when
as nothing in the world that is excellent will hold out, and avail at that day?

But what then will avail at that day when Christ shall come to judge What will
avail at the last day?
both the quick and the dead?

Why, this, That thou have submitted thy self to acknowledge Christ as thy
King, and thy Priest, and thy Prophet: and by means of the Ministry thou have
been wrought on, and the work of the new creature is begun in thee, true and
sincere grace that thou dare look on Christ, that thou art in the state of
grace, this will comfort thee in the day of Judgment.

By this you may discern who take the wisest course; he that measures his who
take the (...).
life by a right measure and rule: who judges aright of persons and things? he
judges aright of things, that values, and labors to interest himself in those
things that will comfort him in this world, and stand by him in the world to
come: he has a right judgment, and esteem of things.

What be those things?

Grace, a holy, humble, gracious, believing carriage, and disposition: when a
man gives himself to Christ, and renounceth the world, and sees the vanity of
all things but the estate of Christianity, he has those things in some little
measure that shall be perfected at that day. Who take the wisest course, those
that seek to please the humor of men, those that seek to feed their own
corruptions, and the corruptions of others, those that will have some present
glory in the flesh? I but what will they have at the day of the Lord Jesus?
Surely, those that labor to approve themselves in sincerity and truth to
Christ Jesus in all things: and so that they may approve their hearts to him,
they care not what the world judges of them; as Saint Paul says, I pass not
what ye judge of me. If there be a day of the Lord, when he shall be Judge,
then those are the wisest and the best courses that will hold out at that Day.
And those that will not, we shall be ashamed of them all.

And that is the reason that many men of excellent parts and endowments are
comfortless in the time of temptation: they did not think to do things with
reference to Christ, in sincerity to please him: fot then they might old up
their heads at that day.

There is a great deal of Atheism in our hearts, we frame our courses to
present contentments, by reason that we have little belief for the time to come.

I beseech you, let us often have in our thoughts the second coming of Christ.
The best things are behind, our chief rejoicing is behind: our rejoicing now is
our hope that we shall rejoice then. The Corinthians were S. Paul's joy now,
because he knew they should be his main rejoicing then. If we rejoice in any
thing now, let it be that our names are written in heaven, in the testimony of
our conscience that we are Gods, that our hearts are wrought on, that we have
something that Christ will acknowledge when he sees his stamp and Image on us:
when he shall look on us, and see his own Image upon our hearts, there will be
matter of joy in that day.

There will be joy in our selves, and joy in all the blessed instruments that
are under Christ, the Ministers they shall rejoice likewise in us, and all of
us shall join in joying in Christ, all shall meet there. For their joying in S.
Paul, and he in them, it was that Christ was theirs: And Christ shall come, as
it is in 2 Thessalonians. 4. to be glorified in his Saints: not only in himself, but
in his believing members: for his glory shall reflect upon them, as the Sun
reflects upon light bodies; all light bodies are made light by the Sun. So the
Sun of Righteousness shall come, and all them that have glory it shall be by
reflection from him, they shall be glorious in him: so he is both the Ministers
joy and the peoples, they shall all glory in Christ, whose glory is their
glory. He shall come to be glorious in his Saints, therefore frame your courses
that way to have glory then, to have comfort in the hour of death, and at the
day of Judgment. And to end the point;

Let us labor to be acquainted with him now before that day: we shall never
have comfort in the day of the Lord Jesus, except we be acquainted with him,
and acknowledge him in the Ministry now, and in the Sacraments: Application to
the Sacrament.
for none shall ever be acquainted with him there, that have not been
acquainted with him, and known him in this world.

How do we come to be acquainted with Christ?

To be present where he is present: and he is present where two or three How we
are acquainted with Christ.
are met together in his Name. He is present now in our meetings, he is present
when we hear the Word. He is present in the Sacrament more especially: we have
his very body, and blood. As verily as we take the outward signs, so verily
Christ is present to our hearts; at the same time from heaven, he reaches us
himself with all the benefits of his passion: when the Minister reaches the
bread, he reaches his body. As our outward man is refreshed with the elements,
so our souls are refreshed with the spiritual presence of Christ. Now he is
excellently present in heaven, he is present to our senses in the Sacrament,
and by his Spirit in the Word.

Would you have him then at his appearing come and own you, and say then, Come
ye blessed? be acquainted with him now upon all occasions: hear the Word,
receive the Sacrament, and come to the Sacrament as acknowledging him there.

How is that?

Why then you acknowledge the bread and wine to be Seals of him, and To
acknowledge Christ in the Sacrament, what.
of all the blessings by him, when you come prepared; when you come to them as
his, or else you do not acknowledge them: you know them to be such and such
things, but you acknowledge them not to be set apart for such a holy use,
except you come with prepared hearts.

Will any body acknowledge him to go to a great person, when he goes deformed,
and in rags? do you know whither you go? would some say, to him. He considers
not whither he goes, that comes to the Sacrament in his old sins. Come
acquainted therefore with Christ, to acknowledge him that shall be your Judge
at the latter day, therefore come prepared.

And then, because the Sacrament is a means to seal to us all the benefits we
have by Christ, and to incorporate us more nearly into Christ: he that comes to
the Sacrament as he should, must come with joy. Is it not a joyful thing to be
united to Christ? and to have further assurance of all the good things by him?
Yes, it is a matter of great joy: Therefore when you have repented of your
sins, come with joy.

And come with holiness. The things are holy; as our Liturgy has it: let us
give holy things to holy persons: here is presented holy bread and wine, and
here you are to deal with Christ; therefore come with holy reverence in the
whole carriage of the business.

And come with faith, and assurance, and then you shall acknowledge Christ in
this Ordinance, in the Sacrament. You shall acknowledge that he deals not
complementally with you, to feed you with empty signs: but you shall have
himself with his signs: you shall have the Lord himself in the Word, and in the
Sacraments. With the field you shall have the treasure in the field, as the
wise Merchant had. With the Word you shall have Christ, wrapped in the Word;
and in the Sacrament you shall have Christ, and all his benefits. Trust to it,
make it your weapon against Satan, he will tempt you to doubt of your interest
in Christ. Think with your selves, Had I grace to receive Christ? to be
incorporate nearer into him? why should I doubt to renew my Covenant? And
though I have fallen by weakness, yet I have a gracious Intercessour in heaven
that makes my peace continually. Come in faith: Know that God in good earnest
here offers Christ with all his benefits.

And come with a purpose and resolution to be led by him. You come to renew
your Covenant; here is the Covenant, when Christ is given to you, and you give
your selves to Christ. Therefore (as I said) if you come with a purpose to live
in sin, come not at all. Christ will not live in a heart where there is a
purpose to sin: therefore esolve to leave all sin, or else you cannot receive
him.

To move you to come, and to come thus; do but consider that it will be your
joy in this world, and in the world to come, before Christ, that you have been
thus acquainted with him herc on earth, acquainted with him in the Ministry,
acquainted with him in the Sacrament, in private prayer, and meditation, in all
the blessed means that he has appointed; and then he will look on you, as upon
his old friends.

But now he that is a Rebel, that goes away, or else comes, not acknowledging
with whom he has to deal; him that shall be his Judge ere long, the Great God
of Heaven and Earth, that shall come in glory and majesty with thousands of
his Angels. Then he shall be Wonderful indeed, as his Name is, Isai. 9. 6. and
as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he uses the word, he shall be
wonderful in his Saints. Then all the world shall wonder at the glory of a poor
Christian, when he shall put down the Sun, and all the creatures in glory.
Consider with whom you have to deal: him that ere long shall be wonderful in
his Saints. Therefore come prepared, come joyfully, come faithfully, come
reverently, and holy, and you shall find a blessing answerable. This I thought
good to touch, concerning the occasion of the Sacrament. Ye are our rejoying.
At the day of the Lord Jesus.


Saint Paul esteemed of nothing, but that which would comfort him at that day.
Therefore let us often think of the day of the Lord Jesus. Why? Thoughts of
Judgment make us painful.
what will make us digest labor, and pains, in dealing with the souls of
others, in doing good, and being fruitful in our places? The consideration of
that Day: there is a Day will come that will make amends for all, and that is
the day of the Lord Jesus.

And considering that there is such a day, let us make much of the day of the
Lord, that is now left us; what is that? This day: The Lords Day: Revel. 1. it
is called The Lords Day. And as I said, labor to be acquainted with that Lord
that must be Judge of quick and dead then. The Lord has a day now wherein we
may be acquainted with him; by hearing his Word, by yielding obedience of his
truth unfolded to us: therefore let us make much of this day, if we would have
comfort at that Day. Ye are our rejoicing in the Day of the Lord.

VERSE XV. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that
you might have a second benefit, or Grace.
IN this confidence,] In this assurance, in this persuasion, I was minded to
come to you.

[That you might have a second benefit,] says the last translation; it does
diminish the strength of the word: therefore go from the Text to the margin:
you have oft-times a fitter word in the margin.

Charis, The word is pregnant in the Original, it signifies Grace: if it
signify a benefit at all, it signifies a benefit that issues from grace and
favor; benefit is a weaker word. Grace, though it be not so common, is a fit
word, and reaches to the strength of the word in the Original, to the meaning
of the Apostle; so it is better to read it so, That you might have a second
Grace.

Saint Paul in this Verse sets down what intention he had to come to them.

And likewise the end of his intention.

In the next Verse he sets down the manner how he would come to them.

Fourthly, he shows why he came not to them, it was to spare them, as he faith
afterward.

Here in this Verse he shows what his intention was: My intention was to come
to you. In this confidence I was minded to come to you.

To what end? That you might have a second benefit.

His intention is set down by the inward moving cause, his confidence; In this
confidence I was minded to come to you.

I will speak of his intention, and purpose of coming: And of the end of it.
And in his purpose of coming, of the moving cause, his confidence. In this
confidence.


What is that? In this confidence, because I am assured that you are my
rejoicing, and I yours in the day of the Lord Jesus; in this confidence that
you will be so to me, and I to you. In this confidence.

Saint Paul had a good opinion of them: The inward moving cause of S. Paul to
come, it was a good conceit of them. It is good as far as possibly we can to
cherish a good judgment, and conceit of Observe. Good as far as may be to
cherish a good opinion of others.
others.


Let others have as good place in our affections as possibly may be.

Why?

If they be good, we wrong them else even in our conceit. We do not Reason 1.
only wrong men in our speeches and actions, but in our sinister judgments, in
the censures of our minds: therefore we should have as good conceit of men as
possibly we can in that regard.

And likewise, because confidence, and assurance that they have something
Reason 2.
in them that is good, and it will be better with them after in the day of the
Lord, this will be a means to stir us up to deserve well of them. Hope stirs up
Will; we have no mind to a thing that we have not hope of. And likewise Hope
stirs up endeavor: And Hope keeps in endeavor. What makes a man so long in
endeavoring the good of others? he has some hope, they are good, and will be
better. So it stirs up our will, the bent of it, it stirs; it stirs up
endeavor upon will; and it keeps us in endeavor when we hope for good at men's
hands.

And therefore we ought not to cast off men (especially those that are Not to
cast off men for infirmities.
young,) for imperfections. The Corinthians were weak, and carnal, as you may
see in the former Epistle, yet in this confidence that they had repented of
their ill usage of S. Paul, he was minded to come to them. Persons that are the
subjects of hope, are not free from infirmities. Novices cannot have that
perfection that grown Christians have at the first. Consider further what is of
passion, and what is of the poison of nature: consider what is of infirmity,
and what is of malice. Consider what sins they have been longer accustomed to,
and how hardly such sins are suddenly broken off. These considerations would
mitigate something where we see any degree of goodness.

Oh, this pleases now some vicious-disposed persons: they think this makes for
them.

Not at all: what I speak is, where there is any ground to hope well of. S.
Paul had some ground, for he wrote a sharp Epistle to them, and he saw they
were amended on it: he saw they yielded, they acknowledged, that is, they
reformed by his Ministry, and by his Epistle. So where we discern reformation,
that there is a willingness of amendment, we must hope of such, though they be
sometimes overtaken. And if they be overtaken we must construe it to the best:
the temptation perhaps was great, and they were not watchful at that time: the
subtilty of the opposition, and the malice of men was great, and their caution
was not so great; thus we may construe to bear with them, if upon the discovery
of their fault, they become pliable: but otherwise, if they arm themselves with
malice and bitter poison, and resolve to be so still, there is no hope, no
confidence of such. Saint Paul's confidence here, was with evidence from their
carriage; they gave him some cause to be so confident.

Therefore it is in vain to think that we are too censorious when we tell you
of your faults: that very conceit that you think bitterly, and arm your selves
with resolutions, rather to vex those that inform you, then to amend that which
is amiss, that is as ill a disposition, as ill a state as can be. We can hope
for no good of such: yet notwithstanding we ought so far to hope of them, as
nor to give them over; as S. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. To prove if at any time God
will show mercy to them, to deliver them out of the snare of the devil. They
are in the Devils snare, yet we ought still to take pains with them: for we
know not whether it will please God, at that time, or at any time, to have
mercy on them, and deliver them out of the snare of Satan.

If God bear with them, we ought to bear with them as well as teach them: but
to have a good conceit of them, when we see them maliciously bent against those
that tell them of their faults, we cannot.

If this be so; It should be an encouragement for all those that are under Use.
Encouragement to inferiors to give occasion of good hope.
others that inform and instruct them, to give them some good occasion and
ground to hope well of them. You would have us hope well of you, what ground do
you give? what is your company? Shall we think you are good, because you
converse with those that are swearers? with vicious, and carnal company? would
you have us blind? Charity indeed interprets the best, but it is not blind.
What shall we judge of you by your outward demeanor and carriage, that is
oft-times scandalous and offensive? when your speeches are filthy, and corrupt,
joined with blasphemies, and oaths; daring God (as it were) whether he will
suffer you to carry it away unrevenged, and unpunished, or not. Where this
abominable corruption of heart discovers it self outwardly in the tongue, how
can we entertain good conceits of you? You think we wrong you, by not
conceiving thus, and thus of you: what ground have we? what hold have we from
any thing that is in you, or from you so to conceit? Resolve on this, there
cannot be grievance offered to the Minister, but you must reward ill to your
own souls; if you be not his joy, it will be your sorrow; you will have the
worst of it. And therefore study as much as may be to have the good hope, and
confidence of others. This will stir up willingness, and stir up
endeavor, as it did in S. Paul; the good hope he had of them by their
repentance, and reformation, and pliablenesse, it stirred up his diligence;
they gained by it: but I mean not to stand on that.

In this confidence, that you will be my joy, and I yours in the day of the
Lord. I was minded to come unto you:


Saint Paul was minded to come unto them. You see then, That Personal presence
has a special power and efficacy. Observe. Personal presence has a special
power.



Personal presence has more efficacy then writing: For there the holy things
that are delivered, they are (as it were) acted to the life. Men are wondrously
affected when they see gracious things delivered with life, and feeling: it
has a wondrous lively working. Therefore S. Paul tells the Romans, Romans 1.
15. that beside his learned, and worthy Epistle he wrote to them, he was
desirous also to preach the Gospel to them.

But some object; Reading is preaching, say they: Some kind of preaching. But
not that which the Apostle meant: for then Saint Paul's Epistle was preaching,
some kind of preaching. But I speak not to Sophisters: but, says Saint Paul, I
desire to preach the Word to you by vocal teaching; it has a special
efficacy. It is wondrous good praying for others, and writing to others: but
presence, when the Minister is the mouth of God with them, and to them: their
mouth to God, to pray together with them; and Gods mouth, to speak to them:
this presence is of a wondrous efficacy; therefore S. Paul says, I purposed to
come to you.

It should stir up in our hearts an esteem of the Ordinance of God, of Use.
To esteem Gods Ordinance.
Preaching: or else we slight it with the prejudice of our our souls: For
does God appoint it for any thing but for our own good? There is a common
Objection, which (because it is raised out of this Epistle, and may be answered
out of this Epistle,) I will answer.

Oh, say some, a lively voice has not always that Energy, that operation,
Object.
that writing and reading have: for we see S. Paul's Epistle was more terrible
then his presence. It is the Objection of men that content themselves in their
own idleness, wresting of such places as this. Among the rest, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
say they, His bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible, but his
letters seem terrible. Therefore this is not always true, That bodily presence
has more efficacy then writing.

I answer briefly, Saint Paul compares not here his bodily presence with Answ.
his letters, as if his letters were more efficacious then his bodily presence:
but he compares his mild dealing, being present, with his sharp dealing, being
absent: his letters indeed were sharper then his presence: But to take away
such Cavils, he tells them after that they shall know (if they reform not,)
that his presence shall be as sharp as his writings. Let such a one think this,
Such as we are in word being absent, such will we be when we are present. We
will be as sharp (if you reform not) in our presence, as we were absent. So he
compares the sharpness of his letter with the sweetness of his presence. It
is not to be taken in that sense that his letters were more effectual of
themselves then his presence: for he says the contrary, You shall know that my
presence shall be as sharp as my letter was. Therefore it is but a Cavil to
think there is more efficacy in Reading, then in Preaching. That you might have
a second Grace. Saint Paul's end in coming to Corinth.



I come now to S. Paul's end: His intention and purpose was to come. The end of
his coming was to bestow a grace on them by his presence. In general Observe
here, That Holy men are fell on work from holy moving causes, and holy aims.
Observe. Holy men work from holy ends.



Holy aims are the winds that carry them to their business, and they are the
water that drive their Mill. I come with a holy confidence that you will be my
joy: here is my moving cause. What is my aim in coming? It is this, to bestow
a grace on you. Holy men have holy aims for holy actions; they have holy
grounds, and holy moving causes.

When two men do the same thing, yet it is not the same thing: perhaps their
aims differ, their moving causes differ. Saint Paul comes here to do a good
thing from a good end, from a good moving cause: In this confidence I was
minded to come, to bestow a grace on you.

Let us look in all our actions therefore to our moving cause, and to our Use.
To look to our aims in our actions.
aims. And especially Ministers, their aim it should not be for the fleece,
it should not be to gain respect, or any advantage to themselves, but to bestow
some spiritual good thing. As the Apostle says, Romans 1. To bestow some good
thing upon you, some grace, as he calls it. This should be their aim, not to
receive good from them so much as to do them good. Ministers are fathers, they
should have that tender disposition. Parents do not think of receiving much:
(they look to that in the second place, that must be maintained) but specially
they look to their Childrens good. I come to bestow a grace on you. How this is
observed, I list not to speak, therefore I leave it; and come to that which
concerns us all. I was minded to come to you:

To bestow a grace on you. We see then, That The Preaching of the Gospel is a
special Grace. Doctr. The preaching of the Gospel a special grace.



It is a free and bountiful benefit of God. Gracce implies freedom, and mercy,
and bounty. It is a free mercy of God to have the Gospel:

Why?

Because this is the means to work all that is savingly good in us. This
Reason. It is the means to work all good in us.
is a means to open to us Gods love in Christ; and to work in us a disposition
answerable to his love: therefore it must needs be a grace. Heaven is a grace,
life is a grace, reconciliation a grace, and such like: therefore the Word must
needs be a grace, by which all these are communicated. Therefore the Word has
the name of these things; It is the Word of the Kingdom of heaven. It is
called the Kingdom of heaven, the preaching of the Gospel: because it puts us
into the state of the Kingdom of heaven: and the Word of reconciliation,
because by it we know our reconciliation with God: it is offered, and wrought
in our hearts; and faith to apply it by this Word. It is the Word of life, Act.
20. the life of grace, and the life of glory all come by this Word. I commend
you to God, and the Word of his Grace, says the Apostle: All grace, and
spiritual life is wrought in us by the Word: therefore the Word preached, it is
a special grace, and favor of God.

Saint Paul here calls his coming to them to strengthen, and confirm them, a
grace: For all means come under the same decree of Gods eternal love with the
decree it self. When God out of grace resolves, and sets down, that he will
bring such a one to heaven, of his free love; he does out of the same grace fit
him with opportunities of persons, and means: he accommodates him with all
means; for he intends in such a way to bring him to heaven.

And therefore S. Austin does well define Predestination: it is an ordaining to
salvation, and a preparing of all means tending thereto. Therefore all fall in
the compass of grace, both the free favor of God, setting a man down to make
him happy; and likewise by sending men that have an outward calling, and
inwardly furnishing them with gifts, and whatsoever, all is of Grace. The
preaching of the Word is a grace.

It concerns us therefore so to esteem it: Do not many sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death? Is it not a grace therefore that we partake of Use. To
esteem the Word as a Grace.
the means of salvation? What is in us by nature better then in Turks, and
Pagans? or then many other people under Satan, and under Popish Teachers, and
so rot away in their Ignorance? nothing; we differ only by the grace of God:
therefore let us esteem it as a grace.

How shall we esteem it as a grace?

Receive it thankfully, as a largess, and bounty, and free grace of God:
receive it as a bounty with thankful hearts: Grace begets grace, it begets
thankfulness: so to receive it as a grace, is to receive it with thankful
minds, to be more thankful for the means of salvation, then for any outward
thing.

How shall we come to be thankful? How to come to be thankful.


Never, unless we find some grace wrought by the Word of Grace. Therefore to
receive it as a grace, is to receive it as a free, loving gift of God, and to
yield to it: when by it holy motions are stirred in our hearts, not to
suppress, and quench holy motions, but to yield to them. Not to quench and
resist the Spirit, but to yield our selves pliable to the Word. This is to
acknowledge it a grace; to be thankful for it, because you find your hearts
wrought to holy obedience by it. Give it way in your souls, that it may be an
ingraffed Word, that all the inward and outward man may be seasoned with it,
and relish of it: that the Word may season your thoughts and speeches, and
desires, and season your course of life, that what you think may be in the
relish and strength of the Word, in the strength of some Divine truth, and the
guide of your actions may be Divine truth, or some motives from it. Then you
will give thanks for what is wrought on you, when it is an ingraffed Word in
your souls, and all relish of it, your speeches, and actions, and your whole
course: when a man may know by your carriage that there is something invested,
and ingraffed in your souls, that gives a blessed relish to all the
expressions of the outward man. Such a one indeed will account the Word a
special grace by a sweet experience wrought in his heart. I will not press
that Point any further.

Again, whereas S. Paul says, he would come to bestow a second grace on them;
we see here, That Those that are in the state of Grace already, they need a
second grace. Doctr. Those that are in the state of Grace, need a second grace.



Those that have initial grace to be set in a good course, they need confirming
and strengthening Grace. S. Paul had planted them before. I but he must come to
water them; there is always somewhat left for the Minister to do, till he see
their souls safe in heaven, he has always somewhat to do to the Christian
souls under him: For he must not only get them out of Satan's Kingdom, into a
good estate, but he must labor to build them up; he must water them, and fence
them, and strengthen them against all discouragements.

A man is never safe till he be in heaven: therefore he says, I will come to
you, but I will come to bestow a second Grace on you, you have need of it, and
my love is such to you, that you shall have it. To enforce this a little,
because we set terms to our growth, and go on plodding in a course, and many
years after we are no better then we were at the first: and some out of a
profane fullness; out of a Laodicean temper, they think they have enough, they
are rich; when indeed they are empty, and miserable, and wretched, and poor:
and if temptations set upon them, they have nothing in them.

To let you see that we stand in need of a second grace, and of a third grace,
and a fourth grace, that we need continual building up.

First, look within, what opposition there is to saving goodness within,
Reason 1. From inward opposition.
what rebellion of lusts, what Ignorance, and blindness, and darkness, and
indisposition: what head the flesh makes in us against the Word of God. Let a
man a little continue out of the means, and he shall see what growth of
corruptions there will be, a distasting of all means, that a man shall be ready
to begin anew with them almost: having a double principle in them, of grace,
and corruption, there needs continually strengthening, and stablishing Grace.

Consider outwardly what discouragements from the ill examples, and Reas. 2.
From without.
allurements, and seducing of others, from the disgrace that is put on good
things; what discouragements, and scandals from without?

Again, are there not oft-times new, and great temptations, that a man Reas. 3.
From new temptations.
must have a new measure of grace to resist? There is continual occasion of new
spiritual strength to oppose new temptations, and new spiritual strength to
endure new crosses, and to enjoy new benefits. In all the passages of our life,
there is a necessity of more grace, of further supply of grace. A man with that
proportion of strength which he had before he cannot encounter with new
temptations; and therefore there must be new grace, and fresh attending upon
the means while we live here.

Again, unavoidable times will come, when there must be strength of Reason 4.
From the time to come.
Grace: sickness will come, Temptations to despair will come; conflicts with
Satan will come: we need not say, put the case, such and such: but it is an
unavoidable case; they will come, wherein a great strength of Grace will be
necessary: therefore we cannot be too much careful, in attending upon the means
of salvation to be confirmed and strengthened.

Again, do we not need a great measure of strengthening Grace continually? does
not the Devil envy goodness, and good actions? when we go Reason 5. From Satan.
about to pray: when the best men are about the best actions, what a deal of
distraction is there? how does Satan confound them with distractions? what a
deal of confirming Grace need we to every good work? when a Christian is taken
out of the Kingdom of Satan, he is the Butt, the object of his malice, and the
malice of those that are his instruments. We must pull every good work (as it
were) out of the fire: we must use violence to nature, to temptations in every
good duty, to perform them strongly: we need a second, and a third Grace; many
degrees of Grace.

Then again, we are capable of more Grace: for our understanding is such,
Reason 6. From the capacity of the soul.
that we may know more still; and our will is such, that it affects more still:
and the more holy truths are made known to us, the more the will is enlarged to
cleave to them: the more we know, the more we may know. Our understandings are
wondrous large, there is a great capacity in them, and our adhesion and
cleaving to truths is more and more; the more we know, the more the Will
cleaves to it: as it is, Act. 11. 23. they exhorted them, that with full
purpose they would cleave fast to God: we must cleave and adhere fast to the
truth, and to God; every day go deeper: get nearer and closer to God, and
labor to be established in good things. Saint Paul prays that they might be
established more and more. And David prays that he might be established in
good thoughts, and desires, and resolutions, in good purposes: to be stablished
in every thing that is good. Grace is a state that we may grow in, and our
souls are fit to be enlarged: for there is a great capacity in the soul, till
we come to heaven it is not full: we may grow in every Grace stronger and
stronger. As in the examples of holy men in Scripture, it was never well with
them but when they were growing: there is a necessity of growing.

If this be true; Let us set no pitch to our selves: and abhor, abhor even Use.
Not to set a period to our growth in Grace.
as the temptation of the Devil, the conceit of fullness, and of
self-sufficiency, to think, I know enough, what should I know more for? or
perhaps, I could read at home: (as I said before.) It is Gods Ordinance, and
cursed is all private study, when it is done in contempt of the Ordinance of
God. Take heed of such suggestions of fullness, and standing at a stay: No, we
need a second, we need many degrees of confirmation, and strength; and all
little enough. There was never any that repented of the careful use of the
means: strengthening, and proficiency, and growth in this kind is a pledge of
perfection; that God will perfect more and more that that he has graciously
begun. I beseech you take it to heart, that we always need a further degree of
strengthening Grace while we live in this world.

The strongest Christians are most desirous of strength: who have you that does
most hunger after the means of salvation? Surely those that have the greatest
measure of grace: because with grace, the capacity of the soul is enlarged to
receive more. The soul is so framed by God, that the more it has, the more it
hungers after: and Blessed are those that hunger, they shall be satisfied. Who
care least for the means? debauched, shallow creatures, those that are Popishly
conceited, such as are ill bred: such as take scandal at all things in the
communion of Saints, at holy exercises, the frequenting of public and private
duties, the making conscience of calling upon God. A Christian that knows what
it is, he thinks all the means little enough, he will not omit one of them,
that may be a means of his growth and strength: he thinks if he neglect one
means, he decays in all. Therefore he joins to all means, private duties: and
then public, of hearing the Word; and he hears out of season, when he finds
himself indisposed. As the Ministers are to preach in season, and out of
season; so he hears in season, and out of season. And therefore of all men, he
that is the most careful of his growth, is the great, the strong Christian: the
better he is, the more he hungers after it.

Take this as a trial: If you do not desire to be strengthened in good Trial
of our estate by desire to grow.
things more and more, you have no goodness at all. I will press the Point no
further at this time, but go on. Says Saint Paul, I was minded to come to you,
that you might have a second benefit, a second Grace, that is, a confirming,
strengthening grace. We all need then a second grace, a confirming grace. Here
I might make some Use to Ministers, (I will but touch it) to show what their
duty is to those that are under them: every man is (as it were) a Minister in
his place, to strengthen another, and to exhort one another, and to bestow
grace one upon another: but Ministers should do it especially. They are like
those that repair the Sea-banks, the Sea gets over oft-times Simile.
and eats out the banks, they must be repair continually, they will impair
else. The Ministers pains it is like the labor of the husbandman: when he
has sown, he must weed; and when he has weeded, he must fence, to keep it
from the birds of prey, and the violence of beasts, etc. and he must live by
faith till the grain be ready. So the Minister after he has planted, he must
water, and weed, and fence, and all little enough: he must look to the banks,
and many times that which he gets in one day, he loses in another: nay,
oft-times the pitiful condition of a Minister is this, that at the weeks end he
has all to do again. Another man sees an end of his work, but in this the
Devil and corruption has undone all again. We enforce good things on people on
the Lords day: but within one day, ill company, and employment in worldly
business overthrowes all: the Sea banks are down, they must be new repaired;
Therefore there is a necessity laid on us of the Ordinances to our lives end,
till our souls be in heaven; there is a necessity of repairing them. We cannot
be too diligent in our places. And those that have the oversight of others, let
them make conscience of it; it is needful.

And mark here in the next Point, the language of Canaan, the language Doctr.
Every blessing a Grace.
of the Spirit of God, that he puts the name of Grace upon every benefit,
especially those that concern a better life. Grace usually we take to be
nothing but a gracious frame of heart, the new creature, as we call it: but
indeed in the language of the Holy Ghost, every free gift of God that concerns
our souls any way, is a grace. The very Ministry is a grace. It is the grace
and free love of God to give us the Ministry. The very heart to embrace it,
and to hear it, is a grace. The very heart to give alms is a grace: says S.
Paul, 2 Cor. 9. Thanks be to God for this unspeakable gift: for this
unspeakable grace, that you had a heart to give: so that every thing that is
good, it is a Grace, a gift of God.

Saint Paul conceived of his coming to them as a grace. Indeed the Grace of God
moved and directed S. Paul to come to them. It is Grace, that God directs the
Preacher to speak to the people. It is a grace, that the Minister speaks
gracious things. It is a greater grace when you close with; and entertain that
which is spoken, all is of Grace. Your ready minds to do good it comes of God,
it is a grace: your acceptance of God, as well as eternal life, all is of free
grace.

The ground of it is this, as Austin (as I said) defines Predestination well,
It is a destinating, and ordaining to a supernatural end, to everlasting
salvation in the world to come, and a preparing of all means to that end. Why
now as it is a grace that God pulls often some men to an eternal estate of
salvation in heaven, to a supernatural estate, that they could never attain
without his especial Grace: so the preparing of all means to that end, it falls
within the compass of Predestination, within the grace.

So when we have any means prepared to bring us to that end, the offer of the
Word, and the Spirit of God disposing us to embrace the Word; this preparing of
the means to that end, it falls within the compass of Predestination, we may
gather our Election by it: when we see the Word sent in favor, and have
gracious hearts to receive it; this is a preparation wrought to bring us to
heaven, a man may know his Election by it: all is of grace that falls within
the decree of grace. When God decrees to bring a man to heaven, all that helps
to the main must needs be grace. The Minister is a grace, the Word a grace,
opportunities to do good, a grace; the communion of Saints a grace, all that
helps a man forward is a grace. A gracious heart sees God in every thing, it
sees Gods love in every thing: it considers of every thing that befalls it as a
Grace. Why? From this disposition especially, because with the grace, there is
grace to make a blessed use of, and to improve every thing.

If this be so, let us look upon every benefit that concerns salvation, (though
it be remote) even the very direction of good speeches to us, account Use. To
look on every b^nefit as a Grace.
it a grace. It is the grace of God that I have this opportunity, especially
the public Ministry. Saint Paul calls it a grace: let us think of it as a
grace. And as we do in Clocks, we go from the hammer that strikes, to the
wheels, and from one wheel to another, and so to the weights that make it
strike; we go to the first weight, the first wheel that moves all, and leads
all. So when we see good done, look not to the good done only, but go to the
wheels, to the weights, what moves it, and makes it strike? what sets all a
going? The grace, and free love of God: when good things are spoken, when any
good is done, go higher to the first wheel that sets all a going, to the grace,
and free love of God. This is the language of the Scripture, and of the Spirit
of God: thus we must speak and think, to the end that God may have the glory of
his grace in whatsoever good is done, or offered.

When Abigail met David, and diverted him from his bloody intention to kill
Nabal, and gave him counsel another way; O blessed be God, and blessed be thou,
and blessed be thy counsel. So when opportunities are offered to do good, and
to hinder us from evil intentions, O blessed be thou, and blessed be thy
counsel. When a benefit is done, if it be a benefit of this life, take it as a
grace, coming freely from God. So, a poor man, his alms is a grace, Thanks be
unto God for this unspeakable gift, says S. Paul. It is grace in him that has
it, that God should respect him so much as to relieve him. It is grace in the
party that gives it, that he has a heart enlarged to do it. So when any thing
outward, or spiritual is done that is good, look on it as a grace, put that
respect on it, and that will make you holy-minded to give God his own.

Our life should be a praising, and blessing of God: we should begin the
Thankfulness.
employment of heaven while we are on earth. How should we do that? In all
things give thanks. Every good thing from God take it as a grace, as a
largess; not as due, not as coming by chance, but as a grace: and this will
make us improve it as a grace for the best; it will make us to give God the
glory, and improve it to our own good, when we are thankful for grace, that we
may have cause to account it a grace. Our hearts would not be so full of
Atheism, and our tongues so full of blasphemies, if we had learned this
lesson, our lives would be a praising of God.

And that we may not want matter to feed a thankful spirit, always consider,
what good things we have, are of grace: we deserve not so much as a crumb of
bread; therefore we pray, Give us this doy our daily bread. Every thing is a
Grace, especially the things of a better life.

How shall I know that the Minister is a grace, or a good speech from a
Minister to be a grace, as S. Paul says here, I intended you a second grace,
that is, to speak gracious thing to you?

I shall know it, if by that gracious means, by those gracious speeches, God
distill into me a spirit to improve them to gracious purposes. As indeed, God
turns all to a gracious end to his children: he gives them a principle of grace
to work good out of every thing; they see grace in every thing: in affliction
they see the love of God. In the worst things, Grace will pick out somewhat,
and make use of it. As God by his providence intends all to good: so his Spirit
by a provident eye to the Word works good out of every thing: but those that
have not grace, they are not grace to them, but tend to their further hardening.

To end this point: when you come to the Communion, come to it as a Application
(...) the Sacrament.
grace. It is the Grace of God that he has ordained us to salvation; it is the
grace of God that he has sent his Word; it is the grace of God that he has
sent his Sacrament to seal that Word, and all little enough: he knows us
better then we know our selves; he knows we have need of all, to confirm and
help us, the Word and the Sacraments, even to the end of our days. As the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. To build us up. The means of grace are not only
necessary for the planting, but for the building up of the Church. And
therefore come with this purpose, to have Grace confirmed, and receive it as a
grace of God with thankfulness; that God will condescend to our infirmity, to
give us helps, to support our weak faith. It is a true proverb, Grace begets
grace; it begets thankfulness, where it is apprehended as a grace: therefore
come with a thankful disposition to the Sacrament; embrace every Ord^ce of God
with thankfulness. Alas, do not thousands sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of death? they do: and therefore those that find the benefit of Gods
Ordinances, they are disposed by the same Spirit that works any good in them,
to return thankfulness to God again. That you might have a second Grace.


Saint Paul's purpose was to come to them, to bestow a grace, not to take from
them: to bestow good, and gracious speeches on them, which he knew the Spirit
of God would make effectual, to work some good in them. A gracious man is a
vessel of grace, and he should take all occasions to vent that Observe. A good
man must take all occasions to do good.
which is good.


When S. Paul says, he intended to bestow a second grace; his meaning is, that
he would utter things that were gracious, that the Spirit of God should seal to
the souls of them that heard him, and make them effectual.

Therefore every Christian should have this disposition: Saint Paul did it as a
holy man, as well as a Minister. Do we think our selves vessels of grace, (as
the Scripture calls the Elect, Children of God,) or no? Yes, God forbid else.
Now Gods Children, God has appointed some to be vessels of Gold, some of
Silver, (as the Apostle says to Timothy,) some for this use, and some for
that: all for good use. A vessel is to be filled with something, and to be used
for something: therefore set abroach some good thing when you have the
advantage of it, when you are called to it; not unnecessarily to thrust forward
your selves. Let the desire of your hearts be to do good upon all occasions. A
vessel of Grace must not be an empty vessel. A Christian he is a member of
Christ, and he has a part in the communion of Saints, and he has gifts for
that end: there is no Christian, but he can comfort, or instruct, or dissuade
from ill when it is moved. There is no Christian, but he is furnished as a
member ought to be, in some competent measure. There is no man that has
benefit by the communion of Saints, but he has grace to fit him for that
blessed communion: He is fitted to comfort, upon occasion; and he has some
grace, some knowledge to correct: he that has not is a dead member, not fit
for that communion. Therefore we should bestow Grace where we come; and not
leave an ill sent behind us, to infect others with filthy speeches, and
blasphemous oaths, to open the rottenness of our own hearts in their presence,
and so be conscious of that which is ill in them, because we strengthen it by
our example, and by our words. S. Paul was a good man. I come to bestow a
second grace, that is, to speak that which is gracious, that Gods gracious
providence shall direct to do you special good. For Gods Word is inspired by
the Spirit; and the same Spirit that breathed the Word of God into the Penmen
of it, the same Spirit is with the Word in the uttering of it: when it is done
by a gracious heart, to a gracious man, it works graciously, it has a blessed
operation with it.

Therefore we should upon all good occasions speak gracious things; Divine
truths, they will have a wondrous efficacy. If men would set on it, and be more
fruitful in this kind, they should have occasion to bless God. But alas, the
life of a Christian is little known in the world; we have but naked, shallow
conceits of the glory of heaven, and of the state of a Christian, and how he
lives in this world; and that makes men live such stained, such base lives,
that will not stand with comfort in his world, or glory in the world to come.
But a Christian should be such a one as frames his disposition to do good
wheresoever he comes: and he has ability if he be a sound Christian. How
graciously did God bless Abigails word to David? yet she was a mean woman. How
do thou know, but that by uttering gracious words in company, in season (as
discretion must guide all our actions, all our words, how do thou know) but
that thou may divert another man from sin, by a word in season?

I beseech you carry this disposition about you, as you desire to be thought
vessels of Grace here, and of glory hereafter, to be thought vessels of gold
and silver, for the use of God, labor to be employed by the Spirit of God to
good purposes, that you may leave a good savor where you come: that others
that are acquainted with you in the time of their visitation, they may bless
God, that ever they were acquainted with such a friend: Blessed be God that I
knew him: As it will be our joy at that day, so it will be one another joy
here; for God blesses the exhortations, and comforts of friends one to
another, as well as the Ministerial oft-times. So I come to the 16. Verse; how
he meant to come to them to Corinth: says he, I was minded to come to you.

VERSE XVI. And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of
Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way to Judea.
SEe what a Circuit the blessed Apostle fetched; indeed he Saint Paul's Circuit.
was industrious after his conversion: he made amends for his harsh conversion
by his speedy labors: For he spread the Gospel like lightning through all the
world almost: his course was like the course of the Sun, he went every where
spreading the Gospel. We see his Circuit here, To pass by you into Macedonia,
and to come again from Macedonia to you, and by you to be brought on my way to
Judea. There is little to be Observed here, because it is a passage to other
things, and circumstantial: I will not dwell on it. Only this by the way: we
see here, That It is a commendable custom among the people of God, to bring
one another on their Observe. A commendable custom for Christians to bring one
another on their way.
way, by way of honor and respect.


Partly it was for his security, and safety: but especially for the honor of
his person. And they knew that it would not be a barren courtesy: for they
knew that he was a man of a blessed spirit, so thankful, that he would deceive
all the tediousness of the journey, by his heavenly discourse. And he intended
their good as well as his own. You may see therefore, Religion establishes
courtesy. Says the Apostle to the Philippians, Chap. 4. 8. Whatsoever things
are of good report, whatsoever things are lovely, (he goes over many instances)
think of these things. Ths same command of God that urges, and presses love,
it commands all the expressions of love, and all the means to kindle love.

Now this, their carrying of him, and going on the way with him, which was for
honor and respect of so excellent a person, that he deserved so well of them;
it was an expression of their love, and a means to preserve it. I shall not
need to prove it, it is taken for granted. Those complements that express and
maintain love, they are good, when the outward expression, and the inward
affection go together.

I speak this by the way; to show, that Religion does not countenance Religion
teaches not incivility.
incivility. Therefore those that affect unnecessary sternnesse, and
unnecessary retiredness, it is not out of Religion: Religion stablisheth
whatsoever is good, whatsoever is of good report, whatsoever may maintain love:
so much as a man is defective in this, he is defective in Religion; unless his
affections and intentions at that time be deeply taken up by serious things:
For then lesser things must give way to the greater, or else there is no
excuse. For Religion is a thing of a large extent, even duties of Civility, and
courtesy, and whatsoever may express and maintain love, is established by
Religion. We see in Genesis 18. when Abraham entertained the Angels, he led them
on their way. And so in Act. 15. The company sent them on their way; and we see
in Scripture many common courtesies.

But I do but touch it by the way: because this whole Verse is but a passage to
another thing; therefore I come to the seventeenth Verse.

VERSE XVII. When I therefore was thus minded (to come unto you) did I use
lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh,
that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay?
THe Apostle still goes on to prevent scandal: Woe to the world, because of
offenses, says our blessed Savior; especially offenses taken: because our
nature is so corrupt, that it is subject to take offense where none is given:
it will pick quarrels enough to go to hell. Proud men that have only nature in
them, they will not be damned without reason. Tush, I had been good, say they,
but for such and such. Now S. Paul was a man much exercised with the cross, he
wipes away scandal from that (as we heard) in the first part of the Chapter, he
says, As his crosses for Christ abounded, so his comforts in Christ abounded,
he lost nothing by it,

Again, they took offense that he promised to come to them, and did not;
especially some that were not well-willers to him: therefore he labors to
satisfy that.

And first, that he might the better satisfy them that he was no inconstant
man, no unsettled man, he premiseth a description of his own disposition, and
course of life, he appeals to his own conscience, This is our rejoicing, the
testimony of our conscience, etc.

And then he appeals to their conscience. A manifest note of a man confident,
that dares appeal to his own conscience, and to the conscience of another.
Obnoxious men are always afraid, not only of their own conscience, (lest it
should tell them that which they would be loath to hear,) but they are afraid
of the consciences of others likewise. Saint Paul appeals to their conscience,
I write no other things then what you read and acknowledge, etc.

And so he comes more directly to satisfy their suspicion of him for his not
coming to them. In this Verse he labors to remove their false imputation, When
I was thus minded to come unto you, did I use lightness?

Wherein you have S. Paul's purgation of himself: here is a prevention of an
Objection of suspicion, that the flesh will move in them that have doubtful
suspicious minds. Why; if you intended to come, why did you not? Says he, When
I was thus minded, did I use lightness? First, Observe hence in general, That
Men are wondrous prone to jealousy and suspicion. Observe. Men prone to
suspicion.



It is the state of Gods Children here in this world to have suspicions raised
of them; they are obnoxious to slanders, and imputations, and they are forced
to their apologies. Men are prone to suspicion, yea, and good men too: as here,
they took his not coming in the worst part, by the wrong handle.

That is suspicion, when there are two handles of a thing, two apprehensions
Suspicion what.
of a thing, and there is a pronenesse in the mind to the worst part; to take
things in an ill sense. They might have construed it many ways better then
thus: but they thought the worst of him; he is light in his promises, he will
say, and unsay again: he is off and on. This is in natural men, yea, in
Christians; as far forth as they have old Adam in them, they are prone to
suspicion.

Whence is this? Whence it is.


Partly out of the poison and malice of man's nature in many, esteeming 1. From
guilt.
others by themselves: for the worst natures are always most suspicious, out of
a privity of their own indisposition in themselves: usually those that deserve
worst, are most jealous, because there is most cause. Conscience of a man's own
imperfections and weakness makes him think others to be as he himself is.

And again, there is envy in man's nature toward excellent persons especially.
2. Envy.
The malice of man's nature cannot abide eminency in others: The false Teachers
among the Corinthians they saw that Paul stood in their light, therefore they
labor to eclipse and obscure him all they could. Hence it is, that men are
willing to entertain willingly any suspicion: For not being willing out of
baseness to rise to their greatness and excellency, they labor to bring them
down by their suspicion to their baseness, and meannesse, that all may be ill
alike. Therefore baseness is subject to suspicion, and the fruit of suspicion,
that is, slander: to take every thing in suspicion, and to utter it in words:
because they would have men of eminency brought down to their meannesse: and if
they cannot do it indeed, they will bring them by reports as low as they can,
that they speak, and unspeak, and are inconstant as other men. There are many
causes of this; and therefore S. Paul seeing the baseness of it, he stands the
more upon it.

How shall we arm our selves against this suspicion, and the fruit of it? Quest.
how shall we carry our selves against this disposition of men among whom we
live?

I answer briefly: First, labor for innocence, that if they will speak
maliciously, Answ. How to arm against suspicion.
yet they may speak falsely. Says S. Ambrose, Et nobis malus, etc. Our care
must be that no man speak ill of us without a lie: let us live so, that no man
may believe them: labor for innocence therefore; but that 1. By Innocence.
will not do.

Therefore Patience in the next place: for innocence could not fence 2.
Patience.
Christ himself, who was Innocence clothed with our flesh: if innocence will
not prevail to make men hold their tongue from speaking their suspicious minds;
then labor for Patience.

But that will not do neither, but men go on still; then Prayer, that was 3.
Prayer.
David's course: that God would defend our innocence, and take our cause into
his hands, and bring forth our innocence as the light, to judge for us.

And when nothing else will serve the turn, neither Innocence, nor Patience, 4.
Apology.
etc. then just Apology, and defense, as we see the Apostle does here defend
himself: For it is not for public persons to dissemble slanders; and
especially for them not to suffer ill suspicions to rest in the hearts of those
that are under them. Therefore the Apostle is enforced through Christian
prudence to his Apology, to wipe away the imputation; When I was thus minded,
did I use lightness, says he? This I Observe in general.

Now because suspicion is a doubtful thing, it is either good or evil; how
Quest.
shall we know when suspicion is naught, and evil?

First of all, when it is out of misconstruction; when it is from weak Answ.
Suspicion when evil.
grounds, or doubtful grounds, then it is ill for the ground.

Or it is ill likewise when it ill affects, and swayes, and disposes the 1.
mind: if it dispose the affections to malice, to the suppression of love; if 2.
it discover it self to come to slander. As here in this place, they thought
presently it was lightness in him; here was a misconstruction, here was a
false ground. What did this incline them to do? From inconstancy presently they
fly to his disposition, from suspicion to slander his disposition. They enter
into Gods Throne: his purposes, and projects certainly they were naught. Carnal
proud man will enter into Gods Throne, and judge a man's thoughts, and purposes,
and intentions. Then a man may know his suspicion is not right, when it enters
too deep, when it rises from false grounds, from suspicious grounds; and
brings men from actions, to go to the disposition; Did I use lightness? or the
things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh? that is, Carnally,
as they thought: this entered to his disposition.

Then again, when it stirs us up to speak in slander, when we speak without
cause or ground. Then when it inclines a man from an error in one 3.
thing, to go to the habitual disposition in all things. As here now, because
in one thing the Apostle was inconstant, and did not come to them, they went to
his habitual disposition in all things. Nay, you may see what he is, you see
what we are like to have from him in other things, he does but purpose things
according to the flesh; he has his own aims I warrant you. So when from one
thing we presently judge that he purposes other things according to the flesh,
that is a bad suspicion: when a man goes from one thing, to the habitual
disposition. When I was thus minded, did I use lightness?


The more to convince them of their suspicion, and hard surmises, he cites
them, and propounds as it were interrogatories to them; I pray answer me; says
he; When I was thus minded, did I use lightness? as you imagine? Or the things
that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh? etc. After he had cleared
his purpose before, and cleared his conscience, now he comes to propound it to
their conscience: because he would have them to think; that if he were such a
man as he showed himself before, that he had a good conscience in all things,
and a good affection to them, that they should not have had a misconstruction
of that particular failing, that he came not to them when he purposed: for
particular actions must be construed according to a man's habitual carriage, and
affection. You see how I have labored in all things to have a good conscience;
and for you, you acknowledge that I purposed to come to you: therefore you
should construe my actions according to that intention. Now having cleared my
disposition, and intention to you; you see your error in misconstruing my not
coming to you: So he comes to it in good season after he had freed himself to
them. When I was thus minded, did I use lightness? etc.


These things he declines, Lightness, or Inconstancy.
Purposing, or Deliberating according to the flesh.


And then inconstancy in his speeches, that they should be yea, yea, nay, nay.

The Point that I Observe from the first concerning Lightness, is, That Every
Christian, especially Ministers and public men should labor by all means
Doctr. Public men to avoid the imputation of lightness.
to avoid the just imputation of lightness, and inconstancy.


The imputation of Lightness is especially to be avoided of those that are in
place. Lightness and inconstancy, what is that? when a man has not pitched
his resolutions and purposes to one thing; when a man does not stand in his
purposes.

Now a man must avoid imputations of lightness, especially persons of quality.

Why?

(Not to speak all that might be said in the Point) Especially for this Reason.
To preserve Authority.
end, to preserve authority. Authority is that that furnishes a man in his
place, in Magistracy, or Ministry wondrously to prevail, to do good. I take
not authority here, for that which the King puts on them, or the chief
Magistrate: but authority is that high respect that the people have of the
eminency of their parts, and honesty; an impression of somewhat more then
ordinary in them: this is that authority, a beam of excellency that God does
infuse, for the strengthening, and fortifying of his own Ordinance: what reason
is there else that a thousand should be subject to one man? but that God does
put a Majesty upon his own Ordinance, and upon the persons in it; and this
respect to it must be maintained, by a uniform constant carriage. Now when
people shall see, that they are as in their place, so in their disposition,
great, and serious, and weighty, and firm in their resolutions, that they may
build on them, and know where to have them (as we say) it breeds authority, and
maintains authority: For then what they say is regarded, and how their
affections stand: if it be love, it is much sought after; if displeasure, it is
much feared: for they are men of a fixed disposition, it gains wondrous respect.

Let men be never so great, if they be such as S. Paul here declines from
himself, that they use lightness, they lose their authority. Authority is the
special help that Governors have to rule, and that Ministers have to prevail:
now, nothing weakens esteem and authority more, then when men are tossed
between the waves of contrary affections: when men are such as we know not
where to have them, as we say, off, and on; fast, and loose: one while fitting,
another, standing: no man will build on them, or much regard their love, or
hatred.

Now you know Authority is a beam of Majesty, and God has put it upon
Magistrates above others; and imprinted likewise the respect of it in the
peoples hearts, to maintain the World, the pillars of the earth will shake
else, as the Psalmist says. What would become of the Pillars of Government, if
it were not for Authority in them that are above, and respect of that
Authority, an impression of it in them that are under.

Now there are many grounds of Authority, as success, when God blesses them
with it wonderfully to admiration; and good parts, etc. but one main Ground of
Authority is Constancy, and firmness: this raises a high respect in the
hearts of the people.

I will not multiply reasons why those that are in place should avoid the
imputation of lightness. Ministers especially should take heed of it; because
they are Ministers of Gods truth: and if they take not heed of it, people will
be ready to go from their moral civil carriage, to their doctrine; and think
there is an uncertainty in that they speak, because they do not regard what
they say.

But let me add this by the way, Matter erroris similitudo, Likeness is the
mother of error: so there is somewhat like Constancy in Governors, Obstinacy
like Constancy.
and others, when they are nothing less, but merely refractory, and obstinate:
to maintain the reputation of constancy, they will run into the fault of
wilfulness. Such as are subject that way, had need of strong wits to rule
their strong wills, to guide them, or else woe be to those that have to deal
with them: that I thought good to add, left we mistake.

We should all labor to avoid inconstancy and lightness in our resolutions,
in our purposes, and affections.

If we ought to avoid it, how shall we come to know it? what is the ground of
lightness?

The grounds are many. Sometimes from the temper of the body: some are of a
moveable temper, of a moveable, quick spirit, that they cannot Grounds of
lightness, and inconstancy.
out of their constitution fix long, except they set weights upon nature. I am
by disposition thus; but my resolution shall be otherwise: as where 1. Temper
of body.
Grace and wisdom is, it will fix the temper, and fix the resolution, and the
thoughts. This I could not do, if I should yield to my own disposition; but
this I will do, and I should do: there are many resolutions, as in the younger
sort, and some out of their very temper are more fixed, and resolved.

But now consider it as it is in Religion, Lightness comes out of the
disposition 2. From the disposition of the mind.
of the mind.

Inconsideration oft-times is the ground, when we do not see the circumstances
of a thing that we promise, or purpose. You know there is nothing 1.
Inconsideration.
comes to action, but it is beset with circumstances; there are advantages of
it, and there are stops, and hindrances of it, somewhat may fall out: Every
thing that comes to action is besieged with circumstances: circumstances you
know have their name of standing about a business, about a thing: now when the
things that are about, the impediments, and the hindrances, and lets are not
weighed, a rash man sees not the things, he considers not the things that he
enters upon: he resolves without considering the circumstances that beset the
thing: he never considers what oppositions he may meet with, or what advantages
there be which perhaps he neglects: but he thinks of the thing, it is good, and
suitable to his purpose: he resolves, and never considers the circumstances
about a thing, but runs on in confidence of his own wit, and parts, and thinks
to rule all by the strength of his wit; not foreseeing, not casting in his
mind, to prevent beforehand what may fall out. It is just with God to shame
such men; frustration of their purposes, it is a just reward of their folly.
Therefore we should take heed of Inconsideration, and have our eyes in our
heads, to set the soul to foresee what possibility there is of the business,
and what may fall out: this is the right way, if we would avoid imputation of
lightness.

Again, another ground of lightness, and of that decay in authority and 2.
Passion.
respect that comes from it, is the passion of men: therefore they are light;
they are carried with the hurry, and wind of their passion. And Satan joins
with passion. A passionate man is subject to Satan more then a man that is led
by reason, or with grace. For that is a beam of God; even reason it self,
judgment, it is an excellent thing, and it prevents many temptations.

Give not way to passion, for those are unreasonable things. As we see Saul in
his passion, Satan, the evil spirit mingled with his passion of anger. So let
men be in any passion, over-joy, or be over-angry; let them give the rains to
unruly passion, and they give advantage to Satan, that we cannot settle our
souls in any good resolution.

Again, in the things themselves; there is cause of lightness and inconstancy,
from the nature of the things, and then it is not so great a fault to change;
then it is not properly inconstancy: but it is inconstancy, when the things are
mutable, and variable, and we do not think of it as we should.

Now the things of this life are variable, and uncertain: the event of things
in this life is wondrous variable. Grace, and glory, they are certain things,
and the way that God directs us to heaven, they are certain promises, and
certain grounds: but the things of this life are subject to much change. God
takes a great deal of liberty in altering things in this world, they fall out
diverse ways.

But now therefore we must take heed that we take not inconstancy for
Inconstancy mistaken.
that which is not. Every change of opinion and purpose is not lightness. It
is not inconstancy for a man to change his mind and purpose, when it is from
the things. Men are men, and the things that we deal with in the world are
subject to variety, and inconstancy; and for a man to alter according to the
variety of things, it argues no inconstancy, if the aim be good.

As for example; a Mariner, a Seaman, he is not inconstant, when Simile.
one time he strikes sail, another time he hoyseth up sail; when he makes
indentures, and goes with a side wind, he goes on his way, and his aim is
still to come to the Haven: he is not inconstant, because he changes not his
star; he always aims at the right star, and to his compass, and card that
he sails by. He varies not from his rule: he varies from the things, because
the winds and the Seas vary, because he deals with variable objects; the things
vary, but he does not vary: he comes to his project, to the Haven; and has his
direction from the North Pole, etc.

So the Husbandman, sometimes he sowes, sometimes he barrowes, sometimes he
reapes, is he inconstant, and varies? No, the matter about which he is varieus.
So, in Governors sometimes they do this, and sometimes that, they are about
variable matters, yet here is no variableness, nor lightness of disposition;
because they deal with mutable; with variable objects.

So God in managing his Churches affairs, in his dispensation in that point:
you see he used one dispensation before Christ, and another since Christ. God
changes not, but the times are changed. In the Infancy of the Church, one
dispensation was requisite, and now another. Therefore it is not inconstancy
for a man to change on good ground; or when the things themselves change

Therefore this should have made them thought well of S. Paul, his affection
was not changed to them, but the business was changed, as we shall see after;
other things let him. So, a good man, his honest' resolution should not change;
his aim to serve God, and his Country, and to deserve well of mankind, this
should be constant: but the manner how, the circumstance of time, and place,
and ordering of these things, they are variable. They do not change, but
maintain their constancy and resolution, in the variety of occasions that fall
out: for we cannot frame our life otherwise then it is, to be unvariable. When
a man is guided by a certain principle; though the things of this life be
uncertain, and he vary sometimes according to his principle, and aim, and end,
yet it is no inconstancy. And it will excuse a man's conscience exceedingly,
when his aim is good, and the rules and principles he goes by are good, and
honest, if things fall out otherwise then he aims at, though there be a change
of his course; because his heart tells him, his rules, and his purposes were
good.

One other main cause of lightness, and sinful inconstancy, it is irreligion;
casting our selves upon future things, without a dependence on Divine 5. Want
of dependence on God.
providence. An Atheistical independance when we project things to come, and
never call upon God to assist us, and never have divine reservations as we
should have, but boast, This I will do: and sometimes negatively, This I will
not do, I have time enough to do it, as if we had future times at our command.
Saint James excellently taxes such people, Jam: 4. 13. Go to now, you that
say, To day, and to morrow we will go to such a City, and buy and sell, and get
gain. Go to now: see here how he shames them by a kind of ironical permission.
Go to now; you will do great matters: whereas (says he) you know not what
shall be to morrow. God that has given us the time present to repent in, and
to do good, the time to come he has reserved in his own power: we know not
what shall be to morrow.

Where he shows the ground of this Atheism, and rushing upon business
without dependence; they forget the condition of this life, that it is a
vapor. What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little
while, and then vanishes away. Your life is inconstant, God is the Lord of
your purposes: he is the Lord of your life, and of all opportunities and
circumstances. Your life is but a vapor: here all things fall under his
providence, and guidance. You consider not this, and therefore you project so
for the time to come: What is your life? it is even a vapor, etc.

Then he comes to direct them how they should entertain resolutions for the
time to come, Ye ought to say, If the Lord will: or if we live, we will do this
and that. If the Lord will, in whose power are our intentions, and resolutions,
and affections: he guides the inward man, and all the things in the world, to
the falling of a hair from our head, to the falling of a Sparrow to the ground,
even the least things; you should say thus.

And he calls it, vain boasting: what makes God confound insolent attempts? as
indeed he triumphs over insolent attempts of Kings, and Captains, or
whatsoever, that set up great business in high conceits, they will do this,
and that. Says S. James, You rejoice in your boasting: they boast they will do
this and that, that makes God confound them so, because they will be gods to
themselves. Man is a dependant creature, every thing is Gods, and we are
dependant, In him we live, and move, and have our being.

Man being a dependant creature, yet he resolves to do this and that, as if he
had the guidance of his own thoughts and purposes: this provokes God to
jealousy when he makes himself a god, and sets not God before him in his
actions; he sets upon things without dependence, without prayer, or
reservation, if God permit this; because God rejoices to confound these bold
attempts, therefore they never thrive in such attempts.

Therefore a true Christians joins modesty for the time to come; he Christians
modest for the future.
will attempt nothing but what he may expect to have Gods protection in: he
that thinks God may cross him, will do nothing ill that he fears God will
cross him in, he will be modest. The best Christians are the modestest, they
consider the uncertainty of the things of this life, and the weakness of man
in foreseeing things, they see a dependence of all things on the Majesty of
God even to the least things; that he guides things that are most casual: and
that he rules even the hearts of Princes, as Solomon says, as the rivers of
water; they are guided by him, they are in his hand: hereupon a wise Christian
becomes modest for the time to come in his resolutions: he undertakes all with
a holy dependence on God; if God will, and if God permit: he will undertake
nothing for the time to come, but with warrant, that he may without tempting of
God look for his assistance: for to go to God to bless us in ill projects, is
to make God the Patron of that which is bad, which is contrary to his nature.
Therefore he learns to depend upon God for the time to come, and will
entertain, or enter upon no business, but such as he may safely without
tempting of God ^epend upon him for his assistance: this is the disposition of
a modest Christian.

You see in Psalm. 2. how the Psalmist there insults over those that threaten to
do this and that: Why do the Heathen rage? and the people imagine a vain thing,
etc. against the Lord, and against his anointed? As if they would swallow up
the Church, and Christ the anointed: why do they do this, and that? God that
sits in heaven, he laughes them to scorn. You see the grounds of lightness, so
far forth as is needful. I will name no more.

The way to prevent it may be in observing these grounds of constancy; Remedies
against lightness.
Especially this:

Stablish your thoughts with counsel, for the time to come: consult, go not
rashly, and headlong about matters. It is not with our common life 1.
Deliberation,
as with those that run in a race; for their swiftness gets all: but in
matters of government in Commonwealth, there the most staid get all: those
that weigh things, and then execute upon mature deliberation; that ripen things
first, and go not rawly, and indeliberately about it: this every man takes for
granted, but it is not thought on.

Then again, labor to suppress passion in any thing that comes from us: speak
nothing in passion; for one of these things will follow: If we execute 2.
Suppress passion. Inconveniency of passion.
it, we are in danger for the things in passion, and inconsiderately spoken: if
not, we shall have the shame of being frustrate; we undergo the shame of
lightness, that we speak that in our passion, and heat, that we retract after.
One of these inconveniences will follow; either you will do it, and then it
will be dangerous: or you will not do it, and then you will be ashamed: a fit
reward of rashness.

God gives us passions to be guided, and ruled, and not to rule us: they are
good servants, and only servants that should be raised up, and stirred up
only when reason, and judgment raises them, and not otherwise. But to go on.

Another cure of this rashness is holy dependence on God by prayer, and
Dependence on God.
by faith, to commit our ways to him, our thoughts to him for the time to
come: leave all to him, entertain nothing wherein we cannot expect his gracious
assistance: the best Christian is the most dependant Christian. That is the
first thing the Apostle declines.

What is the second thing? Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according
to the flesh?


They thought he was a Politician; as this is the lot of Gods Children
sometimes: if so be that God has given them parts, either of nature, or
breeding, carnal devilish men that are led altogether by plots themselves,
esteem them by themselves. The things that I purpose, do I purpose according to
the flesh? He propounds this interrogatory to their conscience, not idly; but
he knew that they had a prejudice in them, by his corrivals, false Apostles:
therefore he labors to wipe away that imputation likewise, that he did not
purpose, and consult of things according to the flesh.

What is flesh here?

Flesh is the unregenerate part of man, whereof fleshly wisdom is the chief:
for that guides the old man, that is the eye of old Adam. Carnal Flesh what.
wisdom, it is the fleshes counselor in all things, therefore especially he
means that.

But why is it called flesh?

For many reasons: among many this is one, that the soul so far as it is Why so
called.
sinful, it is led with things that are fleshly, that are outward, and
thereupon a man is called flesh: and the soul it self is called flesh, because
it cleaves in its affections, and desires to earthly things. And because the
poor understanding now, which ruled all, and should rule all, is become an
underling to the carnal will, and carnal lusts; Therefore it self is called
flesh likewise, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God. For now it is
swayed even which way carnal fancy, and opinion, and the flesh lead it.

The reason is, it is betwixt God and heavenly things, and betwixt earthly
things. And if it were in its right original as it came out of Gods hands,
being a Spirit, it should be led by God, and by Gods Spirit, and Gods Truth; by
better things then it self: (as every infirm thing is guided by that which is
better then it self: as brute creatures are guided by men, and weaker persons
by Magistrates that are, or should be better,) but now since the fall, without
Grace renew a man, the understanding part of man's soul instead of lighting its
candle from heaven, it often lights it from hell, and is ruled by Satan
himself, and takes advice even from things meaner then it self, and plots, and
projects altogether for things worse then it self. It was not given for that
end, (God knows that give it) this soul of ours, to proul for earthly things;
for the ease, and honor, and profits, and pleasures of the world. That
excellent Jewel that all the world is not worth, it was not given for that end:
no, it was given to attain a higher end then this world, to attain communion
with God: but now since the fall it is thus with it, that it is a slave: Carnal
wit is a slave to carnal will; and that carnal will is drawn by carnal
affections: affections draw the will, and the will draws the wit, and makes it
plot and devise for that which it stands for; for carnal lusts and affections
which whet the wit that way: therefore the whole soul is called flesh, even
reason it self.

And hereupon wicked men are called the world: why the world? because Wicked
men called the world.
they are led with the things of the world, with the guise, and fashion of the
world.

A man (in the language of the Scripture) is termed by that which he cleaves
to: therefore if the heart and soul cleave to the flesh, and the things of the
flesh, it is flesh; if it be led with the world, and the things of the world,
it is called the world. Wicked men are the world, because the best thing in
them is the love of worldly things, and their wit is for worldly things, all
the inward parts of their soul are spent upon worldly things: therefore they
are called flesh, and the world. And sometimes Satan himself: a man as far as
he is carnal is called Satan; yea, good men: Go after me, Satan, says Christ
to Peter.

A man as far as he yields to any thing, he is named from that which he yields
to: when fleshly things rule a man, he is called flesh; when worldly things
rule him, profits and pleasures, a man is the world: when a man yields to
Satan, he is Satan.

This should make us take heed by whom we are led, under whose government Use.
Take heed by whom we are led.
we come: Says S. Paul, Do I purpose according to the flesh? that is,
according to the profits, and pleasures, and honors which the flesh looks
after: are those my advisers, my intelligencers, my counselors in the things
I take in hand? what may make for my honor, my pleasure, my estate, my worldly
ease here? No, says he, I purpose not according to the flesh. The rule from
hence is this, That A Christian man ought by all means to avoid the imputation
of carnal Observe. A Christian to avoid the imputation of carnal policy.
policy.


Every Christian, much more a Christian man in Authority and place, a Minister,
or Magistrate, ought by all means to avoid it? Saint Paul here declines it,
Did I purpose things according to the flesh? was I politic. I had just
occasion to speak largely of it in the former Verse concerning fleshly wisdom,
therefore I will speak the less of it now. We ought by all means to decline
the imputation of it, and much more the conscience of it, then the report of
it; to be holily wise, and to be accounted so too.

The reason is, It is Gods enemy, and our enemy: should a Christian consult and
deliberate with his enemy? to take his enemy to be his Judge, Reason. It is
Gods, and our enemy.
and his friend, and counselor? A man that has his enemy to guide him to a
place, that has a Pirate to guide him in a Ship, how can he come to good? He
that is led by the flesh he consults with his enemy, when he looks what is for
his profit, or his pleasure, etc. These things we should renounce as we
promised in Baptism, when we gave our names to Christ. If we live, and
deliberate according to the flesh, we shall dye, says the Apostle
peremptorily. It is a dangerous enemy, death is the issue of all the counsel
of the flesh, Romans 8.

Again, it is a secret enemy, a domestic enemy, it is in all the powers of the
soul, we cannot be too jealous against it. It is a perpetual enemy that
accompanies us continually, in all our consultations, in all places; in
prosperity, in adversity; it hinders us from all good, it keeps us from the
reformation of any thing that is ill.

If a Magistrate be suggested by any other; or by a good motion of his own, Do
this, reform this; Oh I shall run my self into danger, I shall incur censure:
so ill is done, and is unreformed, only by consulting with the flesh: and good
is neglected, I shall be accounted an hypocrite, if I do this.

So there is flesh and blood to hinder in every good thing: the flesh will be
foysting bad ends, or bad moving causes, and the flesh will be ready to keep us
from reforming ill from fear of danger. And if we do ill, and be in ill, it
will be ready to keep us in ill: Oh, it is time enough to repent, etc. a
thousand such policies the flesh has to keep us in ill till we be in hell it
self. Who would be advised, and take counsel by such an enemy?

Therefore let us take heed; we have it in us, but let it live in us only, and
not rule in us; although it will be in us as long as we live, yet let us Use.
To suppress it.
not be ruled by it, let us not admit it to counsel, but suppress it, and keep
it under. Especially those that are Magistrates, that are called to public
business: let them not bring private respects to public business, but bring
public hearts to intend the good of Religion, and of their Country, before
any private interest whatsoever. And not consult according to the flesh; If I
do this, I shall displease such and such: that is no matter. If it were not for
Religion, if a man have a public mind, such as the very Heathens had, he would
lay aside base respects in public business. Therefore I humbly desire such to
examine deeply their intentions and purposes, what they aim at; whether to
serve God, and the Church, and their Country, or to serve themselves: that if
so be they may be safe, they care not what befall their Country, or Religion,
or whatsoever. That is it that moves God to indignation, to cross their
intentions: for when God sees they set earth above heaven, the world present
before the world to come; and the dirt of the world, base respects before those
that are greater, that they invert the order of things, he crosses them in
that they aim at, because they cross him in neglecting their duty. Therefore
as we would have things succeed well, let us labor to consult not according to
the flesh, for our private advantage; but for what may make most first for
Religion, and then for the public good.

Again, we may learn from hence, That A ground of lightness is to purpose
things according to the flesh.


To purpose according to carnal reason, and affection, it is a ground of
Observe. To purpose according to the flesh, a ground of lightness.
lightness. For mark the reason of it, when a man is carried in his
deliberations by carnal respects, this will be for my profit, this will incline
such a man to me, by this I shall get such a place, etc. when he is led by low
and base respects, it makes him light with God; though he be never so good
otherwise. Because carnal respects build on outward things that are uncertain:
therefore all resolutions built on outward things; and carnal respects, are
uncertain. He that takes fleshly wisdom for his counselor, and adviser, and
intelligencer, what does he? he is led with by-respects, with one of the three
Idols of the world, some honor, or pleasure, or base profit: now when the rule
of deliberation is the flesh, and the flesh carries to outward things that are
variable: a man is always light and inconstant, that propounds the deliberation
of things according to the flesh.

What is the reason that a wicked man, (though he be not notoriously, outwardly
wicked; but a shrewd man, that is for himself, that makes himself A wicked man
no sound friend.
the end of all his projects,) what is the reason that such a man can never be
a sound friend? he is never a sound friend; he is only a friend, so long as it
makes for himself; so long as he gets to his own in all things. As the Jesuits
use to say, (so it is true of every natural man) they do all they do, and
consult in an order to spiritual things: they do this, and that, and overruled
Kings, and States, and this is for the good of society, and in an order of
spiritual things. A man that has not grace in him above nature, and above
respects of nature, he can never be a sound friend: for when fleshly advantages
come, of pleasures, and profits, and honors: when these rise one way or other,
there he leaves the bonds of friendship: because there is a nearer bond between
him, and the things of this life; he is led with the flesh, and deliberates
according to the flesh.

And that is the reason likewise why such a man can never be a good Nor a good
Christian.
Christian, he can never go through the variety of times: why? because he
consults of things according to the flesh, and as long as Religion stands with
his aims, that he may enjoy his riches, and his greatness, and the
contentments of this life with Religion, so long he is content to be Religious:
if Religion cross him in these, he has not learned to deny himself, and
therefore he is not constant.

Or if times do not fall out so cross, he is not constant in his disposition;
and God looks on him as he is in his disposition, and so he will judge him at
that day: now being led with the flesh, his disposition alters, and varies.

How shall I know whether I consult according to the flesh, or no?

In a word, examine two things: The ground, and the aim of our actions; How to
know we consult with the flesh.
whence they rise, and what they aim at. Spring they from self-love? aim they
at our self-contentment, and private interest? then a man is led with the flesh.

To use a familiar instance; In Marriage, when a man looks more to wealth then
to Religion, he advises according to the flesh. And so for a Minister to
respect his living more then any thing that might weigh with his conscience
otherwise, if he were good: he is led with respects according to the flesh.
Those that leave their former good acquaintance, and choose such as they only
hope to gain by, and forsake those acquaintance that they cannot gain by,
(though they be never so good otherwise) they are led according to the flesh.

How shall we know that we do not things, and consult not of things according
to the flesh? We consult not according to the flesh.


Some men may know it easily; as when men are of pregnant parts, when the
strength of their wit leads them one way, and Religion leads them 1. In denial
of parts.
another way, yet in the awe of God they do not go that way that politic
respects would carry them; they could be as errant Politicians as the best, but
they dare not: here now is a man that is led by the Spirit, when it is not for
want of parts, but out of conscience, he does not so miscarry by his enemy.
Many times an honest man could be rich by ill means as well as another, he
knows the way; it is not for want of wit, but because he dares not, the awe of
conscience, and the awe of God lead him to better rules and aims; so it is
easily discerned in eminency of parts.

And likewise in fitness of opportunities, if there be not parts; when a man
has all outward advantages to satisfy the flesh, to yield to it, to have his
aims, and yet he will not. If a man have power, and yet does not 2. Of
opportunities.
revenge himself, he consults not with flesh and blood: for he might be
revenged if he would. So I say, when there is something that might sway us
another way; and yet notwithstanding out of mere conscience, and better rules
we will not, it is a sign we purpose not, we advise not things according to the
flesh, but according to the Spirit; we are led with better rules then the world
is.

In strong suggestions, a Joseph can say, How shall I do this and offend
against God? Does not God see it? says Job: so a Christian in the strength of
Temptations, and solicitations, and opportunities to do ill, he considers, Does
not God see? How shall I do this, and offend against God? Shall I break the
peace of my conscience for the gaining of this, and this? why no; then a man is
not led with Carnal wisdom.

Again, we may know this, that we are not led by the flesh, and advised by the
flesh, when we are humble in all our consultations. It is a perpetual 3. When
we are humble in our consultations.
concomitant of carnal wisdom to be proud: knowledge mingled with corruption
puffs up.

But how shall we labor to overcome this, because we have the flesh ready by
us, in all our consultations, we have this counselor always ready at Quest.
hand, as S. Paul complains, Romans 7. That when we would do well, evil is
present; it is present at our elbow; nay it is nearer, the flesh is mingled in
all the powers of our souls: and with heavenly wisdom there is a mixture of
carnal wisdom: how shall we do that we may not be tainted with it?

I will give a direction or two.

First of all, have a prejudice of it, Cave, time, etc. says the holy man S.
Austin, Take heed of the evil man thy self: take heed of carnal reason; Answ.
How to avoid fleshly wisdom.
be jealous of it, it is an enemy, and the issues of the ways it advises to
are death: There is a way that seems good to a man in his own eyes, the issues
whereof are death, not temporal only, but eternal death. It is a deadly enemy:
have a prejudice of it, and conceit of it to be as it is; have a jealousy of
it, and of our own selves; especially in things that concern our selves. What
is the reason that a man is an incompetent Judge in his own cause? This,
because there is natural self-love, and flesh that draws all to it self.
Consult not with it therefore; consult with higher rules, and principles, what
may make most for the chief end, for the glory of God, for the assurance of our
comfort while we live here, and a better estate hereafter, that which may make
most for the common good; let us labor to live by right rules and principles,
God will value us by that.

Put the case a man by passion be led another way, what is his rule? what God
judges us not by passion, but by our tenor of life.
is his aim? his aim is not carnal, he may fall by passion, etc. God judges
not by passion, but by the tenor of our life: God esteems us not by a single
particular exorbitant act that by passion, or incogitancy a man falls into; but
by the tenor of our life. Therefore let us labor to have our rules and aims
good; though we fail in particular, yet that our way may be good; though we
step awry, yet our way may be good; that when Judgment shall come, when death
shall come, it may not find us in an ill way, in an ill course. Therefore let
us consult with God, consult with his Word, consult with those that are led by
the Spirit of God, labor to be under the government of Gods blessed Spirit, to
be guided by the Spirit of God, and by the Word of God: This should be our
care, to labor that God would guide us by his good Spirit in those ways that
may lead to our comfort, that of all other enemies in the world, he would not
give us up to our own flesh to guide us, but that he would take the guidance of
us to himself, that as he has right to us by his Covenant, so he would take us
into his government. And desire Christ that as he is our Priest to die for us;
so likewise he would be our Prophet to instruct us, to subdue all in us. And
let Divine truth be our counselor, to bring our inner man into subjection, as
it is, 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are mighty, to bring all into
captivity, to subject all high devices, and reasonings.

How shall I do this? I shall miss of my ends, I shall miss of my projects. O
but Religion when it comes and brings down all, it makes not a man to cast away
reason, but brings reason under, and brings the soul under God. A man may keep
his wisdom and understanding safe still, so he keep it under, and let Divine
truth sway and bring all in us into captivity to it self.

But alas, the scope of the world is contrary, instead of bringing the soul
Worldly men make all serve the flesh.
into captivity to Gods truth, to be led by him, to have no thoughts, no aims
contrary to Gods will, they make Gods truth a captive, and prisoner to their
own base affections: as S. Paul says, Romans 1. They hold the truth, they
withhold it as a prisoner under base affections. And whereas all should serve
the main end, and intend better things; they make a counterfeit loving of good
things to serve their carnal ends; they make heaven serve earth, they make God
serve man, the Spirit serve the flesh: they invert the order of things clean,
which is as contrary to nature if they had wisdom to consider it, as that the
heaven should be under the earth, and the water above the air: it overturnes
all in Religion, when we suffer carnal wisdom to rule all, to imprison that
light that God has put into the heart and conscience, and the light of his
Word, to base affections, and not to bring all into captivity to the Spirit,
and the Word.

When we come to hear Gods Word, we should consider that we come not for
recreation; but we come to a Counselor, to that that should sway, and direct
all our ways and words, to that that is not only our comfort in the time of
affliction, but our counselor, as David says, it was the man of his counsel.
So we come here to be counseled, to hear that which must direct us in the way
to heaven: we must come with a purpose to be guided by that, to be taught: As
Cornelius faith, We are here in the presence of God, to hear what shall be said
to us from God. Saint Paul gives this direction, 1 Cor. 3. If a man will be
wise in heavenly things, let him be a fool first. It is a strange thing, Let
him be a fool, that is, let him be content to be esteemed so, let him be
content to lose his reputation of wisdom, that he may be wise. When he knows
others to be fools, let him take a substantial course, that the vain world may
think him wise.

It is hard counsel: for of all imputations in the world, many, and the most
had rather be accounted wicked, then be accounted fools: account them the
veriest fools which are unfit to speak; think of them in the highest degree of
ill you can, oh they have wit enough for that, they have learning, and parts
for that; take not away their learning, and parts, account them not fools,
account them what you will. Religion masters this base opinion. Saint Paul
says, Let a man be a fool, if he will be wise. Let no man deceive himself, and
think, Let poor men be so, and so: Religion is the private man's good, and let
them make conscience of such things; but for us that are in place and
authority, we must rule by policy, and he knows not how to rule that is not a
Politician. Let no man deceive himself; there is no man, great or small, but if
he will be wise for heaven, let him be a fool, let him take courses that are
conscionable, though he be accounted a fool for his pains.

Let us be jealous of our own hearts in private and public, let us take heed
to our own hearts that the flesh come not in. Let us labor to be acquainted
with Christ, that he may be our counselor, and our guide in all things.

Specially now when we come to the Communion; we now renew out Application to
the Sacrament.
Covenant with God, and our acquaintance with Christ Jesus: we come to feast
with him. Do we think to have any good by him, any benefit by his death, except
we make him our King, and Prophet, to rule and guide us? except we make him our
Counselor? Therefore let us think beforehand, we cannot come as we ought to
receive the Communion, unless we intend beforehand to renounce the flesh,
Christ's enemy: can you be welcome guests, and resolve after to be led, and
ruled by his enemy? If you will have good by Christ's death, as a Priest to
reconcile you to God: (as this Sacrament seals the benefits of his death, the
breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the wine,) come with a purpose to
be ruled, and guided by this Counselor in all things, he is the great
Counselor, Isai. 9. 7. that is willing to advise us by his Word and Spirit in
all the particular passages of our lives: and the more we enter into
acquaintance with him by the Sacrament, and maintain it by private prayer, and
by all sacred means, the more ready he will be to do the office of a friend,
and counselor, in all the passages of our lives to advise us what is best. I
had occasion in verse 12. to speak at large of fleshly wisdom; therefore I
pass it. That with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay.
This sets down the manner of inconstancy, the form of it, yea, yea, to be on
the affirmative part once; and then nay, nay, the negative: to be of one mind,
and peremptory in it, and then to be of another mind, and peremptory in that;
this is the issue of carnal wisdom, and follows on it, The things that I
purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea,
yea, and nay, nay? insinuating, that those that purpose things according to the
flesh, they are yea, yea, and nay, nay. Whence first we may observe, which I
touched before a little, but it issues more properly hence from the dependence,
That Carnal men are always inconstant men. Observe. Carnal men inconstant.



For a fleshly man, led with the flesh, being led with the things of the world,
and they being inconstant, he must needs be as that which he is ruled by. A man
cannot stand safe upon the Ice, because it self is not safe: a man cannot stand
in a thing that stands not, that has no consistence. Now a Carnal man he has
no prop to hold him but the things below, he cleaves to them, and they are
inconstant, and variable, and uncertain. He that purposes according to the
flesh is yea, yea, nay, nay. Therefore his love is yea, yea, nay, nay. If he
may have good by you, he is yea, yea; he is for you: but can you do him no
good, he is nay, nay, he will not own you then.

Therefore one way to be constant, is not to be ruled according to the flesh,
(which I spoke of before,) for they that are, are yea, yea, nay, nay.

Therefore take heed how you trust carnal men, in near intimate society; Not
overmuch to trust carnal men.
as in marriage: Or in near friendship, never take a man that has his own
aims, and ends: for he will respect you no more then he can advance his own
ends by you. Trust not the Wife of thy bosom, says the Prophet, if she be
carnal she will have her own ends. So a friend that is carnal, he will have his
own ends; the Idol that he respects more then thee, or then any thing in the
earth is his own fleshly wisdom, and his own ends. Every carnal man makes
himself his god, he reduces all to himself; his own ends is his Idol,
therefore have no intimate society with such. That with me there should be yea,
yea, nay, nay.


Observe again in this place, That Carnal men are vehement. Observe. Carnal men
vehement.



They are vehement in either part; if they be yea, they are yea, yea, and yet
they will be nay, nay, naught at the same time. The soul of man will admit of
contraries, and yet be still the same in the general, yea, yea, at one time,
and nay, nay, at another time. And usually they that are vehement in business
one way, are vehement another, if they be carnal. A carnal man is vehement one
way in the pursuit of things, and he is vehement on the contrary if he be
crossed.

What is the reason that men that are carnal, some stand against Religion, and
some for Religion with like eagerness, the one is nay, nay, as much as the
other is yea, yea? both are flesh, and if those that are yea, yea, were where
the other are, they would be nay, nay. For instance, a man is Religious only
for carnal respects, he is yea, yea, O he will have the Religion of the times;
why? he could not be safe else, he cannot have his ends else, he was bred up in
it, etc. Another on the contrary is as much for the opposite Religion: what is
the reason? he was bred in it, it stands for his ends. If a man be Religions
not for religious respects, he is peremptory, and contrary to him of the
opposite religion, and yet they are equally naught.

A common Protestant has no better ground for his Religion, then a Papist has
for his; the same reason that a Papist has, the same such a Protestant has:
he was bred in it, and the King is of that Religion, and he shall attain his
ends by it. Has a Papist other reasons? except a man be truly changed, and
altered, he shall be yea, yea, and nay, nay, sometime one, sometime another;
peremptory in one, and peremptory in another, and all naught.

As for instance, the Sea, sometimes it ebbs, sometime it flows; sometimes
Simile.
it flows one way, and then flows back another way; yet it is always salt, and
brinish, the nature of it is not changed: so some men are peremptory, yea, yea,
they run one way amain, and then they ebb again, yet they always keep their
nature brinish. They are peremptory for good sometimes, and when it stands for
their ends they are peremptory against it. Such a cause is so, it is yea, if it
help their advantage; and it is not so, if it help not that; as if truth it
self in their judgment were flexible, and alterable. Thus a carnal man he
alters, and yet he is never good in his judgment. Saint Paul declines this, he
was not, yea, yea, nay, nay, because he did not purpose things according to the
flesh.

To come to the point it self. This declining of inconstancy, of yea, yea, nay,
nay, it came in S. Paul from hatred of inconstancy, and falsehood: for yea, and
nay, when a man is of one mind and another, it comes from one of these two
grounds in a carnal man:

Either because he is inconstant, that he is now of one mind, and now of
another. Ground of yea, and nay.


Or because he is false and means to dissemble.

Now both are dispositions that are contrary to a Christian man, he should
neither be light, nor be false and untrue.

Now S. Paul does much more decline the imputation of falsehood and dissembling,
(that he should be yea, when he meant not yea, but nay,) when he had declined
the imputation of lightness: for a man may truly say he will, and yet change
his mind after: but for a man to say he will, and yet mean it not, that is
falsehood, and dissembling, which is worse: S. Paul intends much more to decline
the suspicion of that.

Dissemblers are yea, yea, nay, nay; not at diverse times, but at the same time
they make yea, and nay, all at once. We say, Contradictions cannot Falsehood,
and dissembling.
be true, for a thing to be, and not to be at the same time: but dissemblers
would have contradictions true, they make as if they loved, when indeed they
hate.

God is the God of truth, the Word is the Word of truth, and Christ is the
Truth; and the Devil is the father of lies. Therefore as we would be like to
God, and as we would be unlike Satan, let us labor for truth in all things.
Saint Paul here labors to avoid the opinion of dissembling.

How would he think then of Equivocation, when there is yea, and nay at a
breath? they are not at diverse times inconstant, but yea, and nay at
Equivocation.
once, to speak one thing, and mean the contrary, to have reservations of the
contrary. It is so odious, that I will not spend time to speak of it: only
this,

If it were allowable, as the best of their Writers allow it, and practice it;
however, if they do not allow it, their practice is so; but they do allow 1. If
it be allowed, there can be no lie.
it: by this means the devil himself should never be a liar; there would be no
lie at all. And it were in vain for God to make prohibitions against lying, if
there might be equivocation: for there is no lie in the world but it may be
salved up with reservations. Therefore that course that brings the devil from
being a liar, that frustrates Gods course, and that makes men that they shall
not lie whatsoever they do, it is abominable such a conceit, and odious to God:
but to maintain equivocation is to do all this; for with absurd reservations,
what in the world may not be justified?

Then again, we are exhorted to suffer Martyrdom, to stand for Gods cause, now
to allow equivocation, is to avoid suffering. Where is the honor 2. It hinders
suffering.
of Martyrdom, and suffering for Gods cause, when men shall speak untruths,
and justify themselves by a lie? It is contrary (I say) to the whole tenor,
and stream of Scripture.

Then again, they may call it equivocation, to mince it; but it is a lie, to
speak one thing and reserve another: for what is a lie? to speak falsehood 3.
Equivocation a lie. A lie, what.
with a purpose and intention to deceive another: Now they speak false, and
with a purpose to deceive. A lie must be esteemed as it is esteemed by another
that hears it, not him that speaks it. As it is with an oath; Isidore says, An
oath is to be esteemed, as he that I speak to esteems it, not as I in my sense
esteem it, as God esteems it, and he to whom I speak: so a lie is to be judged,
as he judges it that I speak to; because God forbids lying, as a breach of
charity to others, because he would not have others deceived: if I salve it up
in my own thoughts, and deceive others, it is a breach of charity, and a lie,
because it is a speech of untruth, which another thinks to be a truth, it is an
untruth, and to deceive him. But these men will have yea, and nay at a breath,
they will say yea, and yet have a reservation of nay, at once: S. Paul would
much more decline, and abhor this, if he were alive now, when he so declined
the imputation of inconstancy, of yea, yea, and nay, nay, at diverse times.
Indeed S. Paul reserved this; he promised to come to them if God did permit,
with a Divine reservation: we may say in all the business we are to do, This I
will do, if God permit, and if God will; and indeed God hindered his journey:
but I say for equivocation, the matter is so odious, and palpable, that if it
were not that Non dum satis odimus, etc. we hate not these men enough, I would
not have spoken of it. Their Religion is so abominable and odious, we do not
yet hate it enough: and therefore it is good on all occasions to uncase them,
and all little enough: But I go on.

VERSE XVIII. As God is true, our Word to you was not yea, and nay.
THe Apostle in the former Verse having labored to clear himself from the
imputation of lightness and inconstancy, that he did not come to them as he
had promised: and from an imputation likewise of policy for himself, that he
did purpose things according to the flesh, which is the cause of inconstancy,
of yea, yea, and nay, nay: he comes now to that which he more intended then
those particulars: for he was content to be thought to have disappointed them
in the matter of his journey: but that which he aims at was to stablish them
in this, That his doctrine was found, As God is true, our Word to you was not
yea, and nay. Perhaps I promised to come, and did not; it is true: but my
preaching was not yea, and nay; all that I taught was found, and certain, you
may build your souls on it, it was yea. He labors to draw them to be
persuaded of the certainty of his Ministry, as being very unwilling that a
defect in his promise about a business of the world, should weaken their faith
in the truth that he delivered as a Minister. As God is true, our Word to you
was not yea, and nay.


He seems to make a difference between yea, and nay, in Civil things, and in
Divine: there is a difference when a holy man speaks of the things of this
life, and when he speaks of Divine truths. S. Paul promised to come to them, he
meant it honestly, and did intend it; but it was subject to alteration: because
God stops our purposes in this life, yea, our good purposes many times. Good
things may have variety, one good thing may be more convenient then another.
And the cause why he came not to them was not his inconstancy, but their
unfitness; it was from their corruption in manners, and in doctrine: they were
not ready, as he says after, he came not to spare them: they were unfit till
they were humbled with his former Epistle; and then when they were humbled he
purposed to come. But now in Divine truths, what things he spoke to them
concerning grace, and glory, that was certain, Our word to you was not yea, and
nay.

A question may be moved briefly, how S. Paul could be deceived in his journey,
and not in his doctrine; being so good a man led by the Spirit of Quest.
God, how could he promise to come, and yet did not?

I answer, the difference is much between these two. S. Paul had three persons
on him. Answ. S. Paul sustained three persons.
He was a Man. Christian man. an Apostle.

As a man, he was subject to all things that men are subject unto, that is, he
desired in truth of heart to come and visit his friends; he purposed a journey,
with a reservation that God might hinder him: and so as a man he might have a
yea, that is, a purpose to do a thing; and afterward a nay, upon the uncertain
event of the things of this life: so as a man he purposed to come. Nay, as a
holy man he purposed a journey to a good purpose, to stablish them: but with a
reservation, if God permit; God might stop his journey. But as an Apostle, he
taught other things, then speaking of journeys; that he spoke of only as a
man, and as a holy man, always supposing the condition of humane things, and
under permission, if God permit. But as an Apostle he was not yea, and nay,
there he was certain. As an Apostle he spoke Divine truths, and was guided
infallibly by the Spirit of God; he delivered truths without all conditions,
and exceptions: as an Apostle he did not admit of any such uncertainty. There
is an eminency, and excellency in Divine truth, it is stable, and firm, and not
subject to variety, and inconstancy: so his doctrine as an Apostle was always
yea.

For his journey, and coming to them, he promised his journey in veritate
propositi, in the truth of a good purpose of a friend: but as he spoke of
Divine truths, he spoke of them in the certainty of the Divine Spirit: in the
one, he spoke in the certainty of truth; in the other, in the truth of
affection. As a man, he spoke in the truth of a good affection he bare to them;
but as an Apostle he spoke in the certainty of Divine truth.

And you must know this, that God as he used the Apostles, and excellent Holy
men are but men.
men to write his book, to write the Word of God, to be his Penmen, yet he
hindered them not to be men. As he hinders not godly men to be men, but at once
they may be Saints, and men; so Saint Paul as a good man desired to see them,
with a reservation: but as an Apostle he was guided by a certain infallible
assistance of Divine truth.

Nathan, as he was a man gave David liberty to build the Temple, he was
over-shot in it something: but then he goes to God, and consults with him,
whether he should, or no; and then Nathan gives David another advice.

So the Prophets, and Apostles, as men they might be alterable without sin: For
God will allow men to be men, and subject to mistakes. For Nescience, not
knowing the possibility of things to come, is no sin in man; Not knowing things
to come, no sin.
because it is an unavoidable infirmity. So that S. Paul as his usual manner
is in promising things to come, things of that nature he promises them under
reservation, and permission, if God permit, if God will: and he does not sin,
though he be frustrate of his intention.

It is not the only part of a wise man to divine what will be. Saint Paul had
not providence to see whether his journey should be crossed or no: but out of a
Christian intention, he resolved to come, if God did not cross him; that was
as a man, and a good man. But as an Apostle his doctrine was without ifs, and
ands, without exception as we say, if God permit, etc. No, (says he) As God is
true, our word to you was not yea, and nay. So in the Difference in the things
delivered by Apostles as Apostles, and as men.
Apostles we must consider a difference of Divine truths that they delivered as
Apostles, from those things that they purposed as men, and as holy men, those
were subject to be crossed, and without sin too. For God will have men to be men,
that is, variable creatures, and such as cannot promise themselves for the time
to come any certain thing.

It is Gods prerogative to know things to come: we may know them by their
causes, we may know when there will be an eclipse a hundred years hence: but
to know what weather there shall be, as we may know the eclipse, we cannot:
because there is nothing in the cause; I say, God will have men to be men. S.
Paul may promise holily, with a reservation to God, as a man, and as a holy
man, and without sin too; but as an Apostle in his doctrine he was not so: but
as God is true, our word to you was not yea, and nay, but constant as God
himself; that shall suffice to satisfy that. Therefore S. Paul makes the
difference, I promised to come, but I did not: but as God is true, our word to
you was not yea, and nay.

Our voyage to heaven, and the reference we have to a better life stands Our
journey to heaven certain.
not on uncertainties, as the things here in this world. Saint Paul's journey
to Corinth might be frustrate; but S. Paul had another course to heaven: his
religious course stood not on uncertainties: whatsoever he taught in a
Religious course, it was yea; as he says in the next Verse, Christ the Son of
God whom we preach, was not yea, and nay, but yea; that is, infallibly true,
perpetually true, necessarily, eternally true. As God is true, our word to you
was not yea, and nay.


Saint Paul labors to stablish them therefore in a good conceit of his Men
prone to censure men's callings for particular actions.
Ministry; and that made him indeed so much decline the suspicion of
inconstancy in other things: Because carnal men are prone to think a man in his
calling, even a Preacher in his doctrine to be unconstant, if he be so in his
common course.

Saint Paul knew their corruption was such, that from a suspicion of lightness
in his carriage and common course, they would rise to a suspicion of his
doctrine: therefore he was so curious to avoid the imputation of lightness in
his journey; because he would avoid any imputation of lightness in his
doctrine. That is it which he more aims at, he stands not on the imputation of
lightness in his journey, or such matters; but he knew Saint Paul's care to
fence his doctrine from suspicion.
the corruption of men is such, that if a man fail in common things, presently
they think he is so in his calling. Full of false surmises, and suspicions is
the nature of man; and as a man is once; they gather him to be so always:
therefore he deceiving them in not coming, they might think he would do so at
other times too; that makes the Apostle labor to clear himself, but especially
his doctrine from all suspicion. As God is true, our word to you was not yea,
and nay.


Here is a truth:

And the seal of it.

His averring the truth is this, Our word, our preaching, as it is in the
margin: Our word, as it was unfolded, it was not yea, and nay, it was not
uncertain.

And the proof, and seal of it, God is true, as it is in the Original, which is
made up in the English tongue, As God is true, it is in our translation; but in
the Original it is, God is true, and as he is true and constant, and faithful,
so our word is constant, and faithful, you may build on it: As God is true, as
God is to be credited, and believed, so my word to you is to be credited as
yea, as a certain doctrine that is not yea, and nay. It is a kind of an oath.
As God is true.


The holy Apostle here seals it with an oath.

What is an Oath? An Oath what.


An oath is a Religious calling of God to witness, or to be a Judge in
doubtful things.

It is in doubtful things a calling of God to be a witness of the truth we
speak, and to be a revenger if we speak not true. It is to call God to
witness, and to judge, to makes him testis, and vindex. S. Paul here calls God
to witness, God is true, and as verily as he is true, our Word to you was not
yea, and nay.

You know oaths are either as we say, assertory, to aver a thing: Or
promissorie, for the time to come to do this or that: and they are either
imposed, Kinds of oaths.
or voluntary. Now this is an assertorie oath, not a promissorie: he avers, and
avoucheth peremptorily, that as God is true, his Word to them was not yea, and
nay, but yea. And it was a voluntary oath: for no body exacted it of him; but
he saw there was a necessity to stablish them in the certainty of the doctrine
he taught, to seal it with an oath, that they should as well doubt of the truth
of God, as of his doctrine; As God is true, my word is true.

Jeremy the Prophet has three conditions of an oath, Jer. 4. (...). It must be
Conditions of an oath.
in truth, in righteousness, and in Judgment.

In truth, we must speak, and swear true things.

And in judgment, necessary things, with discretion.

And in righteousness.

Now S. Paul observed the conditions wondrous well here. For S. Paul does it in
a true matter; and in judgment: for he was forced to it.

An oath is never good but when it is necessary; not to seal up every idle An
oath not good, unless necessary.
discourse; as if men would make every thing they say to be as true as an oath.
Indeed the life of a man should be an oath: the life of an honest man is an
oath, as true: but we must not call God to question for every idle impertinent
thing; S. Paul saw it necessary to call God to witness it was true, and
necessary.

I will not enter into a large discourse of an oath, because afterward I shall
have better occasion to speak of it. Only thus much at this time: S. Paul here
uses it, he thinks it to be necessary, to establish their minds the better in
his Ministry, and a good conceit of it that it was constant. God is true, our
word to you was not yea, and nay.

Therefore in such a case we may not make scruple of an oath; If it be
Qualifications of an oath.


In Charity. Piety. Necessity.

In Charity, in matters of controversy of Civil life.

In Piety, to establish matters of Religion.

And in matters of Necessity, that cannot be determined otherwise, there is no
scruple to be made of it.

And where we are bid not to swear at all, that is, not in ordinary course, or
not to swear by creatures: but if we do swear, it is a part of Gods service,
What meant by the prohibition not to swear at all.
we must swear by him. And indeed it is a service of God, and to good purpose,
when Christians swear to stablish, and determine truths that otherwise are
doubtful,

They were doubtful of S. Paul's doctrine, and his person; says he, To put
you out of doubt of the truth I speak to you, I dare call God to witness, it
is true, and sound. The Apostle does so once after in this Chapter, therefore I
reserve the further handling of an oath to verse 23. because the word there is
more infallible, I call God to record upon my soul, etc.

The next thing I observe hence is this, That The believing that Gods Word is
Gods Word, and is certain, it is a matter of Observe. A matter of consequence to
believe Gods Word is certain.
great consequence.


It is of great consequence, for Gods people that look to be saved, to be
stablished in their opinion, and judgment of Divine truth, that it is certain,
and not flexible and mutable, according to our wills, and conceits, and
dispositions, but is yea, always the same, as God himself, the Author of it.
For laying this for a ground that I said before, that S. Paul takes God to
witness, he would not enterpose an oath, but in a matter of great consequence:
therefore it is a matter of great consequence to be settled in this, that the
Scripture is Divine truth, unalterable, and unchangeable.

An oath is never good (as I said) but when it is necessary. It must not only
be in truth, but there must be a necessity. It must not only be taken in
righteousness, but in judgment, a man must do it in discretion; when the thing
is not determinable any other way: Therefore it is a matter of great
consequence, that men take the Word of truth not to be as the Oracles of
Apollo, and of the Devil, true one way, and false another. The Devil would
escape the imputation of a lie, though he be a liar: but Gods Oracles be
Divine, they be yea: And it is good that we think them to be so, to be
constant, undoubted, certain, and unmovable. Therefore the Apostle seals it
with an oath: he would not seal a slight truth by an oath, but says he, As God
is true, our word to you was not yea, and nay, etc.

And Saint Paul saw a disposition in them to suspect the truth of God, as
indeed we are proner to believe the lies of our own hearts, and the suggestions
of Satan, and the counsel of Politicians, of carnal friends, then to believe
God himself. Therefore partly for the indisposition in us; and partly for the
great exigence, and necessity of the thing, to believe that Gods Word is his
Word, that it is truth, he seals it with an oath, God is true: It is a point
of great consequence.

The reason is, God can have no service else, and we can have no comfort.
Reason. We cannot else resist temptations to sin.


If we do not believe the Word of God to be undoubtedly true, in great
temptations, and assaults, what armor of proof shall we have? we can have no
comfort, nor grace: For sometimes subtle, and strong temptations to evil
come, if the Word of God be not more undoubted to me, then the present profit,
or pleasure, or whatsoever: if the temptation be ready, and I be not built on,
and settled on some grounded truth that I know to be true as God is true; when
the temptation is strong, and our faith weak, where are we? a man presently
yields to base lusts and temptations.

And so in matter of danger, and despair; when a man is tempted to despair, Or
to despair.
if he cannot build on this, God is true, and his Word is as true as himself,
he will not the death of a sinner, etc. here a man is swallowed up.

It is no matter how strong the foundation be, if the building on that
foundation be weak. If a strong man stand in a slippery place, down he falls;
if a man stand slippery, and have a weak standing on a strong place, on a
strong foundation, if he have a weak building on a strong foundation, he shall
soon be cast off. So, the Word of God is true in it self: but if we be not
persuaded so, that it is infallibly true, that it is always yea, we shall be
shaken with temptations. When we are tempted to sin, the temptation is present,
we are sure of the temptation: if we be not more sure of somewhat against the
temptation, somewhat out of the Word to beat back the darts of Satan, when we
are tempted to sin, and to despair for sin, down we go: and therefore it is a
matter of infinite consequence to be persuaded of Divine truth.

What makes many as they are in courses that are corrupt in their callings?
nothing but this, they stagger, whether it be true or no that there Ground of
going on in sin.
shall be a Judgment: they stagger whether it be true or no that the Scripture
says: if they were persuaded that it were yea, as true as God is in heaven, as
true as they have souls, so their souls must be called to Judgment for that
they speak, and do; would they do as they do? Therefore S. Paul stablisheth
them by an oath, God is true, and as God is true, our Word to you was not yea,
and nay.

Therefore take in good part with thankfulness the means that God has
ordained to strengthen our faith, and assurance of the Word of God, and the
Use. To be thankful for means of strengthening faith in this.
Promises of God. Therefore he has appointed the Sacrament for that purpose. I
say there is nothing in the world so strengthened as the soul of a Christian,
if he give himself to Gods truth to be ruled by it. For if we will believe God,
we have his promise, That Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but
have everlasting life; rich promises, precious promises, as the Scripture calls
them. We have not only promises, but they are sealed with an oath: Now an oath
is an unchangeable thing, Heb. 9. 16. we have promises, and oath, that we might
have strong consolation; whatsoever might secure man we have. Besides his oath
we have his seal, his Sacrament. It was his love to condescend to make any
Covenant with sinful creatures, that upon any terms he would give them life
everlasting. It was a higher degree of love to set Christ to be the foundation
of this peace, and of this Covenant, that now God and we may be at peace with
satisfaction to Divine Justice, that he is the foundation of the peace between
God and us: Now God may be merciful without wrong, without impeachment to his
Justice; that is a higher degree of mercy, to enter into Covenant, and to give
Christ to be the foundation of all. And then it is a higher degree then that to
secure us of the Covenant that Christ is ours, to seal the Word with an oath,
and with the Sacrament which is the seal of the Covenant; what could God do
more?

What a horrible sin therefore is unbelief, that we should tremble at, to call
Gods love, and truth in question! But yet we are prone to it; or else why did
Christ ordain the Sacrament to strengthen and stablish our faith, and to
confirm us, but that he knew our propensenesse to unbelief.

In the time of ease and prosperity, it is easy to think, God is merciful, and
Christ died; but in the time of temptation, all is little enough to shore and
prop up the faith of a drooping Christian. Therefore God out of heavenly
wisdom, and love to us has appointed these Ordinances for the strengthening
of our faith. And all is to no purpose, unless our faith be strong in the
Promises; as Saint Paul takes an oath, to build them on the Promises he taught
them. And so all is little enough, oath, and promises, and seal, etc. Therefore
we should with all reverence attend upon Gods Ordinances, for the strengthening
of our faith. But to come to the words themselves. As God is true, our word to
you was not yea, and nay.


Take the words out of the form of an oath, and the Proposition is, That God is
true, and faithful. Doctr. God is true, and faithful.



In this link of the sentence, God is true; First it is true that God is, he is
truly God, his nature is true, his properties true. Likewise God is true and
faithful, not only in his nature, and properties, but in his free decrees, in
the things that freely come from him. It was free for him to make promises of
salvation, or no, as it was free for him to make a world, or no, and whether he
would redeem mankind, or no: but when he had promised, except he should deny
himself, and his truth, he must send Christ. So in all the free promises of
forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting by Christ, if we believe in him, we
say they are certainly true, because God that is true has promised: God is
true in his Nature, and true in his free Promises, and threatenings; he is true
in his works, true in his Word, every way true. He is true in his nature, all
is true within him, and without him: if any thing could change him from within,
he were not himself, he were not God. And from without there is nothing can
change him: for there is nothing stronger then God. God is true in all his
purposes, true in his free and voluntary decrees. It was free for him to
decree, but having decreed, there is a necessity of performing; it is of the
necessity of his nature as he is God. He is true in his free decrees, they are
not free in regard of the event, but in regard of the Original, as I said; he
might have made a world at the first, or no, and have redeemed mankind, or no:
but having made these decrees, of necessity as he is God he must be true in his
free decrees.

There is a subordination of truths, whereof one is the cause of all the rest.
Now all depends upon this grand truth, God is; it is the first truth that ever
was of all truths in the world, in heaven and earth, that there is a God, that
there is such a thing, such an excellency as God, the Author of all things in
nature, the Author of all things in grace, and glory. I shall not need to
prove this fundamental truth, this Truth of truths, that God is: It infers all
other truths. For grant this, that God is, and a man must needs grant that that
follows upon it, that God is as a God should be, that is, unchangeable,
eternal, immutable, almighty, all-sufficient, and all the blessed attributes,
that he is the author of all good in the creature, that must needs follow, God
is the first truth: and then God is so and so as becomes a God. And then this
must follow in the next place, that he is a God immutable, and unchangeable, he
must be so in all the manifestations that come from him, in his free decrees,
and in the outward manifestations by promises, and threatenings, and whatsoever;
and therefore God is true immutably, and unchangeably true, or else he were not
God; he cannot be otherwise and be God. A man may say of a man, he is a liar,
and yet he may be a man: a man may be a man, and a good man, and yet be
unconstant, and changeable, because he is a creature: but to say a God, and not
to be true, is to say a God, and not a God: of the necessity of his nature he
God true out of necessity of his nature.
must be true. It is not of the necessity of the nature of man to be true, he
may be a man, and be a liar: Every man is a liar; because it is not of the
essence of man to be true: but God is true out of the necessity of nature, he
cannot be God if he be not true; because God cannot deny himself. Man is
changeable, because he is a creature, as Damascen's speech is, All things
created are mutable, and man as a creature is changeable: a man therefore may
be alterable, and false, and be a man; but God cannot be so, and be God.

It will be objected, that God has threatened often, and has not performed: as
we see in the Ninivetes, and Hezekias in his sickness, and so in many Object.
others.

But the answer is easy, God is true in all these: for Gods Promises that come
from his truth; they are either absolute, or conditional. The absolute Answ.
Promises absolute, or conditional.
are those that have nothing annexed to them, but shall certainly be. As God
would have sent Christ without all conditions, Christ should have come without
all peradventure as we say. But now some promises have conditions annexed to
them: if a Nation repent of their sins, God will repent of the evil he has
threatened, as it is in Jeremy. Now those threatenings that are on condition of
repentance, if the condition be performed, the sentence is reversed. All the
Promises are made with exception of the Cross, all must suffer before they
come to heaven, and be glorified: Now all the Promises with the exception of
the Cross are conditional. So God is true both in his absolute Promises that
are made without condition, and he is true in his conditional Promises; because
where he performs the condition, he will perform likewise that that is tied to
the condition: he changes his sentence sometimes, and his threatening, but not
his decree: for his purpose and decree is to forgive and reverse the sentence,
if we repent. I say, it is a clear truth, that God is true, unchangeably, and
immutably true.

And it is the prime truth of all truths, that God is, and God is true. As we
say of the heavens, unless the heavens were moved, there would be That God is,
and is true, the prime truth.
no motion in the earth: For if the Sun had not a motion in the Zodiac up and
down, where were Summer and Winter? If he had not his course, where were night
and day? The vicissitude and intercourse of all earthly things? If the heavenly
motion were not, nisi moverentur, etc. if those did not move, we could not
move, because we depend upon that. So unless it were true, that God were,
there is a God, and God is unchangeably true, there would be nothing true in
the world: for all truth is therefore true, because it is answerable to that
exemplar truth that is true in God, answerable to Gods conceit, and decree of
things.

This I observe the rather, because it is a fundamental thing: it does
wondrously stablish our faith in Divine truths, when we know it comes from God
that is true. If we would seek for evidences of our faith, then we must go
within us, and see what love, and what hope, what combat between Evidences of
faith in us, ground of it out of us.
the flesh and spirit there is; but if we look for any thing to stablish our
faith, go out of us, consider the unchangeable truth of God, whose truth it is.

God as God creating a reasonable creature, he must give him some revealed
truth, he could not be worshipped else. How must we know this revealed truth
whereby he will be worshipped by the reasonable creature? (for no man will be
served by his servant as he pleases) how shll we know these certain truths?
because they come from his nature. God is true; and as God is true: so our word
to you was not you, and way, that is, it was true. There is the same ground of
the certainty of Evangelicall truth as there is of God himself to be true.

To add a little further in the Point, consider the truth of God every way, the
faithfulness of God, as it signifies in the original, as God is faithful.
Consider what relations God has put upon him in his divine truth, how he will
be thought on. And then bring those relations to his nature: for there we must
pitch at last. What is he to us? and how has he revealed himself to us? Thus
and thus. What is he in his nature? So, and so: and there we must rest.

For instance, The Lord has made many promises, who is it that has made them?
he that is true, and unchangably true: there the soul rests in the nature of
God. But what relations has he put upon him? he is a God, and a Lord, and a
Judge, and a Father, etc. The relations of God to us comfortable from his truth.


Now as he is God, he is true, therefore he will do all things that a true God
should do; he will uphold his creature: while he will have his creature
continue, he will give it life, and being, and motion.

And as a Lord he will do with his own what he list, and it is not for us to
contend with him why he will do this or that, why he makes one rich, and
another poor. He is Lord of all, and a true Lord; therefore we must give
authority to this true Lord.

And then as he is a Judge, he corrects men for sin, and rewards them for the
good they do. As a Judge, sometime he punishes them inwardly in conscience,
sometimes outwardly. All the good we have is from this, that he is a faithful,
and true God; therefore there we must rest. He is a true Judge, he rewards
every man according to his works, whether they be good or evil.

And so in the relation of a Father, he is a true Father, he corrects when time
serves, he rewards and encourages when time serves, he gives an inheritance to
his Children, and has pity and compassion on his Children when time serves; He
is a true Father. Other fathers do this and that out of passion, not out of
truth and goodness: but he does. So when we consider God in his relations,
consider of the attribute of his truth.

All truth, in his Word comes from this, God is true. This truth is sealed by
this, that our truth to you, our word to you was not yea, and nay, uncertain:
Gods truth is not uncertain and variable. There is no shadow of change in him,
and his Word is like himself. We say usually in the word of an honest man, and
that is something, In verbum S^rdotis, in the word of a Priest, it was
accounted in former times a great matter: it should be so indeed. In the word
of a King is a great matter. But when God says in the Word of a God. The Word
of the Lord has spoken so, It is not yea, and nay, it was not flexible, and
doubtful, because it is the Word of him that has the command of all that he
says, it is his Word that is Lord of Heaven, and Earth. Now when he that
says a thing is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, he is Lord of his own Word,
therefore what he says is not yea, and nay, uncertain: for he can make good
what he says. There is the same ground of Evangelicall truth, as there is of
God himself to be true. I will speak no more in the unfolding of the Point, it
is plain that God is true.

Is this true, that God is true, that he is truth it self? then many things
issue from hence: It is a ground of many other truths: It was the ground of all
the Uses that S. Paul makes of the Word of God, it is profitable every way. I
will name some principal, to avoid multiplicity in a plain Point.

God is true, and his Word is true; hereupon the threatenings of God Use 1.
Gods threatenings true.
must needs be true, even as true as God himself. If this be so, then unless
we will make another Scripture, another Word, this Word is yea. That Word that
threatens sin, that Idolaters, and covetous, and wantons shall never enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, (Be not deceived, says the Apostle,) that Word is yea,
it is true. God is true: this must follow therefore, that whatsoever he says
is true; therefore his threatenings are true. It is a truth that has influence
into all other truths whatsoever, that which is prefixed here by S. Paul, not
only as an oath, As Gad is true, so his Word is not yea, and nay, but certain:
but I say it has influence into all other truths whatsoever; threatenings,
promises, directions, all are therefore true, because God is true.

Therefore those that shuffle off the threatenings, and think they shall do
well, and bless themselves, Gods wrath shall smoke against them: for God must
alter his nature, and his Word must be altered, or else his judgments must
stick on them to death and damnation without repentance. If God should not be
avenged on ordinary swearers, and blasphemers; if adulterers should live in
such sins, and ever come to heaven, they must have another God, and another
Word of God; this has said, they shall not enter into heaven that live in
these sins. If it be true as God is true, what horrible Atheism is in the
hearts of men, to think that God will change his nature, though they do not
change their course, and that the Word of God shall alter, though they will not
alter? what hope can profane blasphemous persons have that make but a trifle
of swearing, when God has said they shall not go unpunished? and those that
live in a filthy course, when God has said, Whor emongers and adulterers God
will judge? without horrible atheism how can these men hope for favor from
God, when he has sealed his Word with this, that as he is true, and truth it
self, his Word is true, they shall never enter into heaven?

So again, if this be true, that God is true, and his Word thereupon is not
yea, and nay, it serves to comfort us, many ways. Use 2. Comfort.


When we are oppressed in the sense of sin, If we confess our sins, he is
merciful to forgive our sins: he that is true has said it, whose Word is not
yea, and nay, but yea, trust to it. If we doubt of perseverance for the time to
come: he that has begun a good work, will perfect it to the day of the Lord.
He is yea, and his Word is yea; he is true, and his Word is true.

Again, hence for our judgment we learn this truth, That the Word of God has
the same ground of truth as God himself, therefore it is the Judge Use 3. Gods
Word Judge of all Controversies.
of all Controversies: of all things questionable in Religion, the Word of God
is Judge; because it is not yea, and nay, but yea, and it is true, as God is
true. And it is Judge of this controversy too, whether it be the Word of God?

The question between the Papists and us is, whether the Epistles, and the
Prophets be the Word of God, or no? whether is it or no?

I answer, from Apostolical testimony, S. Paul says, As God is true, his Word
is true, the true Word of God; and All Scripture is given by inspiration. The
Word of God therefore is the Judge of all Divine truths; because it is most
certain, even as certain as God himself.

What are the properties of a chief Judge? Properties of a Judge.


He must be true without error: authentical without appeal, such as can from
himself without a higher determine. He must be infallible without peril of
error. All these belong to Gods truth.

It is yea, it is true without error, it is always yea. And then it is
authentical; there is nothing higher but God himself, whose Word it is; and it
has the same authority that himself has, As God is true, so it is true. It is
authentical without all appeal, we cannot go higher then God himself in his
Word. We cannot call God, or Christ from heaven,; he has left us his Word,
and therefore it is to be credited of it self.

And it is infallibly true without danger of error, one depends upon another,
As God is true, so our Word is true. If God be true infallibly, this issues by
consequence, that the Scripture is the Judge, and infallibly true without
danger of error.

Hence we may know what to judge of that Romish assertion. There are No other
Judge always yea.
no other Judges in the world can be said to be yea always.

Councels are not always yea, they are yea, and nay; what one Council has set
down, another has reversed. In the Council of Basile the Pope was above the
Council. In another Council, that is above the Pope.

So one Popes decrees thwart another. The Popes are yea, and nay, and not yea;
for many hundred years they labored to cross and thwart one another. So
Councels, and Popes are yea, and nay, and not always yea.

Traditions of the Fathers are yea, and nay, and not always yea; they thwart
themselves. S. Austin the best of the Fathers, to whom the Church is most
chiefly beholding of all the rest, he was yea, and nay. Does he not retract? He
wrote a book of Retractations of his former opinions, then he was yea, and nay,
and yet a holy man. That which is the Judge of controversies must be yea, that
is, infallibly true, authentically true, that there be not a higher. From all
others, from Fathers, and Councels, there may be appeal to Scripture; but from
Scripture to none: because it is the Voice, and Word of God. All things else
are yea, and nay, they are changeable, and they may be so without prejudice to
the being of them. A Council may be a good Council, and unconstant in many
things. Fathers may be holy Fathers, and uncertain: it is only the prerogative
of God to be infallible like himself, unchangeable in his nature, and his Word
is like himself.

Hence likewise issues this, That whatsoever agrees not with the Word of Use 4.
What agrees not with Gods Word, is false.
God which is not yea, and nay, is false and naught; Therefore those opinions
of the Church of Rome, that say they cannot err, if they be not yea with this
yea, then they are not yea: for only the Word of God is not yea, and nay, but
only yea; that is, only certain, and true. All other Religions that are not
Divine, are yea, and nay. Popery is not grounded upon the Word of God, because
it is yea, and nay, that is, it is uncertain. See how they cross many ways
this Word of God that is always yea, and true as Popery crosses the Word of
God.
God himself is true.

Is it yea, that they saw no Image of God, and therefore they must make and
worship no Image? Nay, says the Church of Rome, they have a nay for this yea;
they will make Images, and worship them, the Image of Mary, and other Saints.
Yea, (says the Scripture) drink ye all of this: Nay, (says the Church of
Rome) they have a nay for this yea, only the Priest must drink the wine. Let
the Word dwell plenteously in you, is the yea of Scripture. The Church of Rome
has a nay for this yea, it is dangerous for the people to read the Scripture,
and therefore they are forbidden it. We must pray with the understanding as
well as with a good affection, 1 Cor. 14. that is, we must know how we pray; it
is proved at large excellently. Nay, understand, or not understand, so the
intention be good, (says Rome) pray in Latin, or howsoever, there is their
nay to this yea. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, is the yea of
Gods Book, therefore the souls of the Clergy, and whosoever: The Church of
Rome has a nay for this yea, therefore their doctrine is bad: for only God is
true, and his Word is only not yea, and nay, but always yea, infallible;
therefore that which is contrary to it must needs be false. If only yea be
true, then that which is contrary to it must needs be false.

And likewise again, if Gods Word be not yea, and nay, that is, not
unconstant, Popery contradicts it self.
then whatsoever is unconstant, and thwarts it self in contradictions, is not
Gods Word. Popery is full of inconstancy, full of contradictions to it self.

First, besides inconstancy, and uncertainty, it is full of contradictions, it
is yea, and nay: for a body to be in many places at once, and yet a true body;
to be in a hundred, in a million of places at once, as they would have Christ's
body to be in the Sacrament, here is to be, and not to be; a body, and no body,
for it has not the properties and quantity of a body: for a body can be but in
one place at one time; here is yea, and nay.

For Christ to be a perfect Redeemer, and yet notwithstanding to need the help
of other Mediators and Intercessours, here is yea, and nay: it is a
contradiction.

That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church: if it be Roman, it is not
Catholic: The universal Catholic Roman Church, it is as much as the universal
particular Church: it is a contradiction, one thing overturnes another.

The sacrifice of the Mass, an unbloody sacrifice: a sacrifice is the killing
of a thing that was alive; a sacrifice is with blood: the offering of Christ in
the bread, is an unbloody sacrifice: a sacrifice, and not a sacrifice: here is
yea, and nay, a contradiction. So that besides their thwarting of Scripture,
they thwart, and contradict themselves in their fundamental points, they are
yea, and nay.

And then they are full of uncertainties, they are not undoubtedly yea. There
is no Papist in the world would end his days so, if he be not Popery full of
uncertainties.
drunk, if he be advised, if he be not surprised with passion, if he do not
forget himself. Come to a Papist, and ask him, what? are the main points of
Popery that you believe, always yea? Can you say when you confess your sins,
that you confess all? No; can you then say then you have a perfect absolution,
that depends upon your confession? No, it is an uncertain thing. What an absutd
thing is Popish Religion? it wracks the conscience of people.

Can you say that the Priest intends consecration in these words, This is my
body? No: and if the Priests intention be not there, then Christ is not there,
and then you are Idolaters. Can you tell certainly that Transubstantiation
depends upon his consecration? No, how full of uncertainties, and
contradictions is Popery? you cannot say the Points of Popery are always yea.
Perhaps they are yea in life, but are they yea in death? It is yea in life,
that they merit salvation by works, but is it yea in death? No; Bellarmine
disclaimes it, It is safe not to trust in our own merits for danger of
vainglory, etc. but to trust only in the mercy of God in Christ. So their
doctrine, it is yea in life, to sin by, to live riotously by, but then it is
nay in death, they reverse it if they belong to God: they disclaim their works,
and other things, and cleave only to Christ, and there is hope of them that
have grace truly to do so. So their doctrine is not yea, that in life and death
they can stick to.

To go on a little further, to lay open the grossness of their tenants, and
the danger of their Religion. (We are better bottomed then they are, which make
the Word of God our rule, and ground, that is not yea, and nay, but yea.) The
Canonization of Saints. The Pope, he makes Garnet a Traitor, and Thomas of
Becket, Saints: how can he know that these were Saints that he Canonizeth? he
that makes a Saint must know the hearts of men, and search the heart; for the
truth of grace is there: now it is the privilege of God to know the heart: So
that Popery is full of uncertainties, and pitiful perplexities.

Indeed they maintain the doctrine of doubting, that we must doubt; as if our
nature were not sufficiently prone to doubt, but we must get arguments to make
us doubt: as if it were needful to have infirmities to stablish grace in us.
Alas, we are too prone to doubt, and the Devil is ready to make us stagger in
the time of temptation.

Again, the Invocation of Saints it is a Point wondrous full of uncertainties:
Can they know and say certainly that the Saints hear them? They cannot know
that one Saint having a finite power should hear a hundred Petitions at once. A
finite creature has but a finite power to hear one thing at one time
distinctly: how can they be persuaded that a finite Saint in heaven at one time
distinctly should hear many thousands that put up their Petitions at once? Can
a man that is but a capable creature though glorified, as Peter, or Mary, etc.
distinctly consider a thousand Petitions that are made? they cannot: how then
can they think that a certain truth, the Invocation of Saints.

The main ground of all their Religion is yea, and nay; the Pillar of it, what
is that? The infallible judgment of the Pope: but how can they tell when he
speaks ex Cathedra? for 9. or 10. exceptions, and tricks they have, when he
speaks to be built on, and when not; how can poor souls know when he speaks
so, that the people may infallibly build on his judgment? Because many times he
is an illiterate man that knows nothing in Divine things wherein he is to
judge. So the very foundation of Popery is yea, and nay, that is a most
uncertain thing.

And then the ground of that, that he is the Successor of Peter; there is no
place of Scripture for it, neither dare they bring any: It is but a Tradition.
It is somewhat uncertain whether ever Peter were at Rome: that he was Bishop
there, is more uncertain: but that the Pope should be his Successor, is most
uncertain and impossible of all.

So indeed, the Religion of Popery is a rack to conscience, especially to
conscience that is awaked and knows what Religion means at all. Why is it a
rack to them? There is no certainty in it, in the main Tenants of it.

It is not only contrary to Gods yea, but it is yea, and nay, uncertain in it
self. Now here the Apostle he frees his preaching from this imputation, Our
Word to you was not yea, and nay: and he calls God to record, God is true, and
as he is true, my Word to you was not yea, and nay, but was certainly yea. Thus
you see what use we are to make of it for confutation, and conviction of our
own judgments.

It may be moved by some perhaps; How does it appear, how shall we Quest. How
to know the Word to be true.
know, by what arguments that it is yea, and not yea, and nay?

I answer: The testimony of S. Paul here is, that it is so, and his appeal to
God with an asseveration, As God is true. Answ.


But our own experience does tell us, that the Word of God is certain, 1.
and true, if we belong to God: for we stand convict in judgment by many 2.
arguments, which I will not now repeat.

But how shall any man certainly know it is yea? the Word is the undoubted Word
of God, unchangeable wheresoever it is. Quest.


In a word, you may know it is so, he thinks it is so, if he yield obedience to
it as to such a Word, absolute obedience to Gods truth without questioning;
Answ.
when once a thing is clear to be agreeable to Gods truth, he yields obedience
to it, then it is yea. If it be a duty he must do it: if it be a threatening, he
must avoid it by repentance: if it be a promise, he must believe it: this is
absolute obedience.

Likewise reverence in hearing it, as Cornelius did, Act. 10. To hear it as the
Word of God; To tremble at the Word of God, as it is, Esaias 66. To tremble at it
as men do at thunder. The thunder is said to be the voice of God. The voice of
God shakes the Cedars of Lebanon: so it is with the voice of Gods Word: Shall
the Lion roar, and the beasts of the Forest not tremble? Shall God threaten
for sins that we are obnoxious to, and shall we not tremble at his
threatenings? Therefore howsoever we hear it as if it were yea, and nay, yet it
is yea: therefore let us not think to go on in sin, and escape, and do well
enough. No, it will not be so: he that thinks it is the Word of God, he
trembles at his Word, and has answerable affections to all the parts of Gods
Word. If God direct, he follows; if God threaten, he trembles: if he promise,
he believes: if he command, he obeyes: he has a pliable disposition to every
passage of Divine truth, or else we do not believe it.

What shall we say then of those that come not so far as the Heathen man did?
We know Felix when he heard of justice, and temperance, and judgment to come,
he trembled. When he heard of things that he was loath to hear, that he should
be called to a reckoning for the course of his life, he trembled and quaked. If
we hear these things, and live in a course perhaps worse then he, and do not
tremble, where is our faith, that the Word of God is yea, that it is
undoubtedly true?

Let us therefore examine our selves what power and efficacy the Word has; it
is a Word that changes, and alters the whole man, it transforms the whole
man. It is a Word of life: if we find it has so altered, and changed us, we
can from experience say it is yea.

And likewise from particular Promises, if we observe Gods Promises made good
to us, if we find peace of conscience upon the confession of our sins, we can
say Gods Word is yea. If upon the committing of sin we find God punishing, and
correcting us, we can say Gods Word is yea; and it is a bitter thing to offend
God.

I find carfulness is the best course to please God, he finds me out in my
sins, and it is a bitter thing to offend God: This is the best way to say in
truth without hypocrisy, that Gods Word is not yea, and nay, but yea.

Thus we see this truth, that God is true, and what follows thence, his Word
is true as himself, and not inconstant, yea, and nay. Besides all this To yield
obedience to Gods Word.
that I have said, Let us make this Use of it, not to think Gods Word to be too
good to be true, but yield obedience to it: yield the obedience of faith to it
in the Promises. Here is a foundation for faith: the foundation of faith is
without us; the evidences of faith are within us, by love, by purging our
hearts, and stirring us up to pray, etc. but the foundation is out of our
selves: here is a foundation, and pillar for faith to lean on; God is true, and
his Word is true, and not yea, and nay, it is eternally true. Therefore apply
all the Promises in the Old, and New Testament to thy self. It was not yea to
Abraham, and not to thee: Gods Promises of forgiveness of sins, were not yea
to David, and not to thee; they were not yea to Manasses, and not to thee: but
Gods truth is yea, eternally yea, Whatsoever was written heretofore, was
written for our comfort; and we are now the David's, and the Manasses, and the
Abraham's of God: we are now the beloved of God; for every one in their age are
as they were in theirs: and as the Promises of God were yea to them, and saved
their souls, because they trusted on them; so certainly every Promise of God is
a shield for those that will have recourse to it. The Name of God is a strong
Tower; and his Word is his Name whereby he will be known in his Promises. Have
recourse to it on all occasions, rely on the Word: wrestle with him when his
dealings seem contrary; though his dealings with us seem to be yea, and nay. We
have been Gods Children, he has assured us that we were in the state of grace;
but now he deals with us as if we were not his children; he afflicts us, he
suffers Satan to be let loose on us to tempt us: here flesh and blood is ready
to say, Certainly I am not Gods child, can I be thus and thus followed as I am?
No, no, Gods gifts are without repentance. Had thou ever grace? God has said
it, who is truth it self, that his gifts are without repentance. Build on it
therefore, if thou had ever any grace, where he has begun, he will make an
end; Where he has begun a good work, he will perfect it to the day of the Lord.

Therefore wrestle with God in all temptations when things seem contrary: yet
allege Gods nature to him, and his Word, for both are true: and one is true,
because the other is true.

He is true in his Nature, and true in his Word, and free in his decree;
whatsoever his actions seem to be: yet Lord, thou can not deny thy self, thou
art unchangeable, thou art truth it self: And thy Word that has promised
regard and respect to humble sinners that rep^t, and come to thee, it is
unchangeably true as thy self; therefore, Lord, I will not leave thee, though
thou kill me; as Job says. Here is a ground of wra^ng as Job ^d; allege the
Nature of God, and the Word of God against his dealing. Let his dealing be what
it will, his Nature is true, and his Word is true, therefore his Promises are
true, which is a branch of his Word, that if we repent, and confess our sins,
he will be merciful to us.

Therefore let us not forsake our own mercy. This will uphold us, as in all
temptations, so in Divine temptations, when God seems to forsake us: so Christ
himself our blessed head did: we cannot have a better pattern; when God left
him on the Cross, and left him to his humane nature, to wrestle with the
Devils temptations, and the pains of his body, and the sense of his wrath; My
God, my God, why have thou for saken me? yet he upheld himself that God was his
God still; and so likewise in the former example of Job. I say it is a special
comfort, that Gods Word is not yea, and nay, as I said, it is not doubtful as
the Oracles of the Gentiles, the Oracles of the Devil: but Gods Word is
certain. Whatsoever it was to any Saint of God heretofore, it is to every
believing, to every humble afflicted soul now, and shall be to the end of the
world. So much for that.

VERSE XIX. For the Son of God Jesus Christ who was preached among you by us,
by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus was not yea, and nay, but in him is yea.
IN the words the Apostle shows in particular what he preached among them, and
we have in them these particulars briefly to be unfolded:

First, That Christ Jesus in his nature, and his offices is the Four Points.
chief, and main object, and subject matter of preaching.

Secondly, That to make him profitable to us, he must be preached.

Thirdly, That consent of Divines, and Preachers helps faith.

Fourthly, That Jesus Christ being preached by the Apostles, is an undoubted
yea, that is, an undoubted ground, and foundation to build on, in all the
uncertainties of this life, in all the uncertainty of Religion. Jesus Christ
pteached by S. Paul and other holy men of those times, was not yea, and nay,
but yea.

First, Christ Jesus is the main object of Preaching. Doctr. 1. Chrise the main
object of preaching.


It were impertinent here to stand on particulars, to show you how Christ is
the Son of God: for he is brought in here as the object of preaching. Only in
a word, we must of necessity believe that Christ Jesus is the Son of God. For
how wondrously does this stablish our faith when we believe in a Savior that
is God: the Son of God Jesus Christ by eternal Generation? In a word, here are
these prerogatives of Christ's Generation from all other Prerogatives of Christ's
Generation.
sons whatsoever. Other fathers are before their sons, this Son of God was
eternal with his Father. Other fathers have a distinct essence from their sons,
the father is one, and the son another; they have distinct existences: but here
there is one common essence to the Father and the Son. Other fathers beget a
son without them, but this Father begets his Son within him; it was an inward
work. So it is a mystical Divine Generation, which indeed is a subject of
admiration* rather then of explication, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God and
the Son of man. This was typified in the Ark, the Ark was a type of Christ^ the
A^ had wood, and gold that covered that wood. Christ's humane nature was the
wood, and his Divine nature that contained it, that is the gold. But I should
be too large, and besides the scope of the Text, if I should unfold this Point;
I only touch it by the way. Christ Jesus in his natures as he is God and Man,
and in his offices as Jesus Christ, that is, anointed as King, Priest, and
Prophet, and in his estates of abasement, and advancement, is the main subject
matter of preaching. For what can we say, but it must be reductive, and brought
to Christ? If we open men's consciences by the Law, and tell them what a
terrible estate they are in, what do we but drive them to the Physician? what
is the law, but as John Baptist was to Christ, to prepare the way, to level the
soul, to pull down the high thoughts and imaginations, to make way, and passage
for Christ? And then in Christ, when we preach Christ, we preach his natures,
God and man, and his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet, as he is
predestinate, and sealed, and anointed by God the Father for that purpose, that
we may have a strong Savior, strong in himself, and authorized by his Father.
And we preach his estates; of abasement, as he was crucified, and suffered for
our sins: and his estate of exaltation, as he arose, and ascended into glory.
These things belong to the preaching of Christ.

And then the benefits we have by him, reconciliation to his Father by his
death, and peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and such like
wondrous benefits we have by him.

And then our duty to him again, which is faith, and a conversation worthy. To
embrace all that is offered by Christ that it be not lost, for want of
apprehending. Christ Jesus is the subject matter of our preaching, in his
natures, in his offices, in the benefits we have by him, in the duties we owe
to him, in the instrument of receiving all, faith: For in preaching, that faith
which we require to lay hold on Christ, is wrought.

For preaching does not only manifest the benefits we have by Christ,
Preaching an instrument to work faith.
but is a potent instrument of the Spirit of God to work this qualification, to
make Christ profitable to us. Now all that we preach of holy duties, is either
to humble us if we have them not, to make us fly to Christ by faith; or when
we believe, to make us walk answerable to our faith. So whatsoever we preach is
reductive to Christ; either to prepare us, or to furnish us to walk worthy of
Christ. Indeed Jesus Christ is all in all in our preaching, and he should be so
in your hearing; of all things you should desire to hear most of Christ. The
apprehension of your sinfulness should drive you to Christ. The hearing of
duties should be to make you adorn your Christian Religion you have taken on
you. Naturally men love to hear flashes, witty conceits, and moral points
wittily unfolded; but all these in the largest extent do but civilize men: it
must be Christ unfolded, and Gods love, and mercy, and wisdom in him
reconciling mercy and justice together. The wondrous love of God in Christ, and
his justice, and mercy; and the love of Christ in undertaking to work our
redemption; and the benefits by Christ, his offices, estates and conditions,
these things work faith and love: these things do us good.

All other things take them at the best, they do but fashion our carriage a
little; but that which enlivens, and quickens the soul is Jesus Christ.
Therefore we should of all other things be desirous to hear of Jesus Christ. It
is a point that the very Angels are students in. For the Ark (which I named
Use. To desire most to hear of Christ.
before) it had the Law, and the Mercy-seat in it, the mercy-seat to cover the
Law. Now Christ has satisfied the Law, and reconciled his Father; he has
freed us from the curse of the Law, and has given full satisfaction to the
Law, he is the Mercy-seat, by whom we have access to God the Father.

Now the Angels were upon the Mercy-seat interviewing one another, and prying
down upon the Mercy-seat, insinuating, that the reconciling of Gods Justice and
Mercy by that infinite wisdom of God in Christ, that our sins should be
punished in him, and yet he be merciful to us, that he should punish our surety
for us; that he should join these attributes together, that all the creatures
in heaven and earth could not devise it, is a matter for Angels to pry into;
the very frame of the Ark signified this: and shall not we be students in those
mysteries that the Angels themselves desire every day to behold? If Christ be
the main thing we are to stand on, Let us labor more and more to understand
Christ, and him crucified: let us see our nature in him advanced now in heaven,
to make us heavenly-minded: let us see our nature in him punished: let us see
our sinful nature in him cleansed, and purged by his death and abasement: let
us see our nature in him enriched.

Let us consider him as a public person, and see our interest in his
humiliation, and exaltation in glory: because he is the second Adam. These How
to think of Christ.
things should raise up our thoughts wondrously to think of his humiliation,
and his exaltation, and of the love and mercy of God in him. And then think of
what you will, nothing is discouraging: think of death, of hell, of the day of
Judgment; think of Satan, of the curse of the Law: they are terrible things. I
but think of the Son of God, of Christ anointed of God the Father to satisfy
the Law, to satisfy his Justice, to overcome Satan, to crush his head, to be
our Savior as well as our Judge at the day of Judgment: these things will make
all vanish. Things that are most tetrible to the nature of man without the
consideration of Jesus Christ the Son of God, all are most comfortable when we
think of him. Now when we think of Satan, we think of one crushed, and trod
under foot, as he shall be ere long. When we think of Judgment, we think of a
Savior that shall be our Judge: when we think of God, we think of God
reconciled in Christ. We have access by Christ to the Throne of grace; he is
now in heaven, and makes intercession for us. When we think of death, we think
of a passage to life where we shall be with him, I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ. So the things that are most uncomfortable, yet bring the
consideration of them to Christ exalted in heaven, having triumphed over all
these in our nature, and sits at Gods right hand. The thoughts of these things
are comfortable meditations.

Nay, think of that which is the most terrible of all: the Justice of God, his
anger for sin, it is a matter of comfort above all other. God is just to
punish, and revenge sin, what then? because he is just he will not punish thing
twice; but his justice is fully satisfied, aad contented in his Son Christ
Jesus, whom he has anointed, and predestinate, and sent himself: and he must
needs acknowledge that satisfaction that is done by him, that he has sent
himself: hereupon we come to think comfortably of Gods Justice.

God out of Christ is a consuming fire: there is nothing more terrible then God
without Christ; but now in Christ we can think of the most terrible thing in
God with comfort. Therefore S. Paul makes it the main scope of his preaching,
and so should we of ours: and you should make it your main desire in hearing,
and the main subject matter of your meditating, something concerning Christ.
Let us often think of our nature in him now exalted in heaven, and that we
shall follow him ere long: our head is gone before, and he will not suffer his
body always to rot in the earth: let us think of his natures, and his offices,
and all the blessed prerogatives that we have by him, and all the enemies that
are conquered by him, that in him we have God reconciled, and the Devil
vanquished, we have heaven opened, and hell shut; we have our sins pardoned,
and our imperfections by little and little cured: in him we have all in all.

There are four things that the Apostle speaks of, which includes all, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Christ Jesus is all in all: if
we be ignorant, he is our wisdom: if we want righteousness and holiness to
stand before God, he is ou^ righteousness; we stand righteous, being clothed
with his righteousness. If we want Grace, Of his fullness we receive Grace for
Grace: he is sanctification to us. If we be miserable, (as we shall be to our
sense) our bodies shall be turned to rottenness, he is our redemption, not
only of the soul, but of the body; he shall make our bodies like his glorious
body: as he makes our souls glorious, by his Spirit conforming them to his own
Image here: he means here redemption of our bodies from corruption, as well as
of our souls from sin. He is all in all: in sin he is sanctification: in death
he is life: in ignorance he is wisdom: there is nothing ill in us, but there
is abundant satisfaction, and remedy in Christ. I speak this the rather, to
show what reason S. Paul had to stand on this, That all his preaching was to
bring Christ Jesus among them. I go on. The Son of God Jesus Christ preached
among you.
All the good we have by Christ, is conveyed by the Ministry. Doctr. 2. All
good by Christ conveyed by the Ministry.



Despise that, and despise Christ himself; Therefore whatsoever benefits we
have by Christ, they are attributed to preaching; they are attributed to the
Gospel as it is preached and unfolded: therefore it is called the Gospel of the
Kingdom, The Word of reconciliation, The Word of life, The Word of faith; all
these are by Christ: but it is no matter, whatsoever we have by Christ, we must
have it by Jesus Christ unfolded in the Ministry of the Word: despise the
Ministry that is contemptible to flesh and blood, and despise Christ himself,
despise the Kingdom, and life, and all: for Christ preached is that we must
rely on, Christ unfolded, the bread of life must be broken, the sacrifice must
be anatomized and laid open, Christ Jesus the Son of God must be preached; he
profits not but as he is preached: his riches must be unfolded, The
unsearchable riches of Christ. Therefore God that has appointed us to be saved
by Christ, has appointed, and ordained preaching to lay open Jesus Christ
among us.

But (to come to the third Point) why does he bring in consent to help? Doctr.
3. Consent of Ministers a help to faith.
By me, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, would not his own authority serve the turn?

I answer, no, it would not sometimes: In it self it will, but in regard of the
weakness of men, it is necessary to join the consent of others. S. Paul was an
Apostle of Christ, but he knew that they were so weak, that they would regard
his testimony the more for the joint testimony of Timotheus and Silvanus; and
the rest.

God considers not so much what is true in it self, as how to stablish our
faith in it. As in the Sacrament, would not God give Christ, and his benefits?
is he not true of his Word? Yes, but he gives the Sacrament for us: his
promises are sure enough, yet he condescends to our weakness, to add
Sacrament, and oath, and all the props that may be: So the men of God that are
led by the Spirit of God, though their own authority were sufficient, yet they
condescend to the weakness of others. Therefore S. Paul alleges with
himself, Silvanus and Timotheus, to strengthen them the better.

Then again, consent is a lovely thing, and proceeds from love: how sweet a
thing is it for brethren to dwell together in unity? therefore we ought to
stand much upon consent, if it may persuade us. But as Cyprian says well, it
must be consent in the truth. Consent that is not in the truth, is not properly
concord, but conspiracy: consent in a lie, in falsehood. The builders of Babel
they had a consent among themselves when they came for a wicked purpose, as we
see oft-times in Scripture. Consent must be in the truth, in that which is
good, or else it is not consent, but conspiracy. By reason of our weakness
consent is useful, and that is the reason why in doubtful cases we may allege
Antiquity; not that the Word is not sufficient in it self; but to help our
weakness, to show that we do not divert from the truth, but that it is a truth
warranted by others before. In doubtful cases this is warrantable. He brings
it likewise to enforce obedience the more, when it was a truth brought to them
by so many. But that is not a thing I mean to stand on, a touch is enough.

That which I will spend a little more time in, is the next thing, that is,
That Evangelical doctrine now is most certain.


Something I spoke of it before in the former verse, but I have reserved Doctr.
4. Evangelical truth is most certain.
something to speak of it now. The Son of God preached by S. Paul with the
consent of these blessed men, it was not yea, and nay, it was not unconstant.
Evangelical truth is not yea, and nay: and the Preachers of it, the Apostles
were not yea, and nay in the delivering of it. As it is true in it self, so it
was true in the delivery of it, they were constant in it, they sealed it with
their blood some of them.

How shall we know the doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ to be yea,
undoubtedly true? Quest. How to know the doctrine of the Gospel true.


I answer, how do we know the Sun shines? I know it by its own light, and by a
light that I have in my eye; there is an inward light joined with the outward
light: So it is in this business, how do we know Divine truth Answ.
out of the Book of God to be Divine? By the light in it self, by the majesty
of the Scriptures, by the consent of the Old and New Testament, by the
opposition of the enemies, and the confusion of them at the last that have been
opposers of it, by the miraculous preservation of it, and the like: But
especially by the powerful work of it on the heart, by the experience of this
blessed truth; I know this to be an undoubted truth, I find it quelling my
corruptions, changing my nature, pacifying my conscience, raising my heart,
casting down high imaginations, turning the stream of nature another way; to
make me do that which I thought I should never have done, only because I have
a strong light of Divine truth, and comfort. There is this experience of
Christ, that a man finds in his soul, it sets him down that he can say nothing,
but that it is Divine truth, because he finds it so.

Besides this, the testimony of the Spirit of God, and the work of the Spirit
in him: For as to see, there is an outward light required, and an inward light
in the eye: so to see Divine truth there must be a light in it self, a Divine
sparkle in Gods Book, in every passage: but yet I must have an eye to see too;
I cannot see it except God witness to my soul, that these things are divine,
that they are yea, that they are certainly, and infallibly true.

There is a great difference between us and our adversaries, I can but touch
it, and I need but touch it. They say we must believe, and we must Office of
the Church concerning Gods Word.
believe because of the Church. I say no; The Church we believe has a kind of
working here, but that is in the last place. For God himself in his Word, he is
the chief. The inward arguments from the Word it self, and from the Spirit they
are the next: the Church is the remotest witness, the remotest help of all.
For the Church is but to propound Gods truth, to lay it open; to be as it were
the candlestick; now the candlestick shines not, but upholds the candle while
that shines: So the Church is but to propose, to set up Divine truth, that of
it self being set up will enlighten well enough. The Church is to set out the
Word, and to publish it by the Ministry, which Word of it self will shine.
That work which the Church has therefore is the last, and the inferior: for
the Spirit of God, and the inward majesty of the Word is of more force.

If a messenger come, and bring a relation, or bring a letter from one, and he
tells me many things of the man: I but, I doubt him, because he may be false
for ought I know: but when I see his hand and seal, and his characters, and
style, that shows such a spirit to be in him, I know by his own characters,
certainly this comes from the hand of that man. Now the messenger Simile.
brings it, and gives it, but I believe it, because I see the characters, and
hand and seal of such a one, that it is a truth. So the Church propounds, it is
the messenger that brings the truth of God to us: but when a Christian soul
hears the truth, and sees Gods seal upon it; there is a majesty and power that
works on the soul, now we believe not for the messenger, but for the thing it
self. Here is the difference, we believe the Scripture for the seal of Divinity
that is in it self; they believe it for the messenger. As if a doubtful
messenger should come that is not certain, and a man should believe the things
he brought, for him, for his sake: we believe, and entertain the messenger for
the message sake; not the message for the messengers sake: our faith is better
built then theirs.

But they say this, All comes to this at the last, God speaks by the Church,
Object.
as well as by the Scriptures: therefore the Church is to be believed more then
the Scripture it self.

I answer; God speaks indeed in his Church, by his Spirit, and by his Answ. How
God speaks in the Church.
Word: but his speaking by his Word is the cause of his speaking in the Church:
For what is the Church but begotten by the seed of the Word? How is the Church
a Church but by the Word? Therefore he speaks first by the Scriptures, there is
a majesty, and a Spirit in the Scriptures; and then he speaks by the Church as
cleaving to the Scriptures, in a secondary manner. He speaks by the Church
mediately, because that goes to the Word which speaks immediately. The Word was
written by men led immediately by the Spirit of God; and the Church relying on
that he speaks by them in the Church; but primarily by his Word. Having just
occasion, I thought to touch this.

Undoubtedly, there are none that are not led with partiality, but
incomparably, they see our faith is built on a better foundation then theirs;
they have a rotten foundation. They talk of a Church, and when all comes to
all, the Church their mother is nothing but the Pope their father. What is
their Church but the Pope himself? for they run from the Church essential to
to the Church representative; they run to Councels: and when we force them with
Councels that they may err, then the Pope he is the Church virtually: so I
say, the Church their mother is nothing but the Pope their father, and what
manner of men they have been, Histories tell us well enough. We see on what
ground they build.

Jesus Christ, that is, the Gospel by him is not yea, and nay, but yea; that
is, it is certainly, and infallibly, and eternally true.

Hereupon we may answer that curious question, that has been, and now is every
where; How we may know that our Church was before Luther's Quest. How to know
our faith is the true ancient faith.
time or no? (as they idly say) How we may know that the faith that we profess
is the ancient faith?

I answer hence: take these grounds: Answ.


First, there is but one faith; men have varied, but faith has not varied, as
S. Austin says well: for there is but one faith, as there is one God, one
August. One Faith.
heaven, and one happiness. There was one faith from Adam. The times vary, but
not the faith of the times: the same fundamental truth has been in all times.
Sometimes it has been more explicated, and unfolded: as we have the Canon
enlarged now in the time of the New Testament in many books. There is not a new
faith, but a larger explication of the old faith. Divine truth is always the
same. It was one faith from the beginning of the world, from the first promise
to Adam in Paradise till now. Abraham believed as we do now: so they were all
saved by faith, Heb. 11.

Even as there is one Catholic Church consisting of all the members (the
triumphant being the greater part) from the beginning of the world, to the end
of the world: so there is one faith; take that for a ground. Indeed the Church
varies as a man varies when he is a child, and when he is a man: he has one
manner of clothes when he is a child, and another when he is a man: so the
Church varies in clothes: it was clothed with Ceremonies then, which were
cast off in Christ: but this is but a variation of garments: the Church had one
faith.

Hereupon comes a second, there is one Catholic Church that is built One
Catholic Church.
on that one faith; one essential Church, one Catholic company rhat believe in
Christ, from the beginning of the world to the end of the world, which we
believe in the Apostles Creed. Well then, this being so, as it is undeniable
that it is so; what Church is built upon that one faith that was yea in the
Apostles, and was yea before then, (as the Apostle says here, Our Preaching
was yea, certain, and true, you may build on it) what Church builds on that,
that Church all the while has been: for there is but one faith, and one truth
that runs along in all ages, which is the seed of the Church: therefore there
must be a Church in all ages that is a branch of the Catholic Church; why? The
Church must be built upon that one faith: therefore all particular Churches
before us, that were branches of the general Church, were built upon that
preaching of the Apostle, which he says was yea. There is but one faith; and
therefore all Churches that are true, are built upon that one faith. If we can
prove that the Apostolical doctrine agrees with our times, that ours has
consanguinity with the Apostles doctrine; then our Church was before we were,
ever since the Apostles, it has been always yea: for there is but one truth.

The Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: and
Christ says, Matthew. 16. when Peter said to Christ, Thou art the Son of God,
etc. says he, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, that is, upon this
confession of thine, will I build my Church. So the confession of faith is the
Rock what.
Rock of the Church. Now there is always one Rock of the Church that is always
yea: if our Church be built upon that Rock, then it is founded upon
Apostolical doctrine, upon the Prophets and Apostles; it was before we were:
and if there were any Church, then it was ours which professes that one faith.

If we conjure the Papists, they are silent, they dare say nothing. Dare they
say their doctrine is nearer Apostolical then ours? they dare not say but ours
is nearer: why then our Church is built upon the foundation of the Apostles:
why so? All the Churches since have been built upon one foundation, because
there is one faith, and one Church: unity of faith makes the unity of the
Church.

The seed of the Church is the Gospel, is Divine truth: now if Divine truth
has been always, there has been a Church always: and if there has been a
Church always, there has been Divine truth that has been yea always. Now it is
an Article of our faith in all times to believe a Catholic Church, therefore
there is a certain truth that is always yea, to be the seed, and foundation of
that Catholic Church. Therefore we must search out what that yea was, what was
the Apostolical doctrine, the positive doctrine in those Apostolical times, in
the Virgin-times of the Church, before the Church was corrupted. The Church was
not long a Virgin as the Father said. What was the yea of those truths? some
there must be always that held Apostolical truths in all ages. Our Church holds
that positive truth that the Apostles held: for directly in so many words, we
defend the Apostolical faith out of the Apostles: Therefore we say our Church
was before Luther, because our doctrine is Apostolical, and the Church
continually has been Apostolical, because it was built upon the Apostles
doctrine.

Our Church has no doctrine in the positive fundamental points of it contrary,
therefore our Church has continued. Put case we cannot name the men, as idly,
and ridiculously they urge, what is that to the purpose? shall we go from
ignorance of particular men, to ignorance of the Church? we must believe that
there is a Catholic Church; and there must always be a positive doctrine and
truth, the seed of that Church.

The Papists cavil with us, and say, we profess a negative Religion: Ye Object.
cut off our opinions, say they, but what have you of your own? what
affirmatives have ye?

It is most certain, that all our affirmatives have been ever since the Answ.
Papists and we have the same affirmatives.
Apostles time: for we and the Papists differ not in affirmatives, only they
add patcheries of their own. Religion stands most in affirmatives, that is the
ground first: For we believe negatives, because they agree not to affirmatives:
we believe a lie to be a lie, because it is contrary to positive truth; and the
truth is before a lie; the affirmation is before the negation: a thing is,
before the contrary is not. This laying for a ground, affirmatives being
truths; our positive truths that we hold have been held in the Apostles times
before, and since: even in the Church of Rome a thousand years after; and even
now the affirmatives that we hold.

Do not they believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God? Yes; but they add
patcheries of their own, the Apocrypha, and their own traditions to be the
Word of God too.

Do not they believe that Christ is Mediator? Yes, but he is the only
Mediator for Redemption, and not for Intercession; they join others with him,
Saints, and Angels.

We are saved by faith, that is the affirmative, and so say they: but they add
of their own, That we are saved by faith, and works.

Then again, we say, there are two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
and so say they: but they add five of their own. So I might run over all their
opinions: whatsoever we hold, they hold. Therefore in their own confessions,
our affirmatives have been ever since the Apostles times: if they had any
Church, we had a Church, because our foundations are included in their
Religion. All that we say, they say: but then again they say many things that
we do not. Therefore they account us heretics, because we make not that that
they hold to be our yea too.

Again, the negatives that they believe, and we do not believe, they are but
novelties in experience, they are not of the ancient Apostolical faith. Popish
negatives novelties.
That the Apocrypha should be had in equal authority with the Word of God in
Scripture, alas, such a conceit was not thought of for 600 years after the
Apostles. That the people should not read the Scriptures, it was but since the
other day. Transubstantiation since the Council of Laterane, a thousand years
since Christ. That the Pope should be Supreme, and depose Princes, such a thing
was not heard of a thousand years after Christ. That he should have authority
to Canonize Saints, it was but since the other day. Equivocation, but of late
time: and so their idle babbling of Divine service in Latin, and twenty other
trumperies. So the things that we deny that are gross and abominable in the
judgment of every man that knows any thing, they were but since the other day;
they were not yea in the Apostles times: Then the Apostolical Church being not
built on them, they must be devised after. As indeed a thousand years after
Christ, the most of these were never heard of. The most of the points of Popery
wherein they differ from us, nay not any of them were never established by a
Council till the Council of Trent, except Transubstantiation by the Council of
Laterane, which was a thousand years after Christ.

The affirmatives that we hold, and they hold too, we say they are constant
from the Apostles time, they have been in all ages maintained and affirmed.

Our positive Points that we ground out of S. Paul, and out of the Scriptures.
We seek the old way, and the best way, as Jeremy advises us. There was none of
the Popish trash in Abraham's time, in the Patriarch's time, in Christ's, and
his Apostles times, or in many hundred years after: they came in by little and
little for their own advantage; a mere policy to get money, and to abuse
people. I say, they hold all our positive truths: but their error is in
addition.

Now this question may be made, whether their additions may be dangerous, or
no? because it may be supposed, that some among them will Quest.
say, that heresy is not in addition, but in contrariety to the faith, and
detracting: but when one holds more then they should, that is no heresy,
because there is somewhat superabounds; now we hold the truth, and more too.

I say it is gross and false: foe if additions did not overthrow the
foundation, there should never be any idolatry, nor never any heresy in these
Answ. Additions in Popery dangerous.
times. What was Idolatry, especially in the Church of God? Among the Jews was
there not the worshipping of the true God? Yes, but before an Image, their
additions, their false manner overthrew the true. There is none of them
fundamental Points (as we call them) though they make them fundamental; they
make their Traditions of as much authority as the Word of God; and their
fooleries, as the Articles of faith: they overthrow the main foundation; they
are such additions as are destructive, to join with the Word of God Traditions.
To worship God under another species and kind, is to be an Idolater: though
they worship the true God, if it be after a false manner, it is prohibited. St.
Paul says, and with a commination, Gal. 1. If I or an Angel from Heaven teach
otherwise: beside: put case it be not plainly, and directly contrary, if he
teach other things that are not necessary to be believed, Let him be accursed.
We ought not to go from the Scriptures in any fundamental point of faith
under pain of a curse. Therefore Popery is a cursed Religion in respect of
their very additions.

Does not St. Paul tell the Galatians they were fallen from Christ, if they
added circumcision to Christ? He does not say if they did that which was
directly contrary to faith: no, but in adding circumcision and works to Christ,
they were fallen from Christ: whole Christ, or no Christ. In some cases
additions are heresies, and overthrow the foundation.

If this be so, we may answer another question easily: The Apostolical Quest.
doctrine you see is only yea; Whether then it be safer to be a Papist or a
Protestant, considering that whatsoever we hold they do hold?

I answer, to be a Protestant it is safer in any man's judgment; because Answ.
Safer to be a Protestant then a Papist.
all that we say, themselves say: it has been Apostolical: we can prove in all
ages of the Church our affirmatives, we have a Catalogue of witnesses in all
ages of them that held what we say: it was founded in the Apostles, and then
came down to all ages. But what they say distinct, and differing from us, they
have not the like testimony for: for indeed they are so beaten, that Bellarmine
has this, The authority of all Councels, and Fathers, and all depends upon the
authority of the present Church: bring to them Councels, and Fathers, Tush,
tush, all authority depends upon the present Church. What authority gives the
present Church, when 20. years after the Church varies? What certainty is
there, when all authority of former times shall depend upon the present Church?

In those things wherein they differ from us, and that we deny, any
understanding, reasonable man may see that they are novelties, and corruptions.
As for the Pope to depose Princes, if a man have but his naturals, he may see
it abominable. To pray in a strange tongue, to debar the people of the wine,
when Christ says, Drink ye all of it; who that has ordinary discretion but
will think it absurd? There is nothing that we differ from them in, but a man
that has but his naturals will condemn. Therefore ours is safer a great deal
by their own confession, the learnedest of them, that it is enough to believe
as we do. Do we not believe the Articles of the Creed? do we not believe the
first four general Councels? we do; who then will not say that these are
sufficient being understood, and believed, to make a man that he be no heretic?

I may answer hence another question, whether a Papist may be saved or Quest.
no? It is a curious question, you will say; but it is so ordinary, that
somewhat I must say.

I answer, no doubt, but many of them are saved. How comes that to Answ.
Whether a Papist may be saved?
pass? They reverse their false grounds, and stick to those positive truths
that they and we hold together, they reject their own works and help of
Saints, and go to Christ only; for, as I said, Popery is full of
contradictions. Now a Papist when he comes to have his conscience awakened,
heleaves the Pope Indulgencies, their 5. Sacraments, Justification by works,
and then imbracheth only Christ, and then he com^ our part. They live by their
Religion, and die by ours. So the question is whether living or dying? Luther
says, If they live, and die peremptorily in all the points professed in the
Tridentine Counsel, they cannot. But no doubt many of them the Lord has mercy
on, to open their eyes to see the vanity of their works and of all their
fooleries, which those that are wise and have their consciences enlightened
turn off then, and so may be saved, but it must be with reversing the grounds
of their religion, and sticking to ours which is agreeable to the Word.

Nay, to speak a little more of it; I say, we do more safely believe we are
more safe, and on better grounds led into some less errors, then they do
believe maine truths. It may seem strange, but it is most true.

For if so be a sound Protestant maintain an error, it is because he thinks it
is in the Scripture, that it is in the Word: if it be discovered out of the
Word of God to be an error, he leaves it; as St. Cyprian, and other Fathers
blessed Saints in heaven they held some errors; but if they saw the Scripture
held otherwise, they had prepared minds to believe otherwise; therefore holding
the maine fundamental truths, though they held particular errors, they were
saved.

The Papists maintain fundamental truths with us; they believe the Word of
God, they believe in Christ, and to be saved by mercy, but upon what grounds?
They believe the truth, upon heretical, divellish grounds. As upon what grounds
do they believe the Articles of the faith to be so? and the Scriptures to be
so? because the Church says so. Who is the Church but the Pope? And what man
is the Pope oft-times? A man, if we believe their own Writers, led with a
divellish spirit: some of them have been Magicians. If they believe the truth,
they do it not as divine truth: they believe the truth for matter: but the
grounds of believing those truths are humane, nay worse, many times, divellish:
for you know in the Revelation, the beast is inspired with the spirit of the
Dragon, with the spirit of the Devil, and teaches the doctrine of Devils. Now
to teach that which is materially true, upon reasons that are diabolical, or
humane, at the best it is but humane, as the testimony of the Church is, what
an unsafe thing is this?

Nay, I say, it is the most horrible witchery, the most horrible abomination
one of them that ever was since the beginning of the World, this principle,
that their Church cannot err; that is the reason of the believing of all
divine truths. Hereupon they come to practice most abominable treacheries,
hereupon they defend lies, hereupon they kill Princes, and dissolve the bonds
of allegiance that Subjects owe to Princes. And all humane and Divine things,
all the light of nature, and Scripture, all becomes a nullitie. Why? because
the Church cannot err. And this they have from their holy Father the Pope, he
is above all Counsels, and all, and cannot err. We know if principles be
false, all other things are false: an error in principles is a dangerous
error. An error in the ground is the worst thing in the World. As to
maintain treason to be lawful it is worse then to be a Traitor: for his
judgment is convinced already; but he that maintains a false principle, he
is a dangerous man indeed: So to have this abominable principle, that the
Church, that the Pope cannot err. Hence come all those dangerous practices in
this Commonwealth ever since the beginning of Queen Elisabeths time.

Who would have thought (but that God gave up bitter, proud, poisonfull
spirits, vain spirits that rejected the Word of God) that men of parts and
understanding should ever be so sotted to believe such a thing, that a wretched
ignorant man should get into the Chair, and he should judge infallibly of the
truths that he never knew in his life, being of another profession, as some are
Canonists, and not Divines? But I leave that point.

To touch one thing more that borders a little upon this, that Divine truth is
of an inflexible nature, whatsoever men think of it: and that crosses another
rule of theirs, that they will give what sense they will of Scriptures, Papists
give what sense they will of Scriptures.
and the Current of the present Church must judge of all former Councels. Now
does truth vary according to men's judgments? according to the pcesent Church?
Must we bring the rule to the crooked timber, or the timber and the things to
be measured to the rule? Shall the judgment of any man be the rule of truth?
shall it be the rule in one time, and not in another? shall present men
interpret it thus, and say it is so now: and others that succeed say,
whatsoever it was now, thus it must be believed?

Hereupon likewise, if it be the constant nature of truth always to be believed:
hereupon it comes to cross another thing, their dispensation: No dispensing
with Gods L^
no man can dispense with Gods Law: truth is truth indispensible. Laws divine,
and natural are indispensible, because they are alike in all things. Reason is
reason in Turkey as well as here: the light of nature is the light of nature in
any country as well as here. Principles of nature vary not as languages do,
they are inbred things.

If the Principles of nature be invariable and indispensible, much more divine
principles, says the Heathen: filthiness is filthiness whether thou think it
to be so or no. Opinion is not the rule of things, but the nature of the thing
it self.

Therefore whatsoever is against nature none can dispense with, God cannot deny
himself. What was naught in one age is naught in another, and is for ever
naught. Whatsoever is divine or natural, is indispensible. No Monarch in the
world can dispense with the law of nature or the Divine Law, the Word of God:
for the opinion of any man in the world is not the rule of his course, but the
undoubted light of God, whether the light of nature or the light of Divine
truth,

I speak this the rather to cross base Parasites, that when God calls them to
stand for true causes, what do they make their rule? Not Gods constant yea, but
they bend and bow to opinion: as if the opinion of any man in the World were
the rule of their faith, and obedience. This is to make men, and no men. Is not
the written Word of God, the Word of God? Is not the law the law? (politic
laws I speak not of) shall a man yield to men's opinion, especially if the
Word do not warrant it? shall he yield to any man living that is inconstant by
his disposition? There is truth which is certain, that a man must maintain to
the Death. He is not only a Martyr that maintains Religion. John Baptist was
a Martyr that stood out in a matter that was not against heresy, but for the
standing out against Herod; (he did not yield as many thousands would have done
in such a case) Thou must not have thy Brother Philips wife, it is unlawful.

Men ought to suffer for the truths of nature, and not deny truth whatsoever,
because it is a Divine sparkle from God. If it be any truth whatsoever, it must
be stood in, because it is constant, and it is the best thing in the world next
to Divine, and saving truth.

If this be so, that the Gospel, and Divine truth be yea: and that the Church
at all times has been built on that; and that whosoever is saved, is Use. To
get certainty of faith answerable to the certain truth.
saved by that yea: Let us labor to have a faith answerable to our truth. We
say, and distinguish well: there is a certainty of the thing, and a certainty
of the mind apprehending the thing. It is certain the Sun is bigger then the
earth; but you shall never persuade a simple Countryman that it is so: There
is a certainty of the object, but not of the subject: he will never believe it,
because it is against sense. But now there must be both in a Christian. The
Apostles doctrine, the truth he does believe, the truth in the Scripture is
yea, that is, it is certain and true, and not yea, and nay, it is not flexible:
it is not as the Heathen Oracles were, that is, doubtful, and wavering. Let our
assent be answerable to the truth: let us build soundly on a sound foundation.

As a Ship that is to rest in the midst of the waves, there is a double
certainty necessary, that the Anchor-hold be good in it self, and that it be
fastened upon somewhat that is firm: if it be a weak anchor, or if it be fastened
upon gound that will not hold, the Ship is tossed about with waves, and so
split upon some rock or other: So our souls require a double certainty, we
must have an Anchor of faith, as well as an object of faith: we must have an
Anchor of hope as well as an object. For the object we may cast Anchor there,
it is Divine truth which will hold, there is no doubt of that, it is yea: but
then our Anchor must be firm, our faith and affiance. Let us labor to build
soundly, and strongly upon it. It should be our endeavor continually to
stablish our faith, to stablish our hope, that we may know on what terms we
live, and on what terms to dye.

Do but consider the difference between an understanding strong Christian, and
another. A Christian that is judicious and understanding, ask him in what
estate he is? why, comfortable: what is the ground of his faith? why, thus; I
live in no known sin, I confess my sins to God, my doctrine is yea, and I
labor to bring my life to my doctrine.

Ask another, What do you mean to live so loosely, and carelessly? why will you
stand thus? will you be content to die so? perhaps he does not know sound
doctrine; or if he do, it is confusedly, he does not build on that rock, on
that foundation.

O let us labor to build stronger and stronger on the truth. Our building
strongly makes us eternal: Gods truth is eternal truth, because it makes us
eternal. Is it not a strange thing that man, that is chafe, and vanity, and
smoke, whose life passes as a tale that is told, that yet notwithstanding if
he build on this yea, which is certain and infallible, the doctrine of the
Gospel it will make him a rock, a living stone, it will make him eternal? All
flesh is grass, but the Word of God endures for ever.

What a comfort is this, our life being a vapor, and vanity, and growing to
nothing, that the time will shortly come when we shall be no more, no more in
this world: then to have Divine truth that will make us eternal? Psalm. 90.
Moses, a good man, he saw men drop away: faith he, Thou art our eternal
habitation from Generation to Generation. What is the meaning of that? That is,
We dwell in thee: here in our Pilgrimage to Canaan we drop away, but Thou art
our habitation from Generation to Generation. So when a Christian considers,
his life is uncertain, all things are vanity that support this life, yet
notwithstanding I have a yea to build on, the Divine truth; The Word of the
Lord endures for ever, and it will make me endure for ever. It is a Rock it
self, it makes me a Rock: it will make me a living stone, built on that
foundation, that all the gates of hell shall not prevail against my faith, and
hope.

What a comfort is this? We have nothing without this Yea; we are yea, and nay,
and our happiness is yea, and nay: we are so happy now, as we may be miserable
to morrow. Let us labor to build on Divine truth which is like it self; that
in all the Changes of the world we may have somewhat that is unalterable, that
is as unchangeable as God himself: As S. Paul here brings God himself, As God
is true, my word to you was not yea, and nay, but yea. So much shall suffice
for that Verse. I go on to the 20. Verse.

VERSE XX. For all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen.
THis comes in after this manner, My Preaching to you (says he) was
invariable, and constant, because Christ himself is always yea: if Christ the
matter of my preaching be always yea, and I preach nothing but Christ, then my
preaching is invariable and constant. How does he prove the minor? how does he
prove that Christ is always yea? All the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in
him Amen. Christ is invariable, and my preaching of him was not yea, and nay.
Christ is not yea, and nay, because all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and
Amen.

The Promises of God in him are Yea, that is, they are constant; and in him
they are Amen. There is some diversity in reading the words. But most
constantly the best Expositors have it as this Translation has it, All the
Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen. The literal meaning is this,
All the Promises of God in Christ are Yea, that is, they are certain, they are
made in him: and in him they are Amen, that is, they are accomplished in him;
in him they are made, and in him they are accomplished.

I might spend a great deal of time to show the acception of the word Amen, but
it is not pertinent to my purpose.

Amen, is here certain, undoubtedly certain, as it is here to make way to that
which is to be understood.

There are three main senses of Amen; It signifies that a thing is positively
so, and not no, it is so. Yea, and Amen, signify that such a thing is; as,
Three senses of Amen.
Let your yea be yea; such a thing is. But now, Amen is more, not only that a
thing is, but it is so truly, and so unchangeably; it is Yea, and Amen. The
Promises are yea, they are made in Christ, and then they are true in him,
undoubtedly, eternally, unchangeably true.

So take it in the strictest, in the strongest sense you can; all the Promises
of God in Christ they are so true, that they are invariably, constantly,
eternally true in him, they are made in him, and performed in him; they are Yea
in him, and Amen in him. So the whole carriage of the Promises is only in
Christ.

The truths we are to deliver out of the words are these:

First of all we must know, That since the fall of man, it has pleased the
Divine Nature, the three Persons in Trinity, to stablish a Covenant of God
since the Fall has made a Covenant of Grace.
grace, and so of salvation in Jesus Christ; and to make him a second
principle, a second Adam, by whom mankind is restored to a better estate then
ever we had in the first Adam. God now since the fall takes another course to
bring us back again to him. He does not leave us as he left the Angels that
fell, in a state of perdition for ever: but as we fell by infidelity and
distrust of him, so now we are recovered again by Promises, and by faith in
them.

There can be no intercourse between God and man, but by some promise on his
part. God deals with man by Promises. Observe. God deals with man by Promises.



The reason is this; How can man dare to challenge any thing of the great
Majesty of God without a warrant from himself? How can the conscience be
satisfied? The conscience looks to God, it is a knowledge together Reason 1.
Else man dares look for nothing from God.
with God; how can conscience rest but in that it knows comes from God?
Therefore for any good that I hope for from God, I must have a promise.

For this is Gods constant dispensation, while we live in this world we are
always under hope, we are children of hope, We are saved by hope, we rejoice
Reason 2. To exercise faith and hope.
in the hope of glory: and hope looks to the promises, whereof some part is
unperformed. How does heaven and earth differ? heaven is all performance: here
is some performance to encourage us, and there is always some promise still
unperformed. We are always under some Promise: and therefore the manner of our
apprehending God in this world differs from heaven: here it is by faith and
hope, there by vision: vision is fit for performance; faith and hope looks to
the Promise always here: Therefore God rules his Church by Promises: partly (I
say) to secure the soul of man, we cannot have any thing from God but by the
manifestation of his own good will. How can we look for any thing from God but
by promise? can we look for any thing from God by our own conceits? that is a
fools Paradise.

Further, God will have his Church ruled by Promises in all ages, to exercise
faith, and hope, and prayer, and dependence upon God. God will try of what
credit he is among men, whether they will depend upon his promise, or no: so
that knowing he is true, by promise it may be certain to them, they shall have
performance in time: he gives men Promises to see if they will trust him.

God will have this manner of dispensation to rule his Church by Promises, to
arm us in this world against fears and discouragements; therefore Reason 3. To
arm us against discouragements.
we have always some Promise. He might have done us good, and have given us no
promise; but now having given us Promises, he will try the graces that are in
us, and arm us against all discouragements and difficulties, till the thing
promised be performed. For we must know, that a Promise is a Divine thing,
better then any earthly performance. Let God give a man never so much in the
world, if he have not a promise of better things all will come to nothing at
the last. Therefore God supports the souls and spirits of his Children with
Promises, to arm them against all temptations on the right hand, and on the
left, that would draw them from trusting in his Promise; he will have them live
by faith, and that has always relation to the Promise. Quest.


This is a general ground then, That God now in Christ Jesus has appointed
Answ. Promise what.
this way, to govern the Church with Promises.

Now what is a Promise?

A Promise is nothing but a manifestation of love, an intendment of bestowing
some good, and removing some ill; a manifestation of our mind Three degrees of
love.
in that kind is a promise, of conferring of a future good, or removing of a
future ill, therefore it comes from love in the party promising.

There are three degrees of loving steps, whereof a promise is the last. The
first is inward love: The second is real performance: And the third is a
manifestation of performance intended before it be; and this (I say) is a
degree of love. For love concealed, it does not comfort in the interim, in the
time that is betwixt. Now God who is love, does not only love us, and will not
only show his love in time; but because he will have us rest sweetly in his
bosom, and settle our selves on his gracious Promises, in the mean time, he
gives us rich and precious Promises. He is not only love, and shows it in
deed, but he expresses it in word. And we may well build on his Word, as
verily as if he had performed it in deed: for whatsoever he says is Yea, and
Amen. This is the nature of a promise; It is not only love, and the expression
of love in deed; but the expression of it in word, when he intends to solace,
and comfort, and stablish, and stay the mind of man till the good promised be
performed.

Therefore even from this we see how God loves us, that not only he has an
inward love in his breast, and does good to us, but he manifests it by No
promise, no faith nor hope.
word: he would have us (as I said) live by faith, and stablish our selves in
hope.

Faith and hope are two graces altogether from Promises: if there were no
promise, there could be no faith nor hope: what is hope? nothing but the
expectation of the things that the Word says. And what is faith but a building
on the Word of God. Faith looks on the Word that God will give such a thing,
and hope looks upon the thing that the Word promises: as the distinction is
good, faith looks to the Word of the thing, and hope looks to the thing in the
Word: faith looks to the Word promising; hope looks to the performance of the
thing promised. Faith is the evidence of things not seen, because it sets the
things that are absent as if they were present; hope is for the accomplishment
of that. If there were no promise to hope, what needed hope? and where were a
foundation for faith? Now God being willing to exercise faith and hope, feeds
them both, and satisfies both, that we may be heavenly wise in trusting and
believing, and not Observe. 2. All Promises in Christ.
foolish as men in the world: Therefore God has given us promises, and sealed
them with an oath, as we shall see afterward.

Now all promises coming from love, what love can there be in God to us since
the fall, but it must be grounded on a better foundation then our selves? If
God love us, it must be in one that is first beloved: hereupon comes the ground
of the Promises to be Jesus Christ, God-man: For all intercourse between God
and us, it must be in him that is able to satisfy God. God will so in the
Covenant of Grace entertain covenant and league with us, as that he will have
his Justice have full content, he will be satisfied; and therefore he that will
be the foundation of intercourse between God and us, he must be God-man,
perfectly able to satisfy Divine Justice; he must be a friend of Gods, and a
friend to us; hereupon the Promises must come from Gods love in Jesus Christ:
and he must first receive all good for us, and we must have it at the second
hand from him. Hereupon it is said here, that All the Promises of God in him
are Yea, and Amen.

It is a rule, The first in any kind is the cause of all the rest. Now Christ
Christ first beloved.
is the first beloved thing; therefore in Coloss. 1. 3. he is called the Son
of Gods love. Christ being the only begotten Son of God, he looks on him first
before he looks on any thing else; and whatsoever is lovel, y he looks 1. As
God.
on it as it is in him in whom his love is first, because he being his only
begotten Son, he is the first object of all the respect that God has;
therefore whatsoever is beloved, it is as it has a consistence in Christ.
Therefore Christ he must first be loved, and then we in him. Consider him as
the Son of God.

Consider him as man, he is the first beloved, being a holy man above all 2. As
Man.
other men: for the nature of man has a subsistence in the second person in
Christ: therefore Christ as man is beloved before all others, having a
subsistence in his Godhead which is first beloved: he is the prime, and most
excellent creature as man. God looks first upon Christ as his only begotten
Son, and upon Christ as man secondarily: Upon the Church in the third place as
united to Christ; and all other creatures in reference to the Church: and
therefore there was never any thing in the world, nor shall be, that ever was
or shall be loved, but in the first-beloved Christ Jesus.

Again, Christ is first, because Christ is the Mediator between God 3. As
Mediator.
and man by office. Consider what relation he has between God and man, and we
may easily see that God first respects him, and us for him. For Christ being
God and man, and Mediator therefore between God and man, he is loved of both;
he is a friend to both, to bring both together; he is first regarded as
Mediator, and then we for whose cause he is Mediator.

Then again, Consider Christ not as he is between God and us, but as he 4. As
our Head, and Husband.
is to us, so he is first beloved. To God, he is his first begotten; to God and
us a Mediator. To us a head, to us a husband to us a brother; a head from
whence there is all influence of life and motion: a husband from whence we have
all riches; he is all in all to us in the relations he stands in to us:
therefore he is first in all things, as the Apostle says, In all things he
must have the pre-eminence; and it is fit it should be so.

Especially since the fall; leave the consideration of Christ, and this may Our
nature odious to God since thn fall.
be a reason, consider us since the fall, as we are in the mass of corruption,
are we fit objects for Gods love? are we not fuel for consuming fire? is not he
a consuming fire, and we stubble for his wrath? is not our nature defiled, and
tainted, and can it otherwise be amiable, then considered as knit to him that
is first amiable, that is Christ? it cannot be. So look to Christ as the Son of
Gods love, whether as God, or as man: look to his Office as Mediator, look on
him as in relation to us as our husband and head; look on us without him, you
may see that Gods love is first founded in Christ, and then in us.

I mean in regard of execution in the passages of our salvation: For at Gods
love first in Christ, and then in us in regard of execution.
first it was a free love that gave Christ to us, and us to Christ, So God
loved the world, that he gave his Son, that was the first that set all the
world in execution: but in the execution from predestination to glorification,
before all worlds he loved us in Christ to everlasting: from the everlasting in
election, to everlasting in glory, all is in Christ in regard of execution. We
subsist in him, we are sanctified in him, we are justified in him, his
righteousness is ours, we are glorified in him, we are loved in him: God
blesses us with all spiritual blessings in him, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. God has made
us accepted in his beloved: In him who is his beloved Son, in whom he is well
pleased: not only with whom, but in whom, in him and all his, in him as
mystical Christ, head and members. God now looks upon our nature as it is
united to the person of his only begotten Son; and thereupon our nature is
lovely in the eyes of God, and enriched, and honored, and advanced in Christ.

Even as a base woman by marriage with a great person is advanced; so our
nature being mean of it self, taking our nature when it was defiled with sin:
(though that particular mass was sanctified by the Holy Ghost) it was much
advanced and ennobled, by having a subsistence in the second person: so God
looks on us in Jesus Christ, and loves us in him, and bestows all spiritual
blessings in Christ.

Therefore whatsoever we have, Christ must have it first for us; whatsoever All
in Christ first.
is done to us, must be done first to Christ. Christ is first predestinate, as
it is, 1 Pet. 1. he is the predestinate Lamb of God, he was ordained before all
worlds, to be a sacrifice for us, and to be the head of his Church, he was
ordained before we were ordained. Christ is first beloved, and then we are
beloved in his beloved. He is well pleased in him, and then in us: he is first
loved, and then we; he is predestinate, and then we: he is the Son of Gods love
by nature, therefore we are sons of Gods love by adoption and grace* what we
are by adoption, he is by nature first of all: therefore we are said to be
elected in him, and sanct^fied in him: he first of all removes all ill, and
then we have it removed, because he has removed it. He is first justified from
our sins, he is first quitted and freed from our sins, when he took them upon
himself, and on the tree satisfied the wrath of God: He bore our iniquities,
and by his stripes we are healed: if he had not been freed from our sins, we
had for ever layen under them: therefore says S. Paul, If Christ be not risen,
you are yet in your sins: we are free from our sins, because Christ our surety
is out of the prison of the grave, he is in heaven.

He must first rise from the dead; he is the first fruits of them that sleep:
the first begotten from the dead, Rev. 1. 1 Cor. 15. for though some rose
before, yet it was in the virtue of Christ, who rose altogether by his own
strength; therefore he has made a living way to heaven: We are born again to a
lively hope by the resurrection of Christ from the dead; we have a lively hope,
a hope that makes us lively in good works, because our surety is in heaven: Now
we hope for an inheritance immortal and undefiled; because he is risen, we
shall rise: he is ascended, therefore we shall ascend: we do ascend in the
certainty of faith now, and shall ascend indeed hereafter.

Whatsoever we do, he does it first: and whatsoever we have from God, it is at
the second hand, he has it first, and conveyes it to us: the Natural Son to
the adopted sons; therefore all the Promises come to be made in him, and not
directly to us alone abstracted from Christ.

It is a point we should often think of, and seriously consider of: for it Use.
Ground of boldness to God.
does wondrously stablish our hearts. Does God love me, and does he do good to
me abstracted from Christ, my self alone? no; for then alas, I should fly from
his presence: but he looks upon me, and considers me as I am in his Son;
therefore in Joh. 17. in that blessed prayer of Christ, says he, That thou
may love them with the same love wherewith thou love me. God loves us with
the same love that he loves his Son with; That the love wherewith thou love
me, may be in them. He loves him first, and then he loves us with that love
that he loves him. Here is the reason that God looks on us with a forbearing
eye notwithstanding all the matter of anger and wrath in us; he looks on us in
his Son, as members of his Son: his love to us, is founded on his love to his
Son.

Hereupon back again is our boldness to God the Father, that we go to him in
his beloved Son, and present his Son to him. Lord, look on thy Son that thou
have given for us, in whom we are members; we are not as in our selves, but in
thy beloved. For as all things descend from God to us, so our souls should
ascend to him. All descends from God to us in his Son: why, all our comfortable
considerations of God must be in his Son Christ; thereupon we have boldness to
God through him, not in our selves, but in and through Christ. Let us bring
Benjamin with us, bring Christ, and then we shall be welcome. If we come in the
garments of our elder Brother, then we shall get the blessing.

But of our selves God cannot endure to look on us: therefore this is a
Heathenish conceit, in our prayers to presume to go to God otherwise then he
has clothed himself with the comfortable relation of a Father in Christ. If
we consider him as a just God, as a God of vengeance, as a holy God, the more
it makes to our terror, if we be not besotted. But go to him as he is now in
his Son Christ, and go boldly. The Heathens otherwise conceived wavering, and
doubtingly of a God: alas, conceiving him out of Christ, he was nothing but a
consuming fire to them.

How dares that man that knows himself, and that knows God, how dares he
think of God? he thinks basely of God, that can think of him, and not think of
him as he is to him in Christ. Dare thou think of God who is a consuming
fire, and not think of him as he is pleased, and pacified in thy nature in
Christ, that has taken thy nature to be a foundation of comfort, to be a
second Adam, a public person for all that are in him, and members of him? to
see God fully appeased in him who is God-man, thou may think of him with
comfort then. Never think of the Promises of grace, or comfort, or any thing
without Christ.

Therefore S. Paul says, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed was the
Promise made; He says not to seeds, as to many, but to thy seed: As speaking
of one, even Christ. All the Promises of good to us are made to Christ, and
conveyed from Christ to us: the Promises, and likewise the things promised; He
has promised to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5. and so
grace, and whatsoever, it is in him: the Promises, and the things promised they
are conveyed from God to Christ, and so to us. They are a deed of gift, we have
them from, and by Christ. Why are the Angels attendants upon us? The Angels
attend upon Jacob's ladder, that is, Christ. It is he that knits heaven and
earth together: so the Angels because they attend upon Christ first, they
become our attendants: whatsoever we are, whatsoever privileges we have, it is
in Christ first, it belongs to us no further then we by faith are made one with
Christ. Thus we see whatsoever we have from God, it is by promises. And these
promises are not abstracted from love, for they are the fruits of love; and
this love is seated in Christ, who has satisfied Gods justice; we have
promises, and promises in Christ.

In the third place, the Apostle says that all the promises of God in him
Observe. 3. All the promises yea in Christ.
are yea, they are constant and sure in him; they shall be performed.

All promises are either Christ himself, or by Christ, or from Christ, or for
Christ. All promises that ever were made to Gods People, they were either of
Christ himself, when he was promised, or such as were promised for Christ. The
promise of Christ himself is the first grand promise, that he should be made
man, the promise in his own person. But whatsoever promise was made by the
Prophets and Apostles, they were made by his Spirit, they were made for him,
for his sake, and in him, and they were made to those that are in him too. For
as Gods love is founded in him to those that are in him mystically as the Son
of his love: so the promises are made, and given over to him of all good: he
takes all the promises of good from God for us, and then they are made to us as
we are in him.

He himself is the first promise that runs along in all the Scripture: and
Christ the first promise.
all the promises of Christ are yea: for whatsoever was promised of Christ
before he came, it was fufilled when he came: for all types were fulfilled in
him, and all Prophecies, and all promises they were all accomplished in him.

All types whether personal, or real.

For personal types, he was the second Adam, Adam was a type of him, All types
fulfilled in Christ.
he is the true Adam. He was the true Isaac, the ground of laughter. He is the
true Joseph advanced now to the kingdom, to the right hand of 1 Personal types.
God: he is the steward of his Church to feed his Church here, and bring her to
Heaven with himself afterward. He is the true Joshua that brought Israel out of
the wilderness to Canaan; he brings us from Moses, from the law to heaven: he
is the true Joshua that brings us through Jordan, from death, and miseries in
this world, to heaven. He is the true Solomon, the Prince of peace: so all
personal types of Kings, and Priests, as Aaron was a type of him, etc. they
were yea in him, they were fulfilled in him.

And all real types, he is the true Mercie-seat wherein God would be 3. Real
types.
heard, and prayed unto: for he covers the Law, the curse of it, as the
Mercie-seat did. He is the true brazen Serpent, that whosoever looks on him
with the eye of faith, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. He is the
true Mannah, the bread of life, that type had its yea in Christ. He is the true
sacrifice, the Passover Lamb, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world: if our hearts be sprinkled with his blood, the destroying Angel
has nothing to do with us. The Passover has its yea in him, therefore that
which is affirmed of the Passe-over is affirmed of him, Not abone of it shall
be broken; that is attributed to Christ, that was performed in the type: that
is applied to Christ that was spoken of the Passover: to signify the
identitie of the type, and the thing signified. He was the yea of that, and of
all comfortable types that were real, and personal, all have their yea in him.

Therefore says our Savior Christ, the last words of his almost upon the
cross, All is finished, all the types real, and personal.

And all promises, and prophecies have their yea in Christ. The first promise
2. All promises and prophecies.
what was it but Christ? The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head,
it was nothing but Christ, it was yea when he was born: and when he died, he
crushed the Serpents head: By death he overcame him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil. So the promise that was renewed to Abraham, In thy
seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed, that is, in Christ. And so to
David that he should come out of his family. And that particular promise of I
say, that a Virgin should conceive. And the Baptist points him out, Behold, the
Lamb of God. All the particular things that befell Christ in time, they were
prophesied of before, and Christ was the yea of all, that is, all had their
determinate truth in Christ when he came. This is one reason why S. Paul says,
All the promises in Christ are yea; whatsoever was promised concerning Christ,
or foretold, it was yea in him, concerning his birth, and the place of it:
concerning his death, and the manner of it: concerning his resurrection, and
ascension; concerning his offices, all was foretold: as we see in Scripture, in
the New Testament it is the foot of diverse verses, that It might be fulfilled;
so this that was foretold in the Old, it was fulfilled in the New. So Christ is
the first promise, and whatsoever was said of him is Yea, and Amen. Whatsoever
was spoken of Christ, it was Yea in the Old Testament, and Amen in the New: it
was made to them in the Old Testament, and performed in the New.

And what is the Old and New Testament but this syllogism. He is the Blessed
seed, that is the Son of the Virgin Mary, born in Bethlehem, that shall come in
the end of Daniels weeks, that shall come when the Scepter shall be departed
from Juda, etc. He is the true Messiah, the true Christ, says the Old
Testament; here is the yea: Amen, says the New Testament to this: But Christ
is the Son of the Virgin Mary, he suffered these things, that it might be
fulfilled; so all is Amen in the New Testament. I say, this is the main reason
that all is built on; He in whom all these agree, is the true Messiah; But,
says the New Testament, all these are Amen in Christ: therefore Christ the Son
of the Virgin Mary he is the true Messiah. We see whatsoever was prophesied
concerning Christ himself, was yea.

And not only so, but all the prerogatives and good things that come by Christ
are yea, they are undoubted in Christ, and they were yea before All good things
by Christ yea.
he was: he profitted before he was, he was yea to Adam: because however he
that was the seed of the woman, came not till the latter end of the World, till
4000. years after the beginning or thereabouts, yet the faith Benefit to former
ages by Christ.
of Adam, and of Abraham made him present: Abraham saw Christ's day, and
rejoiced. There was a virtue from Christ to all former ages, they all had
benefit by Christ, as it is proved at large, Heb. 11. And in Acts 15. We hope
to be saved by Christ, as well as they: insinuating that they hoped to be saved
by Christ as well as we: so he was yea for comfort to all that were before him,
as well as now: all the promises were yea, even to the Patriarchs and Prophets.

Even as if a man should undertake three or four years hence to pay a debt that
is due by one that is subject to be carried to prison, and on that Simile.
condition that this man shall be freed, I undertake at such a time to pay such
a debt; so though the debt be paid three or four years hence, he is let go free
that was obnoxious to go to prison for the debt; though it be to be paid after:
So it was with Christ, he the second person in the Trinity undertook being so
appointed by God the Father: the blessed Trinity stablished this, that Christ
should pay the debt by death; the debt to divine justice should be satisfied by
the cursed death of the cross, that those that before should have gone to hell
else for the debt, should be all freed that had any part and interest by faith
in Christ, who should pay the debt afterward. Christ undertook at such a time
to be incarnate, and to pay it for us: God the Father to whom we were
obnoxious, that was the creditor for the payment of that 4000 years after, let
them go: so Christ was yea to them, they had benefit by Christ's death.

Hereupon the Prophets spoke of him as a thing present, To us a son is
Inlargment of Grace by Christ's coming.
born, to us a Child is given. Faith mounts over many years, 600 years before
Christ in the Prophet it mounted, and made the time of Christ's coming, and his
death to be present: because they had benefit by him as if he had been present.
Only with this difference, in the time present when Christ came in the flesh
they had some comfortable enlargement of Grace. When he came in the flesh (I
say) there was a new world as it were, there was grace poured out in abundance.

So you see that all the promises concerning Christ, they were performed: They
were Yea, and Amen, and the good things by Christ. Saint Paul says
excellently, Heb. 13. Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever.
Yesterday to the Patriachs, to day for the present time he is Yea, and for the
time to come he is Yea, the same always.

He is yea to all ages; he is yea to us as well as to those that were in
Christ's time. Christ is then crucified to thee when thou believe in Christ
crucified. If we now by faith look to Christ crucified, and sent from his
Father to take our nature on him, we have as much benefit by Christ as those
that beheld him crucified. As they before looked forwards by the eye of Faith,
so we look backward, we have benefits by Christ, he is yesterday, to day, and
the same for ever. All the promises are yea in him, that is, they are
constantly yea for all ages. The promises of Christ as the spirits in the body
they run through all ages of the Church. Without him there is no love, nor
mercy, nor comfort from God: as I said before, God cannot look on our cursed
nature out of Christ; therefore whosoever will apprehend any thing merciful in
God, must apprehend it in Christ the promised seed; All the promises in him are
yea.

He is called Logos, the Word, why is he so? both actively, and passively.
Actively, the Word, because how should we ever have known Christ the word how.
the mind in the breast of God hidden, and sealed there, unless Christ had
been the Logos, the Word? For a word is expressed from reason, and there is a
word that is essential, that is reason, Logos: and so the word coming from it,
speech, the issue of reason. So Christ is the essential Word by nature, and by
office the Word to discover the inward will and purpose of God to us: All the
promises of God are discovered by Christ, as the Angel of the Covenant. And
passively he is the Word, Logos, of whom all the Prophets spoke, as Peter
says, Act 3. who was fore-signified by all the types, as I showed: Christ he
is truly all in all.

It is a comfortable way to study Christ this way: to see him, foretold Use. A
comfortable way to study Christ in promises and acplishment.
in the Old Testament, and to see the accomplishment in the New: to parallel
the Old and New Testament; it is an excellent way of studying the Gosspel. For
we know men are delighted to know diverse things at once, when a man's knowledge
is enriched diverse ways at once it delights him: as when a man knows the
history of a thing and the truth with it: when he knows a promise, and the
truth: a type, and the ttuth, how does it delight! When a man sees the type in
the Old, and the truth in the New: the history there, the promise, and the
accomplishment here, it is a wondrous delightful thing. For why does
proportion delight the eye, but because it is an agreement of different things,
a sweet harmony of different things? Why does music so please the ear? because
it is a harmony of different things. When we see a type different from the
truth performed, and a promise different from the performance, and yet a sweet
agreement, from agreement a man is delighted. A man is not delighted with
colors at colors, but as they hold proportion with the rest of the body: he
is not delighted with a limb as a limb, but as it holds proportion with the
man; if there be no proportion, and comeliness, it delights not. So in this
case it is good to consider both together. God therefore for this end and
purpose would have truths conveyed in the Old Testament, by way of types, and
prophecies, and promises, that it might delight us now to hear them, and to
study them the more: (for as I said) when we know many things at once, it is
delightful.

That is the reason why comparisons and allusions are so delightful, because we
know the comparison, and the thing to which it is compared. And that is the
reason why our Savior Christ, besides types, and figures, and promises, and
prophecies, is set out by whatsoever is excellent in nature in the Scriptures.
There is nothing in nature that is excellent, but there is something taken from
it to set forth the excellency of Christ. He is the Sun of righteousness: he
is the water, he is the way, he is the bread, he is the vine, he is the tree of
Life. Whatsoever is excellent in nature either in heaven or earth, it serves to
set forth the excellency of Christ, why? to delight us, that we may be
willing, and cheerful to think of Christ; that together with the consideration
of the excellency of the creature, some sweet meditation of Christ, in whom
all those excellencies are knit together, might be presented to the soul. When
we see the sun, often to think of that blessed Sun that quickens and enlivens all
things, and scatters the mists of Ignorance. When we look on a tree, to think
of the tree of righteousness; on the way, to think of him the way: of life, of
him that is the true life. When we think of any thing that is excellent, think
of Gods love in Scripture to set out Christ, that he would shadow him in all:
for he is the true Sun, all creatures must vanish ere long, and whatsoever is
excellent in the creature, and what will stand then? only he in whom all these
excellencies are comprised in one; All the promises in him are Yea and Amen.

If this be true then, that the promise of Christ himself, (who is the chief
All other promises Amen for Christ.
good promised) is in the New Testament Amen, all of him is Yea and Amen, then
comes this as a deducted truth, all other promises must needs be Yea, and Amen:
for God, he that performed the grand promise in giving Christ in the fullness of
time, will for Christ's sake perform all other promises. Therefore the
incarnation, the life, the death, and resurrection of Christ our blessed
Savior, it is a pawn and pledge to us of the performance of all things to come.

God promised to the Jews that they should come out of Babylon, he promised
that he would deliver them from the enemy; and he usually prefixeth this
promise. A Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and to us a Child is borne,
and a son is given: to signify that therefore they should have deliverance,
because God would give them a better thing then that; he would give them Christ
in whom all the promises are Yea and Amen: and because Christ should come of
that people they should not miscarrie in captivity under their enemies; for
then how should Christ come of them?

Therefore because a Virgin should conceive, and because a Child shall be born,
and a Son given, therefore you shall have outward deliverance. All other things
are Yea, and Amen for Christ, as St. Paul divinely reasons Romans 8. If he spared
not his only begotten Son, but gave him to death for us all, how shall he not
with him give us all things else? All other promises are made in Christ, and
performed for him. And since the grand promise it self is now Amen, that Christ
is come, it is a pledge of all other things that are to come. Is Christ come in
the flesh according to the promise? has he done all, and suffered all
according to the prophecies, as it was written of him? Then why shall we not
look for the accomplishment of all that are to come, on the same ground? have
we not a pledge? Why shall we not look for the resurrection of the body, for
the day of judgment, for the second coming of Christ? is not his first
coming a pledge of it?

When God is become man, and was mortal, why should we doubt that man being
mortal should be immortal? is not the greater performed already? Is it not a
greater matter for God to become man, and to die in our nature, then for we
that are mortal to become immortal by Christ? Why should we not expect that
which is to come since the greater is done? why should we doubt that we shall
be taken up to God since he is come down to man? Therefore since it is upon the
same ground let us look for the performance of all to be Yea, and Amen.

Since the coming of Christ, many promises have been performed in the Church,
and many yet remain: some have been performed, as the calling of the Gentiles,
and the discovery of Antichrist foretold by Saint Paul, and the consuming of
him in part. There is somewhat unfulfilled: the Promises yet unfulfilled.
conversion of the Jews, the confusion of Antichrist, the resurrection to
glory with Christ, etc. Why should we doubt of them that are to come, having
such a pledge of truth of God and Christ in the real performance of that which
is past? Let us not doubt of it; for in Revelations 9. when he speaks of the
destruction of Antichrist, It is done, it is done, says the Angel. As Christ
said when he was on the Cross, all was finished: so it is as true of his
adversaries, all is done, it is as sure as if it were done already.

Therefore the Church and people of God should comfort themselves for the time
to come, in the destruction of the implacable malicious enemies of the Church,
that glory in the flesh, that set up an outward Religion that is opposite to
the power of Christ, that the time shall come that all shall be done to them,
and that all other promises shall be finished: for as in the first coming of
Christ all was finished for the working of our salvation, so in his second
coming there will be a time when it will be said, all is finished for the
accomplishment of that which was done in his first coming. Therefore let us
stablish our souls in the expectation of the blessed promises, for All the
promises in Christ are Yea and Amen, and shall be for ever.

All the promises are infallibly true as God and as Christ himself is true,
Christ shall as soon fail, and God shall as soon fail, as any promise that we
have made us in the Gospel, if we apprehend it in Christ, and believe it in
Christ.

Then here you see for the direction of our judgment, what to think of a Use.
Direction of judgment, that every man cannot be saved by his own Religion.
rotten opinion that some have that are unacquainted with divine truth, and the
alsufficiencie of Christ, and the mercy of God in Christ, that consider not the
vileness of our nature, and the infinite Majesty of God: they will have the
Gentiles saved by the light of nature, and the Jews by the Law of Moses, and
Christians by the Gospel of Christ: as if there were some other means to come
to heaven, and to the favor of God, then by Christ. Whereas now all that we
have must be by promises, and all the promises we have are in Christ: they are
all Yea in him: without him there is no intercourse between the Majesty of God
and us: Therefore, Act. 4. There is no name under heaven whereby we can be
saved, but by the Name of Jesus. Which not only confutes the divellish
opinion, and conceit that some have, but also the charitable error of others
that think the Heathens that never heard of Christ shall be saved; I leave them
to their Judge. We must go to the Scriptures, all the promises are in Christ,
in him they are Yea, in him they are made, in him they are Amen, in him they
are performed: out of him we have nothing, out of the promises in him we have
nothing.

How are we to magnify God that we live in the sunshine of the Gospel, Use.
To magnify God for promises.
that in Christ we have precious, and rich promises? A precious Savior we
have, and precious faith to lay hold on him, and precious promises: all
precious, both promises to be believed: and our Savior in whom they are
apprehended, he is a precious stone: and the faith that lays hold on him is
precious. How are we to bless God that we have these advantages? that we have
Christ laid open, and precious, and rich promises, whereby we may have precious
faith to lay hold on these precious promises? we are much to bless God for it.

Again, are all the promises of God in Christ and in him Yea, and Amen? This
should direct us in our dealing with God, not to go directly to him, but by a
promise: and when we have a promise, look to Christ in whom Use Direct in to go
to God in Christ.
it is performed. Go to God in the blessed promises that we have for Christ's
sake that he would perform all. If we ask any thing of God in Chrsts Name, we
shall receive it, because the promises are in him. If we thank God for any
thing, it must be in Christ, for that we have in him.

What a comfort is this, that we may go to God in Christ, and claim the
promises boldly: because we see out of the love he bears to Christ, he loves
us, and has made us promises in him, and as verily as he loves him, so he
loves us, and will perform all his gracious promises to us? If we lay fast hold
on Christ, I say, he can as soon alter his love to Christ as to us; for the
loves us with the same love that he loves Christ with, he loves us in his
beloved. He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in him, he has made
us sons in him, that is the natural Son; and as his love is unchangeable to
his Son, so it is to us in Christ.

If a Princes, love to any man be founded and grounded upon the love he bears
to his son, if he loves his son he loves such a man because his son loves him:
surely he may have great comfort that it it will hold; because his affection is
natural, and unalterable; he will always love his son; therefore he will love
him whom his son loves always. Now Christ is the Son of God, he loves us in his
Son; he has given us rich promises in his Son. He has given him, the first
promise, and all other promises of forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting
in and through him. As long as he loves Chrst, he will love us, and as sure as
he loves Christ, he will love us.

Nothing in the world can separate his love from his own Son, and nothing in
the world can separate Gods love from us, because it is in his Son. Christ
loves his mystical body as well as his natural body: and God loves the
mystical body of Christ, as he loves his natural body: he has advanced
that to glory at his right hand, and will he leave his mystical body the
Church? will he not advance that? Does he not love whole Christ? Yes, God loves
whole Christ. Our nature that he has taken to him, it is the chief thing, the
most lovely thing in heaven or earth, next to God: And he loves all that are in
him, his mystical body. For indeed he gave us to Christ, he has sealed and
anointed him; he is anointed by God the Father for us.

Upon what an unchangeable, eternal ground is the love of God built, and the
faith of a Christian? How can the gates of hell prevail against the Faith of a
Christian, when it carries him to the promises, and from the promises to the
love of God, and from thence to Christ, upon whom the love of God is founded?
Before the faith of a Christian can be shaken, the promises must be of no
effect, they must be yea, and nay; and not yea; and if the promises be shaken,
the Love of God must be uncertain, and Christ uncertain: heaven and earth must
be overturned to overturne the faith of a Christian. There is nothing in the
world that is so firm as a believing Christian that casts himself on the
promises, that are always yea: and to make them yea, they are founded on Christ
the Son of Gods love.

Well, these promises coming from such love, may be ranked into diverse
Several kinds of promises.
ranks: I will touch some of them, to show how we are to carry our selves, to
make comfortable use of this, that All the premises are yea and amen in Christ.

There are some universal promises, for the good of all mankind: as 1.
Universal to all mankind.
that God would never destroy the world again. Or promises that concern more
particularly his Church. And those are promises either of outward things, or of
spiritual, and eternal things, of Grace, and glory. 2. Concerning the Church.


Now for the manner of promising, they admit of this distinction: All the
promises that God has made to us, either they are absolute Manner of promising
without any condition, so was Christ. God promised Christ, let the world be as
it will, Christ did, and would have come. And so the 1. Absolute.
promise of his glorious coming, he will come, let men be as they will: there
will be a resurrection.

Some promises be conditional in the manner of propounding, but yet absolute in
the real performance of them. As for example, the promises 2. Conditionally
propounded, but absolutely performed.
of Grace and Glory to Gods children: the promise of forgivness of sins, God
will forgive their sins, if they believe, if they repent: they are propounded
conditionally, but in the performance they are absolute, because God performs
the Covenant himself: he performs our part and his own too. For since Christ
though he propounded the promises of the Gospel with conditions, yet he
performs the condition; he stirs us up to attend upon the means, and by his
Spirit in the Word he works faith and repentance, which is the condition: faith
and repentance is his gift.

He writes his law in our hearts, and teaches us how to love: So, though they
be conditionally propounded, (for God deals with men as men by way of
commerce; he propounds it by way of Covenant and condition:) yet in the
Covenant of Grace (which is truly a gracious Covenant) he not only gives the
good things; but he performs the condition, by the Spirit, working our hearts
to believe and to repent.

Again, there are promises not only propounded conditionally, of Grace, and
comfort; but of outward things. All outward things are promised conditionally,
Conditional of outward things.
as thus: God has promised protection from contagious sicknesses, from war,
and troubles. General promises there are of protection every where. Psalm 91.
God will be a hiding place, and he will deliver his Children, there are
privative promises: and then positive promises, that he will do this and that
good for them: but these are conditional, so far forth as in his wise
providence he sees it may serve spiritual good things, Grace, and the inward
man: for God takes liberty in our outward estate, and in our bodies to afflict
them, or to do them good, as may serve the main.

For do what we will these bodies will turn to dust and vanity, and we must
leave the world behind us; but God looks to the main state in Christ, to the
new Creature. Therefore as far as outward blessings may encourage us, and as
far as deliverances may help the maine, so far he will grant them, or else he
denies them: he takes liberty in outward things.

Therefore that sort of promises they are conditional, with exception of
necessary affliction. For we cannot have the blessings of this life, positive,
or privative, we cannot be delivered always, and have blessings: but our
corrupt nature is such, that except we have some what to season them we shall
surfeit of them, we cannot digest them, and therefore they are all with the
exception of the cross; As Christ says, he that does any thing for him, he
shall have an hundredfold here: but with affliction and persecution; he shall
be sure of that, whatsoever else he has: let him look for that. All the
crosses we have in the world, are to season the good things of this life. Many
other distinctions and differences we might have to lay open the kinds of
promises in Scripture: but this shall suffice to give you a taste. Now all
these are made in Christ, and performed in Christ, so far forth as is for our
good.

Are all the promises of what kind soever, spiritual, or outward, temporal,
and eternal, are they all made to us in Jesus Christ, and are they Use. To get
into Christ.
certain, Yea, and Amen in him? Then make this use of it, let us renew our
former exhortation, get into Christ by all means: for out of him we have
nothing savingly good.

But you will say, Does not God do many good things to them that are Object.
out of Christ? does not the rain fall upon the ill as well as the good? and
does not he fill the bellies of the wicked with good things?

Yes he does, he does: but are they blessings? no, they are not: but as God
says to Moses, If you do this, and this ill, I will curse you in your dough,
Answ. The good things wicked men enjoy, are not blessings.
I will curse you at home, and abroad, I will curse you in your Children, etc.
They are cursed in their blessings. There is no man that is a carnal brutish
man, but though he live, and have revenues and pleasures, he is cursed in his
blessings: For what? is he made for this life only? no, he is but fatted on to
the day of destruction; they are snares to him. How do you know they are
snares? because they make him secure, and careless How to know blessings are
snares.
of the worship of God: they make him profane, they make him despise the power
of Religion; a man may see by his conversation they are snares; they are not
promises in Christ; for then they would come to him out of Gods Love. Therefore
get into Christ, rest not in any thing abstracted from Christ: Let us not rest
in any blessing, except we have it in Gods love in Christ.

And I may know that I have any thing in this world, any deliverance from ill,
or any positive good thing from Gods love in Christ, if I have How to know we
have them in love
it with a heart wrought on to the best things, to value Christ, and to account
all dung in comparison of him. When I esteem my being in Christ above all
beings, above being rich, or honorable, or in favor: alas, this I know is
fading, but my being in Christ is Yea, and Amen, that will stand by me when all
these beings will fail. This is comfortable, if I can do this, and have other
things, I have them with the Love of God, and Christ. Let us get into Christ
therefore.

For this purpose attend upon the means of salvation, that the Word may Attend
on the means to get into Christ.
be effectual by his Spirit accompanying his own Ordinance, to open the
excellencies of Christ to us, to make us love him, and get our affections into
him. How are we in Christ? By knowing him; and then knowledge carries our
hearts: For our wills cleave to that that we know to be excellent and
necessary. Christ is discovered as excellent and necessary, and so the will
cleaves to him as a good so discovered; and the affections follow the will.
When the will cleaves to Christ as excellent and necessary, then I love him,
then I rest on him, then I have peace in him. I may know that I am in Christ,
upon my knowledge of him, and cleaving to him, and finding peace in my
conscience. For he that is in Christ, has rest: Faith Rest in Christ.
in Christ has a resting, stablishing power. If I be in Christ, my soul
rests: for I know that all is Yea, and Amen in him. My soul rests in him,
whatsoever I find in the world to unsettle me: things are amiss, and otherwise
then I would have them: but I rest in the Love of God in Christ. Let us get
into Christ by knowledge: Let the will follow that, and our affections follow
that: and then we shall find the rest and peace that will secure us that indeed
we are in Christ.

Alas, what is a man out of Christ? as a man in a storm, that has no clothes
to hide his nakedness, to cover him from the violence of the storm;

As a man in a tempest, that is out of a house to hide him: As a stone out of
the foundation, that is scattered here, and there as neglected: As a branch out
of the Vine, out of the root, what shape is in such a branch? it will be cast
into the fire afterward. A man out of Christ that is not clothed with him,
that is not built on him, and settled on him, and planted in him, he is a man
destitute. We pity such men's cases in the World: but if we had spiritual
eyes to look on these men, on profane civil wretches, that pride themselves
in a little morality (and have scarce that perhaps,) and neglect grace, and
the mystery of Christ, such a man deserves pity: there is but a step between
him and Hell, if he be out of Christ, and live and die so, and at the Day of
Christ he will account him so.

O, says St. Paul, Philip. 3. I account all dung and dross in comparison of
Christ, not having my own righteousness, but to be found in him, having the
righteousness of God in Christ. O happy man indeath, and at the day of
judgment that is found in Christ, and not in himself, not in his own
righteousness; though that there must be, not to give us title to heaven. The
best thing is to be found in Christ, to have his righteousness, and obedience,
that is so excellent that Saint Paul accounted all dung and dross in
comparison of that, to be found in that. Get into Christ by all means; for in
him all the promises are Yea, and Amen, not out of him.

If so be all the promises be Yea, and Amen in Christ, then here again see the
stabilitie of a Christians estate, that has promises to uphold him, compare
Use. The stability of the estate of a Christian.
it with a man that has present things only, with an Esau that has the
things of this life. The men of this world, as the Psalmist calls them, they
have present things, they have performance; he gives them their portion here,
as he says to Dives, Thou had thy good; that which thou caredst for, thou
had it here: and Lazarus had Pain, and misery, and poverty here; now the
case is altered, he is advanced, and thou art tormented.

A Christian as a Christian he has a great many promises, some of them are
performed: for God is delivering him, and comforting him, and protecting him,
and speaking peace to his conscience: but the greatest part are yet to be
performed, the perfection of Grace, and Glory to come; he is a Child of the
promise, a son of the promise, here is his estate. Another man has present
payment, and that is all he cares for: he has something, and he swells in the
conceit of that, that he is some body; What is the difference? what has the
one but a great deal of nothing? what says Solomon that had tried all the
world? All is vanity and vexation of spirit: all is uncertain, and we are
uncertain in the use of them, if we have no better life then the life of
nature: But the promises they are yea, they are certain, they contain undoubted
certain good things, that will stick by us when all else will leave us.

A Christian, take him, and strip him in your thoughts from all the good things
in the world, he is a happier man then the greatest Monarch in the world out of
Christ, why? He has nothing but present things, with a great deal of addition
of misery: and his greatness makes him more sensible of his misery, it makes
him more tender and apprehensive then other men. The other he wants many
comforts of this life, he wants the performance: he is rich in bills and bonds,
God is bound to him, he has promised he will not forsake him; but he will be
his God in life, to death, and for everlasting: he has title to all the
promises: Godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4. Happy man, he has so much performance for the present, as is
useful for his safe conduct to bring him to heaven, he shall have daily bread:
he that will give him a Kingdom, will not deny him bread: he that will give him
a country, will give him safe conduct. And besides that he has here by
performance, he has rich and precious promises, and they are all Yea and Amen,
they are certain.

His life is uncertain, his estate in the world is changeable here, his life is
as a vapor: and the comforts of life, are less then life: when life it self
(the foundation of these comforts) is but a vapor, so uncertain, what are all
the comforts of life? yet a Christian has comfort here, the promises are
invested into him, and lodged in his heart, and made his own by faith.

Faith has a wondrous peculiarizing virtue, it makes a man own that which is
generally propounded in the Gospel. Now faith making the promises his own, and
they are certain, a Christian take him at all uncertainties, he has somewhat
to build on, that is Yea, and Amen, that is undoubtedly constant and certain,
that will stick by him when all things fail him.

I speak this to commend the estate of a believing, repentant Christian, to
make you in love with it. In all the changes and varieties in this world a
Christian has somewhat to take to; And likewise in all the dangers of this
life he has a rock to go to, a hiding place; God has chambers of Providence,
as it is, Isay 26. he bids the Church come into thy Chambers; God has a hiding
place, and secret rooms to hide children in, when it is good for them, in the
time of Pestilence and War, in the time of public disturbance when there is a
confusion of all things, Come into thy Chambers; God is a resting place, and a
hiding place, he is styled so every where in the Psalms, Psalm 18. My Rock,
and my shield: as if David had said, I have many troubles in the world, but in
God is my defense: for he is my Rock, my Shield, and all: whatsoever is
defensive, I have it in him.

What a comfort is this in all dangers? a Christian knows either he shall be
safe here or in heaven: and therefore he does rest: He dewells in the Comfort
in dangers.
secret of the Almighty, Psalm 91. that is, in the love, and the protection of
God Almighty: and as Moses says, Psalm 90. Thou art our habitation from
everlasting to everlasting: that is, God is a dwelling place for him that
builds on his promise: for God and his Word are all one. Thou art our dwelling
place, etc. He saw they dropped away in the wilderness by the wrath of God, as
we do now by the 1625.
Pestilence, and Moses made that Psalm, he took occasion to meditate of the
frailty of man's life. We are as grass, as a tail that is told; but what is our
estate in God, in the promises? Thou art our habitation from everlasting to
everlasting. We dwell not long in the world, sickness may come and sweep us
away, but thou art our habitation: we dwell in God when we are dead, when we
are out of the world; we dwell in God in Christ for ever. Our estate in Christ
is an everlasting estate. Therefore in Psalm. 112. the Psalmist says of the
righteous man there, That he is not troubled for ill news. He is not
senseless, he is very sensible: but yet notwithstanding he is not shaken from
his rest, from his rock and stay for no ill news, or tidings, why? The
Psalmist gives the reason, his heart is fixed: upon what foundation? upon the
promises, and providence of God: God has promised to provide for him, he is
his Father: and therefore he is not afraid of ill tidings.

What a blessed estate then is it to be in Christ, and to have promises in
Christ to be protected and preserved here so as is for our good: and to have
such a state in God for him to be our habitation, and hiding place from
everlasting to everlasting? If our hearts be fixed here, let us hear of ill
tidings, of war, of this sickness, and contagion, let it be what it will, if
our hearts be fixed, blessed men are we. But if we have nothing to take to when
trouble comes, we are (as I said before) as a man in a storm without a hiding
place. Now every Word of God (says the Ps^lmist) is a tried Word, as silver
tried in the fire. The promises are tried promises that we may rest on them,
and as we are Christians what are we but men of promise? the best is behind,
and what is our comfort in this world? God lets down his love to us in gracious
promises; and he gives us a taste of the performance: as Children have somewhat
of their inheritance in their nonage to keep them; so somewhat of heaven to
comfort our souls we have, but the main is to come, and the performance is
left till then: therefore we cannot too much consider of this comfortable
point. Consider how many promises we have in the Word: the certainty of them,
that they are Yea, and Amen: and in whom they are founded, in him that is Amen
himself; for Christ is Amen, the true, and faithful witness, Revel. 1. these
are comfortable considerations.

Are the promises of God in Christ Yea, and Amen? Let us divide men who may
make any use of them; all men they are either such as are in Christ, or such as
are not in Christ.

All the promises being made in Christ, what comfort or what Quest.
good can those that are not yet in Christ have by the promises?

I answer, till they be in Christ, none at all: for a man out of Christ is
Answ. Till a man be in Christ he has no good by the promises.
out of the favor of God; God cannot look on such a man but as the object of
his wrath, and as fuel for his vengeance: and therefore there is no hope for
such a man till he be in Christ. All other things in the world cannot comfort
such a man: for (alas!) his being in the world, his being rich, his being in
favor with such or such, what are they? fading beings, that fail, and himself
with them, he stands on the Ice; they slip and he slips with them. What are all
beings in death, ifa man have not a more stable being in Jesus Christ?

What comfort is there then for such a man by the promises in Jesus Quest.
Christ?

This, that while there is life, there is hope to get into Christ, and so to
get interest in the promises: for the promises are free, the word is Epangelia,
Answ. Hope of wicked men while they live.
free promise, it is not a promise on this or that condition: but a free
promise, out of mere love, a mercy. Then though thou be yet in the state of
corruption in Old Adam, yet the promise is free.

But I have no worthiness in me, thou will say: I have no faith, no grace in
me at all. Object.


But remember the promise is free, the condition is only if thou will receive
Christ, which is not properly a condition of worth in thee: it is not Answ.
propounded by way of condition of any worth, but thou must come with an empty
hand, with a receiving hand: as a man must let fall what he has, before he can
hold, and take any thing. A man must let go other things, he must let go his
hold of the creature; he must not be so proud of the creature, and so confident
in it as he was; he must see the emptiness of the creature, and of all things
in the world: thou must see that if thou be not in Christ, thou art a wretched,
damned creature. The hand of thy soul must be empty, and then a sight of thy
unworthiness is all that is required before thou come to Christ, and the
promises, a sight of thy unworthiness and a coming to graspe with Christ and
the promises; for what is faith but a beggars hand, empty of all things,
coming to receive a benefit? They are most unworthy that find themselves most
unworthy.

But you will say, the promise is made to the poor in spirit, and to those that
hunger and thirst. Object.


It is true, but it is by way of preventing an objection of these men that
Answ. How the promise is made to the poor in spirit.
are cast down in the sight of their unworthiness. As if Christ had said, You
think these men the unworthiest men in the world, that are poor, and hungry,
and thirsty, you think you are destitute and have nothing; but you are blessed,
you have interest in Christ, and in the promises, they are for you. Let no man
therefore be discouraged, the promises are free; therefore be not rebellious,
stand not out against Gods command; God lays a command upon thee, though thou
be not in Christ, and have no right to the promises, he lays a command on thee
to believe.

Thou will ask, what ground, or title, or right have thou to believe, to Quest.
What right a man out of Christ has to claim the premises.
claim Christ and the promises?

This right thou have, thou have the offer of Gods love in Christ. And thou
have not only Gods offer, but his command: God commands thee to do it, as St.
John says, he has commanded us to believe in his Son Christ, as well as not
to commit adultery, or murder: and thou art guilty Answ.
if thou break this command, as if thou break the other of murder or adultery.
And men that live under the hearing of the Gospel, they shall be damned more
at the day of judgment for disobeying this command, for not receiving of
Christ, then for the other; for the breach of all other commands may be
forgiven if this were obeyed. Therefore there is an offer of Christ with a
command to receive him, and a promise if thou receive him all shall be well,
all thy sins shall be forgiven: is not here encouragement enough?

And then there is an invitation, Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy-laden. And put case thou have nothing, yet notwithstanding come and buy
without silver, says the Prophet. If thou say thou have nothing, yet all is
free here, Come whosoever will, and drink of the water of life.

And he threatens damnation if thou will not, the wrath of God hangs on thee if
thou do not come in.

I but I am a sinner.

But where sin has abounded, Grace shall more abound. So if a man stand out of
Christ, and come not in to him; there are many encouragements for him to come,
and terrible denunciations of wrath if he come not, the wrath of God hangs over
his head; for if he be not in Christ, he sinks into hell when this short life
is ended.

So there is this to encourage a man, there is Gods command, and his sweet
invitation, Come unto me. And add to that his beseeching, We are Ambassadors
in Christ's Name, to beseech you to be reconciled to God, to come to Christ, to
come out of the state of nature, and out of the curse of God that you are
under, to come out of the uncertain condition that the world affords: we
beseech you to be reconciled to God, to cast away your weapons whereby you are
enemies to God: he seeks to you for your love. And if you have nothing, come
and buy without money, have you a will to come? If you be besotted, and will
continue in your estate, then be damned, and rot in your estate: but if you
will, come and drink of the waters of life freely.

Let none be discouraged, Christ and the promises are open to all. Therefore
how will Gods vengeance be justified at the day of judgment, when these courses
have been taken, and yet men will not come in? As Christ said to the Jews, You
will not believe in me, that you might have life. Men will not, men are in love
with the profits and pleasures, and fading things, they will not embrace the
promises that are Yea and Amen. It is nothing but wilful rebellion that keeps
men off, that rather then they will leave their sins, and come under the
government of Christ, they will reject Wilful rebellion keeps men from Christ.
the offers of merey: if they cannot have Christ with their sins, away mercy.
If they can have him to lead them to hell, to swear, and cozen, etc. then
welcome Christ; if he will come on those terms he is welcome, but rather then
they will have him upon his own terms, they reject him.

So there is great reason for God to justify the damnation of wretched
hard-hearted persons, that rather then they will alter their course, they will
reject mercy, and Christ, and all. If they may have half Christ they will: they
will have him with mercy to forgive them, but they will not have whole Christ
as a King to govern them. So there is ground for those that are not yet in the
state of grace to come to Christ: if they will receive him upon his own terms,
to take him as a King as well as a Priest, to take him as a King to rule them,
as well as a Priest to reconcile them to his Father. Nay, God (as I said) in
the Ministry entreats them to receive Christ, to cast away the weapons of
their rebellion, to come under his government, and all shall be well with them.

But for them that are in Christ, that have embraced, and clasped him Comfort
from the promises to them that are in Christ.
in some comfortable measure, what comfort is it for them that all the promises
in Christ are Yea, and Amen?

I answer, when we are once in Christ, and believe in Christ, all the Scripture
speaks comfort to us; if we come in, and receive him as he is offered upon his
terms, to be our Governor, our King, our Priest, and Prophet; then all the
promises are Yea, and Amen to us.

As for instance, forgiveness of sins: if we receive Christ, God will forgive
us our sins, and be reconciled to us for Jesus Christ's sake; We have an Of
forgiveness.
advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for our sins. The blood
of Christ shall cleanse us from all sins. These promises shall be Yea, and Amen
to thee: if thy sins trouble thee, they shall be done away. How many promises
to this purpose have we of the forgiveness of sins.

Again, if so be thou find want of Grace all the promises in Christ are In want
of Grace.
Yea and Amen: he has promised his holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.
There is a promise shall be Yea, and Amen, if thou beg it. He has promised the
fundamental graces: He will put his fear in our hearts, that we shall never
depart from him. He will teach us to love one another, you are taught of God to
love one another. He has promised private blessings in this kind, to
circumcise, and cut off the foreskin of our hearts: If a naughty, and stony
heart vex thee, he will take away that, and give thee an heart of flesh, a
tender heart. So these promises in Christ shall be Yea, and Amen, if we apply,
and believe them, to take away our corruption, and subdue that; and to give,
and plant Graces, he has promised to do this: therefore make use of them, not
only of the promises of pardon and forgiveness of sins, but of grace necessary.

Art thou sensible of thy imperfections, that thou can not go about the
duties of Religion, and of thy particular calling? what says Moses? In
imperfections.
Who gives a mouth? is it no tGod that gives a mouth? And, Be not afraid (says
Christ) you shall have speech, and a spirit given you that all shall not be
able to withstand. Be not afraid, God that calls us he will enable us.

You have a promise of sufficiency of gifts: If any man lack wisdom, let him
ask it of God. If any man lack wisdom, to manage his affairs, to bear crosses
and afflictions, let him ask it of God: a rich promise in that kind.

And so, art thou doubtful for the time to come what shall befall thee? God in
Christ Jesus has made a Promise, That where he has begun, he will make an
end, Philip. 1. 6. He that has begun a good work will finish it to the day of
the Lord. Christ is Alpha, and Omega too; and What shall separate us from the
Love of God in Christ? Neither things present, nor things to come, nor any
thing else: why? because it is the love of God in Christ. Gods love is founded
in Christ, and he will love thee eternally: There is a ground of perseverance.
Therefore be sure to take in trust the time to come, as well as the present; he
will be thy God for the time to come, as well as for the present: he will be
thy God to death. Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and to morrow, and the
same for ever. He was, and is, and is to come. He was good to thee before he
called thee; he is good to thee now in the state of Grace, and he will be for
ever. Why should thou stagger for the time to come? Take in trust all that
shall befall thee for the time to come, as well as for the present: for he is
Yea, and Amen himself, and all his Promises are Yea, and Amen. Christ is Amen,
the true witness, Thus says Amen, Rev. 1. and all his Promises are like
himself, Amen.

Oh but I may fall away, my grace is weak, I stagger often. Object. Against
falling away.


But are the Promises founded upon thee? No, the Promises are founded in
Christ. Christ receives Grace for thee, and he is a King for ever, and a Priest
for ever to make intercession for thee, and he is faithful. He is beloved for
ever, and as long as he is beloved, thou shall be beloved, because thou art in
him. God is in Christ, and thou art in Christ, how can thou miscarry? God is
in Christ for ever, and thou art in Christ; will he lose a limb? will he lose a
member? No, the Promises in him are Yea, and Amen, and not in thee. They are in
thee Yea, and Amen, thou have the benefit of them, because they are in him Amen
first.

I, but for the troubles of this world, for afflictions, and crosses, what
promises have we to build on for them? In Troubles of this world.


God in Christ is Yea, and Amen to us; and the promises are Yea, and Amen in
that kind: In all things necessary for this life, Heb. 13. Let yourconversation
be without covetousness: for he has promised, he will not fail thee, nor for
sake thee. It is taken along from Joshuah's time: it was a promise made to
Joshuah, and is enlarged to all Christians, He has promised, he will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee: Therefore Let your conversation be without
covetousness. Insinuating the reason why men are covetous, because they do not
trust that promise, I will not fail thee, nor for sake thee.

For if men in their calling as they should do, would trust in God, without
putting forth their hands to ill means, their conversation would be without
shifting, and covetousness. Therefore covetous men are faithless men, they
believe not the Promise, that God will not fail them, nor forsake them; for
then they would not live by their wits, and by their shifts, but by faith in
this very promise which is Yea, and Amen to all that believe it.

God is a Sun and shield, Psalm. 84. and no good thing shall be wanting to those
that lead a godly life. Would you have more? he is a Sun for all good; he is a
Shield to keep from all ill. I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward,
says God to Abraham: I am thy buckler, to keep thee from all ill; and thy
exceeding great reward, to bestow all good: having these promises, why should
we stagger; they are Yea, and Amen in Christ: God is All-sufficient in Christ.

For the issue in our labors, Oh, what will become of it? we take pains For
issue of our labors.
to no purpose, we rise early, and go to bed late, what will become of all in
the issue? What says Saint Paul? 1 Cor. 15. Be constant, always abounding in
the work of the Lord: be ye abundant in the work of the Lord, knowing that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord: therefore abound you in the work of the
Lord: let the issue go to God, you have a rich promise, Knowing this, that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. Therefore you know, when Peter had fished
all night, and had caught nothing; when Christ bids him cast the net into the
Sea: says he, We have fished all night, and catched nothing, to what purpose
should I cast it? yet in thy Word, in thy command I will cast it; he obeyed,
and he drew so many, that the net brake again with the fish. So, I say, it is
thy command, Lord, that I should go on in the duties of my calling, that I
should do that that belongs to me; and in well doing, to commit my self to thee
as to a faithful Creator, and a gracious Redeemer, and to cast my self on thy
Promises, do what thou will: you shall see then as the Apostle graciously
speaks, Your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Cast your care on him:
for he cares for you. In weak performances.


I but when we have done, there are so many imperfections cleave to that we do,
that they discourage us. Why look, the Promise is Yea, and Amen for acceptance,
a cup of cold water is accepted: offer that thou do in the mediation of
Christ: God will pardon that which is faulty, and accept that which is good. So
we have Promises of acceptance in Christ, God will pardon, and spare us as a
Father spares his child. Does not a father accept the endeavor of his poor
child, and pardon his weakness when he cannot do as he would? God looks on us
as a Father on his children. Therefore let us not fear this, we have a promise
of acceptance of what we do, though it be weak, and maimed, and lame obedience.
If we cannot do as much as others, yet bring two Turtles. They that could not
bring an Ox, a great sacrifice; a less was accepted, two Pigeons: if thou
can not do as much as others, a little sacrifice shall be accepted.

Oh that we had faith, we might run through all the passages of our life,
justification, sanctification, perseverance for the time to come; the duties of
our calling, the issue of our labors, whatever you can imagine. There is no
passage of our life, but our souls would be supported, if we could think that
these promises are Yea, and Amen in Jesus Christ. There is no estate that we
are in, but there are Promises made to it: we want no good, but we have a
promise of supply: we are under no ill, but we have a promise, either for the
removal of it, or for the sanctifying of it, which is better.

We may enlarge it likewise to posterity: If the Promises in Christ be Promise
to posteritys
Yea, and Amen, that is, true to us, and to them that succeed us: for as I
said, Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. He was yesterday to
our ancestors; to day to our selves; to morrow, to our posterity. Therefore
says Peter to the believing Jews, Act. 2. The Promise is made to you, and to
your children; your children are in the Covenant, and God is the God of thee
and of thy seed: For the Promises in Christ are Yea, and Amen: they are
constant to us, and to our children, to the end of the world.

It is a comfort to parents that can leave their children no inheritance,
Comfort to Parents.
they leave them God in Covenant, and he is a good portion: I will be thy God:
for the grand promise is the promise of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. God
has promised to be a Father, and the Father gives his Son, and the Father and
Son give the Holy Ghost. Well then, God is the God of us, and of our children;
he is the Father of us, and of our children: Christ is the Christ of us and
them; the Holy Ghost is the Spirit that sanctifies us and them. Is not this a
comfort to those that can leave their children nothing else, that they leave
them God in Covenant?

And this is a comfort for children if they have good Parents, that they
Comfort to Children.
may say when they pray, O God of my father Abraham. And as David, Psalm. 116. I
am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, I am thy servant my self, and the
son of one that was thy servant. Is not this a comfort to a Christian to say, I
am thy servant, and the son of thy servant, therefore there is a double bond
why thou should respect me? I cast my self on thee, and I am the son of a
believing father, of a believing mother. Oh it is a blessed thing to be in
Covenant with God, that those that can leave their children little else, can
leave them a place in the Covenant by their own goodness, and faith.

Wicked Parents are cruel, they damn their own souls, and they are Wicked
Pare. cruel to post rity.
cruel to posterity. Jeroboam hurt his posterity more then all the world
besides, for his sin God cursed his posterity, They walked in the ways of
Jeroboam. God many times will not punish men themselves, but their posterity.
Wicked Kings, God spares them themselves sometimes, but he punishes their
posterity. Jeroboam was spared for his own life, but his posterity was
punished: when wicked men dye, others applaud their wisdom; they dye thus and
thus, etc. and their posterity applaud their wisdom: God therefore curses
their posterity, walking in their ways. Jeroboam's children I say, had cause
to curse their father; they had a prejudice in his example: they thought him a
very wise man, that by setting up the Calves he could make such a rent, but it
turned to their destruction. I say, parents are cruel to posterity: for God
revengeth their sins on their posterity. Let this be a strong motive to men to
believe in Christ, that they may leave a good posterity, a posterity in
Covenant with God.

Men are very Atheists in this point: for they are more careful a great deal to
leave them rich, to leave them great, then to leave them good; and so they
leave them a little goods perhaps, but they leave the curse and vengeance of
God with it. I beseech you therefore enlarge this comfort, that the Promises of
God concerning all good things are made in Christ, they are Yea, and Amen to
our selves, and to all ours, to our posterity.

Thus I have labored to lay open a little to you the Promises, you may enlarge
them your selves: Therefore take this course,

First, consider your present estate, if you would make use of this portion, it
is our portion, our best inheritance are the Promises, and indeed they are a
good child's portion; though the world take all from us, though God strip us of
all, if he leave us his Promises we are rich men. Therefore the Psalmist calls
them his portion, and his inheritance; and indeed so they are: because they are
so many bonds whereby God is bound to us; they are so many obligations.

And if a wretched exacting man think himself as rich as he has bonds, though
he have not a penny in his purse: (He that has a thousand pound in bonds,
thinks himself richer then he that has an hundred pounds in money, and he
thinks he has reason to be so, because he has good security.) Certainly, a
Christian that has rich faith in the rich promises, he is a rich man, because
he has many bonds, and when he pleases he can sue his bonds, and God is well
pleased with it. Therefore indeed there is little difference between a
Christian in poverty, and a rich Christian; only the one has more for the
present, but God is the riches of the other. As for a worldling, he has but a
Cistern when he has most, the other has the spring, he has God in Covenant,
and Gods promises.

Let us therefore consider every day the exigents we are in, whether in How to
make use of the Promises.
want of grace, or want of assistance, and necessaries, or want of comfort; and
according to that let us consider what we are to do, are we at our wits end
now? is there no hope for this in Israel? Yes, God has left us rich and
precious promises, let us look to them. In the next place then, from our To
suit the promises to our wants.
wants look to the Promises, and proportion the promises to our wants, rank
the promises, it were a good work. Oh, that we should have so many promises,
and yet have them to seek when the Devil besieges us: he lays siege to shake
our consciences, and we are to seek in the time of temptation. Let us remember
the promises answerable to our necessities.

If we be troubled with sin, call to mind the promise of forgiveness. If we be
troubled with want, call to mind the promise of supply. If we be troubled with
fear for the time to come, call to mind the Covenant of grace, the marriage for
everlasting; God whom he loves, he loves to the end. God loves us in Christ, he
loves Christ for ever, therefore he will love us for ever. So, as I said
before, suit the promises to our present estate.

And from the promises have a higher rise yet, go to him in whom they Look to
Christ in whom they are made.
are made: they are rich promises indeed, good promises; but how shall I know
they shall be performed? in whom are they made? In whom! God loves thee in
Christ. What is he? God, and man: he is God, and therefore able to perform
them: he is man, and therefore he loves thee as his own flesh, and therefore he
will perform them. He is the Son of Gods love, God for his sake as Mediator
will perform them: heaven and earth shall conspire for thy good, rather then
thou shall miss of the performance of the least promise. Therefore from thy
wants go to the promises, and from the promises go to Christ, and consider him,
he is anointed of God for thee: he is anointed that he might be thy Christ, and
thy Jesus, that he might be thy Savior, Immanuel, God with us, that he might
reconcile God and us, that in office he might be so, that he might bring God
and us together, Consider him.

And then go to God, and consider what relation in Jesus Christ God has Look
to God in Christ.
put upon him. In Christ God is a Father, and what can a Father deny to his
adopted son in Christ, whom he looks on in his natural Son Christ?

Yea, and to settle our minds the more, let us consider the relations that God
and Christ have put upon them, and the relations we stand in; and the many
promises we have in Christ, who is anointed, and sealed by God the Father to be
our Savior, and to bestow good upon us. God is become God our Father.
our Father; what a world of promises is in that word Father? what will a
father deny to his son? What if God had not left particular promises in
Scripture, if he had left but the relation of a Father, it had been promise
enough, what can a father deny his child?

And then Christ, what relation has he taken on him? he is our Husband: God
our Husband.
what a world of promises is there in that? what can a loving husband deny his
spouse, that he has given himself for?

He has taken upon him to be our head, what want of influence can Christ our
Head.
there be from such a head, that has taken all upon him for the body? the head
sees, and hears, and does all for the body; so Christ hears, and sees, and
does all for us. What a world of promises is in this relation of a head, if
there were no particular promise?

Again, Christ styles himself sweetly our brother: what a world of promises
Christ our brother.
are in these relations? God the Father is ours, Christ is ours: here is the
grand Promise, I will be your God, and will give you my Son.

And then in the third place, he has promised his Spirit; he will give The
Spirit ours.
his Spirit to them that beg him: what a world of Promises is in that promise
of the Spirit? It is a comforting Spirit, a sanctifying Spirit, a quickening
Spirit, a strengthening Spirit, all is in the Spirit. As our soul does all that
the body does: so it is by virtue of the Spirit, all the grace, and all the
comfort we have. God has promised himself, and Christ, and the Spirit, the
whole Trinity. There is the grand Promise, I will be your God, Christ shall be
your Christ, and I will give you my Spirit. If we had not other promises, what
a world of comfort have we in these?

Now in what relation stand we to these? We are children, we are heirs, What
to do when we remember not particular Promises.
we are Temples of the Holy Ghost, etc. put case our memories do not serve to
call to mind particular promises, in the time of trouble. Consider in Christ
how God loves thee, he is thy God in Christ: how Christ loves thee, he has
taken thy nature on him to be thy husband; he makes love to thee, and desires
thee to be reconciled. And the Spirit is given thee by Christ, he has promised
to give him if thou ask him, the holy Spirit is the Spirit of Promise. Think
therefore of the general, of the Covenant of grace; and these relations that
have the force of promises; for sometimes particular promises may not come to
our mind perhaps; and these will stablish a man against the gates of hell, and
against all particular temptations.

This course we ought to take then to feed our thoughts with the promises: the
promises are the food of faith: let not our faith languish and famish for want,
for want of meditations of God, and Christ, what relations they have put upon
them; and for want of meditating on particular promises in all kinds. How well
thriving might our faith be, if we would often think of these things?

And to make us the more to think of these things, consider, that all other
things, alas, what are they, when we have not a promise of them in Christ? They
are all vain, fading things, they will all come to nothing. That which we have
by promise, grace, and comfort, and glory, they are ours for ever. God is ours
for ever, Christ is ours for ever, the Spirit is ours for ever, the relations
we are in are for ever; all other things are nothing, they will come to nothing
ere long. This course we ought to take then, that we may have comfort by the
Promises.

Again, in the next place, if we look to the kinds of the promises, whether
Rules touching the Promises.
to the promises for this life, or the promises of Grace.

If they be promises of this life, take heed we abuse not our selves in them.
1. Not to abuse Promises of this life.
There have been gross miscarriages even from the beginning of the world, and
will be to the end of the world in the false application of outward promises.
We see the Jews cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Loed, as if
God had tied himself to that by a perpetual promise: Trust not to lying words,
says the Prophet, you think you are Gods people, and that he will always keep
you out of captivity, challenge not temporal promises without reservation, and
subjection to Gods will, as he shall see goood. Babylon says, I sit as a
Queen, and I shall for ever.

So mystical Babylon in the Revelation says, I sit as a Queen, till her
Judgment and destruction come in one day; because she trusted to her present
temporal estate. Let no man promise himself that that God does not promise in
his Word, immunity from the cross: for whatsoever Promise of protection, and
provision we have, all is with the exception of the Cross: remember therefore
to construc the Promises aright.

Then again, another rule about the Promises is, That it is usual with 2. Gods
Promises wondrously performed.
God to perform them in a wonderful manner, that men know not how: he does
perform them notwithstanding: (take that for a rule) How is that? As Luther was
wont to say, Gods carriage is by contrary means; he performs them wonderfully.

He promised Abraham a child, but his body was dead in a manner first, and
Sarah's womb. He promised Joseph to raise him up so high; but alas, the iron
entered into his soul first. He promised that Christ should come, but all was
desperate first, The Scepter was departed from Judah. So he has promised, that
we shall rise from the dead, but we must rot in our graves first. He has
promised forgiveness of sins, that he will be merciful to us, but he will
waken our consciences to see our desperate estate, that we are forlorn
creatures first, and unworthy of any respect from him. He has promised us
happiness, we that are Christians are the happiest creatures in the world, yet
in the sense and eye of the world for the present we are the most forlorn
creatures that are: yet he performs his promise with comfort here, and at last
will fully manifest his love to us. So at the last his Promises shall be
wonderfully performed.

God does not perform his Promises according to humane policy; he will not do
thus, because we look he should do thus and thus: he will cross our
expectation, and yet perform his promise. Saint Paul looked to come to Rome,
but he thought not of coming to Caesar by whipping, and peril, and ship wrack.
Moses knew he should come to see Canaan, did he think to have such a conflict
in the Wilderness? alas, he thought not of it. God does wondrous strangely
perform his Promises, by contraries; he crosses our imaginations and conceits
directly, and yet he is true of his promise.

Another branch of this is, That though Gods Promises be Yea, and Amen in his
time, yet he usually defers his promises for a time, and why? Among 3. God
deferreth his performance.
many other reasons, To mortify self-confidence, to fit us for his blessings:
for except he deferred them, we should not be fit for them: he defers them,
that we may be fitted for them long before they come; That we might mortify
self-confidence, to see that he immediately and graciously performs his
promise. And in the mean time to exercise faith, and repentance, and desire,
and prayer, therefore he defers them; but yet they are Amen at last, though he
defer.

Gods time is better then ours, he knows better then we: the Physician knows
his time better then the Patient. Hereupon comes a duty consequently To wait
Gods time.
upon this dispensation of God: if he perform his promises wondrously, and
unexpectedly, and perform them in delay; let thy duty be answerable to his
dealing, wait, wait upon God, tie him not to such and such courses: he can
transcend, and go beyond thy imagination, and do more then thou art able to
conceive, as the Apostle says: therefore wait his good time, H^ that shall
come will come: Stay Gods leisure, prevent him not, run not before him.

And as he does things by contraries: so when thou art in contraries look
Believe contraries in contraries.
for contraries: when thou art in fin, and feel it on thy conscience,
believe that he is made righteousness to thee; he has promised it, it is Yea,
and Amen in Christ. When thou shall be turned to dust in the grave, believe
that he will raise thy body: this promise is Yea, and Amen, and as a pledge of
it Christ is gone to heaven: when thou art miserable, remember the Promise,
thou shall be glorious with Christ as he is glorious: All his Promises are Yea,
and Amen: in contraries believe contraries: because in contraries he performs
contraries: and say as Job does, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. I
know thou can not deny thy self, and thy Promises are Yea, and Amen.

In the worst estate that befalls us, let us learn to wrestle with God in the
Promises, and implead his Promises. Why, Lord, thou have promised forgiveness
of sins to them that ask it: thou have promised grace, and mercy, and favor;
remember thy promise, thou can not deny thy self, thou can not deny thy
gracious promise, thy Word is as thy self, thou art Amen, and thy Word is Yea,
and Amen, only give me grace to wait thy good leisure: yet I will not let thee
depart without a blessing, I will hold thee till I have received a gracious
answer, as Jacob wrastled with him till he had the blessing. Let us labor to
answer the promise with our faith, and labor to bring our souls to be like
his Promises; they are Yea, and Amen, though they be not presently performed:
let us constantly believe a constant Promise, let us cleave to God, let us have
a Amen for Gods Amen. Are the Promises Amen? Amen let the soul say; Lord, So be
it, so it shall be, I will To have Amen for Gods Amen.
seal thy Amen in thy promise, with my Amen in my faith: so let us have an Amen
for Christ's Amen. They are all, and will be all Amen in Christ in fit time: all
the gracious Promises will be Yea, and Amen, let our souls echo, and say,
Amen. For our faith must answer the Promises: faith, and the Promises be
correlatives: for the promise is not except it be applied: Let faith answer the
promise; let us labor to be established in the Promises in Gods Word.

Shall we have certain Promises, and shall we waver and stagger? Therefore
Complaint of Unbelief.
let us complain, Lord, thy Promises are sure and certain as thou have said,
what is the reason I cannot build on them? Oh my unfaithful heart! Let us
condemn our unbelieving, our lying hearts, that call the truth of God into
question, and make that which is yea, and amen, to be yea, and nay. We make
truth a lie, and do rather believe our own lying hearts, then Gods immutable,
and unchangeable Promises. Therefore let us see the fullness of our hearts, and
complain of them to God, and desire him to cure it, and redress it, and he
will do it.

This is to give glory to God indeed; we cannot honor God more then to believe
his Promises, and build on him. This will breed love, when we Faith in the
Promises honors God.
feel the comfort of the Promises. Foolish men think to honor God by
complements, by dead performances: filly men consider that the principal honor
in the world to God; is to seal his truth, that thou should not make him a
liar. Has he promised all things in the world? get faith, that will honor
him, and he will honor thy faith.

What makes God honor faith so much? He that believes he will Why God honors
faith so much.
bring him to heaven. Faith honors him; it gives him the glory of his truth;
the glory of his goodness, of his mercy, of his truth, etc. as it honors him,
he honors it.

The Believer shall come to heaven, when the idle fashionable Christian shall
vanish with his conceits, that thinks to serve God with empty vain shadows.
Honor God with the obedience of faith, man; cast thy self upon him, trust in
him, in life and death, and then thou give him the honor that he requires
at thy hands: For as the honor of his mercy is the greatest honor he will
have in this world, more then that in the Creation: so thou honor him more
in the Gospel, to cast thy self on him for forgiveness of sins, and life
everlasting, and for the guidance of thy daily course of life; thou honor
him more then by looking on the creature, or by doing him any service. He is
honored more by faith in Christ, then by any other way. Let faith go to him,
as faith honors him, so he will honor it, Let it be according to thy faith.

Let not all be lost, let us bring vessels for the precious Promises, the
vessel of a believing heart. Shall all this be lost for a vain heart that will
not lodge up these promises? shall we have a rich portion, and neglect it?
shall we have so many promises, and not improve them, and make use of them?

Therefore I beseech you, let it be our practice continually every day, To make
the Promises familiar.
of all portions of Scripture make the Promises most familiar to us: for duties
follow promises: if we believe the Promises with our heart, they are quickening
Promises, we will love God, and perform other duties. Faith works by love. If
we believe, love will come kindly off. Therefore he says here, All the
Promises are Yea, and Amen: insinuating, that all is included in the Promises.

Let us empty our hearts of confidence in any thing, and fill them with the
Promises in Christ that are Yea and Amen. Let us stablish our hearts with the
Promises, let us warm, and season, and refresh our hearts every day with these.

In these times of infection, what do we? those that are careful of themselves,
that go abroad in dangerous places, they have Preservatives; they take
something to preserve their spirits, and to strengthen them against the
contagion abroad: and it is wisdom so to do, it is folly to neglect it, and to
tempt God, not to be careful in this kind: it is very well done. But what is
this, if thou do not fence thy soul and thy spitit, and take a draught of the
Promises every day afresh? Let us take out our pardon of course every day of
the forgiveness of sins. We sin every day, let us go for our pardon; If we
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. And the blood of Jesus Christ shall purge us from
all sin. And he is in justifying us still every day, he is acquitting our
souls: and there is a pardon of course to be taken out every day. Let us renew
and refresh our hearts with the Promises of pardon and forgiveness of sins
every day. Let us strengthen our souls with renewing the Promises of grace for
that day to walk comfortably before God, that he will keep us by his Spirit
from sin, that he will be a shield, and a Sun to us, that he will give us
wisdom to carry our selves as we should, and he will give us his holy Spirit
if we beg it.

Let us every day take these Promises to be Cordials in these dangerous times;
and then come life, come death, all shall be welcome: why? because we are in
Christ, and have embraced the Promises, and Christ; and all in Christ is Yea,
and Amen: it shall go well with us. What a wondrous comfortable life would a
Christians life be, if he could yield the obedience faith answerable to the
promises? What a shame is it, that having such rich promises we should be so
loose, so changeable, that we should be cast down with crosses, and lift up
with prosperity? It is because we believe not the promises of better things,
therefore we are proud of present things, and cast down with present crosses,
and are fast and loose. Now we have good things for the present, afterward the
devil comes between us and the promises, and makes us let go our hold. Religion
stands on this, which makes me to press it the more. If this were well taken
to heart and digested, we should know what Religion means; if we know Christ,
and the promises, all other things will come off. All others are but
formalities, they will never comfort without the confideration of knowing God
in Christ, and the rich promises to us in Christ.

Likewise, if this be so, that the promises of God in Christ are Yea, and How
to make use of former examples.
Amen; This teaches us how to make use of all former examples of others, and
of all former goodness to our selves. Was God merciful to Abraham, and to
David? Our fathers trusted in thee, and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.
Therefore he reasons, If I trust in God I shall not be confounded: for the
Promises are Yea, and Amen; they are true to one as well as another: And
whatsoever was written before, was written for our comfort, Romans 15. And this is
a singular good use we may make of reading of the stories of the Scripture, and
of holy men, that the same God he lives for ever, his arm is not shortened: he
that was, is, and is to come: and therefore we should read histories with
application: Did God make sure his Promises to them? surely, he will make sure
his Promises to us. Had David forgiveness of sins upon his confession? surely
so shall we. Abraham believed, and it was acc^ed to him for righteousness, and
^o it shall to us if we believe. It is alleged for that end, Romans 4. And S.
Paul prefixeth his example to all posterity, God was merciful to me, and not
so only, but to all that believe in him, 2 Timothy 2.

This is an Use that we may make likewise of the story of our own lives, What
use to make of the story of our own lives.
as well as the story of others: for consider the former times, why, Lord, thy
Promises heretofore have been Yea, and Amen, thou have delivered me from such
and such dangers, thou have been so good, and so good to me, thou art not
changed. Let us store up experience out of the story of our own lives: God is
Yea, and Amen, and his Promises are Yea, and Amen, constant to all his
Children, and to their children: and they are alike in all ages from Generation
to Generation, as Moses says, Psalm. 90. Thou art our God from Generation to
Generation for ever.

Thus we see how to make use of the Promises: for Promises we must know, are
either directly to particular persons, or employed. A promise made to any
directly, to any in particular, is an employed promise to me in the general
equity in matter of grace, and glory, or the removal of some true misery: what
was made to Joshua, is applied to all the Church, Heb. 13. that which was
directly promised to him, is an employed promise to all that will make use of
that example.

Again, if so be that all the Promises of God be Yea, and Amen, that is,
Comfort in the false dealing of men.
certain, and constant in Christ; this should comfort us when men deal loosely
with us, and fail in their Promises, whereon we have perhaps builded too much,
when men deal falsely with us. And indeed there is nothing that makes an honest
heart wearier of this wicked world, then the consideration of the falsehood of
men in whom they trust. Oh it is a cruel thing to To deceive trust, odious.
deceive him, that unless he had trusted he had never been deceived by thee;
it is a treacherous thing, but this world is full of such treacherous dealing,
that a man can scarce trust assurances, much less words. But there are things
thou may trust, if thou have a heart concerning the best good, there are
Promises that are Tea, and Amen: there is a God that keeps Covenant, it is his
glory to do so from Generation to Generation. Here is the comfort of a
Christian, when he finds falsenesse in the world, to retire to his God, and
hide himself there.

And in the uncertainty of all things below, in all changes, as this world is
full of changes, now poor, now rich; now in favor, now out of favor: Comfort
in all changes in the world.
why what has a Christian to cast himself on? The Promises of God in Christ,
they are Yea, and Amen; they are promises that never fail. They that know thy
Name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9. what is the reason? it follows, Thou never
failest those that trust in thee. Therefore in the vicissitude and intercourse
of all earthly things under the Moon, that are like the Moon, changeable, let
us stablish our souls upon that which is unchangeable, and that will make us
unchangeable, if we build on it, For the Word of the Lord endures for ever,
Esaias 40. which is alleged by Peter, 1 Pet. 1. All flesh is grass; and as the
flower of the grass, that is, it fades as the grass, and as the flower of the
grass: all the excellency of wit, and learning, it is but as the flower of the
grass, but the Word of the Lord endures for ever. How does the Word of the
Lord endure for ever? Saint John expounds it, 1 John 2. A true Christian How
the Word of the Lord endures for ever.
endures for ever by the Word of the Lord: he that believes in the Word, he
endures for ever, because his comforts endure for ever, they are Yea, and Amen,
his grace endures for ever, Gods love endures to him for ever. Therefore by
building upon that which is certain, we make our selves certain too, when the
Word is ingraffed, it is S. James his phrase, when it is ingraffed into our
hearts, it turns our hearts to be like it self, it is eternal it self, and it
makes us eternal: He that does the will of the Lord abides for ever, says S.
John. The world passes and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of the
Lord abides for ever. And the Word of the Lord abides for ever, as it is in
another place, the one expounds the other, that is, we by believing, and doing
the Word of the Lord abide for ever.

To stir us up to rely constantly upon this Word, the promises, and the grace
of God brought to us by the promises. As I said before, Shall we To rely
constantly on the constant Promises.
have certain promises of God that never lie, and shall we not build on them?
What is there in the world to build on, if we cannot build on this? and yet the
froward heart of man will believe any thing, rather then Gods truth. The
Merchant man he commits his estate, his goods to the Sea, he has no promise
that they shall come again, it is only in the providence of God, he has made
no promise for it. The Husbandman commits his seed to the ground, though he
have nothing left of his seed; and though he sow in tears, yet he commits all
to the earth in hope of a return; and yet he has no promise for this, but Gods
ordinary providence, that may sometimes fail.

Are we in such hope when we commit our seed to the ground, and when we commit
our goods to the Sea, to the Waves, and yet have not a promise for this; but
Gods ordinary providence, which oft-times fails, having not bound himself that
it shall be always so: because God will show himself the God of nature, that he
can command nature? and shall we not trust him when we have his providence, and
his promise too? when he is bound by his Promise, when he has made himself a
debtor to us? when the free God, who is most free, has made himself a debtor
by his promise, and has sealed his promise by an oath, and by Sacraments.

Alas, God has made all things faithful to us, therefore we trust them: but we
trust not him that has made other things so, and is so faithful to us.
Therefore let us build on these Promises in Jesus Christ.

Now to direct us a little further, to train our selves up to make use of To
observe how God daily fulfills his Promises.
the Promises of God in Jesus Christ; Observe every day, how God fulfills his
promises in lesser matters. Parents train up their children by education, that
they may trust them for their inheritance. So God trains us 1. For temporals.
up to believe his providence, that he will provide for us, without cracking
our consciences by ill means: will we not believe his Promises for these
things, and will we believe him for life everlasting? no, certainly we cannot:
therefore let us exercise faith to believe the promises for provision, that he
will not fail us, not forsake us, but be with us in our callings, using lawful
means for the things of this life.

Sometimes again take another method: when faith begins to stagger 2. For
spirituals.
for the things of this life, quicken it with the grand Promises. Will God give
me life everlasting? and has he given me Christ? are his Promises in him Yea,
and Amen? will he give me the greater, and will he not give me the less?
Sometimes by the lesser, be encouraged to hope for the greater; sometimes
quicken our deadness and dullness in believing the lesser, with the undoubted
performance of the greater. Will God give me life everlasting, and will he not
give me provision in my pilgrimage till I come there? undoubtedly he will: Fear
not little flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom, says Christ.
They were distrustful for the things of this life; Do you think, says he, that
he will not give you the things of this life, that keeps a Kingdom for you?
Fear not.

Again, when we hear any promise in the Word of God, turn it into a Turn
Promises into Prayers.
prayer, put Gods bond in suit (as it were) his promises are his bonds, sue him
on his bond, he loves to be sued on his bond: and he loves that we should
wrestle with him by his promises; Why, Lord, thou have made this and this
promise, thou can not deny thy self, thou can not deny thine own truth;
thou can not cease to be God: thou can as well cease to be God, as deny thy
promise, that is thy self. So let us put the promises into suit, as David,
Psalm. 119. (if it be his) Lord, remember thy promise, wherein thou have caused
thy servant to trust: as if God had forgotten his promise, Lord, remember thy
primise, I put thee in mind of thy promise, wherein the have caused thy servant
to trust. If I be deceived thou have deceived me, thou have made these
promises, and caused me to trust in thee, and thou never failest those that
trust in thee.

What makes a man faithful? Trust to a man makes him faithful; so when God is
honored with our trusting of him, it makes him faithful. Let us therefore put
in suit his promises of provision, and protection every day in the way of our
calling; and for necessary grace and comfort, that he will not fail us in any
necessary grace to bring us to heaven, considering that he has filled our
nature with all grace in Christ.

Again, let us take this course, when we hear of rich and precious promises
Labor to know the Promises.
that are made, labor to know them. What? shall we have an inheritance, a
portion, and not labor to know it? Let us labor to know all our portion, and
to know it of those that search the Word of God, to be glad to hear any thing,
concerning the privileges, and prerogatives of a Christian, those that dig the
Mines of the Scripture, which is the office of the Ministers: let us labor to
know all our privileges.

Let not Satan rob us of one privilege. Every promise is precious, they are
rich promises, yet they are no more then God thought necessary for us; he
thought all little enough to stablish our faith, let us not lose one, we cannot
be without one: let us labor to know them.

And when we know them, work them upon our hearts by meditation, and shame our
selves upon it: say, is it true, are these promises so? is it true, Work the
Promises on our hearts.
that God has revealed these things in his Word? To whom has he made them? to
Angels, or to beasts? No, to men, to sinners, to men in the world to comfort
them; they are their provision, their inheritance, as David says, Psalm. 119.
Thy word is my inheritance, and my portion: they are sweeter then the honey,
and the honeycomb. Are they so? Do I believe this, or do I not believe it?
Yes, I do: If I do, can I believe them, and be so uncomfortable? Let us shame
our selves: do I believe the promises of life everlasting, the promises of
perseverance, the promise that God will hide me in danger, that he will be my
habitation, and my hiding place? and do I look to unlawful means? Do I live
without God in the world, as if there were no Promise? what a shame is this?
There is a weakness in my faith certainly: when a branch withers, there is a
fault in the root; so there is a defect in the radical grace, that it draws
not juice out of the promises as it should: there is a defect in my faith;
therefore I will look where the defect is, and strengthen my faith.

Thus we should shame our selves; Can I hear these Promises, and be no more
joyful, and be no more affected? Can I use indirect means, and yet believe that
God is All-sufficient to me in the Covenant? Certainly I cannot.

Therefore let us come to the trial, to some few evidences, that a man does
believe in the promises.

He that believes the promises of God in Christ to be Yea, and Amen, doubtless
he will be affected answerable to the things promised: says David, Evidences
of believing the Promises.
Thy Statutes they are the joy of my heart. The Promises will be the joy and
rejoicing of our heart. He that can hear of promises, and not be affected, 1.
They breed joy.
certainly he believes them not. When a man thinks of his inheritance, and of
his evidences, that they are clear, that he shall enjoy it without suit, or
trouble, it comforts him, he cannot think of it without comfort. Cannot a man
think of a little pelf of the earth without comfort, when he knows he has
assurance to it? and shall we think of heaven, and happiness, and not rejoice?
will not these be the joy of a man's heart? certainly they will affect him. When
good things are apprehended by faith, will they not work upon the affections?
certainly they will.

Again, where the promises are believed, they will quicken us to all 2. They
quicken to obedience.
cheerful obedience: certainly, if God will assist me with strength, and
comfort if I go on in his ways, and in the end of all give me life
everlasting, this will quicken me to all obedience. Therefore those that go
deadly and dully, as if they had no encouragement here, nor promise of glory
after, they believe not the promises. For God does not set us on work as
Pharaoh set the children of Israel to make brick without straw: but when he
bids us do any thing, he promises us grace, and gives us his Spirit, and after
grace he gives glory. If men did believe this, they would go about Gods work
without dullness, and staggering: so far as we are dull, and stagger in the
work of God, so far our faith is weak in the promises of God.

Again, as they quicken in regard of comfort, so they purge in regard of
holiness: for they make men study mortification, and sanctification, 2 Cor. 3.
They purge.
6. and the beginning of the 7th. Having these promises, Let us purge our
selves from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit, perfect sanctification in the
fear of God. Having these promises: So that the promises as they have a
quickening, so they have a purging power; and that upon sound reasoning. Does
God promise that he will be my Father, and I shall be his son? and does he
prcmise me life everlasting? and does that estate require purity? and no
unclean thing shall come there? certainly these promises being apprehended by
faith, as they have a quickening power to comfort, so they purge with holiness.
We may not think to carry our filthiness to heaven: Does the swearer think to
carry his blasphemies thither? filthy persons; and liars are banished thence,
there is no unclean thing. He that has these promises purges himself, and
perfecteth holiness in the fear of God. He that has this hope purifieth
himself, as he is pure, 1 John 3. So these promises affect, and quicken, and
purge.

And then the promises they do settle the soul: because they be Yea, 4. They
quiet the soul.
and Amen; they make the soul quiet. If a man believe an honest man on his
word, he will be quiet; if he be not quiet he does not believe: so much faith,
so much quiet; Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. So much faith, so much peace, Philip. 4. In nothing be
careful, but let your desires be known to God in prayer, supplication, and
thanksgiving; and when you have done this, The peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. So where
there is prayer, and thanksgiving, and doing of duty; The peace of God which
passes all understanding, will keep the mind in Christ: and where there is not
quiet and peace to preserve the heart and mind, there is neglect of duty
before, not committing our selves to Gods promises to build on them.

Again, where there is a believing the promises, there is not only a staying of
the soul in general, but when all things are gone; when all things 5. A
staying of the soul when all i^ contrary.
are contrary; that is the nature of faith in the promises. Put the case, that
a Christian that is of the right stamp, have nothing in the world to take to,
only Gods Word and Promises: surely he knows they are Yea, and Amen. It is the
Word of God all-sufficient, he is Jehovah: he gives a being to his Word, and to
all things else, therefore he has the Name Jehovah: therefore thinks the soul,
Though I have nothing, yet I have him that is the substance of all things: all
other things are but shadows; God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the
substance that give all things a being, and therefore I will cast my self on
God: here now is the Triumph of faith, when there is nothing else to trust to:
nay, when all things else are contrary, when it is faith against faith: and
hope against hope; when there is such a conflict in a man, that he sees nothing
but the contrary: here faith will shut the eye of sense, and not look to
present things too much: though I see all things contrary, though I see rather
signs of anger then otherwise, yet I will hope, and believe in God; for this,
or that. Here is the wisdom of a believing Christian that believes the promises
he will shut his eyes, and not look on the waves, on the troubles, they will
carry him away, and dazzle him; but he looks to the constant love of God in
Christ, and to the constant promises of God: his nature is constant, and his
truth is as his nature: he cannot deny himself and his own Word when he has
made himself a debtor by his promise, and bound himself by his Word.

Therefore in contraries say as Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in
him. True faith when it is in strength will uphold a man when all fails: nay,
it will hold a man when all is contrary. This our Savior Christ, in whom all
the promises are Yea, and Amen, did excellently teach us by his own example:
For when all was contrary, and our blessed Savior felt the wrath of God, which
made him sweat drops of blood, and made him cry out, My God, My God, why have
thou for saken me? yet here faith wrastled with, My God, my God, still, even
under the wrath of God. He brake through the seeming wrath of God, into the
heart of God.

Faith has a piercing eye, it will strive through the clouds, though they be
never so thick; through all the clouds of temptation. Christ had so piercing a
faith, it brake through all; he saw a Fathers heart under an angry semblance.
So a Chistian triumphs by faith in oppositions to faith: when all is contrary
to faith, yet notwithstanding he can say My God still. This is an evidence of a
strong faith in the promises.

Again, an evidence of faith in the promises is faithfulness in our selves, in
6. Faithfulness in our Promises to God.
our promises to God: for surely the soul that expects any thing of God, that
he should be faithful, it studies to be faithful in the Covenant, Psalm. 25.
All the ways of God are mercy, and truth. All his dealings to his Children are
mercy, and truth, to them that keep his Covenant. For you know, the promises
have conditions annexed: and where God fulfils his promise, he gives grace to
perform the condition, to walk before him, to allow our selves in no sin: for
if we allow our selves in any sin, we perform not the Covenant on our part. Now
God will give grace to perform the Covenant where he will perform his own.
Therefore those that are unfaithful in their Covenant, and yet think God will
be faithful to them, it is presumption.

When we come to the Communion, we think we do God a great deal of service: but
we must consider we enter into Covenant with God, as well as he binds himself
to us. He gives us Christ, and all his blessings: he reaches forth Christ with
all in him, if we will receive him. I but we bind our selves to God, to lead a
new life, and to be thankful, and to show it in obedience. And so in Baptism:
we do not only receive in the Sacraments, but we yield, we bind our selves to
God. And we must be careful of what we promise to God, as well as expect that
which he promises to us: if we expect his truth, we must be faithful, and
careful of performing our Covenants to him.

Oh but how shall I do that, says the distressed soul? I have no grace. Quest.


God knows that well enough: therefore he that promises, he promises Answ.
God gives grace to perform the Covenant.
grace to perform the condition: that is one part of the Covenant, to give
grace to fulfill the Covenant. For he that says, If we believe, and repent,
etc. he will give us hearts to repent, if we ask them: he has promised to
circumcise our hearts, to give us new hearts, and to give us his holy Spirit if
we ask him. Why, Lord, thou know I have no grace in my self to fulfill the
Covenant: no, but thou must perform both parts; thou give the grace, and good
thing promised, and grace to keep the Covenant too: therefore let none be
discouraged.

Many things are required it is true; but the things are promised that God
promises the things be requires. Promises, Legacies.
are required, if in the use of means we depend on him by prayer. For the
promises are Legacies as well as promises, what is the difference between a
legacy, and a Covenant? A Covenant is with condition, with stipulation: a
Legacy is an absolute thing, when a man gives a thing freely without any
condition. So, though the promises be propounded by way of Covenant, with
stipulations to and fro in the passages of them, as a Covenant: yet in regard
of Gods gracious performance, to them that depend upon him, all the promises
are Legacies.

Therefore Gods promises, and Gods Covenant they are called a Testament,
Covenant, a Testament.
as well as Promises. They are called a Will. A Will, showing what God will
give us freely in the use of means, as well as what our duty is in the
Covenant. Therefore our estate is happy in Christ, if we depend upon God in the
use of means: He will give us all things that are necessary that he has
promised; nay, he will give grace to fulfill the Covenant, if we beg it.

If a man be careless and live in sins against the Covenant, he cannot
perform the Covenant; and let him not allege this, that he cannot: for God
will give grace to them that are careful to fulfill it. Let such a man as
neglects the performance on his part, expect no good from God while he is so,
let him expect vengeance: for all the threatenings of God are Yea, and
Threatenings of God Amen, as well as Promises.
Amen, as well as his Promises, to them that live in sins against conscience.
Those that will not expect grace to serve him for the time to come, all the
threatenings are Yea, and Amen; there is no comfort for such.

I beseech you therefore consider, it is a terrible thing to live in a State
without God, and without Christ; to have no care of the performance of that
that we have bound our selves to God by the Sacrament, and in our particular
vows: for his threatenings are effectual as well as his promises: In Zech. 1.
5. there he tells the Jews of the Prophets that had threatened many things:
The Prophets are dead (says he) that threatened your fathers: but for all that,
the threatenings lighted on them. The Prophets where are they? They were but
men, but when they were gone the threatenings lighted on your fathers. Jeremy
dyed, but the Captivity that he threatened it did not dye; they were carried
captive 70. years. So we threaten the vengeance of God on obstinate sinners,
that will not come in to the Gospel: we are not Yea, and Amen, in regard of our
being, we die; but our threanings are Yea, if they be not reversed by
repentance, the threatenings are Amen, as well as the Promises. It is an
evidence therefore we do not believe, if we have not care to make good the
Covenant on our part.

Again, another evidence of a Child of the promises, of a man that believes 7.
Opposition of flesh, and fleshly men.
the promises; it is inward opposition of the flesh, and hatred of fleshly men:
for as it is, Gal. 4. The son of the bondwoman persecuted the son of the
freewoman. A true downright Believer is a son of the freewoman, a son of
promise; and the flesh in us opposes it, like Ishmael, like Job's wife, and
like Sarah, that laughed when the promise was made; we have an Ishmael, and a
Sarah in us. I, can this Promise of life everlasting when I am rotten, and this
promise of forgiveness of sins, and that good will be good to me if I crack
not my conscience? if I take this and that course, shall these promises be
performed? here is opposition. We cannot believe the Promises without much
opposition.

So carnal men, they mock and deride the counsel of the poor, as the Psalmist
Carnal men despise those that trust in Gods Promises.
says. The children of the promise that depend upon Gods mercy in Christ, they
are persecuted by fleshly Justitiaries, and they that look to be saved by
themselves without a promise, they will not be beholding to God so much: their
proud swelling hearts rise against Christians that honor God by trusting in
his promises, and will be saved by promises.

A proud Popish person, his heart rises against a holy Christian that is a son
of the promise, he scorns him: You intend to be saved by the righteousness of
another; no, we will not be so much beholding to God, we will satisfy for our
selves: we will merit heaven our selves. God shall not be beholding to us to
trust in him, we will bring somewhat our selves, we will buy it out. Can these
men have humble hearts? Nay, can they have any other then malicious persecuting
hearts against humble, believing Christians, that honor God by trusting in his
promises?

You know Isaac was a son of the Promise, how was he born? not according to the
course of nature; Sarah's womb was dead. Christ was the Son of the promise, how
was he born? not according to the course of nature: for his mother was a
Virgin. So a Christian is a son of the Promise, he is begotten where there is
nothing in the course of nature likely, where there is breeding for sin, no
works, no righteousness, then he believes in Christ. Isaac was a notable type
of Christ, and a son of promise, he was begotten besides the course of
generation: so a Christian is not begotten as a proud Justitiary, by works; but
he shows himself therein to be a true believer, he is begotten against the
course of nature, when he sees a barren heart, and sees as little disposition
in his heart to be a Christian, as was in the Virgins womb for Christ to be
born.

How was the Promise made to the Virgin? She could not conceive how this should
be since she knew not man. It was replied again, The Holy Ghost shall
overshadow thee: her heart closed with that speech, and Christ was conceived
then. So the barren heart of a Christian if it can believe, his sins shall he
forgiven, and he shall have life everlasting, if he can honor God in
believing, that he will keep him in life, and death: let the heart close with
these Promises, and a Christian is begotten, he is a son of the promise.

As for the proud Justitiary that will have something in himself to vaunt of,
and will persecute others that are true Christians, he relies on no promise. A
Christian when he sees nothing to rely on but the promise, he closes with the
promise, and Christ is begotten in him at that very instant. To name no more
evidences; you see how we may examine our selves whether we trust in, and cast
our selves upon the Promises of God, or no: if we do, we shall find them Yea,
and Amen.

Consider it therefore, and be glad of these Promises, and when you have them,
go to God in Christ for the performance of them. Take the counsel To go to God
in Christ to perform the promises.
of that blessed man, that in these latter times brought the glorious light of
Religion to light; Luther I mean: (to whom we are beholding for the doctrine of
free grace more then any other Divine of later times,) Go to God in Christ in
the Promises. Christ is wrapped up in the Promises; the Promises are the
swaddling clothes wherein Christ is wrapped, as he says. We must not think of
God out of Christ. There is (faith he) God absolute in himself; so he is a
consuming fire: but there is God incarnate; go to God incarnate, to God making
good his promises in Christ, incarnate: How to think of Christ.
go to Christ sucking his mothers breast, lying in the manger, living humbly,
talking with a sinful woman, inviting sinners to come to him, conversing with
sinful creatures, altering, and changing their natures, that never refused any
that came to him.

Go not to God absolute, he is a consuming fire; go to Christ incarnate,
God-man: go to him abased, and there is sweet converse for thy faith: for All
the promises are made in him Yea, and Amen.

I beseech you therefore be acquainted with the mystery of Christ more and
more, we have the promises in him. And you must know besides, that the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, they have a part, a hand in Christ's abasement: for Christ
did all by his Fathers appointment, and therefore it is as much as if the
Father had been abased: for Christ was anointed to be so. Therefore think, that
God the Father allures, and invites you when Christ does it, because he is
anointed to invite you. Think, that the Father is as peaceable as Christ was,
because Christ was so by his Fathers appointment, by his anointing. See all the
three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in Christ. See God incarnate
making all the Promises before, and as the ground of all that is made good to
us. See the wondrous love of God incarnate. And then go, and see Christ raising
that flesh that he was abased in: see him ascended into heaven, and sitting in
it at the right hand of God: then think of God in Christ glorious; think of
Christ a public person, and we all in him. So as Leo says, Only Christ was
he that dyed, in whom all dyed: he was crucified, in whom all were crucified:
and he rose again, in whom all rise, he being a public person: other
particular men dyed, and themselves dyed only. Let us look upon God incarnate,
and see our selves in him, see God in Christ, see Christ a public person: for
therefore the second Person took the manhood, that he might be a public
person.

Christ took not our persons, but our nature; that our nature being knit to the
second Person, he might be a public Person: as Adam was a public man for all
mankind. Therefore think of all the Promises in Christ as God-man, that he was
the man Christ, made man for us. This is wondrous comfortable, let us solace
our selves with it.

Take away Christ, and the promises in Christ, and what is there in the All in
the world nothing without Christ.
world? nothing but Idolatry, and Superstition, staggering, and wavering, and
darkness, and blindness, and Popery, and divellishnesse. Who reigns in the
world but the Devil, and Antichrist; Heathenism, and Paganism, and all
filthiness? Take away Christ, the sound knowledge of Christ incarnate, and the
sound knowledge of the Promises, the clear settled promises in Christ; and what
is the life of man, but a horrible confusion, even a hell upon earth? Where
Christ is not known, what are the lives of men, the utmost quintessence of
them, but only projecting for an estate here in this world, and then to slip
into hell? To live a Civil life, as morality perhaps may fit a man for that,
and then to be cast into hell.

Out of Christ there is no salvation, no certain comfort, no life, no light,
nothing to be reckoned on out of Christ, and the promises in Christ. Therefore
let us love them, and build on them, and make much of the truth we have, and
get into Christ; for All the Promises in him are Yea, and Amen. God has no
commerce with us immediately, but by Christ the Mediator, through whom he
looks on us, and in whom he conveyes all good to us.

The Scripture is termed a Paradise; it is like a Paradise, wherein we have the
streams of the water of life, and the tree of life, Jesus Christ: and wherein
we have the Promises of life. And there is no Angel to keep the door, or gate,
or entrance of this Paradise; but rather we are allured to come to it to
refresh our selves. There is God himself walking, there is Christ himself the
tree of life. Therefore we should make the Scriptures wondrous familiar to us,
especially single out the Promises, make use of them: learn what it is to live
by faith in the Promises: for All the Promises in Jesus Christ, in him are Yea,
and in him Amen. To the Glory of God by us.


The end of all this, that God will engage himself by promises; that he will
stablish these promises so sure in Christ Jesus the Mediator, God, and man;
that he will make them Yea, and Amen in him, it is for his own glory: And to
the glory of God by us Ministers; for we preach these promises to the people,
and people believe them, and they believing give glory to God. Gods glory is
manifested in the Gospel, especially when it is believed in the Observe. Gods
glory manifested in the Gospel.
Promises.


What wondrous glory has God in the promises in Christ?

More a great deal then in the Creation. In the Creation man was made according
to Gods Image. Now in the Gospel we are created according More then in the
Creation.
to Jesus Christ God man. There God added light to light, comfort to comfort:
he made man good, and would have continued him good: but here is the glory of
his mercy and goodness in Christ: here he does good to sinners, he raises a
sinner to mercy; he does not add light to light, but he brings light out of
darkness. In the Gospel, mercy strives with misery, and strives with sin, and
overcomes all our ills: it is Gods will in the Gospel to do good to sinners;
mercy is added to sinful men, contrary against contrary: Gods goodness
triumphing over the misery of man.

The righteousness that Adam had, it was the righteousness of a creature, of
a man: but the obedience we have in Christ, it is the obedience of Our estate
in Christ better then Adam's.
God-man: therefore that being imputed to us, it is a more exquisite
righteousness; it brings us to God, and intitles us to heaven, it is
infinitely more then Adam's was, God manifests greater glory then in the
Creation: there is greater love, and greater mercy, and greater goodness
manifested in the Gospel, then to Adam in innocence.

Our estate in Christ is more perfect; his estate was not Yea, and Amen, for it
was yea to day, and nay to morrow, he stood but a while: but in Christ the
Promises are Yea, and Amen. He had no promise, we have; our estate by promises
in Christ is better then ever Adam's was, as we are in a better root then he.
For he was not in Christ the Mediator: we by faith are united to Christ
Mediator; and by virtue of the promise, God where he begins, he will make an
end; where he is Alpha, he will be Omega. What a glory is this to God, that he
can repair man to a better estate then ever he had at the first: as Gods
mending is ever for the better. The state of grace and glory is better then
ever the state of nature was; spiritual is better then natural. Therefore it is
much for the glory of the wisdom of God, that he can in Christ reconcile
justice, and mercy, and show more mercy then ever he did in making man out of
the dust of the earth, and all is to the glory of God. These attributes
especially are glorious in the promises in Christ.

His Justice is glorious in punishing sin in Christ: there sin is odious in
Glory of Gods Justice.
the punishing of Christ God-man: if we speak of justice, there is justice.

If of Mercy, to put it upon our surety, for God to give his Son for us; His
Mercy.
there is transcendent mercy, and transcendent justice in the punishing of our
sin, how could it be punished greater?

And then the glory of his Wisdom, to bring these together (infinite mercy,
Wisdom.
and infinite justice) in Christ.

Infinite Power, for God to become man, and without sin, to be so far abased;
a humble omnipotency, to descend so low, that God could be mortal, Power.
and then to raise himself again.

And then the glory of his Truth, that whatsoever was promised to Abraham,
Truth.
to David, to the Prophets, all was performed in Christ, all the Types: here is
glory by Christ, of Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, Truth: for all are Yea, and Amen
in Christ. Therefore he may well say, all this is To the glory of God.

Therefore consider how the glory of God shines in the face of Jesus To see
Gods Attributes in Christ.
Christ, as the Apostle says. If you would see God, see him shining in the
face of Jesus Christ: see his Mercy shining in Christ, and his Justice in the
punishing our sin in Christ: see his Truth, his Power, his Wisdom, shineing in
Christ, and shining more then in the Creation, or in any thing in the world
besides.

Can you honor God more then in believing the Gospel? Can you To honor God by
believing the Gospel.
dishonor him more, then to call his truth into question, that is Yea, and
Amen? If you believe the Gospel, you set to your seal that God is true, 1 John
3. What an honor is this, that God will be honored by you? in setting to your
seal that he is true, you give him the glory of all his attributes. In not
believing, what a dishonor do you do to God? you deny his Mercy, his Wisdom,
his Justice, his Truth, you deny all his attributes, you make God a liar: what
a horrible sin is unbelief?

Therefore fortify your faith. The Devil lays siege to our faith above all
other things, if he can shake that, he shakes all: for holy life goes when
faith goes. Who will love God, or obey God, when he knows not whether he be
his God, or no? Let faith flourish, and it will quicken life in the heart. Let
the promises grow in the heart, and the Word be graffed in the heart, and all
will flourish in a Christians life, all will come off clearly and freely:
obedience will be cheerful, and free, when we see God reconciled in Christ.
Then love will be full of devices, when I see Gods love to me, what shall I do
to show love again, to show thanks to God? where is there any that for Cods
sake I may do good unto? How shall I maintain the truth, and resist all
opposers of the truth? Can I do too much for him, that has done so much for
me? Love quickens. The Devil knows, if he can shake faith, he shakes all. Let
us fortify faith, and we glorify God more then by any thing else. He is
glorious in the Gospel, and how shall he be so by us, except we set our hearts
to believe him? Therefore let us seal Gods truth by our faith, and set to our
seals that God is true. God vouchsafes to be honored by weak sinful men
believing of him: and that faith that honors him, he will be sure to honor.
By us.


By us Ministers. How? When the Gospel is preached, God is carried in triumph,
as it were, and his banner is set up, and the Promises displayed, Glory of God
by the Ministry.
and sinners called unto him: and God is glorified by the discovery of these
things, and faith is wrought in people to whom they are discovered; and they
glorify God when they believe, they bless God that ever they heard these
tidings: so every way God is glorified.

The Ministers they open as it were the box of sweet ointment, that the savor
of it may be in the Church, and spread far. They lay open the tapestry, the
rich treasures of Gods mercies: they dig deep, and find out the treasure.
Therefore these Promises in Scripture being so made, and performed in Christ,
they tend to Gods glory, but by us, by our Ministry. God, to knit man and man
together, will convey the good he means to convey by the despised Ministry.

The enemies therefore of the Ministry of the Gospel, what are they? here is a
double prejudice against them: they are enemies of the glory of God, and of the
comfort of Gods people, for they glorify God in the sense of his mercy: when
it is unfolded to them, God gets glory, and they comfort.

What do we think then of Popish spirits, that feed the people only with dead
and dull ceremonies? but let them go. I go on to the next Verse, having dwelt
somewhat long on this.

VERSE XXI. Now he that stablisheth us with you in Christ is God, who has
anointed us, etc.
AS the riches of a Christian consists in the promises of God, which (as we
have heard) in Christ are all Yea, and Amen: so unless he be stablished and
built upon this strength, all is nothing. What if a man stand on a rock, if he
be not built on it? what if the foundation be never so strong, if he be not
stablished thereon? It is not sufficient that the Promises be stablished, but
we must be stablished upon them. The Promises of God are indeed Yea, and Amen,
(might the soul say) but what is that to me? Therefore the Apostle adds, He
that gives the Promises, will stablish us upon the promises. Now he which
stablisheth us with you in Christ, is God.


The first thing that I will observe (before we come to the particular handling
of the words) shall be only this in the general, from the connection and
knitting together of this Verse with the former, viz. That there must be a
double Amen. Observe. A double Amen.



There is an Amen in the Promises, they are in themselves true; there must be
an Amen likewise in us: we must say Amen to them, that is, we 1. In Gods
Promises.
must be stablished upon them. There must be an Echo in a Christians heart unto
God; that as God says, These and these things I promise, and they are all
Amen: so the soul by faith must Echo again, These things are 2. In our Faith.
for me, I believe them.

For (as we say in the Schools to good purpose) there is a double certainty, a
double firmness: a certainty of the Object, and a certainty of the Subject:
there is a firmness of the Promises in Jesus Christ; and there must be a
firmness in us upon those Promises. It is no matter what the certainty of the
thing be that we are to build upon, if there be not a certainty in the person,
if there be not a building on that thing: God shall lose the glory of his
truth, and we the comfort, unless we be certain, as well as the promises are
certain. It is no matter what the garment be, if it be not put on: It is no
matter (as I said before) how firm the rock be, if we plant not our selves upon
it: and therefore besides the writing of Gods Word on Tables, unless he write
it likewise in our hearts, unless our hearts be stablished on that truth that
in it self is certain, that it may be certain to us, all is to no purpose.

You see therefore the absolute necessity of the application of the soul
Necessity of application.
unto those truths which are certain and sure in themselves: there must be a
stablishing of us, as well as a stablishing of the promises. There is a
necessity of the application of the promises to our selves, that they be true
to us. Christ is a garment, we must put him on then: he is the robes that we
appear glorious before God in; but we must put him on by faith. Christ is the
food of life, he is so indeed, but then he must be digested. Meat, except it be
applied, except the stomach work nourishment out of it by application, and so
digest it to all the parts, the body has not nourishment from it.

Christ is the foundation of his Church: I but there must be application; we as
living stones must be built on him. Let the foundation be never so strong, if
the stones be not laid on the foundation, the stones cannot stand. Though
Christ be the Spouse of the Church, and be never so rich, there must be
application, and consent; we must strike up the bargain and match between
Christ and us. There must be our consent to tie our selves to him, to give up
our selves to him. So look to all the comfortable relations that our blessed
Savior has taken upon him in the book of God, they all enforce application.

The ground (I say) is this, that though there be never so much certainty in
the thing, yet if there be not a certainty in the person to found application
upon; all is to no purpose.

These two therefore must go together, and they are sweet relatives, promises
on Gods part, and faith on our part. The Promises, and Christ, are nothing
without faith. For there must be a touch to draw virtue. If faith have never so
little touch of Christ, it will draw virtue: but there must be a touch, there
must be application. Christ is nothing without faith, and faith is nothing
without Christ, and the Promises.

For what is the difference between faith, and presumption? presumption is an
empty, groundless, fruitless conceit: faith builds on the Promises Difference
between faith, and presumption.
of the Word, we can allege the Promise. It is nothing for a mad man to assume
himself to be King of another Country; why? he has no promise. He that made
account that all the ships that came to the Haven were his, it was but a
frantic part of him, and so he was accounted: So a man that thinks his estate
is good, and builds not himself upon the promise, that has no ground for it
out of Gods Word, it is but a presumptuous frantic conceit. The promises are
nothing without faith, and faith is nothing without the promises. There must be
application. This I thought good to observe first in the general. To come now
more particularly to the words themselves. He that stablisheth us with you, etc.


In the words you have first, A gracious Act of building, or stablishing.

Secondly, The Basis, the foundation of that stablishing, or building; and that
is Christ.

Thirdly, the Author of this stablishing; God.

Lastly, the persons, who are built and stablished on that foundation; with
you. He that stablisheth us with you in Christ, is God.

The first thing is the Act, Stablishing.

The point is this; first, That Stablishing, settling grace is necessary.
Observe. Stablishing grace necessary.



It is necessary that there be a stablishing, confirming grace. It is not
sufficient that we be brought out of the Kingdom of Satan; for when we are
gotten out of his hands and strength, he pursues us with continual malice;
therefore there must be the same power to stablish us still in grace, that
first brought us into the state of grace: For as Providence is a continual
creation, so stablishing grace is the continuance of the new creature: the same
grace that sets us in the state of the new creation in Christ; the same
stablisheth us. Stablishing grace is necessary: It is necessary many ways. Man
of himself is an unstable creature; take him at the best, but a creature. God
found no stability in the Angels; take the best of creatures, even as creatures
they are unstable. For God will have a creature as a creature to be a dependant
thing upon the Creator, who is a being of himself Jehovah. There is no
stability in any creature. Man in his best estate was an unstable creature.
Since, we are very unstable, ready to be carried away in our judgment to the
wind of any false doctrine; ready to be blown over with every little
temptation. Nay, now in the state of grace, in our selves we are very unstable,
ready to fly off presently; and therefore we have need to be established of God.

It is necessary in regard of the indisposition of our nature to supernatural
truths: we are an unprepared subject for them in our selves. The Law Reason 1.
In regard of our indisposition.
indeed we have some principles of it; but of the Gospel there are in us no
seeds at all of it: and that is the reason there are so many Heresies against
the Gospel, there are none against the Law: And therefore Divine truths being
contrary to our disposition, as there must be a supernatural beginner, so there
must be a supernatural strengthener; he that is Alpha, must be Omega: As there
must be a mighty subduing of the heart to be a vessel to receive these truths,
an Almighty power to lay the soul on this foundation; (because of the
contrariety of the truth to the natural heart of man,) so there is need of no
less then of a Divine and supernatural stablishing. Our natures are very
inconstant, and unsettled, and wayward: take us at the best, before the fall,
you see how soon we fell, being left to our selves, and having no stablishing
grace: Much more now since the fall, is there a nenecessity of Divine
stablishing: when we come to know the truth, we are subject to fall away; like
little children, that are ready to sink, if they be not upheld by their
parents, or nurse: God must uphold and propus, and shore us up, we presently
sink else. Moses was but in the Mount a while, and we see how soon the
Israelites fell to Idolatry. Paul did but leave the Galatians a little, and
they were removed presently from Christ to false Teachers. The nature of man is
wonderful unstable, very loose and unsettled: Divine truths are supernatural;
we have need of stablishing therefore.

Again, stablishing grace is necessary, in regard of those oppositions that 2.
In regard of oppositions.
are made against us after once we be in Christ: For with what malice does
Satan pursue a Christian, when he is once taken out of his Kingdom? And the
world runs a clean contrary Byas in the several examples thereof: How many
scandals do there arise daily even in the very Church it self? How many things
are in our natural disposition joining with them? all which will make a man fly
off, and unsettle him, if he be not stablished in grace.

And indeed, what is the difference between one Christian and another
Difference between true Christians and others.
that lives in the bosom of the Church? between a temporizer, and another? The
difference is but in their radication, in their stablishing: for all have the
general knowledge of the truth; but here is the difference, the true Christian
is radicated, and rooted in the truth; a false Christian is not, and thereupon
when temptations come either from within, from conscience: or from without,
from Satan, and the world; he falls away, because he is not rooted: but the
other holds on, because he is established.

And the best of us all have need of stablishing: for there be degrees of
Degrees of faith.
truths, degrees of faith, in all the parts of faith: there is conjecture, a
certain suspicious knowledge: and there is opinion, which is with fear of the
contrary: and there is knowledge; and there is faith, which is founded upon the
Authority of the speaker. And yet this faith, though it be founded upon the
Word of God, it may receive further and further strength in all the parts of
it: In assent there may be a higher degree, in affiance there may be a higher
degree, etc. And therefore the best of us all have need of strengthening.

But where shall we have it?

Christ is the Basis, the foundation of all our stability: Now in the Covenant
of grace, we are stablished in him, not in our selves. The Point is this, That
Christ is the ground of our firmness. Observe. Christ the foundation of our
stability.



As all the Promises are made to us in Christ in regard of the execution, so
God he brings us to Christ; all is conferred to us in Christ: as the Promises
are made, so they are executed. God stablisheth us in Christ, he draws us to
Christ. None come to me, but God the Father draws. Therefore God does reveal
Christ to us in our conversion, and our stablishing is in him. Therefore our
salvation is so certain, because it is laid upon one that is so certain in
himself, Christ Jesus.

And happy it is, that we are stablished in him that loves us so well, that is
both a low high Priest, that will pity us; and a great high Priest, equal with
God, able to do all things to God for us, and between God and us. Adam (we
know) had his strength in his own keeping, and being left to himself, we see
what became of him. The Angels had their strength in their own keeping, and we
know how soon they fell: But since the fall, we are founded and bottomed upon a
surer foundation; now we stand not by our own strength, but we are established
in Jesus Christ: we are surer then the Angels were before they fell, surer then
Adam was in Paradise: for now we arestablished in Christ the Mediator, God and
man: and because we could not keep our stability in our selves, we are
stablished in him that wrought it for us, and that possesses it for us in
heaven, and that keeps it for us: and as it is laid up and kept for us, so we
are kept for it; You are kept by the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet. 1. And
therefore as there be many differences which advance the state of grace above
the state of nature; so this is one, that our state in grace is more stable and
firm, as being stablished upon a better ground, even upon Jesus Christ the
second Adam. God never mends, but he mends for the better: and he never
restores, but he restores for the better: the new heaven and the new earth
shall be better then the first, so the new creature, the new Adam is more
glorious then the first: and as that which we recover in Christ is more and
better then that we lost in Adam, so the certainty and security of our estate
in grace, is far beyond the other, this being stablished in Christ.

But what in us is stablished in Christ? and in Christ how considered?

First of all, our Judgment, that is stablished in Evangelical truths,
concerning the Natures and the Offices of Christ, concerning the privileges
that 1. Our Judgment stablished in Christ.
we have by him; and this is the ground of all other stablishment: we cannot
firmly cleave to that with our Will and affections, which we do not clearly
apprehend with our understandings. When we have a clear and judicious
apprehension of things, then follows a firm affection to them: the adhering
and cleaving of the will and affections, it comes from the discerning of the
understanding: and therefore as we say of the first concoction, if that be
naught, all is naught; and if that be good and sound, it makes way for all
concoctions after: so if things be well digested in the Judgment, if there be a
sound illumination and apprehension of Divine truths, it makes way for a
constant and firm adhesion: therefore the first stablishing is of our Judgments.

Secondly, as our Judgments, so our Wills are stablished in cleaving unto
Christ, making choice of him above all things in the world; that as he 2. Our
Will.
became man to sue unto us for our love, and to become our Husband: so we then
marry him, when upon judging what an excellent person he is, and how fit for
us, we choose him, and cleave unto him constantly without all separation, for
better, for worse, in our joy, in our love, and delight: for indeed, he is the
only excellent object, and most fittest for our affections to be placed on:
whatsoever other things besides we place our affections on too much, they make
us worse then our selves; only he can advance us to a better estate then we
are in, that can raise us higher.

In a word, the whole soul, judgment, will, and affections, and all the inward
man (for so the Apostle takes it in that latitude, Ephesians. 3. 16.) is 3. Our
affections.
stablished in Christ, and this carries the outward man with it. We are
stablished in Jesus Christ, not in our selves.

Now when we are stablished in Christ, whatsoever Christ has, or is, is ours.
It is a most excellent condition to be in Christ, and to be stablished in him:
for to be established in Christ, is to be in a firm estate, in an everlasting
estate; once Christ's, and for ever his: it is a glorious state, for he has
conquered over all enemies whatsoever, and his conquest is ours.

Well then, we see the foundation of the Church, and of every particular
Christian (Christ Jesus;) whence comes the stability and firmness of the
Church, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it? It is built upon
the rock, upon Christ. So all the stablishing that a Christian has, it is from
this rock, his being built upon Jesus Christ: If we were built upon man, we
could not stand: if we were built upon Angels, we could not stand: if we were
built upon any thing in the world we could not stand; but being built upon
Jesus Christ, (who is all in all to a soul that is stablished in him) there
must needs be an everlasting stablishing.

It is a fond Objection of some, and unlearned, against the principles of A
Christians stability more then Adam's, or Angels.
Divine truth, that we may fall as well as Adam in Paradise, as well as the
Angels in heaven: As if there were not a wide and broad difference between the
state of grace, and the state of nature. A Christian has more strength then
the Angels in heaven, or then Adam in Paradise ever had: he has a more firm
consistence, because he stands by grace; By grace we stand, as the Apostle
says. A Christian has promises of perseverance, Adam and the Angels had none:
and therefore to fetch a reason of falling away from grace, from the proportion
we have to that condition, is a mere Sophisme, not rightly discerning the
disparity. It is not alike with the Angels and Adam, and us, for we stand by
grace, out of our selves, being stablished in another.

We have not only a promise of happiness as the Angels and Adam had
happiness and a blessed estate, but they had no promise to stand, and be
confirmed. A poor weak Christian has a promise to be stablished, and
confirmed. Therefore those proud Sectaries that are between us and the Papists,
and join rather with them then us, that trouble the Church so much, they make
an idle objection concerning falling away from grace, to say, Did not Adam fall
away? What is that to the purpose? was Adam under the same Covenant as we are
now in Christ? Is there not a new promise made to us in Christ better then ever
Adam could attain to.

Besides, we are founded upon a better Adam, upon the second Adam, God-man: we
have not only a better foundation, but better promises, that Adam, and the
Angels themselves wanted. And therefore the Covenant of grace is said to be an
everlasting Covenant; I will marry thee to my self for ever, Hos. 2.

A Christian is not to be considered abstractively, or alone; for then indeed
he is a weak creature, as weak as other men are: but consider him in his Rock
on whom he is built; consider him in his Husband to whom he is united and knit;
consider him in his head Christ: look upon him as he is thus founded and
stablished, oh he is an excellent person.

See him in the difference betwixt him and others. Those that are not None are
firm but Christians.
stablished by a firm judgment, and will, and affection, and so by faith in
Jesus Christ, what consistence, what stability have they? Those who have the
firmness they have in the favor of men, it is but vanity: those that have the
firmness they have in riches, what are they? how soon do they leave it all?
those that have the firmness they have in dependence upon any creature, be it
never so great; alas, they are nothing, they are all vanity. Both we our selves
in depending, and the things we depend upon, are vanity: therefore we are
vanity, because we fasten upon that which is vanity: things have no more
firmness then that has upon which they lean: those that have but a weak prop
to support them, when that falls, they fall together with it. Now those that
are not founded upon Christ by knowledge and love, and united to him by faith,
alas, what standing have they, when all things else besides God are vain? For
nothing has a being but God, and a Christian so far as he leans upon God. Were
not all things taken out of nothing? and shall not they all turn to nothing?
must not this whole world be consumed with fire?

There must be a new world, a new heaven, and a new earth; but this and all the
excellencies in it, as they were raised out of nothing, so they shall come to
nothing: God he is, I am that I am, says he: and Christ he is yesterday, to
day, to morrow, and the same for ever. A man cannot say of any creature in the
world, that it was yesterday, and shall be to morrow, and for ever. We may say
it of Christ, he is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, he was, and is,
and is to come: and therefore those that are founded upon him, that have their
happiness in him, they are firm as he is firm: and those that build upon any
other thing, they vanish as the thing vanishes. There is nothing in the world
has such a Being, but it is subject in time not to be: it is only a Christian
that is in Christ, who is as firm as Christ is; and Christ can never be but
that which he is; for of necessity God must be always like himself, he is
Jehovah, I am, I am at all times; and Christ he is Jehovah: A Christian
therefore, and none but a Christian has a firm stablishing in Christ. Without
this stablishing in Christ what are we? what are wicked men? Chafe, that the
wind blows away; they are grass, etc. things of nothing carried away with
every blast: but a Christian is a stone, a rock, built upon Christ Jesus.

But to come to the Person, who it is that stablisheth: He that stablisheth us
in Christ, is God

Wherein we may consider these two Branches:

God must stablish.

God will stablish.

Can none stablish the soul upon Christ, but God?

No; For God is the only maker of the Marriage between Christ and Observe. God
only can stablish the soul.
the Church. The same God that brought Adam and Eve together in Paradise,
brings the Church and Christ together. And as he gives Christ to the Church,
and has sealed and appointed him to be wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption: (being made of God unto us for that purpose, as
the Apostle says) so he works the consent of the Church, a consent in heart
and spirit to take and embrace Christ. Now it is God only that can work the
heart to Christ; None can come unto me, except God the Father draw him. It is
God that gives Christ to be the husband of the Church, and that brings the
Spouse the Church to Christ.

For first, it is God by his Spirit that discovers to the soul its hideous,
desperate, 1. By showing our misery, and Christ's excellency.
and woeful estate without Christ; and by the Spirit in the Ministry of the
Word, lays open the riches and excellency that is in Christ, and the
firmness, and stability that is to be had in him; and so draws us with the
Cords of a man, with reasons, discovering an absolute necessity of geting into
Christ, and of having him to be our Husband, except we will lie under the wrath
of God and be damned; and withal, discovering the fullness and excellency that
is in Christ.

Again, it is God only that must stablish the soul, all the parts of it, both
judgment and conscience: For (I beseech you) what can any humane creature, what
can any thing under God work upon the soul? I mean so firmly as to stablish it:
and therefore our controversy with the Papists is just and good.

We say, The reason and ground of our believing the Word of God, to be The
ground of believing Gods Word.
the Word of God, must not be the testimony of the Church, and the authority
thereof: for alas, what can the judgment of man, what can the judgment of the
Church do? It may incline and move the will by inducing arguments, and so cause
a humane consent: but to establish the soul and conscience, and to assure me
that the Word of God (which is the ground of my faith) is the Word of God, it
must be God by his Spirit that must do it; the testimony of the Church will
never do it. The same Spirit that inspired holy men to write the Word of God,
works in us a belief, that the Word of God is the Word of God: The stablishing
argument must be by the power of Gods Spirit. God (joining with the soul and
spirit of a man whom he intends to convert, besides that inbred light that is
in the soul) causes him to see a Divine Majesty shining forth in the
Scriptures: so that there must be an infused establishing by the Spirit, to
settle the heart in this first principle, (and indeed in all other Divine
principles) that the Scriptures are the Word of God.

And (to go on a little further) this is a fundamental error in our practice.
Reason of Apostasy.
For what is the reason we have so many Apostates? what is the reason so many
are so fruitless in their lives? what is the reason that men despair in death?
but even this, because men are not built and stablished aright: Gods Spirit
never stablished their souls in Divine truths. For first, concerning
Apostasy, ask them, what is the reason they are of this or that Religion? They
will say, they have been taught so, they have been brought up to it; the
company with whom they have conversed, have been devout men, and have been
always led with this opinion; and they see no reason to thwart it.

Is that all? Has not the Spirit wrought these things in thy heart? has he
not given thee a taste of them? has he not convinced thee in thy judgment that
it is so? have thou not found the power of the Spirit working upon thy soul,
changing of thee, raising of thee, drawing of thee out of the world nearer to
God? have thou not (I say) felt the power of the Spirit this way?

No, but thus I was catechized, and thus I have been bred, and thus I have
heard in the Ministry. And no otherwise? Alas, it will never hold out; there
will be a falling away: for when a man believes not that which he believes from
the Spirit of God, he will be ready when dangerous times come, when there is an
onset made by the adversaries, to fall, and to fall clean away, as we see it
was in the time of Popery: for whatsoever is not spiritual, whatsoever
knowledge is not Divine, and from the Spirit of God, never holds out. Therefore
(I beseech you) what is the reason that you have many illiterate men, that set
upon the truth and hold out to the end: and on the contrary many great seeming
Scholars that are skilful in school-learning, and in other Authors, do not?
The reason is, the one has the truth from the Spirit, discovering all the
objections that the heart of man can make against it, and the strength that is
in the truth to answer and silence all those objections. The other man has
only a discoursing knowledge, an ability to gather one thing from another, and
to prove one thing by another, by strength of parts: But the Spirit of God
never discovered the sleights and the corruptions of his heart, never fastened
and settled his heart upon the truth, he never had experience of the truth: For
indeed nothing does stablish so much as the experience of the truth on which we
are stablished.

Again, what is the reason of that unfruitfulnesse that is amongst men? The
reason of unfruitfulnesse.
but because truths were never settled in the soul by the Spirit of God. That
which men know out of the Word of God, concerning Christ and the privileges by
him, they were never persuaded of it in their hearts; therefore they come not
to a fruitful conversation. It is impossible but that men should be abundantly
fruitful, that have spiritual apprehensions of Divine things, of Evangelical
truths. Hence comes all our unthankfulness and undervaluing of the Gospel. The
Gospel of it self is an unprized thing; however we esteem of it, God values it
highly: we value it not, because our apprehensions of it are customary and
formal, gotten by breeding, and education, and discourse, and not by the
Spirit: we feel not the spiritual and heavenly comforts of those truths we
think we know.

How comes likewise Despair in time of temptation, and in death, but The reason
of Despair.
only because men want this stablishing by the Spirit of God? Men go on in
evil courses, trusting to a formal, dead, humane knowledge, gotten by humane
means; and not settled in them by the Spirit of God, that has not sealed the
truth in their hearts: and hereupon when sharp trials come, they despair,
because they have no feeling of the truths of the Gospel: and so when
conscience is awakened and smarts, it clamours and cries out upon all their
formal and humane knowledge: For they having not a spiritual sense of the
mercies of God in Christ, and the persuasions of comfort, are not so near to
support the soul, as the tentations, and vexations, and torments are, how can
they but despair? Now who can still the conscience but the Spirit of God? Why
now, if the knowledge that men had were spiritual and heavenly; in all
accusations of conscience, it would set conscience down, and still it; I am a
sinner indeed, I am this and this, but I have felt the sweet mercies of God in
Christ: God has said to my soul, I am thy salvation: he has intimated to my
spirit by a sweet voice, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Where there is (I
say) a knowledge and an apprehension of these Evangelical truths wrought by the
Spirit, it sets down Conscience and stills it, though the heart rage at the
same time. There are thousands in the very bosom of the Church that miscarry
because of this, resting in a literal, outward, formal knowledge, gotten
only by discourse, and by reading, and commerce with others; and never labor
to have their hearts stablished in Christ by Gods Spirit.

You see here then a necessity of Gods writing his truth in our bowels: he
says in the Covenant of grace, I will write my Law in their inward parts;
thaat is, I will teach their very hearts: that knowledge that they have, shall
be spiritual.

For (beloved) the knowledge that must save us, must not only be Spiritual
knowledge necessary.
of Divine things, but it must be Divine; it must not only be of spiritual
things, but it must be spiritual: the light that we have of spiritual things
must be answerable to the things; we must see them by their own light: we
cannot know spiritual and heavenly things, by a humane light, but as the things
themselves are spiritual, so we must have the Spirit of God, that by it we may
come to know spiritual things spiritually.

Desire God therefore to vouchsafe us his Spirit, that it may teach us, and
convince us of the truth of those things which we read and hear. God must do
it, he must persuade and bow the heart, and will, and affections; and so he
will do it, and does it to those that rely upon him: And this is the second
Branch. As God must do it, so God will do it. Observe. God will stablish us.



What is the Reason of that?

It is this; he will do it, because he is constant: where he begins a good
work, he will finish it to the day of the Lord. He will do it, because in the
1. Because he is constant.
Covenant of Grace he has undertaken both parts, both his own, and ours. He
undertakes his own part, which is to give us eternal life, and to give us
Christ; and he undertakes our part too, which is to believe, and to cleave unto
Christ, etc. he makes this good himself, he works this in the heart by the
Spirit: for therefore it is called the Covenant of Grace, because God himself
is graciously pleased to do both parts. Which must be comfortably remembered
against an Objection that flesh and blood will make. I might indeed come to
God, and Christ, but I am an unworthy empty creature, I have no faith.

Come, and atrend upon the means, the gift of application, and confirming, and
stablishing, is part of the Covenant. The Covenant that God makes with thee, is
not only to give thee life everlasting, and glory; but to give thee grace
likewise. Faith is the gift of God. He that stablisheth us, and confirms us
upon that which is certain in it self, is God.

Lay it up against a time of temptation for a pillar and ground of your faith;
that here God does both: he gives us Promises, and gives us Christ whereon the
Promises are founded; and likewise establishes us, and seals us, etc. he does
all. So that as none can stablish the soul but God by his Spirit: so he will do
it. It is an excellent reason of the Apostle in Romans 5. If when we were enemies
God gave us his Son to reconcile us, how much more now shall we be saved? If we
were saved by the Death of Christ when we were enemies, much more shall we be
preserved by his life, he now living in heaven. So I say, If God when there was
nothing in us, but we were in a clean opposite estate, did begin spiritual life
in us, much more will he stablish that which he has begun in us.

And this stablishing as well as the beginning of grace comes likewise All of
Grace from God.
from God: for take Grace in the whole latitude and extent of it, take all that
can be in grace, all comes graciously from God: the offer of it, the beginning
of it; this manner of it, that it should be strong, the strengthening of grace,
it comes from God: he strengthens us in grace, as well as begins it: so that
Grace it self, and this Modus, this manner, that it is strong and firm, that it
should hold out, all comes from God.

A Christian needs not only converting grace, but stablishing grace: God that
converted him, must stablish him, and build him up, and confirm him. Peter was
in the state of grace, and yet when God did not stablish him; you see how he
fell: so David was an excellent man, but when God did not stablish him, you see
how he fell. The weakest with the stablishing grace of God will stand; and the
strongest without the stablishing grace of God, will sink and fall.

The Apostle does not say, he has done, but he does stablish us. This must be
considered, that the life of a Christian is a perpetual dependant life: not
only in his conversion he lives by faith, he has his first life; but ever
after he lives by faith, that is, dependence on God for assistance, and
protection, and strength in the whole course of his life.

The ignorance of this makes us subject to fail: for when we trust to grace
received, and do not seek for a new supply, we fall into Peter's case: Though
all men for sake thee, yet will not I: hereupon Peter fell foully, he had too
much confidence in grace received.

Therefore God is fain to humble his children to teach them dependence: and
usually therefore in Scripture, where some special grace is given, he has
somewhat joined with it, to put them in mind that they do not stand by their
own strength. In the same Chapter where Peter makes a glorious confession, Thou
art the Son of the living God, and he was honored of Christ by that
confession; yet Christ calls him Satan in the same Chapter, and he forsakes his
Master. A strange thing: To teach us, that we stand not of our selves. When we
are strong, it is by God; when we are weak, it is by our selves.

Jacob wrastled, and was a prevailer with God, but he was fain to halt for it;
he was struck with halting all the days of his life: though he had the
victory, and overcame God, taking upon him (as I said before) the person of an
enemy to strive with him; yet God to put him in mind, that he had the strength
whereby he prevailed, from him, and not of himself: he made him limp all his
days. We need perpetual dependence upon God.

Therefore let us set upon nothing in our own strength, as Hannah says
comfortably, 1 Samuel 2. No man is strong by his own strength. God is all our
sufficiency. Man's nature does affect a kind of Divinity, he would be a God to
himself: but God will teach him that he is not a God; but a dependant creature.
He affects a Divinity; thus he will set upon things in confidence of his own
wisdom without prayer, and thinks to work things with the strength of his own
parts, to compass things with his own wit, to bring things to a good issue. O
no, it will not be so. In Prove. 3. Acknowledge God in all thy ways: That is,
acknowledge him in thy enterprises in any thing: acknowledge him in the
progress, that thou need stabilishing grace: acknowledge him in the issue,
that thou need his blessing upon all thy endeavors: acknowledge God in all
our ways.

Therefore whas do we but make our selves Gods, when we set upon business,
especially weighty, without invocation and dependence? A Christian is wondrous
weak, a man is vanity in himself: but take him as he is built upon the
promises, and as he is in the love of God, and Christ, he is a kind of almighty
man; then I can do all things in Christ that strengthens me. A Christian is
omnipotent if he depend upon the Promise, and commit his ways to God; but he
is impotent, and weak in himself. It is God that must stablish us. A man that
is vanity, he makes him firm: a man that is weak, he makes him strong: a man
that is unsettled, he settles him. The Word is a firm thing, and God that
builds us on the Word is as firm; and Christ in whom we are built is as firm.
Peter when he built on the Word he was wondrous firm, he was a rock too. A man
that stands on a rock is firm. Now in believing the Gospel, and in being built
on the Gospel, upon the Prophets and Apostles, upon Apostolical truth, now we
that are weak in our selves are firm.

The weakest creatures have the strongest shelters; and weakness is turned by
God to be a help: for conscience of weakness makes us seek for strength out of
our selves. You know, the Conies (as Solomon says) they hide themselves in the
rock, they flee to their buroughs. The birds, because snares are laid for them
below, they build their nests on high to secure themselves that way. We see the
Vine, a weak plant, it has the Elm to prop it, weak things must have a strong
support: So man being weak in himself, weak in judgment, weak in affections, he
is stablished by God.

God herein triumphing in our weakness over strength. For when we have strong
Adversaries, and we are weak, Satan is a strong enemy. God himself puts upon
him the vizor of an enemy sometimes, as in Job's case, and Christ's on the
Cross; when God personates an enemy, and the devil is a real enemy; And the
devils instruments, Heretics, and Seducers are strong, strong in wit and parts
every way, and we are weak to encounter with God, to wrestle with him; and we
are weak to encounter with Principalities and powers, and with men of stronger
parts, that are besotted, and intoxicated with Satanical temptations, and
labor to draw all into the snare of the devil with themselves: Now when God in
weakness shall triumph over strength, here is glory to God, in stablishing us.
It is God that must stablish us.

And as God must only do it, so he is ready to do it: for in the Covenant of
grace it lies upon him, God has promised there to confirm it; and therefore
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 8, 9. binds it with the faithfulness of God, Faithful
is he that has promised, who also will do it. God is content that our
confirmation should lie upon his faithfulness; and therefore when he accepts
us into the Covenant of grace, he performs our part as well as his own: God is
faithful (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.) who has called us to the fellowship of
Christ, who will confirm us to the end: he is content to hazard his reputation,
as it were, and to be counted unfaithful else: so that strengthening grace is
of God, he has bound himself by his faithfulness to confirm and to stablish
those that are his.

Mark here by the way, (before I come to handle the Doctrine of perseverance)
what an invincibld Argument you have to prove, that a man that is once in
Christ can never fall away.

Say they, Indeed, God for his part is ready to maintain us, to do this; Ground
of a Christians not falling away.
but we for our part are subject to fall away: as if the carrying of us along
in the course of grace to salvation, did not lie upon God and Christ. God is
faithful to confirm us to the end: we being once in the Covenant of grace, he
does our part and his own too: how can those then that are in the state of
grace ever finally fall away?

Now God does confirm us, by working such graces in us by his Spirit, God
stablisheth b^ working stablishing graces. Fear.
by which we are stablished. As for instance; I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall never depart from me: he stablisheth us by fear: Make
an end of your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in
you both the will and the deed: he puts a spirit of jealousy into a man over
his corruptions; and a reverential filial fear, which keeps him from
presuming.

And likewise he preserves us by Wisdom, as it is, Prove. 2. 10, 11. When
Wisdom.
wisdom enters into thy heart; discretion shall preserve thee, and
understanding shall keep thee.

And by Faith: You are kept (says the Apostle) by the mighty power of God
Faith.
through faith to salvation.

And by Peace of Conscience, which is wrought in the heart by the Spirit: Peace.
The Peace of God which passes all understanding shall guard (for so the word
signifies) your hearts and minds; that is, a true Believer that is once in
Christ, he finds such joy in the Holy Ghost, such inward peace of conscience,
as preserves and guards him from despair, from the temptations of Satan, from
the seeming wrath of God. So that God as he stablisheth us, so he stablisheth
us as it becomes Christians, as it becomes men, by sanctifying our
understandings, by working grace in our hearts, the grace of fear, of wisdom,
of faith, of peace, etc. so that a Christian now cannot presume, save in a holy
kind of presumption, that God will finish his own good work. But of this (I
say) I shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter.

To conclude therefore; God you see must stablish, and God will stablish. It is
a Point of great comfort every way: Comfort from the foundation and root in
whom we are stablished; and from him that has taken upon him to stablish us,
God by his holy Spirit. If a Christian should fall, God must be unstable; or
Christ the foundation must be unstable; or the holy Spirit by which we are
stablished must be unstable: but it were blasphemy to think thus.

I come now to the last thing, The subject, or the persons that are stablished;
us with you. He that stablisheth us with you.
We should have honorable conceits of all Christians: there is an ointment
runs down upon the very skirts of Aaron's garment: there is not the lowest
Christian, but he receives something from Christ the head. Perhaps thou have
one grace in an eminent manner; it may be he has another more eminent then
thou have: thou may est have more knowledge, he may have more humility: thou
may have more strength of judgment, he may have more sense of his own wants.
There is somewhat in every Christian that is valuable, that is estimable and
precious, not only in the eye of God, who valued him so as to give his Son for
him; but should be so also in the eye of stronger Christians: therefore S. Paul
here, a strong Christian, out of the sweetness of his spirit, joins, us with
you: he says not, you with us; but as if they were as firmly set in Christ as
himself, he says, us with you: he puts them together with himself: for indeed,
all of us one with another, weak Christians, and strong Christians fetch all
that we have from one Fountain, draw all from one Spring, are led all by one
Spirit.

You have here also the Character of a sound Christian; he loves and values all
Christians. A carnal man may value excellent Christians, that To value all good
Christians.
have excellent parts, of whom he hopes for kindness in some peculiar regard,
but he loves not all the Saints. Love to all Christians as they be Christians,
because they have some anointing of the Spirit, some earnest, somewhat they
have to be valued, is a note of a good and sound Christian.

Another reason why he joins us with you, is, to show that the working The
Spirit works as we are in the body.
of the Spirit, it is not in the members severed from the body; but as they are
in the body. The Spirit works in us, but in us with you, and in you with us:
that is, as all the spirits come from the head and heart to the several
members of the body, so they must be united, they must be in the body, before
they can have the benefit of the spirits; there must be an union with Christ
the head and with the rest of the members before we can have the Spirit to
strengthen us and anoint us; those that rend themselves from the body, cannot
hope for stablishing from the head.

This should be a bond to ty us to the communion of Saints: we have Bond of
communion of Saints.
all that we have in the body: we all grow in the body: we are all stones in
one building, whereof Christ is the foundation; therefore as stones in an Arch
strengthen one another, so should we. Let us look for grace to be given in the
communion of Saints: it is an ill sign when any man will be a solitary
Christian, and will stand alone by himself. As we are knit to Christ by faith,
so we must be knit to the communion of Saints by love. That which we have of
the Spirit, is had in the communion of Saints. It is worth ohserving, the
better to cherish Christian lovingnesse.

Thus you see the parts of this sentence, in which we have, the grace it self
here spoken of, Stablishing.

In whom we are stablished; In Christ.

By whom; by God.

And who those are that are stablished; Us with you.

To make now some Application of all.

If it be God that stablisheth us, let us make this Use of it; Let God Use. To
give God the glory of our stablishing.
have the glory of our stablishing. If we have it in dependence upon God by
Prayer, let us return all by praise, and thanksgiving: all comes of his mere
grace, let all return to his mere glory; Not unto us, but unto thy Name give
the praise. It is the song of the Church on earth, and the song of the Church
triumphant in heaven, that all glory be to God in all the whole carriage of
salvation. The promises are his, stablishing is his, that he would make a
Covenant it is his, that he will perform his Covenant to us it is his; that he
will enable us to perform the Covenant, it is by his strength, all is his:
therefore both the Church here, and the Church in heaven, our song should be,
Great, and gracious, and merciful is the true God, that is so gracious, and
righteous in all his promises.

Let us labor (I beseech you) for stablishing, especially in these times. Is
it not a shame that we have gotten no more ground now, then we had threescore
years ago? nay, that we rather call principles into question? The Pope has
been Antichrist; and Traditions have been accounted Traditions, and not equal
with the Word: what shall we now stagger in the foundation? is here our
progress? Oh (beloved) labor to be stablished in the present truth, that you
may not be a prey for every subtle man.

And here especially I would speak to the younger sort, that they should labor
for this stablishing betimes, before they be engaged in the world, and before
other businesses possess them over-deeply: for falsehood has more
correspondency, and suits better with our corruption, specially if it be forced
from subtle wits, it prevails much with unstable dispositions; those that are
uncatechized and ungrounded, they are soon led away: and therefore with other
studies we should study the truth; and remember, that our best calling is to be
a Christian; and our best honor, to be able to stand for the truth we profess.

Labor to have fundamental graces established, and then all will be
stablished: Strengthen radical graces.
if the root be strengthened, the tree stands fast; radical graces must be
strengthened.

First, Humility. The foundation of Religion is very low, and humility 1.
Humility.
and abasing is in all parts of Religion, every grace has a mixture of
humility; because our graces are from God: they are dependences. Now humility
is an emptying grace, and acknowledges, that in my self I am nothing.
Spiritual poverty with humility acknowledges that I in my self am a dependent
creature; if God withhold his influence, if God withdraw his grace, I shall be
as other men, as Sampson when his hair was cut. Our strength is in God
altogether. Let us pray that we may be humble: God gives grace to the humble.
When I am weak (says blessed S. Paul,) then I am strong: that is, when I am
humble, and feel, and acknowledge my weakness, then I am strong: or else a man
is not strong when he is weak, but when he feels, and acknowledges his
weakness. Therefore let us labor to grow in humility, and self-denial, and we
shall grow in strength.

Then again, another radical grace to be stablished, is Faith. Depend 2. Faith.
upon God altogether: for considering our strength is out of our selves, and
faith being a grace that goes out of our selves, and lays hold of that that is
out of our selves, faith is necessary to our stablishing; Believe, and ye shall
be stablished, says the Prophet. Though the Promise be sure in it self, yet we
must be established by faith. How does God stablish us? by working a spirit of
faith: therefore strengthen faith, strengthen all other graces: all have their
issue from faith.

And faith comes from sound knowledge: knowledge therefore has 3. Knowledge.
the name of faith, This is eternal life, to know thee; strengthen, and
increase knowledge. Historical faith is nothing but knowledge: when we know the
Word of God to be as it is; and that is the ground of justifying faith, and
dependence. For the more I know God in Covenant as he has revealed himself,
and the more I know the promise, and the more I know Christ, the more I shall
depend upon him, and trust in him; They that know thy Name, will trust in thee,
Psalm. 9.

Therefore let us labor for certainty of knowledge, that we may have certainty
of faith. What is the reason that our faith is weak? because men care not to
increase their knowledge. The more we know of God, the more we shall trust him.
The more we know of a man that we have bonds from, that he is an able man, and
just of his word, we shall trust him more, and the more our security upon his
promise, and bond is increased: so the more we know of God as he has revealed
himself in his Word, and his voluntary Covenant he has made with us, and
performed in the examples of Scripture, the more we know him, the more we shall
trust him.

And this must be a spiritual knowledge; not only a bare, naked reading,
Knowledge must be spiritual.
but it must be spiritual, like the truth it self. We must see, and know
spiritual things in their own light: to know them by their own light, is to
know them by the Spirit. You know the Spirit dictated the Scripture to the
Prophets, and Apostles, the Spirit did all: they wrote as they were acted by
the Spirit. Now the same Spirit must inform our understanding, and take away
the vail of ignorance and infidelity; I say; the Spirit must do it, we must
know spiritual things in their own light.

Therefore a carnal man can never be a good Divine, though he have never so
much knowledge; an illiterate man of another calling may be a better Divine
then a great Scholar: Why? Because the one has only notional knowledge,
discoursive knowledge, to gather by strength of parts one thing from another.
Divinity is a kind of Art, and as far as it is an Art to prove one thing by
another: so a natural man may do wonders in it, and yet know nothing in its own
spiritual light. That is the reason the Devil himself knows nothing, he is a
spirit of darkness, because he knows nothing spiritually, and comfortably:
therefore as there must be humility, and faith, for our stablishing so there
must be spiritual knowledge.

It is said here, that God stablisheth us: the same God that stablisheth us,
must give us faith whereby we are stablished, and he must give us knowledge.
Beg of God that he would vouchsafe us his Spirit: when we read the Scriptures,
beg of God that he would open our understanding by his own Spirit, that as
there is light in the Scriptures, so there may be in us.

You know an eye must have light, before it can see the light; light is full of
discovery of things in it self. I can see nothing except there be light in my
eye too, there must be a double light: so there must be a Spirit in me, as
there is a Spirit in the Scripture before I can see any thing: God must open
our eyes, and give us spiritual eye salve, to see, and then the light of the
Scripture, and our light together, is suficient to found a saving faith, as
stablishing faith on.

What is the reason that a Christian stands to his profession, though he be
weak, when the greatest learned men in the world flinch in persecution? The
knowledge of the one is spiritual, and heavenly, he hatht ligh in him; the
other has no divine; spiritual light; when light is joined with light, the
light in the soul with the light in the Scripture, it makes men wondrous
confident.

To this end, labor to be acquainted with Gods Word, study the Scriptures, and
other Treatises of that kind, that you may be able to hold fast 1. Be
acquainted with Gods Word.
the truth, that it be not wrung from you upon any occasion. And in reading, it
is a good course to observe the main, principal undeniable truths, such
Dogmaticall truths as are clear and evident, and to lay them up; and often make
queries to our selves; Do I understanst this or no? Yes, I do, this I know is
true: build on it then, and bottom the soul upon it. And so if it be matter of
promises: these promises are undeniable true I will stay my soul upon them. And
so when we meet with plain evidences in the Scriptures that cross our
coruptions, that meet with our known sins, then consider of those places as
Jewels, and lay them up that you may have use of them as occasion serves.

All things have not an equal certainty in Scripture to us; some things we may
have an implicit faith in: but the main we must have a clear apprehension of.
There are some things that concern Teachers more to know then others, by reason
of their standing in the Church: it is sufficient that in preparation of mind
we be ready to embrace further truths that shall be discovered; but in
fundamental truths it is not so, we must have our hearts stablished upon them,
that as they are certain in themselves, so they may be certain to us. And often
let us examine our selves, Would I die in this, and for this? would I stand in
the defense of this against any? this will make us make much of so much truth
as we know, and labor to grow in truths in that kind.

And take no scandal to hear that any shrink from the profession of the truth,
2. Take no scandal at those* that shrink.
and the maintaining of it, that are of great reputation. Was Christ the worse
for Judas betraying of him, and for Peter's denying of him? was Paul's truth the
worse because he had many enemies, Elymas the sorcerer and others? Is the truth
the worse because there are many that have carnal outward dependence, that
seem to shrink when they should stand out? The truth is not the worse, it is
the same truth still: truths are eternal in themselves, and in the good they
bring, if they be believed. The Word of God endures for ever, it is not
variable, as man is: and therefore be not discouraged, though men
discountenance it: remember whose truth it is, and for whose good it is given,
the Word of God; it is a soul saving truth.

And retain the truth in love. Love is an affection with which we should 3.
Retain the truth in love.
receive the truth: or else God will give us over to uncertainties. They in 2 Thessalonians. 2, 10. had the truth, but because they received not the Love of the
truth: therefore God sent them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie. O how lovely is the truth! The certainty of our estate in Christ; the
glorious privileges that come by him; that the gifts of God are without
repentance: that God looks on us, not for foreseen faith or works, but such as
he had decreed to work himself: How comfortable, how lovely are these truths
being the Word of God, notwithstanding some seek to shake them! These very
truths should be retained in love. And indeed, the truth is not in its own
place, till it be fixed in the heart and affections, and in a good conscience,
which S. Paul makes likewise the vessel of the truth, and those that care not
for that, they make shipwreck of the truth.

And what truths you know, labor to practice, and then you shall be
stablished. 4. Practice truths ^nown.
If any man do the will of my Father (says our Savior, Joh. 7. 17.) he shall
know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Be
true to known truths; be not false in disobeying them: To him that has, shall
be given: We have a little stablishing; by an uniform obedience to the truth we
shall have more, God will increase it. I say, let us be faithful to the truths
we have' and not cross them in any sinful course: let us not keep the truth
prisoner to any base affection: as those in Romans 1. that had but the light of
nature, yet because they imprisoned it, and held it in unrighteousness, and
lived in sins contrary to that light rhat God had kindled in them; though (I
say) it were but the light of nature, God gave them up to sins not to be named:
much more will he do to us if we withhold the light of the Gospel: take heed
therefore that we inthral not the truth to any base lust whatsoever, and that
is a means to be stablished in the truth.

And be often in holy conference with others. Conference if it be rightly 5. Be
frequent in holy conference.
used is a special means to stablish; that is most certain, which is certain
after doubting and debate; because that which is doubted of at the first, we
come to be resolved of at the last, comparing reason with reason; Remembering
always that of S. Ambrose, That there must not be striving for victory, but
for truth. And then when we have tried all, we must keep that which is good,
and not be always as the Iron between two Loadstones, haled this way, and that
way; always doubting, and never resolved; there must be a time of resolution:
This the Apostle observes to be an excellent way of stablishing, often to confer
of things doubtful.

And labor to get experience of the truth in our selves: nothing stablisheth
more then experience. Our Savior Christ in Joh. 6. 68. when many left him out
of dullness, not understanding the spiritual things that he taught (as many
whose wits will serve for matters of the world, and to make them great amongst
men, but when they come to heavenly things they have no understanding, they
cannot apprehend them) he asks his Disciples, Will you go away also? Peter, who
had his heart opened by the Spirit of God, says he, Lord, whither shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal life; insinuating, that the experience that he
had of the power of that truth that Christ taught, did so establish him in the
present truth, that with a holy kind of indignation at the question, he
replies, Whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life: I have found
thy words to have a spiritual life in them. So when we come once to have an
experimental knowledge of the truths we learn, then our hearts are stablished;
indeed, then it is an ingraffed Word, as S. James says: then the Word is true
leaven, when it alters and changes the soul; in such a case there is no
separating from fundamental truth, when it is one with our selves, and
digested into us.

And pray to God often (as David did, Psalm. 86.) to knit our hearts to fear 7.
Pray to God to stablish us.
his Name: Lord, my heart is loose and ready to fall off of it self, Oh knit my
heart: it is unsettled, Oh settle my unsettled heart; settle my judgment and
affections: this should be our meditation.

And because it is God that stablisheth, always maintain spiritual poverty 8. Be
spiritually poor.
in the soul, that is, a perpetual dependence upon God: see the insufficiency
that is in our selves, that we cannot stand out. What is the reason that God
suffers great men to fall from the defense of the truth, and from the
profession of it in their lives? (as we see it in the case of Peter) to show,
that we stand not by our own strength: therefore we should be always in this
temper of spiritual poverty, to know that as Samsons strength was in his Hair,
so our strength is in God. God is my strength, of my self I have no strength.
And therefore upon every new defense of the truth, when we are called to it, we
should lift up ejaculations, and dart up strong desires to God, that God would
strengthen and stablish our souls, that we may not be traitors to the truth,
but that we may stand to it; for in his own strength shall no man be
established

And grow every day more and more in detestation of a lukewarm temper. 9.
Hate lukewarmnesse.
Your Ancipites as Cyprian calls them, your doubtful flatterers of the times,
that have their Religion depending upon the State, and the times, that are
neither fish nor flesh, Bats, as we say, that are neither Mice nor Birds, but
of a doubtful Religion, that out of carnal policy are fit to entertain any
thing, Oh this is a devilish temper. Howsoever we (in our lukewarm
disposition) value the truth; God values it highly; it was purchased by Christ's
blood, and sealed by the blood of Martyrs, and shall not we transmit it to our
posterity, as safe and as firm, and retain it, come what will? Let us grow into
dislike of this temper; atemper that we should as much hate as God hates it;
such a temper as is in Popery, they are in an adiaphorisme temper in Religion,
a lukewarm, cold temper, a temper of Religion according to reasons of flesh,
and reasons of policy, this will make us be spued out of Gods mouth at the
last. Do we think to lose Religion alone? Oh no, never think to part with
Religion alone; it came with peace and prosperity, and if we keep not this
Depositum, this truth delivered to us, God will take it away, and that which we
betray it for, Peace, and Plenty.

Let us labor therefore to be radicated in our Judgment, in our Affections, in
our Love, in our Faith, in our whole inward man, in the truth revealed. To be
stablished in the truth, it is our best inheritance, it is that will stand by
us when all leaves us.

What consistence has a man out of the truth? are you rich or honorable?
death will drive you out of all your riches and honors in the world, and strip
you of all. What stablishing has any man but in Christ, in the truth? Take a
man that is not bottomed, that is not fastened on Christ, he is the
changeablest creature in the world, he is vanity, he is nothing.

Oh love this state, that we may say, Though I be variable here, though I be
not so rich as I was, or have not that favor of great ones that I have had; or
it is not with me as it has been, but in all changes I have somewhat that is
unchangeable: my soul is settled upon Christ, and upon the truth in him, which
is certain. As it is a glorious being to be found in Christ, so it is an
eternal and an everlasting being: once Christ's, and for ever his, he will never
lose a member. Labor we therefore to be stablished in Christ in all the
changes and alterations in the world, and then we shall have something that is
unchangeable to fix and stay our selves upon, even in the hour of death.

Again, in the second place, (to make an Use of examination) I beseech Use 2.
Examination of our stablishing.
you examine your selves whether you find this stablishing in your hearts or
no? whether your hearts be thus settled or no by the Spirit of God? For
(beloved) it is worth the labor and pains to get this grace; and to be
assured that you have it, stablishing in Christ is most necessary, and we stand
in need of a great deal of spiritual strength. Do we know what times may come?
If dangerous times come, if we be not stablished, what will become of us? Oh it
is a happy estate, a Christian that is stablished in the sound knowledge and
faith of Christ! I beseech you therefore consider of it. To give you an
evidence or two whereby you may discern whether your hearts be settled and
stablished.

A man has the grace of stablishing, and confirmation, when it is upon 1. When
it is grounded on the Word.
the Word, when God does stablish him upon the promises.

And then again, by the effect of it. A man is stablished by the Spirit of God,
when his temptations are great, and his strength little to resist, and yet 2.
When weak men overcome strong temptations.
notwithstanding he prevails. Satan is strong; if we prevail against Satan's
temptations, we are stablished; God is strong, too strong for us: if we can
break through the clouds, when he seems an enemy, as Job, Though thou kill me,
yet will I trust in thee. Here is a prevailing, a stablished faith. In great
afflictions, when clouds are between us and God; when we have faith that will
break through those clouds, and see God through them shining in Christ, here
is a strong, a stablished faith; because here is mighty temptations, and
oppositions.

The strength is known by the strength of the opposition, and the weakness of
the party. In the times of Martyrdom, there was fire and faggot, and the
frowns of cruel persons: who were the persons that suffered? Children, women,
old men sometimes, all weak. Children, a weak age; women, a weak sex: old men,
a withered melancholy dry age, fearful of constitution. But when the Spirit of
God was so strong in young ones, in weak women, in old withered men, as to
enable them to endure the torment of fire, to enable them to endure
threatenings, and whatsoever, as we see, Heb. 11. here was a mighty work in weak
men. A man may know here is stablishing grace: because except there were
somewhat above nature, where were a man in such a case? Then a man may know
especially that there is stablishing grace, when he sees somewhat above nature
prevailing over the temptation, and confirming the weak nature of man, that is
the best evidence we have, of Gods stablishing grace; sometimes, them that are
stronger at some times, are weaker at other times: but (as I said before) that
is to teach them, that they have their strength from God.

Again, if your hearts be soundly bottomed and founded and grounded 2. By
freedom from base fears, cares, etc.
on Christ and the promises of God in him, then you will be freed at least from
all victory and thraldom to base fears, and to base cares, and base sorrows,
and base passions.

A man that has no settled being on Christ, he is tossed up and down with
every passion: he is full of fears and cares for the world, which distract the
soul upon every occasion, full of unseasonable and needless sorrows and
griefs, which vex and perplex the soul continually. Oh how he fears for the
time to come! what shall become of me if such a thing happen? how shall I be
able to live in such a time, etc? If he were settled upon God in Christ, that
he were his Father: if he were stablished upon the promises of God in Christ, I
will not fail thee nor forsake thee; Fear not little flock, it is the Fathers
will to give you the Kingdom: and, Why do you fear, O you of little Faith?
and, He that provides for the birds of the Air, for the Sparrowes, for the
Lillies of the field, for the poorest creature, will he not much more for you?
If I say we were thus stablished upon Christ, and the promises, there would be
no disquietnesse, those fears and griefs that usually perplex and inthrall the
minds of men; but where there are these distracting cares, and vexing sorrows,
and needless fears, it argues a heart unsettled; though perhaps there may be
some faith notwithstanding.

Let us often examine our selves in this particular: how it is with us when such
thoughts arise, what if trouble should come, what if change and alteration
should come? He that has truly settled his heart will say, If they do come I
am fixed, I know whom I have believed, I know I am a member of Christ, an Heir
of Heaven, that God is reconciled to me in his Son: I know God has taken me
out of the condition I was in by nature, and has advanced me to a better
condition then I can have in the world: and when the world shall be turned
upside down, I know when all things fail I shall stand.

He that his heart can answer him thus, is firm. A good man (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 1 12. 7.) shall not be afraid of evil tidings; why? his heart
is fixed, trusting in the Lord: and again, in Verse 8. his heart is stablished,
therefore he shall not be afraid. If our hearts be established, then we shall
not be afraid of evil tidings, nor afraid of wars, nor of troubles, nor of
loss of friends, nor of loss of favors, or the like. A righteous man is
afraid of no evil; he that has his heart stablished in Christ, and that has
peace of Conscience wrought by the Spirit of God in the promises, his heart is
fixed, in all alterations and changes he has somewhat that is unchangeable:
even when he cease to be in this world, he has a perpetual, eternal being
in Christ: if he die he goes to Heaven, he has his being there where he
enjoyes a more near communion with Christ then he can have in this world. So
that all is on the bettering hand to him that is stablished in Christ: for it
is not an act of one day to be stablished in Christ; God does it more and more
till death, and then comes a perfect consummation of this stablishing; we shall
be for ever with the Lord, says the Apostle. A man then that is stablished in
Christ, he is fixed, he is built on a rock, come what can come, he is not
afraid.

Alas, others that are not so, they are as wicked Ahaz in Esaias 7. he was
boisterous out of trouble, but in trouble he was as fearful, his heart shook
as the leaves of the forest, as the leaves of the forest when the wind comes,
they are shaken, because they are not seemly knit to the tree, because they
have no stability.

All those whose hearts are not firmly settled in the knowledge of Christ, and
the excellent prerogatives that come by him, when troubles come, they are as
the leaves of the Forest; or as you have it in Psalm. 1. As the chafe that the
wind drives to and fro; because it has no consistence, it is a light body: or
as the dross, Psalm. 119. God shall destroy the wicked as dross: see how the
Scripture compares men (not only for their wickedness, but for their misery)
that have no certain being, but on earthly things, though they be never so
great, and (as they think) deeply rooted, when troubles come, they are as
dross, they are as chafe that has no firmness, before the wind: when the
wind of Judgment comes, they are as stubble presently wasted and brought to
nothing.

I beseech you therefore without deceiving of our own hearts, let us enter into
our own souls, and examine, for our knowledge first, and then for Examine our
knowledge.
our boldness.

What do thou know in Religion that thou would die for? or die in? we are
stablished in no more to purpose, then we would dye for. Are those truths thou
know so firmly wrought in thee by the Spirit of God? have thou such
experience of them, such spiritual sense and taste of the goodness of them,
that thou would be content to part with thy life, rather then to part with
them? thou art stablished then by the Spirit of God in Christ. I do not speak
of every little truth, it needs not that a man should die for that; but I speak
for fundamental truths, can thou prove them so out of the Scripture? and
do thou find the testimony of Jesus Christ witnessing to thy heart that they
are true? then thou art confirmed and stablished in these truths. I beseech
you, let us often examine upon what grounds, and how firmly we know what we
know. For, have we not many, that if the Adversaries should come, would conform
to Popery, and join themselves to Rome, because they cannot back their
principles with Scriptures, and because they have not a spiritual
understanding, and apprehension of Divine truths? Now he that is stablished
stands firm against temptations, and against arguments; he will not be won away
from his faith, but remains unmovable.

Therefore (I say) let us often examine our selves in this particular: I
believe this and this against the Papists and others; I but how shall I stand
out for this? If trials should come, am I able to prove this from the
Scriptures so clear as if it were written (as he says) with a Sunbeam? The
temptation and assaults of the Devil, by men's subtle wits and arguments, will,
shake our judgments, will hurt more, and if time should come, try us better
then fire and faggot. Those Spies that brought an evil report upon the Land of
Canaan, we see, that though the Land (when it was won) was fruitful enough, and
the conquest of it honorable, etc. (and therein those Spies discovered their
own weakness) yet when they had made that shrewd Oration, and brought subtle
arguments to the eye of flesh and blood, we see (I say) how the people were
discouraged, and how they staggeted. So a man that is not stablished, he may
sometimes have shrewd men to deal withal, perhaps Atheists, Papists, Jesuits,
and the Devil joining with them to unsettle men; and they will prevail if men
be not well settled and stablished before.

And so for the course of our life and conversation amongst men; we should
examine how we are stablished in that: for we are not only to stand Examine
our course of life.
firm in cases of Religion; but for causes of honesty. John Baptist was as good
as a Martyr, though the cause he dyed for was not Religion, but a bold telling
of Herod, when he thought he took an unlawful course in keeping his brothers
Wife.

An honest man may dye and suffer much for civil matters. Therefore examine
your selves in this: I have undertaken this cause, upon what ground? in what
confidence? how far would I willingly go in it? could I be content to lose the
favor of great ones? to dye in the quarrel if need be? So far as a man is
stablished by Gods Spirit, so far is he settled also in this.

You have had Heathen men, that would stand out firmly even to the death,
against all disfavours, against all losses and crosses for evidence of Civil
truths, as you have it storied of Papinian an excellent Lawyer, that in the
defense of right, stood forth to the loss of his life; and many other the like
examples have been: But much more does the Spirit of God stablish men; this I
understand, this cause is good, this I will stand in, come what will, when I am
called to it.

Let us often call our selves to an account, what we believe, and upon what
ground: what we do, and upon what ground we undertake it; whether on grounds of
conscience, or out of spleen and passion? When a man undertakes things on
natural grounds, in great temptations, (if God do not assist him) he will sink.
Take the strongest courages that are, if they have no more but nature, though
they may stand out sometimes, (to the shame of Christians) yet in some cases
they will show themselves to be but mere natural men.

And therefore labor for the Spirit to stablish us. It is not necessary that
we should enjoy our wealth, nor the favor of men, nor our life it self; but it
is necessary that we should keep a good conscience; it is necessary that we
should be saved, it is necessary that we should look upon our Judge with
confidence at the day of Judgment.

It becomes Christians who besides the light of nature, have the Spirit to
stablish them, to be settled in their courses, to look that the conscience be
good, the cause good, the aim good. If such a one give over when the cause is
clear and good, it is a sign that his heart is not stablished by the Spirit of
God in Christ: he has either corrupt aims, or else he is weak, and
understands not the grounds of Religion, and the vanity of this life as he
should do.

There are none that flinch and give over in a good quarrel, but either it is
from hypocrisy, that he pretends to believe in Christ, and life everlasting,
and yet he does not; or else it is from extreme and wonderful weakness, which
(if he belong to God) he shall recover, (as Peter did) and shall stand more
strongly another time.

It is but a forced, a false encouragement and stablishing, when a man None but
a Christ an truly courageous in death.
(that has not the Spirit of God) shall set light by death, though perhaps he
die in a good quarrel, and with some comfort. For when a man shall know, that
after death there is a Judgment, and that God has many things to lay to his
charge, when his conscience shall tell him that he is guilty of a thousand
deaths, if he be not in Christ, and his pardon sealed by the Spirit of God in
the blood of Christ: is it not madness to be courageous in that which he
cannot conquer? It is good for a man to be courageous in time of conquest: It
is a dastardly thing for a Christian to be cowardly, because he has death and
hell conquered, and every thing is made serviceable to help him to heaven. But
for another man to set light by these things, it is more madness. No man but a
Christian can be stout and courageous, except it be from a false spirit;
especially in things that are above man's natural power, as death it is eternal,
and what man can stand out against the eternal wrath of God?

And therefore those that put on a Roman stoutnesse and courage, though they
seem to have strong spirits, it is but false; either they are besotted with
sensuality, or else with a spirit of pride. When they look before them, and see
eternity, and see their sins, and that they must all appear at the day of
Judgment, they cannot be strong. Let us labor therefore to have our hearts
stablished by the Spirit of God; and try our selves often, by propounding
Queries, how we do things? with what minds and? upon what grounds?

Again, another Evidence, whereby we may know that we have spiritual 2. Desire
of Christ's coming.
strength and stability in Christ wrought in us by the Spirit of God, is this:
when it makes us desire the coming of Christ: when it makes us think of death,
and of the time to come with joy and comfort: and that for the present it gives
us boldness to the Throne of Grace in extremities. He that in extremity can go
to God in Christ, it is a sign his heart is established.

Hypocrites in extremity fly to desperate courses, as Saul and Achitophel did:
but in extremity the soul that is stablished goes to God: My God, my God, says
Christ: so Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. I say, it is an
evidence of a soul stablished upon Christ by the Spirit of God, to have
boldness to the Throne of Grace in extremity; nay, when God seems to hide
himself (which is the principal extremity of all) as in Divine temptations,
when God seems to be an enemy, then for a man to fight and wrestle with God,
and tug with the temptation, and not to let God go, though he kill him; this is
a true Israel, a conqueror of God: this is a heart fortified by the Spirit.

It is an argument of a heart established, when (besides for the present) for
the time to come, he can cheerfully and boldly think how it will be with him
when death shall come, that he shall go to Christ, that the Match shall be
fully made up that is begun by God between Christ and him, (for the contract is
in this world, but the nuptials are celebrated in heaven) and in confidence
hereof can say, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

A heart that is not stablished says, Oh come not. Wherefore art thou come to
torment us before our time? say the Devils to Christ; so an unstablished heart,
at the hour of death, is afraid it shall be tormented before the time: and
therefore come not, come not, says such a soul. But the soul that is
stablished upon Christ and upon the promises in Christ of forgiveness of sins,
and life everlasting by the Spirit of Christ, that says, Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

I have been larger upon this Point, then I intended: these unsettled times
moved me to speak a little more then ordinary, that we might labor to have our
hearts stablished, that whatsoever comes we may have somewhat that is certain
to stick to; that our estate in Christ may be sure, whatsoever becomes of our
state in the world otherwise.

VERSE XXII. Who has anointed us, and also sealed us, and given the earnest of
the Spirit in our hearts.
THe Apostle having formerly laid open the riches of a Christian; In this Verse
he comes to show his strength: His riches consists in the promises of God in
Christ: His strength, in being stablished upon those promises. Now that which
he had spoken of more generally in the word stablishing, he unfolds in three
borrowed Terms, Anointing, Sealing, Earnest: Implying therein the manner of the
Spirits establishing a Christian. He who stablisheth us: how is that wrought?
By the Spirit anointing, by the Spirit sealing, and by the earnest of the
Spirit: which three terms do all argue assurance. For you know, that in the old
Law, Kings, Priests, and Prophets were anointed, that is, they were authorized
and confirmed in their places. And for sealing; Writings (among our selves) are
sealed for security. And an Earnest secures Contracts and Bargains. So that
whatsoever may serve to strengthen a Christians faith and assurance, is here
laid down: God to help our souls by our senses fetches it from humane
affairs, applying words borrowed from earthly commerce, by a heavenly
anagogical sense to spiritual things.

First, the sure estate of a Christian is set down in the general, by
stablishing: and then in particular, we are anointed and sealed, and have the
Earnest of the Spirit.

God, in the Covenant of grace does our part and his own too; he gives faith,
and strengthens faith, and seals us: he gives us promises, he does stablish us
upon those promises, and works our hearts to an embracing of them, he anoints
us, and seals us, and gives us the Earnest of the Spirit. All in the Covenant
of Grace depends upon the faithfulness of God; and not upon ours, but upon
ours dependantly, as he is faithful in stablishing us. Now because the holy
Apostle would have us settled in the excellency of the state of a Christian in
the Covenant of grace, you see how largehearted he is; he uses four words
implying one and the same thing, Stablishing, Anointing, Sealing, and giving
Earnest; all of them words used in ratification amongst men.

God is pleased to stoop to speak to us in our own language; to speak of
heavenly things after an earthly manner: and therefore he sets down the certain
estate of a Christian by borrowed speeches. This is a gracious condescending of
God, stooping (as it were) lower then himself: and indeed so he always abaseth
himself when he deals with man, coming down far below himself.

To come to the words in particular. And has anointed us.


This word has a double reference. The holy Ghost carries our minds first to
the relation and proportion that is between the graces of the Spirit of God,
and the ointment with which in former times they were anointed in the Jewish
Polity. And it has reference likewise and relation to the persons that were
anointed. The persons were Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

Now God has anointed us in Christ. The order is this:

First, Christ himself as Mediator is anointed with the oil of gladness above
his fellows; but for his fellows. The ointment is first poured on the head of
spiritual Aaron, and then it runs down to all the skirts of his garment, that
is, to the meanest Christian. Even as the least finger and toe is actuated, and
enlivened, and moved by the soul and spirits, that the head and the chief vital
parts are: so every Christian though he be but as the toe or the foot, yet all
have communicated by the Spirit from Christ the head. So that the third person,
the Holy Ghost, that sanctified the humane nature of Christ, that filled and
enriched it with all grace, and anointed Christ; the same Spirit enricheth all
his mystical members. As there is one Spirit in Christ, and that sacred body he
took on him; so there is in the mystical body but one Spirit quickening and
enlivening, and moving the head, and the members. He is a head of influence, as
well as a head of eminence: Of his fullness we have all grace for grace: He is
first anointed, and then we are anointed in him.

We will first speak of it as it has reference to an ointment: and then as it
has reference to the persons anointed.

In the first place then, why are graces here called anointing?

I answer, they are called anointing, from reference to that composed ointment
in Exodus 30. where you have the composition of the holy oil laid down.

But in particular, you may observe these five particulars in which the
relation stands.

First, Ointment is a liquor supereminent, it will have the highest place, it
will have the eminency, and be above all other liquors, and in that respect it
is a royal liquor: so the graces of Gods Spirit, they are of an eminent nature.
Spiritual gifts are above the gifts of nature; and spiritual blessings are
above earthly things: the grace of God is a supereminent, a royal thing, it
will be above all, even above our parts of nature: if a man have by nature a
strong wit, grace will subdue his wit, so that he shall be only witty to
salvation, he shall be only strong to defend the truth, and to do nothing
against it: he will subjugate and subordinate his parts and whatsoever
excellency he has by nature, to grace; cast all at Christ's feet, count all as
dung, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ. And so again, grace
is above corrupt nature, above all our corruptions, it will bring them under,
it will subdue corruptions, temptations, afflictions; any thing, what you will,
that is either natural; or diabolical: for grace is spiritual, and that which
is spiritual, is above all that is below: Grace is of an invincible nature, it
will bear sway by little and little; it is little in quantity, but it is mighty
in operation. And it is above any outward excellency whatsoever; if a man be a
King, if he have this anointing, it makes him better then himself: he is better
in that he is a Christian, that he has this sacred anointing, then for any
other created excellency under heaven whatsoever; yea, though he were an Angel.
Grace has its derivance and influence from Christ, who is higher then all, and
will be above all; and so will grace. That is the first. Other liquors, the
best of them will be beneath; but oil, it will be above all.

It is compared to ointment in the second place, because that ointment is sweet
and delightful; so was the ointment that was poured upon our Savior by the
woman in the Gospel: therefore the Spouse in Cant. 1. 3. speaking of Christ,
Because (says she) of the savor of thy good ointments, thy Name is as an
ointment poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee: The graces that are
in Christ are so sweet, that they draw the Virgins, they draw all believers
after him. So grace in a Christian, it makes us sweet; it sweetens our persons,
and our actions: It sweetens our persons to God; God delights in the smell of
his own graces: it makes us delectable for Christ and his holy Spirit to lodge
in our souls as in a garden of Spices: It makes us sweet to the Church, to the
communion of Saints. A gracious man that has his corruptions subdued, is
wondrous sweet, his heart is as fine silver, every thing is sweet that comes
from him. When the woman poured the box of ointment upon Christ, the whole
house was filled with the smell thereof: so the whole Church is filled with the
savor of the graces of good men, that either do live in the present times; or
have left their graces in writing to posterity.

A wicked man is an abomination to God, and so are all his actions; he that is
in the flesh cannot please God: a civil man that has not this anointing, all
that he does is abominable to God; all things are unclean to the unclean even
their best actions have a tincture of defilement from their corruption: without
this ointment we are not sweet, neither to God, nor to others; therefore the
Scripture terms men in the state of nature, Swine and Goats, stinking
creatures; and so indeed they that have not this anointing, they are stinking
Goats, and shall be set at Christ's left hand, except they have grace to sweeten
their understandings and affections, and to draw them higher then nature can.

Likewise grace is full of sweetness to a man's self; it sweetneth our nature
and our actions to our selves: a good conscience being privy to it self of the
work of grace, is a continual feast; the conscience of a Christian, once
renewed by grace, inlargeth the soul, and fills it with sweet peace and joy in
believing.

Thirdly, the graces of the Spirit are called anointing, because anointing
strengthens; therefore usually Warriors and Combatants, (amoug the Heathen)
that were to encounter, were first anointed: so there is a Spirit of strength
in all those that are true Christians which they have received from God,
whereby they are able to do that that worldlings cannot do; they are able to
deny themselves, to overcome themselves in matters of revenge, etc. they are
able to want and to abound, to bear crosses, to resist temptations, and, as
the Apostle says, able to do all things; nothing can stand in the way of a
gracious man, no not the gates of hell; he that is in him, Grace is stronger
then he that is in the world: the least measure of grace, though it be but as a
grain of mustard seed, is stronger then the greatest measure of opposition,
though strengthened with all the power of hell.

In the fourth place, ointment makes the joints of the body nimble: so this
spiritual anointing it oils the joints of the soul, (as I may say) and makes
them nimble, and ready to serve God in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the letter. Gods people are called a willing people, and a cheerful
people, ready to every good work. And there is good reason for it; for they
have an inward spiritual anointing, that makes them active and nimble in every
thing they do: that Spirit that sanctifies them, that Spirit tells them what
Christ has done for them, that there is no damnation to them, that God is
reconciled to them, that they are freed from the greatest dangers, that all is
theirs, and so their joy and nimblenesse is from good reason: and there is a
spirit of love in them unto God and Christ, which makes them nimble. When a man
is without grace, he goes lumpishly and heavily about the service of God: he is
drawn and forced to prayer, and to hearing, and to conference and meditation:
he is dead and dull, and frozen to good works; but when a man has received
this sweet anointing of the Spirit, his heart is enlarged to all duties
whatsoever, he is prepared to every good work.

Again, oil makes cheerful: so does grace, it makes cheerful in adversity,
cheerful in death, cheerful in those things that dismay the spirits of other
men: so much grace, so much joy; for even as light and heat follow the fire, so
the spirit of joy does follow this spiritual anointing: Conscience of the
interest he has in the favor of God in Christ, and the evidences of grace
stamped upon his heart, and an assurance of a better estate in the world to
come, wonderfully enlarge the soul with spiritual joy: that which makes a man
lumpish, and heavy, and earthly, is not the Spirit of God: the Spirit of God is
a Spirit of joy, and it puts a gracious cheerfulness in the heart of a
Christian; if there be mourning, it is that it may be more cheerful: for light
is sown to the righteous sometimes in mourning. God loves a cheerful giver,
and a cheerful thanksgiver; all must be sweetened with cheerfulness, now this
comes from the Spirit of God: and he that is anointed with the Spirit, in some
measure partakes of spiritual joy and cheerfulness.

Again, ointment you know is of a healing nature; as Balm and other sweet
ointments have a healing power and virtue: the Scripture makes mention of the
Balm of Gilead: so grace has a healing power; repentance that is of a
purging, spiritual joy of a healing nature; there must (you know) be first a
cleansing, and then a healing and strengthening: so some graces are purgative
and cleansing, some again are strengthening and healing: repentance is a good
purgation; it carries away the malignant and evil matter; but the Cordial that
strengthens the soul, is joy, The joy of the Lord is your strength. Nehem. 8.
and so the grace of faith and love tend to cherrish and corroborate the soul:
so that (I say) these graces, this Balm of the Spirit, has a special
Sovereign power to heal us, to heal us both from the guilt of sin, and from
the dominion, and rule, and filthy stain of sin; it has both a purging and a
Cordial virtue.

Thus you see, that upon good grounds the graces of Gods Spirit, that he
communicates to the Elect, and only to them that are in Christ, they are called
anointing; and they will have the effect of an ointment in us, if we receive
this anointing,

Let us therefore try our selves by these, whether we be anointed or no; what
cheerfulness is there? what joy? what strength? what nimblenesse to that which
is good? what sovereignty has grace in our hearts? you have a company that
profess Religion, but make it serve their own turn, that make heaven to come
under earth, that make the service of God to stoop to other ends: Beloved,
grace it is a superior thing, and Religion makes all subordinate: Grace and
Religion wheresoever it is in truth, is of a ruling nature: and so it is sweet,
and it is strong wheresoever it is; it is curing, and purging, and cleansing
wheresoever it is: therefore I beseech you, let us not deceive our selves.

I need say no more of the Point, you may enlarge it in your own meditations.

I come to the persons

As this anointing has reference to the ointment, so it has relation to the
persons that were anointed.

Now the persons anointed were first dedicated by anointing; they were
consecrated to God and separated from the world: And as they were dedicated and
separated, so they were dignified by this anointing, it raised them above the
common condition: And likewise with this anointing God gave them qualifications
suitable.

You have three eminent persons that were anointed, and so raised above the
common condition of other men.

Prophets, to teach the people.

Priests, to offer sacrifice

Kings, to govern them.

Now Christ is principally all these: He is the principal Prophet of his
Church, the Angel of the Covenant; He is Logos, the Word, because as the inward
word, the mind of a man, is known by the outward word; so Christ is called the
Word, because as a Prophet, he discovers his Fathers mind, and makes known his
Fathers will unto us.

And he is the great high Priest, he makes atonement between God and us, he
stands between his Father and us.

And he is the great King of his Church, that rescues it from all its enemies,
to protect and defend it.

But as Christ has received this anointing primarily, and above his fellows,
yet (as I said before) he has received it for his fellows. Every Christian
has his anointing from Christ's anointing, all our graces and all our oyatment
is derived from him. He (says the Appostle, Rev. 1.) has loved us, and washed
us in his blood; (he loved us first, which is the cause of all, and then he
washed us in his blood; he did not only shed his blood for us, but he washed
us in his blood: he has applied his blood to our souls, and by applying that
and sprinkling it upon our souls,) he has made us Kings and Priests to God his
Father: And indeed, the great King of heaven and earth, he is and will be
attended upon by none but Kings and Priests; he has no servants but such as
are anointed; he is followed of none but eminent persons, such as are separated
from the world, and dignified above all other people: for the glory of his
followers tends to his honor: therefore those whom God chooses to be his
atendants, he qualifies them, gives them the hearts of Kings, royal
qualifications, and the hearts of Priests, and the hearts of Prophets. But this
in the general.

To show it therefore in particulars.

A Christian is anointed, he is a person severed from the world, dedicated to
God, and dignified above others, and that from good reason, because God has
given him an inward qualification, which is the foundation of all.

And first, he is a true Prophet, for he has received the anointing of the
Spirit, 1 John 2. whereby he is enabled to discern of things: he knows what is
true honor, to be the child of God: he knows what is true riches, Grace: he
knows what is true Nobility, to be born of God; what is true pleasure, Peace
of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost: he can discern between seeming and
real things, and only he that has received this anointing of the Spirit.

And again, as a Prophet, he knows not only the things, but the doing of the
things; he has with the anointing of the Spirit ability to do that which he
knows; the grace of God teaches him not only the duty, that he should live
justly, and soberly, and godly, but teaches him to do the things; for God
writes his Laws in his bowels, that is, in his affections: he can love and joy
in God, and hate sin, and overcome revenge, etc. The Spirit shows him Divine
things by a Divine light; he sees heavenly things with a heavenly light: and
Divine and spiritual knowledge is a working knowledge, of the same nature with
the things known. The poorest Christian in the world having this anointing,
sees good things with such a convincing light, and evil things with such a
convincing hatred, that he is doing and acting: whereas a Christian that has
not the Spirit, he may know heavenly things by a natural light, by a
discoursive knowledge; he may know what he should do, and so perhaps he may
talk, but he cannot do: he may talk of death, but he cannot dye; he may talk
and discourse of suffering, but when it comes, he cannot suffer: he may speak
much of patience, but he cannot act patience when occasion is: A true Christian
has the knowledge of doing things.

And likewise he is able to speak a word in due season, to reprove, to
admonish, to comfort. Every member in the communion of Saints has some
qualification in regard of knowledge, when he is put to it.

But especially he has received this anointing as a Priest, and a King.

As a Priest, to stand before God, and to offer up prayers for himself and
others. Every Christian is a Favorite in heaven, he has much credit there, he
has Gods ear open at all times, and he improves it for the good of the Church,
for the good of others as well as for his own. And as to pray for our selves
and others, so to bless our selves and others; that was one part of the
Priests Office, and so (as the Scipture says) we are called unto blessing; and
therefore those that are given unto cursing, are not Priests.

And again, a Christian that has received this anointing as a Priest, he keeps
himself unspotted of the world: You know, the Priests were to touch no unclean
thing, nor to defile themselves with any manner of pollution; so every
Christian in some measure is enabled to abstain from the common pollutions of
the times, to hate even the garment spotted with the flesh: he is not carried
with the stream of the times; he will not converse amiably with those that may
stain him, but as his calling leads him, lest he contaminate his spirit.

And likewise a Christian has his heart always as the Holy of Holies, that so
he may offer up thanks and praise to God; there is a disposition in him always
to praise God. As the fire in the Sanctuary must never go out; so the fire that
is kindled by the Spirit of God in the heart of a Christian, it never goes out,
the Holy Ghost maintains it continually: he is ready to praise God upon all
occasions; ready to offer up himself unto God as a sacrifice. The sacrifices of
a Christian are a broken heart: and as in the Law, the sacrifices for sin must
first be killed, and then offered; so now in the Gospel, it is the work of
every Christian, to mortify, to kill, and slay those beasts, those corruptions
that are in him contrary to God. A Christian must not offer himself to God as a
sinner, but he must first slay his corruptions: he must mortify his sins, and
then offer up himself slain to God.

Therefore our care must be to mortify every corruption, every faculty of the
soul, and every part of the body: we must circumcise our eyes, that they behold
not vanity; and our ears, that they hear not, and delight not in unchaste
things; and our thoughts and every part, our wills and affections, and then
offer up soul and body as a living sacrifice unto God, that all may be
dedicated and sanctified unto him, and then it is a sweet sacrifice: then when
a Christian has dedicated himself to God, it is an easy matter to give him
his goods when he calls for them, then he will be ready to let all go, as the
Apostle says of the Corinthians, they first gave themselves to God, and then
to others: other sacrifices will follow when we have first given our selves to
God: therefore the first sacrifice is to kill our corruptions, to offer our
selves to God, and then we shall be ready to offer our estates, and to have
nothing but at Gods disposing; Oh Lord, of thy hand I have my body and my life,
and my goods and all, I give them unto thee: if thou will have me to enjoy
them, I do; but if thou will have them sacrificed, I am a Priest, I am willing
to offer my self as a burnt-sacrifice to thee even to the death, and all other
things when thou shall be pleased to call for them: and indeed, all other
sacrifices of our goods, and thankfulness in words, they will easily come off
when we have offered our selves, as I said before.

What is the reason that men will not part with a penny for good uses? They
have not given themselves as sacrifices unto God: therefore in the Scripture we
are pressed to give our selves unto God first: and it uses arguments to that
purpose; as that we are not our own, but bought with a price, etc.

And so for the Kingly office.

Every Christian by this anointing is made a King, Rev. 1. 6. He has loved us,
and washed us, and made us Kings, etc.

But how are we Kings? (to take away an Objection that arises in the hearts of
carnal men) Oh (say they.) they talk that they are Kings, when perhaps they
have not a penny in their purse; they talk they are Kings, when in the mean
time they are underlings in the world: here are Kings indeed, think profane
conceited persons.

Indeed, all other things are but shadows, these be realities; this is a
Kingdom to purpose: Thou live by sense and by fancy, or else if thou had
the spiritual eye salve, if thou had thine eyes open to see the dignity of
a Christian, thou would judge him to be the only King in the world: and
therefore I do not enlarge the Point to set colors upon matters, but indeed, I
rather speak under: there is no excellency that we can think of in this world,
that rises high enough to set out the state of a Christian: he is indeed a
King.

For (I beseech you) what makes a King? Victory and Conquest, that makes a
King: Is not he a Conqueror that has that in him that conquers the world, and
all things else? others that are not Christians, they are slaves to lusts and
pleasures. A Christian that is chief Conqueror in the world, he conquers the
world in his heart, and all temptations are inferior to him; he sees them as
things that he has gotten the mastery of: He subdues the principal enemy: a
Christian fears not death, he fears not Judgment, he fears not the wrath of
God; he knows God is reconciled in Christ, and so all things are reconciled
with him: God being at peace, all things else are at peace; so he is a
Conqueror: he has a Kingdom in himself, others have Kingdoms out of
themselves, and in themselves they are slaves; he is such a King as has a
Kingdom in himself; he has peace and joy, and rest from base affections, and
terror of conscience.

Is not he a King that is a Lord and Master of all things? A Christian is
Master of prosperity, he conquers it; he can make it serve his turn, to be
thankful to God, to be ready to distribute: he is Master of adversity, I can
want, and I can be abased, I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, says blessed Paul: He is an omnipotent King in some sense,
he can do all through him that strengthens him: He has conquered the King of
fears, death: that that makes the greatest Monarch in the world to shake and
tremble, a Christian can think of with comfort: He can think of Gods wrath with
comfort, appeased in Christ, stenched with his blood; he can think of the day
of Judgment with comfort, that then his Savior shall be his Judge, and that he
shall stand at the right hand of God: He can think of afflictions with comfort,
he is sanctified to all things, and all things are sanctified to him, and all
things shall work for his good, nothing shall be able to separate him from Gods
love to him in Christ, neither things present, nor things to come: That which
amazeth the Belshazzars of the world, and makes their knees smite one against
another (as that handwriting did him,) that which makes others quake to think
of (a revenging God, before whom they must appear, and answer for all their
miscarriages and their neglect of precious time, and abuse of their places)
they can think of with joy and comfort.

He has conquered himself and his own heart; he can subdue the carnal part of
him, and bring it under the Spirit; all others, (though Kings) if they be not
Christians, are slaves to some reigning lust or other.

He is a King likewise in regard of possession; which is a second thing which
makes a Christian an excellent person; as he is a great Conqueror, so he is a
great possessour; for All is yours (says the Apostle,) things present and
things to come, life and death, afflictions and crosses and all is yours: How?
to help him to heaven; things present are his: comforts are his if they be
present: afflictions are his to purge him, and to fit him for heaven: things to
come are his, heaven is his, and terrors to come, all serve him: Even evil
things are his in advantage and success; though in disposition they be not
his, but have an hostile disposition in them, they are all overpowered by the
love of God: And Christ the King of heaven and earth overrules all to the good
of his: And so all good things are his, though not in civil possession, but as
far as the great Governor of all things sees fit: what a King is this? and
therefore the word is not too great, to say; a Christian is a King: he is
indeed the most excellent person in the world.

And he has likewise a Kingly spirit, that is, he does things with love and
freedom of spirit, that others do upon compulsion: for he has the royal Law
of love (as the Apostle says) written in his heart: what is that? the royal
Law of love is this, when a man does that which he does from love, and from a
Princely spirit, when he is not compelled: that which others do not at all, or
by force is wrung from them, he does out of a Princely spirit that is in him,
because his spirit is enlarged and anointed by the Spirit of God to every good
work.

These things might be enlarged, but a taste of them is sufficient; and they
are very useful to raise our hearts to consider that there is another manner of
State then the world thinks of: there are spiritual and excellent Kings and
Priests; and this will stand by us when all other excellencies will fail: All
flesh is grass, and as the flower of the grass; but this dignity, this
anointing which we have by the Spirit, and by the Word of God, it endures for
ever, and abides to all eternity.

Now (not to go on in more particulars, but) to make some Use of this. Surely,
this is true in some degree of every Christian, that he is a Prophet, to
discern of things that differ; and he has a supernatural heavenly light
answerable to the things; a spiritual light to judge of spiritual things: And
he is a Priest to stand before God continually: And he is a King, by conquest,
by possession, by qualification. I say, this undoubtedly is true of all
spiritual persons that are anointed. As it is said of Saul, that when he was
anointed he had another Spirit; so God never makes a Christian, but he gives
him the Spirit of a Christian: Gods calling is with qualification, it is not a
mere titular anointing, but there is another Spirit goes along with this
anointing, then there was before calling: though men be trained up from their
infancy in the truth, yet when they are anointed by the Spirit of God, there
will another manner of Spirit appear in them, then ever was in them before, or
then that which is in the world.

I beseech you therefore, (for dignity prepares and stirs up to duty, a man
never so carries himself in his place and condition, as when he thinks of his
condition,) often think of the excellent estate we are advanced to in Christ; it
will put us in mind of a qualification and disposition answerable: that as the
Apostle often presses it, we may walk worthy our calling, that we may walk
worthy of this dignity.

When we are tempted therefore to sin, and to base courses, let us say as good
Nehemiah when he was moved to fly, What shall such a man as I fly? so should
we say to any temptation to base courses of life, what shall such a man as I do
this? Why, if I be a Christian, if I be not only a titular Christian, (which
is only sufficient to damn me, and not to do me good,) but if I be a real
Christian, I must be a Priest, I must keep my self unspotted of the world, and
undefiled, and not touch any unclean thing: I must be in a state and condition
to pray to God, Shall I regard iniquity, that God should not hear my prayer?

If I be a Christian, I am a King; shall I debase my self? shall I cast my
crown in the dirt? God has raised me, and made me an heir of heaven, shall I
abase my self to sins, and to base lusts, so that I cannot rule my own members,
and yet profess my self to be a King? For a Christian that is a King, that
has a guard of Angels about him, that is the most excellent creature in the
world, for him to abase himself to the world; he that is bred from heaven, for
him to have no higher thoughts then the things below, to have an earthly mind,
and earthly thoughts, it is a shrewd presumption that he is but only a titular
Christian; and has not received this inward and spiritual anointing. It was a
speech of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, when they were asked their
names, they gave this answer, Christianus sum, I am a Christian; and that
satisfied all questions: so when we are basely tempted to courses unbefitting
our dignity, answer them from our Baptism, I am baptized into Christ, and so
am become a Christian, and this is unbeseeming the profession of Christianity.

I beseech you let us remember our calling, we are called to be Prophets,
Kings, and Priests, and not only here, but in the world to come we shall be
so; we must not think to be Kings in Heaven, except we begin it here.

It is with a Christian, as it was with David, he was anointed many years
before he was actually a King upon the Throne; while Saul lived, he did not
enjoy the Kingdom: So we are anointed in this world, in part we are Kings
while we are here; Kings over our selves, and over the world: a Christian sees
all under him that is worldly, he treads the Moon under his feet: but our
anointing has then especially its effect when we are in heaven; as David's
anointing it had its special effect when Saul was dead. We must now carry our
selves as those that shall be Kings: those that are not Kings here, shall never
be Kings hereafter; those that are not Priests here, shall never walk with
Christ in heaven in long white Robes for ever. Eternal life is begun here in
all the parts of it.

And therefore I beseech you, if our memories be so shallow that we cannot
remember other bonds, let us remember our Baptism, let us read our duty in our
Baptism: what are we baptized into? Into Christ, that is, to take the Name of
Christ upon us, to be Christians; which name implies these three, to be a King,
Priest, and Prophet. What do we then when we sin? We reverse our Baptism in
some sort: let it be an aggravation then when we are tempted to sin; it is
Treason to God, I shall leave my Captain, under whose banner I have vowed to
fight against the Devil, the world, and the flesh; and to forsake my colors is
the greatest treachery: Yea, it is sacrilege: and so God accounts it, when
thou prophanest thine eyes and thine ears in seeing and hearing of vanity, as
you do when you frequent Play Houses and the like: I say, it is sacrilegious;
Kings and Priests were dedicated persons, and to employ dedicated things about
any other business, then to God, is sacrilege; it is a committing of folly
with thy soul. Men have slight conceits of Religion, and scarce a tincture of
it: if they did deeply consider what Religion is, that it seizes upon the
soul, that it alters and changes it, that whosoever will have benefit by the
Promises, he must have an inward qualification, and be anointed with the
Spirit; they would have better conceits of it then they have: and hence it is
therefore that men make so little conscience of giving liberty to their ears
and eyes to hear and see vanity, and defile themselves in evil courses, and
cleave to the occasions of sin.

Let us often (I beseech you) be stirred up to think of our high prerogatives,
with high admiration, what love! what love! has God showed, That we should be
called the sons of God, that we should be made Kings and Priests to God the
Father. And if every you hope to have comfort by Religion, you must find this
anointing in your selves, raising you above other men to holy duties, to be
Kings, and Priests, and Prophets. Who has anointed us, and sealed us, etc.


You see then, a Christian is stablished this way in Christ, because he is
anointed by the Spirit of God; he is dedicated and consecrated to God: Hence
(before I go on to that which follows) in that the Apostle coupleth
anointing, and sealing, and earnest to the Promises, observe this briefly, None
have interest in the Promises of mercy, none can find comfort by them, but such
as find some change in themselves.


The Promises of God (as I have often said) are the riches of a Christian, and
his inheritance: take all from him, you must needs leave him this, you cannot
take this from him: and as an Usurer thinks he is a rich man, though he have
not two pence in his house, but all that he has is in Bills and Bonds, so a
Christian, though happily he have not much in actual possession, yet he is rich
in that he has Gods bonds in the promises: but now a man cannot say that he is
interessed in the promises, that he can lay claim to them, if he be an
unfruitful man, an unhallowed man, that has not the sweet ointment of the
Spirit, changing of him (as it is said of Saul) into another man: for God
wheresoever he reconciles himself, and gives any promise of favor and mercy,
there he works a qualification. Of necessity it must be so, because he is
reconciled to amity: now in friendship there must be a correspondent similitude
of disposition and sympathy. Now as long as we are in our natural estate, and
remain unhallowed and defiled, we are in such terms as God and we cannot meet
in amity, and therefore wheresoever the promises of the favor of God and
reconciliation are of force, there must be a change: God, when he intends to
show favor to any, he alters and changes them, that they may be such as he
may have content, and complacency and delight in.

We see then there is a necessity of examining our selves in this point. If
thou be anointed, examine thy self, what inward power of grace thou have, what
sweet work of the Spirit; whether thou find in thee a principle above
corruption, that makes thee rule above that which the world is inthralled unto:
undoubtedly as our title to heaven it is out of our selves, by the promises we
have of salvation and reconciliation in Christ; so the evidences must be found
in our selves; there must be anointing, and sealing, and the Earnest of the
Spirit: therefore I beseech you, think seriously of what I have delivered of
that Point before. But we shall have occasion in the particulars after to speak
more of this. I go on therefore to the second word, Who has sealed us.


The same God that anoints us, seals us. Anointing and sealing go both
together; both are to secure us of our estate in Christ: both wrought by the
Spirit of God.

Now Christ is the first sealed, Job. 6. Him has God the Father sealed: Christ
is sealed to be our Redeemer, that is, God has set apart Christ from others,
has distinguished him, and sealed him, and set a stamp upon him to be the
Messiah: sealed him to the great work of Redemption, first by the graces of the
Spirit; (for he is full of them, having received the Spirit above measure,) and
not only so, but he sealed him by many miracles, by the resurrection from the
dead, by which he was declared to be the Son of God; by the calling of the
Gentiles, and by many other things.

Christ being sealed, he sealed all that he did for our redemption with his
blood: and for the strengthening of our faith, he has added outward seals,
the two Sacraments, to seal our faith in this blood, and in him who is sealed
of the Father,

But here in this place is meant another manner of sealing; for here is not
meant the sealing of Christ, but the sealing of us, that have communion with
Christ. The same Spirit that sealed the Redeemer, seals the redeemed.

What is our Sealing?

Sealing we know has this use.

First of all, it does imprint a likeness of him that does seal upon the wax
that is sealed: as when the Kings Picture or Image is stamped or sealed upon
the wax; every thing in the wax answers to that in the seal, face to face, eye
to eye, hand to hand, foot to foot, body to body. So we are said to be sealed,
when we carry in our souls the Image of Jesus Christ: for the Spirit sets the
stamp of Jesus Christ upon every Christian, so that there is the likeness of
Christ in all things: understanding answers understanding, in proportion; as a
child (you know) answers the father, it has limb for limb, foot for foot,
finger for finger, but it is not in quantity, but in proportion and likeness:
so it is in the soul that is sealed by the Spirit, there is a likeness to
Christ, something of every grace of Christ: there is understanding of the same
heavenly supernatural truths; there is a judging of things as Christ judges:
and the affections go as Christ's do; he loves that which Christ loves, and he
hates that which he hates: he joys in that which Christ delights in: Every
affection of the soul is carried that way that the affections of our blessed
Savior are carried in proportion: Every thing in the soul is answerable to
Jesus Christ; and there is no grace in Christ, but there is the like in every
Christian in some small measure: the Obedience of Christ to his Father even to
the death, it is in every Christian: the Humility whereby Christ abased
himself, it is in every Christian. Christ works in the soul that receives him,
a likeness to himself.

And this is an undoubted Character of a Christian; The soul that believes in
Christ, does not only believe in him for his own sake, to be forgiven of his
sins, but together with believing, feeling the forgiveness of his sins, and
that Christ has so loved him, and done such things for him, he is ambitious to
express Christ in all things; and it stirs him up with desire to be like
him: for, thinks he, is there such love in Christ to me? and is there such
grace and mercy in God to me? and was Christ so good as to do and to suffer
such things for me? Oh how shall I improve things for him? Oh that I might be
like him! lovely in his eyes! This (I say) must needs be so, these desires are
undoubtedly universally in the souls of all those that partake of Christ; it
is the nature of the thing to be so: we shall desire to be transformed more and
more to Christ; Every way to bear the Image of the second Adam, who is (as the
Apostle says) from heaven, heavenly; and so shall we be heavenly-minded as he
was heavenly-minded on earth, talking and discoursing of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and sitting people for the Kingdom of heaven, and drawing others from
this world to meditate of a better estate: there is a likeness to these in the
soul of every believer: and that is the reason that Christ's Offices are put
together in all those that he saves, that look whosoever he is a Priest to, to
dye for their sins, to them he is a Prophet to teach them, and a King to subdue
their corruptions, and to change them, and alter them, and to rule them by his
Spirit.

You have carnal men in presumption, which leads them to destruction; they
sever things in Christ, they will take benefit by Christ, but they care not for
his likeness: they will have him as a Priest, but they respect him not as a
King. Now all that are Christ's have the stamp of the Spirit upon them: there
are desires wrought in them by the Spirit of God to that purpose: and a Spirit
of Sanctification, that makes them every way like Christ in their proportion.

And that is an evidence of the sealing of such a soul; because the soul of it
self has no such impression: for the soul of it self is a barren Wilderness,
a stone that is cold and incapable of impression: when therefore the soul can
command nature, being stiff, and hard, and dead, we see an impression of a
higher nature, a man may know that undoubtedly the Spirit of God has been in
this soul; for we see a loving spirit, an humble spirit, a gracious, a
believing, a broken spirit, an obedient spirit to every commandment of God; the
soul can yield it self wholly to the will of God in all things: certainly (I
say) the Spirit of God has been here; for these things grow not in a natural
soul. A stone (you know) is cold by nature, and if a man feel a stone to be
hot, a man may undeniably gather, Certainly the Sun has shined upon this
stone: Our hearts are very cold by nature, undoubtedly when they are warmed
with the love of God, that they are made pliable to duties, the Sun of
righteousness, Christ has shined on this cold heart. Gods Spirit can work on
Marble, can work on Brass, as Jeremy says. It was the commendations of one of
the Fathers, that he could work on Brass. God can work on our souls which are
as brass, and make an impression of grace there: and therefore when a man sees
an impression upon such hard metal, certainly he may know that the finger of
Gods Spirit has been there. So that the work of Sanctification is an undoubted
feal of the Spirit of God.

A second use of a Seal is Distinction. Seals are given for distinguishing:
for you know sealing is a stamp set upon some few out of many: so this sealing
of the Spirit, it distinguishes Christians from others; as we shall see more
at large afterward.

Then again, a Seal it serves for Appropriation: for men seal those things that
are their own. Merchants seal those Wares that they either have, or mean to
have a right unto: Men seal their own sheep, and not others, and stamp their
own Wares, and not others. God here stoops so low as to make use of terms that
are used in humane matters and contracts: and by sealing, he shows that he
has appropriated his own to himself, chosen and singled them out for himself
to delight in.

Again, sealing further serves to make things authentical, to give authority
and excellency to things: Magistrates and Officers go with their broad Seal,
and deliver things that they would have carried with authority, sealed; and the
Seal of the Prince is the authority of the Prince: so that a Seal is to make
things authentical, to give validity to things answerable to the value and
esteem of him that seals.

These four principal uses there is of sealing. Now God by his Spirit does all
these: for God by his Spirit sets the stamp and likeness of Christ upon us; he
distinguishes us from others, from the great refuse of the world: he
appropriates us to himself; and like wise he authorizeth us and puts an
excellency upon us to secure us against all: when we have Gods Seal upon us we
stand against all accusations; Who shall separate us from the love of God? we
dare def^ all objections, and all accusations of conscience whatsoever: a man
that has Gods* Seal, he stands impregnable, it so authorizeth him in his
conscience: for it is given us for our assurance, and not for Gods: God seals
not because he is ignorant, He knows who are his.

But what? is the Spirit it self this seal? or the graces of the Spirit? or the
comforts of the Spirit? what is this seal? (for that is the question now)
whether the Spirit it self, or the work of the Spirit, or the comfort and joy
of the Spirit?

I answer, indeed the Spirit of God where it is, is a sufficient seal to us,
that God has set us out for his: for whosoever has the Spirit of Christ is
his; and whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his: but the Spirit
is the Author of this sealing: and the sealing that is in us, is wrought by
the Spirit: so that except you take the Spirit for that which is wrought by the
Spirit, you have not the right comprehension of sealing; and so the Spirit with
that which the Spirit works, is the seal: for the Spirit is always with his own
seal, with his own stamp. Other seals are removed from the stamp, and the
stamp remains, though the seal be gone: but the Spirit of God dwells and keeps
a perpetual residence in the heart of a Christian, guiding him, moving him,
enlightening of him, governing him, comforting him, doing all offices of a seal
in his heart, till he have brought him to heaven: for the Holy Ghost never
leaves us; it is the sweetest inhabitant that ever lodging was given to: he
does all that is done in the soul, and he is perpetually with his own work in
joy and comfort; though he seems sometimes to be in a corner of the heart, and
is not discernable, yet he always dwells in us: the Spirit is always with the
stamp it sets upon the soul.

What is that stamp then? (to come to the matter more particularly,) what is
that that the Spirit seals us with especially? what is that work?

I answer, the Spirit works in this order for the most part; and in some of
these universally.

First, the Spirit does together with the Word (which is the instrument of the
Spirit, the Chariot in which it is carried) convince us of the evil that is in
us, and of the ill estate we are in by reason thereof: it convinces us that we
are sinners, and of the fearful estate that we are in by sin: this is the first
work of the Spirit on a man in the state of nature; it convinces us of the ill
that is in us, and of the ill due unto us, and thereupon it abaseth us:
therefore it is called the Spirit of bondage, because it makes a man tremble
and quake till he see his peace in Christ.

When the Spirit has done that, then it convinces a man by a better, by a
sweeter light, discovering a remedy in Christ, who is sealed of God, to
reconcile God and us. And as he enlightneth the soul, convinces it of the
all sufficiency that is in Christ, and the authority that he has, being sent
and sealed of God for that purpose; so he works on the affections, he inclines
the heart to go to God in Christ, and to cast himself on him by faith.

Now when the soul is thus convinced of the evil that is in us, and of the good
that is in Christ, and with this convincing is inclined and moved by the holy
Spirit, (as indeed the holy Spirit does all) then upon this the Spirit
vouchsafes a superadded work, (as the Spirit does still add to his own work)
he adds a confirming work, which is here called Sealing: that seal is not
faith: for the Apostle says, After you believed, ye were sealed: so that this
sealing is not the work of faith, but it is a work of the Spirit upon faith,
assuring the soul of its estate in grace.

But what need confirmation when we believe? Is not faith confirmation enough?
when a man may by a reflect act of the soul know that he is in the state of
grace by believing?

It is true, as the natural conscience knows what is in a man, as the natural
judgment can reflect, so the spiritual understanding can reflect; and when he
believes, he knows that he believes, without the Spirit, by the reflect act of
the understanding (except he be in case of temptaton) what needs sealing then?

This act of ours in believing, and the knowledge of our believing it is often
terribly shaken: and God is wondrous desirous (as we see by the whole passage
of the Scripture) that we should be secure of his love; he knows that he can
have no glory, and we can have no comfort else: and rherefore when we by faith
have sealed to his truth, he knows that we need still further sealing, that
our faith be current and good, and to strengthen our faith, for all is little
enough in the time of temptation; and therefore the single witness of our soul
by the reflect act, knowing that we do believe when we do believe, it is not
strong enough in great temptations; for in some trials the soul is so carried
and hurried, that it cannot reflect upon it self, nor know what is in it self,
without much ado: therefore first the Spirit works faith whereby we seal Gods
truth, Joh. 3. He that believes, has put to his seal that God is true: when
God by his Spirit moves me to honor him by sealing his truth, that Whosoever
believes in Christ, shall be saved, then God seals this my belief with an
addition of his holy Spirit: so that this sealing is a work upon believing; and
as faith honors God, so God honors faith with a superadded seal and
confirmation.

But yet we not come particularly enough to know what this Seal is. When we
honor God by sealing his truth, then the Spirit seals us; certainly then the
Spirit does it by presence, by being with us in our souls. What then does the
Spirit work when we believe? How shall we know that there is such a spiritual
sealing?

I answer, the Spirit in this sea^g works these four things:

First, a secret voice or witness to the soul, that we are the sons of God.

Secondly, a voice or speech in us again to God, causing us to have access to
the Throne of grace with boldness.

Thirdly, a work of Sanctification.

Fourthly, Peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

By these four ways we may know the sealing of the Spirit after we believe,
and that our faith is a sound belief, and that we are in the state of grace
indeed.

First, (I say) the Spirit speaks to us by a secret kind of whispering and
intimation, (that the soul feels better then I can express,) Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee, says he to the soul, I am thy salvation:
there is (I say) a sweet joining, a sweet kiss given to the soul, I am thine,
and thou art mine: God by his Spirit speaks so much; there is a voice of Gods
Spirit speaking peace to his people upon their believing.

And then secondly, the Spirit of adoption stirs up the speech of the soul to
God, that as he says to the soul, Because thou believe, now thou art
honored to be my child; so the Spirit stirs up in the soul a Spirit of
prayer to cry, Abba, Father; it can go boldly to God as to a Father; for that
Abba, Father, it is a bold and familiar speech.

There are two things in a prayer of a Christian that are incompatible to any
carnal man: there is an inward kind of familiar boldness in the soul, whereby
a Christian goes to God, as a child when he wants any thing goes to his father;
a child considers not his own worthiness or meannesse, but goes to his father
familiarly and boldly: so (I say) when the Spirit of God speaks to us from God,
and tells the soul, I am thine, I am thy salvation, thy sins are forgiven thee,
be of good comfort; and when the soul again speaks to God, when it can pour
forth it self with a kind of familiar boldness and earnestness, especially in
extremity, and in time of trouble, and can wait in prayer, and depend upon God
this spiritual speech of God to the soul, and of the soul to God, it is a seal
of the Spirit that indeed we are true believers, because we can do that that
none can do but Christians: God speaks to our souls, he raises our souls, and
by his Spirit he puts a spirit of supplication into us, and helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to ask, but he helps our weakness, and
enables us to lay out the wants of our souls to God: these are evidences of
the presence, and of the seal of the Spirit.

In the third place, this sealing of the Spirit after we believe, is known by
the sanctifying work of the Spirit: for (as I told you before in the unfolding
of the Point) the Spirit seals our spirits by stamping the likeness of the
Spirit of Christ on us: so that when a man finds in his soul some lineaments of
that heavenly Image of Christ Jesus, when he finds some love, he may know by
that love that he is translated from death to life; when he finds his spirit
subdued, to be humble, to be obedient, when he finds his spirit to be heavenly
and holy as Christ was; when he finds this stamp upon the soul, surely he may
reason, I have not this by nature, naturally I am proud, now I can abase my
self; natureally I am full of malice, now I can love, I can pray heartily for
mine enemies, as Christ did: naturally I am lumpish and heavy, now in
afflictions, I can joy in the Holy Ghost, I have somewhat in me contrary to
nature, surely God has vouchsafed his Spirit (upon my believing in Christ) to
mark me, to seal (...) to stamp me for his, I carry now the Image of the second
Adam, I know the Holy Ghost has been in my heart, I see the stamp of Christ
there: Know you not that Christ is in you, except you be cast awayes? says the
Apostle; so upon search, the Christian soul finds somewhat of Christ always in
the soul to give a sweet evidence that he is sealed to the day of redemtpion.

The fourth evidence that the Spirit of God has been in a man's heart, is the
joy of the Holy Ghost and peace of conscience, sanctification is the ordinary
seal that is always in the soul; this is an extraordinary seal, peace and joy:
when the soul needs encouragement, then God is graciously pleased to superadd
this, to give such spiritual ravishings which are as the very beginnings of
heaven, so that a man may say of a Christian at such times that he is in heaven
before his time, he is in heaven upon earth; but especially God does this when
he will have his children to suffer, or after suffering, after some special
conflict, after we have combated with some special corruption, with some
sinful disposition, with some strong temptation, and have got the victory: To
him that overcomes will I give of the hidden Manna, and a white stone, and a
new name that none can read it, but he that has it; that is, he shall have
assurance that he is in the state of grace, and the sweet sense of the love of
God, and that sweet heavenly Manna that none else can have: thus God dealt with
Job; after he had exercised that Champion a long time, at the last he
discovered himself in a glorious manner to him; so it is usually after some
great cross: or in the midst of some great cross, when God sees that we
must be supported with some spiritual comfort, we sink else; then there is
place and time for spiritual comfort, when earth cannot comfort: thus St. Paul
in the midst of the dungeon when he was in the stocks being sealed with the
Spirit, he sang at midnight; Alas, what would have become of blessed Paul? his
spirit would have sunk if God had not stamped it with Joy in the Holy Ghost;
and so David, and the three young men in the fiery furnace, and Daniel in the
den, God does then even as parents, smile upon their children when they are
sick and need comfort: so above all other times God reserves this hidden
sealing of his children with a spirit of joy when they need it most, sometimes
in the midst of afflictions, sometimes as a reward when they come out of
their afflictions: sometimes before; so our Savior Christ had James and John
with him upon the mountain to strengthen them against the scandal of suffering
after: so God when he has a great work for his children to do, some suffering
for them to go through, as an encouragement beforehand, he enlarges their
spirits with the joy of the, Holy Ghost: and some times also after a holy and
gracious disposition in the Ordinances of God, God does add an excellent
portion of his Spirit, a seal extraordinary: for indeed, God thinks nothing
enough for his children till he have brought them to heaven, seal upon seal,
and comfort upon comfort; and the more we depend upon him in the means of
salvation, and the more we conflict with our corruptions, the more he
increases the sweet comforts and the hidden Manna of the Spirit.

Thus we see how the Spirit seals: I beseech you therefore let us examine our
selves by that which has been spoken: after we believe, God seals those that
do believe; we honor him by believeing, he honors us by sealing us with his
Spirit: Has God spoken to thy soul by the witness of the Spirit, and said, I
am thy salvation, thy sins are forgiven thee? does God stir up thy spirit to
call upon him, especially in extremity? and to go with boldness and
earnestness to him? surely this boldness and earnestness is an evidence of
the seal of the Spirit; for a man that has no seal of the Spirit, he cannot go
to God in extremity; Saul in extremity he goes to the Witch; and Achitophel and
Judas in extremity go to desperate conclusions: a man that has not the Spirit
of God speaking peace to his conscience, to whom God has not given the Spirit
of Adoption to cry, Abba, Father, in all manner of exigents, he sin^ks as lead
to the bottom of the sea; so heavy is the soul that is not raised by the Spirit
of God, he has no consistence till he come to the Center, to hell. Did you
ever feel the sweet joy of the Spirit after conflict with corruptions, and
getting ground of them, and in holy duties? etc. it is a sign that God has
sealed you.

But you will say, How can that be a seal that is not always? a seal cotinues
with the thing; Gods children find not peace always, the joy of the Spirit
comes after the work of the Spirit: how then can this be a seal?

I Answer, Yes; for howsoever it be or not always sensible, yet it is always a
seal: though we have not always the joy of the Spirit, yet we have the Spirit
of joy; a Christian has not the joy of the Spirit at all times, for that is
moveable, but he has always the Spirit of joy, which Spirit though it be not
known by joy, yet it is known by operation and working: there is the work of
the Spirit, where there is not always the joy of the Spirit: and therefore
when that fails, go to the work of sanctification, and see what stamp and
resemblance of Christ there is: see if thy heart be humble and broken, if thou
have a loving disposition in thee like to Christ, that thou hate that which
Christ hates, that thou see a division in thy self: I say, when the joy of
the Spirit cease, go to the work of the Spirit, and to this work of the
Spirit, viz. the voice of the Spirit, can thou cry to God with prayer and
supplication? and if thou can not pray with distinct words, can thou mourn
and groan to God? this sighing and groaning is the voice of Gods Spirit, and
God knows the voice of his own Spirit. But for the question propounded: the
soul of a Christian knows that when it finds not extraordinary comfort from
Gods Spirit, that Gods love is constant: It can reason thus, Though I find not
the comfort of the Spirit, yet I have the Spirit of Comfort, because I had the
Spirit in former times, and Gods Spirit is unchangeable, and therefore though
it be not with me now as in those ravishings of the Spirit, yet the love of God
is the same, though my feeling be not the same; because though I be off and on,
and my feeling ebb and flow, yet his love is not so: and here upon the
extraordinary feeling of the Spirit, which is superadded as an extraordinary
seal, it may be a sound seal of Comfort from the constancy of God who gave it,
and he gave it for this end, that we might have recourse and retire back in our
thoughts, and argue, it was thus and thus with me; then we remember the times
of old, as David says, Psalm. 77. and help our selves with our former feelings:
he that always has life, is not always alike stirred; Christ may be begotten
and live in us, but he stirs not always alike: so though the Spirit of
sanctification be in us, and stir in us, yet his stirring is not alike so
sweet; and the stirring of the Spirit though it be not always, yet the Spirit is
always there; so the soul may have recourse to that which is unchangeable and
constant, even God himself; and his love is as himself.

But to take a Christian in his worst time, in the worst and greatest
afflictions, how shall he know then that he is sealed of the Spirit? when
corruption, temptation and affliction meet together in the soul: when
temptation is joined with our corruption, and afflictions yield ground to
temptations: (for Satan uses the afflictions we are in as temptations to shake
our faith, Can thou be a child of God, and be so exercised? is this grace? so
affliction is a weapon to temptation, for Satan to help his fiery darts with.)
Now how shall a man know that God has any part here?

He may know that he is sealed by the Spirit of God, if he have a spirit to
thwart these, if he row against the stream, if he go contrary to all these; if
he find a spirit resisting Satan's temptations, and raising himself above
afflictions, and standing against, and combating with his corruptions, and
checking his carnal soul when it is drawing him down, Why art thou
discomforted, O my soul? says David; Psalm. 42. and 43. He found corruptions,
and afflictions, and Satan's temptations working with them, depressing his soul
downwards; hereupon having the Spirit in him, says he, Why art thou disquieted
within me? trust in God: He first chides his soul, Why art thou so? and then he
lays a charge upon it, trust in God. So I say, when this is in the soul in the
greatest extremity, when I can check my soul, Why art thou thus? yet trust in
God; whatsoever is in the world, yet there is hope in heaven, though there be
little comfort upon earth; this is a sign that I am sealed with the Spirit of
God: and thus in the worst temptations that can come, and so in the worst
times, a man may know that he is in the state of grace.

One use of a seal (I told you before) was to distinguish, if a man therefore
find in himself a distinguishing from the errors of the times: Many walk
(says the Apostle) of whom I have told you often, their end is damnation, their
belly is their god, they mind earthly things: but what did S. Paul in the mean
time? what did the Spirit work in him? But our conversation is in heaven, says
he. The whole world was overspread with a deluge of sin; but what was Noah and
his family? God by his Spirit distinguished them, they went a contrary course
to the world; and Lot in Sodom: so a man may know that he is sealed, when the
Spirit leads him another way, that he is not led with the errors of the times.

Thus we have unfolded to you the sealing of the Spirit; and you see the Spirit
of God not only anoints, but seals. Now we should labor to have our hearts
thus sealed by the Spirit: Can we desire and never be at quiet till our
Instruments be sealed, till our acquittances, till our Charters be sealed? and
shall we be patient not to have our souls sealed?

Let us labor by all means to have the Image and likeness of Christ stamped
upon our souls especially, that is wondrous comfortable when we can find
somewhat in us like to Jesus Christ.

To encourage us to this, let us consider, that death and Judgment will come,
and God will set none at his right hand but his sheep that have his mark: those
that he sets his stamp and Image upon, those he will set on the right hand in
the day of Judgment.

And how comfortably in the hour of death can the soul commend it self to God,
when it sees it self stamped and sealed by the Spirit of Christ? when he can
say to Christ, Lord Jesus, receive my soul that thou have redeemed by thy
blood, that thou have sealed by thy Spirit, and that thou have set thine own
stamp upon, acknowledge thine own likeness, though it be not as it should be:
what a comfort (I say) has the sealed soul at the hour of death? and so in all
other extremities, and in times of trouble and danger, those in whom God sees
his own Image and likeness, he will own, and to those he will always show a
distinct and respective love in hard times.

What a difference is between that soul and others in the time of affliction,
as in the time of pestilence and war: the soul that is sealed knows that he is
marked out for God, for happiness in the world to come, whatsoever befalls him
in this world; and he knows that God in all confusion of times knows his own
seal: those that are sealed God has a special care of, I say; therefore in
Ezekiel. 9. they are said to be marked in their foreheads: not that there was any
visible mark on them, but it is a phrase to signify what special care God had
of his people, specially in times of destruction, God will as it were set them
out in those times, and make special provision for them: thus Josiah was taken
away from the evil to come; and Lot was taken out of Sodom when fire and
brimstone was to come from heaven: and Pella, a little Village was delivered
when the general destruction came upon Jerusalem. So that (I say) God has a
special care of his little ones in this life; and if he take them away, yet
their death is precious in his sight: He will not part with them but upon
special consideration; he sees if they live it will be worse for them; he sees
it is better for them to be gathered to himself, and to the souls of men made
perfect in heaven.

And as he has a special care of them in regard of outward miseries and
calamities, so in regard of spiritual contagion and infection, as Rev 7. there
Gods holy ones were sealed, so many of such a tribe, etc. which is to signify
to us, that God has always some that he will keep and preserve from the
universal infection and contagion of Antichrist in the worst times: God has
always a Church in the worst times, in the obscurest ages of the Church, eight
or nine hundred years after Christ, especially nine hundred years, when
Egyptian darkness had overspread the world, and there was little learning and
goodness in the world, God had always sealed ones, marked ones, that he
preserved from the danger of dark times: and so he will always have a care of
his own, that they be not led away with that soul-hurting error, Popery;
another manner of mischief then men take it for. The Scripture is more punctual
in setting down the danger of those, especially in lighter times of the Church,
that are carried away with that sin, then any other sin whatsoever, they have a
contrary mark, those that have the mark of the Beast, it is contrary to the
mark of Christ, it is far from being the mark and seal of the Spirit, that
implicit bloody faith: Theirs is the bloody Church, pretend what they will,
and they stand out to blood in the defense of all their cruel, superstitious,
and bloody decrees. Those persons (I say) that are deeply died in Popery, that
have the mark of the Beast, they are in a clean opposite condition to those
that are marked with the Spirit, that Christ marks for his.

Let us not fear therefore, I say, if we have the Spirit of God stamped upon
us, though in a little measure, if it be true, let us not fear death, Christ
knows his own mark even in death, and out of death. And let us not fear
afflictions nor evil times, Christ will know his seal, He has a book of
remembrance for those that are his, Mal. 3. for those that mourn for the sins
of the times, and when he gathers his Jewels, those shall be his, he will
gather his Jewels as a man in his house gathers his jewels, he suffers his
luggage to burn in the fire: so God in common calamities, he suffers luggage,
wicked men, to go to wrack; but he will free his own.

Let us labor therefore for this seal, to have our souls stamped with the
Spirit of God, to have further and further evidence of our state in grace, that
in the time of common calamity we may be free from danger, free from error,
and destruction.

But you will say, What shall I account of it, if there be but a little sign of
grace?

Be not discouraged: when the stamp in wax is almost out, it is current in Law:
put the case the stamp of the Prince be an old coin, (as sometimes we see it on
a King Harry groat) yet it is current money, yea, though it be a little cracked:
So, put tbe case the stamp of the Spirit be, as it were, almost worn out, (it
is our shame, and ought to be our grief that it is so,) yet there are some
evidences, some pulses, some sighs and groans against corruption, we mourn in
our spirits, we do not join with corruption, we do not allow our selves in sin;
there is the stamp of the Spirit remaining, though it be overgrown with the
dust of the world that we cannot see it.

Sometimes Gods children though they have the graces of the Spirit in them, yet
they yield so much to their corruptions, that they can read nothing but their
corruptions; when we bid them read their evidences, they can see nothing but
worldliness, nothing but pride and envy, etc. though there be a stamp on them,
yet God holds the soul from seeing it, so that they can see nothing but
corruption, this is for their negligence; God gives them up to mistake their
estates, because they will not stir up the graces of the Spirit; because they
grieve the Spirit, and quench the Spirit, by doing that which is contrary to
the Spirit.

Let us therefore (that we may have the more comfort) preserve the stamp of the
Spirit fresh, by the exercise of all grace, and communion with God, and by
obedience, and by faith: honor God by believing, and he will honor thee by
stamping his Spirit on thee more and more. And let this be our work every day
to have the stamp of the Spirit clear: Oh what a comfort it is to have this in
us at all times! if a man have nothing in him better then nature, if he have
nothing in him in regard of grace, if he have not Christ's Image upon his soul,
though he be a King, or an Emperor, yet he shall be stripped of all ere long,
and be set on the left hand of Christ, and be adjudged to eternal torments.

It is the folly of the times come up of late, there is much laboring for
Statues, and for curious workmanship of that kind, and some pride themselves
much in it, and account it great riches to have an old Statue: Alas, alas! what
a poor delight is this in comparison of the joy that a Christian has by the
seal of the Spirit? and what is this to the ambition of a Christian, to see the
Image and representation of Christ stamped in his soul? that he may be like the
second Adam, that he may be transformed more and more by looking on him, and
seeing himself in him, to love him, considering that he has loved us so much:
(for we cannot see the love of Christ to us, but we must love him the more, and
be transformed into him.) Now this transforming our selves into the Image of
Christ, is the best picture in the world; therefore labor for that every day
more and more.

There is besides the common broad seal of God, his Privy Seal, as I may call
it: It is not sufficient that we have the one, that we have admittance into the
Church by Baptism; but we must have this privy seal which Christ sets and
stamps upon the soul of the true Christian: Alas, for a man to build only on
the outward seals, and outward prerogatives, (which in themselves are
excellent, yet) the standing upon them betrays many souls to the Devil in
times of distress.

It is another manner of seal then the outward seal in the Sacrament that will
satisfy and comfort the conscience in the apprehensions of wrath at the hour
of death or otherwise. It must be this privy seal, and then comes the use of
those public open known seals, the broad seals; then a man with comfort may
think upon his Baptism, and upon his receiving the Communion, when he has the
beginnings of faith wrought in him by the Spirit of God; when a man finds the
beginnings of faith in him, then he may make use of the broad seal to be a help
to his faith.

We must not be so profane as to think slightly and irreverently of Gods
Ordinances, they are of great and high consequence: for when Satan comes to the
soul, and shakes the confidence of it, and says, Thou art not a Christian, and
God does not love thee. Why, (says the soul) God has loved me, and pardoned
my sins, he has given me promises, and particularly sealed them in the
Sacrament: here is the excellency of the Sacrament, it comes more home then the
Word, it seals the general promise of God particularly to my self. I am sealed
in the Sacrament, and withal I find the stamp of the Spirit in my heart; and
therefore having the inward work of the Spirit, and God having fortified the
inward work, and strengthened my faith by the outward seal, I can therefore
stand against any temptation whatsoever: They are excellent both together, but
the special thing that must comfort, must be the hidden seal of the Spirit.

Let us labor therefore to be sealed inwardly, and observe Gods sealing-dayes,
(as we use to speak) which though it may be every day if we be in spiritual
exercises, yet especially on the Lords Day; for then his Ordinance and his
Spirit go together.

Now as there is a sealing of our estates that we are the children of God, so
there is of truths, and both are in the children of God: as for instance, this
is a truth, Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have everlasting
life: now the same Spirit that stirred up the soul to believe this, seals it
in the soul, even to death, and in all times of temptation: and likewise there
is no promise but upon the believing of it, it is sealed by the Spirit upon the
soul; for those truths only abide firm in the soul which the Spirit of God
sets on.

What is the reason that many forget the comforts and consolations that they
hear? because the Spirit sets them not on, the Spirit seals them not. What is
the reason that illiterate men stand out in their profession to blood, whereas
those that have a discoursive kind of learning they yield? the reason is this,
the knowledge of the one is sealed by the Spirit, it is set fast upon the soul,
the Spirit brings the knowledge and the soul close together; whereas the
knowledge of the other is only a notional, swimming knowledge, it is not
spiritual.

Those therefore that will hold out in the end, and not apostatize, those that
will stand out in the hour of death against temptation, and those that will
hold out in the time of life against solicitations to sin, they must have a
knowledge suitable to the things they know, that is, they must see and know
heavenly things by a heavenly light, spiritual things by the Spirit of God.

And therefore when we come to hear the Ministers of God, we should not come
with strong conceits, in the strength of our wit; but with reverend
dispositions, with dependence upon God for his Spirit, that he would teach us
together with the Ministers, and close with our souls, and set those truths we
hear upon our souls, we shall never hold out else. And it must be the Holy
Ghost that must do this; for that which must settle and seal comfort to the
soul, must be greater then the soul, especially in the time of temptation, when
the terrors of the Almighty are upon us, and when the hell within a man is
open, when God lays open our consciences, and writes bitter things against us,
and our consciences tell us our sins wondrous near, they are written as it were
with a pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond upon our souls: now I say,
those truths that must satisfy conscience that is thus turmoiled, must be set
on by that which is above conscience; the Spirit of God who is above our
spirits, can only set down our spirits, and keep them from quarrelling and
contending against the truth, and quiet the conscience; and this the Spirit
does when it sets the truth upon the soul.

And therefore when our souls are disquieted and troubled, and we hear many
comfortable truths, let us lift up our prayers to God, let there be
ejaculations of spirit to God; Now Lord, by thy holy Spirit set and seal this
truth to my soul, that as it is true in it self, so it may be true to me
likewise.

This is a necessary Observation for us all: Oh we desire all of us in the hour
of death, to find such comforts as may be standing comforts, that may uphold us
against the gates of Hell, and against the temptations of Satan, and terrors
of Conscience: why, nothing will do this but spiritual truths spiritually
known; nothing but holy truths set on by the hoy Spirit of God.

But what course shall we take when we want comfort? when we want joy and peace?

In the third of John, there are three witnesses in heaven, and three in earth
to secure us of our state in grace, and the certainty of our salvation. The
three witnesses upon earth are the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these
three agree in one; and the three that bear witness in heaven, are the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and the three on earth, and these three in heaven
agree in one.

Now the Spirit is the feelings and the sweet motions of the Spirit. The water
may well be that washing of the Spirit, sanctification. The blood is the
shedding of the blood of Christ, and justification by it. When therefore we
find that part of the seal, that extraordinary seal that I spoke of before, the
joy of the Spirit of God, that it is not in us, what shall we do? shall we
despair? No, go to the water, when we find not spiritual joy and comfort, when
the witness of the Spirit is silent, go to the work of the Spirit in
sanctification.

I but what shall we do if the waters be troubled in the soul, as sometimes
there is such a confusion in the soul, that we cannot see the Image of God upon
it in sanctification, we cannot see the stamp of Gods Spirit there, there is
such a Chaos in the soul: God can see somewhat of his own Spirit in that
confusion, but the Spirit it self cannot?

Then go to the blood of Christ, there is always comfort; the fountain that is
opened for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, is never dry: go therefore to the
blood of Christ, that is, if we find sin upon our consciences, if we find not
peace in our consciences, nor sanctification in our hearts, go to the blood of
Christ, which is shed for all those that confess their sins, and rely on him
for pardon, though we find no grace: For howsoever as an evidence that we are
in Christ, we must find the work of the Spirit; yet before we go to Christ it
is sufficient that we see nothing in our selves, no qualification: for the
graces of the Spirit they are not the condition of coming to Christ, but the
promise of those that receive Christ after. Therefore go to Christ when thou
feel neither joy of the Spirit, nor sanctification of the Spirit; go to the
blood of Christ, and that will purge thee, and wash thee from all thy sins.

This I only touch for a direction what to do when our souls want comfort,
when perhaps we cannot see the seal of the Spirit in sanctification so clearly.

To go on now to the next. And given us the Earnest of the Spirit.


Here is the third word borrowed from humane affairs, to set out the work of
the Spirit in our souls: Anointing we had before, and Sealing; now here is
Earnest.

The variety of the words shows that there is a great remainder of unbelief
Why God uses so many several words to sec^ us.
in the soul of man, that the Spirit of God is fain to use so many words to
express Gods dealing to the soul to bring it to believe, to be assured of
salvation. And indeed so it is, howsoever we in the time of prosperity, when
all things go well with us, we are prone wondrously to presume, yet in the hour
of death when conscience is awakened, we are prone to nothing so much as to
call all in question, and to believe the doubts and fears of our own hearts,
more then the undoubted truth and promise of God: therefore God takes all
courses to stablish us; he gives us rich and precious promises, he gives us the
holy Spirit to stablish us on the Promises, he seals us with his Spirit, and
gives us the earnest of the Spirit, and all to settle this wretched and
unbelieving heart of ours.

So desirous is God that we should be well conceited of him, he loves us better
then we love our selves: He so much prizeth our love, that he labors by all
means to secure us of his love to us, because except we know his love to us, we
cannot love him again, and we cannot joy in him, etc. But that only in the
general.

Here is earnest, and the Earnest of the Spirit; that is in plain terms, he
gives us the Spirit with the graces and comforts of it, which does in our
hearts that which an earnest does amongst men.

But what is this Spirit an earnest of?

It is an Earnest of our inheritance in heaven, of our blessed estate What the
Spirit is an Earnest of.
there. We are sons now, but we are not heirs invested into the blessed estate
we have title to. God leaves us not off in the mean time while we are in our
Pilgrimage; he keeps not all for heaven, but he gives us somewhat to comfort us
in our absence from our Husband, from our Lord and King Christ: he gives us the
Earnest of the Spirit, that is, he gives the holy Ghost into our hearts, which
is the Earnest of that blessed everlasting glorious condition which we shall
have in heaven hereafter: that is the meaning of the words.

In what regard is the Spirit called an Earnest?

First of all, an Earnest is for security of bargains and contracts: so the The
Spirit an Earnest,
Holy Ghost assures the soul of salvation, being present with his graces and 1.
For security.
comforts: the Holy Ghost is given for security.

Secondly, an Earnest is part of the whole bargain; though it be a very 2. It
is part of the whole.
little part, yet it is a part: and so the Spirit of God here, and the work of
the Spirit, and the graces and joy of the Spirit, it is a part of that full joy
and happiness that shall be revealed. The Spirit dwells not fully in any one,
he dwells no further then he sanctifies and reviveth, but that is an Earnest
for the time to come, that the Spirit shall be all in all, wherein we shall
have no reluctance, nor nothing to exalt it self against the sure regiment of
the Spirit.

Thirdly, an Earnest is little in comparison of the whole bargain: so the 3. An
Earnest is little to the whole.
work of the Spirit, the comforts, the joy, the peace of the Spirit, it is
little in comparison of that which shall be in heaven, in regard of the
fullness of the Spirit which we shall have there. An Earnest, though it be
little in quantity, yet it is great in security and assurance: a shilling may
secure a bargain of a thousand pounds perhaps; so the Spirit, it is little in
quantity it may be, but it is great in assurance. And as we value an earnest,
not for the bigness of the piece; for (alas!) it may be it is but little; but
we value and esteem it for that which it is an earnest of: So the work of the
Spirit, the joy and peace of the Spirit; the comforts of the Spirit, though
they be little, yet they are great in security, and are to be prized according
to that excellent bargain and possession, of which they are an Earnest.

Fourthly, an Earnest is given rather for the security of the party that
receives 4. It serves the party receiving it.
it, then in regard of him that gives it: so God gives the Earnest of the
Spirit, grace and comfort, this not so much in regard of God, for God means
to give us heaven and happiness, he has passed his Word, and he is Master of
his Word, be is Jehovah, that gives a being to his Word as well as to every
other thing; but notwithstanding having to deal with doubtful mistrustful
persons, he does it for our security, he regards not himself so much, but us:
He works answerable to his own greatness, strongly; but he speaks according to
our weakness: and therefore here is the term of Earnest borrowed for this
purpose.

And lastly, an Earnest is never taken away, but it is made up with the 5. It
is never taken away.
bargain: so it is with the Spirit of God, the graces and comforts of it are
never wholly taken from a Christian, but accomplished in heaven. I will leave
you the Comforter (says our Savior Christ,) that shall abide with you for
ever.

So that in these and such like other respects, the Spirit of God by it self,
together with the graces of it, and the comforts it brings, (for they go both
together) are called an Earnest.

Hence then (having thus cleared the words) we may observe some particular
Doctrines. As first, I Observe from the first property of an Earnest, that it
secures the whole bargain this, That A Christian ought to be, and may be
assured of his estate in grace. Observe. A Christian man be assured of his
estate in grace.



Because (as I said before) an Earnest is given for security, and that not so
much for Gods sake, as for our sakes; this then must needs follow, either none
have this earnest, or those that have it may be assured, or else God is fickle
and plays fast and loose with his children, which is blasphemy to affirm. If
none have this earnest, then the Apostle speaks false, when he says here, he
stablisheth us, and gives us the earnest of his Spirit, and us with you, both
together; ordinary Christians as well as grand ones, as well as Paul, may be
assured of their salvation. And if this be so, then either those that have this
earnest, this seal of the Spirit, they may be assured, or no; and if not, where
is the fault? does not God mean in good earnest to them when he gives them
this? undoubtedly he does; and why is it given but for assurance? he is
desirous that we should be persuaded of his love in all things, and therefore
Gods Children they may, and they ought to be assured of his love in this world.

It is a Point that we have often occasion to meet with in other portions of
Scripture: I speak it therefore here only as a ground out of this place, in
that the Spirit of God, together with the graces and comforts are called an
Earnest: I say therefore from hence, that we may be assured of our salvation.

I beseech you, what is the aim of the Epistles to the (...), to the Ephesians,
of the Epistle of S. John, but a stirring of them up to whom they All in the
work of Redemption is for that end.
wrote to be persuaded of Gods love to them, and to show what excellent things
we have by the love of God in Christ? And S. John's Epistle it is for nothing
else (in respect of the substance of it) but to give evidences how we may know
that we are the sons of God. Wherefore did God become man? Wherefore was Christ
himself sealed by the Father, Son; and Holy Ghost to his office, when he was
baptized? and wherefore he did dye and rise again? and wherefore does he make
intercession in heaven? that we should doubt of Gods love, when he has given
us that which is greater then salvation, that which is greater then all the
world, his own Son? Would we have a greater pledge of his love? Is not all
this, that we should not doubt of his love to us, if we cast our selves upon
him by faith? Christians may, and ought, and have had assurance, these here had
assurance, and the Christians not alike assured at all times.
Scripture speaks of such as had it: they have had it, we may have it, because
the Spirit is a Seal, and an Earnest; and we ought to have it, because God has
framed both his Word, and his Sacraments, and all his dealing to man so as to
persuade us of his love.

Yet add this Caution, That Christians have not at all times a like assurance
of their salvation; neither all Christians at all times have it not, nor the
best have it not at all times: For there is an infancy of grace, when we know
not our own estate and condition: and there is a time of temptation after
infancy, when likewise we stagger in our assurance: there be times likewise of
desertion, when God to make us look better to our footing leaves us a little,
as if he would forsake us, when indeed he leaves us to draw us after him, to
cleave more closely to him: (for this shaking is to settle us deeper,) So there
be times and seasons wherein though we be assured, yet we cannot then know our
own assurance. And this assurance differs in Christians; for some have more,
some less: even as the constitution of the body, some are of a melancholy
constitution, (that helps Satan in his temptations,) and they are subject to
fearing and misdoubting: and so as there is a difference in regard of tempers,
some are more hardly brought to be persuaded then others: so there is a
difference likewise in care and diligence; for those that use more care and
diligence, have more assurance: there is a difference likewise in growth and
continuance in Christianity, some are fathers, and some are babes: Answerable
to the difference of constitutions, and of care and diligence, and of age and
growth in Christianity, so is the difference of assurance.

Nay it is possible, that for a long time Gods child may want this act of
assurance: for there is a double act of faith.

An Act whereby the soul relies upon God as reconciled in Christ, and Double
act of says.
relies upon Christ as given of God; and relies upon the promise. And 1. Direct.
then there is a reflect act, whereby knowing we do thus, we have assurance.
Now a man may perform the one act and not the other; we may do that deed 2.
Reflect.
that may found our assurance if the waters of the soul were not troubled; that
is, we may believe, and yet want assurance, because that is another distinct
act that follows upon our casting of our selves upon God. And so many of the
dear children of God sometimes they can hardly say that they have any
assurance, but yet notwithstanding they can say (if they do not belie
themselves, and bear false witness against themselves,) that they have cast
themselves upon Gods mercy, they have performed the first act of faith; and
this faith is not fruitless altogether.

Now there be many things that may hinder this other act, viz. that act The
reflect act may be hindered.
of faith whereby I am assured of my state in grace: sometimes God (together
with my believing) will present such things to the soul, as wholly take it up;
so that a man cannot have definitive thoughts upon that that God would have him
think of: As when God will humble a man for his boldness in adventuring upon
sin, he takes not away the Spirit of faith, but God to humble him thoroughly he
sets before him his anger, sets before him terror, even hellish terrors, that
will make him in a state little different from a reprobate for the time; so
that he is far from saying that he has any assurance at that time: yet
notwithstanding he does not leave off, he casts himself upon Gods mercy still,
though God kill him, yet he will trust in him, and yet he feels nothing but
terror; and this (I say) God does, to school him, and to humble him, and to
prepare him for the feeling of assurance after.

These things we must observe, that we give not a false evidence of our selves,
that though we have not such assurance as we have had, and as others have; yet
I say, always there is some ground in us, where upon we may be assured that we
are Gods, if we could search it. Such ought to labor for assurance, and such
will in time come to assurance. And therefore we should be far from alowing
that Doctrine, which is as if a man should light a candle before the Devil, as
we use to say, to help him against our hearts, by a Doctrine of doubting; as if
our naughty hearts were not ready enough of themselves to doubt.

It is the profaneness of the world, they will not use the means that God
Naughty heart content with a state of doubling.
has appointed to this end; nay, they had rather stagger and take contentment
and assurance in their own ways; if God will love me in a loose course, so it
is; but to give diligence to make my calling and election sure, I had rather
believe the Popish Doctrine, that I ought to doubt, and only to be of a good
hope: Whereas we ought constantly to labor to be assured of our state in
grace, that God may have more honor, and that we may have more comfort from
him again, and walk more cheerfully through the troubles and temptations that
are in the world.

A Carnal proud person he swells against this Doctrine, because he feels no
such thing, and he thinks what is above his measure is hypocrisy; he makes
himself the measure of other Christians, and therefore he values and esteems
others by his dark state; for a carnal man's heart it is like a dungeon, a man
in a dungeon can see nothing, because he has no light; but he that has the
light, he can see the dungeon: the heart of a Christian has a light in it,
there is the Spirit in him, and therefore he can see his own estate, and he can
tell what is in him upon due search: now in a carnal man all is dark, he sees
nothing, because his heart is in a dungeon, his eye is dark, his heart is full
of darkness, all is alike to him, he sees no difference between flesh and
Spirit, and therefore he holds on in a doubting hope, and confused disposition
and temper of soul: But a Christian that labors to walk in the comforts of the
Holy Ghost, he is not content with such a confused state, and therefore we
ought to abhor that Doctrine by all means; and to justify this Doctrine, that
we ought, and that we may have assurance of salvation in this world.

The second thing which I observe, and which I join to the former, is the
Doctrine of Perseverance: An Earnest you know I told you is made up with the
Bargain, but it is never taken away: so that the Point is this, That Gods
Children as they may be assured of their salvation, So They may be assured that
they shall hold out to the end. Observe. Gods Children may be assured they shall
held out to the end.



I think many of you think these two Points to be so clear, that it is
unnecessary to divide them: for if we be assured of our salvation, there must
needs be perseverance to the end; for what kind of assurance is it, to be in
the state of grace to day, and not to be to morrow?

But if you ask some degenerated followers of Luther, that leave him in his
sweet and comfortable Doctrines, and take up some errors of his; and some
others that would divide these; hot they are against the Papists for denying
the Doctrine of assurance of salvation: but when they come to perseverance,
they hold that a Christian may fall away altogether: these things cannot stand
together, for undoubtedly it is most sure, and just, and right, that these
truths follow one the other, assurance of salvation, and perseverance: and
therefore if they maintain that we ought to be assured of salvation and not
doubt of Gods love, surely then they cannot with the same Spirit and the same
ground doubt that God that has begun a work, will finish it to the day of the
Lord: there is no question but that the one follows the other; because an
earnest as it assures us of salvation, so it assures us of perseverance. Herein
an Earnest differs from a pawn or pledge; a pledge it is given, but it is taken
away again: but an Earnest when it is once given, is never taken away again;
but as it is a part of the bargain, so it is filled and made up with the
bargain; so grace is a part of glory, and is never taken away, but made up with
perfect on of glory.

From this we see then, that he that is in the state of grace, is undefeasable;
he perseveres to the end, because he has the earnest of the Spirit: if God
should take away his Spirit from him, he should take away his earnest; and if
he take away his earnest, he takes away that for which he gives it, assurance
of salvation, and so should overthrough all. But God never repents of his
earnest; man oft-times repents of his earnest, and wishes he had not made such
a fruitless bargain; but God never does, but where he gives the first fruits,
he makes up the harvest; where he lays the foundation, he makes up the
building, where he gives Earnest, he makes up the bargain: where he begins a
good work, he finisheth it to the day of the Lord; once his, for ever his: We
cannot be so sure of any thing as we may be of Gods love for the time to come.
We have a common speech amongst us, I know what I have, but what I shall have I
know not: It is an ill speech, thou know not what thou have, for these
worldly things a man has them so to day as they may take to themselves wings
and be gone to morrow, for they are but vanity; A may be as rich as Job in the
morning, and as poor as Job at night; so that a man knows not what he has:
but for the time to come for grace and glory, he may say, Though I know not
what I have, or how long I shall have it, I know what I shall have, I know that
neither things present, nor things to come shall be able to separate me from the
love of God in Jesus Christ.

So that you see here a foundation of the sweet and comfortable Doctrine Grace
and glory differ but in degrees.
of perseverance: Grace is the Earnest of glory, and it does but differ in
degrees; the beginning of glory is here in grace, the consummation of it
hereafter. We are anointed Kings here, we shall be Kings in heaven; we are sons
here in this world, we shall be heirs in heaven: we shall be adopted there in
soul and body: here we are adopted in soul; for in this life Christ's first
coming was for the soul, his second coming is for body and soul; therefore the
resurrection is called the day of regeneration, because then it shall be
perfected; here regeneration is only begun.

So that in respect that the work of the Spirit, the graces of the Spirit are
called an Earnest, we may know and be assured of perseverance in grace, and
that that which we have now in the beginning shall be accomplished.

Oh how should this set us upon desires to have the blessed work of the Spirit
upon us, to have the Spirit to set his seal upon us, to be Christ's, to have
this Earnest, and to get more and more Earnest till we have the full bargain
accomplished in heaven!

Thirdly, I told you, that an Earnest is part of the whole, they therefore that
have not the Earnest cannot look for the bargain: The Observation hence is,
That Those that look to be happy, must first look to be holy. Observe. Those
that look to be happy, must first be holy.



This Point I mean to touch very briefly, I am loath to pass it by; (though it
be not the principal thing I aim at) because it may serve for a kind of trial,
whether a man have any right to heaven, or no.

It is the ordinary presumptuous error of common Christians, to think to go to
heaven out of unclean courses, with Lord, have mercy upon us: but miserable
wretches are they, that have not this Earnest of the Spirit in them, an Earnest
of heaven beforehand in grace, and peace, and joy: We must all read our
happiness in our holiness; and therefore it is that happiness in heaven, and
holiness here (which is happiness inchoate) have both one title, to show that
we cannot have the one without the other: we must enter into heaven here in
this life.

The stones (you know) they were hewed before they were brought to the building
of the Temple, they were all made and fitted beforehand; and so all that shall
be stones in heaven, they must be hewed and prepared and fitted here; there
must be no knocking and fitting of them there.

So then you see these three things touched, that the holy Spirit together with
the graces and comforts of it are called an Earnest, and therefore that it is a
part of the whole, an assurance of the whole, and that it shall never be taken
away.

Now for the fourth, that an Earnest is little in regard of the whole; (and
indeed the holy Apostle aims at this partly as well as at any other thing
else) an Earnest is little, perhaps we have but a shilling to secure us of many
pounds. So then the point is this, That Howsoever we may be assured of our
estate in grace, and likewise that we shall Observe. We may be assured from a
little measure of grace.
hold out, yet the ground of this assurance is not from any great measure of
grace, but though it be little in quantity, it may be great in assurance, and
security.


As we value an Earnest not for the worth that is in it self, but because it
assures us of a great bargain; we have an Eye more to the consummation of the
bargain then to the quantity of the Earnest: so it is here, Grace is but an
Earnest, yet notwithstanding though it be little as an Earnest is, yet it is
great in assurance and validity, answerable to the relation of that it has to
assure us.

There is nothing less then a grain of mustard seed, but there is nothing in
the world so little in proportion (in a manner) that comes at length to be so
great, as the graces of God, and the work of the Spirit is. The Crocodile, a
huge creature, comes of an egg; and the Oak, it rises to that greatness from
an Acorn: but what are these to the wondrous work of the new creature, to be
the heir of heaven, rising from so little, despised beginings, from a little
light in the understanding, from a little heat in the affections, from a little
strength in the will, compared for the littleness thereof to a grain of
mustard seed?

Indeed, grace grows a man knows not how. As Christ says of the seed sown
in the earth, it grows up first to a blade, and then to a stalk, and then to
an ear, and then to be corn, but a man cannot tell how; so it is with the work
of grace and the comforts of the Spirit; when the Spirit together with the Word
works upon the soul, there is a blade, a little, and then a stalk, and then
Corn.

First a babe in Christ, little at the first; and as it is little, so it is
much opposed. As we see the Sun when it is weak in the rising in the morning,
there gather a great many vapors, to besiege the Sun, as it were, as if they
would put out the light of it, till it comes to fuller strength, and then it
spends them all, and gloriously shines in heaven: so it is with the work of the
Spirit of grace, when it first arises in the soul, there gather about it a
great many doubts and discomforts; the flesh rises and casts up all the dirt
and mud it can, to trouble the blessed waters of grace, till it have gotten
fuller and fuller strength to spend them all, as it is when a man comes to be a
strong Christian. But yet as little as it is, seeing it is an Earnest, and the
first fruits, (as the Apostle says) which were but little in regard of the
whole harvest, yet it is of the nature of the whole, and thereupon it comes to
secure. A spark of fire is but little, yet it is fire as well as the whole
element of fire. And a drop of water it is water as well as the whole Ocean.
When a man is in a dark place, put the case it be in a dungeon, if he have a
little light shining into him from a little crevice, that little light
discovers that the Day is broke, that the Sun is risen. Put the case there be
but one grape on a vine, it shows that it is a vine, and that the vine is not
dead: So, put the case there be but the appearance of but a little grace in a
Christian, perhaps the Spirit of God appears but in one grace in him at that
time, yet that one grace shows that we are vines, and not thistles, or
thorns, or other base plants, and it shows that there is life in the root.

The Spirit of God appears not in all graces at once, it appears some time or
other in some one grace. We see in plants, the virtue of them appears The
Spirit appears not in all graces at once.
diversely; In Winter the virtue of them lies in the root; In the springtime,
in the bud and the leaf: In the Summer, in the fruit; it is not in all parts
alike: so it is with the Spirit, as it is an Earnest, it appears not in all
graces in a flourishing manner at the first; sometimes it appears in the root,
in humility, sometimes in faith, sometimes in love, sometimes in one grace,
sometimes in another: though the Spirit be in every grace, yet in appearance to
a man's self and others, it appears but in one. An Earnest is little,
especially at the first.

Weak Christians therefore should not be discouraged, Despise not the day of
little things: there is cause of mourning; we that have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, we mourn because we have but the first fruits, and we
would have the full harvest; but as there is cause of mourning, because we have
but the first fruits; so there is cause of comfort, because it is the
first fruits: it is an Earnest only, and not the whole bargain, therefore we
have cause of mourning that it is so imperfect, that it is so weak as it is;
yet there is cause of comfort, because though it is not the whole, yet is a
part, and secures us of the whole.

And therefore Christians should labor to mingle duties, and let one grace
qualify another: For indeed a Christian is a mixed Creature, his comforts are
mixed, and his mourning is mixed: With a carnal man it is A Christian is a
mixed creature.
all otherwise, if he mourn he is all a mort, because he has no goodness; if
he joy, he is mad, his mirth is madness.

A Christian joys indeed, some times he has joy unspeakable and glorious,
because he looks to his hope, and the accomplishment of it, and yet he mourns,
because he has but the Earnest, because he has but the beginnings, because he
has but the first fruits here.

And therefore again, as it should comfort us, if we have any thing; so it Use
2. To examine the truth of grace.
should exhort us to examine rather the truth, then the measure of any grace;
we have examined the truth, it is the truth of this Earnest, the truth of grace
and comfort: it is an excellent speech of our Savior Christ, in Rev. 3. to the
Church of Philadelphia, in verse 8. Because thou have a little strength, and
have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name: there is a great promise made
to the Church of Philadelphia: and why? Because thou have a little strength;
how is that discovered? Thou have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name. So
then, if that little be true, God respects not that little as it is little in
quantity, but as he means to make it ere long; he looks upon the Earnest, as he
means to make up the bargain: he looks upon the foundation, as he means to rear
up a goodly building: he looks upon the first fruits, as he means to add the
harvest; and therefore, Ephesians. 1. and other places, We are elected to be holy
and blameless in his sight. So, Ephesians. 5. latter end, He purges the Church,
that she may be presented to him without spot. So Christ looks upon his Church
as he is purging and washing, till he have made it holy in his sight. We are
elected, not to Earnest, not to first fruits, but to be unblameable; we are
elected to perfection: it is the comfort of Christians, that God looks upon
his, not as they are imperfect here, but as they are in beginning, and as they
are growing, and as he intends to bring them to perfection afterward: For all
things are present (we know) to him, the time to come, what we shall be: he
considers us as if we were in heaven already; we are in our degree, and in our
faith. So now we sit in heavenly places: therefore as he looks on us as we
shall be, so faith answers his looking, when we are framed by the Spirit to
comfort; faith looks not upon the weak Earnest, the poor beginnings, but as we
shall be after in heaven, without spot and wrinckle.

I but how shall we know the truth of his Earnest, that it is true, though We
may know grace is true, though little.
it be little? To speak a word or two of that for trial.

Where the Spirit of God is, with the relation of an Earnest, he is as an
Earnest by way of grace and comfort: for those two ways the Spirit discovers
himself in us, to sanctify our nature, or by comfort, and peace, and joy, and
such like. Then it does stir up the soul to mourn, that is but an Earnest, 1.
The soul mournes that it is little.
(as I said before) and to wait for the accomplishment, as the Apostle says in
Romans 8. We that have received the first fruits of the Spirit, mourn in our
selves; that it is no better with us, then it is; and withal, We wait for the
redemption of the sons of God, the adoption of the sons of God, we wait for the
accomplishment 2. Wait:
hereafter: it is the nature therefore of the Spirit of God, as it is an
Earnest, to stir up the spirits of Gods children to mourn something, and
likewise to wait patiently, to wait for the full accomplishment hereafter; and
as a fruit of their waiting, to endure quietly, patiently, and comfortably that
3. To wait with Patience.
which is between the Earnest, and the accomplishment of it: and therefore God
gives them the grace of hope and constancy, and of perseverance, till all be
accomplished; for there is the tediousness of time, between which is irk some,
hope deferred, and a tediousness of deferring, and besides many afflictions
withal.

Now Gods children that have the Earnest of the Spirit, they have a spirit 4.
Constancy.
likewise to wait: and that they may be strengthened to wait, they have the
Spirit of Constancy, a Spirit of patience to endure trouble, and to persevere,
and to hold out in regard of the tediousness of the time. So that they may not
give over religious courses, though they have it not fully here, but go on
still, and wait. And likewise those that have the Earnest of the Spirit, that
have the Spirit, as it has this qualification upon 5. To purge our selves.
it of an Earnest, it stirs them up to frame themselves, answerable to the
full ccaomplishment; for He that has this hope, (says the Apostle) purges
himself: he that finds some little beginnings of grace and comfort, the
beginings of heaven upon Earth, he frames himself to the perfect state in
heaven: for it is the nature of faith and hope wheresoever they are, to frame
the disposition of the person in whom those graces are planted by the Spirit,
to the condition of that that soul believes and hopes, for it is in the nature
of the thing it should be so. For does not hope in any man that hopes to appear
before some great person, make him alter his attire, and fashion his carriage
and deportment, as may be plausible before the person whom he goes to? and does
not faith and hope of better things, where they are in truth, fashion and
dispose every man to be such as may be fit for heaven? The title to heaven we
have indeed by Christ; but the soul knows there must be a qualification, No
unclean thing shall enter into heaven: and therefore where the Earnest is,
there is a continual desire to be better, a continual relinquishing of
corruptions more and more, a perfecting of the work of mortification, and the
work of grace more and more: for the same Spirit that is an Earnest, and gives
us any beginning of a better life, it likewise stirs us up, it fits and
prepares us for that state that is kept for us; it is impossible it should be
otherwise. In what strength the Earnest is, in that strength sanctification and
mortification are: and therefore persons that live in sins against Conscience,
that defile their tongues, and defile their bodies, let them talk what they
will, it is but a presumptuous conceit; it is not the voice of Gods Spirit, but
of carnal presumption: for wheresoever the Spirit is an Earnest of heaven, it
is always preparing and fitting the soul for that glorious and happy estate.
And wheresoever likewise this Earnest of the Spirit is, wheresoever 6. Desire
of accomplishment.
this grace is begun in truth, there is a desire of accomplishment, an earnest
desire of the coming of Christ to finish all, to finish the bargain. Rev. 22.
The Spirit and the Spouse say, Come; that is, the Spouse by direction of the
Spirit, where the Spouse is guided by the Spirit; and so far as the Spouse is
guided by the Spirit, she says, Come, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Except in two Cases. Except the Christian has grieved and wounded Cautions.
his conscience, grieved the Spirit, and then it is loath to go hence. 1. When
conscience is wounded.


Unless likewise the spirit of a Christian be careless, and would settle
things in better order before he go to Christ: for this is the fruit of
presumption, 2. Have been careless.
and carelessness, that it grieves the Spirit of God, and the Spirit being
grieved, grieves them; he makes that which should be their comfort, their going
to Christ by death, he makes it terrible: for as we see a weak eye cannot
endure the light, so a gauled guilty conscience trembles to think of Christ's
coming, though the Earnest be there; yet if the soul tremble, that the soul be
wounded, stay a while; Oh stay (says the Psalmist) before I go hence, and be
no more seen. When the wife has been negligent, she would have her husband
stay; but when she has been diligent, then the wife is willing her husband
should come; but perhaps things are not settled as they should, and therefore
she does not desire his coming as at other times.

But take a Christian in his right temper, he is willing to dye; nay, he is
willing, and glad, and joyful to go to Christ; then he knows the Earnest shall
be accomplished with the bargain: then he knows what God has begun, he will
perfect; then he knows, all the Promises shall be performed, when all
imperfection shall be removed, and all enemies shall be conquered, etc. A
carnal man does not say as the Spirit in the Spouse speaks, Come, Lord, come;
but stay, Lord, stay: and as the Devil that possessed that person, What have we
to do with thee? Art thou come to torment us before our time? they think of it
with quaking. For otherwise they that have the Earnest of the Spirit, have
joyful thoughts of it, and wishes answerable to those thoughts.

Again, wheresoever this Earnest is in truth, the Earnest of the Spirit, 7.
Growth in grace.
there is growth; for it is the nature of things imperfect to come to their
perfection, that they may encounter with whatsoever is contrary to them, and
that they may do their functions that they are fitted by for God.

Now God having fitted the new creature to serve him, and to go through all the
impediments in this world, and all the crosses, where he has begun this work,
it will labor to come to perfection. As in the natural body we are not content
to live; but when we have life, we desire health: and when we have health, we
are not content with that, but we desire strength; not only health, but
strength to perform that we should do. So where the spiritual life is begun,
the living soul is not content to live, to find an Earnest, a little
beginnings; but if he have that, he would have health, he would not have any
spiritual disease to lie on the soul, that might hinder it in the functions of
it: and together with health, it desires fuller and fully strength, because it
has many temptations to encounter with, many corruptions to resist, many
actions to do, many afflictions perhaps to bear, all which require a great deal
of strength: wheresoever grace is in truth, it is always with a desire of
growth, and answerable to that desire will be the use of all the means of
growth.

Again, to name one or two more, and so end: Wheresoever the Spirit is 8.
Quieting of the soul.
as an Earnest, it does as the seal does spoken of before, that as it has a
quieting power, an assuring power, it quiets the soul, wheresoever it si, it is
given to stay the soul, to comfort it, that the whole shall be performed in
time: and therefore the soul that has the Earnest of the Spirit, so far forth
as he has this Earnest, it quiets and stays the soul. A man may know true
faith from false, and true Earnest from presumption by this, as we know other
things: I say, it stills and quiets the soul, and it will endure the trial.

We say of Alcumy gold, it is counterfeit, it will not strengthen the heart;
true gold has a corroborating power to strengthen the heart, whether it be so,
or no, let the Alcumists look to it: but it is true, that true Eanest, the
beginnings of faith, though it be but in a little measure, it has a quieting,
a stilling, a strengthening power, to strengthen and corroborate the soul, for
it is given for that purpose. And a man that has the least grace will endure
the search, as true gold will endure the touchstone, the false will not: and it
9. True gold will endure the trial.
is a sign that a man has true grace in him, although it be with much
imperfection, that desires to be searched in preaching, hearing, searching
Sermons, and desiring to be searched in Conference, and that doubts not his
conscience, but would be searched thoroughly.

When men fret at the searching of their sins, they will not be searched, and
are content to go on in presumptuous courses, and think all is well; it is a
sign there is not so much as an Earnest. But not to go farther, that in the
Revelation shows the truth of a little grace: what says he? Thou have a little
strength: what does that little strength move the Church of Philadelphia to do?
Thou have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name. Where there is a little
strength, there will be a keeping of the Word in obedience, a keeping of it in
conversation: where is not a regard to Gods Word, a moulding of the soul into
it in obedience of it, there is not so much as a little strength of grace; and
therefore those that live in rebellious courses, have not so much as an Earnest
to them: yet, Thou have kept my Word, and withal, thou have not denied my Name.

Where a little strength is, there they will not deny Christ's Name, they 10. It
will persevere.
will hold out in the profession of the truth, and confess it if occasion
serve: and therefore where any are slight in their profession, that give in if
they be ready to dash upon any displeasure of any one: if they be to venture
their estates or so, then they are ashamed of Christ, and that profession which
they took upon them; they deny his Name, at least they do not own it, they have
not so much as a little strength, if they do not recover: Peter was in such a
temptation, but he recovered his strength, and got more strength, and a firm
standing upon it; the shaking of Peter was for the rooting of him.

So God to shame his children, suffers them sometimes to have dastardly
Christians get strength by their falls.
spirits, but they recover themselves, they are ashamed of it; but those that
are common Politicians in this kind, that will not stand out in a good cause to
maintain their truth and profession, when God thrusts his cause into their
hands, specially at such times when God says to them, Who is on my side? who?
now is the time to appear then; if they have not a word for God, they will not
own the quarrel and cause of God, and Religion, they have not a little
strength; for they that have a little strength here, keep the Word, and have
not denied the Name. Those therefore that can fashion themselves to all
Religions, to all companies, they will have a Religion mutable and flexible to
their occasions: where is the Earnest of the Spirit? the Spirit as much as he
is, is strong and vigorous, and powerful; these men have not so much as a
little strength, that are as water which is fashioned to the vessel it is in,
like to the Samaritans, (as Joseph the Historian of the Jews writes of them,)
When the Jews prospered, oh then they would be Jews; when the Jews had ill
success, then they were great enemies to the Jews: so you have many that are
no friends to the afflicted, to the disgraced truth; but as long as the Cause
of Religion is carried out with the Countenance of the State, with the favor
of great ones, so far they will own it; but if Christ once comes to be abased,
they will not know Christ, nor his Cause.

I beseech you, let us take notice of it, it is a sign there is no grace at
all, where there is such an habitual disposition without shame or grief, or
repentance; for Gods children sometimes may be overtaken with a spirit of
dastardlinesse, which afflicts them sore afterward, that they gather more
strength. A man may know if he be Gods child in such a state; for it is
universally true, Gods children are never overtaken with a spirit of
cowardlinesse and fear, but they regain it, and grow more strong upon it; as we
see in Cranmer and others, God purposes sometimes to let them see what they
are in themselves without his support and strength; but afterward they gather
new resolutions, new purposes to stick firmer to the truth then ere before. I
might add many other things; but I go on to that which follows.

You see here now how we may try, if we have any true Earnest in us at all, or
no.

Now I beseech you, let us labor to have this Earnest, (if we have it To
labor for assurance.
not) to have this assurance especially, let me desire those of the younger
sort to labor to have the seal of this Spirit, and the Earnest before they be
further and further engaged into the world, and before they be so hardened that
they will not receive a contrary stamp to their corruptions. It is a wondrous
advantage that Gentlemen, and others that are young, before the world has
soiled them, and before their understandings be darkened, and their affections
are crooked, and carried away much with the stream and errors of the time,
they have much advantage above others; for they have spirits fitter for grace,
fitter to receive the impression of this seal of the Spirit, and fitter for the
Earnest. Let us labor for this Earnest betimes: what a comfortable thing will
it be to carry along with the Earnest an assurance of a better estate from our
youth to our age; and from our age, to our old age, and so to heaven with us?
what a deal of comfort do young ones deprive and rob themselves of, that will
not be gracious betimes? Let us labor to have the stamp of the Spirit set on
us in our prime time, in the strength of our years. But I will press the
Point, if the time will give leave, afterward.

Now we must know, that God gives this Earnest not for himself, but for Earnest
given for our sakes.
us, to secure us: and that is one reason why it is called an Earnest.

There is besides bargaining another state and condition that Earnest is
applied unto, which perhaps the Apostle aims at, as marriage: whatsoever was
before the Consummation of the marriage, was a kind of Arrah, a kind of
Earnest, to assure the affection of the contracted person and persons that
loved one another, till the Consummation of the marriage.

So Christ now contracts us on the earth, and having love to us, and taking our
Nature on him, that he might woo us in our own flesh, and in our own nature,
taking upon him the Earnest of our flesh, he gives us the Earnest of his
Spirit: and to assure us tha^ he loves us, and that he means to make up the
bargain afterward, he sends us love tokens, graces, and comfort, and joy. Even
as Isaac when he was to marry Rebecca, he sent by his servants Bracelets and
Jewels, and such things, to secure her of his love.

So Christ in heaven intending the consummation of the Match, he sends To
labor against unbelief.
us here graces and comforts of the Spirit, and all to secure us; all is for
us, (I say) which I observe the rather, because I would raise your hearts to
hate unbelief and distrust exceedingly, because God labors to undermine it by
all means possible.

Wherefore does he use so many terms here, of Sealing, Anointing, and Earnest,
with words, and Sacraments, and all whatsoever may confirm you? The Holy Ghost
applies it to us; all this is that we may not doubt of the favor of God: and
therefore when we find any goodness in us, let us account that to give false
witness against our selves is a horrible sin; it is to make God a liar. God
stands upon his credit; and therefore take heed what we say, (specially if we
have found the work of grace in former time, any Earnest,) that we have no
grace; God does this for our assurance: all his dealing of Word and Sacraments,
of Earnest and Oath, and all that may be to assure us; and therefore we should
not cross the goodness of God, so as to cherish such a disposition as is most
contrary to him, that he labors to undermine by all means.

And therefore here is the poison of Popish Religion, that it maintains
doubting, and leaves men doubting: indeed they do well to maintain it in their
Doctrine, for indeed they false found a man upon satisfaction, they false found
him upon Purgatory and merits, and the foundation they have of a Christian soul
is uncertain, and therefore they may well teach doubting, it suits with the
course that they take: but I say, it is very corrupt, for God uses all means
that we should not doubt: and therefore it is idly objected, God for his part
will, but for our part we have reason to doubt why he in all things stoops to
us, he labors to secure us; and therefore in the Covenant of grace he does his
part and ours too.

But I hasten to that which follows, because I would end with the time. To
touch that a little distinctly by it self, that the Spirit does all, the
Earnest of the Spirit: for indeed, though Spirit be not added to stablishing,
yet the Spirit stablisheth by Christ, and the Spirit it anoints, and the Spirit
seals to the day of redemption, and the Earnest of the Spirit.

So it is the Holy Ghost does all, here you have the three Persons in the
Trinity, we have three grand Enemies, the world, the flesh, and Satan. Now here
are the three persons in the Trinity stronger then all our enemies; He which
stablisheth us, is God the Father by his Spirit: upon whom? upon Christ, ^n
Christ, and gives us the Earnest of his Spirit; you have, I say, the three
Persons of the Trinity here: but why does the Spirit give us the Earnest? why
does the Spirit give us grace and comfort, seal us, and does all, and
stablisheth us?

I answer; First of all, because now since the fall we have no principles
Earnest the work of the Spirit.
of supernatural good, and therefore it must be a principle above our nature to
work both grace and comforts in our barren hearts.

Again, as there is no principle to that which is supernaturally good, so there
is opposition to that which is supernaturally good; and therefore there must be
somewhat to overpower the corruption of our nature.

But why the Spirit, rather then the Father and the Son? He comes from 1. He
proceeds from Father and Son.
both, and proceeding from both he is fit to witness the love of both; for the
Holy Ghost is in the breast of the Father and the Son, and proceeds from both,
and he knows the secret love of the Father to us, and the love of Christ Jesus
Mediator to us.

Now the Spirit knowing the secrets of God, as a man's spirit (says the
Apostle) knows his own secrets, he knows his love, and he knows whom he
loves: So the Spirit of God knowing the affection of the Father, and the
affection of Jesus Christ to us, is fit to be an Earnest, fit to be a Seal.

Indeed all things are wrought by the Spirit in grace for application; the
desert is from the Son, originally from the Father, but in regard of
application of what is wrought by the Son, all is by the Holy Ghost; both
graces and comforts the Holy Ghost takes from Christ: for if grace be wrought,
it is with divine reasons from the love of God in Christ: if grace he wrought,
it is from the wondrous love of God reconciled in Christ, wherein heaven is
opened, hell is vanquished; it is by reasons fetched from Christ; and so he
takes of mine, (as Christ says,) He shall take of mine, and give to you: he
takes reasons from Christ the holy Ghost, whereby he makes all, the application
is altogether by the Spirit.

And it must be by the Spirit again, because the Spirit of God, and no 2. He
only can quiet the soul.
less then the Spirit can quiet our spirits: for when the soul is distempered,
it is like a distempered lock that no key can open: So when the Conscience is
troubled, what creature can settle the troubled Conscience? can open the
ambages of a troubled Conscience in such perplexity and confusion? and
therefore to settle the troubled Conscience aright, it must be somewhat above
Conscience; and that which must quiet the Spirit, must be such a Spirit as is
above our spirits: This is excellently set down in this Epistle, in the 3.
Chap. the work of the holy Ghost in this kind. But I cannot stand upon it now
at this time. I go on.

Likewise in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the second Chapter, and 11.
ver. that one place shall stand in stead of all: What man knows the things of
a man, but the spirit of a man that is in him? So the things of God no man
knows but the Spirit.

Now, We have received the spirit, not of the world, but the Spirit of God, to
know the things that are freely given us of God: if our spirits were in the
heart and soul of another man, in the breast of another man, we should know
what another man thinks: if a man had a spirit in another man's spirit, surely
he would know all his thoughts and all his affections.

Now the holy Spirit of God is in the breast of the Father, and the Son, and he
knows our spirits better then we know our own spirits; he searches, he is a
searcher, as the word is in the original: the Spirit is a searcher, he
searches our own hearts, and he searches the secret love of God to us, that
is the Spirit must stablish us.

Well then, if the Spirit does all, how shall we know then that we have How to
know we have the Spirit.
this Spirit? A note or two, and so go on.

If we have this Spirit of God to seal us, and to be an Earnest: I will not
speak all that may be, but a little; for indeed all comes from the Spirit. 1.
By life and motion.
Even as in our souls, how may a man know that he has a soul? by living and
moving, by actions vital, etc. So we may know a man has the Spirit of God by
those actions that come only from the Spirit, which is to the soul, as the
soul is in the body: for as all beauty and motion comes from the soul to the
body, so to the soul from the Spirit, all comes of the Spirit, and therefore
every saving grace is a sign that the Spirit is in us.

In a word, the Spirit is in us in the nature of fire, as in other things, so
in 2. By transforming us.
this in transforming; wheresoever the Spirit dwells, he transforms the soul,
he transforms the party like himself holy and gracious. Those therefore that
find the Spirit transforming and changing them in the use of the Ordinance of
the Word, they may know that they have the Spirit sealing them, and being an
Earnest to them.

They may know likewise, that they have it wrought by the Spirit, for 3. By
Conflict.
every one grace, you may knowspiritual graces are with conflict: for what is
true, is with a great deal of resistance of that which is counterfeit.

Comforts and graces that are not the Earnest of the Spirit, are with little
conflict: but where there are true comforts and graces of the Spirit wrought by
the Spirit, it is with much conflict with Satan and with himself: for there is
a great deal of Envy in the Devil against the man that walks in the Spirit.
Thinks he, what such a base creature as this is to have the Earnest of heaven,
to walk here as if he were in heaven already, and to defy all opposite powers?
Nay, I will trouble his peace, he shall go mourning to heaven, if he go there:
this is the reasoning of the cursed spirit, and hereupon he labors to shake
the assurance and persuasion; and the grace and Comfort of a Christian it is
with much conflict and temptation, not only with Satan, but with his own heart.

Our hearts misgive us, when we are guilty of some sins, as always there is
guilt on the soul, so much guilt, so much doubt; till the soul be free from
giult, it will never but be casting of doubts: and therefore there is always
resistance in us, and there must be a higher power then the heart and soul of a
man to set the heart down and quiet it: It is always in conflict.

And the gracet and comforts of the Spirit wrought by the Spirit, are always
4. By supernatural obedience.
in the use of means, holy means; and it carries a man above the strength of
nature, it carries a man to the practice of that which he could not do by
nature, to pardon his enemies, to pray for them, to overcome revenge, and to
enjoy prosperity without pride in a comfortable measure: and it enables him to
practice the last Commandment, That he shall be content with his estate, and
not lust after others: and the first Commandment; the graces of the holy Spirit
enables a man to love God, and to rejoice in him above all as his best portion,
it makes his joy spiritual, and it makes him delight in all connatural things
that are like the Spirit; as whatsoever is spiritual, is connatural to the
Spirit.

If a man have the graces of the Spirit, he joys in spiritual company, he
joys in the presence of God, he hates sin as being contrary to the Earnest of
the Spirit, he hates terror of conscience, and the way unto it, he will look
on good things, as God looks on them, and as the Spirit looks on them, and
every thing that is spiritual he relisheth, he savours the things of the Spirit.

Now be cause I will not detract your thoughts, there are some six or seven
properties of the Spirit, in one Chapter, that you may have them all together,
in Romans 8. I will not name all, but such as are easy.

First of all, it is said in the 9. ver. that the Spirit where it is, it dwells
as in 5. It dwells in us.
a house: now wheresoeve the Spirit is, he is dwelling and ruling; for the holy
Ghost will not be an underling to lusts, and he repaires and makes up the
breaches of the soul; where the Spirit dwells, all the breaches are made up.
Ignorance to knowledge, he begets knowledge, and affection, and love: he
prepares all, he prepares his own dwelling, and it is familiar and constant to
the Spirit; a dwelling implies familiarity and constancy; he is not in us; as
he is in wicked men that have the Spirit; As Austin says, The Spirit of God
knocks at their hearts, but he does not dwell there.

To go on, that is the first: The Spirit dwells in us, if we have the Spirit.
6. It mortifies sin.
And then the Spirit does subdue the contrary; for the Spirit, when it comes
into a man, it pulls down all the strong holds, it makes way for it self: and
therefore it is said to mortify the deeds of the flesh, ver. 13. If you
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, you are led by the Spirit. Those
therefore that by the help of the Spirit, by spiritual reasons, subdue their
corruptions, they are led by the Spirit: those that cherish corruptions, or
mortify them, not by spiritual reasons, but out of civil respect to carry
authority among men, and therefore they would be free from aspersions, as might
disable their reputation, they have not the Spirit.

Thirdly, as many as are led by the Spirit, are the sons of God; the Spirit 7.
It leads us.
leads them as the Angel that went before the Israelites, from Egypt unto
Canaan: so the Spirit of God like the Angel goes before us, and leads us the
way, and removes the lets: it does lead us (I say) sweetly, and not violently,
as the Devil leads his, that are possessed with his spirit: So that those that
have the Spirit working grace and comfort in them, sweetly he leads them, and
yet strongly too; for it is strongly, because it is against corruption and
opposition from without; but yet sweetly, preserving the liberty and freedom of
the soul. We by nature are like children, or blind men, we cannot lead our
selves, and therefore the Spirit leads us. Those therefore that have the
Spirit, it leads them, they submit themselves to the guidance and leading of
the Spirit: That is another evidence.

A fourth is this, That it is a Spirit of adoption; it assures us that we 8 It
is a Spirit of adoption.
are the sons of God: it gives us assurance of our adoption, that we are the
sons of God; the same Spirit that sanctifies us, it witnesses to us, it makes
us holy; it witnesses to us that we are the sons of God.

And then again, the Spirit stirs up sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed, when we are not of our selves able to pray: this is an evidence of
the Earnest 9. It teaches to pray.
of the Spirit, when we can send our sighs and groans to God: I say, God will
hear the groans, the voice of his own Spirits; for whence come those sighs and
groans to God? why should we not rather sink in despair in troubles, but
because the Spirit is in us? Those therefoore that in extremity having nothing
to comfort them, and yet are able to send forth sighs and groans to God, they
may certainly know that they have the Spirit.

And likewise the Spirit makes us mourn, and wait for the adoption of the sons
of God; those that mourn and wait, have the Evidence of the 10. And to wait.
Spirit: for a worldling does not mourn for his imperfections, for his
corruptions; he does not mourn that he is absent from his Savior, neither does
he wait for the accomplishment of that that shall be bestowed on Saints,
because he has his portion here: therefore those that can mourn for their
corruptions, for those things which the world is not able to tax them for,
because they cannot serve God with enlargement of the Spirit as they would, and
they wait also without despair, or without discouragement, till God have
finished their course, they are led with a better Spirit then the world.

Though I should name no more, what a many sweet evidences are here to manifest
a soul truly acted, and guided, and led by the Spirit? but these shall be
sufficient for this time.

Well then, if the Spirit does all, if the Spirit anoint and seal, and give
Earnest of grace, and comfort and all, till he bring us to heaven, being
Christ's Vicar; for Christ has no other Vicar on earth but his Spirit; if the
Spirit does all, as indeed he does all for God to us, and from us to God;
whatsoever God does to us it is by the Spirit: he anoints, and seals, and
sanctifies by the Spirit, and whatsoever we do to God, it is by the Spirit, or
else it is not acceptable: we sigh and groan in the Spirit, we pray in the holy
Ghost (says Jude,) and that God does to us immediately from the Spirit, and
all that we do to God, is in the Spirit.

Is this so, then as it an undoubted truth, oh then we should labor by all
means for this Spirit of God. To give some directions in a word, and so to end.

Labor (I say) to have the Spirit, and to groan in the Spirit: and to this
end, because the Word is the Chariot of the Spirit, in which the Spirit is
Directions to have the Spirit.
carried, attend upon the Ordinances of God, and use all kind of spiritual 1.
Attend Gods means.
means, wherein the Spirit is usually effectual: for the Spirit will only
work with his own means: all those bastard inventions and devices fetched from
the Church of Rome, humane devices in Gods service, they are naught; Gods
Spirit will not be effectual with Popish devices: and therefore Rome is the
habitation of Devils; Gods Spirit has nothing to do there, because they have
set up a worship contrary to Gods worship, they have set up a Covenant contrary
to Christ's Covenant, they have set up the Covenant of Works, and deny, in a
manner, a Covenant of Grace: Christ is not taught as he should be there.

Now, wheresoever the Spirit is, it is with the clear teaching of the Gospel:
Received you the Spirit by hearing of the Law, or of faith preached? Therefore
let us attend upon the unfolding of Christ Jesus in the Gospel; for the Spirit
is given with a clear and true unfolding of Christ: and omit no spiritual
means, wherein the Spirit is effectual, as meditation, reading, etc.

For as a man working in a garden, though he think not of it, perhaps he draws
a sweet sent of the flowers, there is a tincture from the air that is round
about him.

So the Word of God being indicted by the Spirit of God, we being in holy
company, being led by the same Spirit, a man shall either by reading of the
Word, or in holy company, or conversing in good books, he shall draw a
spiritual sweetness from the Word, or from those that he has to deal with.

The spirit of a man is like water that runs from Minerals; as we see bathes
have their warmth from Minerals that they run through, they have a tincture
from them to be hot in this or that degree, in this or that quality.

So it is with the soul, when it runs through holy things, when it has to deal
with good books, and good company, etc. it draws a spiritual tincture: and
therefore if we would have the Spirit of God to guide us, let us be much in
those things that the Holy Ghost has sanctified us for that end, at all times,
when we have liberty from our callings.

And withal, take heed, that we greive not the Holy Ghost any way, if 2. Not
to grieve the Spirit.
we will have the Spirit to seal us, to increase our Earnest.

How do we grieve the Holy Ghost?

By cherishing contrary affections, and lusts, and desires. And resist not 1.
By cherishing Lusts.
the holy Ghost: as now when you hear the Word of God, if you shut your
resolutions, if you shut your hearts, and resolve not to give way to any
instruction that shall be delivered; This is a resisting of the Holy Ghost: God
now knocks at the hearts of those that are here, by his Word and Spirit; and
therefore we should open the everlasting doors, and let the King of glory come
in.

We should lay open all to the Spirit: Oh when the Spirit, when Christ is so
willing to give the Spirit, it cannot be any but our fault, if we be no more
spiritual then we are: for indeed there is nothing in a manner required to be
spiritual, but not to resist the Spirit.

The Holy Ghost presses upon us in the Word such reasons of
heavenlymindednesse, of despising of earthly things, of purging our selves from
the corruptions in the world, such reasons to be good, that indeed none are
damned in the bosom of the Church, but such as set a bar against the Spirit of
God in their hearts, with a cursed resolution that they will not be better,
that they will not part with their cursed lusts: therefore they are damned,
because they will be damned, that, say the Preachers by the Word, and Spirit
what they will, they think it better to be as they are, then to entertain such
a guest as will mar and alter all that was there before: take heed therefore
of resisting of the Spirit, and of grieving of the Spirit by any thing in our
selves, or by conversing with company that will grieve him.

He that has the Spirit of God in him, cannot endure carnal company: for what
shall he hear, what shall he draw in at his senses? but that which will be
vexation of spirit to him: therefore it is said of Lot, His righteous soul was
vexed with the unclean conversation of the Sodomites: it is an undoubted sign
of a man that has no grace, not to care for his company that has grace.

Likewise yield all obedience and subjection to the Spirit, and to all the 2.
Obey the Spirit.
motions of the Word and Spirit; bring our hearts into subjection, lay our
selves, as it were, before the Spirit, suffer our selves to be moved, and
fashioned, and framed by it: for God gives his holy Spirit to them that obey
him.

And beg the Spirit also as the principal thing: God gives the Spirit (says 3.
Pray for the Spirit.
Christ) to them that ask him: and by Christ's manner of speaking there he
insinuates, as if he should say, What can I give you better then the Holy
Ghost? and yet this will I give you, if you ask him, that is the good thing
that God gives: for indeed, that is the seed of all graces, and of all comfort;
and therefore a world of promises are included in that promise, that he will
give the Spirit to them that ask him.

Labor by these and such like means for the Spirit: and then if you have the
Spirit, the Earnest of the Spirit, and the seal of the Spirit, then mark what
will come of such a temper of soul, that will go through all conditions
whatsoever, come what will: for the Spirit is above all, and the comforts of
the Spirit are above all earthly comforts; and the graces of the Spirit are
able to encounter with all temptations.

So that a man that has the Spirit, stands impregnable; the work of grace The
Spirit makes impregnable.
cannot be quenched, because it is the effect and the work of the Spirit, all
the powers of all the Devils in hell cannot stir it: God may hide his comfort
for a time, to humble us; but to quench the work of the Spirit once wrought in
the heart, all the power of all the Devils in hell cannot quench the least
spark of saving grace, it will carry us through all opposition whatsoever.

Let a man never baulk or decline in a good cause, for any thing that he shall
suffer; for the seal and the Earnest of the Spirit is never more strong then
when we have no other comfort by us but that, when we can draw comfort from the
Wellhead, from the Spring; therefore we should labor for the Earnest of the
Spirit; for it will fit us for all conditions whatsoever.

What makes a man differ from himself? what makes a man differ from another?
Take a man that has the Earnest of the Spirit, you shall have him defy death,
the world, Satan, and all temptations. Take a man that is negligent in
laboring to increase his Earnest, you shall have him weak, and not like
himself.

The Apostle Peter, before the Holy Ghost came upon him, the voice of a weak
damsel astonished him; but after, how willing was he to suffer any thing?
Therefore let us not labor much to strengthen our selves with the things of
this life, or to value our selves by our dependence upon others; if thou have
grace, thou have that that will stand by thee when all other things will fail:
for all other things will be taken away, but the Comforter shall never be taken
away; it goes along with us continually.

First, it works Earnest in us, and then it stamps upon us his own mark, and
then it leads us from grace to grace; and in the hour of death, then especially
it has the work of a Comforter to present to us the fruits of a good and holy
life, and likewise the joys of heaven; when we are dead the Spirit watches
over our bodies, because they were the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and at the
day of judgment the same Spirit shall knit both body and soul together, and
after, the same Spirit that has done all this, shall be all in all to us in
heaven for ever, and then our very bodies shall be spiritual, where as now our
souls, even the better part of them, is carnal. Even as the fire when it
possesses a piece of Iron, it is all fire; So our bodies shall be all
spiritual.

What a blessed thing is this, to have the Spirit? what are all friends to the
Holy Ghost, which will speak to God for us? The Spirit will make request with
sighs and groans, and God will hear the voice of his own Spirit.

What prison can shut up the Spirit of God? Above all, labor to have more of
the Spirit of God: this will make us more or less fruitful, more or less
glorious in our profession, more or less willing to dye. Labor to increase
this Earnest, that the nearer we come to heaven, the more we may be fitted for
it.

Consider but this Reason, if you want this, alas, we can never be thankful No
thankfulness without the Spirit.
to God for any thing; if by the Spirit we have not assurance that our state is
the state of grace; for otherwise we might think that God gives us all in
anger, as a etrnal man, he always fears that God fatts him as an ox to the
slaughter: what a fearful case is this, that a man cannot be thankful for that
he has!

Labor for the Spirit, that we may be thankful to God for every thing, that
we may see the love of God in every thing, in every refreshing we take; that
that love of God that fits us for heaven, and that fits heaven for us, it gives
us daily bread: the Earnest of the Spirit will make us thankful for every
thing.

Again, labor for the Earnest of the Spirit, that we may be joyful in No joy
without the Spirit.
all conditions: how can a man suffer willingly, that knows not that he is
sealed with the Spirit? that knows not that God has begun a good work in him?
Alas, he is lumpish and heavy under the Cross.

What makes a man bear the Cross willingly, but this assurance? what makes him
deny himself in temptations, and corruptions? Oh (says the child of God,) the
work of the Spirit is begun in me, sealing me up to life everlasting, shall I
grieve and quench this Spirit for this base lust? But a man that has not the
Spirit, says, I had as good take this pleasure, as have none at all; for ought
I know, I shall have none: he sees no greater pleasure, then the following of
his lust.

So that none can resist temptations, but he that has the Spirit, giving him
Earnest in a comfortable measure; and it is a good sign when we resist
temptations for spiritual reasons, that the Spirit works it.

Again, unless we have this Earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, we can No
will^ngnesse to dye without it.
never be content to end our days with comfort: he that has the Earnest of
the Spirit is glad of death when it comes; there shall be then an
accomplishment of all the bargain, then the Marriage shall be consummate, then
shall be the year of Jubilee, the Sabbath of rest for ever, then is the triumph,
and then all tears shall be wiped from our eyes.

But now let a man stagger and doubt whether he be the child of God, or no,
that he cannor find any mark of the child of God in him, that he cannot read
the evidences of a Christian state in his soul, they are so dim, he sees
nothing but corruption in him, he sees no change, no resistance of corruption,
he has no Earnest. Alas, what a miserable case is such a man in when he comes
to dye? death, with the eternity of misery after it, who can look it in the
face, without hope of life everlasting, without assurance of a happy change
after death? Therefore we should labor for the Spirit, that howsoever we grow
or decay in wealth and reputation, let God alone with that; but above all, beg
of God that he would increase in us, and renew the Earnest, and the stamp of
the Spirit, that we may have somewhat in our souls, wherein we may see the
Evidences of a Christian estate.

I might add many things to this purpose, (but this is sufficient to any
Judicious Christian,) to encourage us to labor for the Spirit above all things
in the world: all other are but grass, but fading; but grace and glory, grace,
and peace, and joy; nay, the very Earnest of the Spirit is better then all
earthly things: for the Earnest of it is joy unspeakable, and glorious, and
peace that passes all understanding.

If the Promise, and the Earnest here be so, I beseech you, what shall the
accomplishment of the promise be? if the Promises laid hold on by faith so
quicken and cheer the soul, and if the giving a test of heaven lift a
Christians spirit above all earthly discouragements, what shall it be when the
Spirit shall be all in all in us, if the Earnest be so comfortable? But I go on
to the next Verse.

VERSE XXIII. Moreover, I call God to record upon my soul, that to spare you, I
came not yet to Corinth.
IN this Verse, the Apostle labors to remove suspicion of levity, and
inconstancy: there were jealousies in the minds of the Corinthians, which were
also fomented by some vainglorious Teachers amongst them, that labored to
undermine S. Paul in the hearts of the Corinthians, as if he had not loved the
Corinthians so well as they did; therefore he is so careful to clear himself
in their thoughts, from suspicion of inconstancy, and want of love to them:
because suspicion grounded upon the lightness in his carriage, might reflect
upon his doctrine.

He knew well enough the malice of man's nature, and therefore he is very
curious, and industrious, to make a clear passage for himself into the hearts
of these Corinthians by all means possible, as we heard in part out of the 17.
Verse. Moreover, I call God to record, etc.


Saint Paul is here purging himself still, to clear himself.

First, he labors to clear himself from the suspicion of inconstancy, and
Parts of the Verse.
want of love to them in not coming.

Secondly, he sets down the true cause why he did not come, I came not, to
spare you: You were much to blame in many things, and among the rest of the
abominations among you, you cherished the incestuous person, and many of you
doubted of the resurrection. I should have been very severe, if I had come,
therefore I came net, to spare you, hoping that my letter would work upon your
spirits, so that I need not be severe to you: therefore do not suspect that for
any ill mind I came not: for it was to spare you, that I might not be forced to
be severe.

Then the third thing is, the sealing of this speech with a serious oath, I
call God for record upon my soul, that I came not, to spare you. So here is the
w^ping away of suspicion: And the setting down the true cause why he did not
come: And the ratifying and confirming it by an oath; he makes his purgation
here by an oath. These three things I will briefly touch.

First of all, you see here he avoids suspicion of lightness which the
Corinthians had of him, partly by the false suggestion of proud Teachers among
them, who fomented their suspicious dispositions: because they would weaken S.
Paul's esteem among the Corinthians: they had a conceit he was an uncertain
man, he promised to come, and did not: now here he declines that suspicion.

Where first, Observe these two things briefly.

First, that the nature of man is inclined to suspicion.

And secondly, that it is the duty of men to avoid it as much as may be, and to
wipe it away, if it cannot be avoided. Man's nature is prone to suspicion.


Man's nature is prone to suspect ill of another, though never so good. Observe.
Man's nature prone to suspicion.
Christ could not avoid it: because he conversed sociably with other men, he
was thought to be a Wine-bibber, a companion of sinners. And God himself was
suspected of Adam in innocence: the Devil is so cunning, that he calls God
himself into question, as if he had not meant so well to him. What will that
impudent spirit do, that will bring the creature in suspicion of him that is
goodness it self? God knows, that when you eat, your eyes shall be open, and
you shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. Do you think that he intends you
any good, in forbidding you to eat, etc? He did not spare Christ, innocence it
self, clothed with man's flesh; and will he spare to bring uncharitable
suspicions upon others? surely he will not. And then man's nature of it self is
prone to suspect and think ill of another; From many grounds:

Sometimes out of experience of the common infirmities thnt men meet Grounds of
suspicion.
with in the world; out of the experience of the falsehood of men they are many
times prone to suspicion. 1. The infirmity of men.


But most commonly it is out of guiltiness that men think ill of others,
because others have cause to think ill of them: none are so prone to suspicion,
2. Guiltiness.
as those that are worst themselves; because they judge others by their own
hearts.

The better sort of people think of others, as they are, and as they deserve
themselves: but others, because they are naught, they think others are so;
because they deserve ill, they think others have deserved an ill opinion of
them: so many times it comes of guilt, because we are not as we should be.

Then again, it arises from a guilty conscience in another respect: we think,
because men have cause, though they have no wrong to themselves; yet because
our own hearts tell us we are ill, we suspect them. So from an uncharitable
disposition, and guiltiness of conscience it oft-times comes.

Then again, sometimes from the concurrence of probabilities, the suiting 3.
From Probabilities.
of circumstances that makes things somewhat probable whereupon suspicion may
be fastened. Sometimes when there is a concurrence of probabilities of the
likelihood of things, there suspicion is prone to rise: for suspicion is not a
determining of a thing, it is but a slight kind of conceit: it is more then a
fear, and less then judgment of a thing. It is more then fear: Suspicion more
then fear, less then judgment.
for he that fears, suspects not: suspicion is a degree to judgment: it does
not fully judge, for then it were not suspicion: it is more then fear; suspects
not, but fears; It conceives slightly that such a thing should be done, and yet
he dares not say it is done.

Suspicion is nothing else but an inclination of the soul to think and imagine
Suspicion what.
ill of another: a looking curiously under a thing, or person. As we use to
say, Envy pries into things; an envious person searches: so a suspicious
person looks under to see if he can see matter of ill to fasten his ill soul
upon. So it inclines the soul to think ill upon slight grounds. Now this
oft-times arises, and is fed with seeming probability. Christ conversed with
wicked men, here was some color for them to conjecture him so.

We say, things have two hands, a right hand, and a left; now suspicion
Suspicion makes the worst construction.
takes hold of the left hand always: if things will admit of a double
construction, suspicion always takes hold of the worst, suspicion takes hold of
the ill part. That is the nature of a diseased soul, to take things by the
wrong hand. We see then it is a disposition that we are subject unto naturally;
and it is cherished by Satan, and Satan's instruments, wicked men.

And why does the Devil so cherish suspicion, and a jealous disposition?

Oh, it has been wondrous instrumental to Satan: I dare say, there is Why the
Devil cherishes suspicion.
no disposition or frame of soul that has been the occasion of more
bloodshed, of more unjustice in the Church and State from the beginning of the
world, then a jealous disposition, especially in great ones. Therefore the
Mischief from suspicion.
Devil labors, as to breed jealousies of God, so of Gods Church and Children
from the beginning. Was it not ever the disposition of ill-minded men to put
jealousies into the hearts, especially of those that were in authority
concerning men far better then themselves? Was it not Hamans policy? when the
Jews had angered him, Oh they are a people that care not for the Laws, etc.
perhaps they were more obedient then himself: had it not been the occasion of
their ruin, if God had not been more merciful?

Herod had a jealousy and suspicion, that Christ when he was born would turn
him out of his Kingdom; and all Jerusalem was in an uproar. Alas, Christ came
to give a heavenly Kingdom, and not to take away earthly: yet this jealousy
cost the lives of the poor Infants.

So in the Primitive Church, there were wicked men put jealousies (concerning
the Christians,) into the heads of the Emperors: when alas, they reverenced
the Emperors, (next God) above all: yet always there were wicked instruments
that sought to domineer, and have their own ends under the Emperors, they
conveyed jealousies; and thence came so much bloodshed. In later times in
Popish Countries, if a man read the stories, whence came that bloodshed? This
was one chief cause, jealousies, and suspicions cast into the heads of Popish
Princes by wicked men about them, set on work by Satan himself. O they are such
as will turn you out of your state; a people that are rebellious, and unquiet.

This was the policy among us in former times; we may consider of later times:
to see the disposition of a man, that was a great Statesman in his time, and a
man of great parts and learning, but of a very fierce and cruel disposition: I
mean Stephen Gardener. The chief hurt that was done in that magnanimous Princes
time, it was done by him. And how? By jealousies, as appears by his Letters,
etc. Oh if these things prevail, this and that will come: he cast such
jealousies that did affright thas great Prince. Oh, other Princes will fall out
with you, if you maintain not these things, they will break with you. And so
upon his deathbed; this doctrine of Justification if the people once know it,
all is gone.

God shows, that all these jealousies are but follies; for all that he feared
came to pass. In good Queen Elizabeth's time, Religion that he was so jealous
of, was established: and she cared not for Princes correspondency, that were of
other Religions, further then might stand with reasons of State; and did not
she flourish, and her people in quiet all her time, notwithstanding all former
jealousies, as if Religion established could not stand with peace? So that the
event proved what kind of jealousies these were.

Do we think then that a great deal of hurt is not done among particular
persons, when in States there is such a world of hurt done by Satan, and his
instruments? Well, let us take notice therefore of our disposition, and of the
inclination of men this way, that we may the better prevent it, and that will
appear in the second thing, That We should labor by all means to avoid
suspicion, and to decline it as much as we can. Observe. To labor to avoid
suspicion.



It should be the care of Ministers, and others, (it generally belongs to all
Christians) to free themselves from any ill suspicion in the hearts of others
as much as they can; as S. Paul did here the suspicion of inconstancy, and
lightness, and want of love to them that he did not come among them.

Suspicion is a Canker that eats into the soul where it is, and it will consume
and waste all love. It is the very venom of Love, and friendship. A Suspicion
a Canker.
little thing will breed it, but will not work it out. Therefore we ought first
of all to take great heed that we give no ground of suspicion at all; or if we
do, that we be careful to get it out as soon as we can: for usually where it
takes place, it boyls till it break out into words, and then words when they
are discovered, breed strangeness, and that breeds other inconveniences.

And the rather we should labor to avoid it, because, Quod suspectum, etc.
that which is suspected, is made unprofitable: for a man when he unwarrantably
That that is suspected, is made unprofitable.
suspects another thing, it is unprofitable to him. We take little good by
those that we suspect are ill, or ill-affected: to us and then we do little
good to them: for love is much danted by the ill conceit we have taken against
them. A man cannot do that good that he might, when he is suspected: there lies
a bar in the way, ill suspicion in the other party, which is an obstruction
between him, and the good he might do. Therefore even for the love of others we
ought to avoid suspicion as much as may be, that they may receive good from us.

As we ought not uncharitably to suspect others, that we may do good to them;
so we ought to avoid by all means suspicion from them, left it be a bar for
that good we might do toward them. Let us labor to clear our selves from all
suspicion of want of love, and ill carriage what we may, that so there may be
nothing between our spirits and theirs that may hinder the good that might come
from us to them, but that all may pass clear. You see how curious holy men
have been in all times, to avoid suspicion as much as they could.

Even God himself (we cannot have a more glorious pattern,) what course God
labors ^o free himself from suspicion.
has he taken from the beginning of the world with mankind? he has
condescended, and stooped to man's weakness, to clear himself of suspicion of
unkindnesse to man, that man might not cherish suspicion that he does not love
him. For there is that poison in the cursed nature of man, that do God what he
can, he will lay imputations upon God, to bear himself out in stubborn courses,
as if God delighted not in him, nor regarded him. And as you have it in Ezekiel.
18. I am punished for other folks sins, God deals hardly with me, and brings
the sins of my fathers upon me: and, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge. God knows the cankred disposition of man
since the fall: Satan lies upon the disposition of man, and broods upon it, to
make it like himself, malicious even against God himself. God (as it were) puts
himself to his purgation, even with no less then an oath: As I live, says the
Lord, I will not the death of a sinner. You think I am severe to you; and men
they will rather impute it to Gods severity, then their own sin, that is the
pride of man's nature.

A sinner is wondrous proud till he cometo destruction it self, and the book of
conscience be opened. Sin will have something to shelter it self with; sin is a
proud thing: God purges himself by an oath, As I live, says the Lord, I will
not the death of a sinner: If you dye, you may thank your own sins; though you
be so bad, if you will repent, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he return, and live. Yet notwithstanding, man to countenance himself in
sin, he-will fly perhaps to the decree of God, God perhaps does not delight in
me; whereas the rule of our life is, He has showed thee, O man, what is good,
to do good, and abstain from evil, and then that question will be out of
question, whether thou be Gods, or no. But man will force upon himself, that
God does not regard him, that he may sin with more freedom.

As the unfaithful servant, I knew thou were a hard Master, that exactedst that
that thou had not given; and therefore I hid my talent. The bad servant
forces upon himself hardness in his Master, when he was not so, that he might
be idle: So men force upon themselves somewhat in God to be hard, Gods dealings
to be so and so, that they may take more liberty. For if God be so loving, and
so gracious, as he has discovered himself to be, their hearts would melt, they
would never live in such courses, but rather put all to the venture, then to
clamor upon Gods Justice. Therefore God himself purges himself from a
disposition of unkindnesse, and unmercifulness, As I live, says the Lord, I
will not the death of a sinner: fo his whole course is to show that he loves us.

And what is our Savior Christ's whole course, but to free men from Christ
labors to be freed from suspicion.
suspicion of want of love? did he ever turn any back from him, but those that
went away of themselves? did he not shed tears for those that shed his blood?
so merciful, and gracious was he. If so be that holy men of all times have
labored to clear themselves to others.

We ought not to rage against the ill dispositions of men. If we were as good
as God, and as Christ, men would have false suspicions of us. It is no
innocence in the world that will free a man from suspicion: the wicked,
poysonful disposition that the Devil stirs up against him. Therefore rage
not against it, but bear it with a spirit of moderation.

And let us decline as much as we can, and free the hearts of people from evil
suspicion: and if we cannot avoid it, yet to bear it without discontent,
considering it is the Lot of Gods childen to be suspected, as we see here S.
Paul was. To spare you, I came not to Corinth.


S. Paul besides his laboring to remove suspicion, he sets down here the true
cause of his not coming to them, it was not lightness and inconstancy, it was
to spare you. They had many abuses among them, and amended they must be, that
was a conclusion. But the question is De modo, whether by gentle means, by
writing an Epistle, and staying a while, or afterward by coming, and telling
them their sin to their face, and by being severe, and terrible among them? Now
he concludes, I came not among you, for this very cause, that I might not be so
severe, and terrible among you, as by office I should have been, if you had not
amended before I came: as indeed they did, for they cast out the incestuous
person, and reformed other abuses comfortably. They prevented S. Paul's severity
with their reformation; they had not at the first cast out the incestuous
person, and they had factions among them, they had Atheists among them that
doubted of the resurrection, many abuses were crept in among them. S. Paul
wrote a former Epistle upon a desire to reform those, and there was a blessed
reformation wrought. S. Paul did not delight in austerity; therefore he
deferred his coming, that he might have more joy, and contentment, then sorrow.
To spare you, I came not.


Before I come to the Points, take this for a ground, Sin must be judged and
censured, when it is committed.


It must be undone by repentance, or by eternal punishments in hell; it Sin
must be censured and judged.
must be censured here, or hereafter.

For it is against Gods nature, and Gods Word, The soul that sins shall dye.
It must be repented of, of necessity, or eternally punished in hell. Censured
it must be, one way or other; It is of such a contrary nature, so opposite to
the holiness of God: that is a ground.

Now this being laid as a ground, the question is, What is the best way to take
away sin, whether by gentle means, or severe? by gentle means, if it may be: if
not, then by severe. S. Paul would not have spared them, if he had come, if
they had not amended. So the Points are two.

First of all, That the best way for the redressing of sin, is by gentle means,
if it may be.

Secondly, if that will not, then by severe, if men would not have men damned.

I came not to spare you, because I desired that gentler courses might prevail.
So I say, the first Point is this, That If gentler courses will prevail, they
ought especially, and in the first place to Doctr. Gentle courses first to be
used.
be taken.


It should be the care both of Ministers, and of all those that deal with
others, first of all to use mild, and winning, and gaining courses.

Now to prove this.

First, they are more suitable to the nature of man: for the nature of man
Reason 1. It is suitable to ^ns nature.
is best wrought on, by rational courses suitable to his nature, suitable to
his principle: man is a reasonable creature, therefore rational courses will
prevail with a rational man, a course of persuasion and discovery. A man that
is not beast-like, tell him but the danger of his sin, tell him the peril of it
in gentle words, and he will amend, if so be he be not hardened by God to
destruction: or if God do not reserve him to a more severe redress. Gentle
courses ought first to be used, because they are agreeable to the nature of man.

Again, they suit most to Gods disposition; for God is love, and his Reason 2.
To Gods disposition.
course to man is love: if he take any course contrary to love, it is not his
own work; as he says, to punish man it is not his own work, he is forced to
that always: to show love and mercy, that is his work, that that comes from his
own principle, from his mercy, he is love; he does not say, he is justice, or
rigor, but he is love. It agrees with the nature of God to deal mercifully, if
he deal otherwise, it is forced from us.

It suits with the whole carrirge of our salvation these courses of love, and
Reason 3. To the carriage of our salvation.
gentleness first of all: for we are saved by a manner of love: we are saved
by God giving his Son, and by his Son giving himself. We are saved by a course
of entreaty: the Ministers of God are Ambassadors to desire us to be
reconciled to God. God having saved us by a manner of love, he will have us
taught by a manner of love, in the Gospel especially: because Gods aim is to
gain our love, and which way can that be, but by a way of love?

For the nature of man is such, that it will never love, till it know it be
loved first. Therefore God stoops to a way of love, because he would have our
love; which he would never have by other courses, because they are contrary to
our nature.

It is the practice of God, his custom is answerable: for first, he deals
Reason 4. Gods course.
by gentle means always, and then after; if those will not prevail, he goes to
severe means, and in severe means he takes degrees; first less and then more
violent, and then violent indeed. God would never descend to sharper courses,
if milder would serve the turn. You know he bade his own people before they set
in hostile manner upon any, to give them fair warning, to offer them conditions
of peace: so it is his course to offer conditions of peace: so he did to the
old World; and so he does to us: before he corrects, he offers conditions of
peace You see how sparing Christ was, and how full of love, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, etc.

Again, they are courses that promise best success ordinarily: for the Reason
5. It is most successeful.
proud nature of man will raise it self up, and will harden it self against
severe courses. Man naturally (as I said) will be led, and not forced; his
nature will rise against forced violent courses, therefore for the event it
self it is the best.

Again, they are courses that are more lasting: that that is gained by love,
Reason 6. It is tasting.
is constant; that that we prevail with men for by reason, it will hold: other
courses are not so faithful, they will not hold. What we gain on men by fear,
there is shame in it, that a man should be forced to any thing; and nature will
break out: But it will hold best, that is gained by way of love and reason.

Therefore let us imitate God in this, when we are to deal with any, not Use.
To deal gently with others.
to take violent courses in the first place, but to deal with men as men, deal
with them by love, and reason, and not stand upon our own stomach and
greatness, and take delight (as it were) in the commanding of others, that we
have a destructive power, a power that can quash, and crush men, and show it to
the utmost, and pride our selves in it. If God should deal so with such, where
were those proud creatures? If God were not a forbearing, indulgent, sparing
God?

Therefore you may see what disposition those are of, that are all for fire;
for violent courses, rigorous courses. That is not the way that God uses, it
is not the way that Christ used, it is not the way that ministers do use that
have the Spirit of God.

You have some kind of people, that if a man be not always in matters of
damnation, his Sermon is nothing. So you have some that in their courses are so
violent, that they know nothing that is moderate, (and yet perhaps they are
good too, but) they cherish too much a violent disposition. Now St. Paul,
though he were a very zealous, holy man, yet notwithstanding he would not put
himsef upon violent courses, but when there was great necessity. He is rather a
Butcher then a Physician that loves to torment his Patient. You see what course
is first to be taken. I need not be long in so clear a Point; therefore I will
spend no more time in it: but come to the second, that is more generally
useful, because indeed men are so, that gentle means will hardly prevail with
them: what must be done then? not spare them. When gentle means will not serve
the turn, then we must not spare.


S. Paul came not, that he might spare them. Now if they had not amended,
Doctr. When gentle means prevail not, severe must be used.
what would S. Paul have done, think you? would he have suffered them to have
cherished the incestuous person among them? that wicked person that had
committed that which was intolerable amongst the Heathen? would he have
cherished proud factious men among them? that would disgrace S. Paul's Doctrine,
to win authority to them selves? would not he have told them to their face the
danger of their sin, and have made them ashamed? undoubtedly he would: he would
have spared. So I say, if gentle means will not prevail, men must not be
spared; meither Minister nor Magistrate must spare; especially in dangerous
courses that are prejudicial to the souls of others.

Why?

We must spare none, that God may spare all. We that are Ministers Reason. Men
must not spare, that God may.
must spare no sin, that God may spare all. Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
(says God) and tell Israel of their sins. If gentle means will not reform
them, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet. Cast out Jezabel with her painted face:
though sin paint, and color it self, it must be cast out. Jonas must out of
the ship, the ship will perish else: Achan must be stoned. We must tell men of
their danger, not with hatred of their persons, but to prevent an eternal
punishment.

You know well that preventing justice is better then executing justice. Is not
discipline better then execution? Is it not better to hear of our faults
roundly, when other means will not prevail, then to cherish that that will be
for our eternal destruction? Is not searing, and cutting, better then killing?
Is it not better that a limb be seared and cut, then that all be clear cut off,
and the whole body perish? Is not the pain of Surgery, or Physic that makes
a man sick for a while, better to be endured then the painse, and terrors of
death it self? These preventing courses are the best courses: therefore we must
spare none, but tell them of their danger faithfully.

Only, liberty of speech must not be a cover for boistrousnesse, or a cover
Against* selfr^spects in reproos of sin.
for the venting of evil humors, as sometimes it is. For flesh will never
prevail with flesh; flesh, and pride in the speaker, will never prevail with
pride in the hearer: but it must be a spiritual kind of severity discovering
the danger to them we speak to, with a spiritual holy affection, and a spirit
of love, though with severity: (for there is a severity of love and
gentleness) it will prevail when it comes from such a spirit. But if there be
a discovery of flesh, not only in Ministers; but in those that deal with
others, flesh will rise against flesh. A man may sometimes find fault with
another with greater corruption then the thing he finds fault with in another;
he may be more to blame for his dealing, then the other for his fault. I came
not, to spare you.

Therefore when Ministers are plain in discovering the danger of the Use.
People to be willing to bear of their sins.
times, the danger of the persons, and places where they are to deal, people
must hear them as they love their own souls. If they have any quarrel, let them
quarrel with their master: for what we speak is from the Word of God: we come
as his Ambassadors, and servants, and should be considered as Ambassadors,
therefore considering whose message we bring, they must take it in good part to
be told of their sins, in a good manner. As S. Austin says very well: Christ
(says he) speaks to the Sea, and it was quiet: Christ said, Be still, the Sea
heard, and the waves were still; but he speaks to us in the Ministry to stay
our violent courses in sin, and we puff and swell when we are told of our
faults; is this good, think you? No; if we do so, it is a sign that God intends
to seal us to destruction. As we know, Elies sons when they did not hearken to
their Fathir, God had appointed them to destruction. Those that will not
hearken to Ministerial reproof, it is a sign God has sealed them over to
destruction.

If we would not have either Ministers or others to be severe in telling How to
prevent severity in others.
us; let us be severe to our own sins first. Men are like to children; first
they foul, and defile them selves, and they cry when they are washed: so men
soil themselves with sin, and cry when they should be purged from them. If we
cannot endure to be told of our faults, how shall we endure to be tormented for
our faults in hell? Those that are so tender, that they will not endure a word
contrary to their dispositions, how will they endure that sentence, Go ye
cursed, when they shall be turned into hell? Consider what will come of it, if
we live in sin.

I beseech you therefore, suffer the Word of exhortation at our hands. Our
salvation lies upon it: if we discover not the danger of the sins of people to
whom we speak, if we discern them, we shall perish for it, because we are
unfaithful in our Embassage. Therefore for your own souls; and likewise that we
may discharge our duty as we should, patiently, and quietly fit under
exhortation, and reproof, not only public, but private, if occasion be.

O Beloved, at the latter day it will be a matter of vexation that we were
Vexation in hell to those that were cherished in sin.
cherished too much in our courses. Do you not think that the damned spirits in
hell wish, O that we had been told; O that we had been dealt with violently,
that we had been pulled out of this flame! There is an excellent place in Judes
Epistle, Have mercy upon some. Use some gently that are of tractable
dispositions: and pull some out of the fire with fear, with threatening eternal
damnation; with terrible courses, that they may have cause to fear: first with
admonitions, and if that will not prevail, with suspension, with further
censure; and if that will not prevail, with excommunication cast them out of
the Church (as this incestuous Corinthian,) that their souls may be saved in
the day of the Lord.

There is a threefold correction, or finding fault, that are gradual one after
another; and they should be of vigor in the Church in all times. Threefold
correction.


First, a friendly telling of a fault, between man, and man, if we see any
thing dangerously amiss. 1. Private admonition.


Then when a man takes another man before company; when he takes him before
those that he respects, when privately he will not amend: Then correction, if
admonition of friends will not do, tell the Church, rather 2. Before others.
then suffer his soul to perish. These steps, and degrees were observed in the
best times of the Church; and if they were observed now, many souls would be
saved. This is that that S. Jude speaks of, Save some, pulling them out of the
fire, that is, snatch them out by violent means, by excomunication, that their
souls may be saved in the day of the Lord. Those that are in hell wish that
they had been pulled out with fear, with violent courses: O that we had been
told of our filthy courses, of our s^vearing, of our i^justice, that we had had
violence offered us rather then to have come into this place of torment. O
those will bless God another day for that gracious violence. And those that
are let alone will curse all another day, Ministers, friends, and parents, they
will curse all, that there were not more violent courses taken with them, to
stop them in their way to hell: to deal plainly with them, it is the best mercy
that can be showed, to be faithful in this kind.

Therefore while it is time, suffer the word of Exhortation, and reproof: the
time will come else that you shall condemn your selves that you were so
impatient, and shall wish, O that we had had those that would have dealt more
violently with us! It is cruel pity as can be in Ministers, to be flatterers,
and to daub; or in parents and governors of others, to dissemble with them in
their courses, and not to tell them of it: it is the most cruel pity of all;
it is betraying of them to eternal torments. For sin (as I said,) it must be
judged and censured here, or hereafter: if it be not here, there is more
reserved for the time to come, when God will open the treasures of his wrath.
We put into his treasury fast enough: and the time will come of opening all the
treasuries of his vengeance, when he will pour out the vials of his wrath upon
sinners that are not reformed. So much for that Point. I call God for a record
upon my soul.


S. Paul, to purge himself from suspicion, seals all this with an oath. Herein
he does show his great love to them, and his care over them, that he would so
seriously purge himself to gain their love, and good opinion of him. Is was an
argument of the great esteem he had of them: he was willing they should think
he was very desirous of their love, and of their good opinion, for whose sake
he would swear, and clear himself by an oath. As God esteems man's love much,
when he will condescend so far as to seal his love, and promise with an oath:
God would have us to think that he values, and esteems our respect very much:
so S Paul would have them think he esteemed them much, that he would make such
a solemn oath for their sakes. Now to speak of an oath a little.

An oath (as we know) is, either in judgment before a Magistrate; or in
particular cases between private persons. And it is either assertory of a thing
past; or promissory of a thing to come. Now this oath of S. Paul's is an
assertory oath of a thing that was past, to secure them that he did not come to
them upon this ground, that he had a mind to spare them. it was no promise of
any thing to come, but an assertion of a thing that was past. An Definition of
an Oath.
oath is either an assertion or a promise, with a calling of God to be a
witness and a Judge: to be a witness of the truth, or a Judge if he say
false. You have the description of an oath in this text. I say, it is either an
assertion of a thing past, or a promise of a thing to come, a sealing of this
by calling God to witness of the thing we say; and to avenge the falsehood if
we say false. As S. Paul here, I call God to record, that what I say is true,
and upon my soul, if I say false.

Many Conclusions concerning an oath might be raised out of the text.

First of all, concerning the person that makes an oath, he should indeed be
None but good men should take an Oath.
a gracious, a holy, and a good man. As S. Paul says, Rom* 1. 9. I call God to
witness, whom I serve in my spirit. A man is scarce fit to swear (which is a
part of Gods worship) that is not good otherwise. Will he care for the Religion
of an oath, that has no Religion in him? He whose oath should be taken, should
be such a man as S. Paul, in some degree, whose oath should be taken. The Turks
are careful of this (to the shame of Christians,) they will not take an oath of
an ordinary swearer. It must be a man that has somewhat in him, that shall
have his oath regarded.

Again, we see by whom an oath should be taken: by the Name of God: To swear by
none but God.
we ought not to swear by creatures, but by God himself. nor to swear by any
Idol, as the Mass, and by Mary, and such like. It is a taking God to witness.
An oath is a part of Gods service, a part of divine worship, as it is, Deuteronomy. 6.
and other places: now we ought to serve God only: therefore we ought not to use
the name of any creature in an oath. He that we swear by must know the heart,
whether we speak true or no: now who knows the heart but God? therefore we
must swear only by the Name of God. These things are easy, therefore I do but
name them.

We see here again, the two grand parts of an oath: besides assertion, or
Invocation, in an Oath. Imprecation,
promise of the truth, there must be a calling God to witness, and
imprecation. Though these be not always set down, they are implied. Sometimes
the Scripture sets down the one part: but always the other is implied. There
is imprecation in every oath. Sometimes imprecation implies both, as God do so
and so; sometimes there is a calling God to witness without imprecation, yet
it is always implied. For whosoever swears, calls God to witness of the
truth, and if it be not true, that God would punish him.

These three go together in an oath. God that can discover it, he knows my
heart whether I say true or no. And he is Judge; and thereupon a revenger. In
an oath God is considered, not only as Index, but as Judex and Vindex: not only
as a discoverer, but as a Judge and revengeri, f it be false. Therefore it is a
part of divine worship: because it is with prayer; and imprecation is always
implied if it be not expressed. So we see in this text, what an oath is; and by
whom it is to be taken; and the parts of it.

Again, we see here in the text, that an oath ought to be taken in serious Oath
to be taken only in serious matters.
matters. The rule of an oath is excellently set down by Jeremy, Jerem. 4. I
know no one place of Scripture more pregnant, and therefore I name it. Thou
shall swear, How? The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness. An Oath must be,


We must swear in truth, that is, that not only the thing be true, that 1. In
Truth.
we swear, (we must look to that:) but we must think it so too: the thing must
be true, and we must apprehend it so. We must swear in truth.

And then in Judgment, that is, with discretion, we must understand thoroughly
the matter whereof we swear, and what an oath is. Therefore 2. In Judgment.
persons under years ought not to take an oath, because they cannot swear in
Judgment, to know what the weight and validity of an oath is; and when it is a
fit time to take it: it must be taken in serious business. As S. Paul here to
clear himself to the souls of the Corinthians whom he labored to edify: when
he saw their ill conceit of him hindered their edification, therefore he clears
himself by an oath.

Thirdly, it must be in Justice, that is, we must not bind our selves by an
oath to any thing that is ill; it is a rule a long time past. Herod bound 3. In
Justice.
himself by an oath in that kind. But an oath must never be a bond of
injustice, but it must be taken in righteousness.

Therefore here is condemned the equivocation, and reservation of the Papists.
They will swear before a Magistrate, but with equivocation: this is not Against
equivocation.
in righteousness. For it is a rule, that an oath must be taken in that sense
as he to whom we swear takes it, (that is a constant rule among all Divines)
because it is to persuade him of the truth, that we swear: it is for his, and
others sakes; and as he, and others take it, so it must be took. Therefore
equivocation with absurd reservations are wicked, because they are absurd if
they be expressed: he will swear that he is not a Priest, he means after the
order of Melchizedeck: it is a mocking, and profaning of an oath, it is not to
swear in Justice, and righteousness. But it is so foul and abominable a
course, that it is not fit to be spoken of almost: and they are ashamed of it
themselves. S. Paul's oath was all this: he swear in truth, he was truly
persuaded of the truth of his own affections toward them. And then in Judgment;
it was done in discretion: for being not able otherwise to clear himself,
having no witness in earth, he goes to heaven for a purger, he goes to God
himself for a witness; he fetches strength from heaven. There was none on
earth that knew S. Paul's affection but the Spirit of God, and his own spirit:
and he thought his own spirit was not sufficient: my own spirit tells me that I
came not, to spare you: but if you would know my mind better, (...) all God to
witness, and to be a revenger, if I speak false, that I came not, for this end
that I might spare you, to prevent the rigor, and severity that I should have
used toward your sin.

An oath should be true, and weighty. but that is not enough, it must be in
matters indeterminable: for if a thing may be determined without an oath, we
should never use it. The end of an oath is to end controversies: An oath only
in matters in determinable.
for if S. Paul could have persuaded them of his gracious, and loving heart
that he stood affected as he did, he would not have used an oath: but having no
other means to do it, he goes to heaven for a witness.

It were but misspending of time to show that an oath is lawful. Have we
Anabaptists among us, that call this into question? No, we have Oath lawful.
many Atheists: it is dangerous Atheism in the Anabaptists to question whether
they may take an oath? We have the example of S. Paul; we have the example of
God himself; shall we think it unlawful when God himself swears, and the Angel
swears, and Christ swears, and the Apostle swears?

Where it is forbidden that we should not swear, it is meant that we should not
swear in our ordinary talk; where we need not seal every light Ordinary
Swearing forbidden.
speech with the solemnity of an oath. Men will not put on their best apparel
every day: so men ought not to use solemn matters upon every occasion, but only
upon holy and grand occasions.

Our Savior Christ forbids swearing, first by the creature at all; and
swearing in ordinary talk at all: Whatsoever is more then yea, and nay, in
ordinary talk, is sin: Therefore considering that S. Paul does it in a serious
matter, we ought to learn, not to swear except it be in great matters; when we
are called before a Magistrate, or when we are to purge our selves from evil
suspicion of our Christian friends: as we see here S. Paul does to the
Corinthians: he calls God to witness against his soul, if it were not true.

But you will say, Men will not believe me except I swear, and therefore Object.
I swear so often.

Then live better for shame, that men may believe thee for thine honest Answ.
Swearing without good life nothing.
life: if thy honest life be not better then thy oath, they will not believe
thee for swearing: for he that swears often, swears false; and in many words
there cannot want iniquity, much more in many oaths there cannot want
iniquity; and he that swears much, out of doubt he often forswears.

Oh, it is my custom, and I cannot break a custom. Object.


Use that apology to a Judge: though malefactors be none of the modestest Answ.
Custom no plea for swearing.
creatures, will any of them say, It is my custom to rob, and steal? will not
the Judge say, It is his custom to cut them off? Thou say it is thy
custom; it is Gods custom to damn such persons: therefore that is an
aggravation of thy sin.

But here we that are Ministers may take up a complaint, that when we have to
deal with the wretched disposition of men in things concerning their souls,
and a better life, do what we can, we cannot prevail with them to leave that,
that they have no profit, nor no good by; they are not put upon it by any fear:
It is only out of superfluity of pride, and malice against God, out of the
abundance of profaneness.

Can we think to prevail with men to deny themselves in greater matters, to
forsake their unlawful gains, or to venture the suffering ill for a good cause,
and to renounce pleasures that are lawful, do we think to gain upon men for
these things, when we cannot for superfluities, that they are not forced to by
any violence, that they have no gain nor credit by, except it be among a
company of debauched men like themselves? yet it is our case, we deal in the
world with a company of persons to leave that that they have no gain by, except
it be the wrath of God, and yet we cannot prevail.

Oh, but you will say, I live with such company that I must swear. Object.


What a shame is it for thee, that carnal company should prevail more Answ.
Company no excuse for swearing.
with thee then the vengeance of God, and the authority of God in the
Ministry? What a heart have thou, that a base person like thy self should move
thee to do that that God himself, and the authority of his Ordinance cannot
move thee to forbear? It is an argument of a base nature. How dare thou look
God and Christ in the face another day, when for his sake thou will not leave a
superfluous profane oath? Thou regardest a wicked companion more, because thou will not be mocked of him, thou will swear for company; or because thou will
please him, that he may think thee to be so and so, a companion fit for him: to
please him, thou will displease God, and Christ, before whom thou shall be
judged ere long. If people were not mad, and sold to destruction, they would
consider these things.

Indeed, these things are so clear, and so odious in themselves, that we need
not press them. We should spend that little time we have, to preach of more
sublime matters, then to come to dissuade men from swearing: alas, under the
glorious Gospel that we have lived so long, have we gained so little, that we
are forced to spend our time to dissuade men from swearing? We should look to
the mysteries of Religion, and draw men to further perfection: but such times
we are fallen into, and we must be content with it: and I would we could gain
any thing by discovering the danger of these things.

An ordinary course of swearing, it argues a very vile heart wheresoever it is:
(bear it out as boysterously as they will.) It argues this venom in Swearing
ordinarily, argues a vile heart.
the heart: Well, I cannot offend against the second Table, but the Laws of
the Kingdom will hamper me; I cannot steal, or murder, but somewhat I can do
in despite of God himself, and the worst that can come, it is but a trifling
matter. What venom is in the hearts of men, that where there is but the least
damage, they will be restrained: and here, because there is not present
execution upon a sinner in this kind, they profane and abuse the glorious Name
of God?

When Gods Name is abused by swearing, and blasphemy, usually the Original of
it among other things, is Atheism. If we thought that God Original of common
swearing.
were so as the Scripture shows, we would not dally so much. They that lead
others into bad courses, it is from the height and depth of Atheism. 1.
Atheism.
Make the best of it, it is a great degree of irreverence to the glorious
Majesty of God. For when God shall say, He that takes my Name in vain, shall
not carry it away guiltless; what will he do (think you) to him that swears
idly, and profanely, when the vain taking of Gods Name in vain without an
oath, the vain trifling with the Name of God shall not escape? When men do not
reverence and fear an oath, as it is, Eccles. 9. it argues much unreverence.

And indeed, it is worse in the principle, then in the thing it self: though
the words be heinous, yet the principle whence it rises is worse, that is,
Infidelity, and Atheism, and always unreverence and want of fear of the glorious
Majesty of God, this ground makes it more odious: therefore those that are
subject to it, if they would amend it, let them remove the ground.

Sometimes again, it is cherishing too much passion: so because they 2.
Cherishing passion.
cannot be sufficiently revenged upon their poor brethren, God must smart for
it; they will tear his glorious Name that never did them wrong. What a mad
passion is this? has God done them any wrong? Therefore (I say) let us labor
to remove the ground of it; and labor to plant the contrary in our hearts, the
true fear of God, that we may fear an oath. Let us labor to subdue unruly
passion.

Again, in some others affectation is the cause. Many of the frothy 3.
Affectation.
sort, they think it a thing commendable to fill up their discourse with these
parentheses, with oaths: which perhaps does them a service to knit their
wounded discourse together. So this foolish and sinful affectation is one
cause: men desire to be thought to be some body, by swearing; they would have
the world to think that they are valorous men, that can be so bold with God
himself; therefore let other men take heed how they meddle with them, when God
smarts for it. As if he that could swear most, had most courage. And in many it
is out of a sinful shame, because they will hold correspondence 4. Shame.
with the company; and they are afraid to be thought to be strict: and that
they may be thought to be free from suspicion of over much conscionablenesse in
their ways, they will not let the world see that they shall not think that
they are men that make any conscience of strictness, but they can be bold with
the Name of God: so, because they would have others think, that they are men
that do not stand upon terms of conscience, and strictness, they will swear,
they are men for the world, they are serviceable for any purpose: Men that make
conscience of any thing, make conscience of all: but a man that makes
conscience of an oath, or any such thing, he is a stiff man, he is not
servisable, he is not for the turn: now because men would be thought of others
not to be of that strain, to make any conscience, hereupon they break out to
the profaning of the Name of God. How shall such persons (that out of sinful
weakness labor, and apply themselves more to satisfy sinful men, then the
great God, how dare they) look God in the face? Jesus Christ says, He that is
ashamed of me before men; he that is ashamed to own Religion, nay, to own
Justice, to own even common good behavior, rather then he will offend others:
he that is ashamed of me in such mean things as these, I will be ashamed of him
before my heavenly Father.

If other reasons will not move us to leave this sin; let the love of the Men
should abstain swearing, in love to the Kingdom.
State and Kingdom we live in do it. Jeremy says, for oaths the land shall
mourn. Indeed, there is a mulct for this, but that men slight it. And God, I
hope, will be merciful to the State, for the censure of the State upon
profanation, it is a very worthy act: but if that be not executed, or men grow
not to make more conscience, the Land will mourn for it: because where the
Magistrates cease to do their office, God will do his office: where sin is
punished, God will not punish; where the Magistrate spares, God will not spare;
he will punish: therefore this sin where it is not censured and punished, the
Land shall mourn for it.

If the care of the Kingdom will not move them, yet the care of their For love
to the^r own sam lies.
own houses and families should; in Zech. 5. the Prophet speaks of a flying
book of Judgments that should come upon the house of the swearer, and consume
the posts of his house. And the Wiseman says in Ecclesiasticus (though it be
Apocryphal) The plague shall not depart from the house of the swearer. Gods
vengeance accompanies even the very family, and house of the swearer.

And for avoiding of this I would there were more conscience made of Conscience
of less^r oaths.
those oaths that border upon gross oaths. I will not dispute the matter;
take it for granted, they be no oaths, but asseverations; as to call their
troth in question, and their confidence in matters of Religion: who will lay a
thousand pound to pawn for a matter of six pence? who, if he be discreet, and
considerate, will lay his faith and Religion to pawn, for every trifle, in
common talk? Faith is the most precious thing in the world: for a man to lay a
great matter for a two-penny, or six-penny debt, it is odious among men.
Certainly, it is idle at the best among men, to lay asseverations of Religion
without ground, upon every trifle. He that will avoid danger, must not come
near it; he must avoid all that borders upon it. I would therefore more care
were had even of these.

I will only add one thing more; whereas he calls God for a record upon his
soul, that those that are overmuch given to rash calling upon the Name of God,
to rash swearing, let them know this, (as I said) that there is an imprecation
employed in every oath: they do as it were curse themselves. If Ordinary
Swearers curse themselves.
the thing be not true, their damnation is sealed under a curse: they call God
to record upon their souls against themselves.

Let us so live, that our life may be a kind of oath: the life of a Christian A
Christians life a kind of oath.
should be so: An oath is a calling God to witness, a calling God to curse if
it be not so. A Christian should live so, as he may call God to witness for
every action he does; to bring himself to an oath, under a curse oft-times; as
it is in Ezra, and often in Scripture, If I do not so and so, etc. Because our
nature is unstable, it starts from holy duties: we should bring our selves to
duties with an oath, under a curse.

It is an excellent thing when we can live as in Gods presence; to do all we do
in the presence of God. God is a witness whether we call him, or no. Therefore
we should so carry our selves, that we might call God to witness the sincerity
of our aims, and whatsoever we do. He is a witness, and he will be our Judge:
therefore whether we formally in the manner of an oath call him or no, that is
not the matter: but let us know and think that he is, and will be so.

I beseech you consider the sweet comfort that will arise out of it, that he
that will live, and think, and affect, and speak in the presence of God, that
he may call God to record of the sincerity of his intentions, of all that he
speaks, and thinks, and does; how comfortably shall he live, and give his
account to God, that has lived as in the presence of God all his days? He
that has presented to his soul (as it were) the bar of Christ in his
lifetime, that has lived as one that could give an account and reckoning,
when he comes to the point, that he must give up his account, how joyfully, and
comfortably will he do it? So much for that verse.

I come now to the last Verse of the Chapter.

VERSE XXIV. Not that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your
joy: for by faith ye stand.
SAint Paul is yet in his clearing, he is yet in his apology, Not that we have
dominion over your faith, etc. I do not tell you, I came not yet to spare you,
as if I meant to domineer over your faith when I came: because those words, I
came not yet, to spare you, might seem to carry some highness, some
Lordlinesse with them, as if the Apostle would have taken much upon him;
therefore he corrects those words in this Verse, Not that we have dominion over
your faith, etc. So that in these words he removes a suspicion of spiritual
tyranny over them: because he had said before, he came not, to spare them; they
might think, What would he have done if he had come? would he have enforced us?
Oh no; indeed your reformation has spared me a labor, and you a chiding; but
if I had reproved you sharply, it should have been for your good.

Then, he sets down the true cause, We are helpers of your joy. If I had come,
and told you of your faults, if I had not spared you, it should have been to
help your joy; and now I came not to you, it is to help your joy; my scope in
all is to be a furtherer of your joy. So these words are a reason of the former
why he did not come, to domineer over their faith, For by faith ye stand. You
stand by faith, and you stand out by faith against all oppositions whatsoever,
therefore your faith must not lean on me, I must not domineer over that you
stand by, if your faith should rely on me, I am but a man; faith must rely on
God, it must have a better pillar then my self, you must stand upon Divine
strength: therefore you stand by faith: and if you stand by faith, we have no
reason to have dominion over your faith.

These words are declined by many Interpreters, they know not what the
dependence is: but this is the best dependence of the words, We domineer not,
or rule not over your faith: because by faith you stand as upon a bottom; you
stand against all adverse power by faith. Therefore you had need to have it
well founded, you had need to plant your faith well, by which you stand against
all opposite power, and against all humane authority. For a man may be a liar,
and do good in many things: a man has a deceitful nature, as far as he has a
corrupt principle in him: he may deceive, and yet be a good man too; in
particular cases he may show himself a changeable creature. But there must be
no falsehood or uncertainty in faith: for it is a grace that must have truth,
and certainty; it must have unmovable, and unchangeable truth to build on:
therefore we domineer not over your faith, God forbid we should do so: for
faith is the grace whereby you stand; if you should build upon us as men, you
could not stand always. The Point is clear, That No creature has dominion over
the faith of another. Doctr. No man has dominion over another faith.



The faith of a man is only subject to the Spirit of God, to God, and to
Christ. And by the way, S. Paul taxes those false Apostles, and false
Teachers, that labored to creep into the consciences of people, to have higher
place in the hearts of people then they should have, that so they might rule
the people as they list. Now that should not be the scope of the Minister to
have dominion over the faith of others; for the Ministry is a Ministry, not a
Magistracy. A Minister, so far as he is a Pastor, he is a Minister; that is, he
is to deliver things from God that may stablish the soul, not to domineer over
men's faith, as if he could prescribe what men should believe.

Now to unfold this Point, I will first show what it is to have no dominion
over men's faith. And then what it is to have dominion and rule over other men's
faith, and who are guilty of this.

Not to have dominion over another man's faith, it is not when a Church does
force prescribing to the Articles of Religion, that is not to have dominion 1.
What it is not to have dominion over the faith of others.
over the faith of others, to draw people to conformity of the same Religion in
the substantials of it; (as some that seek extravagant liberty, lay that
imputation perhaps,) it is used in all Churches.

Again, it is not to domineer over faith, to suppress that that they call of
late in neighbour-Countreys a liberty of prophecy, to suppress a liberty of
preaching when men list; that men should have an unbridled license. We see in
Polonia, and those Countries, what abundance of Heretics there are, where
there is more liberty to preach, and to publish what men list. Those Countries
are like Africa, where (they say) there are always new Monsters. Or like to
Egypt, when Nilus overflowes, it leaves a slime behind, and when the Sun works
upon that slime, it breeds many imperfect strange creatures: So those Countries
where there is liberty of Religions, there are always some strange novel
opinions, some Monsters: experience of foreign Countries shows it too true:
therefore to hinder that extravagant liberty, is not dominion over faith.

Nay, to force men to the means of faith, it is not to domineer over faith. S.
Austin himself was once of this mind, that people were not to be forced: it is
true; but they may be compelled to the means, though they cannot be compelled
to believe. Men may be compelled to the means by mulcts, and other courses of
State. And it is a happy necessity when people are forced to the means, under
which means by Gods blessing they may be reduced to abetter habit, and temper
of soul.

Therefore it is cruelty to neglect this care, to leave people to their own
liberty to attend upon the means, or not to attend on them. Therefore our State
is, and may be justified well, for those violent courses to Recusants. And many
of them after bless God they have done it, and they have cause. For there is a
Majesty in the Ordinances of God: if people were brought under the means, Gods
Spirit would make the means effectual. And there is not a greater snare of the
Devil, whereby he holds more in the Romish Church in perdition, then by
persuading them that it is a dangerous thing to come to our prayers, and to
attend upon the means of salvation: when as in our Liturgy there is nothing
that may justly offend. Therefore to force to the means, it is not to domineer
over faith; because it is only a drawing from outward inforcement to the use
of means.

Again, it is not a ruling over faith, nor a base slavery, when men hear the
Word of God opened directly, and clearly, when men shall persuade others
according to their own judgment, that this is so, and when others shall yield.
There is some faith that may be called in some degree implicit faith, and
obedience, that is not sinful, but good, and discreet. As when men by their
standing in the Church, and by their experience and holiness of life, are
thought to be men that speak agreeable to the ground of Scripture, though they
have not a direct rule, and place of Scripture for it; other men's conscience
may follow what they say: I have been directed by such men at such times, that
by reason of their calling have opportunity to advise.

But this frees it from base service, that it must be with reservation, till it
appear otherwise by some place of Scripture, or till better counsel may be
yielded: obedience to others with reservation, and counselling with others,
this is no domineering, because it is with reserving our selves to a further
discovery, and a further light. That the Moralists use to call the opinion of
an honest man: where the Law speaks not, it is much to be esteemed: especially
an honest discreet Christian, when the Law of God speaks not directly; then he
that speaks out of conscience, and some light, he may persuade another man with
this reservation till further light be discovered: this is no domineering over
faith.

I might take away many things that might breed a suspicion, as if we
domineered over the faith of others, when we do not.

But to come to show you this positive truth, what this tyranny over the faith
of others is, and where it is practiced. What ^ranny over the faith of others
is.


Those tyrannize over the faith of others, that do equalize men's Traditions,
some Canons of their own with the Word of God, and press them with equal
violence, perhaps more: because they are bra^s of their own brain. Those that
will devise a voluntary worship of God, and so entangle people, and tell them,
This you must do, when there is no ground for it in the Word of God: it is
will worship. God loves willing worship, when we worship him willingly: but he
loves not-will-worship, when it is the device of our own brain how we will
serve him. As if a servant; or a slave must devise how his Lord will be served:
what impudency is this, if we consider what God is? They tyrannize over peoples
consciences, that equalize their own dotages, (though they account them witty
devices,) and their own inventions with the worship of God: that jumble all
together, as if conscience were equally bound to any device of their own, as to
Gods Word.

Again, those do tyrannize over the faith of others, that think they can make
Articles in Religion to bind conscience. Those that think to free themselves
from the danger of error, as if what they said were unfallible, they tyrannize
over others. Those that for trifles excommunicate whole Churches, because they
hold not correspondency with them in their errors, they tyrannize over the
faith of others. Those that withhold the means of knowledge, that so in a dark
time all their fooleries may be more admired. As we see masks, and such like
overly things, they must have the commendation of some light that is not so
glorious as the Sun to win admiration of men: so those that would win
admiration of their fooleries, they shut people (as much as they may) in
darkness, that they may have their persons, and all other things in
admiration; this is to tyrannize over faith, and to hinder them from that that
is the means to reform them better

But who are guilty of all this? Quest.


We see what Church especially is guilty of this of domineering over the Answ.
The Church of Rome domineers over the faith of others.
faith of others: that is, the Church of Rome. The Council of Trent equalizeth
Traditions with the Word of God: they divide the Word of God into the written,
and unwritten; and under a curse they pronounce that all must be received with
the same reverence. 1. By Traditions.


And then they have devised a will worship of their own, and follow, and force
their will worship with greater violence, then the worship of God, and 2.
Will Worship.
they set Gods stamp upon all their fooleries to gain authority, under the name
of Christ's Church, and the Word of God, they carry all.

Again, you know, they hold the Church to be infallible: they hold the 3. That
the Pope cannot err.
judgment of the Pope, the man of sin, to be infalible, he cannot err; and
hereupon whatsoever he says, it must bind conscience, because he is in his
Chair and cannot err: whatsoever he says is the scope of Gods Word,
infallible. And this is a fundamental error, as we call it, a first lie, a
leading lie. This is moving to error, this is the mover that moves all other
errors under it.

For where upon is all the abominations of Popery justified? They are justified
by this, though they seem ridiculous, gross, and blasphemous, they came from
the Church, and the Church is virtually in the Pope. An absurd Position, that
the whole Church should be virtually in one man: yet that is the Jesuitical
opinion: and the Church cannot err: therefore it is good, because these
tenants come from him whose judgment is infallible. That is the error that
leads to, and establishes all other errors under it; it is the first lie.
And in lies, there is a leading, one goes under another, they never go alone;
so this is the leading lie of all Popery, that the Pope cannot err: by this
means they domineer over the faith of others; and make the people even beasts
indeed.

But to see the indignity of this, that the Pope cannot err, it is the
greatest A grand lie that hinders their Reformation.
error of all, and the prevention of all amendment on their side: do you think
that they will ever amend their opinion, when they hold this that is a block in
the way of all reformation, that the Pope can err? for deny that, and you call
all the fabric of their Religion in question: and grant that, it stops all
reformation on their side. What reformation may we hope for on their side that
hold this Position, that they cannot err? Hence come all their treasons, and
rebellions: they have some dispensation from the Pope, and he cannot err,
though he prescribe rebellion, and treason.

Another opinion they have, that the Church is the Judge of all Controversies,
in which the faith of men must be resolved at last; but it is the 4. Church
Judge of Controversies.
Pope that the Jesuits mean. Now this is indeed to domineer over the faith, to
make a man of sin to be a Judge over all points of faith, and faith to be
resolved at last into that, into the judgment of the Church.

The Church has an inducing power, a leading power, persuading to the belief
of the Scriptures, and to hear what God says in his Word; but after, there is
inward intrinsical grounds in the Word, that make us to know the Word without
the Church. Now they would have the authority of the Word depend upon the
Church, and so overruled men's consciences in that case. Whereas all that the
Church has, is a leading, inducing, persuading to hear the Word, under which
Word, and Ordinance we shall see such light and majesty in the Scriptures,
that from inward grounds we shall be persuaded that the Word of God is the Word
of God. Therefore the Church is the first inducer to believe the Word of God,
not the last object to which all is resolved. For they themselves cross it in
their tenants when they speak discreetly. Is this opinion so, and so? The
Church holds it: but what authority has the Church to maintain it? where is
the authority of your Church? then they bring some place of Scripture: I will
be with you to the end of the world. And, He that hears you, hears me, etc.
I do but a little discover to you the danger of this error. They make the Word
of God to be believed, because the Church says so: they make truth to be
believed, because their man of sin, whom they depend upon, says so. Do we
believe the Trinity, or that Christ is our Redeemer, because the Church says
so? should we not believe it except the Church say so? what if the Church teach
the Doctrine of Devils, as they do? they cannot shake it off; we must believe,
because the Church says so; so upon equal grounds they shall teach the
Doctrine of Devils, and the Doctrine of Christ, because the Church says so.

As it was said anciently, he that believes two things, the one for the other,
he believes not two, but one in effect; because he believes the one for the
other: So in effect they believe nothing but the Church; that is, themselves
believe the truth to be divine, because they say so: so they may believe any
devilish error, because they say so: so any treason, or rebellion must go
current, because they say so, because they cannot err. Yyou see how they
domineer over the faith of others: shall not Christ be Christ, nor God be God,
nor the Devil be the Devil, except the Church say so?

Again, in the very matters themselves, in the points that themselves do 5. In
the intention of the Minister in the Sacrament.
not urge, the Church of Rome domineers, and tyrannizeth over the souls of
people. For example, they hold that the intention of a Minister in the
Sacrament makes it effectual. What a fear does this breed in the souls of men,
that they know not whether they be baptized or no, because it must be in the
intention of the Minister?

And then in confession, they must confess all: what a tyranny is this to
Confession.
the souls of people, when perhaps there is somewhat that they have not
confessed, and so their confession is of no worth?

And in satisfaction: perhaps I have not made satisfaction enough by their
injunction laid on me, and therefore I must satisfy in hell: what a rack is
this to conscience?

So, what a rack to conscience is that opinion, that the Pope cannot err: when
I cannot tell perhaps whether he be the right Pope or no; if he came in by
Simony, or is not in Cathedra? and many conditions they have to salve that
Point. If any of those conditions be not observed, he is not the man he should
be: what tyranny do they force upon people over their faith? Therefore they are
called in the Revelations, scorpions: indeed they are spiritual Scorpions, that
sting the souls of Gods people.

The Devil is the King of darkness; and is not he the Prince of darkness that
maintains ignorance of the Word of God, that all his old tenants and opinions
may have the better sway; that he may sit in the blind and dark consciences of
people? It is said, 2 Thessalonians. 2. that he sits in the Temple of God, that is, in
the Church: nay, he labors to have another Temple, to sit in man's soul, which
is the Temple of the Holy Ghost. It is not sufficient for him that is the man
of sin to have any other place, he must sit in the very souls and consciences
of men.

Satan has a special malice to sit in the place of God; since he was turned
out of heaven, and cannot come thither, he will come to that place (if he
Satan's malice to sit in Gods throne.
can) upon earth where God should be: and where will God be? God will
especially be in the hearts of his people, in the souls, and consciences of his
people. Conscience is Gods throne: Satan being thrust out of heaven, labors to
stablish his throne there. Now they that are Satan's vicars led with his spirit,
they are of the same mind; let them be what kind of great ones they will, they
desire to sit in Gods throne, in the conscience: and if a man will not tie his
conscience to them, he is no body to them. This is the property of Antichrist
in the highest degree: as far as any are addicted to this, that they will not
be satisfied, but the consciences of men must be tied to them, they must deny
all honesty, and justice, and law, and all to please them, and to gratify them
with particular kindness; so far they are led with the spirit of Antichrist,
and of the Devil himself, who labors to sit in Gods throne, that is, in the
hearts, and consciences of people. And therefore (as I said) they labor to
keep people in darkness for this very purpose, that people may let them into
their consciences, and rule them as they please.

As Sampson, when they had put out his eyes, they led him to base services: so
do they with Gods people, they put out their eyes, and then they lead them to
grind in the mill, to all the base services they can. It is not to be spoken of
the brutish slavery, and ignorance that is in Spain, and other Countries where
that Devilish Inquisition reigns, which is a great help to Popish Tyranny.

What should I speak of the state of the Romish Church? indeed the Popery would
subdue all.
main scope of it is to subdue all to them, to subdue all Kings, and Kingdoms
to them; that is the grand scope of the greatest of them: others have their
particular scope for their bellies, and base ends: but those among them that
have brains, that are Governors, their scope is to bring all under their
girdle: and how shall they do this? They cannot bring their persons, but they
must bring their consciences: for where the conscience is, the person will
follow presently; therefore they labor to lay a tie upon the conscience of
Prince and people, upon all, that so they may domineer and rule over their
consciences. And for that end, they labor to nourish them up in blindness:
for by blindness they rule in the conscience; and ruling their conscience,
they may rule their persons and Kingdoms. This is their main scope, this has
been their plot for many hundred years.

So that the Romish Religion indeed is nothing but a mere carnal devilish
policy, to bring others to be subject to them: and to make not only Kings, and
Princes, but to make God, and Christ, and the Scriptures, whatsoever is divine
or humane to make all to serve their aims. What do they with Christ, but under
the Name of Christ serve themselves? What do they with the Church, but under
the name of the Church, carry their own ends? What do they with the names of
Saints and Angels, Peter, Mary, etc. but under a plausible pretense carry their
own ends, and set up a visible greatness in this world, answerable to the
Cesarian Monarchy? This is plain and evident to all that will see, that it is
so; and one main way to attain their ends is to rule over the conscience.

And that they may help all the better forward, they have raised in the Church
a kind of faith which they call an implicit, and infolded faith, that people
must believe what the Church teaches, though they know not in particular what
the Church teaches, and so they lead people hoodwinck'd whither they please
themselves.

To make some Use of it briefly.

Let us labor to bless God that has freed us from this spiritual tyranny.
Use. To be thankful for freedom from this tyranny.
O beloved, it is a great tyranny when conscience is awaked, to be racked and
tormented, and stung by Scorpions: to have conscience tormented with Popish
errors; as in the point of satisfaction, the most of them (if their eyes be
open) they dye with terror. O, it is a blessed liberty that we are brought out
of Antichristian darkness, that we know we believe, and upon what terms we
believe; and are taught to submit our conscience only to the blessed truth of
God: that the soul it is the bed (as it were) only for Christ, and his holy
Spirit to dwell in, and to lodge in: and that no man may force the conscience
with any opinion of his own, further then it is demonstrated out of the Word of
God: what a sweet enlargement of Spirit do we live in now! and our
unthankfulness perhaps may occasion God to bring us in some degree of Popish
darkness again.

I beseech you, let us stand for the liberty of Christ, and the liberty of our
consciences against the spiritual tyrant of souls. Let us maintain our
liberty by all we can, by all laws and execution of laws; by all that may
uphold our spiritual liberty: for there is no bondage to that of the soul. Do
but a little consider the misery of the implicit faith that the Popish sort
are under, that infolded, inwrapped faith, wherein they are bound to believe
(without searching) what the Church determines. Hereupon they swallow in all
doctrines that tend to superstition, that tend to rebellion, that tends to
treason; they swallow up all under this implicit faith: as if God had set an
Ordinance, and Ministry in the Church against himself: as if he had advanced
any Ministry against his own Ordinance. How to think of Popery.


When you think of Popery, consider not so much particular dotages, as about
Images, and Transubstantiation, and Relics, etc. but consider the very life,
and soul of Popery in this opinion, the leading error of all others, the
tyranny over souls of people, and holding them in blindness and darkness. It
is not a device of mine; do but read the Council of Trent in some editions.
There the late Pins Quartus that sat there daily, he made more Articles then
the Apostles, distinct, not proved by Scripture; he made Articles of his own to
be believed; people were tied upon the necessity of salvation to believe them,
and to believe them with that faith that is due to Scripture.

And it is a common tenent among them, Every man is bound to be under the
authority of the Church of Rome, under peril of damnation. There is the grand
error, that it is a matter necessary to salvation to be under their tyranny.

Hereby they excommunicated all the Eastern Churches, and all former times
wherein they were not undes the Roman tyranny: for that is but of late, six
hundred years since; they condemned S. Cyprian's time, and other times. And
they made Articles of Religion, and established them with this censure, that
upon pain of damnation men must believe these things as well as the Articles of
the Creed; As Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, and such
things: they are so many Articles indeed, (as I say) they have more Articles
then the twelve Articles of the Apostles.

We say, an error in the foundation, it is not mended after: and the first
concoction if it be naught, all after are naught: if there be not good
concoction in the stomach at the first, the blood is naught, and all is naught.
So this is a fundamental error, and a ground of all errors, that they hold
they cannot err; and hereupon they come to tyrannize over the consciences, and
souls of people.

Therefore (I say) let us bless God that has set our souls in spiritual
liberty, that now we see God in the face of Christ: now we see the means of
salvation; we see the bread of life broken to us; we see Christ unveiled; we
see what to found our consciences upon: we cannot be sufficiently thankful for
this. Thankful we may be for the peace of the Kingdom that we have so long a
time enjoyed, and for the outward prosperity we have so long had: But above
all, be thankful for the peace of Religion, for the peace of conscience, for
the liberty of soul that we enjoy. And (as I said) if any thing move God to
strip us of all, it will be our unthankfulness, and our practice witnessing
our unthankfulness, by valuing no more the blessed estate of the Gospel we
enjoy. Not that we have dominion over your faith.


This disposition, to domineer over the faith of others, from abominable
grounds it arises:

Partly from pride, and tyranny, that they would set themselves in the Grounds
of spiritual Tyranny.
Temple of Christ, where he should rule in the hearts of his people.

And partly, out of idleness: they raise the credit of their own Traditions,
that they may not be forced to take the labor of instructing the people;
therefore they fasten a greater virtue upon outward things then there can be,
only to avoid the labor of instruction.

And then it rises partly from guilt, they are so in their lives (especially
if they be looked inwardly into) as that they cannot endure the knowledge of
people. They are afraid that people should know much, lest they know them too
well, and their courses, and errors. So partly from pride, and partly from
idleness and sloth, and partly from guilt, they domineer over the faith of
Gods people. But are helpers of your joy.


The end of the Ministry is not to tyrannize over peoples souls, to sting,
and vex them, but to minister comfort, to be helpers of their joy; that is, to
help their salvation, and happiness; which is here termed joy: because
Salvation termed joy, why.
joy is a principal part of happiness in this world, and in the world to come.
Now the end of the Ministry is to set the peoples hearts into a gracious, and
blessed liberty, to bring them into the Kingdom of grace here, and to fit them
for the Kingdom of glory, to help forward their joy.

This is the end, both of the Word, and of the dispensation of the Word, in the
Ordinances of salvation in the Sacraments, and all, that our joy may be full:
as our blessed Savior says, These things have I spoken, that your joy may be
full. It is the end of all our communion with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
and with the Ministry, and one with another; as it is, 1 John 1. These things
have I written, that your joy may be full; you have communion with the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and with us, that your joy may be full; all is for
spiritual joy. We are helpers of your joy.


The meaning is, we are helpers of your faith, from whence joy comes more
especially: for he does not repeat the word again, We have not dominion over
your faith, but are helpers of your faith: but instead of that, he names joy,
as that that does accompany true faith.

The Points considerable in this clause are these:

That joy is the state of Christians that either they are in, or should labor
to be in: because the Apostle names it for all happiness here. All that have
given their names to Christ, should labor to rejoice; either they do rejoice,
or they should labor to come to it: that is supposed as a ground: I will be
the shorter in it.

The second is, That the Ministers are helpers of this blessed condition.

The third is, They are but helpers; they are helpers, and but helpers; they
are not authors of joy, but helpers: We are but helpers of your joy, says the
Apostle. These three things I will speak of briefly out of these words. First,
Joy is that frame and state of soul, that all that have given their names to
Doctr. 1. The state of a Christian is joy. Nature teaches it.
Christ, either are in, or should labor to be in.


For this Doctrine is fetched from the principle of nature. We do all with joy;
all in our callings is done with joy. What do men in their Trades, but that
they may have that that they may joy in when they have it? It is an old
Observation of S. Chrysostom, We do all, that we may joy. Ask any man why he
does take so much pains, and be a drudge in his place? it is that he may get
somewhat to rejoice in in his old days. So out of the principle of nature this
ought to be the scope of all, to joy.

Now those that are Christians, God requires it at their hand as a duty,
Rejoice always, again I say, rejoice. And he does prepare and give them matter
God gives matter of joy.
enough of joy, to those that are Christians.

For whether we consider the ills they are freed from, the greatest ills of 1.
Freedom from ill.
all: they are freed from sin, and the wrath of God, they are freed from
eternal damnation; they are freed from the sting of death, from the greatest
and most terrible ills.

Or whether we regard the state that God brings them in by believing; 2. The
good they are brought to.
being in the favor of God, they enjoy the fruits of that favor, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. And then for the life to come, they are under the hope
of glory. The state of a Christian is a state of joy every way, whether (I say)
we regard the ill he is freed from, or the good he is in for the present, or
the hope of eternal good for the time to come. A Christian which way soever he
look, has matter of joy. God the Father is his, Christ is his, the Holy Ghost
is his Comforter; the Angels are his, all are his, life, or death, things
present, or things to come, all are his. Therefore there is no question of
this, that every one that has given his name to Christ is in a state of joy,
(if he answer his calling,) or he should labor to be in it, he wrongs his
codition else.

Why should they labor to be in that state?

Among many Reasons, one is, That God that gives them such matter of Reason 1.
That God may have glory.
joy, may have glory from them. For what should the life of a Christian be that
is freed from the greatest ill, and advanced to the greatest good? his life
should be a perpetual thanksgiving to God; and how can a man be thankful, that
is not joyful? Joy is as it were the oil, the anointing it makes a Reason 2. It
makes active in doing good.
man cheerful, it makes the countenance of his soul to be cheerful, it makes
him active in good when he is anointed with the oil of gladness. Now every man
should have a desire to be good, to be diligent and expedite in all that is
good. Therefore we should labor for this spiritual anointing, that we may be
ready for every good work; Vessels of mercy prepared for every good work.

And then for suffering, we have many things to go through in this world;
Reason 3. And able to suffer ill.
how shall a man suffer those things that are between him and Heaven, with joy,
unless he labor to bring himself to this temper of joy?

And then for others, every man should labor to encourage others. We Reason 4.
To encourage others.
are all fellow-passengers in the way to Heaven, therefore even to bring on
others more cheerfully, we ought to labor to be in a state of joy. Those that
do not rejoice, they bring an ill report upon the way of God, as if it were a
desolate, disconsolate way. As the Spies brought an ill report upon the Land of
Canaan, whereupon the people were disheartened from entering into it. So those
that labor not to bring their hearts to spiritual joy, they bring an ill
report on the ways of God, and dishearten others from entering into those
ways; which way soever we look, we have reasons to encourage us to joy: That
God may have more glory; and that we may do him more service; that we may
endure afflictions better, and encourage others: and take away the reproach of
Religion from those that think it a melancholy course of life; which indeed do
not understand what belongs to the state of a Christian: for the state of a
Christian is a state of joy.

And if a Christian do not joy, it is not because he is a Christian, but
because he is not a Christian enough, because he favors the worse principle in
him, he favors himself in some work of the flesh.

God in the Covenant of grace is all love and mercy; he would have us in our
pilgrimage to heaven, to finish our course with joy: and he knows we can do
nothing except we have some joy. It is the oil of the soul (as I said) to make
it nimble and fit for all actions, and for all sufferings. It gives a luster
and grace to whatsoever we do: Not only God loves a cheerful performer of
duties, but it wins acceptance of all others; and makes the worker himself
wondrous ready to any action. This I mention only as a ground. A Christian
that has given his name to Christ, is either in a state of joy, or else should
labor for it.

The second (which is the main) is, That The Word of God as it is unfolded, is
that that helps this joy.


We are helpers of your joy, we Ministers, S. Paul spoke of himself as a Doctr.
2. The Word unfolded helps this joy.
Minister. The Word of God is a helper of joy, especially as it is unfolded,
considered as it is dispensed in the Ministry. You know the Word of God, it is
called The Word of reconciliation, because it does unfold the Covenant between
God and us: It is called The Word of the Kingdom, The Word of life, etc. which
all are causes of joy; therefore the Word breeds joy, Psalm. 19. 8. One
commendation of the Statures of God is, that They comfort the heart, and
refresh the heart. He follows the commendations of the Word at large, The
Statutes of God are perfect, converting the soul; The Testimonies of God are
sure, making wise the simple. And among the rest of the commendations, as a
commendation issuing from the rest, The Statutes of God are right, rejoicing
the heart. The Word of God is a Cordial, especially to refresh, and solace the
heart.

Saint Paul, Romans 15. 4. makes it the scope of the Word, Whatsoever was written
afore-time, was written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope. So likewise, 1 Cor. 14. He that Prophesies
speaks to men to edification, to exhortation, and to comfort. He that
prophesies, that unfoldeth the Word, he speaks to men to edification, to
exhortation, and to comfort. So the end of the Word, and the end of
prophesying, the Ministry of the Word, is to help our joy, our comfort, to
support us against all ills eithert felt or feared, by greater arguments then
the ill is. For that is to comfort and rejoice, to make any to joy, it is to
support the soul against all grievance either spiritual, or outward, either
felt or feared, To comfort, what.
and that from stronger arguments then the grievances are. If they be equally
poized, it is no comfort; if the comfort be inferior, it is no comfort.

As the Heathen man complained of those comforts he had, I know not how it is,
but the Physic I have to cure the grievance of my mind, it yields to the
malice of the disease, the disease is above the cure: So it is true of all
Philosophical comforts, that are fetched out of the shop of nature, the Physic
yields to the disease: the malady or disease exceeds the remedy, therefore
there is no comfort. Comfort is, when the inward support is greater and
stronger then the grievance is, whatsoever it be.

Now such comfort must only be fetched out of the Word. The Scripture is a
common treasury of all good, and comfortable doctrines: but especially as it is
dispensed in the Ministry, as it is divided by the Ministers of God;
thereafter as they see the necessity of Gods people, and the exigents they are
brought to, accordingly they should draw comfort out of this common treasury.
Thereupon that that Christ says of himself, Esaias 50. Thou have given me the
tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the weary soul: it is true
of all the true Ministers of Christ, that have that spiritual anointing, that
have the same Spirit that Christ had: God has anointed them that they might
speak a word in season to poor distressed souls. God has given them the
tongue of the learned for this very end and purpose. God has given them a
healing tongue for a wounded soul. Indeed, they carry Physic in their tongues;
and the very leaves, the very words, have a medicinal force.

When those that are true Ministers speak a word in season to a wounded,
distressed soul, the Spirit goes with the Word, and it has wondrous efficacy
for the comfort, and raising up of the soul. Experience shows this.

Now to give a few instances how it is done, how the Ministers do it, The
Ministers helpers of joy.
how they are helpers of our joy. They do it first of all, by acquainting
people with the ill estate they are in: for all sound comfort comes from the 1.
By showing people their ill.
knowledge of our grief, and freedom from it. They acquaint people with their
estate by nature, that they are in the state of damnation, that they are under
the curse of God, under the wrath of God, that they are in a spiritual bondage:
they labor that they together with the Spirit of bondage, may make people to
see their state of bondage. For they must plow before they sow, and the Law
must go before the Gospel. The Law shows the wound, but the Gospel heales the
wound. Now they must know the wound; the commanding part, all the threatening
part of the Word. They must know what they are, before they can know their
comfort. Therefore John Baptist he came before Christ, he made way for the
sweet doctrine of Christ that came with blessing in his mouth, Blessed are the
poor in spirit; Blessed are they that hunger and thirst: Blessed are those that
suffer persecution, etc. Even as to Elias there was a strong wind came before
the still voice; so there must be somewhat to rend, and to open the heart,
before this oil of comfort can be poured in. Now that is the first thing, the
Ministers help people to comfort, by helping them to understand themselves,
what they are in the state of nature. They labor to search the wound first, to
cure the soul as much as they can of all guile of spirit, that the soul may not
be guilefull to misunderstand it self.

And when they have done this, then they breed joy, by propounding; 2. By
showing the remedy.
and showing the remedy which is in Jesus Christ: then they open the riches of
Gods love in Christ, then open the sweet box of ointment in Christ, they show
to man his righteousness. As you have an excellent place in Job, Chap. 33. 14.
of the whole force of the Ministry, it is followed at large what the Minister
does to bring a man to joy: he begins, verse 14. God speaks once and twice, but
man perceives it not; In visions and dreams by night, when deep sleep falls
upon them: then he opens the ears of man, and seals instruction, etc. He
chastises him with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with
strong pain; so that his life abhorres bread. He speaks of a man, that is
brought down by the sight of sin; His flesh is consumed away, it cannot be
seen, his bones stick out, etc. A strange description of a man in a
disconsolate estate; his soul draws near to the grave, and his life to the
destroyers. What of all this? what is the way to bring him out of this? If
there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one of a thousand, one that has
the tongue of the learned, to show a man his righteousness, then God is
gracious to him, and delivers him from going to the pit. I have found a
ransom, etc. The messenger, one of a thousand, the man of God, that has the
tongue of the learned, he has showed him where his ransom is to be had, he
has showed him his righteousness.

Thus did S. Peter, after he had brought them to Men and brethren, what shall
we do to be saved? then he points them out to Jesus Christ. Therefore the
Ministry is called the Ministry of reconciliation, and the Ministry of
peace; they are called Messengers of peace. You know joy comes from
reconciliation with God in Christ, joy comes from peace. Now the Ministers they
are Messengers of reconciliation, and Messengers of peace, and therefore
Messengers of joy; They bring glad tidings of joy. You see how Ministers are
helpers of joy, by showing to man his ill, and then by showing to man his good,
and comfort in Jesus Christ; they show, that where sin has abounded, grace
abounds much more. They dig the Mine, to let people see what riches, what
treasure they have in the Word of God, and what comfort they have there.

And then in the continual course of life, they are helpers of joy: For what do
Ministers if they be faithful in their places, but advise in cases of 3. By
advice.
conscience what people should do? so their Office is to remove all scruples,
and hindrances, and obstacles of spiritual joy, by advising them what to avoid,
and what to do.

We know that light is a state of joy: The Ministry of the Gospel is light, it
sets up the light of Gods truth; it shows them the way they should go in Light.
all the course of their life: and thereupon it rejoices them. The Word of God
is a Lanthorn, especially in the Ministry.

Spiritual liberty, and freedom, that does make people joyful: but the end of
the Ministry is to set people more and more at liberty; both from Liberty.
the former estate that I named, and likewise daily by office, to set them at
liberty from corruptions, and temptations, and snares; to bring them to an
enlarged estate.

Victory, and Triumph is a state of joy: Now the Ministers of God Victory.
teach Gods people, how to fight Gods battles, how to handle their weapons, how
to answer temptations, how to conquer all, and at length how to triumph:
therefore in that regard they are helpers of their joy: they encourage them
against discouragements, against infirmities and afflictions, against Satan's
temptations, showing them grounds of joy out of the Scriptures.

Then they are helpers of their joy, by forcing it as a duty upon them, Rejoice
evermore, and again I say, rejoice, says S. Paul. They are as guides 4. By
forcing it as a duty.
among the rest of the Travelers, that encourage them in the way to heaven,
Come on, let us go cheerfully. As the Apostles in all their Epistles, they
stir up to joy and cheerfulness: so should those do that are guides to Gods
people. Travelers they need refreshments of wine, etc. Now thus the Ministers
of God help the people of God in their spiritual travel to heaven: if the
people of God faint at any time, then as it is, Cant. 2. they refresh them with
apples and wine, with the comforts of the Holy Ghost: they are ready to support
and comfort them in all their spiritual falls, when they are ready to sink.

We see by experience in all places where the Ministry of the Word is
established, how comfortably people live, and dye, and end their days above
other people that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: so we see this
is true, That the Ministers help joy, because they help that that breeds joy,
not only at the first, but continually help the joy of the people of God, even
to death.

And then in death it self, the end of the Ministry is to help joy, to help 5.
In death.
them to heaven, to help them to a joyful departure hence, to give them a good
and comfortable loose out of this world, drawing comfort out of the Word for
this purpose: for whatsoever the Minister does, it is by drawing comfort out of
the Word, showing them that the sting of death is taken away, that now death is
reconciled, and become a friend to us in Christ; that it is but a passage to
heaven, that now it is the end of all misery, and the beginning of all
happiness, Blessed are those that die in the Lord; so they assist, and help
them in those last agonies.

There is special use of the dispensation of the Word in all conditions while
we live, and at the hour of death. You see it is clear, (I need not further
enlarge the Point) that the Ministers by reason of the Word (which indeed is
the main thing that comforts,) they are helpers of the joy of Gods people.

But you will say, They help Gods people to sorrow, and they vex and Object.
trouble them oft-times.

Indeed carnal men think so, as the two Witnesses in the Revelations, Answ.
Ministers trouble the joy of carnal men.
it is said, They vexed the men upon the earth: so indeed the faithful
witnesses of God, they vex the earthly-minded, base men; as Ahab said of Elias,
Thou art he that troubles Israel; he accounted him as one that troubled
Israel, when it was himself that troubled Israel: these Ministers, they are
accounted those that mar all the mirth in the world; that a man that is given
to pleasures and delights, he trembles at the sight of them, as men opposite to
his delights, and carnal course, he cannot brook the very sight of them: so it
is with a carnal man.

But we may make an Use hence to judge of what spirit they are that judge and
think so, they are not true believers: for there is no man that has given his
name to Christ, and makes it good by his life that he is a good Christian, but
he accounts the Ministers helpers of his joy. Those that do not so, are in an
ill course; and which is worse, they resolve to be in an ill course.

Therefore let us make much of the Ordinances of God, as that which is the joy
of our souls; not only make much of the Word of God, but of the Word of God
in the ministerial dispensation of it: for oft-times we find that comfort by
the opening of the Word of God, that our own reading and private endeavors
could never help us to, experience shows that. We see when the Enuch was to be
converted, it was he that read, but Philip was sent to open the Word to him,
and then he went away rejoicing. And so the poor Jayler when the Word was
opened, and applied to him, then he rejoiced: therefore as we intend our own
comfort, let us regard the Ministry.

Many object that that Naaman the Assyrian did, I can have as much Object.
comfort by reading. Answ. Private means will not comfort, when public are
neglected.


I would they were so well occupied: but God gives a curse to private means,
when they are used with neglect of the public. And joy comes from Gods Spirit:
God will not attend our pleasure to giveus joy and delight in what we single
out, but in his own course and way. And if Naaman the Assyrian, that thought
the rivers of Damascus were as good as Jordan, and therefore he thought it a
fond thing to wash there; if he had not yielded to the counsel of his servants,
he had gone a leper home as he came; but he was wiser: So those that cavil at
the Ordinance of God, they may live and die Lepers for ought I know, except
with meekness of spirit they attend upon the Ordinance.

But you will say, Those that are true Christians, and good men, they are
oft-times cast down by the Ministry, and brought to pangs of conscience:
Object.
therefore what joy can there be? how are they helpers of their joy?

If they do so, yet it is that they might joy: S. Paul did bring the
Corinthians Answ. The sorrow caused by the Ministry, tends to joy.
here to sorrow, but he brought them to sorrow that they might joy; as you have
it excellently set down, 2. Cor. 7. 8. For though I made you sorry with a
letter, I do not repent, though I did repent; I was sorry that I was forced to
be so bitter against you: for I perceive that the same Epistle made you sorry,
though but for a season; now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry: here is a
sweet insinuation: but that you were sorry to repentance, for you were made
sorry after a godly manner, that you might receive damage by us in nothing. So
the sorrow that is wrought by the Ministry in the hearts of people, it is a
sorrow to repentance, a sorrow tending to joy.

We say of April, that the showers of that Month dispose the earth to flowers
in the next; so tears and grief wrought in the heart by the Ministry, they
breed delight in the soul: they frame the soul to a delightful, joyful temper
after. And that is part of the scope of this very text, we are helpers of your
joy, and therefore if I had not spared you, but had come in severity, all had
been for joy: so whether the Minister open comfort, or direction it is for
their joy. If they see them not in a state fit, then to discover to them their
sin, and danger, and to tell them, that they must be purged by repentance,
before they can receive the Cordial of joy: but all is for joy in the end.

A Physician comes, and he gives sharp and bitter purges: says the Patient,
Simile.
I had thought you had come to make me better, and I am sicker now then I was
before: but he bids him be content, all this is for your health, and strength,
and for your joyfulnesse of spirit after; you will be the better for it: so in
confidence of that he drinks down many a bitter potion: So it is with those
that sit under the Ministry of God, thought it be sharp, and severe, and
cross their corruptions, yet it is medicinal physic for their souls, and all
will end in the health of the soul, in joy afterward.

It will be objected again, The Word of God, and the dispensation of it, Object.
it is for Doctrine, to teach, and to instruct, and not especially to joy, that
should not be the main end: for we see in Romans 14. Whatsoever was written, was
written for our learning: so in 1 Cor. 14. he that speaks, speaks to
edification, and exhortation, as well as to comfort.

It is true; but all teaching, and all exhortation, and all reproof, they Answ.
tend to comfort; even Doctrine it self tends to comfort. For as it is with
diverse kinds of food, they have both a cherishing virtue in them to strengthen,
Simile.
and a healing virtue to cure: So it is with the Word of God, the doctrinal
part of it has a comforting force. And indeed, doctrine is for comfort: for
what is comfort, but a strengthening of the affections, from Comfort what.
some sound grounds of doctrine imprinted upon the understanding, whereof it is
convinced before? The understanding is convinced thoroughly, before the soul can
be comforted thoroughly. Therefore the Scripture tending to doctrine, (that
being one end of it,) tends likewise to comfort, because that is the issue of
doctrine: for what is comfort, but doctrine applied to a particular comfortable
use?

As in Plants and Trees, what is the fruit of the tree? nothing but the juice
of the tree applied, and digested into fruit: so indeed, doctrine is that that
runs through the whole life of a Christian, and the strength of Doctrine is in
comfort. Comfort is nothing but doctrine sweetly digested and applied to the
affections. He will never be a good comforter, that does not first stablish the
judgment in some grounds of doctrine; to show whence the comfort flows. So
that howsoever there be many things in Scripture that are doctrinal, yet in the
use of them those doctrinal Points tend to joy, and comfort. As (I said) in
meat there is the same thing sometime that both nourishes, and likewise
refreshes, as a Cordial: So the Word of God both nourishes the understanding,
and is as a Cordial to refresh and comfort; and it is a kind of joy to the
soul, to have it stablished in sound doctrine; that is the ground of comfort.
So that notwithstanding any thing that can be objected, the end of the Word of
God, especially in the dispensation of it, is to joy, and comfort.

Which should teach people to regard the Ministry in this respect, that Use.
To esteem the Ministry.
it is a helper of their comfort, that they do not grieve those that help their
comfort: for what is the end of a Minister, as a Minister, but to make others
joy? that both God in heaven, and the Angels, and Ministers, and all may
rejoice together in the conversion of a Christian. Now for people to vex those
that by virtue of their calling labor to help forward their joy, is very
unkind usage: yet it was the entertainment that our blessed Lord and Master
himself found in the world. And S. Paul himself says, The more I love you, the
less I am loved of you.

And then it should move people to lay open the case of their souls to To open
the case of our souls to spiritual Physicians.
their spiritual Physicians upon all good occasions. People do so for the
Physicians of their bodies; they do so in doubtful cases for their estates: is
all so well in our souls that we need no help nor comfort? no removing of
objections that the soul makes, no unloosing of the knots of conscience? is all
so clear? or are men in a kind of numbnesse, and deadness, and Atheism that
they think it is no matter, that they put all to a venture, and think all is
well? It were better for the souls of many if they had better acquaintance with
their spiritual Pastors then they have: for their calling is to help the joy of
the people: and how can they help it except they lay open their estates to them
upon good occasion? what do they herein but rob themselves of joy? they are
their own enemies.

I pass to the third, They are helpers of joy, and but helpers. Doctr. 3*
Ministers but helpers, not the authors of joy.



They do but utter and propound matter of joy, grounds of joy from the Word of
God; but it is the Spirit of God that does rejoice the heart, The fruit of the
lips is peace, it is true, but it is when the Spirit of God speaks peace to the
soul together with the lips; God creates the fruit of the lips to be peace,
says Esaias. The fruit of the lips is peace, b^ God creates it to be so: so the
Ministers are comforters, but God says, I, even I am thy comforter. We speak
matters of comfort and grounds of comfort, but God seals them to the heart by
his holy Spirit. God is the comforter himself, He is the Father of comfort, and
the God of all consolation. And the Spirit is called the comforter; to show
unto us that however in the Ordinances the materials of comfort be set abroach
to Gods people, yet notwithstanding that that that speaks peace to the heart,
and sets on those comforts to the soul and conscience, it is the Spirit of God,
God himself. So there is the outward preaching, and the spiritual preaching; He
has his chair in heaven that teaches the heart, as S. Austin says. S. Paul
speaks, but God opens the heart of Lydia: he has the Key to open the heart.

Therefore you have all attributed to the Spirit of God. In Joh. 16. I go
hence, but I will send you the comforter, the Holy Ghost; and what shall the
Comforter do? he shall convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and
judgment. Do not pretend therefore your own inability, that you are unable to
comfort, or to cast down, or to seal unto people their righteousness: do you
that that is your duty, propound grounds of direction, and casting down, and of
righteousness, and of judgment, of holy life after; and then the Holy Ghost
shall go with you; the Comforter shall do this to the hearts of people; the
Holy Ghost shall convince. What is Paul? or what is Apollo, but Ministers? Paul
may plant, and Apollo may water; but if God give not the increase, what is all?

Therefore Christ promises his disciples, that the Holy Ghost should accompany
their teaching. They might have objected, Alas, we shall teach the world, that
they are Gentiles, that they are obstinate persons, hardened in superstition.
Do not fear, (says he) I will send the Holy Ghost, he shall fall upon you, and
furnish you. Now when the Holy Ghost was in them, and the Holy Ghost in their
auditors too, together with the Word inspired by the Holy Ghost; when the
Spirit meets in these three, there are wonders wrought. When the Spirit of God
is in the teacher, and the Spirit of God in the hearers, and the Spirit of God
in the Word; I say, when there is one Spirit in the teacher, and in the
hearers, and in the Word, there are wonders wrought of conversion, and comfort.

It is the Spirit that must do all, we are nothing but Ministers: Let a man
conceive of us as Ministers, and dispensers of the Gospel. Ministers of comfort
we are, and but Ministers; just so we are helpers of your joy, but we are but
helpers. Those that account us not helpers of joy, know not our calling: and
those that account us more, that we are able to comfort people by the Word,
they turn the preaching of the Word to magic, to a charm. We can speak the
Word: but God must speak to the heart at the same time.

As it is with Physical water; there is the water, and there are many strong
Simile.
things in it: What? does the water cure, or purge? it is a dead thing, it has
no efficatious quality, but to cool, etc. Whence comes the efficacy? There are
some cool herbs, some strong things in it, and then it does wonders: So what is
the infusion of the Word but water, but aqua vitae, water of life, the dew of
heaven, Rosa solis? whence is it so? as water? no, but there is a Divine
influence and vigor in it, that refreshes, and quickens the soul. It does
not do it of it self, but it has a Divine influence of the Spirit.

So we see, though Minist^s be helpers of joy, they are but helpers; they Gods
Spirit only specks comfort.
are but the conduits that convey that that comes from the Spirit of God, they
are instruments of the Spirit. 1. He only knows our hearts.


You see it clear then, that God only speaks comfort: because the Spirit of God
only knows our spirits thoroughly. The spirit of God can only comfort, because
he knows all the discomforts of our hearts, he knows all our griefs, all the
corners of our hearts; that the Minister cannot do. The Minister may speak
general comforts: but the Spirit of God knows all the windings, and turnings
of the heart, and all the disconsolate pangs of the heart and soul; every
little pang, and grief the Spirit of God knows it. Therefore the Spirit of God
is the Comforter: he strikes the nail, and seals the comfort to the soul we
are but helpers.

Then again, the Spirit of God must do it, because the soul must be set down
with that that is stronger then it self: it must be so convinced and 2. He only
can set down the soul.
set down, that it must have more to say against the grief or temptation, then
can be alleged by the Devil himself. The soul before it be comforted, it must
be quieted and stilled. Now who is above the soul, and Satan that tempts the
soul? Let Satan be let loose to tempt the soul, and the soul has a hell in it
self, if God let it alone, who is above those unspeakable torments of
coascience, if they be not allayed by the Spirit of God.

Who is above the soul but the Spirit of God? will the soul allay it self? no,
it will never. Therefore the Spirit of God that is stronger, and wiser then the
soul, and is the Spirit of light and strength, it must set down, and quiet, and
calm the soul, that it has nothing to say against the comfort it brings, but
quiets it self, and says, I must rest, I must see this is from heaven, I am
quiet. This the Spirit does.

Therefore make this Use of it, that in all our endeavors to procure peace to
our consciences, and spiritual balm to the wounds of our souls, let us Use To
look for comfort from the Spirit by the means.
go to this heavenly Physician: not depend overmuch upon the Ministry, or
reading, or any outward task: but in the use of all things lift up our hearts
to God, that he would comfort us by his Spirit, that he would send the
Comforter into our souls.

Though the disciples had comfort upon comfort by Christ; yet till the
Comforter, came whose office it was to do it, to seal his Word to their souls,
alas, they were dead-hearted people: but after the resurrection, when the
Comforter came, and refreshed their memories, and convinced their
understandigs, then they could remember all the sweet comforts that our blessed
Savior had taught them before. So it is with us, we hear many sweet comforts
day after day, out of Gods book, comforts against sin, comforts against
trouble, outward, and inward, and all: but till the Comforter come, till God
send his holy Spirit, we shall not make use of them. Therefore let us labor to
have more communion with God before we come to hear the Word; and after we have
heard it, let us have communion with God again, that he would seal whatsoever
is spoken to our souls, and make it effectual to us.

Therefore we must learn to give the just due to the Ordinance of God, and not
to idolize it: to make it the means of comfort, not to make it the Not to
idolize the Ordinances.
chief Comforter, but the Spirit of God by it. What is Paul, or Apollo? what
are we but Ministers of faith? and by consequent Ministers, and helpers of
comfort, but not the authors of comfort.

Oh, if I had such and such here, I should do well, I should be so and so.

Alas, all is to no purpose, unless thou have the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
God; that can help by weak means. Therefore we must not tie comfort, and joy to
this or that means: but in all means look to the ground of comfort, and the
spring of all, the Holy Ghost.

The reason why men do nor profit more, that they are not more cheared, and
lift up with the Ministry of the Word, (which is a Word of reconciliation, and
of joy, and comfort) it is because they are more careful in the use of means
then in going to God for his Spirit to bless the means. Now these must go
together; a care of using the means, and a care to pray to him that he would
give us wisdom, and strength, and blessed success in the use of all means.
Then if we would join religiously, and conscionably these two together, the use
of all means conscionably, and in the use of all to lift up our hearts to God,
to bless them; we should find a wondrous success upon the Ministry, and all
other good means likewise. So much for that. I go on to the last clause of the
Chapter. For by faith ye stand.


Why does the Apostle vary the word, we have not dominion over your faith, but
are helpers of your joy, whereas the consequence it seems might run thus, we do
not domineer over your faith, but are helpers of your faith: he puts joy
instead of faith; and afterward he brings in faith again, for by faith ye stand?

This is one main reason; because joy rises from faith, therefore he why S.
Paul varies the phrase.
names it in stead of faith: for the Holy Ghost is not curious of words, but
when the same Spirit wroks both, he names that which he thinks will fittest
suit the purpose. Faith breeds joy. Observe. Faith breeds joy.



How is that?

Because faith first of all does show to us the freedom from that that is the
cause of all discomfort whatsoever: it takes away all that may discourage. 1
Faith takes away all that may discourage.
For it takes away the fear of damnation for our sins; it shows our
reconciliation in Jesus Christ. Faith shows liberty, and deliverance; and so
discovering deliverance by a Mediator, it works joy.

Is not a prisoner joyful when he is set at liberty? 2. It shows Gods love in
Christ.


Then likewise faith discovers to us the face of God shining to us in Jesus
Christ: it shows not only deliverance, but favor. It shows us the ground of
all; the righteousness, and obedience of our Savior, whereby we are
delivered, and brought into favor.

Now from this comes peace: from the knowledge of our deliverance, and
acceptance with God, founded upon the obedience of God-man, a Savior, there
comes in peace, and peace breeds joy: because faith discovers all these, the
ground of reconciliation with God in Jesus Christ, and thereupon peace:
therefore it causes joy.

For this is the pedigree, and descent of joy; as the Apostle has it, Romans 14.
The Kingdom of God is in righteousness, and peace, and joy. There must
Pedigree of joy.
be righteousness first of a Mediatur, to satisfy the wrath of God and
procure his favor: From righteousness comes peace, peace with God, peace of
conscience: From peace comes joy: there is no joy without peace; no peace
without righteousness.

And this whole pedigree of joy (as it were) is excellently set down, Romans 5.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord;
and have access to the throne of grace, by which grace we stand; and not only
so, but rejoice. So there is justification by the righteousness of Christ: and
thereupon peace with God; and from peace boldness, and access to God; and
thereupon joy. So we see how faith brings in joy: because it shows the spring
of joy whence it comes, it shows peace; and peace rises from reconciliation;
and reconciliation from righteousness of Christ Mediator: whereupon we are
delivered from all that we may fear, and set in a state of true joy, God being
our friend. When God is reconciled, all is reconciled, all is ours, have we not
cause of joy then? Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 15. The God of peace fill
you full of joy in believing: showing, that faith is the cause of all spiritual
joy. And the same you have in 1 Pet. 1. 8. In whom ye rejoiced after ye
believed, with joy unspeakable and glorious. In whom after ye believed, that
is, in Christ, you rejoiced with joy unspeakable and glorious. And therefore
you see the Apostle might well substitute joy in stead of faith, because it
springs, and rises from faith in Jesus Christ the Mediator.

Hereupon we may come to make this Use of trial, how we may know Use. To try if
our joy be good.
whether our joy be good, or no. Among many other evidences, this is one, that
spiritual joy is good, if it spring from the Word of faith. If it 1. If it
spring from the Word.
spring from the Ordinance of God unfolded in the Word, showing us the ground
of believing. For he that truly joys, can show the ground of his joy.

Herein joy differs from presumption, from presumptuous swelling conceits: true
joy that is not the joy of an hypocrite, it does show from whence it comes, it
rises from grounds out of divine truth.

Then again, this joy does more immediately spring from faith in the 2. It
springs from faith.
Word, from assurance that God is ours, and that Christ is ours; that God is at
peace with us, and that we are at peace with him; it arises from peace, that
is wrought by faith.

Then again, this joy, if it be sound, it is such a joy as S. Peter says is an
unspeakable and glorious joy; joy arising from the Word of God, and 3. It is
above discouragements or allurements.
from faith; and peace, it is above discouragement: because we have in the Word
of God matter of joy, above all discouragements, and all allurements
whatsoever. It is a joy above the joy of riches, or pleasures, or profits; why?
because the Word shows matter of joy above all these. The Prophet David
rejoiced in the Word of God above Gold, and Silver, as one that had gotten
great spoils; you see how often he repeats it, Psalm. 119. It was sweeter to him
then the honey, and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19. It put his soul out of taste with
all other things. This joy of the Spirit it puts such a relish in the soul,
that it makes it undervalue all other things whatsoever: the price of other
things falls down, when a man joys in the Holy Ghost: because it arises from
the grounds of faith, from peace, and righteousness.

And likewise, if it look forward, from the hope of life everlasting, and the
favor of God, the ground of all: It rises from things that are above all
other contentments, The loving kindness of the Lord (that faith apprehends,
that is the ground of joy,) it is above life it self. Now life is the sweetest
thing upon earth: but the loving kindness of God is better then that.

Therefore those that lose their souls in base contentments, and joy in the
dirty things of this life, (that are not fit for the soul to fasten on, to
place contentment in: but are only to be used, as those that take a journey to
refresh them; but) those that are swallowed up in these things, they know not
what spiritual joy is, that arises from the Word of God, from divine truth,
that arises from faith: for if they did, this joy would raise them higher,
above all earthly contentments whatsoever.

Then again, where this joy is, this spiritual enlargement of soul which is 4.
It is with humility.
called joy, it is from true grounds, it is with humility: For the same Word
that discovers matter of joy, discovers matter of humility, and grief in our
selves, by reason of the remainders of sin, and of our own deservings. So true
joy it is a tempered and qualified joy; it is not joined with pride, and
swelling: because it rises from those grounds that teach us what we are in our
selves: alas, such that we need not be proud in our selves, but if we will
glory, we must glory in God. Well, it is not that that I mean principally to
stand on, but only I speak of it, because it is placed here for faith, as it
springs from faith: we are helpers of your joy. To hasten then to that that
follows. For by faith ye stand.


This principally depends upon the first words, We have not dominion over your
faith, because faith is such a grace as you stand by in all conditions: Now
what you stand by, must be firm, it must be on a good bottom: and what is
firm, must not be humane, but divine; therefore we have no dominion over your
faith, for by faith ye stand.

Standing is a military word: by faith ye stand, that is, first of all faith
gives a standing, a certain standing, before any conflict; it gives a standing
Standing, what meant by it.
in Christianity; it sets the soul in a frame, in a standing.

Nay, faith helps us, we stand by faith: not only in a frame of Christianity,
and furnished with spiritual strength; but then we are fit to encounter
opposition, by faith we stand to it, and stand against all opposition: we
stand, and stand to it by faith.

And standing likewise implies continuance in managing Christianity, and
opposing all enemies whatsoever: by faith we stand, and continue standing; we
hold out in all opposition.

Standing likewise in the next place implies a kind of safety, together with
victory at length. By faith ye stand: you stand so, as you are not wounded to
death; you stand so as you are kept safe, especially from mortal wounds; and
altogether safe, so far as you use faith as a shield, till you have got perfect
victory, and faith end in triumph. So faith is that grace whereby we stand,
whereby we are in a frame of Religion fit to stand; and whereby we so standiug,
encouter oppositions, and continue so encountering, and preserve our selves
safe, till victory be obtained: this is the full expression, and comprehension
of the word, By faith ye stand.

Now why is it by faith that we have this standing? Quest.


Because faith it is that grace (in the new Covenant) that makes the soul Answ.
Why our stand ing is by faith.
go out of it self; it empties the soul of all things in it self, and goes out
to somewhat else, whereupon it stands. For in the new Covenant since Adams
fall, all our strength is in the second Adam, our head; we fetch it there. And
faith is the hand of the soul.

Now because faith in the new Covenant is an emptying grace, and likewise
because as it is a grace that empties the soul, so it fastens upon another
thing, whereupon it relies: for faith is an uniting grace as well as an
emptying grace: now faith emptying, and uniting, so it makes us stand.

And likewise faith as it draws, it has a drawing virtue, an attractive
force: it is a radical grace: it is like a root, when it knits to Christ, it
sucks out, and draws virtue from him: every touch of faith draws spiritual
strength, and virtue, so it causes us to stand by the attractive virtue it
has.

And then it is the force of faith likewise to make things present. For therein
it differs from hope, hope looks upon things as absent; now the things that
hope looks on as things remote and distant in time, and place, faith makes them
present: therefore it is said to be the evidence of things not seen. Now that
that makes the soul to be strong, and able to stand, it must be somewhat
present: however the full possession of things be reserved, not for faith, but
for vision, for comprehenders in heaven, where faith ends and determines: yet
notwithstanding, faith draws so much for the present: it sets things to come
so far present with such evidence, and force as it upholds the soul, and makes
it stand. It is the evidence of things not seen. And thereupon it has a kind
of omnipotent power to make things that are not, to be. Heaven, and glory, and
happiness they are not for the pesent: but faith looking on them in the
authority of God, and the divine promises, faith makes them present by a kind
of almighty power that it has, laying hold on an almighty power: and hereupon
it upholds the soul, it is the prop, and stay of the soul as in Heb. 11. it
signifies to stay up, to hold up as a pillar; even from this virtue it has to
make things to come present.

You see then what it is to stand, and how faith is fitted for this purpose:
because, as I said, it is the grace of the new Covenant, emptying us, and
drawing us to Christ from whom we draw all virtue: and because it makes things
to come as present.

By faith wr are set in a right frame, and condition again, as by want of faith
we fell. The same grace must set us right, for want of which we fell.

How came we to fall at the first? You know Adam hearkened to his wife Eve, and
she hearkened to the Serpent: they trusted not in God; they began to stagger at
the promises, to stagger at the Word of God: Satan robbed them of the Word. He
observes, and continues the same Art still, to take the Word from us, and to
cause us to stagger and doubt whether it be true or no. He comes between us,
and our rock the Word of God: So Adam fell. Now we must be restored by the
contrary to that we fell: we fell by unbelief, and distrust, by calling Gods
truth in question, we must learn to stand again by the contrary grace, by
faith: Thus you see the terms something unfolded. By faith ye stand. To clear
it a little further. There be four degrees of a slent that the soul Four
degrees of assent.
has to any thing.

The first is a slight assent that we call opinion, that is with some fear 1.
Opinion.
that it may be otherwise; that is a weak, a pendulous assent. It is a wavering
assent, it yields not a certain assent. Opinion is a weak thing: it may be so:
I, but it may not be so: it is with a fear of the contrary.

The second degree of assent is that that has a better ground, that is the 2.
Knowledge.
assent to grounds of reason: a man has reason to yield, and assent to, and
those reasons satisfy the soul, and rest the soul something, thereafter as the
strength of them is. And that assent we call knowledge, science; this is
founded upon grounds of reason.

There is a third kind of assent, and yielding that the soul has, that we call
3. Believing.
believing, which is merely upon the credit of him that speaks, though we know
no reason why the thing should be so: but only the person it may be is a person
of credit, and wisdom, and knowledge; and thereafter as we conceive well of
him, thereafter we fasten our faith and assent to his authority: so that assent
to the authority of the speaker, we call belief.

The fourth degree of assent is, when we do not only assent to the thing 4.
Experience.
because we have reason so to do, and arguments, or because we have some man to
confirm it by authority; but because we feel it to be so by experience, and by
taste. As a man assents that fire is hot, and that sweet things are so, not
from reason altogether, or from the speech or rehearsing of another man, but
because he feels it so indeed, he assents to it from experience.

Now you will say, How come we then to stand by faith?

As faith especially relies upon the authority of God, upon Gods Word, How we
stand by faith.
so we stand by faith, because it assents to an authority. But Gods Word gives
reasons too: therefore faith assents to the authority of Gods Word first; and
then we see divine reason enough too, when we once believe God.

And then experience in Divine things too; after we, believe there is an
incredible sweetness in divine things: there is a knowledge with a particular
taste. There is never a Divine truth but it has an evidence in it, when a man
believes it once, that a man may say, I know whom I have believed, from
experience; let the speakers of the things be what they will, let them
apostatize from that that they have spoken: after a man believes, he will see
the things themselves have Divine reason in them, as well as Divine authority
stablishing of them.

Some Divine truths are altogether upon Divine authority; we see no other
reason, but that God has said it: but some truths are both credible, and
intelligible. Credible, because God has said it, and there is reason to prove
it: as a man may prove by Divine reason, that all shall work for the best; why?
The Apostle faith, We love God, and God has called us according to his
purpose: therefore all things shall work for them that God has called, to them
that answer his Divine call. There is both reason and comfort: so it is
credible as it has divine truth, and intelligible as it has comfort. There
are homogeneal reasons with divine authority. God does not only press us with
authority, but he gives us reasons.

Besides this, there is experience: for the doctrine of divine providence, and
of the corruption of nature, and the doctrine of comfort in the Mediator
Christ altogether. The doctrine of faith, the doctrine of the issue of all
troubles for good, we find these by experience; however the teacher that
teach^h them perhaps may have no sense of them himself, let him apostatize, and
do what he will: our faith stands upon them, partly because God says so, that
is the chief; and because there is reason for them; and because we find it so
by experience: in many divine things, these three, both reason, authority, and
experience concur in faith. But to come a L^de further.

What does faith it self stand most on by which we stand? that which Quest.
we stand o^, must stand it self. Let us examine a little what faith it self
stands on by which we stand.

I showed you before partly, by Divine authority and experience, which Answ.
What faith it self stands on:
gives some light to it; but we will follow it a little further: That faith by
which we stand, must stand it self: therefore it cannot be opinion, it must be
faith. It must not be bare science neither, it must be science that has faith;
faith must come in. Now faith looks to Divine revelation especially, it looks
to truth revealed from God: now faith looking to the Word of God, it builds,
and pitcheth, and bottoms it self upon Divine truth, Divine authority, Divine
revelation, which we call the first truth, the first verity.

And not only so, but faith that it may stand the better, has together with
the Word of God, the seals: for God has added Sacraments as Seals to the
Word, that helps the Word: (to us at least) Gods Word is true enough of it self
in regard of him: but he condescends to us, and therefore that faith may stand
the better, that we may build upon his Word, there are his Sacraments: there
are seals together with his Word, and his oath too.

Again, that his Word may be the better foundation for faith, it is conceived
under the manner of a Covenant, the Evangelical part of it: the Covenant of
Grace, wherein God in Christ promises to forgive our sins, to accept us to
life everlasting, if we believe in Christ: It is a gracious Covenant. God
condescends to make a Covenant that faith may stand; shall not I believe him
that has made a Covenant, and bound himself by Covenant that he will do so?
Nay, in the Covenant of grace, faith lays hold upon this, that he will
fulfill, and perform both conditions himself, both his part, and our part. For
the same truths that are a Covenant, are a Testament too in the Gospel. A
Testament bequeathes things without a covenant, and therein it differs from a
covenant. A Testament is, I bequeath, and give this: Now whatsoever Christ in
the Covenant requires, because that in the Gospel he makes good the Covenant as
a Testament; If we believe, and repent: Now he has promised to give
repentance, and belief in the Covenant of grace to all that attend upon the
means, and expect the performance of the Covenant from him.

For we can no more perform the conditions of the Covenant of grace of our
selves, then the Covenant of the Law. Nature cannot do it, because it must be
done by the Spirit altogether. Now here is a foundation for faith to stand on:
God so far condescends, as he gives his Word, and his Seal, and his Oath with
his Word, to convey that Word by way of a Covenant, and to make that Covenant a
Testament and Will to us, that he will do this, and to seal that Will with his
own blood: for a Testament is of no force, till the Testatour be dead, his own
blood has sealed the Testament: you see here what ground there is for faith to
stand upon.

Then again, the sweet relation that God has taken upon him in Christ, God our
Father.
he is our Father, faith builds not on naked God, divested of his sweet
relations; (for then he is a consuming fire) but upon God a Father in Christ:
what a sweet thing is it to consider God a Father? In Christ the nature of God
is Fatherly to us, and our nature is sweet to him: We are sons in Christ, his
nature is sweet to us, and ours to him; he will surely perform his relations:
For in Christ he is a Father, not in creation only, but in the Covenant of
grace. Faith relies upon the Word of God, upon the Covenant, and Testament, and
upon God himself, altered and changed in the Covenant of Grace to be a sweet
Father.

But what is a further ground of this? The nature of God himself who The nature
of God.
is a Father: for if God himself were not clothed with properties that might
satisfy faith, and satisfy the soul fully, though he were a Father, it were
not a sufficient ground for faith. But now who has taken the relation of a
father upon him? God, who is infinitely good, infinitely merciful above all our
sins: it must be infinite mercy, faith would not have footing else. For the
soul will so upbraid in the sense of sin, that if God were not a Father, and a
Father infinite in mercy, nothing but infinite mercy will satisfy the soul
when conscience is awaked, and infinite power to subdue all enemies, and
infinite wisdom to go beyond the reach and subtilty of all the Devils in hell.
God is such a Father, as in his Nature is of infinite mercy, and wisdom, and
power: here is a foundation for faith to lay hold upon indeed; to have a
Father, and such a Father that is Jehovah: there we must rest in his essence,
he is Jehovah, I am, he is eternal and immutable, an eternal being of himself,
and he gives being to all; and all things have their dependence upon him. The
Devils in hell, and wicked men, he can quell them all, and substract their
being, and turn them to their first nothing from whence they came.

You see if we resolve all to Jehovah, I am, to the eternity of God; and then
to his nature, clothed with power, and wisdom, and mercy: and then to his
relation of a Father, and then how he condescends to convey himself sweetly by
way of Covenant, and Testament. I beseech you, is not here a foundation for
faith to build upon in the Word of God, when God has thus opened himself to
us? You see what this standing is. And how by faith we stand, and what faith
stands on, and may well stand on. To come to some Observations then.

First of all, Observe hence, That The foundation of faith must be out of a
man's self. Observe. The foundation of faith out of us.



That bottom that a man must lay his soul upon, must be out of himself, it must
be Divine, it must be God. For the soul rests not till it come to God; and if
the Word were not Gods Word, it would not rest on that. God must open himself
by his Word. It must be Divine revelation that the soul must stand upon, and at
last resolve to pitch, and build, and rest there. It must not be humane
authority therefore, not the authority of any creature that the soul must stand
on: because that that the soul stands on, must stand it self. Now nothing has
a firm consistence, but that which is Divine: Which I prove thus, There is no
creature, but though it be true and good, yet it is changeably true, and may be
otherwise then it is, and yet be a creature still, and a good creature. There
is no man but he is changeable, and is changeable as a creature, and as a
creature severed from the consideration of sin he is changeable. The very
Angels are changeable as they are creatures: all things created are mutable; it
is the Observation of Damascene.

Now that that is the foundation of faith must not only be true, but
infallibly, and unchangeably true: there must be no danger of error in that
that faith lays it self upon. It is an old rule, Falsehood cannot be under
faith, because faith must lie upon truth, infallible and immutable truth; and
who is so but God? and what revealed truth is so, but Divine truth? Therefore
faith only relyeth upon the first good, and the first truth, upon God and his
truth.

Therefore we may see what to judge of that controversy between us and our
adversaries that would have our faith to be resolved into the authority of the
Church, and not of the Scriptures, and by consequent not to the authority of
God himself.

The question is, Who has the best standing, the Papists, or we? We say we
stand by faith, therefore we stand better then they. They say they stand by
faith too, but how? Their faith is resolved into the authority of the Church at
length, and there they rest. But I say, even by the confession of themselves,
or of any reasonable man, the Word of God is more Divine then the authority of
the Church can be. For the authority of the Church is therefore infallible and
true, because the Word of God says so, That he will be with the Church, etc.
and save his Church. The ground is determined upon the Word.

Now the Word to which they have recourse, to prove that they cannot err, that
must be trusted before them; if they have credit from the Word, the Word must
be believed before them, before men: for there is no man if God speak by him,
but he speaks by him so far as he understands the Scripture, and builds upon
the Scriptures first. Therefore we must first found our selves upon the
Scriptures, and upon men as far as they agree to the Scriptures.

If the Scriptures were not the Word of God indeed, they could not be the
foundation of faith, we could not stand upon them; but they are the Word of God
indeed, for men wrote as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost. Now that that
comes from men it is not infallibly the Word of God; but if they speak any
thing that is good, it is so far as it is agreeable to the first truth, the
Word of God.

Indeed, the resolution of their faith is very rotten, and unsound, and
bewrayes what their Church is: for they come at length in the grand Point of
all, to mere traditions. What is the present Church? The Pope is the Church
virtually. How do they know that he cannot err? he is Peter's Successor. How
do they know he is so, the Scripture says not so? it is Tradition: so that the
foundation of their Religion is mere tradition, a thing from hand to hand; that
is questionable and uncertain, that is the foundation of all their Religion;
what a resolution of faith is this?

We stand upon this against the gates of hell, and against all temptations and
trials whatsoever: we believe, and fasten our souls upon this truth, why? It
is the Word of God. How do we know it is the Word of God? Indeed the Church
first of all has an inducing, leading power, persuading to read, and to hear
the Word of God, and to unfold the Word by the Ministry; and that is all that
the Church does: but when we hear this, there is a Divine intrinsecal majesty
in the Word it self, by which I know the Word to be the Word. How do I know
light to be light? from it self, it gives evidence from it self: so Divine
light in the Scriptures gives light of it self to all those for whom the
Scripture was penned. For whom was the Scripture penned? For Gods people. To
all that have gracious hearts, the Word carries its own evidence with it: as
light carries its own evidence, it discovers it self and all things else; so
does the Scriptures, You have a sure Word of the Prophets.

Our Savior Christ himself founds what he teaches upon the Word. Shall not we
therefore ground our faith upon the Word, when he that was the Head of the
Church brings all to the Word in his teaching? Therefore we have a better
resolution for our faith then they have.

For indeed to say the truth, as we may say of their kind of prayers, when they
may to Saints, etc. They worship they know not what. So we may say of their
faith, they believe they know not what, they believe in a (...) man: for the
present Pope is all their Church, which is an ignorant man (many times) in the
Scriptures, perhaps he never read them: and he must determine controversies,
and get into the Chair, and judge that that shall judge him ere long; he must
judge the Scripture that must be his Judge, and the Judge of all mankind. I
list not to be large in this point, a (...) discovery is enough.

I hasten to something more practical. We see then that faith has an
establishing power, to stand by faith. Then hence we may see these truths which
I will but touch.

First, that faith is certain, it is a certain thing, and makes the soul
certain; it is not a weak apprehension.

Again, in that it is said here, By faith ye stand, we see here the
perseverance of faith.

But you will say, That faith whereby we stand is changeable, and therefore we
may fall. No, S. Peter makes a Comment upon this place: We are kept by faith to
salvation: and receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
We are kept through faith to salvation. So God by his power keeps that faith
that keeps us. There is a divine power that keeps faith, that faith may keep
us: so we stand by faith; and that faith stands to salvation, because it has a
firm bottom to stand on, and because it is kept by God himself, We are kept by
the power of God through faith to salvation. Mark how it runs along to
salvation. Salvation is not only certain in it self, but that faith that lays
hold on salvation, is sure. By faith we stand: not only for the present, but
we continue by faith, and stand even to the death.

Again; in the third place, which follows from the other: faith is a certain
thing in it self, and we are assured of our continuance; we are assured that we
shall be saved: he that believes may be assured that he shall be saved. First
faith is a certain thing in it self, laying hold upon a strong foundation, the
Word of God. And it is sure to continue, it builds upon the rock. Therefore a
man may believe, and he may know that he shall be saved: he may know that he
shall continue in a sure faith. There is a latitude, a breadth in faith; and
sometimes there is doubting, and sometimes faith, but yet there is always
faith, more or less. There is a little and a great faith, but there is always
faith: By faith we stand. These things need not further enlargement. I only
show how they spring from this Text.

In a word, hence we learn, That it is by faith that we stand, and withstand
Faith withstands opposition.
all opposition whatsoever; for faith is our victory: This is your victory,
even your faith, 1 John 5. 4. By faith we overcome the world, by it we stand,
and stand against all opposition whatsoever.

To make it a little clear.

The reason is, partly because faith does present to the soul greater good then
the world can, therefore nothing on the right hand can shake the soul of a
believing Christian. Shall pleasures, and profits, and the honors of the world
draw a Christian from his faith, when faith presents better honors, better
pleasures at the right hand of God, plesures for evermore? No, they cannot: for
there is nothing in the world, but there is better in Religion, incomparably
better. There is no comparison of the pleasures of Religion, and of the world;
between the honor of being a child of God, and the honors that the world can
give. Therefore there is nothing on the right hand in the world that can
overcome the faith of a Christian, but he can stand against all, though it be a
Kingdom: Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; why? Faith
presented him greater honors in the Church of God: he accounted the very
reproach, the worst thing in the Church, better then the best thing in the
world, the reproach of Christ better then the treasures of Egypt.

Let discouragements be offered to Faith by Satan, and the world; let them come
with all the terrors and threatenings they can, faith is victorious, and
triumphant against them all, it stands against them all: because it sets before
the soul greater good, then the ill that the world can inflict; and sets before
the soul greater ills if it apostatize, then the world can inflict. Says the
world, If you do not thus and thus, you shall be cast into prison, or perhaps
you shall lose your life. O but says the soul, If I yield to the temptations
of Satan, and my own vile corruptions I shall be cast into hell, is not that
worse? There can nothing be presented to the soul that is terrible, but faith
will present to it things more terrible: therefore if there be faith in the
soul, it will stand against all those terrors whatsoever. Fear not them that
can kill the body, when they have done their worst; if you will needs fear, I
will tell you whom you shall f^ar, Fear him that can cast both body and soul
into hell.

So, if we be forced to suffer the loss of any thing that is good in the
world, or be cast into any ill condition, what says S. Paul? The troubles and
afflictions of the world, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed.
Let us set that glory before us, and that will prevail against that all the
world can threaten, or take from us; what is all to it? nothing. Therefore by
faith we stand, we keep our own standing, and withstand all oppositions
whatsoever.

Oh, but what if there come more subtle temptations; end the Lord himself
Quest.
seems to be our enemy, that we have sin, and God is angry, and we see he
follows us with afflictions that are evidences of his anger; how shall we
stand now, and keep our selves from despair?

This is a fiery dart of Satan, when a man has sinned, and conscience is Answ.
How we stand by faith, when conscience is awakened for sin.
awakened, to make him sink in despair. O but faith will make the soul to stand
in these great temptations against those fiery darts: faith puts a shield into
the hand of the soul, to beat back all those fiery darts. For faith will
present Christ to God. Indeed I have been a sinner, but thou have ordained a
Savior, and he is of thine own appointing, of thine own a^ting, a Savior of
thine own giving, and thou have made a promise, that Whosoever believes in
him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life; I cast my self upon thy mercy
in him: hereupon faith comes to withstand all such fiery temptations
whatsoever, nay, against God himself, Lord, thou can not deny thine own
Savior, thou ^mest to be an enemy, and though I be a sinner, and have deserved
to be cast into hell, yet I come to thee in the Name of thy Son, that is at thy
right hand, and pleads for me by virtue of his blood shed for me; I came in his
Name, thou can not refuse thy own Son. For all temptations when a man has
faith in him, it will send Satan to Christ to answer for him. Go to Christ, he
is my husband, he has paid my debts, he has satisfied for my sins. So that
whatsoever the temptation be, make it as subtle as you will, there is a skill
in faith to stand against it, and to beat back all the fiery darts of Satan.

Therefore, to end all, we see here what an excellent estate a Christian The
firmness of a Christians standing.
is in above all others, that he has a better standing then others have; not
only a better standing in Religion then the Papists have, but in the
profession of Religion, he has a better standing then common professors; why?
he stands by faith, by sound faith. He stands not upon opinion, or because he
has been bred so: he stands not upon his wit, because he sees reason for it;
he stands upon faith, and faith stands upon divine authority, he stands partly
upon his own experience that seconds faith.

Those then that care not for Religion, what standing have they? those that
stand only in pleasures and profits, and in the favor of great men, what
standing have they? They stand, as the Psalmist says, in slippery places.
There is no man, but if he nave not faith he stands slippery, though he be
never so great; if he be a Monarch, alas, what is it to stand a while? all
these things are but uncertain, though they yield present content, they are but
uncertain contentments; the Wiseman says, they are but vanity: they are like
the reed of Egypt, that will not uphold; they will not sustein the soul in the
time of trouble: there is nothing that a man can stand upon, and fasten his
soul upon, if he be not Religious, that will hold scarce the fit of an ague,
that will hold in the pangs of death, even in the entrance of it, that will
hold in terrors of conscience.

How little a trouble will blow away all those that stand on so weak a
foundation as an earthly thing is? For they have but an Imaginary good to speak
of, and that Imagination is driven out by the sense of the contrary. Let
contrary troubles come, and all their fools Paradise, and their happiness
they had before, is at an end; it goes no deeper then Imagination.

All the things in this world stablish not the heart: Those that do not stand
by faith in the favor of God in Christ, let their standing be what it will, it
will soon be over turned by any temptation; they can stand out against nothing.

Therefore let us labor above all things in the world, to have that faith
strengthened by which we stand: and let us often be encouraged to strengthen
our faith by all means, that we may stand the better upon it; and try our faith
before we trust it: it is that that we must trust to, and stand to in life and
death.

Therefore let us often think, Is my faith good? is it well built? Let us often
put this query to our souls, I believe the Religion I profess, but upon what
grounds? I believe the truths in the Word of God, but upon what grounds? have I
a clear understanding of them, because they are divine? does the Spirit of God
open them, and show a light in the Scripture that is divine? does the Spirit of
God give me a relish of the Scriptures above all the pleasures in the world? Do
I find God speaking to my heart in the Word? do I find the Spirit of God with
his Ordinance? then my knowledge and my faith will hold out, I can stand by
that faith in the Word that is wrought by the Spirit, and fastened upon the
Word with the Spirit. But if I believe the Religion I profess, only because
the State does so: and if the King and State should do otherwise, I would
change my Religion: or if it be because my parents were so, or my friends, and
Patron is of that religion, whom I depend upon: or because I see greater
seeming reason for this then for the other. I can hold argument for this, and
not for the other; Alas, this will not hold. But labor to know the truth of
the Word of God by experience as much as we can; and by the Spirit of God
giving evidence to our souls from the inward grounds of Scripture, that it is
the Word: I know whom I have trusted, I know the promises are good, I have felt
them in my soul: the Spirit has reported them to my soul; they are sweeter
then all the things in the world. It is a sure Word, I bottom upon it, I have
found the comfort of it before, therefore I will build upon it.

We can never stand, unless we can make our knowledge spiritnal; it is but
acquisite knowledge else.

We fall in three things vilely, we labor that our knowledge of Religion If
our knowledge of Scripture be not spiritual.
be spiritual, and fetched divinely out of the Word of God together with the
Spirit.

We fall into sin from this very ground: for why do men fall into sin? 1. We
fall into sin*
because at that time they stand not upon the Word of God, revealed by
conscience to be the Word of God. Ask them why they sweat? if they did believe
the truth, the Word says, I will not hold them guil^lesse that take my Name in
vain. But I am not convinced by the Spirit assuring my soul that it is the Word
of God; if men did believe it, would men bring a curse upon themselves?

And so whoremongers; the Word of God says, Whoremongers, and adulterers God
will judge; would men if they did believe this truth, live in these sins? But
they have only an opinion of these things, I hear that these things are divine,
perhaps they are not so, and the knowledge that we have is not divine; faith is
not mingled with the Spirit.

Then again, from sin, we fall into despair for sin at last, why? because 2. To
despair.
our knowledge of divine truths is not spiritual, nor from inward grounds of
Scripture felt by experience, the Spirit sealing the Scripture to my heart by
some spiritual experience; and thereupon men fall into despair for sin at
length. For Satan plies them with temptations from their own guilty conscience;
the grounds of their fears are present, and the grounds of their terrors are
present to their souls: for they are there, as it were, sealed, and branded in
their very souls; but their comforts are overly, the promises are overly, the
Word is not rooted in their hearts by faith, it is not sealed there by the
Spirit of God, the sanctifying Spirit never brought the Word, and their souls
together. Hereupon they fall into desperation, when their terrors are present,
and their comforts are overly.

If a man have never so sound a foundation, if he stand not, but float upon it,
he may fall, and sink: if a man be never so weak, if he lie on a rock, the
strength of the rock is his: so in our temptations if we have a strong
foundation, if we do not rest on it, the foundation will not uphold us. Now how
can those rest on it that stagger in it? that were never convinced by the
Spirit that these things are so? and that have had no spiritual experience?
Satan draws thousands of souls to perdition, because their terrors are
present, and their comforts are overly; they are not built upon divine truth by
the Spirit of God.

Again, for Apostasy, in the times of the alteration of Religion: why 3. To
Apostasy.
do men alter as the State alters? they are ready to have every Month a new
faith, if the times, and Government alter, why? because they were never
convinced by the Spirit of God of divine truths. They had it from foreign
arguments: The former State of things countenanced this way, now another State
countenanceth another opinion, therefore I will be of the safest. This is
because the soul was never convinced of the truth.

Therefore I beseech you, labor to have arguments from the experience of the
power of the Word in your souls, and arguments from the Spirit of God to your
spirits that it is the Word of God. I will stand to divine truth, I find such a
majesty, such a humbling, pacifying, satisfying power in it to all my
perplexities and doubts, that it cannot but be the Word of God, it stays my
soul in all oppositions, in all temptations, and corruptions: it gives a stay
and foundation to my soul, that no truth in the world else can do. When the
soul is brought to such a frame; such a soul will not fall into gross sins
while it is in such a frame; much less will it despair for sin: and if there
be altering of Religion a thousand times, it stands as a rock unmovable;
because it knows from inward grounds, from the Word of God it self sealed by
the Spirit to my spirit, that it is the Word of God: such a soul will hold out,
and only such a soul.

We should labor therefore by all means to have our faith strengthened; The
Sacrament strengthens faith.
and amongst other means, by the use of the Sacrament whereby God sweetly
conveys himself to us, by way of a banquet strengthening our faith in Christ;
he presents Christ to us as the food of our souls to refresh us, even as the
bread and wine does. Our blessed Savior is wiser then we, he knows what we
stand in need of, that we have need to strengthen our faith. For we have need
to strengthen that that must be our strength, which is faith. And what is the
Ordinance of God to strengthen faith, is it not the Sacrament? The proper use
of the Sacrament is to strengthen faith: which the Sacrament does, being a
visible Sermon to us: for here we see in the outward things Christ's body
broken, and his blood shed, it is a lively representation, a visible crucifying
of Christ, a breaking of his body, and pouring out of his blood. And withal
here is an offer of Christ to us in the elements, sealing of what it represents
to our souls, if we come prepared.

God feeds us not with empty signs, but together with the outward things
themselves, he gives the spiritual to the soul that is a worthy Receiver.

Therefore come with a humble stooping to Gods wisdom in appointing these
Ordinances to this end, to strengthen faith. And come with a desire to have
faith strengthened, that will uphold us against all temptations to sin, or to
despair for sin.

Oh beloved, if we knew what good our faith must do us ere long, we would
labor to have it strengthened by all means. What will become of us in the hour
of death, and in great temptations? we shall be as chafe driven with the wind,
if we have no consistence, and stability in divine truth, if our souls be not
built on that, if we have not faith whereby our souls may be rooted in Christ,
we shall be but a prey for Satan. Therefore considering that faith is of such
wondrous consequence, it is the root of all other graces whatsoever; as the
Apostle says here, By faith ye stand. He does not say, By patience, or by
hope, or the like, they are drawn from faith. Strengthen that, and strengthen
all other that are infused from it.

As a tree, we cast not water on the branches, but on the root; all the Faith
the radical grace.
branches are cherished by the root: so strengthen faith, we strengthen love,
and hope, and all, if we strengthen faith, and assurance of Gods love in
Christ. Thus I have at length gone over this fruitful portion of Scripture.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table, DIRECTING The Reader to the Ready finding out the
Principal Points and Matters handled in this Book.
A.
Achaia. AChaia the Country wherein Corinth was, Page 5 Acknowledge.
Acknowledge, or Acknowledgment, what, p. 316, 331 To acknowledge Christ what,
page 331 Christ acknowledged in the Minister, p. 331, 333 How to know whether
we acknowledge the Minister, p. 331, 332, 333
Action. Three sorts of Actions: good, ill, indifferent, p. 254 Adam. Our
estate in Christ better then Adams, or the Angels, why. p. 438, 445 Affliction.
Gods Children subject to Afflictions, and why, p. 47, 60, 74, 126 Gods people
are sensible of Afflictions, and why, p. 129, etc. Good men lying under
Afflictions and Crosses are subject to rash and hard censures, p. 120, 124 The
Afflictions of the Saints are for the good of others, how. p. 102, 103 The good
we get by others Afflictions, is by stirring up grace in us, p. 109 God aims
at many things in the same Affliction, p. 114 Effects of Afflictions to Gods
Children, and to the wicked, p. 163 Affliction called Death, p. 171 See more in
Persecution, Suffering, Tribulation.
Aim. Holy men work from holy Aims and Ends, p. 347 All. Christ is all in all
to us, p. 391 Alone. The Devil set on Christ when he was alone, p. 71 See
Solitariness.
Amen. Amen, what, and how taken, page 401 A double Amen, p. 440 All Promises
in Christ Yea, and Amen, p. 401, etc. 410, etc.
Anointing. What kind of persons were formerly anointed, p. 463, 464, 467 The
order of our Anointing in Christ, p. 464, 467 468 The graces of the Spirit
resembled to Anointing, or Oynment, why page 464, etc.
Antiquity. Antiquity of our Church and Religion proved against the Papists, p.
394 395, 396 Popish Religion not ancient, page 396, etc.
Apology. Christians are often driven to their Apology, p. 215 Apostle. The
Privilege of Apostles above ordinary Ministers, and how they differ from them,
p. 2 S. Paul's Prerogative above other Apostles, ibid. Apostles and Prophets
how subject to err and mistake, and how not, p. 374
Application. Necessity of application of the Promises to our selves, p. 441
Assent. Four degrees or kinds of Assent, page 541, 542 Assurance. A Christian
ought and may be assured of his estate in grace, p. 487 All Christians have not
a like assurance, nor at all times, p. 488 Gods Children may be assured that
they shall persevere to the end, p, 489 See Perseverance. We may be assured
from a little measure of grace, that we are in the state of grace, p. 491
Authority. Why S. Paul alleged humane authority in his Epistles, and in his
dealing with men, page 4 What power or authority the Church gives to the
Scriptures, p. 3, 4, 545 See Church, Scripture.

B.
Believe. HOw hardly man's heart is brought to believe, p. 48, 486 Best. A true
Christian is best, where he is best known, p. 273 Bless. To bless God what,
p. 17 How God blesses us, and how we bless G^d, ibid, We add nothing to God,
when we bless, him, ibid. Wh^ we ought to bless God, ibid. We ought to bless
God for Christ, p. 21 Blessing what, p. 9 The Popes blessing nothing worth,
ibid. See Praise, Thankfulness.
Brother. Timothy S. Paul's Brother, how. p. 4 All Christians, or all Believers
are Brethren, ibid.

C.
Called. MEn in Scripture are often called by that which they are led and ruled
by, p. 275, 365 Censure. Against censuring those that are under crosses and
afflictions, p. 124, 150 Men are prone to censute men's callings for some
particular actions, p. 375 Sin must be censured and judged when it is
committed, p. 510
Certainty. A double Certainty, p. 120, 440 How the Prophets and Apostles were
certain, and infallible, and how not, p. 374
Christ. Christ three ways taken in Scripture, p. 77 Christ is the main object
of preaching, p. 388 Christ is all in all to us, p. 391 How to think of Christ,
p 390 Gods love to us founded in Christ, p. 404, 405 How to get into Christ, p.
415 Christ a Prophet, Priest, and King, p. 467 The Scripture sets forth Christ
by all comfortable terms that may be, p. 55
Christian. What is done to Christians, is done to Christ, p 81 A true
Christian is best where he is best known, p. 273 A sound Christian loves and
values all Christians, p. 450 Christians are Prophets, Priests, and Kings, how.
p. 468, etc. See Saint.
Church. Whether the Church can give authority to the Word or Scripture, p. 3,
4, 545 God has a Church in most wicked places, and among most wicked people,
p. 4 Every Christian ought to be a member of some particular Church or
Congregation, p. 6 The Church has its name sometimes 1. From the mixture in
it. 2 From the better part of it. ib. Churches not to be left or forsaken for
some corruptions in them, p. 339 Civil. A mere civil man who, p. 8
Comfort, Consolation. Comfort or Consolation what, p. 39, 8^ God the God of
comfort, how. p 39, 40 What this Title attributed to God implies, p. 42
Whatsoever the means of comfort be, God is the Spring and Fountain of it, p. 43
God can create comfort out of nothing, p. 42 God can raise comfort out of
contraries, p 42, 3 What use to be made of this, that God is the God of
comfort, p. 43, 44, etc. Reasons or grounds why Christians are uncomfortable,
p. 45 God comfort his people in all tribulation, p. 46, 48 Objection against
this answered, p. 47, 69 God applies comfort answerable to all miseries in
this life, p. 48 To comfort wha, p. 49 What use to be made of this, that God is
the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, p. 49, 50,
etc. How to derive comfort from the God of comfort, p. 50 No comfort for such
as go on in sin, p. 51 Comforts for those that are relapsed, p. 52 General
comforts should be had for all kind of maladies and grievances, and which be
they, p. 52, 53 Means for obtaining of comfort, p. 52, to 60, and 69 To keep a
daily course of comfort, how. p. 54, to 60 Christ in Scripture is set forth by
all terms that may be comfortable, p. 55 Means whereby we may be enabled to
comfort others. p. 60, 61, 64, 65 All Gods Children have interest in divine
comforts, why. p. 61 Divine comforts are not impaired by being communicated,
ibid. God conveyes comfort to men by men, p. 62, 63 We should be willing,
ready, and able to comfort one another, p. 62, 63, 64, 70, 71 Experience a
great help to comfort others, why. p. 65, 66, 67 Objections of such as complain
of want of comfort, answered. p. 69 Our comforts and consolations are
proportionable to our sufferings, page 82 Greatest comforts follow greatest
sufferings, why. ibid. What hinders comfort in affliction, p. 97 No comfort for
wicked men, p. 98 Comfort or consolation abounds by Christ, p. 99 Why
Christians are no more comfortable, p. 100 Suffering a necessary precedent of
comfort, why. p. 117 Those that suffer as they should, are sure of comfort, p.
118
Commendation. A man may speak in commendation of himself, and in what cases,
page 215 Communion. Bond of Communion of Saints, page 450 Companion. Companions
in sin, shall be companions in suffering, p. 119 Conceit. We should have a good
conceit of others p. 322, 323 It Is good to have a good conceit of others, p.
344 See Hope, Opinion.
Confidence. Certain account of, and looking for death, is a not able means to
draw us from self- confidence, p. 136 Gods Children prone to self- confidence,
p. 137 See Trust.
Conformity. A threefold conformity with Christ, p. 118 Conscience. Conscience
what. p. 219, 220, etc. Three things joined with Conscience, p. 221 God has
set up a Court in man, wherein Conscience is, 1. Register. 2. Witness. 3.
Accuser. 4. Judge. 5. Executioner, p. 222 Conscience Gods Hall, wherein he
keeps his Assizes, ibid. Judgment of Conscience a forerunner of the great and
general Judgment, ibid. Conscience bears witness. p. 223 What manner of
witness Conscience is, viz. 1. Faithful. 2. Inward, ibid. How to have
Conscience witness well, p. 224, 227 An ignorant man cannot have a good
Conscience, p. 225 Why men have bad Consciences, ibid. Papists cannot have a
good conscience, why. p. 226 The witness of a good Conscience the ground of
joy, why. p. 227, 235 A good Conscience breeds joy, 1. In life. p. 228, to 232
2. In death. 3. At the day of Judgment. A good Conscience comforts in all
estates and conditions whatsoever, p. 228, 229, 230 Why a good Conscience does
not always witness comfort, p. 231, 232 Means how to joy and rejoice in the
witness of Conscience, p. 233 Nothing worse then a bad Conscience, p. 236,
237, 238, 239 Labor for a good Concience, ibid. Commen^atior of a good
Conscience, ibid. How to have a good Conscience, p. 240 Gods Children have
place in the Conscience of others, p. 320
Contraries. God is able to raise comfort out of contraries, p. 42, 43 God
carries on the work of our salvation by contraries, why, p. 146
Conversation. Conversation what. p. 266 Christianity may stand with conversing
abroad in the world, p. 267 Keligion makes a man converse abroad in the world
untainted, ibid. A Christians Conversation is best, where he is best known, p.
273
Corinth. Corinth a very wicked City, yet ever there God has a Church, p. 4
What is now become of the Church of Corinth, p. 5 Corinth the Metropolis or
Mother-City of Achaia, p. 6 See Achaia.

D.
Danger. God suffers his Children sometimes to fall into extreme perils and
dangers, why, p. 125, 126, etc. Day. Christ has a Day, p. 339 There be two
special days of Christ, ibid. The measure of a Christians joy is, as it will
be esteemed at the day of Judgment, p. 340 We should often think of the day of
the Lord Jesus, p. 341 See Judgment.
Death. Gods Children are sometimes very sensible, and much afraid of death,
why, p. 130, 131 How and in what respect the Saints desire death, p. 133 Christ
was afraid of death, and yet thirsted after it, how, p. 132, 133 Gods Children
are often deceived concerning the time ^f their death, why, p. 134 Death
uncertain, how. ibid. The time of death uncertain, why, p. 134, 135 Certain
account of, and looking for death is a means to draw us from self-confidence,
and from the world, and to make us trust in God, p 136 Physicians fault in
flattering the sick, and feeding them with false hopes ^f long life at the
point of death, taxed. ibid. Affliction called Death, p. 171
Deliver. God does not deliver his children at the first, but suffers them to
be brought to a low ebb, to a very sad condition, and why, p. 171, 172 God
delivers after he has done his work, p. 172 Gods time to deliver, when. p. 173
Gods children always stand in need of deliverance, p. 175 God delivers both
outwardly, and inwrdly, p. 176, 180 Christians have deliverance from trouble,
p. 177 A double deliverance of God, p. 178 Experience of Gods deliverance in
time past, a ground of confidence to expect the like for time to come p. 172,
178, 182 Objection against the Doctrine of Gods delivering his people from
trouble, answered, p. 179 Deliverance various, or manifold, p. 180 God will
deliver his people out of all trouble, p. 181
Dispense. No dispensing with Gods Law, p. 399 Dissembling, Dissimulation.
Grounds of Dissimulation, p. 244 A threefold Dissimulation, 1. Before the
project, p. 224 2. In 3. After Objection for dissembling answered, page 247 Man
naturally prone to dissemble, p. 244, 250 Dissembling to be avoided and
declined, p. 371, 372 A Christian is no Dissembler. p. 317 See Simulation.
Dominion. No man has dominion over another faith, p. 519 What is no
domineering over the faith of others, p. 520 What is domineering over the faith
of others, ibid. Who are guilty of domineering over other men's faith, p. 521
The Church of Rome guilty of domineering over the faith of others, how, and
wherein, ibid. Grounds from whence this domineering over other men's faith
arises, p. 527
Double. Doubling a great sin, p. 247 Man by nature is prone to double, and the
grounds of it, p. 250 Some persons and callings are more prone to doubling then
others, ibid. A Christian is no doubler, p. 317

E.
Earnest. What the Spirit is an Earnest of, p. 486 The Spirit resembled to an
Earnest in five particulars, p. 486, 487 How to know whether we have the
Earnest of the Spirit, p. 493, 494, 495 How to get this Earnest of the Spirit.
page 501, 502, 503 Motives to labor for this Earnest, page 504, 505
End. Holy men work for holy Ends, p. 347 Equivocation. Popish Equivocation
odious and abominable, p. 246, 372, 516 Error. How Prophets and Apostles were
subject to errors and mistakes, and how not, p. 374 See Infallible, Mistake.
Experience. Former Experience a ground to expect like mercies for the future,
p. 182, to 188 Extremity. God sometimes suffers his children to fall into great
extremities, and why, p. 126, 127 Gods people are sensible of their extremity,
p. 129 See Afflictions, Sufferings, Tribulations.

F.
Faith. Difference between Faith and Presumption, p. 441 A double act of Faith,
1. Direct, page 488 2. Reflect. Of standing by Faith. See Standing. To have
dominion over the Faith of others. See Dominion. The foundation of Faith must
be out of a man's self, p. 544 True Faith is built upon the Word or the
Scriptures, not upon unwritten Traditions, p. 544, 545, 546 Popish Faith not
built upon the Scriptures, but upon Traditions, p. 545, 546 Faith sure and
certain, p. 546 True Faith will persevere and hold out to the end, ibid. It Is
by Faith that we stand, and withstand all opposition whatsoever, ibid. Faith a
Christians victory, by it he conquers all adversary powers, ibid. The Sacrament
a means of strengthen Faith, p. 550
Falsehood. Falsehood to be declined, p. 371, 372 Father. God as the Father of
Christ to be praised, p. 21 See Praise. God the Father of Christ, our Father,
and the Father of mercies, how. page 21, 22 Why God is called the Father of
mercies, p. 23 Why not the Father of mercy, but of mercies, ibid. Uses to be
made of this Title of God, The Father of mercies, p. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 See
Mercy.
Flesh. Flesh what. 276, 364 Carnal wisdom why called Flesh, ibid. To purpose
and consult according to the Flesh, a ground of lightness, p. 366 How to know
whether we consult according to the Flesh, p. 367 Signs whereby to know that we
are not led or advised by the Flesh, ibid. How to avoid fleshly wisdom, page
368, 369 See Wisdom.

G.
Generation. PRerogatives of Christ's Generation, p 388 Gentle. Gentle courses
first to be used, why. page 510 When gentle means prevail not, severe must be
used, ibid.
Glory, Glorying. Whether a man may glory of any thing in himself? how he may,
and how not, p. 216 Cautions for glorying in grace, page 241 Gods glory
manifest in the Gospel, viz. the glory of his, 1. Justice. 2. Mercy. 3.
Wisdom. 4. Power. 5. Truth, p. 438, 439 Gods glory is displayed by the
Ministry. p. 439 Grace and Glory differ but in degrees, p. p. 490
Good. Gods children do good in every condition, p. 113 What good we get by
others afflictiens, p. 109 The sufferings of Saints do good to others, how.
ibid. See Afflictions. God in all outward things that are ill, intends the good
of the soul, p. 151 A good man a public good, p. 272 A good man should take
occasion to do good, p. 354 The good things the wicked enjoy, are not
blessings, but curses and snares to them, p. 414 How to know they are so, p.
414 415 How to know that the good things we enjoy, we have them in love, p. 415
Govern, Guide. All inferior creatures areunder the guidance and government of
some Superior, p. 289 Grace. Grace sweetens all a Christians conversation, p.
9 Grace what, p. 10 Christians though in the state of Grace, yet still need
Grace, p. 119, 349 How to have continual assurance of grace, p. 12, 13 A man
may know his own estate in grace, p. 234 Objection against this answered, p.
235 Why the Apostle names Grace, not Wisdom, p. 289, 290 Grace twofold, p. 296
Grace wrought in us described, p. 296, 297 All our wisdom comes from grace,
page 297 Every thing necessary to bring as to heaven, is a grace, p. 298, 351,
352 All the good we have is of grace, p. 298 God is ready to give us grace, p.
299 Signs of being led and guided by grace, p. 302, to 309 Helps or Means to
be led and guided by grace, p. 309, to 312 The Preaching of the Word is a
special Grace, p. 347 Every benefit and blessing is a grace, p. 298, 351, 352
We ought to strengthen radical graces, viz. 1. Humility. 2. Faith. 3.
Knowledge, p. 454 We may be assured from a little measure of Grace, that we are
truly in the state of grace, p. 491, etc. How to know whether the little grace
we have be true grace, p. 493, etc.

H.
Health. HEalth is a gift, yea, a great blessing of God, p. 202 All other
blessings are uncomfortable without health, ibid.
Holy. Holy men are but men, subject to mistake, p. 374 Holiness and
Happiness differ but in degrees, p. 490 Those that look to be happy, must
first be holy, p. 491
Hope. A double effieacy in Hope, p 120, 123 We may steadfastly hope for
performance of Divine truths, p. 123 We should hope well of others, p. 323,
344, 345, 346 See Conceit, Opinion.
Hypocrite. Wherein a true Saint differs from an Hypocrite, p. 8, etc. A
Christian no hypocrite, p. 8, 317 Profane Professors are gross Hypocrites,
p. 7

I.
Jealousy. Men are wondrous prone to Jealousy and suspicion, p. 356, 506
Whence Jealousy or suspicion arises, p. p. 357, 507 Jealousy what, ibid.
M^schief from Jealousy, ibid. We should labor to avoid Jealousy, why. p 508
Inconstancy. Public persons should labor to avoid the just imputation of
Inconstancy, page 359 Grounds or causes of Inconstancy, p. 360, 361, 362 We
must not take that for Inconstancy, which is not, p 361 Remedies against
Inconstancy, p 3^3 Carnal men Inconstant, p. 370
Indulgences. Popish Indulgences what, p. 107 Popish Indulgences confuted,
ibid. See Satisfactions.
Infallibility. How the Prophets and Apostles were infallible, and how no. p.
374 See Error, Mistake.
Ingratitude. Ingratitude a horribe sin, p. 204 A Carnal man Ungrateful, why.
p. 19
Joy, Rejoice. Christians have their joy, or a Christians estate is a joyful,
and a rejoicing estate, p. 217, 528, etc. A Christians joy is spiritual: he
rejoices in spiritual things, and what these are, p. 217, 218 Wicked men dare
not reveal their joy, but seek to hide the ground of it, p. 218 A Christian is
not ashamed of his joy, why. ibid. A faithful Minister is the joy of the
people, why, page 333, 528, 530, 531, 32, 533 The peoples proficiency in grace
is the Mininisters joy, p. 336 Salvation termed joy, why. p. 528 The end of the
Ministry is to be helpers of the peoples joy, p. 528, 530, 531, 532, 533 How
Ministers are helpers of the peoples joy, p. 531, etc. Objections answered, p.
533, etc. Joy is that frame and state of soul, that Christians are in, or
should labor to be in, why. p. 528, etc. Reasons or Motives why Christians
should be joyful, p. 529, etc. Ministers only helpers, not authors of joy,
p. 535, etc. Gods Spirit alone speaks joy and comfort to the soul, why. p. 536
Faith breeds joy, how. p. 538 Signs or Evidences whereby to know whether our
joy be good, p. 539, 540
Journey. It Is a commendable thing for Christians to bring one another on their
journey, p. 355 Our Journey to heaven certain, page 375 How S. Paul could be
deceived in his journey, and not in his doctrine, p. 373, 374
Judgment. Gods Word, ^r the holy Scriptures the Judge of all Controversies, p.
382, 383 Properties of a Judge, p. 383 Judgment of Conscience a forerunner of
the great and general Judgment, p. 222 The measure of a Christians joy is as it
will be esteemed at the day of Judgment, p. 340 We should of ten think of the
day of Judgment, p. 341 See Day.

K.
King. CHristians are Kings, how, p. 469, 470 Knowledge. God is known in his 1.
Nature. page 158 2. Promises. 3. Works. If our knowledge be not spiritual, we
fall into, 1. Sin. 2. Despair. 3. Apostasy. p. 549

L.
Legacy. GOds Promises are Legacies, p. 435 Difference between a Legacy and a
Covenant, ibid.
Lightness. Public persons should avoid the just imputation of Lightness, p.
359 Grounds of Lightness, p. 360, 361, 362 Remedies against Lightness, p.
363, etc. To purpose according to the flesh is a ground of Lightness, p. 366
Lie. All sorts of lies are unlawful, p. 247 A lie what, p. 372 Equivocation is
a lie, ibid. See Equivocation.
Live. We may not live as we list, if we mean to dye well, p. 271, 272
M.
Mercy. MErcy what, p. 24 God styled the Father of Mercies, why. p. 21, 22, 23
Why not called the Father of Mercy, but of Mercies, p. 23, 24 Use to be made of
Gods Mercifulness, or in that he it the Father of Mercies, p. 25, to 38
Against presuming upon Gods mercy, p. 27, 28 Men are prone to presume of Gods
mercy, p. 26, 27, 28 See Presumption. All Gods Attributes without mercy are
terrible, p. 23 Objection of a poor dejected soul against the Doctrine of Gods
mercy, or mercifulness, answered, p. 30 To whom Gods mercy is unlimited, viz.
to repentant souls, not to presumptuous sinners, p. 27 How to be made fit for,
or capable of mercy, p. 36 How to improve mercy daily, p. 37 Kinds of Gods
mercies, p. 24, 25
Merit. Against Merit, p. 202 Minister, Ministry. Ministers must win by life
as well as by doctrine, p. 274 Ministers joined are with Christ in acceptance
and neglect, p. 333 A faithful Minister is the joy of the people, ibid. The
Ministry is a great gift and blessing of God, p. 334, 346, 347 348. The
peoples proficiency in grace is the Ministers joy, p. 336 All the good we have
by Christ, is conveyed by the Ministry, p. 39 Consent of Ministers is a help
to faith, p. 391 Ministers are to be prayed for by the people. See Prayer.
Mistake. Holy men are subject to Mistakes, page 374 See Error.

N.
Name. MEn have often their name and denomination in Scripture by that which they
are ruled by, p. 275, 365 New. Popery is a new Religion, p. 396, 397
O.
Oath. OAth what, p. 376, 515 An Oath lawful, p. 516, 517 Kinds of Oaths, p.
376, 514, 515 A Christian life is a kind of Oath, p. 518 Conditions of an Oath,
page 376, 514, 515 An Oath not good unless necessary. p. 376, 515, 516, 517
Qualifications of an Oath, ibid. None but good men should take an Oath, p. 515
Parts of an Oath, ibid. An Oath to be taken only in serious matters, p. 515,
517 See Swearing.
Occasion. A good man must take all occasions to do good, p. 354 Oil, Ointment.
The Spirit with its graces compared to Oil, or Ointment, p. 464, etc. Old. Our
Religion is the old Religion, p. 394, 395, etc. Popery no old, but new
Religion, p. 396, 397
Oneness. A Christian man is one man, he does act one man's part, p. 317 There
is but one Faith, p. 394 One Catholic Church, ibid.
Opinion. It Is good to cherish a good Opinion of others, p. 323, 344 See
Conceit, Hope.

P.
Partake. THose that partake in other men's sins, shall also partake in their
sufferings, p. 119 Paul. St. Paul's prerogative above other Apostles, page 2
St. Paul's modesty and humility, p. 3 S. Paul had a good opinion and conceit of
the Corinthians, p. 322 How S. Paul could be deceived in his journey, and not
in his doctrine, page 373, 374 How Timothy is called S. Paul's brother, p. 4 S.
Paul's course to hold out in holy resolution to the end, p. 324
Peace. True Peace issues from Grace, p. 14 Persecution. They that persecute
the Saints, persecute Christ, p. 81 See Affliction, Suffering, Tribulation.
Perseverance. Resolution to persevere, and hold out in a good course to the
end, p. 323 S. Paul's course to persevere in holy resolution to the end, p. 324
Gods Children may be assured that they shall persevere and hold out to the end,
page 489, etc. He that is in the state of Grace, shall persevere in it to the
end, p. 490
Physician. Physicians do ill in flattering the sick, and feeding them with
hopes of long life, when they are at the point of death, p. 136 We should open
the case of our souls to our spiritual Physicians, p. 535
Policy. A Christian should avoid the imputation of carnal Policy, p. 365 Not
to subordinate Religion to State- Policy, p. 294, 295
Pope, Popery. Popery crosses the Word of God, p. 385, 386 The Popes Treasury
what, p. 107 Popery founded upon Traditions, p. 545, 546 Popery a rotten and
unsound Religion, ibid. Popish Religion is full of Contradictions, p. 386
Popish Religion is full of uncertainties, p. 386, 387 How and wherein Popish
and Protestant Religin agree, and differ, p. 395, 398 It Is safer to be a
Protestant then a Papist, p. 397 Whether a Papist may be saved, page 397, 398
Popery to be detested, because it teaches men to trust to their own works, and
satisfactions, p. 142
Praise. God the object of Praise, how, p. 20 God to be praised as he is the
Father of Christ, p. 21 Praise follows prayer; or, After prayer praises are
due, p. 204 The praises of many are grateful and acceptable to God, ibid. How
the unreasonable creatures praise God, p. 206 We are to praise God for others;
for all sorts of men, ibid. Wherein praise consists, p. 207 See more in Bless,
Thankfulness.
Prayer. Prayer is a means to convey all good, and deliver from all ill, p. 188
Gods children can pray for themselves, p. 190 Christians ought to help one
another by prayer, p. 191 People ought to pray for Ministers, p. 193, 200, 201
What is to begged of God or prayed for for Ministers, ibid. Christians have not
the Spirit of prayer at all times alike, p. 193 Prayer is not a work of gifts,
but of grace, p. 194 Diverse gifts in prayer, ibid. Prayer is a prevailing
course with God, and why, p. 195, etc. How to know whether our prayers help the
Church, p. 199 It Is an ill condition not to be able to pray, p. 200 God will
deliver the Ministers by the peoples prayers, ibid. It Is a good thing to beg
the prayers of others in sickness, p. 203 The more eminent men are, the more
they are to be prayed for, p. 215
Preach. Christ is the main Object of Preaching, p. 388 See Ministry, Word.
Presence. Personal presence has a special power, p. 346 Presumption. Against
presuming upon Gods mercy, p. 27, 28 See Mercy. Difference between faith and
presumption, page 441
Pride. Pride is a sin against all the Commandments. page 219 Priest.
Christians are Priests, how. page, 467, 468 Promise. God deals with men by
Promises, page 402 Promise what, p. 403 All Promises made in Christ, page 403
All the Promises are Yea, and Amen in Christ, p. 407, 408, etc. Several kinds
of Promises, p. 413 Till a man be in Christ, he has no good by the Promises,
p. 418 What right a man out of Christ has to the Promises, p. 419 Comfort from
the Promises to them that are in Christ, page 420, 421, etc. How to make use of
the Promises, and to have comfort by them, page 424, 425, etc. What to do when
in trouble we cannot call to mind any particular Promise, p. 425 We should make
the Promises familiar to us, p. 428 Signs or Evidences of believing the
Promises, page 432, 433, 434, etc. to 438 Promises are Legacies as well as
promises, p. 435 Gods Promises called a Testament, a Will, ibid. Necessity of
application of the Promises to our selves, p. 440 None have interest in the
Promises, but such as find a change in themselves, p. 473
Prophets. How Christians are Prophets, page 468 Prophets and Apostles how
subject to error, how not, p. 374
Providence. Providence what, p. 177
R.
Rejoice. See Joy. Religion. NOt to subordinate Religion to State Policy, p.
294, 295 Religion tends to practice, p. 295 Popish Religion is a carnal
Religion, p. 312, 313 The most Religious men are the best Statesmen, p. 315
Wherein our Religion and the P^pish agree, and differ. p. 395, 398 Popish
Religion unsound and rotten, p. 546 Popish Religion is not founded upon the
Scriptures, but upon Tradition, p. 545, 546 Popish Religion crosses the Word
of God, p. 385, 386 Popish Religion is full of contradictions, p. 386 Popish
Religion is full of uncertainties, p. 386, 387 It Is safer to be of the
Protestant Religion, then of the Popish, p. 397 Whether one living and dying in
the Romish Religion may be saved, p. 397, 398
Repentance. Late Repentance (such as is in time of sickness and death)
seldom true Repentance, p. 33 Reproof. It Is a sign of a gracious heart to
endure reproof, and to esteem and affect the reprover, p. 330, 513 A Minister
must not spare to reprove people for sin committed, p. 512, etc. A threefold
Reproof, or Correction, p. 514
Resolution. Of good Resolutions, page 323, 324, etc. Resurrection. The
Resurrection is an argument to strengthen faith, p. 167 There will or shall be
a Resurrection, p. 167, etc. God raises the dead, p. 167, to 171
Rock. What is meant by Rock, Matthew. 16. 18. p. 394
S.
Saint. OUr love and respect should be carried to all Saints, p. 5 God scatters
his Saints, why. p. 6 All that make profession of Religion, should indeed be
Saints, ibid. Professors called Saints, why. ibid. Four things required to
make a Saint, viz. 1. Separation. 2. Dedication. 3. Qualification. 4.
Conversation, page 7, 8 How to know a Saint from a mere civil man, p. 8 True
Saints wherein different from hypocrites and formal professors, ibid. See
Christian.
Salvation. Salvation wrought by affliction or suffering how, and how by
Christ, p. 108, to 113 How Afflictions or Patience in suffering afflictions
helps to salvation,. p. 110, 111, 112 Two ways to obtain salvation, p. 108
Salutation. Use of holy Salutations threefold, p. 9 Salutations should be
holy, p. 10 Gods Name when taken in vain in salutations, ibid. Salutations in
what cases to be omitted, ibid.
Satisfaction. Against Popish Merits and satisfactions for others, p. 107 See.
Indulgences.
Scripture. How to know the Scripture to be the Word of God, and truly Divine,
p. 386, 392 Whether the Scriptures receive any authority from the Church, p. 3,
4, 545 The Scripture is to be believed for it self, not because of the Church,
p. 392, 393 See Word.
Seal. Christ the head is first sealed, and then the members, viz. Christians,
page 473 Our sealing what. p. 474 Four uses of a Seal, p. 474, 475 The Spirit
compared to a Seal, wherein. page 474, 475, 476, 478, 481 How the Spirit
differs from other seals, p. 476 How the Spirit seals us, p. 476, 477 Four
things the Spirit works in this sealing, 477, etc. How to know the sealing of
the Spirit, or that we are sealed by the Spirit, p. 477, 478 Objection against
the Spirits sealing answered, p. 479, etc. Motives to labor to get the Spirits
sealing, or to have the image of Christ stamped upon our souls by the Spirit,
page 481, to 486
Simplicity. Simplicity what, and how taken, p. 216, 242, 243 Why called godly
simplicity, or the simplicity of God, p. 243 Difference between Simplicity and
sincerity, p. 241 S. Paul's conversation in Simplicity, how. p. 241, 242 To
what things Simplicity is opposed, p. 244, 245, 246 Directions or Means to get
Simplicity, p. 251
Simulation. Of Simulation, p. 244 Aggravations of this sin, p. 245 See
Dissembling.
Sincerity. Sincerity what. p. 253 How Sincerity differs from Simplicity, p.
241 Why called godly Sincerity, or the Sincerity of God, p. 253 A Christians
conversation in the world should be in sincerity, p. 253, 271 Sincerity in good
actions how discovered, or tried, p. 254, 255 Sincerity how tried or discovered
in ill actions, p. 256 Sincerity how tried or discovered in actions
indifferent, p. 257 Motives to labor for sincerity, page 258, 259, 263, 264
Means to get sincerity, page 260, 261, 262 Corruptions and imperfections may
stand with Sincerity, p. 264, etc. Order in sincerity how to be kept, page 265
Sincerity extends it self to all the frame of a man's life, p. 266 We must have
our conversation in sincerity while we live in the world, page 271
Singularity. There is a spirit of singularity in many, page 3 Slander. How to
arm and fence our selves against Slander. page 357 Society. The comfort and
benefit of Society, p. 71, 267 Solitariness. Solitariness very dangerous,
page 71, 267 See Alone, Society.
Son. Christ the Son of God how differing from others sons, p. 388 Soul Gods
Spirit alone speaks comfort and peace to the soul, p. 536 God in all things
that are ill intends the good of the soul, p. 151 The soul must have somewhat
to trust to, ibid. People should do well to open the case of their souls to
their spiritual Physicians, p. 535
Spirit. The Spirit with its graces compared to Anointing, or Ointment. See
Anointing, Ointment. The Spirit compared to an Earnest. See Earnest. The Spirit
compared to a Seal. See Seal. Why the work of Grace is attributed to the
Spirit, rather then to the Father, or the Son, p. 498 Why the Spirit is said to
seal, and to be an Earnest, and not the Father, or the Son, ibid. Means to
attain or come by the Spirit, p. 501, 502, 503 How to know that we have the
Spirit, p. 499, 500 Of our anointing by the Spirit, p. 463, to 473 Of our
sealing by the Spirit, p. 473, to 485 Gods Spirit alone seals comfort to the
soul, p. 536
Stablish. Stablishing grace necessary, why. page 442 Christ is the foundation
of our stability, p. 443 Our judgment, will, affections, etc. are stablished in
Christ, p. 444 It Is only God that can stablish the soul; he must do it, none
else can, page 446, etc. As God can, so he will stablish us, page 446, etc. God
stablisheth us by working in us stablishing graces, viz. 1. Fear. 2. Wisdom.
3. Faith. 4. Peace of Conscience, etc. 449 Means of stablishing, or whereby we
may come to be stablished, page 455, 456, 457 Signs or Evidences of our
stablishing, p. 458, to 463
Strength. How these two may stand together, 2 Cor. 18. We were pressed out of
measure above strength, and 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, and will lay no
more upon you then you shall be able to b^r, p. 124, 125 Suffering. The
sufferings of Christ abound in us, or, Gods Saints are subject to many
sufferings, why. p. 74 All Christians suffer, how. p. 112 A threefold suffering
in the Church since Christ's time, p. 76 The sufferings of Christians are the
sufferings of Christ; and why so called, p. 77 Christ's sufferings twofold,
ibid. Differences between the sufferings of Christ, and ordinary crosses, p. 78
Motives to suffer for Christ, ibid. How the sufferings of Saints do good, or
are profitable to others, p. 109 Gods children partake of the sufferings of
others, how. p. 115 Suffering must prec^de comfort, and why, p. 117, etc. Those
that suffer as they should, are sure of comfort, p. 118 See more in Affliction,
Persecution, Tribulation.
Suspicion. Man's nature is prove to suspicion, page 356, 506 Grounds of
suspicion, from whence it arises, p. 357, 506, etc. Suspicion what, p. 357,
507 How to arm our selves against suspicion, p. 357 How to know when suspicion
is evil, p. 358 Suspicion is more then fear, less then judgment, p. 507
Suspicion makes the worst construction, ibid. Why the Devil cherishes
suspicion, ibid. Mischief from Suspicion, ibid.
Swearing. What meant by the prohibition, Swear not at all, p. 376, 516, 517 To
swear by none but God, p. 515 Swearing lawful, p. 516, 517 Ordinary swearing
condemned, p. 376, 516, 517, 518 Objections for common and ordinary swearing
answered, p. 517, etc. Original causes of ordinary swearing, p. 518, 519
Motives against ordinary swearing, p. 519, 520 Means against ordinary swearing,
page 519 Ordinary swearers curse themselvse, p. 518

T.
Thankfulness. It Is the disposition of Gods people to be thankful for mercies
received, page 16 We are to be especially thankful for spiritual favors. p.
18 Means to become thankful, p. 18, 19, 20, 208, 209 A carnal man unthankful,
why. page 19 Motives to thankfulness, page, 20, 210, 211, 212 Not only verbal,
but real thanksgiving is required, p. 212 See Bless, Praise.
Tradition. Popish faith is built upon Traditions, p. 345, 346 Treasury. The
Popes Treasury what, p 107 The Popes Treasury confuted, ibid. Christ is the
only Treasury of the Church, ibid.
Tribulation. Gods Children are subject to Tribulation, p. 47, 60, 74 See
Affliction, Persecution, Suffering.
Trust. Gods Children are prone to trust in themselves, why. p. 137, 138 Not to
trust in any thing, but in God, p. 139, 142, 143, 144 Signs of trusting in
these outward things, as riches, etc. p. 139, 140 It Is a dangerous thing to
trust in our selves, or in the creature, why. p. 141 Popery to be detested,
because it teaches men to trust to their own works, satisfactions, etc. p. 142
We must not trust our own graces, page 142 Creatures may be trusted to
subordinately, p. 144, 145 Worldlings trust in the creature above God, yea,
against God. p. 144 How to cure false confidence, or trusting in ourselves, and
in the creature, page 145, 147 To trust in God a lesson hardly learned, p. 148
God to make us trust in him, is fain to cast us out of our selves, ibid. God is
the sole and proper Object of trust, p. 153 God in Christ the Object of trust,
ibid. It Is a man's duty to trust in God, page 154 Trials of trust in God, or
Signs whereby to know whether we trust in God, p. 155, 156, 157 Helps or
Means to trust in God, page 158 Trust in God how to be exercised in great
afflictions, p. 161 Trust in God how exercised in the hour of death, p. 162 God
to strengthen our trust has given us his, 1. Promise. 2. Seal. 3. Oath. 4.
Earnest. 5. A pawn. 6. Seizin. p. 164 Objection against trusting in God
answered, ibid. A Christian may trust or rely on God for the time to come, p.
178 Trust what. p. 321 See Confidence.
Truth. Truth may not be spoken at all times, p. 246. God is true and faithful,
how. p. 379 Objection against this answered, page 380 How to know the Word of
God to be true, p. 386, 392 It Is a matter of comfort to believe the Word of God
to be true, p. 377, etc. The Word of God, or Evangelical doctrine is most true
and certain, p 392

V.
Vain. MInisters labor is not in vain in the Lord, p. 1 Vehement. Carnal men
are vehement, p. 371 Unbelief. The heart of man is full of unbelief, and can
hardly be settled in the persuasion of Divine truth, p. 485, 486 Uniformity. A
Christian is uniform, p. 317 Union. There is a threefold Union, viz. 1. Of
Christ, and our nature. 2. Of Christ and his members. 3. Of one member with
another. p. 116
W.
Wait. GRounds of waiting upon God for deliverance from trouble, or Motives
thereunto, p. 173, etc. 426
Way. It Is a commendable custom for Christians to bring one another on their
way, p. 355 Weak. The weakest creatures have the strongest shelters, p. 448
Will. Every one in his calling placed by the Will of God, p. 2, 3 The more
will, advisednesse and deliberation in sin, the greater the sin, p. 249
Wisdom. Wisdom manifold, p. 274, 275 Wisdom what, p. 275 Carnal or fleshly
wisdom described, p. 275, 276, 277 Why called fleshly Wisdom. p. 276 All
carnal men have not fleshly wisdom, p. 278 Fleshly wisdom is where there is
no simplicity, nor sincerity, ibid. Gods children not ruled by fleshly wisdom,
why p. 279, 288, 289 Mischief of carnal wisdom, page 280, 281 Carnal or fleshly
Wisdom hinders our joy and comfort, p. 287, 288 Popery is founded on carnal
Wisdom, p. 312 How to avoid fleshly Wisdom, page 368, 369 A Christian needs
Wisdom, why. p. 291 Wisdom may be had, p 292 We should go to God for Wisdom,
page 292, 293 God gives Wisdom for the things of this life, p. 293 True Wisdom
touches conversation, p. 299
Word. The Preaching of the Word accompanied with Gods Spirit, is able to
convert and change the most wicked hearts that be, page 4, 5 See Ministry,
Preaching. It Is a matter of consequence to believe the Word of God to be true,
certain, and immutable, p. 377, etc. The Word of God is the Judge of all
Controversies, p. 382 Christ the Word, how. p. 409, 467 The Word of God is most
true, certain and infallible, p. 392 How to know the Word of God to be true, p.
386, 392 See Scripture.
World. Christianity may stand with converse in the World, p. 267 Religion
makes a man converse in the world untainted, ibid. Wicked men called the World,
why. p. 275, 4, 365

Y.
Yea, and Nay. GRounds of Yea, and Nay, p. 371 Dissemblers are Yea, and Nay,
all at once, p. 372 All Promises and Prophecies are Yea in Christ, p. 407, 408,
409, etc.

Trin-uni Deo gloria.

