A TRUE RELATION OF VIRGINIA AND Maryland; With the Commodities therein, which
in part the Author saw; the rest he had from knowing and Credible persons in
the Months of February, March, April and May:

By Nathaniel Shrigley, Anno. 1669.

Published by Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn for Thomas Hodson Book-binder, Living the
next door to the Sign of the Blew-Boar in Redcross Street.

A TRUE RELATION OF VIRGINIA and MARYLAND, With the Commodities therein, etc.
IMprimis, the Capes are in the Latitude of 37 Longitude of 302. from whence a
Large Bay called Chesebeack Bay flows about seven Leagues broad N. by E.
betwixt three and four degrees in length; then it branches it self into many
small Rivers: the depth of the Bay is seven, ten, twelve, or fourteen Fatham;
it has several small Islands in it. Out of which Bay on the East side, these
are the principal Rivers, Anamesax, Ockahanock, Nautecocke, little Choptauke,
great Choptauke, St. Michaels, Wy River, Chester, Sacifrax River.

On the West side these are the principle Rivers, Elizabeth, Nansemum, James,
Back, York, Rapahanock, Petomock, Patuxon, Soueth, Severn, Gunpowder River,
Patapsco; from which River the Bay draws straiter, and devides it self into
many lesser Rivers.

Out of which Bay and Rivers, there are branched many Navigable Rivers and
Creeks, the which no Ten men in the Land are able to nominate.

The Shore on the East from the Bay to the Ocean, is but about twenty miles
broad.

The Rivers on the West of the Bay are Navigable, some 40. some 50. some 100.
some 200. some 300. miles; which Bay, Rivers and Creeks are plentiful of Foul
from September till March, of all sorts, as Swans, Geese, Brants, Ducks,
Widgeon, Teale, with many other sorts too tedious to relate, some of which
tarry with them all Summer: And Fish multitudes, as Porposses, Grampases,
Herring-Hoggs, Drums, Sheepsheads, Bass, Mullets, Perch, Sturgeon, Eales,
Salmon, Trouts, Thornbacks, Garrs, Cats, Oysters, Crabs, Turtles, with many
more too tedious to relate.

The Cattle naturally of the Country, are Bucks, Does, Staggs, Hindes, Hares,
Ratoons, Possums, Beavers, Otters, Lions, Bears, Wolves, Panthers, Leopards,
Foxes, Wild Cats, with many more.

Foul naturally to the Land are Eagles, Hawks, Vultures, Cranes, Crows,
Turkies, Partridges, Pidgions, Larks, Red-birds, the Baltenore bird, being
black and yellow, blew Birds, mocking Birds, Woodpickers, and many sorts more.

English Cattle; plenty of Cows, Bulls, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Horses, and
all manner of English Poultrey.

The Country is naturally full of Vines, Fruit Trees, and Timber, As, F.
Mulberries. F. Plumbs. F. Pesimmons.
T. Ash. Holly. T. Elder.
F. Cherries M. Beach.
Locust. N Hasle.
T. Chestnut. T. Poplar. T. Pine.
Oaks. A. T.
White. Red. Black.
Sasifrax. T. Ceder.
Chestnut. Spanish.
T. Cypress. Syccamore. T. Wallnut.
Gum Trees being cut, runns Balsome, with many others
Pekickery. Sasiperella.


These Trees marked F. are fruit, M. are Mass or feeding for Swine, T. timber
or plank, A. Acorns, N. Nutts, with Grape-Vines climbing up the trees very
fruitful; and Hops also in the Woods; multitudes of Rasberies, Strawberies,
Barberies, Cranberies, with infinite of all sorts of Herbs; the best Garden in
England affords not better.

In Orchards all sorts of Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Quince, Peach, Apricocks,
Cherries, Figg-Trees, and Vines; Gardens as good as England affords for
flowers, herbs and roots of all sorts; with Colworts, Musmillions, Cuecumbers,
Wate^millions, May-cocks, Horns, Peshaues, Ros^^Trees, sweet-Bryers, and many
things more.

There is a Root common in the Woods called Tuckaho, the Natives eat it for
bread; our Swine eat it; with Acorns and Nuts of all sorts, they are Fat; and
is the sweetest Bacon that ever man tasted.

The planters feed not their Swine nor Cattle, but kill them fat out of the
Woods.

There is Fullers-Earth, Marle, Saltpeter, Iron, Stone, Lead, Tin and Silver
Oar.

There is plenty of English grain, as Wheat, Barley, Beans, Peace and Oats.

The ground is very fruitful, and produces plentiful Crops with great speed,
what ever is planted or Sown; as for example, one careful laborious man will
plant, tend, and get in 50. barrels of Indian Wheat, without the help of Man,
Horse or Ox; each barrel is five English bushels. And if the stone or see of
any fruit be sown, it will bear the third year without grafting; each Planter
makes great Crops of Tobacco; the Western limits of the Land are unknown In
Maryland; their Religion is free to all that profess to believe in Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.

