An Exhortation to Repentance, and Union among PROTESTANTS. OR A DISCOURSE Upon
The BURDEN of DUMAH.

Isaiah. XXI. 11, 12. He calls to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the
Night? Watchman, what of the Night? The Watchman said, the Morning comes, and
also the Night: if ye will Enquire, Enquire ye: Return, Come.

Math. 12.25. Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation;
and every City or House divided against it self, shall not stand.

Phil. 2. 1-4. If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of Love, if any Fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye
my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of
one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of
mind let each esteem other better than themselves. Look not every man at his
own things, but every man also at the things of others.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for the Widow Swart, near the Exchange. Anno, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Danger, which threatens the Protestant Interest at this day is so visible
to every Eye, that 'twere a needless Labor to prove it. All the Symptoms that
appear in the Reformed Churches, seem to presage and signify a dismal Crisis.
It Is not possible, I confess, to make a certain Conclusion about the Event;
neither is it our Duty to attempt it: But if the Cause of the Reformation from
Popery be really so valuable and dear to us, as we profess; Every Protestant is
obliged to afford his utmost Assistance for its preservation. There are very
many who think, this is sufficiently secured by wise Laws, and learned
Disputations; both which have their use, but will never of themselves be
sufficient to such an End. Inward Holiness and Purity are requisite to secure a
Doctrine, which bears those Characters. If our Religion were of an Earthly
Original and Constitution, it might he defended well enough by Human strength
and Policy, and such methods as Rome Pagan and Antichristian have found
Necessary for the support of their Hierarchy. But a Doctrine which comes from
Heaven, and leads thither, must have its chief support from thence, and will be
best maintained by a serious compliance with its Holy Design. And therefore
after all the Books of Controversy, whereby the false Principles of Popery have
been exposed and baffled, nothing but the Love of Truth, and Obedience to it,
will be found an effectual Bulwark against the Corruptions and Designs of the
Roman Church. There is no wicked man but needs such an Opium as Popery to quiet
his Conscience, and reconcile a sensual ungodly Life with the Hopes of Heaven.
He has already received many Errors for Truth, and so is prepared to admit
more: He is destitute of that which should preserve, him from Delusion: He
never had any Experience of the Efficacy, and Certainty, the Truth and Power of
the Principles of Religion, that should settle and establish him: He has not
that Affection to divine Truth, that should make him diligent in searching
after it; or that Purity of Heart which might enable him to receive the beams
of Heavenly light. It Is only by the practical fear of God, or the keeping of
his Commandments, that any can be assured to be taught of God. So that the most
certain way to keep the Faith, is to keep a good Conscience toward God and men.

On the other hand, there is no such Preparation for Popery and other damnable
Errors as a wicked Heart and Life. When men receive not the Truth in the love
of it, God sends them strong Delusions to believe Lies. If men are false and
unfaithful to the Common Principles of Christianity; if they resist the Light,
and rebel against it; if they hold the Truth in unrighteousness; and debauch
their Consciences by a vicious practice; they must needs disrelish and dislike
Holy Truth: and having forfeited the Assistance of God, they are prepared for
Sadducism, Deism, or Popery. These Delusions do ordinarily enter at this back
door. Men are sensual, not having the spirit, and then the Doctrines of the
Gospel are Foolishness to them. This Consideration will both justify the
Providence of God, in permitting so many to be thus deceived, and does let us
know what we are to expect concerning the Generality of Loose and Carnal
Protestants; how unlikely they are to hold fast their Profession, if called to
suffer much for it. They are built upon the Sand, and prepared for Delusion;
and no wonder if they are blown up and down by every wind of False Doctrine; or
tossed to and fro from one Religion to another, as to their Profession, when
they have really none at all in the Practice. This method the Romish Emissaries
have taken in all the Courts and Kingdoms of Europe, where they could have
Admission: After the same manner that the Devil leads men to Hell, have they
endeavored to bring men over to their Church; viz. by gratifying the Lusts of
men, and promoting voluptuousness and sensuality, that men's Understandings
being clouded, they might not discern the Cheats and Impostures of their
Unscriptural Doctrines and Worship.

It is therefore the great Interest of all true Protestants, (who taking the H.
Scriptures for the only Rule of their Faith, desires, and duty, have the same
objective Religion, and are all of one Church,) to endeavor every one to live
better, and to promote serious Godliness among others; especially if we are
under any apprehensions and fears of the threatening Anger of God against us for
the want of it. An Union in this would make it easy for us to bear with one
onother in Love, notwithstanding all our lesser Differences.

This being recommended in the following Discourse, when the substance of it
was not long since preached to the English Congregation here, the Printing of it
was judged might be of some use, and to that end was desired by several. For
the sake of our Brethren in England I have enlarged the latter part, as I did
the former on another account. I am sensible, I have adventured the displeasing
of many with the Hope that I may profit some; however, declaring my readiness
and desire by further Light to be better informed, and praying for the Peace of
Jerusalem, I recommend it to the Blessing of God.

J. Shower.
Rotterdam Aug. 20/30. 1688.
THE BURDEN OF DUMAH OR A Discourse upon those words of the Prophet,
Isaiah, XXI. 11, 12. The Burden of Dumah. He calls to me out of Seir,
Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? The Watchman said,
the morning comes, and also the night: if ye will Enquire, Enquire ye: Return,
come.


THe great difference among Interpreters is, whether by Dumah be meant the
Country of the Ishmaelites, or that of the Idumeans; Gen 24.14.
whether the Race of scoffing Ishmael, or the Posterity of profane Esau. We
read of one of Ishmael's Sons of that name, and that part of Arabia, where he
seated himself, was called Dumah on that account. But the following expression,
One calls to me out of Seir, Genesis 32.3, 4.
makes it more probable that the Edomites or Idumeans are understood, Seir
being the Land of Esau, or the Country of Edom, which God gave to Esau and his
Posterity, and would not permit the Israelites so much as to pass through it,
without their leave; which Moses requested as their nearest way to Canaan, but
it was denied 'em, Deuteronomy. ^. ^.
and they passed by the borders of Idumea, without entering into it.

For the better understanding of this and several other places of H. Scripture,
I shall premise somewhat, 1. Concerning Esau. 2. His Country. 3. The Idumeans,
his Posterity.

1. Of Esau, the Brother of Jacob, and Father of the Idumeans, we read that he
is called Edom. Genesis 25. v. 30. Esau, quasi Factus, Genesis 25.25. Joseph: An tiq:
lib. 2. c. 1.
says Dr. Lightfoot, being born Hairy, as if he had been of mature Age: or
Edom, red, from the Color of his Hair. And afterward that name was confirmed
to him on the Sale of his Birthright, for a mess of red pottage, to his Brother
Jacob. The Contentions and Enmity that should happen between the Posterity of
the two Brothers was presignified by their struggling in their Mother's Womb.
Genesis 27. The Lord said unto Rebecca, two Nations are in thy Womb, and two
manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels; and the one shall be
stronger than the other, and the Elder (Esau) shall serve the Younger. This
Oracle she kept in her mind, and so firmly believed it, that when Jacob
scrupled to follow her Counsel, as to the manner of obtaining his Father's
Blessing, lest instead of it, (being discovered) he should meet with a Curse,
Genesis 27.12, 13.
she tells him, Upon me be thy Curse, my son, only obey my voice. It is not
improbable that she seared lest the whole Family might otherwise be excluded
from the Blessing of Abraham: apprehending, that God might justly disannul the
promise, as to Esau, because of his Profaneness, which he discovered, not only
by the contempt of the Blessing, in selling his share in it, and right to it,
Genesis 26.34, 35.
with his Birthright, for so small a matter, butin his whole Conversation,
especially by his Marriage among the Hittites, who were under the Curse of God,
and to be rooted out. Concerning one of Esau's Wives, it is said expressly, that
she was a Daughter of Ishmael; and by that marriage, (against the Consent of
his Parents, as is intimated by their grief and concern at it,) He endeavored
to establish the Pretensions and Plea of Ishmael, the son of the Bondwoman, for
the Blessing of Abraham, to the exclusion of his Father Isaac, Heidegeri Hist.
Patriarch: de Esavo. Dissert. 12. Deuteronomy. 2.12. 21.
in whose line God had fixed it.

2. Concerning the Country of Psau. He at first inhabited the Eastern part of
Idumea, and therein Mount Seir, or the Land of Seir, as it is called, Genesis 32.3.
But before Israel came out of Egypt, his Posterity slew the Horites or Horims,
of the race of Cham, (who inhabited the southern part) and so possessed
themselves of all Idumea See Spanhemii F. Hist. Jobi: c. 4. Genesis 32.
By the South is sometimes meant Idumea, and confounded with the Southern part
of Iudaea. Esau dwelt in Seir before the death of Isaac; for from thence he
came in an Hostile manner to meet his Brother Jacob, returning from
Mesopotamia, whither he had retired, after he got the Blessing, to avoid the
Revenge which his Brother threatened. Upon their Reconciliation Esau returns to
Scir. Genesis 32.16. He came afterward with his Family to Hebron; and was there
with his Brother, Gen 36.6, 7, 8.
at the Death and Funerals of their Father Isaac. But such was the Increase of
the two Families, that the Land could not bear them both; there was not
sufficient Pastorage for their Cattle: therefore Esau departed with his Family
and Substance, and went to Mount Seir, and there remained the rest of his Life.

He being the Prince of that Country, Mare rubrum, mare Erithraeum, vel mare
Idumaeum, ab Edomo vel Erithro. N. Fulleri Mise 5. lib. 4 cap. 20.
the adjoining Red Sea had its name from him. Solomon is said to have sent
ships to Ophir, on the banks of the Red sea, in the Land of Edom, 1 Kings. ^.
c. 26. The Country o^ Idumea is commonly divided into the Greater and Lesser:
the former swallowed up; (says Decas choragr. marco praef 1. and 5 Spanhemii
Hist. Jobi. cap. 4.
Dr. Lightfoot) under the name of Arabia, and the Lesser or new Idumea is
mentioned by the Evangelist Mark. 3. c. 8. which at length was a part of
Iudaea, as possessed by the Idumeans, after they were Proselites to the Jewish
Religion. A Steph. Morin: Dissert: de cognatione Laced: and Hebraeorum.
learned man has lately attempted to prove the Phaenicians and Idumeans to be
all one: Phaenices dicti quasi Idumaei, and rubri a mari Edom.

3. Concerning the Edomites or Idumeans, (who bordered on Indaea, as did the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Ishmaelites,) three things are observable.

1. That notwithstanding their Agreement in Circumcision, yet the Jealousies
and Contentions between them and the Iows were irreconcilable. They looked upon
their Father Esau as the Firstborn, and that by the privilege of
Primogeniture, the premised Blessing of the Messiah should come in his line:
rivalling the Israelites as having no Right unto it, but by Jacob's supplanting
their Father Esau. But God had particularly promised that Biessing to the line
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. On this account he is so often styled, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, to denote a special Relation
to the Jews as his peculiar people, Mr. Alliae Reflections sur le Pentat: part.
2. chap. 15.
in opposition to the pretenses of all their Neighbors. The God of Abraham,
and not of Lot, against the Moa bites, who descending from Lot pretended to the
Blessing of the promised seed in that line. The God of Isaac, and not of
Ishmael, against the Ishmaelites, who to the like purpose pleaded the
Primogeniture of their Father Ishmael. The God of Jacob, and not of Esau, to
exclude the Idumeans, of the race of Esau, who therefore hated the Israelites,
and were always Jealous of them.

Some conformity and agreement in Sacraments among Christians, we find by
Experience, does rather produce Jealousy, than procure love. The differences
in other things are therefore thought the more unreasonable, and hard to be
born by the differing parties, and are the more insisted on to the exasperating
of one another. Instances of the like may be given in the discord between the
Jews and the Samaritans. Epiphanii opera. Tom. 2. lib. 1. Hzres. 29.
Epiphanius takes notice of the Nazarites, who acknowledged J. Christ, but
withal continued the Customs and Ceremonies of the Jews, that such was the
hatred of the Jews against them, that they did solemnly curse'em three times a
day in their Synagogues. The Turks have an honorable Esteem of our Savior J.
Christ, which the Tartars have not, yet the latter embrace the Christian Faith
sooner than the Turks. So for the Turks and Persians, tho both are Mahumetans,
and both Circumcised, they yet detest one another more than they do the
Christians, and will sooner permit the Christians to live among them, than
tolerate one another.

2. I would farther observe, that the Hatred and Enmity of the Idumeans against
the Jews, did on all occasions discover it self, till the time of the
Macchabees. Not only did they deny them a passage through their Country, Namb. 22.
but they took all opportunities to join with their Enemies, to ravage and
spoil them. When Nebuchadnezzar burnt the City and Temple of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.
the Edomites (with others who served under him) rejoyc't in its Ruin, and
assisted the Chaldaeans. They cried, Raze it, Raze it, even to the ground.
Psalm. 137. v. 7. Following the Chaldaean Army like Ravens to feed upon the
Carcasses, which fell by their Cruelty: and taking the advantage of their
miseries, to be Revenged upon them. Ezekiel. 25.12: 15.
For which God threatens to take vengeance on Edom. Of this the Church
professes her Confidence, 60 Psalm. Jer. 49. c. 8.
8. God has spoken in his Holiness -- over Edom will I cast out my shoe. It Is
an Emblem of subduing them under his feet. I will walk through possess, and tread
down the land of Edom: which was true when David put garrisons in Edom, and all
they of Edom became his servants. He penned this Psalm, 2 Samuel 8.14.
when his General Ioab smote twelve thousand Edomites or Idumeans, in the
Valley of Salt, and Abishai six thousand; and therefore called 1 Chronicles. 18:12.
Eighteen thousand. They are called Syrians in one place, and Edomites in
another.

During the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, it is thought the Idumeans did
invade those parts of Iudaea, that were next adjoining to their Country and
fixed there, till rooted out by the Macchabees. They served the Israelites (the
Seed of Jacob) for about seven hundred years: and had no proper King of their
own, till the time of Iehoram, when they cast off the yoke of Judah. 2 Kings
8.20.
Every Viceroy was called a King till that time. So we read, 1 Kings 22.47.
There was no King in Edom, a Deputy was King:

It was foretold by old Isaac, Genesis 27. c. 40. Joseph: Antiq lib. 8. c. 8 l. 9.
c. 2.
that the Time should come when Esau should have the Dominion, and break the
Yoke of Jacob from off his neck. This began in Solomon's time (when he forsook
God, and turned to Idolatry) by Hadad, who fled to Egypt for shelter, when
Ioabs Army conquered Idumea; afterward under Iehoram, they wholly revolted,
and slew their King, who had been subject to Jehosaphat the Father of Iekoram.
For about eight hundred years they continued a free People, Ibid. lib. 13. c.
17.
till the time of Johannes Hircanus, the son of Simon the Macchabee, who forced
and compelled them to receive Circumcision and the Religious Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jews. This was one of the first Instances of Force used in
the matter of Religion, which as it was a symptom of the degenerate State of
the Jewish Church at that time, so it was attended with the ordinary Consequent
of such Compulsion, viz. instead of making the Idumaeans sincere Professors of
the Jewish Religion, it did but exasperate them the more against their Religion
and Nation. 'T was an Evidence the Spirit of God had greatly forsaken the Jews
under the second Temple; and it succeeded accordingly: for the Pharisees, who
were lately his Favorites, and suggested that Counsel to Hircanus; Ibid lib.
13. c. 18; 19.
and put him upon it, were the next whom he severely proceeded against; for
under the most grievous penalties he forbad (and endeavored to abolish) their
Opinions and Ordinances, and within a few years, the very Family of Hircanus
too, (by contentions and quarrels among themselves) was extinquisht, and by the
righteous Judgment of God, the Government of the Jews fell into the hands of
the Idumeans, when such as Antipater and Herod ruled over them. After this the
Jews were more careful, as well they might, not to make Proselytes to their
Religion by fraud or Force, or to admit any but such as offered themselves
freely, of their own accord.

From that time the Idumeans were comprehended among the Jews, Light foot,
centur: Choragr. Matthew. praem. cap 3
and Idumea began to be confounded with Judea, and reckoned as a part of
Pallestine. Balaam's prophecy had now been fullfilled, that Edom should be a
Possession, and Seir a Possession for his Enemies. 24. Numb. 18. They were now
reputed as Jews, and Herod, the son of Antipater, of an Idumean stock, being
the son of Parents who were Proselites, might be called the Brother of the
Jews, and being by profession a Jew, and standing in the third Generation,
might enter into the Congregation, and be their King. Joseth de bello Jud. lib.
1. c. 15. Spanhemii dub. Evang. pars. 1. dub. 16. De Herodis M. genere.
Causabon Exercit. 1. ad appar. Baron.
Herod's family, of the race of Edom, did by leave of the Romans reign over the
Jews for the space of an hundred years, then had Esau dominion over his Brother
Jacob, as foretold Genesis 27. c. 40. till this time they were separated from the
rest of the world, under Governors of their own, who descended from Jacob; and
this is the time, when the coming of Shiloh the Messiah drew near. And many do
here reckon the Accomplishment of that Prophecy 49. Genesis 10. The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, till Shiloh come. But the learned Medes, diatribe in Gen
49.10. and Petavli Animadv. ad Hzr. 29. Epiphan.
Mr. Mede has proved that Shilo, or the Messiah, was to come, and the
gathering of the Nations (or Gentiles) unto him, was to be accomplished, before
the Scepter should finally depart from Judah, which was not so soon. Josephus
mentions many instances of the violence of the Idumeans against their Brethren
in the last Civil Wars of the Jews, which issued in the Final Destruction of
Jerusalem, De bell. Jud. lib. 4. c. 5, 6.
their Temple, City, and Nation, by the Romans: when Wrath came upon them to
the uttermost, and the Scepter departed from Judah, so that they have continued
without King or Prince, or distinct Government of their own, to this very day.

3. It is farther to be observed concerning Edom or the Idumeans, that they
being the old Inveterate Enemy of Israel, all the Adversaries of the Church of
God are sometimes expressed by that name. We read 83 Psalm. 7, 8. in a short
Catalogue of the Enemies of the Church, that Edom is set in the head of them.
And the Messiah, when described as a Conqueror over his Enemies, is said to
come from Edom, Isa. 63.
with dyed Garments (or garments stained with Blood) from Bozra, the chief City
of Idumea. As the name of Israel is used for the whole Church of God, so the
Edomites by reason of their ancient Malice, and near Neighborhood, are
mentioned by a synecdoche for all other Adversaries. On this account we read of
so many Complaints, and prayers, and imprecations of the Prophets against them,
and the Destruction Ezekiel 25. c 9 and chap 35. Jer. 49. c. 17: 18. Obad v. 10.
Amos. 1, c. 11: 12. Joel. 3. c. 19: 20.
threated by God is answerable, in several places. The modern Jews would feign
make the Sea Galatin. de Arcan. lib. 4. c 28. B^xtorf syn: Jud cap. 10.
Schickardi Jus R. Hebr c. 1. theor. 3.
Christians, whom they call Romans, to be the Edom, that shall be destroyed,
and the Roman Empire they call by the name of the Edomitical Empire. The
ancient Jews by Edom, and the Remnant of Edom, understood all the rest of
Mankind besides themselves, or the Jewish Nation, who descended from Jacob. The
spiritual victory of the Messiah over all Nations is thus described by the
Prophet, that his Ministers shall lay their hand on Edom and Moab. Isai. 11. c.
14. Moab is sometimes taken in this general sense. as Isai. 25. c. 10. What we
translate the Remnant, or Residue, of Edom, Amos. 9. c. 12. (according to the
present reading of the Hebrew Text,) the Apostle James more truly renders, the
Residue of men. Acts 15. c. 16, 17. as Mr. Mede, and Dr. Pocock observe. Mr.
Mede's Letter to A. B. Usher. Pocock, Porta Mosis Misc. c. 4. in loc.
It Is there foretold, that when the Tabernacle of David shall be raised up in
Christ, and the Breaches thereof closed, that the Gentiles shall be taken in,
as well as the Jews.

I now proceed from this Historical Account of the Idumeans. to consider what
is here said of them, or what is contained in this Burden of Dumah. He calls
to me out of Seir, saying, Watchman, what of the night? etc. The Prophet is
commanded by God, in his vision, to set a Watchman in a Watchtower, v. 6.
who having related what he had seen concerning old Babylon, does now declare
what he had heard concerning Dumah, or Idumea: that he heard one call to him
out of Seir, saying, Watchman, what of the night? for the better explication of
this Question, and the Answer to it, in the following words, the Original Text
(as is See Sentimens de Qu: Theol. sur l'Hist. Crit. let. 15.
necessary in other places) must be paraphrased, because the sense will not
otherwise be entire and full, by a literal Translation into any other Language.

One calling to the Watchman out of Seir, represents the temper of all the
rest; who were ready to ask the same question, having the same Apprehensions of
things, and as desirous to be informed. And this being represented in a Vision,
the metaphorical sense of Night is principally to be considered, signifying a
dark season of Calamity, Fear and Terror, as the morning light is frequently
expressive of Joy and Comfort.

The Question may be considered in a double sense, according to the Principle,
from whence we may suppose it did proceed: either 1. In Raillery, as the effect
of a scoffing humor, that argued the greatness of their Confidence and
security; whereupon they derided the Prophet, and made a mock of the Judgments
he denounced, and threatened. Or 2. As a serious Enquiry, from the real Danger
of their case, and correspondent Fears, and apprehensions of it.

1. In Raillery, and so the question is supposed to be put by the Edomites to
Isaiah, or some other Prophet of the Jews, who had denounced Judgment on Edom.
(If it be to one of their own Watchmen, that had done the like, it will differ
very little.) Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? the
doubling of the Expression implies the greater Derision and scorn, i. e. You
profess to be commissioned by God to foresee evils to come, and to give warning
of approaching Calamity; you have often threatened us with desolating Judgments,
and told us they were near at hand, even at the door; but where is that Night
of darkness, and distress you would have frightened us with? whence is it, that
we have not long ago been destroyed, as you told us we should be? We see
nothing of the denounced Tribulation and Misery; we feel nothing of all those
dismal Things you prophesied should come to pass. Our Sun is not yet set: no,
we have a Bright and a Prosperous Day; and have had so ever since we cast off
the Yoke of Judah. Or thus. 2 Kings 8.20.
Watchman, what of the Night? What Tidings of Judgment do you farther bring us?
You have said, it did hang over our heads; Is it now any nearer than formerly?
What is become of all your sad story of an approaching Night? Where are all the
Terrible things you were wont to presage? Watchman, what of the Night? you
pretend to be a Man of God, who know the times and the seasons, and are favored
with Visions and Revelations of things to come; what further Evils do you
threaten us with? what is the next Mischief and Calamity, we are to expect?
What are we now to look for? Can you tell us any thing more? or is there any
thing like to be true, of all that which you have already told us? We have
Liberty, Peace, and Plenty for the present, and will not be afraid of any
tragical Story you can threaten for the future.

To this there is a modest and serious Answer in the following words; The
Watchman said, The Morning comes, and also the Night. i. e. Tho now you
Rejoice in Prosperity, think your selves Happy for the present, and are
confident and secure, with respect to the future; as men after a dark and
tedious Night, rejoice in the light of the Sun; yet your Country shall be made
desolate; Tribulation and distress shall as certainly overtake you, as the
Morning will be succeeded by the Evening, or the Day by the Night. And such a
Night it shall be, as no morning of Deliverance shall follow after it. 1 Mal.
2, 3. Therefore if you will Enquire, Enquire; Return, Come: i. e. if you would
know the mind of God, ask seriously about it, and not in an Ironical and
scornful manner: if you would before it be too late understand your Danger, and
prevent it; you ought without delay to consider your case, and Enquire in good
Earnest what is to be done: and with that Temper and Resolution, you may
return, and come again, and Enquire farther. Or

2. Suppose the Question to be Serious, from Fear and Terror, on the account of
real and apprehended Danger; the Edomites are then represented, as setting a
Watchman in an high Tower, to observe the motions of an Enemy; and by reason of
their Fears, they call often to him, to know what he discovers. Watchman,
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? i. e. Has the Enemy attempted
any thing farther? does he approach nearer? in what a posture does he seem to
be? are we in any better, or in a worse Condition than before? What Time of the
Night is it? Is the Morning at hand? When shall these Clouds be blown over?
this night be ended? Is there no prospect, no approach of Deliverance? shall we
always be thus in Fear and Terror? To this the Answer is very serious and
proper, The Watchman said, the Morning comes, and also the Night, i. e. You
think at the approach of this morning that your Fears will be scattered, and
the grounds of them removed, and your danger be altogether past, and therefore
wish for the Morning, and would fain be informed how near it is: But you
deceive your selves if you think your Calamity will be of so short a
Continuance, as only for one day: for after the break of day has put an end to
this Night, you must expect another. If you are not pillaged, and destroyed,
and made Desolate, by this attempt of the Enemy, during the present Night,
another will quickly come, and your Danger will not be less after the present
cloud is dispersed. The Morning may come, as to a deliverance from present
fears, but the Night will also come: tho you get out of one Trouble, you will
be involved in another; and you will need to Enquire again, be as much at a
loss as now, and as solicitous to be informed of your danger, and to prevent
it. Therefore, if you will Enquire, Enquire, and Tarry here with me (so the
Septuagint express it,) or abide near me, and you shall know what I can tell
you. Or thus, If you will Enquire, Enquire; i. e. you may go, and come, and ask
again, one Morning after another, and one Night after another; as far as I can
discern, your Danger is not past, or like to be. If therefore you will Enquire,
do so, go and Return again, and come for Information another time; as far as I
perceive, there will be need of further Inquiries. Your Fears, as to the
grounds of them, may justly Continue: at least, I see nothing for my part to
the Contrary: if you can see any thing that has a better and more favorable
Aspect, we would be glad to hear it; Return, and come, and tell us. But the
most take these last words, as an Exhortation to Repentance. If you will
Enquire, make such an Enquiry as may be of some use and advantage. Not only to
satisfy your Curiosity by the knowledge of your Danger, but such as may assist
you to escape it. Let me advise you to such an Enquiry, as may do you real
service. Such questions as you put will signify little, if not in order to
somewhat farther. The great Question should be, How to appease the displeasure
of God, and turn away his Wrath; or how to meet him in the way of his
Judgments. Therefore Return to God by Repentance, and Come, and join your
selves with his People. (Tarry with me, or near me) and try what may be done by
Prayer and Supplication, with Repentance and Amendment, to divert the Effects
of his Anger, so that the threatened storm may pass away, and this feared
approaching Night may not overtake you.

This Burden of Dumah being thus Paraphrased, and explained, let me consider,
1. From the Title of this Prophecy, The Burden of Dumah, in what respects the
threatened Judgments of God (Temporal and Eternal) do answer that name of a
Burden. 2. From the Question, Watchman, what of the Night? as in Raillery and
Derision of the Prophet, consider the sin, and folly, the mischief and danger
of Mocking at the threatened Judgments of God. 3. From the Succession of the
Night to the Day, in a Metaphorical sense, the Morning comes, and also the
Night; Consider how a Time of Darkness and Distress, a season of Calamity and
Trouble does succeed, and follow the Peace and Prosperity of the wicked, both
as to particular Persons, and Nations. 4. From this Question of the Edomites,
as a serious Enquiry (by those who apprehended themselves and their Country in
more than ordinary danger) and the Answer to it, as Containing proper counsel
to prevent a threatened Calamity, I shall consider them both with Relation to
English Protestants. 1. That we may take notice, what time of the Night it is
with us: or what signs of the Times may be reflected on, as to the approach of
a Darker Night, if not speedily prevented. 2. Upon such an Enquiry, what
Returning is our Duty, to divert the Anger of God; What may and ought to be
done, to lengthen out our Day of Peace, and render the Light, which yet shines,
more steady and glorious, as well as lasting.

1. Let us consider the Title of this Prophecy, The Burden of Dumah. The word
[Massa] signifies in general any thing that is carried or delivered from one to
another; and so strictly imports no more than a Message, or prediction from
God, Dr. Pocock, comment on M^l. 1. c. 1.
concerning any person, or people. It is not always taken in an ill sense, being
prefixed to the promise of Blessings, Zach. 12. c. 1. as well as to the
threatening of Judgments. But because the Jews derided the Message of the
Prophets, and retorted these very words upon them, The Burden of the Lord, in
contempt and scorn; God severely reproves and threatens them for it, Jer. 23.
c. 34, 36. I will punish that man and his house, that shall thus say, the
burden of the Lord; Every man's mouth shall be his Burden. Ye have therein
perverted the words of the living God: therefore ye shall rather say, what has
the Lord answered, or what has he spoken. However, since the Predictions and
Menaces of Calamity against a People, are so frequently mentioned under this
name, and the Execution of them have the same appellative, ( Every man shall
bear his own burden, Gal. 6.5.
i. e. suffer the punishment due to his sin,) we may therefore consider the
Threatenings of Judgment, as very fitly styled by this name of a Burden, with
relation, 1. to God, who threatens and inflicts Judgment. 2. To his Prophets,
and Ministers, who in his Name denounce, and declare his threatened Wrath. 3. To
the People, against whom these Judgments are threatened, and upon whom they are
Executed.

1. To God himself. The Judgments which he threatens and inflicts may be termed
Burdens, because he does not Afflict willingly, Lament. 3.33.
or grieve the Children of men, much less destroy them.

Judgment is his strange work, and he comes out of his Place, when he comes
to make desolate. He waits long, and calls often and loud, he gives frequent
warning, and does not execute Judgment hastily, and in a Passion; And when the
Honor of his Name makes Punishment necessary, yet how loath and unwilling does
he seem to be! How backward and Averse to such a work! How shall I give thee
up, Ephraim! How shall I deliver thee, Hos. 11.8, 9.
o Israel! How shall I make thee as Admah! How shall I set thee as Zeboim! my
Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together, etc. i. e. Tho
thou deservest to be forsaken by my Mercy, which thou have abused, and seized
by my Justice, which thou have provoked; yet how shall I find in my Heart to
permit it? tho I can hardly tell how to bear with thee any longer, or without
the dishonor of my Government, delay the Execution of my threatened Anger, yet
Oh Ephraim, my dear son! How shall I give thee up? O Israel! the Posterity of
my ancient Friend Jacob, how shall I deliver thee over to final ruin, and (as
Admah and Zeboim, that were destroyed with Sodom and Gomorrah?) Jude v. 7.
Deuteronomy. 29. c. 23.
My Heart is turned within me. I find such strugglings of kindness in my Heart
toward thee, that I know not how to forsake thee: when it comes to the
Execution, my Bowels are moved, my affections stirred, and I know not how to do
it. My Repentings are kindled together; all the thoughts and arguments that
might persuade me to repent of my threatened Judgments, are all mustered
together to dissuade me, so that I begin to Repent of the Evils I have
threatened. I will not Execute the fierceness of mine Anger, and make a full end
of thee. The like in other Places: O Israel! what shall I do unto Thee? O
Judah! what shall I do unto thee? Oh! Hos 6. c. 4. Isei. 5. c. 4. Mic. 5. c. 3,
4, 5.
that there were such an Heart in them? Oh that they knew the things of their
Peace! How long does he wait on a sinful Nation! how earnestly does he summon
them to Repentance! sometimes by the voice of his Prophets; Woing them by his
prophets, who have the Sword of his mouth, 6. Hos. 5. That they may not be cut
off by the sword of Judgment. And sometimes in the threatening of Judgment, he
roars like a Lion, that he may not devour, and tear in pieces. By lesser
strokes of Judgment, he sometimes gives warning to prevent greater. He first
makes use of a pruning Hook, before he takes the Ax in hand; he speaks once,
yea twice, and a third time, doubling and trebling his calls to Repentance, by
the Voice of his Rod, before he gives over a people called by his Name. He
shoots his arrows of lesser Judgments, 1 Samuel 20. c.
as Jonathan did his to David, with Letters round about them; not utterly to
destroy, but mercifully to instruct. Hos. 5. c. 12, 15.
He is first as a Moth to Israel, and as rottenness to Judah, before he comes
like a Lion, and a Bear, to destroy. The Impenitent Jews had lesser Judgments,
the beginning of sorrows, before Wrath came upon them to the uttermost. We read
of Golden Vials full of the wrath of God, 15. Rev. 7. Golden Vials, because the
death of men is precious, and God delights not in it: and Vials, such vessels
as no great Evils can come out of at once; coming out through a narrow neck, they
hinder one another, and cannot come out but by degrees; unless we break the
Vials in pieces by bolder provocations, and hasten destructive Judgments on our
selves. Nay, he does not presently destroy, tho his warnings be slighted; but
all the day long, he is said to spread out his hands to a stiff-necked and
rebellious People; tho he might have consumed them in the morning, or at noon.
He sets many Beacons on fire, shoots off many a warning piece, and gives many
an Alarm to awaken us to Repentance. He first whets his sword, Psalm 7.12.
and bends his bow, and makes ready his arrows. He was but six days in making
the World, but was seven days in destroying one little City, Josh. 6.
as Chrysostom observes concerning Jericho. He departs gradually, as if he were
loath to be gone. He gives orders for their destruction, and then recals the
Warrant, and tries one year longer. When Justice renews her plea, Mercy
interposeth to beg a reprieve, and pardon. On this account God permitted
Abraham to plead with him so long on the behalf of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
other Cities of the Plain; If there be but Fifty, if there be but Forty, if
there be but Thirty, but Twenty, Genesis 18. c. 23.
but Ten Righteous Persons, for whose sake he should spare them, it should be
done. God was willing to hear the utmost which Abraham could urge, to prevent
their destruction: as if he had told him, that he would have been glad to meet
with an Argument, that might dissuade him from so unpleasing a work. He grants
him so often, till the Patriarch was ashamed to ask further. So unwilling was
God to destroy; such a Burden is the inflicting of Judgment, even to God
himself.

2. It Is a Burden to the Prophets and Ministers, who are employed to denounce
and declare the Judgments of God. How does the Prophet Isaiah express his
Affection in such a case, when he was to threaten Judgment in the name of the
Lord, and foresaw the Execution of it, 22 Chap. 4, 5. Look away from me, I will
be bitter in weeping; labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
Daughter of my people. For it is a day of Trouble, and of treading down, and of
Perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts, in the valley of Vision. So the Prophet
Jeremy. 4. c. 19. My Bowels, my Bowels; I am pained at my very heart; my Heart
makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my Peace, because thou have heard, O my
soul, the sound of the Trompet, the alarm of War. By the spirit of Prophecy he
knew it was at hand, and as certain, as if he had already heard it. And when
the Jews scoffed at the word of the Lord, and dared his vengeance, saying, let
it come, 17. c. 15. How does he appeal to God, v. 16. As for me, I have not
hastened from being a Pastor to follow thee: ( i. e. as I did not on my own
head, without thy call, seek the Office of a Prophet to this people, so being
called, I did not decline to follow thee) neither have I desired the woeful day,
thou know: that which came out of my Lips was right before thee. i. e. I was
loath to be a Messenger of such sad Tidings, but I have done it in obedience to
thee, Lord, thou know.

So for Spiritual and Eternal Judgments, threatened by the Ministers of Christ
to the Impenitent; It Is a Burden to their souls to consider the Folly, and
foresee the Misery of hardened, deluded sinners, and declare the woes and
curses in the book of God against them.

But tho we tell you weeping, as the Apostle, 3 Phil. 18. we must declare, that
their End will be Destruction, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ by wicked
works. You force us to speak terribly, in the name of the Lord. We had rather
be Ambassadors of Peace, than Heralds of War: We would feign be every one a
Barnabas, Sons of Consolation; but in faithfulness to our trust from God, and
to the souls of men, we must frequently be Boanerges's, Sons of Thunder: We
would rather bring nothing but glad-tidings of Joy, but it is part of our
Commission to publish the Severity, as well as the Mercy of God; and knowing
the Terrors of the Lord, do endeavor to persuade men, 1 Corin 5.11.
by that which may work upon their Fears, as well as their Hopes. We would
rather be like Doves, to bring an Olive branch in our mouths, as a symbol of
Peace and Reconciliation, than like Ravens, to presage Death, croak Funerals,
and foretell destruction; but Necessity is laid upon us, to declare the whole
Counsel of God; not only, that whosoever believes and obeys the Gospel shall be
saved; but that he who does not, shall be damned, John 3. c. 16, 18. Hebr. 10.
c. 26, 31. Luke 13. c. 3.
he is condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him; that there is no
escaping, if we neglect so great salvation: and except you Repent, you shall
perish.

3. A Burden to the People, and Persons, against whom Judgment is either
threatened, or inflicted. Most men would have us Prophecy nothing but smooth and
pleasant things, and care not to hear of the Terrors of the Lord, of the
certain and intolerable Damnation of the Wicked, who will not turn and live.
This is legal preaching, says one; this will fright men out of their wits,
says another; these are hard sayings, who can bear 'em; this is the way to
make men run distracted, and to drive them to Despair; and if all this be true,
who shall, who can be saved? Therefore many think, and some say, of the most
Faithful Ministers of Christ, what the Priest of Bethel said to Icroboam
concerning Amos, Amos 9 c. 10.
The land is not able to bear his words. According to the prediction, that in
the latter days, men shall not endure sound (and searching) Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.
c. 3
On this account the men of the Earth, or Carnal, sensual men, are said to
Rejoice at the silencing and slaying of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. c. 10.
because they tormented them with their Words. But if the threatening, and
Denunciation of divine Judgments be so burdensome, what will the Execution of
them be? If the roaring of the Lion be so dreadful, what will it be, when he
shall devour and tear in pieces? If the menacing Voice of God by his Messengers
be so heavy, (when he is said to Hew men by his Prophets,) how much heavier
will his Hand be in the inflicting Judgment? If the message of the Word be
insupportable, which tells you, you must Turn or Dye, Repent or Perish; if that
flash Hell fire in your faces, and you cannot bear it; how much less will you
be able to bear the Wrath of God, as a Consuming Fire, when he shall make good
his word, and fulfill his threatenings? Jer 17 c. 15. Ames. 5. c. 18. Isai. 5. c.
19.
They therefore who say, where is the word of the Lord? let it come; who desire
the day of the Lord, and say, let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we
may see it; and let his Counsel draw nigh, that we may know it; they know not
what they say; for the day of the Lord is Darkness, and not Light. They know
not what they wish; for all his threatenings will prove Terrible Burdens when
ever they are executed, however now they be despised, and made light of. Which
brings me to the Second thing proposed, viz.

2. From the Question, Watchman, what of the Night? as in Raillery and derision
of the Prophet, to consider the Sin, and Folly, and Danger of mocking at the
threatened Judgments of God, whether temporal, or Eternal. I mention both,
because the same Principle of Infidelity is the source of both: and that I may
render this discourse the more useful to every Reader, let us consider.

1. The Sin of Scoffing. The Devil has tried without success, by the Rage of
Persecutors, and by the subtilty of Deceivers and false Teachers, to destroy
Religion, and banish the Fear of God out of the world: but of late he has
attempted the same thing by Atheists and Sadduces, and Epicurean Deists,
endeavoring by drollery, and Buffoonry to expose the Mysteries of Religion to
contempt, and render them ridiculous; deriding the Threatenings and Fears of
divine Judgment as a groundless Bugbear, as only the trade of Ministers, and
the trick of States Men. Such Scoffers, it is foretold, should arise in the
Latter days, Jude v. 18.
walking after their own lusts. In other sins men do not so directly strike at
God, but seek the Satisfaction of some lust or appetite; but in this scoffing
humor there is an immediate Affront to God, a downright Cotnempt of him, and
opposition to him: whereas the very Devils own his Being, and tremble at his
Power and Vengeance.

2. However they may set up for Wits, and think themselves considerable, as soon
as they are Impudent enough to break a Jest upon the H. Scriptures, and deride
Religion, yet this their way is their Folly. Not only as against all the rules
of good Manners, to make a mock of that, which the greatest part of their
Neighbors and Acquaintance do reverence, and reckon sacred; but as they employ
their Understanding, Fancy, and Wit against the God who gave them Reason, and a
Capacity for Religion, to distinguish them from Brutes: and as in defiance to
all reason, they contradict the faith of all History, and the Experience of all
Ages; and run against the settled Judgment and Testimony of all wise and sober
men, who have inquired into these things: yea some of them against their own
Convictions and Experience, which they have drowned by sensuality, and made a
shift to forget: but the Folly of it will be more apparent, if we consider,

3. The Danger of it: for if there be a God, an infinitely Holy, Almighty, and
Righteous God, and the Scriptures be his word, they pull down vengeance on
their own heads, laugh themselves into Misery and Ruin, and shall dearly pay
for their scoffing Humor: let them read 28 Isai. 14, 15, 18. and tremble.

It Is seldom they escape the Righteous Judgment of God in this world; Yea the
places where such infect the Air, and the Societies to which they are related,
do fare the worse for them. 2 Chronicles. 36. c. 15, 16. They mocked the Messengers
of God, and despised his word, 'till the wrath of God rose against his People,
and there was no Remedy. But if in this world they escape, the day is hastening,
(and oh how certain, and how near is that day!) when God will speak to them in
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. And when Death and Judgment
are in view, will they then stand to what now they scornfully utter in their
drunken Mirth? Will you then maintain your Slanders? and justify your contempt
of God, and his threatened Judgments? will you then avouch it as your settled
opinion, when you are to leave this world? Alas! while you are scorning the
Judgment of God, and by foolish Jests, and Raillery, make a mock of Sin; how
many Thousands are suffering under endless Despair, that threatened severity of
God, which you despise, and some of them too did once deride! Will the Holy
God, think you, be afraid to fulfill his word, because you make light of it?
Will he not laugh at your Calamity, Prove. 1. c. 25.26.
and mock when your Fear comes? That day is hastening; for as the Morning
comes, so also the Night, which is next to be considered.

3. From the Succession of the Night to the Day, that a Time of Darkness and
Distress, a season of Calamity and Trouble, shall succeed and follow the
Present Prosperity and Peace of the wicked.

This will appear to be true, both as to particular Persons, and Nations. 1.
Particular Persons have their Morning, their time of Light, and a Day of Gods
Patience, to which a Night of Darkness and Affliction succeeds. Let us not be
confident and Secure in the midst of Plenty, Health, and Peace, while the light
of God shines upon our Tabernacle, and the Evil day seems afar off; because
Clouds and Darkness, Storms and a Tempest may overtake us, ere we are aware;
and tho they should not, yet the Night will quickly come. And oftentimes when
we are most secure and confident, and please our selves with dreams of a long
Continuance of Earthly Blessings, some great Disaster and Calamity, some
surprising Stroke of Judgment does seize us on a sudden, when we least expect
it: The tables may be turned, the scene alter, and our Light go out in
darkness. Let us therefore use this World as not abusing it, knowing that the
Fashion of the World passes away. It Is certain, the clearest and most
prosperous and brightest Day of the Wicked, will be followed by an Everlasting
Night. Yet a little while, and their Sun will set, and gross Darkness, that may
be felt, Vuter, and Eternal Darkness, be the Portion of their Cup. If we
believe and foresee it, let us not envy their present Sunshine; for after they
have warmed themselves a while, with the sparks of their own kindling, they
shall lie down in Sorrow. 2. It Is true of Nations and Countries, they have
their Morning, and a day of Peace, which is succeeded by a Night of Judgment
and public Calamity. Tho God had favored the Jews above all other People, and
by a Covenant of Peculiarity they were his Portion and Inheritance; yet there
was a Time when it might be said by the Daughters of Sion, in the valley of
vision, Woe be unto us, for the day goes away, Jer. 6 4.
and the shadows of the Evening are stretched out. Their day had many a dark
cloud, and violent Storms, when their Country was made Desolate, and their
people carried Captive: and at last Destruction by the Romans put an end to the
day of their Peace. And tho more than sixteen hundred years are past, their
Night is not yet ended. The like is foretold should happen to the Enemies of
the Church. All mine Enemies, says she, have heard of my Trouble; they are
glad that thou have done it: Lam. 1.21.
but thou will bring on them the Day of Calamity, that thou have proclaimed,
and they shall be like unto me. They shall have their time of darkness and
distress, as I have mine. There is an hour of Temptation for Nations, Luke
8.13. 21 Chap. 22.
as well as particular Persons. It Is true, God waits long, and gives frequent
warning before he does execute vengeance on a Wicked People; but when they have
filled up the measure of their sins, all their Privileges and prayers shall
not save them. Tho Noah, Job, and Daniel should intercede for them, he will not
be entreated. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them, he
will even hide his face from them at that time, Mic. 3.4. 1 c. 14.
as they have behaved themselves evil in their doings: And all their
Auxiliaries and Succors, all their Friends, Confederates, and Allies shall
prove a vain Refuge. Now that we may know how far we and our Brthren are
concerned in this, and what use we ought to make of such a Reflection, let us

4. Consider this Question in the Text, as a Serious Enquiry, by those who
apprehended themselves, and their Country, in a more than ordinary Danger, and
the Answer to it, as containing proper Counsel and Advice to prevent a
threatened storm, that we may be informed, 1. What time of the Night it is with
us, and reflect upon the signs of a Darker Night approaching, at least enquire,
whether the state of our Case be not such as may cause us to apprehend and fear
it. 2. Upon such an Enquiry, consider what Returning to God by Repentance, and
to love and unity with one Another, is our present Duty, that if it be not too
late, we may yet prevent it. That there are some Signs of the Times that we not
only may, but ought to observe, cannot be denied; because some are operative
and Moral, which have an active influence on the dismal Events they
presignifie: There are others which are only Indicative; and concerning them
it is more difficult certainly to determine or to make a Judgment by 'em. Although I
am far from prescribing limits to the Long-suffering of God, or pretending to
tell, when his Patience will Expire, and bear no longer with the Provocations
of English Protestants; yet, to reflect on the Moral Prognostications, and
propable forerunners of National Calamity, can neither be presumptuous or
impertinent, but a seasonable duty; because it is by a serious observation of
such things, that God awakens his People to betake themselves to their Hiding
place, in obedience to that Call, 26 Isai. 20, 21. Come my People, enter thou
into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for
a little moment, until the Indignation be over past; for behold the Lord comes
out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their Iniquities.
Such things the wicked, who continue to do wickedly, shall not understand; but
the wise shall understand. 12 Dan. 4, 10. And the neglect of observing these
things, is the subject of a divine Complaint and Threatening: that the stork,
and the Crane, and the Swallow should know their time; but my People, says
God, Jer. 8.7. Psalm 28.5.
know not the Judgment of the Lord. i. e. They will not observe they do not
take notice of what I have done, or am about to do in the Earth.

That the night is not past, with respect to the Reformed Churches, but further
Darkness to be expected, may be argued in the general, from the flourishing of
that Antichristian Kingdom, and Interest, whose Destruction God has promised,
and we expect. And who can imagine, that such great things, as God has
foretold, concerning the final Ruin of Babylon, should ever be effected without
great Commotions? The last strugglings of Antichrist to support the throne of
the Beast, we may presume, will be the fiercest. We read of an Earthquake to
precede the Raising of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.13. and of another great
Earthquake, at the Fall of Babylon. 16 chapter 18. Blessed is he, who shall be
counted worthy to escape the things coming on the Earth, and to stand before
the Son of Man. Therefore he that has Ears to hear, let him hear, not only
what the spirit says to the Churches, but what the Providence of God speaks to
the Professors of the Reformed Religion, in Great Britain, Ireland, and
Holland. He calls loudly to us, by the Bonds, by the Banishment, by the Blood
of our Brethren in other places; (which will be found in the skirts of
Babylon;) by a Voice out of Hungary, a Voice out of France, a Voice out of
Savoy, and Fiedmont, to consider our Ways, and turn to the Lord; and not to
think or say, that they were Greater Sinners than we; but enquire, whether the
cup of Trembling be not like to go round, Except we Repent. Some of the grounds
of our Fears, with reference to an Approaching Night, I shall now mention.

1. Tho in the Evening time it may be Light, yet the diminution of Heat, by the
declining Sun, betokens Night to be at hand. Such is the increase of Knowledge
among Protestants, (and Blessed be God, the Light is much greater than
formerly) that some are ready to conclude on that account, that we have nothing
to apprehend or fear. But we have no such reason to be Confident, considering
the prevalency and spreading of many pernicious Errors against the Mysteries of
Faith; that a Flood of these is of late come out of the Mouth of the old
serpent. If withal we consider the Prejudices and obstinacy of the most for the
Opinions they have blindly received, against the Evidence and Conviction of
farther Light. And the miserable neglect of Catechizing younger persons, in
private and in public, to the shame of English Protestants in comparison with
the Dutch, or French: so that multitudes have a Zeal for the Reformed Religion,
but not according to Knowledge; and by ignorance of the grounds and Principles
of Faith and Practice, are prepared for Apostasy: and of those who know the
Truth, the greatest part hold it in Unrighteousness; the Light shines in
darkness, and they have not received the Truth in the Love of it. However,
granting that there is more light than formerly; may it not be the last blaze
of the Candle of the Lord, gasping as it were a little flash of Light, before
it be quite Extinct, and the Candlestick removed? Because the Light of Truth is
accompanied with little warmth of Devotion, little love to God, and fervor in
his Service. A spirit of Lukewarmness, Indifference, and Formality has
overspread all Churches, and all Places. And who almost is free from the Common
Contagion? When the Generality of Protestants grow Loose and Vain, Covetous and
Worldly, Proud and Sensual, in any particular Country, may we not fear that God
will spue them out of his Mouth? Rev. 2.4, 5.
when they have lost their First Love, that he will come quickly to the like
severity against them, as against the Church of Ephesus?

God departs by degrees from a People, as he does from Particular Persons.
First he is cast out of the Heart, then out of the Closet, secret Devotion is
neglected; then out of the Family, he is not invok't and called upon there;
then out of the Congregation, public Ordinances are laid aside as useless; and
at last they are given up to a spirit of Profaneness and Irreligion. Any of
those degrees have a threatening aspect as to a further progress. The Tree is
first Barren, and brings forth no Fruit, then no Leaves, then no Bark, and so
is fit for the Ax, and to be cast into the Fire. Ezekiel 9.
So a gradual Departure of the Presence of God from his Temple (as represented
in the Prophet's vision by five several removes) threatens further and final
forsaking. For as it was not the Ark of God alone, with the Mercy-seat covered
with Cherubims, but the Answers given immediately by God in the Holy Place,
that were the undoubted evidences of the Presence of his Glory with Israel; so
it is not the Doctrine of the Gospel alone, and the public Ministry of it, in
our days, but the Powerful Operations of the Spirit by the Gospel on the
Consciences and Lives of men, that is the clearest demonstration of his
Gracious Presence. It Is true, there is much Light by Preaching, but few hard
Hearts are melted and softened, few blind Eyes opened, comparatively but a few
in most places. The Word is a dead Letter for the most part, preached and heard
without the Life, and Heat, and Power of the Quickening Spirit. Isai. 6.9, 10,
11. John 12.40.
Thus it was with the Jews before the Babylonish Captivity; and so in our B.
Savior's time before their final Ruin.

2. When Drowsiness, a spirit of slumber and security, does generally obtain;
not only among the Foolish Virgins, but even those who would be accounted Wise:
When Christians are more careless and confident than ordinary, settled on their
lees, little concerned for any thing but their own Repose, and loath to be
stirred up, and kept from sleeping. It Is an ill sign, when tho their Neighbors
House be on Fire, they are no more affected with it, than men fast asleep on
their beds; such a spiritual Judgment does commonly end in Temporal Plagues:
that they who are not sensible of the one, may be made to feel the other. For
such a provocation, God commands the Prophet, to set the Trumpet to his mouth,
and proclaim war against Israel. Hos. 8.1.
Especially when former warnings have been slighted, preceding Judgments
disregarded, the word of God despised, his Messengers mocked, and his Ministers
silenced; in such a case we read, that his wrath arose against them, and there
was no Remedy. For this God threatened, to search Jerusalem with Candles, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Isai. 30.8. 9, 12, 13. Zoch. 1.12.
and punish the men settled on their lees: who say in their Hearts, The Lord
will not do good, neither will he do Evil. The Security of Particular Persons
is a presage of their Ruin; when the slothful and wicked servant thinks his
Lord does delay his coming, he will come, Math. 24.50.
and cut him asunder in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he is not aware of: when Agag said, the Bitterness of death is past, he was
nearest Execution: When the Rich Fool in the Parable, said, soul take thine
ease; the next news we hear of him, is that the Pillow is plucked from under his
Head, and he is cast into Hell. So for Nations, in the Instances of the old
world, of Sodom and Gomorrah, the People of the Jews, and the Romish Babylon,
whose Plagues shall come suddenly upon her, as in one day, when she sits as a
Queen, Rev. 18.7, 8.
and thinks she shall see no Evil.

3. The night is a Time of Solitariness; men don't meet together in such
Companies by night as by Day. In the Evening every one seeks a Shelter, and an
Hiding Place for himself to rest in. Thus a selfish, narrow, dividing spirit
generally obtaining among any People, is an ill sign that a Night of Calamity
is at hand: When all mind their own things, Phil. 2.4.21.
and few or none the things of Christ, or of their common Peace. And here the
want of Concord and Union among Protestants, Divisions, and Separations, and
the sinful causes of 'em, ought to be confidered; especially when they arise to
that degree, that tho the Common Interest be at stake, men will not, so far as
in them lies, unite together to preserve and defend it. I shall speak of this
more largely in the conclusion of this Discourse.

4. Another sign of an approaching Night, is when God calls home his Laborers
from their work, and his Children to their bed of Rest. When his Remembrancers
in Sion, who should stand in the breach, to turn away Wrath; they who are the
Root and the substance in the midst of a Land, Isai. 6.13. Mich. 7.1, 2. 5 Jer.
1. Ps. 112.1. 2 Kings. 2.13.
who are the Stay, and the Staff, the Chariots and the Horsemen of Israel, are
called away in great numbers. One Elisha by his Interest with God, and the
prevalency of his Prayers, was a better defense to Israel than Chariots and
Horses, and all their warlike Preparations. The loss of such is the weakening of
a Country, because they can do more for its preservation, than the most
numerous and disciplined Army. May we not apprehend the fall of an House, when
we see the principal Pillars of it removing. Prove. 10.25.
The Righteous is an everlasting Foundation, says Solomon; Fundamentum seculi,
as some renderit, the foundation of his Age and Generation; as if the Happiness
and Peace of any Age depended on the Righteous who live in it, and when they
dye, the Foundations are removed. Isai. 65.8. Obad. 21.
They are the Repairers of Breaches, the Restorers of Paths to dwell in, the
strength of a People, the Saviors of a Nation. By their Examples, Councels,
Authority, Interest, and Prayers, they do their utmost to stop that Current of
sin, which brings Desolation.

It Is for their sakes, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.
that others are not destroyed, that national mercies are given, and continued;
and desolating Judgments kept off. A Vineyard is watered and fenc't for the
sake of the Vines which bear fruit; otherwise it would quickly be laid waste,
and the wild Boar of the Forest suffered to enter. How often had God destroyed
the Israelites, Psalm. 106.23. Genesis 19.21, 22.
had not Moses, his chosen, stood in the breach? A whole City is spared at the
Intercession of Lot. Had there been ten Righteous Persons in Sodom, it had been
spared; and when that number was not found, yet it could not be destroyed, till
Lot was gone. No wonder therefore, when such Intercessors are removed, if
Judgment follow; as when the Wind cease, the Rain falls. When there are but a
few left to stir up themselves to call on God, and know how to wrestle with him
for National mercies, no wonder if God hides himself from a professing People,
Isai 64.7. Isai 57.1.
and consumes them for their Iniquities; for such are taken away from the Evil
to come. While they continue, a storm is often delayed, and Judgment deferred;
as the Wars in Germany till after the death of Luther, who was wont to say,
that God would be Propitious, and spare 'em as long as he lived, and no longer.
God will not sweep a Land with the Besome of Destruction, till the greatest
part of his Jewels are picked out of the Rubbish; and the Residue shall be taken
care of. For their sakes he will spare a Remnant, Obad. 16.17. Math. 24.22.
and not make an utter Consumption. And when they cannot prevail to divert the
Calamity, yet it shall be lessened, and shortened for their sakes. Exemplary
Christians, and Faithful Pastors, are the Glory of Christ, and stars in his
Right Hand; and therefore their Removal cannot but presage Judgment to follow.
Especially when the Ignorance and Corruption of very many of those who succeed
them, is a new provocation to hasten vengeance. When the nurseries of Learning
are little better than schools of Vice; and the sons of the Prophets strengthen
the hands of Evil doers; and the offering of the Lord is made to be abhorred
among the People, through the vileness of the sons of Levi; for this, says God, I
will feed them with Wormwood, Ezekiel 22.26. Jer. 23.14. Jer. 5.30.
and make them drink the Water of Gall. Shall I not visit for these things?
shall I not be avenged on such a Nation as this?

5. When the Shadows grow long. The higher the sun, and the farther from
setting, after once he is risen, the shorter always the shadow; but the shadows
lengthen toward sunset. It Is therefore an ill sign when shadows are greatned,
and so much more ado is made about Ceremonies, and circumstances, and Points of
Discipline and Church Government, than for the weightier Things of the Law and
Gospel. When those things, which by one party are acknowledged to be
Indifferent, and but a shadow, and others fear to be sinful, are yet imposed,
and urged, as if they were Necessary. How desirable soever Uniformity in
lesser things among Christians may be imagined, (as it cannot be proved that
the H. Scripture does require it, so) too dear Experience will assure us, that
it is not practicable without Persecution: And even that likewise has been too
long tried without Success. It Is impossible but that Christians of different
degrees of knowledge, different tempers, educations, etc. will have various
apprehensions about doubtful points. It is not to be expected they should ever
agree in the lesser disputable Doctrines, and modes of Worship; nor in any such
Terms of Church Communion, as Christ and his Apostles have not made necessary.
But yet they ought, and very well may, bear with one another in those
Differences, for the sake of their Common Christianity; and so hold the Unity
of the spirit in the Bond of Peace. Div. Dialog. 5. 6. 30. p. 412.
"It would confer much to this, says Dr. H. More, (who lived, and dyed in the
Communion of the Church of England,) if all Opinions and Practices in Religion,
that either hinder, or do not promote the Life of God in the world, were
universally undervalued by the Church of God. -- and by this means all
occasions of squabling, and Contention about the shadows and Coverings of
Opinions and Forms, being thus removed and taken out of the way, it will be
easier to perform what the Apostle exhorts to, Ephesians 4 3.
To keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. For then there would be
no opportunity or pretense of any ones showing himself to be Religious, but
wherein true Religion does Consist: and no man would be able to bustle with any
credit, unless in the behalf of what tends to the good of the People of God,
and of all mankind. To this purpose he advises, That we all mind the
fundamental Mysteries of Truth and Interest, appertaining to the Kingdom of
God, 27. p. 398.
in opposition to the Papacy, which (he scruples not to say) is the Kingdom of
Antichrist, or that City of Babylon wherein the People of God were held
Captive. We should leave no string or Tassel, says he, of our Ancient
Captivity upon us, such, I mean, as whereby they may take hold on us, and pull
us back again into our former Bondage; but look upon our selves as absolutely
free from any tie to them, more than in endeavoring their Conversion and
Salvation. Which we knowing so Experimentally not to be compassed by needless
symbolizings with them in any thing, I conceive our best Policy is studiously
to imitate'em in nothing; but for all indifferent things, to think rather the
worse of 'em for their using them: As no Person of Honor would willingly go in
the known garb of any lewd and infamous Persons. Whatsoever we Court them in,
they do but turn it to our scorn and contempt, and are the more hardened in
their own wickedness. Wherefore, seeing that needless symbolizing with them
does them no good, but hurt, we should account our felves in all things
indifferent perfectly free, to please and satisfy, in the most universal
manner we can, those of our own Party -- supporting our selves on plain
Scripture, and solid Reason, to use and profess such things, as will be most
universally agreeable to us all, and do make most for the safety and welfare of
the true Kingdom of Christ. Such a Reconciling moderate spirit would do much to
heal our Breaches: And if we will not know the way of Peace on easier terms, by
uniting in the substantials of Religion, God may be provoked to cure our
dissentions about lesser matters by sharper methods; to chain us together in a
prison, for the common principles of the Reformed Religion; or soder us
together with our own blood; as Queen Mary ended the differences between the
pious Bishops, Ridley and Hooper, who in Edw. 6ths time could not agree about
Ceremonies and Vestments; The King could hardly get Hooper consecrated Bishop
of Gloucester, without Conformity to the scrupled Ceremonies. But Queen Mary
composed their quarrel, by a prison and a stake. Now they were perfectly
reconciled, and wrote affectionate Letters to one another, as the dearest
Brethren: and Ridley Bishop of London stoops with his Ceremonies to the others
further Reformation, telling him in a Letter when the one was a prisoner at
Oxford, the other at London, Now, my dear Brother, forasmuch as we thoroughly
agree in those things which are the grounds, and substantial points of our
Religion; against which the world so furiously rages in these days, how so ever
in time past by certain bymatters, and Circumstances of Religion, your Wisdom
and my simplicity have a little jarred; now, I say, be assured, Fox Martyr: Dr
B. Hist. Reform. part. 2 lib. 2. An. 1552 and An. 1555.
that even with my whole Heart, God is my witness, in the bowels of Christ, I
love you in the truth, and for the Truth's sake, which abides in us, and I am
persuaded, shall by the grace of God, abide in us for ever. The sense they had
of these Differences, says Dr. Burnet, ought to inspire all others with more
moderate thoughts in such matters: It had been happy, if the Fires that
consumed those Good Men, had put an end to these Contests: and if those that
have been since engaged in the like, will reflect more on the sense they had of
them, when they were now preparing for Eternity, than on the heats they were
put in concerning them, when perhaps Ease and Plenty made their Passions
keener, they may from thence be reduced to have more moderate thoughts of such
matters. Considering withal, (as the same learned Person argues, in his late
Excellent Preface concerning Persecution,) To his translation of Lactantius, of
the Death of Persecutors.
the sublimity of divine Truth, and what a poor low thing the mind of man is,
we shall see reason to blunt a little the Edge of our spirits, if they are too
sharp in such matters. -- and if Education and Temper, (which prepare men for
some opinions, and prepossess them against others) have hit together, it will
require a very extraordinary elevation to rescue a manfrom their force. --
Among all those that differ, some must be in the wrong, and those who have the
power in their hands, may possibly be of the wrong side, and in that case, all
their severity (upon the account of such differences) is turned against the
Truth, and those who believe it. -- Our being subject to error ought at least
to have this effect upon us, as to keep us from being too ready to judge hardly
of those who are of another mind, or to use them roughly for it, since they may
be in the Right, and we may be Mistaken; at least, they may have very probable
Reasons for their Opinions, which if they do not quite justify their Mistakes,
do very much excuse and lessen them. -- As to the great Controversy concerning
the Obligation which lay on the Gentiles for obeying the Mosaical Law, tho it
were judged by the Apostles against the Judaisers, yet how gently are they
treated, telling them, that the Kingdom of God, or the Gospel, did not consist
in those scrupulous distinctions of Meats and Drinks, but in Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the H. Ghost; and that every man was to endeavor to be fully
persuaded in his own mind, and was not to Judge his Brother in such things, but
leave him to the Judgment of God. With much more to the same Purpose.

Secondly, Upon such Reflections as these, what Counsel may be given? as a
means to continue the Light where it yet shines, and render it more steady and
glorious, (notwithstanding the threatening Tendency of any Dark cloud) and
likewise to help what we can to recover it again in those places, where a Night
of Darkness has overspread our Brethren? The Directions will principally
concern English Protestants, in such Duties as these:

First, Thankfulness to God for past and present Mercies, in our own Land, with
Sympathy and Compassion toward our Suffering Brethren in other parts of
Europe. God sent the Word of Life, the Blessed returning Light of the Gospel to
shine early upon these Nations, by the Doctrine of the Reformation, scattering
the darkness of Popish Errors, discovering the true Religion, freed from the
Corruptions and Impostures of men, from a Burden of Ceremonies almost Jewish,
and of Superstitions and Idolatry almost Pagan. This Light has been continued
by an able and faithful Ministry. No Country in the World has had greater, or
on all accounts equal, Advantages with our own in this particular. Foreigners
have admired the Burning and shining Lights in our Candlestick. And if in any
part of England there is any defect of this Light, it is part of our sin, and
Punishment. As Men, as Christians, as English Christians, our Portion has
been, that of the Firstborn, greater than our Brethren have enjoyed. And tho we
have waxed fat, and lifted up the Heel, forgot the God of our Mercies, and
provoked him by our Ingratitude; yet with what admirable Patience has he born
with us? By what various methods has he called us to Repentance? Warning us by
lesser strokes, and then turning from the fierceness of his Anger? saving us
for his own Names sake, when our own Follies, or the Malice of our Popish
Enemies have brought us within a step of Ruin? How often has he defeated their
Counsels, prevented their Cruelty, and brought their works of Darkness to
Light? Many a time and often, may we say with the Church, Ps. 129. have they
afflicted me from my Youth, yet have they not prevailed. God has cut in funder
the Cords of the Wicked, tied up their hands, broken their Measures, bafled
their Projects, discovered their plots, and cut out other work for'em, so that
they could not hitherto accomplish their Enterprise, (and God grant they never
may) of Extirpating the Reformed Religion out of these Islands. What Gratitude
do we owe to God, when we Constder the many deceived, oppressed Nations of the
Earth, that are without Knowledge, Holiness, or Peace? The vast Countries under
Heathenism, Infidelity, or Popery; While Britain still continues to be
Emanuel's Land. Has any Nation under Heaven been honored with more signal
marks of divine Favor? How many and famous have our Deliverances and
Salvations been? which all about us observe, and say, Ps. 126.3.
The Lord has done Great things for them.

At the same time while we have been spared, others have been made Examples to
warn us; his Anger has smoakt against his own Inheritance in other places. Our
Brethren (especially in France and Piedmont) have been exposed to the Rage of
barbarous Persecutors; multitudes imprisoned, tormented, executed, innumerable
families and almost whole Provinces ruined, Ministers banished, Temples
demolisht, and a thousand Outrages committed against the Professors of the
same Faith, that we as yet quietly profess and own. Their solemn Assemblies
have mourned, and their Blood been mingled with their Sacrifices, while we have
had the liberty to worship God according to the Rule of the Gospel, and at the
same time sit peaceably under our own Vines and Fig Trees. Their Harps have
been hanged on the Willows in Babylon, while we might sing the songs of Sion in
the public Assemblies of his People: and our Country been made a Refuge and a
Sanctuary to the escaped Remnant, who are as Firebrarnds plucked out of the
Burning, and in their Exile state have experienced the generous and Christian
Charity of Great Britain, Holland, and some other Protestant Countries.

Shall we not then mingle our Tears with the dust of Sion? and put on sackloth,
when she is thus covered with a cloud? Shall we not weep with our Brethren,
that weep for the loss of their Pleasant things? and feel the Irons entering
into their souls? Shall we gratify our Pride, and put on our Ornaments, and
indulge our selves in Luxury? While they are stripped naked and afflicted with
Baldness; while they are fed with the Bread of Adversity, Isai. 22.12, 13, 14.
and the Water of Affliction? such shall go Captive with the First that go
Captive, and this their Iniquity shall not be purged away.

Secondly, Humility and Cautionary Fear, in opposition to vain Confidence and
Presumption, concerning any particular Church or Nation.

Let us not trust in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord; as if because
we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, rejecting the Corruptions of the
Roman Church in Doctrine and Worship, that no Corruption of Manners could
provoke God to punish and to destroy us. Some build their Confidence of our
safety on the vast Numbers of Protestants, on the strength of the National
Church, on the Multitude of those who by common Interest are obliged to defend
it, and on other such considerations for the present, or with reference to the
future, which may be of some weight to a mere Rationalist; but if God, upon the
Provocation of National Guilt, be risen out of his Place to execute Judgment,
he will reject and shame us notwithstanding our Confidence, except we Repent.
For whatever may be apprehended to be the immediate Occasion of a People's
Ruin, in vain do men think to obviate and prevent it without making peace with
God. And whoever be the Instruments of Calamity to a People, it is the Justice
of God, as provoked by sin, that must principally be attended to: without which
we can be consident of the success of nothing that is attempted for our
Preservation. It Is he who in righteous Judgment permits an open Enemy to
prevail, or suffers a most unseasonable Misunderstanding among them who should
Unite: Isai. 9.14.
It Is He who mingles a perverse spirit among those who have manifold obligations
to agree together. If the Voice of Union and Concord among Protestants cannot
be heard, at a time when there are most pressing and importunate Calls to it,
it is of the Lord, who does not give an Ear to hear, nor a Heart to consider. 1
Kings. 12.23, 24.
Thus we find it concerning the Division of the Ten Tribes of Israel from the
two.

Some are Confident on other grounds, and expect the speedy accomplishment of
many Prophecies and Promises of the latter days, and presume to speak
positively as to the time. But how uncomfortable will be the Disappointment, if
we should conclude for one time, when God has determined another at the
distance of several years? How many Holy Men have been mistaken already, and
lived to see themselves Confuted? How different are the Opinions of Learned and
Good men concerning the Calculation of the Times in the Apocalypse? as to the
Slaying and the Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the pouring out of the
Vials, whether they have already emptied themselves upon their proper objects,
or when they shall; when the 1260 Days of the Woman's Wilderness State shall
expire, and Babylons Time and Day be no more, (to determine which we must know
when it began,) how different are the Opinions of Learned Protestants as to the
Time of these things? Let us not therefore anticipate the Counsels of God, (the
vision being for an appointed Time) by too positive Conclusions as to such
things; but give him Glory, as the fittest Judge of the Times and seasons,
wherein to accomplish his own Great and Holy Purposes.

Neither can we argue from any unfulfilled Prophecies the preservation of any
particular Country, or Church, after great and general provocations, without
suitable Repentance and Reformation. And tho that of all others be the most
neglected and despised method of national safety, (the most think by Politics,
and Numbers, Confederates, and such imaginary Fences to keep off danger) they
will yet find, that they cannot more despise Repentance and Returning to God,
than he does contemn, and will defeat and shame all their wise Counsels and
Contrivances without it. Therefore the next and principal Duty we are called to
is,

Thirdly, Humiliation and Repentance among Protestants of all Parties and
Denominations, for their respective Guilt, with serious endeavors to promote
practical Holiness, and Reformation of Manners. All have contributed to provoke
the Anger of God, and more or less have been faulty in our carriage to one
another; and therefore it becomes us all to search and try our Ways, and turn
unto the Lord. God and Men are our Accusers; we have opened our own shame, and
it cannot be hid; and the fire is already kindled which reveals our sin in the
effects of it; it is no time for any Party or Profession to stand upon their
Credit, and excuse themselves; but rather endeavor to turn away the displeasure
of God, by falling at his feet in penitent Confessions of sin, and sincere
Repentance.

Without this, all other methods will be ineffectual, and the Anger of God will
most easily and certainly bear down before it all the little Banks and Ramparts
that humane Policy or strength can oppose. It will prove a dangerous and fatal
Mistake for us to imagine by any other means, if this be neglected, to be able
to provide for our safety. The Folly of the ancient Gauls related by N.
Damascen, De moribus Gentilium.
may move our Compassion, who when the sea broke into their Country, went and
stood in the breach with their weapons in their hands: and we shall be guilty
of the same or worse folly, if we think to secure the interest of Religion in
England against a threatening Inundation, by any Humane Expedients whatsoever,
without Repentance. The use of Wisdom and Prudence is now if ever seasonable;
but that alone is not to be trusted to: for the Highest Wisdom of any People,
under such a Guilt as ours, is to make Peace with God by Humiliation for sin.
Whilst this Achan remains undiscovered or indulged, the Camp of Israel will be
troubled, and we shall not be able to stand before an Enemy. An Heathen Cato
(as we are informed by S. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, lib. 1. c. 33.
who commends the saying) could tell the wise and warlike Romans, that it was
impossible their Commonwealth should flourish, stantibus Maenibus, ruentibus
Moribus, tho their Walls were never so firm, if their Manners were degenerate.
Our Lives and Conversations must protest against the Corruptions of Popery, if
ever we keep it out. It Is a dismal symptom of an approaching Darkness, that so
few in comparison are awakened to a due sense of this obligation: God's Calls
unto it are more loud than ordinary; and we never seemed to be more deaf to
such a voice than now. God may justly complain of us, as he did of the
Israelites of old, Jer. 8.6.
I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man Repented him of his
Wickedness, saying, What have I done?

This therefore we must in good earnest set about, if ever we are established
and saved: Every one must reflect, and mourn for his own sins in particular,
and then for the sins of others. There is no party or sort of men among us who
have reason to think, that all the sins, whereby God is provoked, and which are
to be confessed and reformed, are among those who differ from them. I am far
from laying the Guilt of National sins to any one party of Protestants, because
there are no Orders and Degrees of men, no Particular Societies or Parties, in
Cities or Country, (however some Individuals may have approved themselves to
God) but need a call to Repentance.

Besides, the sins of Professors as such, in Formality, Barrenness, Conformity
to the World, and decays of Faith, Love, and Zeal, they who have suffered for
their Nonconformity, have been too Impatient under their sufferings; and have
set themselves more than they ought against the Authors or Instruments of them,
and endeavored to make them odious. Instead of looking up to God, and praying
for their Repentance, and endeavoring their Conviction in the spirit of
Meekness; by Censures and Slanders, Bitterness and the workings of Revenge,
they have fled from Concord, and the way of Peace, and made the Breaches wider.
What might tend to an Accommodation of our Differences, has by neither side
been so well entertained as it ought. Peacemakers and Reconcilers have been ill
treated, and had little success. The want of a Public spirit has also been
visible among the several parties, and is one mischievous Consequence of our
Divisions. Every one shifting for himself in a time of Common Danger; taking
care of his own Goods and Cabin, with the neglect of what is necessary to
preserve the whole Ship from sinking. There has likewise been great partiality
in our Esteem and Affection, toward those of one party, having men's Persons
(for the sake of their Opinions) too much in Admiration; whilst others, very
deserving of our Respect and Love, have been despised and undervalued. Neither
is there any one Party but has seemed to suppose, that the whole Intrest of
Religion was more concerned, than it is, in the prosperity or sufferings of
themselves, and those of their Persuasion. I speak these things in faithfulness
to the souls of my Brethren, and include my self as Guilty, desiring
forgiveness of God, and professing Repentance.

I likewise beg of God, that so Considerable and Worthy a Body of Protestants,
as the Church of England, may seriously reflect upon the severities they have
used to their Dissenting-Brethren, to the silencing of so many Ministers,
(whose preaching might be useful) to the Ruin offo many Families, and the
hindrance of Common Christianity, by obstructing the free Progress of the
Gospel of Christ, the endeavors of all who are qualified to serve that design,
(were the number greater,) being little enough in so populous a Kingdom.
Besides the Ignorance, Negligence, and Scandalous Lives of so many of the
Clergy, with the Corruption of the Universities, Ecclesiastical Courts, and
Cathedral Worship: How has the Conscientious Diligence of several Ministers
been discountenanced and censured, by the Inspectors of the Clergy, for
omitting some part of the Rubrical Conformity, when such as were manifestly
scandalous have been better treated? In how many places have the more serious
and Conscientious Christians been reproacht and prosecuted for their
Nonconformity, when Drunkenness, Swearing, whoredom, and scandalous
Immoralities have been overlookt in others, or the guilty persons, so they kept
to the Rites of the Church, been more gently treated, than Dissenters, tho
otherwise sober and unblameable in their Conversations? Such things as these we
are now called upon, by God and Man, to consider, and repent of. If all Parties
do not see their Sin, how can we hope for a Cure?

If an Apology be needful for so much Plainness; I shall subjoyn the Words of
the Reverend Mr. Baxter (for whose Ministry and Writings I desire, with many
others, to bless God,) when he gives the Reasons of his speaking so freely of
the Sins of Ministers, in his Reformed Pastor. If thousands of you, says he,
were in a leaking Ship, and those who should pump out the water, and stop the
Leaks, should be sporting or asleep, yea or but favor themselves in their
Labors, to the hazarding of you all, would ye not awake them to their work,
and call out upon them to labor as for your lives? and if you used some
Sharpness and Importunity with the sloathful, would you think that man were
well in his Wits that should take it ill of you? that should accuse you of
Pride, self-conceitedness or Unmannerliness, to presume to talk so sawcily to
your Fellow-Workmen? or should tell you, that you wrong them by diminishing
their Reputation? Would you not say, The work must be done, or we are all Dead
men? Is the ship ready to sink, and do you talk of Reputation? Or had you
rather hazard your selves and us, than hear of your Faults?

If after all the Warnings we have had, and the threatening Danger we are in, we
will not be persuaded to Repent, and seek the Common Peace; has not God told
us in his Word, and does he not show us in his Providence, that he has other
ways to humble us than those he has formerly made use of? His Arrows are not
all spent; he has a Lash of Scorpions, if we remain Impenitent under former
Rods. Pestilence, Sword, Rev. 9.12, 20. De Gubern. Dei. lib. 7.
and Fire, have taken their turns, but without success. So that the Complaint
of Salvian is applicable to us, Nos Vrimur and secamur, etc. no former
Applications have wrought a Cure; and which is more deplorable, we grow worse
by our very Medicines. We grant this in the General; but at the same time our
Divisions have this ill Effect (among many others) that each party is apt to
clear themselves, by laying the whole Burden on the other; whereas all have
contributed to the raising of the Storm, tho few have the ingenuity of Jonah,
who acknowledged, it was for his sake.

Can we say, that our Brethren in France, and other places, were Greater
Sinners than we, whom God has made to drink so deep of the Cup of his
indignation? Should we not rather conclude, that Our sin will find us out? and
that except we Repent, we shall also perish? When the Jews were in great
danger, and as great security, notwithstanding the Anger of God against their
Brethren of the Ten Tribes, they continued to bless themselves in their Hearts,
saying, we shall have Peace, we need not fear; God commanded the Prophet
Isaiah, to cry aloud, and lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, Nai. 58.1.
to tell the People their Transgressions: and the Prophet Joel calls to the
Priests and Elders to sound a Trumpet in Sion, Joel. 2.
to publish a solemn Assembly, to sanctify a Fast, to gather the people, young
and old, together, to humble themselves, mourn, and weep, to rend the Heart,
and not the Garment, to confess sin, and deprecate Judgment, and seek the face
of God for mercy; and withal, to turn from their Evil ways; without which no
solemn Humiliation will be accepted of God, but incense him the more.

Therefore if ever our Breaches be healed, and National Destructive Judgments
prevented, we must agree in this, to Repent and Reform, and do our utmost to
retrieve and promote the Power and Practice of Serious Godliness. It Is the
Practical Love of the Truth, with entire Devotedness to God, and Conscientious
regard to our known Duty, that alone will be able to secure us from the
Judgments of God, or be an Effectual Preservative against Popery, Dr. Owen,
Sermon. 10. Contin. Morn. Euerc. on 1 Pet. 2.3. Ib. Mr. How, Sermon. 4. on Colos.
2.2.
as a late learned Person has proved and pressed it. This has been recommended
with great Light and strength by another, who is yet living, in answer to that
Question, What may most hopefully be attempted to allay Animosities among
Protestants, that our Divisions do not prove our Ruin? Where it is proved, that
the best means to unite, establish, and preserve us, both against the Judgments
of God, and the Endeavors of such as design the Ruin of the Common Christian
Interest among us, is to Improve our Faith to greater Clearness, Certainty, and
Efficacy, with respect to the substantials of Religion; and to evidence the
fruits of such a Faith in holy Love and Obedience. Without this, tho we speak
and write never so much or well in defense of the Reformation, yet whilst our
Adversaries behold our unholy lives, they will still open their mouths to
reproach the Reformed Religion, and live in hopes of extirpating it. In vain is
it hoped, that the most learned Pens can preserve the Doctrine of the
Reformation, if our Vices contradict and undermine its Foundation. Unless our
manners and Conversation do correspond to and credit the Religion we profess,
we are very unlikely to transmit its Doctrine to Posterity, or to keep the
possession of it our selves.

Fourthly, To mourn in secret for the Sins of others: This should accompany
Repentance and sorrow for our own Sins. The public Abominations for which God
threatens to make the Land mourn, should be bewailed; and our Protest against
them thereby entered, that God may not charge us with the Guilt of public
Transgressions. This must needs be Acceptable to God, as an Evidence of our
Love to him, and of our Concern for his Glory; and Seasonable for us; as a
Testimony of our affection to that Country and People to which we belong. When
the Being of God is boldly questioned; his Providence, and his Authority mocked;
his holy name blasphemed; his Institutions profaned and polluted; his Christ
(and our Jesus) vilified and despised, and by open Impieties crucified again;
when his Glory is trampled on by abounding Wickedness, willful and barefaced,
so general and to such a degree, as is the usual Forerunner of Ruin and
Desolation; Can we love God, or wish well to the Land of our Nativity, without
mourning for these things? Can we consider the growth of Atheism and
Infidelity, Popery, and Profaneness, and not mourn? Can we see Idolatry, which
God abhors, get ground, and so many Thousands in a neighboring Country
receiving the mark of Antichrist in their Foreheads, and in their righthands,
and such a multitude in our own land in a Preparedness to do it, and not be
affected with the dishonor of God? not drop a Tear, or lift up a cry to
prevent the effects of his just Displeasure? And if we love our selves, is
there any better, any other method to provide for our own Preservation and
safety? Whatever night of darkness and distress may come upon a Nation, Men of
this Character have always been favored with special Protection; God has set a
mark on their foreheads for preservation, Ezekiel 9.5.
when the Destroyers have been Commissioned to execute Judgment. He will cover
their heads in the day of Battle, when his Arrows are sharp in the Hearts of
his Enemies. He will hide them in the hollow of his hand, provide a Zoar, a
Gath, a Pella, some place of Retreat till the Storm be over; give them to find
Favor in a strange Land, or overshadow them in their own, accompany them in
Banishment, and open the Hearts and Hands of others to show them kindness; Moab
shall hide his Outcast, and Cyrus let go his Captives, and the Earth help the
Woman, Rev. 12.16.
the most unlikely means and instruments assist and succor that Remnant whom
he will save. And if we should be called to bear Testimony to his Name and
Truth by suffering for it, such a Temper and Practice will best dispose and
prepare us for it: It will secure his gracious Presence with us; it will
interest us in the Promise of his Assistance and Help; and after we have
Confessed him before men, he will publicly acknowledge and reward us before
the whole World.

Fifthly, Earnest Prayer to God for the Peace and welfare of Jerusalem, and
that part of it to which we are most nearly related. We are required, not to
keep silence, or give him any Rest, till he make Jerusalem both a peaceable
habitation, and a Praise in the Earth. Isai. 62.1. Ezekiel. 22.30.
When the hand of God is lifted up, there is need of an Enquiry after such
Intercessors as will stand in the Gap, and turn away Wrath. Numb. 16.
It Is time to run with a Censer as Aaron, when the Fire of God is begun to fall
down in our sight; to make haste, and humble our selves, and cry mightily to
him, as Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.
for the Residue of his People, when the Executioners are gone forth with a
Commission to destroy; saying, O spare thy People! spare the Remnant of thy
scattered flock! spare our Brethren in France and Savoy, the Witnesses of thy
Truth! spare Great Britain and Ireland! spare the United Provinces!

Could I represent the languishing disfigured Countenance of the Reformed
Churches, mourning in Sackcloth and Ashes in several places; whole Countries,
which have been as the Garden of God, whose Inabitants are now as the
Generation of his wrath; the great multitude that once walked with Christ in
the Profession of the Truth, that now walk no more with him; the many
neighboring Vineyards, from whence a few years ago he had pleasant fruit, now
broken down and laid wast; could I represent these things fully, you would see
the Necessity of more earnest Intercessions with God on the behalf of Sion than
ordinary. But tho she stretches out her hands, Lam. 1.2, 17.
Who is there of all her Sons that she has brought up to comfort her? Who
among all her Lovers to pity her? Who among all her Sons to guide her, and take
her by the hand? Even when she is shaken, and in danger to have both her
Pillars, of Truth and Peace, broken and cast to the ground? She sits in the
dust, and few or none seem to care for her: and tho they see her sorrow, and
hear her complaints, will hardly offer up a prayer more than at other times for
her Deliverance.

However, we have the greatest Encouragement to make use of Prayer in this Case
of all others, because all the great things promised by God, and expected by
his People, must come this way. The Return from the Babylonish Captivity, tho
the time of it was adjusted in the promise, must be brought about by prayer.
Jer. 29.10.
The wrath of God was poured out on the Pagan Persecutors, Rev. 8.3, 4.
in answer to Prayer. The Judgments of God against the Adversaries of the
Church, come out of the same Censer, into which the Prayers of the Saints are
put. The seventh and last Vial, that shall make an end of the Enemies of Sion,
is to be opened by Prayer. Let our own Case, or the condition of our Brethren,
seem never so desperate, we may obtain Relief this way. Rev. 14.15, 16, 17.
When every Reed, on which we leaned, is broken; and our fingers knocked off
from all humane Dependence; when the secular Arm of Help shrinks and withers,
and nothing but a Wonder can prevent despair; when every Prop is removed, and
Confidence blasted; When all our Physicians prove of no value; when all
Expectations of succor are defeated; when only an Infallible Eye can direct our
way, and an Almighty hand preserve from Ruin; when no Plaster will stick to
our sore, no balm cure our wound; all our Anchors come home, and our hopes
ashamed; when the Clouds return after the rain; and threaten such a Storm that
Affliction shall not need to rise a second time; under the smartest sufferings,
and deepest distress for the present; under the saddest symptoms, and darkest
prospect for the future; tho we should hear the sound as of many Waters, and
every thing from day to day have a worse appearance than formerly, yet by
Prayer to God we may stay and support our spirits, both with relation to our
selves, and the case of our Brethren. * Such is the Harmony between the Prayers
of the Church and the Counsels of God, that a spirit of serious fervent
supplication for Sion is a Token of approaching Deliverance. * This succor
will be able to reach our Brethren at a Distance, in other Countries. * This is
the most speedy Assistance we are able to send them, by engaging God for their
Help. * This is an Invisible Help, which no Adversaries can hinder or prevent:
These Arrows against Babylon will kill in the dark, and no force or power can
obstruct their Execution. * This will avail sometimes when nothing else will;
some Devils will not be dispossessed, some difficulties will not be removed, some
Dangers not prevented, some mercies can not be obtained, any other way than by
Fasting and Prayer. * By this one Christian, any one, the poorest, the meanest
upright Christian, may help and succor a great Many others, yea the whole
Church. This Every Good man is capable of, who can do nothing else; this Bow
and Arrow will fit the weakest Arm, wherewith to combat the Adversaries of
Sion. * And there is no case wherein this may not be of some Advantage; as no
other means will be effectual if this be neglected. We shall obtain spiritual
Mercies for our own souls, as the Reward of it; and it may be a temporal
Prefervation for our Persons and Families: or we may prevail for the deferring
of public Judgments and a longer Time of Trial; or for the mitigation and
lessening of them; or for a Preparedness to meet with God in the way of his
Judgments; and the sanctified Improvement of Public Calamities; or obtain
favor for more Innocent Posterity: And shall at least have the Consolation, of
having discharged our Duty to our Brethren, and to our Country, and of having
manifested the Affections of Children, who are sensibly affected with the Anger
of God, and do what we can to make up the Breach.

Let us therefore be much in Prayer to God for Sion, in secret, and in Company
with others, as we have opportunity: with deep Humiliation and Repentance, with
sincere aims at the Glory of God, and the Honor of Christ, with Faith and
Confidence, with Fervency and Importunity, with stedfastness and Perseverance:
Notwithstanding the Inefficacy of any former attempts this way, from the
seeming Delay of God to answer; Considering, that all the supplications and
Intercessions of the Israel of God in former Ages will have a real hand, in the
final Deliverance of the Church, and our Prayers must help to fill up the
measure, and hasten the Coming of the Son of Man.

How far the Great Argument, used by the Church of old, John. 3.9. Jer. 14.9,
21. See Mr. Howe's trest. of the Right use of that Argum. in prayer from the
Name of God 80. 1682.
We are called by thy name, thou art yet in the midst of us, and what will thou
do for thy Great Name? may be pleaded by us, ought seriously to be considered.
For the Case of a particular People and Nation may be such, as to give just
grounds to fear, lest the Argument from the Name of God should make against us;
lest the Honor of God, and the Glory of his holy Name be more concerned to
punish, than to deliver us. We would humbly Hope, that our Case will yet admit
the use of this Argument, in our Intercessions with God. Thou art yet in the
midst of us; the Relation is Reciprocal between thee and us; and we hope it
will be for the honor of thy Name to save us. What will thou do for thy Great
Name? i. e. what becomes of us and of our Posterity after us, is no such great
matter; tho we should perish, and our Name be blotted out from under Heaven:
but if the B. Gospel be removed, or continue to be an Empty sound, if
Profaneness and I dolatry increase and prevail, thy Holy name will be
dishonored, thy sacred Truth reproacht, the Glory of our Redeemer Ecclipst,
the fruits of his Death obstructed, and thine Adversaries will triumph, and
say, that thou have born Testimony to their Errors and Impieties, favored
their Designs, and Countenanc't their Wickedness. Lord! What will thou do for
thy Great Name? And may we not say, that Thou art yet in the midst of us? tho
there are not so many visible Tokens of thy special Presence as formerly,
either with Ministers or People; yet thou do walk among thy Golden
Candlesticks, and now and then let us know that thy Glory is not quite gone:
There are some, (Oh that there were more!) who feel and live those Truths which
others only talk of; who bear the Image of their Lord, and their souls cleave
to him, and follow hard after him; who delight in his ways, and love his
Interest and People with a cordial affection, to whom the honor of his Name is
incomparably; dear and precious who value his love, and communion with him as
their felicity; who mourn for the sins of others, and to whom the Reproach of
the solemn Assemblies is a daily Burden, etc. Oh Continue this Presence of
thine! and vouchsafe more visible enlarged effects and manifestations of it!
which we may rather hope for, while he is thus in the midst of us, than to
obtain a Recalling of it, when he is quite gone; as the Cure of a Disease, and
the Recovery of health may more hopefully be prayed for than a Resurrection
from the dead. There is yet another thing very seasonable to be joined with
Prayer, and which we are obliged to, whether we have more or less hope
concerning any particular Church or Nation; and that is,

Sixthly, The Exercise of Faith in God concerning the Promised Salvation and
Perpetuity of the Christian Church. The Gares of Hell shall not prevail against
her; she shall not dye, or Death (whose mouth is the Grave) shall not be
Victorious over her: the burning Bush shall never be consumed. We think this
and the other thing makes against the Church, and threatens to destroy it. Here
one part is rooted out, there another is oppressed, and the whole World almost
wanders after the Beast, and the False Prophet. Edom and Amaleck, and Moah and
Ammon, are all in a confederacy and Combination against Sion. But if it were
yet worse, we must live by Faith, that all shall tend to the accomplishment of
God's great design, of the Furtherance of the Gospel: The truly Christian
Interest shall live, and flourish, and get ground after all opposition; yea by
those thins shall it be advanced, Mic. 4.11, 12, 13.
which we may apprehend as prejudicial to it. God's thoughts are not as ours,
nor his ways as ours; what we think a threatening mischief, may prove a great
Blessing, and often does so. Psalm. 107.7.
What a Compass did Israel fetch from Egypt to Canaan, and yet God says, he
led them by the Right way? forty years in a journey, that might have been
despatcht in ten days. He is never out of his way, or mistaken in the methods
of his Providence to fulfill his word. This we are most certain of, that the
Interest of Christ and the Christian Church shall live in the midst of all
storms, be rooted and established by the most shaking Providence: and that when
it seems lowest, and most likely to sink, it is the fittest time for the
Wisdom, Power, and Faithfulness of God to discover it self. Rev 5.4.
When none was found worthy or able to open the book, the Lamb takes it out of
the hands of him who sat on the throne. Our Exalted Savior, who has the Keys
of Death and Hell, is not weary of holding the Scepter in his hand. He sits at
Helm, and steers the ship, and will not suffer it to perish. Therefore no
Depths, no difficulties, no delay of deliverance, should dishearten us. If God
will work, a Fire not blown shall consume his Enemies, and Destruction and Fear
shall come together. Job 20.26, Rev. 18.7, 8.
The Vision is for an appointed Time, in the end it shall speak, it shall not
Lie; it shall Come, it will not Tarry: tho to our Sense it may seem to Tarry,
our Faith must correct the Verdict of our Sense, and make us wait for it: for
not a word or tittle of what God has spoken concerning the latter days shall
be unfulfilled.

When Providence are dark, and a storm is begun, we are ready to be puzzled,
and cry out; what shall we say to these things? but let us remember what the
Apostle adds, as a sufficient Reply, If God be for us, who can be against us?
Romans 8.31.
we are apt to question the Power of God: this is at the bottom of our
unbelieving Fears; were it otherwise, See Numb. 11.19, 21.
we should not believe and trust God least, when Dangers are greatest. When
Abraham's faith had overcome that Difficulty about the Power of God, he was
able to triumph over all discouragements. Hebr. 11.17: 18, 19.
God can do more abundantly for us than we can ask or think; and give Spiritual
and Temporal Salvation at once; that upon Mount Sion there shall be
Deliverance, and Holiness too. Obad. 47.


Let us not then be discouraged: God rules over all the Kingdoms of the Earth,
and changes the Government, and Governors of them as he pleases. He has
tossed up and down the Powers of the world by turns: and can and will do the
like again, as shall best serve the ends of his Glory, and the accomplishment
of his word. Sometimes almost all the Princes of Europe have been Protestants;
and on a sudden the scene has changed, and the most of them have given their
Power to the Beast. In one year, Anno Christi 1619. See Rushworths: Collect:
17: Jacobi 1.
when in Holland the Synod of Dort was called, the King of England was a
Protestant, and the Prince Elector Palatine, a Protestant, was chosen King of
Bohemia, and four or five Princes in Germany were also Protestants: insomuch
that some were ready to cry out, the Golden Age was come, and the Glory of the
latter Times. But within one year, all was turned again: when the Bohemians
were routed, and their new King and Queen forced to fly into Holland, being
over-thrown by the Imperial Forces, in the famous Battle at Prague. Upon which
the Protestant Union in Germany declined, and most of the Princes of it
reconciled themselves to the Emperor, and only interceded for the Palatine, but
in vain. We must trust in God, and live by faith, notwithstanding all the
changes and revolutions of the world; tho the Kings of the Earth should not be
Nursing Fathers to the Church, as well as when they are.

The last Counsel is mutual Forgiveness, and Forbearance, with serious
endeavors, in our several Places after Christian Concord. And because of the
seasonableness of this advice to English Protestants, I shall speak of it under
several Considerations, which may enforce the duty, and assist us in the
performance of it.

First, Consider the Common obligations we are all under, as Christians, to
Brotherly Love, and Charity; and to endeavor the Unity and Peace of the Church.
These things were never discommended by any, and therefore it will not be
needful to say much in the Praise of them: as that Love is the fulfilling of
the Law, the End of Faith, the badge of a Christian, etc. that all Knowledge,
Gifts, Utterance, Sufferings are in vain, where this is wanting. But it is
Ignorance and mistake concerning the nature of Brotherly Love and Union, and of
the way and means that lead to it, that has made our Divisions and the
Consequences of them so mischievous to the Church of God. For the Unity of the
Church in Faith and Love may very well be preserved, without having just the
same Conceptions of all Revealed Objects. Such an Union as that is morally
impossible, and can never be expected; and therefore to endeavor the Peace of
the Church on that Foundation, is an hopeless and vain attempt. As much may be
said concerning an Union in doubtful, unscriptural Rites, Orders, and
Ceremonies: None of our Lords commands of Unity, or directions for it, do
either require, or so much as mention this. Many lesser Differences in opinion
and practice are consistent with the nature, ends, and fruit of that Unity
recommended and enjoined by the Gospel; if such differences be but managed with
a spirit of love, mutual Forbearance, and condescension.

Our great care must be to Remember our Relation to the Vriversal Church of
Christ upon Earth, which is first in order of nature, by our Baptism, before
our Relation to any particular Church; and is both more noble, more necessary,
and more Durable. We must therefore take heed of confining our Love to any one
Party of Christians, because of our mind and way, (altogether as unreasonable
as to love only those of our own Age, Stature, or Complexion,) lest the great
and more comprehensive Interest of Christians, and Provestants, be forgotten
and neglected: lest a narrow Zeal for a small Party of Christians should
prejudice the Interest of the Universal Church, or cause of Christianity. There
is one God, and one Lord, one Head, and one Savior, into whose name we are all
Baptized; one Covenant, which all in Baptism make with this one God and
Savior; One spirit, whereby we are all Regenerated; one New Creature, in all
Holy Christians, begotten by this Spirit; One Gospel, the Rule of Faith and
Life, and Foundation of our Common Hope; one Body of Christ, both Mystical and
Visible; (all real Christians are members of the former, and all professing
Christians of the latter, by visible subjection to Christ as their Head;) one
way of Faith and Holiness, wherein all must walk; one End, and Happiness; which
all expect; and one Heaven, where all the Children of God shall meet, and live
forever, (however they fall out by the way) with one mind and Heart, in one
Blessed work of Praising our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. From hence
cannot but result an obligation to Brotherly love and Unity in seeking the
Peace and Prosperity of the whole Christian Church; not reproaching others as
Heretics and Schismatics, who are not of our mind in lesser things; not
partially excusing the faults of them who are, and aggravating those of other
Christians, and Brethren, whose salvation we should desire and endeavor, and
not lay snares before 'em, much less hate and persecute 'em, because in some
things they do not think, and speak, and act as we do. How unbecoming is it the
Disciples of the Prince of Peace (his Ministers especially) to render the
greatest part of Christians odious, and tempt the weak to Slanders, Judgings,
and Envies, which are fruits of the Flesh?

If ever God will Heal his Broken Churches, a spirit of Love, and Unity, and
moderation must be revived, instead of fierce dividing zeal: and the H.
Scriptures alone be thought a sufficient Rule; and no men's Confessions made the
Test of Church Communion any farther than as plainly agreeing with the H.
Scriptures. Concord and Union upon such terms in which we are all agreed, must
be our Cure, if ever we are cured. But Healing Truths are never likely to be
entertained among us till God give healing spirits to the Pastors, and Leaders
of the Church. The Concessions of the moderate men of all Parties, would be a
sufficient foundation for Agreement, (in Christian love to one another) for the
Interest of the whole; managing the lesser differences with mutual forbearance
and condescension, without endangering or troubling the Church. Loving those
with whom we cannot in all particulars join, corresponding with them in what we
can, praying for and with them, Treating them as Brethren, and subjects of the
Kingdom of Christ, pitying them in their Afflictions, Sufferings, Errors, and
Temptations, relieving their wants as we are able, having no aversation to
their Persons, not seeking their Hurt, or rejoicing in it, not judging or
censuring them, (any otherwise than natural Reason, and the Rule of Scripture
will allow) much less rejecting them from the Body of Christ, by unchurching of
'em.

They who are thought to go farthest from the Church of England's Discipline,
while they all acknowledge the Doctrine of the 39 Articles, however they may be
accused, have declared their Moderation, as to their Brethren from whom they
differ, in as full and charitable Expressions, as can well be desired; Mr.
Phil. Nigh has wrotea book to prove the lawfulness of hearing the Preachers in
Parish Churches; and before him Ames against Johnson, Treatise of Evang. Love
and Unity. p. 85, 86.
God forbid, says Dr. Owen, that any such thought should enter into our
Hearts, as tho the Churches constituted in all things according to our light,
and the rules we apprehend appointed in Scripture for that purpose, should be
the only true Churches in the World; and whilst we judge others to be true
Churches, we shall not be much moved or provokt by their Judgment, who think
ours are none, because we differ from them, and plead for Reformation beyond
their measure. We have the same thoughts of the Christian Churches in Europe,
called Reformed, the same love toward them, the same readiness for Communion
with them, as we would desire any Disciples of Christ in the World to have,
bear, or exercise toward us. We do not think that the things wherein they
fail, wherein they miss, or out-go the rule, are in their own nature absolutely
destructive of their Church State.

Dear Experience, one would think, should now call us to mutual forbearing one
Another in Love. And whatever be the Reward of Reconcilers from men, (commonly
to be ill thought and spoken of by many of the differing parties) yet he that
calls to Love and union, calls to Holiness. All that is against Love, is
against Holiness, against God, against Christ, against his Spirit, his Church,
and the Interest of Mankind. The want of forbearing one another in Love has
brought us more than once very near to Ruin. And how long, and how often have
we been warned of this! Preface to his Interest of England.
The pious and Judicious Mr. Corbet told our Brethren thirty years ago, That
they who contemned. All Overtures of Peace, Union, and Accommodation, might
come to see the need, and know the want of it, as well as others; for who
knows (said he) what God is doing, or where will be the end of his working,
whose Judgments are unsearchable and past our finding out? And how often has
the Reverend Mr. Baxter told the world, to the displeasing some of all Parties,
that what Party soever it be that endeavors a Union, by the Extirpation and
Ruin of the other part, whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, or
Anabaptist, is Schismatrcal, and takes the way of Desolation.

Secondly, Consider the impossibility of our agreement in things Dark,
Doubtful, and Numerous; and the unreasonableness of endeavoring it by ways of
Violence. The terms of Christian Union laid down by the Apostle, 4 Ephesians. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. are sew and sure, plain and possible. And after all the methods that
have been tried by any, to bring us to unite upon other terms, than those of
the Scripture; we see they are as far from effecting it as ever. Every one must
endeavor to be fully persuaded in his own mind, as to what he is to believe
and practice in things sacred and Religious; nor may he make his own
understanding the Rule of Truth and Worship unto others. Every Conscientious
man ought to be determined by his own reason and Judgment, regulated by the
word of God, concerning his duty, as to the Edification of his Soul. For men to
adhere to any particular Church, or to refuse communion with any, when
opportunity offers, on any other account, than because they think it their Duty
to do so, is neither becoming Men, or Christians. And they woe are Conscious of
their own Sincerity herein, will be most inclined to judge favorably of
Others, who differ from them, and to hope that they also Act sincerely upon the
like Principle, according to their Light. And will likewise be careful how
they fasten ill and odious Consequences upon those different Opinions which
Others hold, if they be such as they disown, and would detest the Doctrines, if
they were convinced that any such Consequences did belong to them.

After all that can be said or done to justify the Severities, which any have
used in such Cases toward their Brethren, (I exclude none who have at any time
been guilty,) the greatest part of Sober men will still believe, that all Power
from God to Christian Princes and Pastors, is for Edification, and not for
Destruction: that he never gave any against his own Laws, and the Interest of
the souls of men. They will still think, that they are most concerned, it
should be, for the welfare of their own souls; and can best tell what they
find to be profitable or hurtful to 'em, and most for their edification; and
that if no Humane Authority can tie up a man to eat that which he cannot
digest, so neither to attend that Ministry only, which they do not find so much
to the Advantage and Edification of their souls, as some other which God
affords them. The different Relishes of the minds of men may here be
considered, and the benefit of gratifying them in order to edification. For I
know of some, and hear of many, who profess that they are never more Reverent,
devout, and serious, and their Hearts more affected, than in the use of the
Common Prayer: others profess with the like seriousness, as to themselves, that
they Experience the Contrary. And shall we think it reasonable, that they
should be obliged to the measures of the former? or that either should censure
the other, as not belonging to Christ on that account? Is there any Law of
Christ, any Rule of the Gospel, any duty of Love to the Brethren, that can
require men to hinder their Edification? or to join in ordinary local Communion
there, where they cannot attain the great ends of Church Communion?
Nevertheless, we must be Careful not to have the Faith of our Lord I. James 2.1.
Christ with respect of Persons. For there is a culpable Partiality with
respect to Ministers, causing Envyings, ^ Cor. 3.3.4.
Divisions, and Strifes, which the Apostle condemned in the Church of Corinth.

Were Ministers humble and self-denying, and did we more Earnestly desire and
seek the Honor of God, the Advancement of Holiness, and the salvation of
souls, we should rejoice if the people could learn more, Mr. Baxter Cure of Chapter
^iv. dir. 5. (...) Min.
and edify better by other men's Ministry than our own; tho it may be some
error in Judgment that directed their choice. A true Mother who knows her Child
is like to thrive more by the milk of another woman than her own, will be so
far from hatred or envy at the Nurse or Child, that she will consent, and be
glad of it. Would a faithful Physician rather let his Patient pine away in a
Consumption, than be healed by another, whom the Patient (with, or without
cause) prefers before him? I know there needs a great deal of self-denial unto
this but I think it ought to be so, because the Apostle rejoiced that Christ
was preached, Phil. 1.15, 16, 18.
tho by them who did it in Strife and Envy, to add affliction to his bonds.

If any number of Christians judge, tho it should be by mistake, that the terms
of Church Communion required of them are sinful, (and of doubtful and numerous
ones very many are like to think so) can they act like Honest men to comply
while they thus judge?

Will any be so unreasonable, as to desire me to do that to please him, (and
punish me if I will not) when I apprehend I should displease God by doing it?
Is it at all strange, that many serious Christians in a Country Parish, cannot
content themselves with such Guides of their souls, as an Ignorant, drunken
Patron shall think fit to put over them, who it may be are as bad as he? What
if they think they have a natural Right to choose one themselves? As well as to
choose their Physician, or Lawyer, and rather, as the Consequence is more, and
greater? especially since such a Principle is allowed by Leading men in the
Church of England. For every man to Worship God according to his Conviction,
Preface concerning Persecution.
(says Dr. Burnet,) is an essential Right of Humane nature, Antecedent to all
humane Government, and can never become subject to it. What the Rev. Dean of S.
Paul's (whose singular Learning is so deservedly honored in all the Reformed
Churches,) has discourst formerly on this subject, cannot be too often
transcribed, viz, in the peaceable and Christian Preface to his Irenicum, and
in the Part. 1. c. 6 p. 118 -- 123.
book it self, If he continue not in every thing of the same mind, Truth and
Reason is still the same. And Dr. Sherlock tells the A. B. of Canterbury, in
the Epistle dedicatory to his Answer to the First part of The Protestant
Reconciler, That a Recantation of a Book is no Answer.

And let me add, that the Christian Design of that book, the First part of the
Prot. Reconciler, and the Judgment and Moderation of the Worthy Author, it is
hoped will now be otherwise esteemed of, than three or four years ago, when so
Great a man as the Master of the Temple treated both with so much sharpness and
contempt.

The Laws of Christ, says Dr. St. were meek and gentle; the Duties he required
were necessary, just and reasonable. He that came to take away the
insupportable yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to gall the
necks of his Disciples, with another instead of it: and it would be strange the
Church should require more than Christ himself did, and make other Conditions
of Communion, than our Savior did of Discipleship. What possible reason can be
given, why such things should not be sufficient for Communion with a Church,
that are sufficient for Eternal salvation? and certainly those things are
sufficient for that, which are laid down as the Necessary duties of
Christianity by our Lord and savior in his word. What ground is there why
Christians should not stand on the same terms now, which they did in the time
of Christ and his Apostles? was not Religion sufficiently guarded and fenced in
them? was there ever more true and Cordial Reverence in the Worship of God?
What Charter has Christ ever given the Church, to bind up men to more than
himself has done? and to exclude those from her Society, who may be admitted
into Heaven? -- The grand Commission the Apostles were sent out with, was only
to teach what Christ had commanded them, not the least intimation of any power
given them to impose, or require any thing beyond what he himself had spoken to
them, or they were directed to by the immediate guidance of the spirit of God.
-- We never read the Apostles making Laws but of things supposed necessary.
When the Council of the Apostles met at Jerusalem, for deciding a Case that
disturbed the Churches peace; we see they would lay no other Burden on the
Gentile Christians besides those Necessary things. 15. Act. 29. It was not
enough with them that the things would be necessary when they had required
them, but they looked on an Antecedent Necessity, either absolute, or for the
present State, which was the only ground of their imposing those Commands.
There were after this great Diversities of Practice, and varieties of
observations among Christians; but the H. Ghost never thought those things fit
to be made matters of Laws, to which all Parties should Conform; all that the
Apostles required as to these, was mutual forbearance and condescension toward
each other in them. The Apostles valued not Indifferences at all; and those
things it is evident they accounted such, which whether men did them or not was
not of Concernment to Salvation. And what Reason is there, why men should be so
strictly tied up to such things, which they may do, or let alone, and yet be
very good Christians still? Without all Controversy (says the Doctor, and
Experience will confirm it,) the main inlet of all the Distractions,
Confusions, and Divisions of the Christian World, has been by adding other
Conditions of Church Communion than Christ has done. Would there ever be less
Peace and Unity in the Church, if a Diversity were allowed as to Practices
supposed indifferent? yea, there would be so much more, if there were a mutual
forbearance and Condescension as to such things. The Unity of the Church is an
unity of Love and Affection, Chap. 6.
and not a bare Uniformity of Practice and Opinion. -- Were we but so Happy, as
to take off things granted unnecessary by all, and suspected by many, and
judged unlawful by some, and to make nothing the bonds of our Communion but
what Christ has done, one Faith, one Baptism, etc. allowing a Liberty for
matters of Indifferency, and bearing with the Weakness of those who cannot bear
things which others count lawful, we might indeed be restored to a true
primitive Luster, far sooner than by surbishing up some antiquated Ceremonies,
that can derive their pedigree no higher than some Ancient Custom and
Tradition. God will one day convince men, that the Union of the Church lies
more in the Unity of Faith, and Affection, than in the Uniformity of doubtful
Rites and Ceremonies.

And after that unseasonable Sermon at Guildhall of the Mischief of Separation,
yet in the Defense of it, P. 81, 82.
the Dt. in the Preface propounds this very seasonable Question What then? Is
there nothing to be done for dissenting Protestants, who agree with us in all
doctrinal Articles of our Church, and only scruple the use of a few Ceremonies,
and some late Impositions? Shall these Differences still be Continued, when
they may so easity be removed? And so many useful men encouraged, and taken
into the Constitution? Do we value a few Indifferent Ceremonies, and some late
Declarations, and doubtful Expressions, beyond the Satisfaction of men's
Consciences, and the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church? In Answer, he says,
That tho he thinks there is no ground for scruple as to the use of those
things, Notwithstanding that, because the use of Sacraments in a Christian
Church ought to be the most free from all Exceptions, and they ought to be so
administered as to invite, rather than discourage Scrupulous persons from
joining in them; I do think it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and
Condescension in the Governors of our Church, to remove those bars from a
freedom in joining in full Communion with us. --

Thirdly, Consider the great Mischief of our past and present Divisions, to the
Interest of Real Christianity, the Reformed Religion, and the Peace and
Happiness of the Nation. The Contentions among Protestants, the passionate
Heats among Difsenters themselves, and the severities used by others to enforce
an Uniformity, have dishonored the Profession of the Gospel, and cost the
Nation very dear on all accounts. These things have hindered the usefulness and
fruit of many Ministers preaching, and deprived us of the advantage of the
public labors of many hundred others, and lessened the Authority and Success
of the Ministry in general, filling many with such prejudices, that they have
turned their backs upon all preaching. By this means the weak have been
scandalized, See First Part of the Prot. Recontiler. chap. 1. Mr. I. Buroughs
Itenicum chap. 27, 28, 29, 3^.
the doubtful staggered, Infidels hardened, Scepticks gratified, Popery and
Profaneness advanced, thousands of souls endangered, the Devil pleased, and his
Kingdom built up, to the weakening of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Reformed
Interest. Besides the Good that is lost, and the Miseries procured hereby, the
sinfulness of Heart-Divisions among Good men is greatly aggravated. The
Provocation to mutual Revenge, and the advantage given to Popery, is that I
wish all Protestants would consider. As to Revenge, our Experience now tells
us, that it is an effect of such proceedings: tho I wish it could be suppressed
and cured; yet, considering the Corruption of Humane nature, might well enough
be expected. This Dr. B. in the Preface above mentioned, has represented with
some sharpness. How unreasonable is it, says he, that they, who cannot help
thinking as they do, should be made a sacrifice to the Rage of others, who
perhaps have little more to say for themselves, than that they are in the
Possession of the Law: which in the next Revolution of Affairs that may fall
out, will be an argument so much the stronger for using themselves in the same
manner, because it is a just Retaliation on them, for that which they made
others to suffer --.

The Reverend and Worthy Dean of Canterbury in his Preface to Bp. Wilkins's
Sermons, commending his Moderation, says That Virtue, however of late
declaimed against, must be the Temper of the Members of the Church of England,
especially of the Clergy, if ever they seriously intend its firm establishment:
and do not industriously design by cherishing Heats and Divisions among our
selves, to let in Popery at those Breaches.

Most of those who renounce our Religion, and embrace Popery, profess this to
be the first great stumbling block, the want of Unity.

This their Priests of late in several Pamphlets have insisted on, Dr Stilling
Idolatry of the Romans Church. ch 5. Mr. Baxter, safe Religion, and other
Treatises.
aggravating our Divisions to prove the Necessity of an Infallible Judge as the
Center of Unity. How unreasonably this is urged by Papists, who differ among
themselves about Fundamental Doctrines of Faith, many of our Divines have
shown. However the Church of Rome has manifestly served its own ends by
procuring and animating the rigid Imposition of doubtful disputable terms among
Protestants; that all those who could not conform to the established Rites,
might be looked upon, if not as bad as Papists, yet as unpeaceable and
Factious, and be provoked to do somewhat that might make them as unfit to be
tolerated. Hereupon the Papists have pleaded for themselves as better subjects,
or deserving at least an equal Toleration with Protestant Dissenters. And what
some of the latter have suffered on the account of their different sentiments
from the Established Church, has tempted them to so much Revenge, as that the
less considerate and judicious are too ready to join with the Papists, or any
body, rather than with those by whom they have been oppressed tho this be greatly
to be lamented, yet it cannot much be wondered at; for Solomon tells us, that
Oppression will make even a wise mad Mad, And is it strange that some who do
not see far before them, nor well consider what they do, and what forgiveness
the Gospel requires, should be ready to say, we were as good join with the
Papists, who promise us our Liberty, than adventure to be Ruined by
Protestants. That there is not now much ground to fear it, and therefore that
no Protestant ought to act on such a supposition, I shall endeavor to show
presently.

Fourthly, The Unity of the Adversaries of the Reformed Religion against us,
notwithstanding the Differences among themselves, deserve to be considered. We
read of ten or eleven sorts of men of several opinions and ways in the matters
of Religion, who all with one Consent joined against Sion. Psalm. 83.5, 6. Ten
Kings of the Earth were of one mind, to give up their Power to the Beast, and
make war with the Lamb, 17 Rev. 13. The Popish Clergy, that acknowledge the
Headship of the Infallible Man at Rome, agree in their desires, and are bound
to unite their endeavors, for the Extirpation of the Northern Heresy, i. e.
the Reformed Religion. And shall not we agree and unite, for the preservation
of that common Interest, against which so powerful a Confederacy has been and
still is engaged? yea, may we not very well do so, Notwithstanding our
Differences, if we can but be wise and honest enough to forbear one another in
love? Soldiers of different Nations, habits, and customs, may engage in the
same cause: and notwithstanding their little quarrels with one another in their
Respective Garrisons, may be unanimous (and thereby Victorious,) when they come
into the field. In a Battle between Hannibal and Scipio, Livy.
when the two Armies joined, we read that the shouts of Scipio's men were far
more Terrible than those of Hannibals, because being all Romans, they had
almost all the same tone of voice, whereas Hannibals Army being made up of
several Nations, their shouting was less formidable by reason of the Variety of
their voices; it will not therefore follow that their success must be the less
on that account. Our opposition to Popery might appear to them, and to the
world, more formidable, if we were altogether of one speech, and of one way,
and our shouts more uniform; yet the Success may be as Great, and the Victory
as sure, tho we are not, if we are but wise enough to bear with one another in
our lesser Differences.

Fifthly, Since none of us do pretend to Infallibility, we have all the reason
in the world to bear with one another. The principles of the Roman Church will
better justify them to demand a blind Submission to all that is required, and
to treat them severely who refuse it, than any of the Protestant Churches with
reference to one another. We all acknowledge our selves liable to mistake, and
therefore should use gentleness and Compassion to our Brethren, that we think do
Err; and pity them upon the account of Humane frailty and fallibility; which
all would be more disposed to do for others, had they a deeper sense of their
own. What two persons in the world are just of the same Sise of understanding,
have the same apphrehensions of things, or hold the same Opinions? What man in
the world, but as he grows elder, (and without losing time, does also grow
wiser) but alters his Opinions in many points? Do not various Educations,
callings, Studies, Company, employments, interests and conditions in the world,
make a mighty difference in the apphrehensions of some from others, and of all
men from themselves at different seasons? Besides the various degrees of the
grace of God to several Christians, etc. all which should incline us, as
fallible mutable Creatures, to bear with one another. The Papists teach, that
an implisit faith in the Judgment of the Clergy is sufficient to justify the
belief and practice of the People, and so may better exact an Uniformity in
Doctrine and Worship, than we who deny it; and hold, that every man must Judge
for himself.

It may farther be considered, that men cannot change their Opinions when they
please, any more than their Stature or their Taste. You may as soon fill a man's
belly with a Syllogism, as alter his Opinion and Belief by Force, Till his
Reason be convinced, he will believe as he did. If any are willing to know the
truth, and endeavor it, and practice according to their light, and desire to
live peaceably with others of a different persuasion; is it just and
reasonable, much less Christian, that they should be persecuted and destroyed,
because they will not subscribe some doubtful Articles, cannot sit within the
little Circle of some men's Opinions that are uppermost, or consent to worship
God just after the same manner they would have them? Especially they who stand
out to their outward Disadvantage, whose temporal Interest pleads strongly for
a compliance; in such a case, there is ground for Charity that they are
sincere. There is hardly any man but some time or other will allow such
Considerations to have some strength. The word of God, says Bp. Saunderson,
Cases of Conscience, lect. 3. 29.30.
does Expressly forbid us, to subject our Consciences to any other, or to usurp
Dominion over the Consciences of any. And there is no hope that Religion should
be restored to her former Original and Purity, till the wounds that have been
made wider by our quarrels and dissentions, being anointed with the oil of
Brotherly love as with a Balsom, shall begin to close again, and to grow entire
into the same unity of faith and Charity. Bp. Tailor has much to the same
purpose of moderation, Part 3. p. 420, 425.
(not to quote the many places in his Liberty of Prophecy,) in his Great
Exempler, or Life of Christ, he says, We should ill dye for our Brother, who
will not lose a meal to prevent his sin, or change a dish to save his soul. And
if the thing scrupled be Indifferent to us, yet it ought not to be indifferent
whether our Brother live or dye. -- When the Evil occasioned by the Law is
greater than the Good designed, or greater than the Good that will come by it
in the present Constitution of things, and the Evil can by no other Remedy be
healed, it concerns the Lawgivers Charity to take off such positive
Constitutions, which in the Authority are merely humane, and in the matter
indifferent, and Evil in the Event.

Sixthly, Let us consider the Vnseasonableness of our Divisions, and
backwardness to Union and Forbearance, at this Time. Neither the Church of
England, nor Protestant Dissenters are ever like to have such a time of Trial
again as this, when mutual Interest does so loudly call for an Accommodation of
our unhappy Differences. For not only does the Height and progress of
abounding Wickedness and Impiety require the utmost Union of Hearts, and Hands,
and Tongues, to promote Repentance and Reformation; but we all do now see the
mischief of our past Divisions; all Parties in their turns have been sensible
of it. All have complained of a Spirit of Bitterness, Persecution, and Revenge;
and therefore none should imitate that which they condemn; or be averse to that,
which sometime or other they have thought desirable. 2 Kings. 17. See Isai.
9.21.
The Divisions of Israel made them a prey to their Enemies; and those of the
Jews exposed them to Destruction by the Romans. Which they might have prevented
by an carly Submission, or by uniting their Strength to defend themselves; but
by reason of their Divisions, could do neither. So the contest between the
Greek and the Latin Church ended in the Ruin of the Eastern Empire. And justly
may God leave us to be destroyed of one another, or by the Enemies of our
Religion, if we will not at last learn the way of Peace. Who will pity us? who
can help us, if having a prize in our hands, we will not know it, or improve it?

Ought we not to consider, that next to the Displeasure of God for the sins of
English Protestants, this is the great strength of the Church of Rome, and
their most Considerable Advantage against us? We need not otherwise fear their
other Politics, (for which they have been so cried up in the World, tho
principally because they scrupled nothing that would serve as a means to attain
their end:) were we duly sensible of this one Policy of theirs, to divide, and
exasperate us one against another. The Preaching of their Monks and Priests
will of it self do little to turn the Nation to Popery: if we may Judge by
their printed sermons, they are not like to get much ground by their Preaching
among a People, who in most places have been used to so much better. And as
little need we fear their books of Controversy, notwithstanding the noise that
has been made of the Learning of the Jesuits; their strength has of late
been tried, to their irreparable shame (if they are capable of any,) and as
much to the Honor of the learned Divines of the Church of England. Their
Converting-books and Pamphlets have been so weak, and the Answers to them so
strong and so many, that they are not like to prevail much that way neither; if
English Protestants would but bear with one another, and not seek Revenge,
which the juncture of Time does dissuade from as unseasonable, as well as our
Common Christianity does forbid as unlawful, which will appear, if we consider,

Seventhly, Whether it be not Improbable, that the Leading men of the Church of
England should hereafter commit the same Error again, to molest and Persecute
their Brethren for the Differences between us and them. All the world now sees
at what door a great part of the severity against Protestant Dissenters ought
to be laid: (so far as it was the sin of others, I hope God will let them see
it, and give 'em Repentance.) And there are very many Parish Ministers in
England, who are pious and peaceable, who preach and live holily, and never did
consent to the Persecution of their Brethren, but endeavored to hinder it; I
only wish they had been more. If it be said, they are by consequence Partakers
of such a guilt; it has been, and must again be replied, that if God should
Charge undiscerned Consequences upon them and us, none of us would be meet
either for Church Communion now, or for Heaven hereafter.

The past faults and miscarriages of some, should not make us injurious to
others. Far be it from us to imagine, that there are no Faithful Ministers of
Christ in England, but such as are of our principles, and particular
persuasion. Let us not refuse to love those that are Good, because many of
their Church or Opinion are bad. Is there any Kingdom or Country upon Earth
where the greatest part are not bad? Is there any place where the Religion
countenanc't and encouraged by the Government, has not many who comply with it
for secular Interest?

The Author of the late Apology for the Church of England, as to the spirit of
Persecution, has said many things to this purpose: it will be good news to
hear, that the greatest part of his Brethren are of his mind: that all Prot.
Dissenters might believe, that the wisest and most leading men of that Church,
do see their Error, (their sin too, might be added, if it be an essential Right
of Humane nature, as Dr. B. says, for every man to Worship God according to
his conviction.) And we have great Reason to hope, that they will not again use
severity to their Brethren, if it should ever be in Their Power; but come to a
Temper in the matters of Conformity, as the seven Bishops have under their
hands declared their disposition to do. And in the mean time; one of the
Articles which the A. Bishop of Cantcrbury has recommended to the Bishops
under his Jurisdiction, is a Tender Regard to their Brethren, the Protestant
Dissenters: At the same time assuring us, and all the World, that they are
really and sincerely Irreconcilable Enemies to the Errors, Superstitions,
Idolatries, and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome: and that all the unkind
Jealousies to the Countrary, have been altogether groundless.

Let us not therefore be over sensible of past Injuries to the Hindrance of
Concord for the common Good; lest we wrong the Church of Christ, and neglect
the security of the Reformed Religion, and the welfare of the Nation and of
Posterity, because others have wronged us. For however the Jesuits may now
plead for Liberty of Conscience, no Protestant (British, or Irish especially)
but must needs know, that of all Religions in the World, the Romish, by their
avowed Principles, is obliged to be the most Cruel: As Soon as our divisions
have made us weak enough, we have but too much reason to expect it, which God
Prevent.

Lastly, Consider that we Agree with the Church of England in great and many
things, and those things wherein we differ are comparatively few and small, and
therefore mutual forbearance and Concord is possible, as well as desirable.
Yea those things for which they are Hated and struck at by the Church of Rome,
are not such Doctrines, or modes of Worship, wherein we differ from them; but
it is for the sake of those things wherein we agree with the Church of England;
and therefore in prudence we are obliged to espouse their cause, as our own.

The Reader may easily perceive, that all that I have said relates to the Union
of Protestants among themselves, who, tho of different Persuasions in some
External and Circumstantial things, do hold the Head, 2 Coloss. 19. and agree
in the main and Essential Doctrines of Faith: But as to the Church of Rome,
which perverts the Christian Faith, maintains and practices Idolatry and false
Worship, and the declared Enemy to all Protestants, and by her Constitutions
does oblige all her Members under an Anathema, to root out, and to destroy them
as Heretics: how far those of her Communion may be tolerated in a Protestant
Country, without sin or Danger, is a matter too large at present to dilate
upon. It would seem very strange and Irrational for any Party of Protestants to
strengthen the Papists, and contribute to their being set up in Power and
Authority, especially in the Legislative power, in opposition to those of the
Church of England, as fearing that these will not establish and allow them
Liberty of Conscience; and imagining that the Papists will, who depend upon a
foreign Power, and are not masters of their own Consciences, but have
subjected them to another, whom they suppose Infallible. Surely from the
Members of the Church of England we ought the rather to believe and hope this,
because they have of late deserved so very well of all Protestants, by a
vigorous and learned opposition to Popery, in a great number of select
Discourses upon all the Considerable points in Controversy between us and the
Church of Rome. And having done so much to keep out Popery as to the Doctrine,
let us hope, and pray, and charitably believe, that they will also do their
utmost hereafter to prevent Persecution, which is one of the worst parts of
Popery in Practice. I conclude with the pathetical Exhortation of the Devout
Bishop Hall, O Lord, Passion Sermon p. 390, 391.
how long shall thy poor Church see the dear sons of her womb bleeding about
these Apples of Strife? The Enemy is at the gates of Syracuse. How long shall
we suffer our selves to be taken up with Circles and Angles in the dust? ye
Men, Brethren, and Fathers! Help, for God's sake put to your hands for the
quenching of this Common flame; the one side by Humility, the other by
Compassion, both by Prayers and Tears: Let me beg for Peace as for Life, by
your filial Piety and duty to the Church of God, whose Ruins follow upon our
Divisions; by your love of God's Truth, by the Graces of that one Blessed
spirit, whereby we are all informed and quickn'd, by the precious blood of the
son of God shed for our Redemption, be inclined to Peace and Love. Tho our
Brains be different, yet let our Hearts be one. -- Let us have Peace with our
selves, and War with none but Hell and Rome. Amen.

THE END.

