DIVERSE Select SERMONS Upon several TEXTS of holy SCRIPTVRE,

Preached by that Reverend and faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, D. James
Sibald; Doctor of DIVINITY, Late Preacher of the Gospel, at ABERDENE,
There-after At DUBLIN, in IRELAND* Published after his Death.

Remember how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. REVEL.
3. 3. Printed at ABERDENE, by James Brown, 1618.

TO The Right Honorable JOHN JAFFRAY PROVEST.
ROBERT FORBES, GILBERT GRAY, ALEX. ROBERTSONE, ALEXANDER ALEXANDER Bailies:
And the remnant of the Honorable Council of the City of ABERDENE, Grace,
mercy and peace, etc.
RIght Honorable; This posthumus WORK coming forth to Public view, IT was
thought fit, not without reason, to have your H. Names [so eminent Favorers
of learning and piety] prefixed unto it, For, by the defense it may expect at
your hands as an Orphan; The Author of it did labor in your City a
considerable time in the Lords Work, and probably would have ended his
Labors, where he began them, if GOD in his holy providence, (whereunto he
learned to submit himself,) had not disposed otherwise of him. As he studied to
approve himself unto GOD, a Workman that needed not to be ashamed rightly
dividing the Word of Truth, and to have his Conversation such as became a
Minister of the gospel of Christ, and through his rich blessing upon his
travels, was isntrumental for strengthening to well-doing, for lifting up of
weak hands, for comforting of Mourners, for winning to, and settling in the
Truth, so (with the same mind in the rest of his beloved Charge) your love and
respects toward him, and your longings after him, when he was withdrawn from
you, were very great. Upon these accounts, next to the glory of GOD, and the
well of his Church in general, These following Sermons preached upon several
occasions in your hearing are published, and to be an encouragement to your H.
to go on and persevere in the ways of holiness and righteousness, whereunto
while he was with you, he did from time to time most earnestly exhort you, that
as ye were his hope here, ye may be his Joy and Crown of rejoicing, in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming; Which is the earnest prayer of

Your H. humble servant I. S.

Christian Reader,
SOme of the Travels of one, who is now resting from his labors:, are here
presented unto thee* It is more then probable, if before the publication of
them they had been revised by himself, for thy further satisfaction, they had
come forth both more polisthed and enlarged. Notwithstanding, it is hoped that
the Voice of the Dead yet speaking in them, upon thy diligent perusal of them,
through the Lords Mercy, may prove helpful, to further thee in thy way to
eternal life.

The Author was first called from the profession of Philosophy in
COLLEDGE-MARISCHALL in Aberdene to a pastoral Charge of souls in the same
City, where, to his great joy, he saw the seal of his Ministry, and the LORDS
Work prospering in his hand. Afterward when the troubles of this Nation both
in Church and State, were come to a great hight, (the sad effects whereof, he
oftentimes foretold and bemoned) upon the not concurring of his judgment, in
the manner of Church-Goverment with them who were other ways minded; He was
called to afflictions and sufferings, and which he, looked upon as the heaviest
of all; to leave them who were so dear unto him, and to whom so often, with
(...) mutual joy he had holden forth the word of life.

His last Service in the ministry of the Gospel was in the city of Dublin in
Ireland, which at that time was again and again in great danger of the bloody
sword of their unnatural Contrymen, of the popish party, their rageing
exceedingly and sheding much innocent blood. Here he acquitted himself so
eminently a burning and ashining light; that he was greatly beloved of all,
living very much desired, and dying no less lamented, and the re^lity of their
affections was demonstrate by evident testimonies of their respects to him,
both in his life time and after his death. In this city after he had run his
race of ten years labors in the LORDS Work, he finished his course, and was
called to receive that eternal Crown, which was prepared for him, and for all
who love the appearing of our LORD Jesus Christ in Glory at his second coming.

I have only this to add further in a word, that his recepts from the Father
of lights were not small, for his great abilities in the Oriental languages and
all kind of liberal sciences humane and divine, expressing them selves with
the tongue of the learned, and daily growing to greater perfection, were
accompanied with the power of Godliness, earnest desires for the peace of the
Church, unanimity with his worthy fellow laborers, gravity, humility, charity
and all other christian graces. So being confident that his Memory shall he
blessed and his labors profitable; I shall add only that of the Poet
speaking of another.

Vivet extento Proculeius aevo,
Notus in fratres animi paterni:
Illum aget penna metuente solv^
Fama superstes
Horat. Lib. 2. Carm. od. 2. J* S.

THE FIRST, SERMON.
PSALM. CXLV. verse. 1. 2. I will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless
thy Name for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever.


ALthough all Scripture be given by inspiration of GOD, and be profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:
Excellency of the Psalms.
2. TIM. 3. 16. yet the Psalms among other parts of scripture, have been ever
thought to have a special excellency, S. Chrysostom in the 5. Tom. of his
works, and 6. Hom. of Repentance; says, That this was the common sense of
Christians in his time: albeit says he, Moses was the great Lawgiver and saw
God face to face, yet says he, his books are scarce read once a year. The
gospel wherein Christ's miracles are registrat, wherein we see death destroyed,
and life restored, and God as it were conversing with men, is read says he,
but once or twyce a week. The Epistles of S. Paul, who was the Orator of
Christ, who was taken up to the third heaven, who saw things which is not
lawful to utter, are read says he, but twice a week. But says he, in the
mean time DAVID is read day and night. All carry him about at all times, as a
precious and sweet smelling ointment. If we abide in the Church all night,
David is the first, and the middle, and the last with whom we end. If we sing
hymns to God in the morning, DAVID is the first, and the middle, and the last.
If we have pomp at the Funerals of the dead, DAVID is the first, the middle,
and the last. Even they that have not letters, have him as it were engraven in
the heart. Neither is this only in Churches and towns, but in all places and in
all times. 2. Sam. 23. 1. The sweet singer of Israel, conveeneth as as it were
the servants of God into their sacred stations, exciteth, inflameth, and so
adorneth them, that he changes as it were men into Angels, and earth into
heaven. He accommodateth himself to all sorts and all estates of men, to the
young, to the old, to them that are in joy, to them that are in sorrow, to the
righteous, and to the sinner; That he is as it were a divine Harp, joining as
it were, the souls of men together, to sing the songs of God, in a most sweet
and melodious harmony. Such is the excellency of this part of scripture which
we call the Psalms.

Again amongst the Psalms, 2. Excellency of this Psame.
I may justly say, That this whereof I have read a part, has a special stamp
and degree of worth. If you look to the matter, IT is no less then God his
infinite and divine perfections which are declared and praised here throughout
the whole Psalm. If you look to the manner of framing this song; IT is most
divine, all is set down here so sweetly, so gravely, so powerfullie. Hence
albeit God be praised in many other psalms, yet the Title of this Psalm by
way of excellency is DAVID his praise, or his psalm of praise. Beside every
verse begins with the letters of the Alphabet in order. Of which kind there
are no more but seven in the whole book of the Psalms, the xxv. the xxxiv. the
xxxvi. the cxi. the cxii. cxix. and this cxLv. which is the last of them.

The matter and argument of this psalm as we said, is the praise of God, 3.
Argument of it.
and his perfections; his infinite greatness, infinite power, infinite mercy,
the splendour and excellency of his kingdom, the righteousness and holiness which
appears in his ways and works, and lastly his wonderful providence to all,
especially to Mankind, and most singularly to his own people. In the words
that I have read, he sets down his purpose to praise God in a poetical
manner, by converting his speech to God, I will extol thee, my God, O King,
etc. There are two things chiefly considerable in the words. First, The Person
whom he intends to praise, and a short description of him containing the
ground of all his praise, namlie, The King is God, as he has manifested
himself by his NAME. 2. The praise which he intends of him, which is not
simple praising, but extolling and blessing, every day, continually, for ever
and ever.

Let us come first to the Person praised, and to the grounds of his praise. 4.
Sum of the words.
1. He calls him God, which imports. That he has in himself infinite
perfection, and so is worthy of all praise. 2. He says, O King, which
imports his Authority over all creatures, even over himself who was a king
and over others. For he calls him King absolutely, meaning the King of
kings, and Lord of lords: Who rules all, and is ruled by none, who does
whatsoever he will both in heaven, and in earth. And thus also he terms him,
to signify that he was to praise him for his Attributs and works belonging to
him as King and Governor of all, especially of his own people. 3. He calls
him his God, to signify that he had interest in the great goodness of God,
and that he was to speak what he says here, out of the sense of his
goodness toward himself. Lastly, He mentions his NAME in the 2. verse. Which
contains yet a further obliedgement to thankfulness and praise, as we shall
see hereafter.

IT will not be needful to speak of God, as he is God and King; for that which
concerns him this way, 5. David's applicatie^.
is set down at length in the Psalm herafter. We shall content our self at
this time to speak a little of this application which DAVID makes, when he
says, My God, and of his NAME, which he promises to bless every day. First,
He says, My God, God as he is in himself, God infinitlie perfect, and King
over all, is most worthy to be extolled, blessed and praised, yet this praise
will never flow from us so kyndlie and sweetly as it ought to do, except we
find him to be our God, and to have an interest in him and communion with him
as DAVID professes here. Thou art my God, says David psalm. cxviii. 28. and I
will praise thee: Thou art my God, I will exalt thee. It is the common doctrine
of Romanists, That a man can have no assurance of this, that God is his God,
and that he enjoyes his love and favor but by deceivable conjectures, and they
oppose both our Divines and their own men who teach the contrar. But if we had
no other ground for this but conjectures; to how weak a ground (I beseech you)
should that praise, joy and confidence lean; which DAVID professes here in
his own name, and in the name of all the godly. Suppone there be infinite
goodness and perfection in God as there is; what sound or solid comfort can I
have in God, except I know him to be mine, and that I have his favor and the
light of his countenance lifted up upon me. Albeit David knew that his sin
was pardoned by the voice of Nathan, yet had he not contentment, till he heard
God himself speak, as it were, unto him; Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation: and uphold me with thy free spirit. Make me to bear the voice of
joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.

O but say they, We cannot know assuredly that God is ours, and that we have
his favor, unless we assuredly know that those graces are in us which he
requires, 6. Certainti^ of Gods favor possible.
and this knowledge cannot be had without revelation. I mind, by Gods grace,
to speak at length of this, when I come to the 16. verse of the eight chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, where it is said, That the Spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Now shortly
I ask, what are these graces required in us? The chief are by the consent of
all, Faith, hope and love. As for Faith it may be known, for S. PAUL says,
Prove your selves, whether ye be in the faith. 2. cor. 13. 5. S. Augustine in
his 13. book of the Trinity, 1. chap. says, That he who believes, knows
by a most firm knowledge that he does believe, as he who believes not,
knows that he does not believe. The reason is manifest, Faith, (say our
Adversaries) is an Act of the understanding, and a man has certainty of
nothing more then of such acts. Beside, a true Christian is prepared to suffer
any thing, rather then to quite his faith, it cannot be therefore but he is
assured that he does believe. Lastly the prime schoolmen ancient and recent
grant this. Thomas in the 1. of his 2 part. 112. quaest. and 5. art. says,
That he who has science or says knows that he has it. So Vasquez in his
201. dispute, and diverse others. The same also he grants of Hope, and if he
would deny it the scripture is clear, where we find the saints professing and
avowing their hope in God most confidently; But say they, yet, for all this we
are uncertain of our Love. But consider I pray you, that S. Peter being
demanded by our Savior concerning his love to him; answers most confidently.
Thou know that I love thee. Thou that know all things, know that I
love thee. So S. Augustine in his 8. book of the Trinity, 7. chap. says,
That we more certainly know the love that we carry to our brother, then our
brother himself. They answer to this, That we may know indeed certainly, that
there is in us a love and affection to God and our neighbor: but yet say they,
we cannot know for what end, and upon what motive we love him, and
consequently whether our love be such as it ought to be. But they should
consider that the Apostle says 1. Cor. 2. ^1. That the spirit of a man
knows the things of a man, and that we have received the Spirit of God, that
we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. Hence a most
learned Romanist Vega in his 9. book of ^ustificat. 39. chap. grants, That
we may know not only our own inward actions, but also for what end and upon
what motive they are exercised by us, and consequently that we love God above
all things: and that we are ready to suffer the loss of all things rather
then to offend him, and that we have truly sorrowed for our bypast sins.

But to leave this, let us mark here, That it is not without great cause that
DAVID intending to bless and exalt God, 7. This gives confidence.
mentions particularly this his assurance, that God was his God, and that he
had a particular interest in him. This, as we touched before, is a most
singular benefit, from which many excellent fruits do spring. For first, hence
flows a boldness toward God, a boldness to come in his presence, and a
confidence to be heard of him in our prayers. If our heart condemn us not, we
have confidence toward God. 1. John 3. 21. A son that is persuaded of his
fathers love, is bold to come, to him, and to present his suits unto him when
occasion serves: so we being persuaded that God is our God and Father, are
confident to pour out our hearts in his bosom, and to expect a gracious
answer from him. I have written unto you says S. John 1. 5. 13. 14. 15. that
ye may know that ye have eternal life, And this is the confidence that we have
in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And we
know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. Where first, we have
the knowledge of eternal life, then, confidence to be heard, and to have our
petitions granted. If we have to do with a man of whom we know not whether he
loves us or not, we can have but small hope to obtain our suits from him: but
if we be assured that we have his favor, we are confident to obtain our
requests according to that degree of favor which we persuade our selves to
enjoy: so if we be persuaded that God is our God and Father, we cannot doubt of
obtaining from him that which is good. If ye that are evil can give good
things to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give his good
Spirit and all good things to them that ask him. He that gave to us his own Son
(when we did not pray to him) how much more with him will he give to us all
things which we pray for?

Secondly, This assurance that God is our God, and that we are in his favor,
8. Alacrity in GODS service.
makes us to go on cheerfully in the obedience of God. It enlarges our heart
with comfort, so that we run the way of Gods Commandments. There is nothing
that will make a good servant cheerful in doing his Masters will, so much as
to know that himself and his service is well accepted: so nothing more fit to
stir us up to alacrity in well doing, then to know that our persons and
works are acceptable to God. This is a notable spur to a good life, He that
has this hope purges himself, that he may be holy as God is holy says S.
John. I have hope toward God, of the resurrection of the just and unjust,
says S. PAUL Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men.

Thirdly, 9. Peace in troubles.
This assurance that God is ours, and that we have his love; breeds to us
peace that passes understanding and joy unspeakable and glorious even amidst
all our worldly troubles, S. Paul having said, Romans 5. 1. being justified by
faith we have peace with God, subjoyneth, That we rejoice in the hope of the
glory of God, and that we rejoice also in our tribulations. For being at one
with God, the peace of God keeps our minds, Philip. 4. 7. It guardeth and
defends them, as a wall or garrison (so the word signifies) It guardeth I
say, not only our bodies or estats always: but also our minds, that we sink not
through the weight of our afflictions, nor fall away from our steadfastness by
any crosses. For he that is in this estate can reason thus; Though my wealth
and preferment be taken away, though my friends have forsaken me, though want
and troubles sease upon me; Yet Christ is mine, God is mine, heaven and the
inheritance of the joys of it is mine. These outward troubles can do no more
but batter without, and at the most pull down the earthly house of this body,
but That building which is without hands in heaven, they cannot reach unto.
These troubles may take away my outward joys, but that joy which is within,
which is in God even my God, is beyond the power of Life or death, of height or
depth, of principalities or powers, of things present or things to come, Romans
8. 38. This comforted Job in the midst of all his grievous sorrows; I know
says he, that my Redeemer lives, and that with mine eyes I shall see him.
This comforted the godly Hebrews chap. 10. 34. Ye took joyfullie the spoiling
of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better and an
enduring substance. Hence, hope which is grounded upon this assurance, is
compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. An Anchor holds the ship firm and stable,
that it be not driven hither and thither or overwhelmed, although the sea be
stormy and tempestuous; even so our hope setleth our souls in the midst of
tribulations, that we be not swallowed up thereby So it is compared to an
helmet 11. These. 5. 8. For as an helmet securing the head, puts courage in
a Soldier to fight, so hope securing us of the maine point our eternal
safety, gives courage and confidence to us in all our troubles. I come now to
David his last expression of that, which he intends to praise and bless;
That is the Name of God.

I will bless thy Name says he. IT is not without great cause that he
mentions here the NAME of God. For clearing of this, we shall show you
shortly, first, what is meaned by his Name. 10. Gods name what
2. How great a ground this is to us of praise and blessing. For the first, A
name properly is not the thing it self which is named, but is without it,
signifying representing and manifesting it. Now God who in himself is hid,
cannot be manifested to us but by his works and word whereby we attain to the
knowledge of him, and that knowledge of him, or rather himself or his divine
perfections as they are made known and discovered to us is called his Name.
When he does the works of Almighty power, we call him Omnipotent; When he
does the works of Justice, wisdom, goodness, etc. we call him just, wise, good
etc. And of all these is made up his dreadful, glorious and blessed Name which
he has amongst men. So that the Name which God has amongst us lies first
inwrapped in his works, and from thence by the knowledge and due esteem of
them is convoyed to our hearts, whence again it is published and proclaimed
everiewhere. To this purpose the Lord being to declare his Name to Moses Exodus
34. 6. The LORD, The LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin, etc. Thus the Name of Christ Jesus in
whom God was reconciling the world to himself, is called Isai. 9. 6.
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, etc. and Jerem. 23. 6. his name is
called IEHOVA, The Lord our Righteousness. Let us now come to the second
point, and consider how great a ground, of comfort and praise this Name is.

First it is so great a ground of comfort and consequently of praise, that no
grace is bestowed upon us, nor promise of it made unto us, but for this Names
sake. The Name of God is the original, root and spring, out of which all flow,
and into which all are resolved; It is of his goodness and mercy (which is
his Name) that he promises any thing to us, and it is of his truth and power
(which also belong unto his Name) that these promises are accomplished, Hence
DAVID Psalm. 25. IT For thy Names sake O Lord, pardon mine iniquity for it is
great.

Secondly, As we can have no good, but for and through his Name; so in it and
by it, all goodness is to be had. There is in it, 12. All Comfort in it.
infinite sufficiency of comfort against all our distresses, wants and
temptations, if we know it, believe in it, and call upon it. Are thou
perplexed with thy sins? look upon the Name of God Exodus 34. This is a part
of it, The Lord God merciful. He is the Lord God, and therefore able to
forgive. He is Merciful, and therefore willing. But it may be thou will say,
thy sins have made thee most unworthy of any favor. Look again upon his
Name. He is Gracious, and abundant in goodness says it. Thy sins do not so
abound, but his grace and goodness superabound. If thou say, thou have
continued long in sin and often relapsed. Look to his Name, there is comfort in
it against this also. He is long-suffering and slow to wrath. In a word,
whatsoever be the heinousness of thy sins, whatsoever the circumstances, yet
there is comfort in his Name, and a ground of the hope of pardon, for his Name
bears, That he keeps mercy beside him, as it were in treasure; forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin. Need thou refreshment as well as pardon?
Look to his Name, as it is elsewhere descrived; He is the Father of mercies,
and the God of all comfort, Who comfort us in all our tribulations. Would
thou have peace? The God of peace is his name also. Would thou have grace to
heal thy corruptions? He is the God of all grace. Would thou have wisdom to
direct thee? He is the Father of Lights. All this belongs to his Name.

In likemanner if we look to the Name of Christ, 13 Comfort in Christ's Name.
in whom and for whose sake, all good is bestowed upon us by God, we shall
find all manner of comforts. His Name is, The Prince of peace: and according to
it, able to give us tranquillity in all out troubles. His Name is the mighty
God, and accordingly He is able to save us to the uttermost, though there be
nothing but troubls without, and terrors within. Would thou have his Image
renewed in thee? He is the Everlasting Father, A Father to beget his Likeness
in us, and Everlasting to preserve it in us. To give us wisdom, he is the
Counselor, and he is Wonderful, to work in us and for us, beyond all that we
can ask or think, even to wonderment and admiration. And if our sins disquiet
us, He is IEHOVA, our Righteousness. The righteousness that is in him, is
ours, as well ours to save us trusting in him, as his to glorify him.

Thus we see, what matter of unspeakable comfort we have in the name of God, as
he is God, and as he is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 14. This upholdeth
us when other comforts fail.
and in him our Father. When all other comforts fail us, yet in this Name
comfort is to be found. IT falls out sometimes with the godly, that they are
not sensible of that former comfort of the assurance of Gods favor; They
cannot be persuaded of it, neither of the truth and sincerity of the graces
of God in them, they find not that delight which before they had in prayer or in
other means; yet when all failleth, we find the Name of the Lord, to be a
strong Tower: Proverb. 18. 10. and the Righteous flee to it and are saved. Ye
know the use of a Tower is that when all other fortifications are taken and
forsaken, when the walls are scaled and houses left, men flee to it, as to the
last refuge: so when we are beleggered with troubles without and terrors
within: when we are forced to quite all other holds and grounds of comfort,
yet have we Gods Name to flee unto, as to a strong Tower. Whatsoever be our
distress, we may say to him, O Lord, there is mercy and power with thee, that
is thy Name. In Jesus there is Righteousness, even our righteousness: that is
his Name; And thou have commanded us to call on thy Name in the time of our
trouble. To this Altar I flee. I take hold on the horns of it, and if I
perish, here will I perish. So ye see the Name of God, is a most sovereign
ground of comfort. Whence DAVID says to God Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy
Name, will put their trust in thee. And the Apostle Romans 10. 13. out of the
PROPHET, Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall the saved. Great
reason therefore have we to praise and bless it, and that for ever and ever.
This much of the object of DAVID'S praise: we come now to the praise it self.

He is not content to say simply that he will praise God, but uses sundry
pregnant words to this purpose, to signify the vehemency and fervencie of his
desire to honor God. First he says, I will extol thee or exalt thee. 15.
Exalting what.
We cannot exalt God by making him higher, for he is most high: and we are low
and base. There can be no accession to his Highness, and though there could,
yet cannot we contribute to it. We are said to exalt him in that sense, that we
are said to magnify, glorify and sanctify him. This we do by acknowledging,
proclaiming, and worshipping his Greatness, Glory and Holiness. So we exalt
him when we acknowledge his infinite Highness and Excellency, when we most
highly esteem of it, most highly love it, and most humbly submitt our selves
unto it. Thus, I will extol thee, is as if he had said, I will most highly
praise thee, reverentlie worship thee, magnificently proclaim and incomparably
prefer thy Highness and Excellency to all others.

Secondly he says, 16. Blessing what.
He will bless Him and his Name. BLESSING is a wishing of good to another, and
the bestowing and conferring of it, when it lies in our power. IT
comprehends two acts: the one of the Will, the other of the Understanding. By
the first, we wish or will good, by the other we confer it, and so it is a
practical kind of speech. This Blessing as it proceeds from God, is ever
effectual. If he speak good to us, it is done: his word is able to do,
whatsoever he wills: As when a King has the honors of a kingdom in his own
hand, If he say to one, be thou a Duke, to another, be thou an Earl, it is so,
by virtue of this his speech, these honors are conferred. But it is not so
with our blessing, especially of God. His good is either inward or outward; as
for his inward good, it is in himself, in infinite perfection. He laiketh
nothing, nor can we contribute any thing in that kind. All that we can do in
respect of this good, is to congratulate and express our joy at this, that he
possesses in himself all good. As for the outward good which belongs to him,
namlie the knowledge, the love, the fear and worship of his Name, unto that we
may and ought to contribute by his grace. We should not only wish that good,
but so much as lies in us should endeavor to procure it. Thus when DAVID
promises to bless him and his Name, he means that he wished all to know, to
fear, to love him, and that he would to the uttermost endeavor to effectuat
what he wished.

Thirdly, 17. Praising what.
He promises to praise Him. PRAISE is a proclaiming of the excellency that
is in any by reason of his actions and worthy deeds. So God is often praised
for his acts of mercy justice and power. The excellency that is in any by
nature, is rather honored then praised, says the Philosopher: yet often men
are praised for natural excellencies, as engyne, beauty, strength* etc. And
God here and often elsewhere in scripture, is praised for his Natural
excellencies, Infinite greatness, goodness, power, mercy, etc.

Lastly, DAVID promises thus to exalt, praise and bless God and his Name
Every day, for ever and ever. He will begin it now, but is never to end it.
So long as he lived he did praise him, and now being dead does praise him on
earth, by this and other songs of praise; 18. God should be praised in all estats
and in heaven does and shall for ever bless him. Beside this he promises to
do it without intermission, Every day says he, which signifies, that nothing
should befall, no change, no trouble that should divert him from this exercise.
Whence we may learn this profitable instruction, that it is our duty in every
estate, whatsomever befall us, to praise and bless God. No trouble or
temptation should make the praise or blessing of him to depart from our mouth,
nothing should make our courage to quail, our patience to weary, our
tranquillity to cease or stay the lifting up of our hearts, to bless his holy
Name. For this should be done by us every day, and at all times, Psalm. 34. 1.
Thou should bless him in the day of thy sickness, as well as in the day of thy
health, in the day of thy want, as well as in the day of thy abundance, in the
day of desolation, as well as in the day of consolation, in the day of
adversity, as well as in the day of prosperity. What great matter is it, says
holy AUGUSTINE upon this place, that thou blesses God in thy joyful day* when
all things flow to thee according to thy heart? What if a sorrowful and
melancholious day appear? will thou not bless him then also? If thou will
not, thou did not truly say* Every day will I bless thee. How many and how
grievous evils came upon Job, and that how suddenly? yet did he not intermitt
the praising of God in that his most sorrowful day. When all the evil tidings
had come unto him, he worshipped and said, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Thus ought we all to do, and the
reasons are manifest.

For first, 19. The reasons.
If God be thy God, then thy heart is upon him, and thou places in him, thy
sovereign good, which is to be found in him alone. Now no cross or trouble
can bereave thee of him, unless thou thy self forsake him. Job his hudge
wealth was taken away, and his children, for whom he kept it, were taken
away: but God who gave the one and the other, and was able to restore that and
infinitely more, could not be taken from him. Thus the day of worldly sorrow
cannot take our God from us, and so we have the ground and matter of our true
and chief joy, and consequently have reason still to bless him. 2. Whatsomever
God does to his own, he does it for the best. He makes all their sorrows and
troubles to work for their good, yea oftentimes promoveth their good by
sickness, want, and adversity, more then it should have been advanced by
health, abundance, and prosperity. LAZAR us sores and poverty were more
profitable to him, then all the wealth and dainties of the Rich-man were to
him. Both found it to be so in end, when the Rich-man was laid in flames of
fire, and was feign to beg one drop of water, which yet he could not have, and
when Lazarus was carried by the angels into the bosom of ABRAHAM. We may not
judge of these outward evils by our own sense, but by the word, wisdom,
goodness and power of God, which makes them all to serve to our good. Now if it
be so, we have reason in the midst of all our worldly sorrows to bless and
to praise the Name of our God. Happy is he that can do so, this is a most happy
and holy way, by which a man may go through all the sorrows of this life to
heaven, rejoicing and exulting. The Lord grant that we may so do, and that for
the merits of Christ Jesus, to whom etc.

THE SECOND SERMON.
Psalm. CXLV. Verse. 3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: and his
greatness is unsearchable.
THe holy Prophet having set down his purpose of extolling and praising God in
the two first verses; he now enters into the praise intended by him, and in a
most divine manner declares and commends the chief of his divine
perfections. IT is marked by holy Augustine, in his Preface on this Psalm,
That God is both the Object and the Author of the praise that is here set
down. God praises himself.
God is commended and praised here, and it is God who praises himself. DAVID
was but the Instrument and Penman of the Spirit, by whose instinct and
endytment he utters this praise of him. Neither should it seem strange, that
God does praise himself. It is otherwise with God then with man. It is
arrogancy in man to praise himself, and therefore it is said, PROVERB. 27. 2.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine
own lips. But for God to praise himself, it is a singular work of mercy: For
first, by praising himself, he instructs us, how we should praise him, 2. By
setting forth his own praises, he represents to us his Excellency and the
loveliness thereof, that we may be inflamed with his love, wherein our
happiness consists. Let us now come to the words

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised etc. The PROPHET begins his
praise of God, 2. Consideration of Gods greatness the fountain of his praise.
at the consideration of his Greatness, and not without cause. We can never
praise God aright, till we have some apprehension of his Greatness. But when
we look upon it, and thereby are brought into admiration and astonishment, our
praise, extolling and blessing of him, flows kyndly as it were, from this
fountain. And thus in general; The meaning of DAVID'S words is; O my God, who
art the King of kings, I said, That I would extol, and bless and praise thee,
and that Every day, and for ever and ever. And good reason have I so to do; for
Great art thou, even above all, and therefore, thou deserves to be praised
greatly and above all; yea Thy greatness is unsearchable, or without end, and
therefore thy praises should be without end or bound.

In the words ^ee have two things particularly to be considered; First the
Perfection of God, which DAVID commends. 3. Divisio^ of the words.
2. The Duty whereunto we are obliged by reason of that perfection. The
Perfection of God commended here, is his Greatness, which first is simply
set down; Great is the Lord, and thereafter, is more particularly descrived,
namely that his Greatness is such that it is unsearchable or
incomprehensible. The Duty which we owe to God, by reason of this his
perfection is Praise, and that in the highest degree, under which many other
duties are comprehended; Great is the Lord (says he) and greatly to be
praised. Before we enter into the matter, it is to be observed that the last
words are diverslie rendered. Our Interpreters render them, His greatness is
unsearchable: and upon the margin, Of his greatness there is no search: The
seventie and vulgar latin render them thus, Of his greatness there is no end.
but both come to one purpose. Gods greatness is truly unsearchable, as we
shall hereafter hear, and the word in the the original properly signifies so
much. Hence in the 40 of Isa^ah, where it is said That his understanding is
unsearchable, ye have the same word that is used here. Upon the other part,
the reason why the Greatness of God is unsearchable is this, namely that it
has no end, no bounds or limits: Therefore it cannot be searched into or
comprehended: and so both the expositions do well agree, both with the words
and amongst themselves.

For clearing of this point the better, and that we may make our use of it more
fruitfullie, we shall consider first, 4 Points to be considered.
What is this unsearchable greatness of God, where of the PROPHET speaks. 2.
We shall show you that it is in him. 3. We shall consider more particularly
what things belong to it. And 4. How truly, in respect of these thing, it is
called unsearchable As for the first, It is certain the Greatness here spoken
of, is not the greatness of bodily quantity. That is not in God nor is it of it
self the object of praise: so out of all doubt the Greatness here spoken of is
the greatness of perfection, which the PROPHET not only ascriveth to God, but
also in the highest degree, while as he says, That it is such a greatness
that cannot be searched into, and consequently has no end, or bounds or
limits, but is boundless and infinite.

Neither is this greatness of God infinite or boundles only in some respect,
but also every way. A thing may be said to be infinite two manner of ways. 5.
Infinitnes what.
First, because in respect of some thing or other it is unbounded or unlimited.
This way a line, if drawn out in length without end, should be infinite, namely
in respect of length: so the Merit of Christ in respect of worth and virtue is
infinite, for there is not, nor can be any merit in any creature so great, but
the Merit of Christ, in worth does infinitlie exceed it: and that because he
is not only Man but also God to whom it belongs. 2. A thing may be said to be
Infinite, not in this or that respect, but every way, as containing in it self
the whole fulness of being or perfection, that is or can be: and that in the
most eminent or excellent manner. Thus God is infinite, and this infiniteness
is his greatness, whereof the PROPHET says here, that it is unsearchable, or
that it has no limits or bounds. Thus much shortly of the first point; I come
now to the second, to show you, that this absolute Infiniteness or unbounded
and unlimited greatness, is in God.

This is clear both by the light of nature, and by scripture. First, by the
light of nature, by which we know that God is the first and independent Being,
6. It is in God.
who has his Being from none, and gives being unto all things. Now if it be
so, (which if it were not, there should be nothing at all: for we must come
to One first, and pryme Beginning; which gives being to all other things) The
Being of God cannot be any ways bounded or limited. First, because there was
none to bound or limite him; The creatures are bounded and limited, because
they are and do depend from one, who has set to every one his bounds; but he
that is the First and pryme Being, could have none to limite or determine him.
2. If the Perfection of God had any bounds or limits, then something might be
added to him, and if he be capable of any addition or increase, then there most
be some one prior or superior, who may add unto or ^ugment his perfection,
and consequently the first and supreme Being, should not be the first and
supreme; but in some respect dependent from another, which implies a manifest
contradiction. Thus the light of nature leads us to the infiniteness of God.
By the light of scripture this is also manifest, for beside this and many other
like places, the Lord descriving himself, to his servant Moses, Exodus 3. 14.
takes the name of Being to himself, as proper and peculiar to him; Thus shall
thou say to the children of Israel, says the Lord, ( I AM) has sent me unto
you. by which name he signifies, that he is alone of himself: whereas all
other things of themselves are not. That he is fully, containing in himself
the amplitude of all that is, or has, or can have any being, that he is
eternally and unchangably. So being that he cannot cease to be at all, or to be
what he is, and in a word, that he is Being it self, the unbounded Ocean of
being: from which all being fl^weth and depends, whence S. Paull, out of the
poet says, That in him we live, move, and have our being; so then the Being
of God both by the light of scripture and nature is such as excludes, not
being infinitely: which therefore has not nor can have any place in him. IT is
not so with the creatures; They are of themselves nothing; and therefore of
themselves, they tend to nothing, and while they are, bounded and limited
within some one kind of being, without which they are not. But so it is not
with him whose Greatness has no end or bounds, which the PROPHET here
ascriveth to God. Now let us in the third place, see more particularly what
belongs to this infinite and unbounded greatness of God.

The first thing that belongs to him, 7. All perfections ar in him.
by reason of his infinite Greatness, is that he comprehends in himself all
kind of being and perfection that either is or is possible, created or
increa^ed. There is no good in man, or angels, in earth or heaven, no j^y or
bless, no goodness or beauty, etc. which is not in him. If it he in the
creatures, it must needs be in him; Shall not he see, who made the eye, or
shall not he hear, who made the ear. There is no perfection in the creature,
which is not the expression of his eternal conception, and a footstep o^
resemblance of that perfection which is in him. In like manner, that is nothing
or perfection possible which is not in him. If any such thing or perfection be
possible, it must needs be in him by whom alone it can be brought forth and
made actually to be: for if he have it not himself, how can he give it unto
others? So then name or conceive what perfection you will, Sense, Life*
Understanding, goodness, Beauty, Wisdom, Mercy, Power, Truth, etc. it is in
him, yea infinitely more perfections are in him then we can conceive, even all
that are or any way can be. This is the first thing which belongs to his
infinite Greatness.

The second thing is, 8. In the highest degree of perfection.
That all the kinds of being or perfections, are in him in the highest degree
of perfection and excellency that can be. As all things are in him: so there is
nothing in him according to that manner of imperfection, in which we perceive
by our sense or conceive by our mind. Look unto things sensible, to the
heavens, to the earth, or to any thing that is therein, there is nothing like
to him. To whom will yet liken God, and what liknesse will ye compare unto him?
Isai. 40. 18. There is Beauty indeed in him, but not such a beauty as we
perceive in things bodily: but a beauty which the angels cannot comprehend.
There is Light in him, but not such a light as is in the sun or the startes; he
dwells in light that cannot be approached unto, which no man has seen or can
see. There is Sweetness in him, but not such as is in meat or drink or any such
like thing: but a sweetness which exceeds the capacity of al other things.
Hence holy AUGUST. in his 10. book of the city of God, and 6. chap. says,
what do I love when I love my God? Not the beauty of bodies nor of bodily
sound, or smell, or sweetness: and yet when I love him, I love a certain light,
and voice, and smell and food and embracement; Even the light, and voice, and
smell, and food, and embracement of the inward man; where that shyneth to my
soul which place cannot comprehend, and that sounds which time takes not
away, and that smells, which no blast can dissipate, etc. And again look to
the perfectio^s which our minds conceive; these a^ not in God as conceived by
us. For example, Neither goodness, nor justice nor wisdom nor mercy nor
truth, at in him as we conceive them: we conceive them but imperfectly, and so
they are not in him, as they are conceived by us, they are finite and bounded,
and distinct one from another: but so in him they are not. So if we would
conceive God and his greatness aright; we must not only transcend our sense,
but also all the imaginations and thoughts of our mind: and must consider,
that he is infinitely more high and excellent and all that is in him, then all
that we can conceive or comprehend. His Wisdom, as I said is not as ours, but
of a boundles perfection. It contains all the kinds, degrees and measures of
wisdom, that is or is possible, and extends it self to all that can be
understood, that actuallie is or is not, present, bypast and to come. His
Beauty in likemanner, comprehends all kinds and degrees of beauty bodily or
spiritual, that are or can be, and in a manner infinitely more perfect then
we can conceive. So it is with his Goodness, Power, etc. This is the second
thing that belongs to his infinite greatness, namlie that he has in
himself, all perfections in the highest degree of excellency.

The third thing is, 9. In a most perfect unity.
That he has all these his perfections joined in the most perfect manner,
namlie in a most perfect Unity and simplicity. His perfections are not in him,
as ours in us. Our perfections are distinguished one from another, but it is
not so in him. By his most simple nature and essence, as he is God: so he is
Wise, and Just, and Good, and True and Omnipotenz, etc. each of these
perfections including other, as they are in him: for they are one and the same
with his own Essence. God, says holy Augustine in his 6. book of the Trinity
and 7. chap. is called Great, and Wise and True: but we may not think that his
Greatness is another thing then his Wisdom* or that his Wisdom is another
thing then his Goodness and Truth, or that his Truth is differentif^o^ any of
these. we conceive these things indeed as really distinct, but that is through
the imperfection of our mind, which cannot co^ceive things divine, according
to that ^ie and sublime manner after which they are in God, but most needs
think of them with a proportion to the creatures in which we and the essence of
things distinguished from (...) perfections, and (...) perfections
distinguished one from another* It is fa^ otherwise in God, what soever is
dispersed here and there in the creature, is all joined in him, in a most
perfect unity, and that without any limits or bounds, as was said before.

Thus shortly ye have that which we can conceive of this infinite Greatness
of God, 10. His highness above the creatures
whereby we may easily understand that there is no end of it, not any thing
that can be compared to it. All the creatures in respect of him, are nothing.
Isai. 40. 12. He meteth out the heaven with his span, says the Prophet
there. He measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, be comprehends the
dust of the earth in a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance. Behold the nations are (...) the drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust in the balance: All nations are before him as
nothing, and are counted to him^lesse then nothing, and vanity. If ye would
compare the hudge Ocean with a small drop of water taken out of it, ye would
think there were a great distance betwixt them, and yet far greater distance is
there, betwixt this great God, and all the creatures that are or are possible.
That drop of water, is of that same nature with the rest of the water of the
Ocean, but the perfections of the creatures, are not of that kind with that
which is in God, as we have showen. That drop of water, little as it is, was a
part of the Ocean, but the perfections of the creatures, ar no part of God. 3.
If many drops were added to that one drop, it might at last equal the whole
Ocean, but add whatsoever ye^ can conceive, to the goodness, to the power, to
the wisdom, etc. that is in the creatures, they can never equal the Goodness,
or Wisdom, or Power that is in God. So his Greatness is infinitely high above
all that is or can be, without himself.

Secondly, 11. His greatness is unsearchable
Hence follows that which DAVID says here, That him greatness is
unsearchable or incomprehensible. It is have no bound or ground, how can it be
searched out by the creature which is finite and bounded? It is true, God
comprehends himself folly. His Infiniteness is to him in a manner finite.
His Understanding is infinite; and therefore equal to his divine Effence, yea
one and the same with it. But no creatures^, man or angel, can fully search
into (...) comprehend this ^reatnes of God. If this could be, we should see
him as perfectly as he can be seen, nothing of him should be hid from us, and
all his greatness should be enclosed, as it were, within the compass of our
minds, which cannot be, except our understanding and sight were infinite.
Hence, by the way, we may learn that we should not curiously pry into his
nature, decrees and counsels, which are unsearchable as himself is. It becomes
us to praise him that he has revealed and manifested himself to us so far
forth as he knows to be fit for his own glory and our salvation, and so much
the rather, that he has sent his own Son for this effect. God has no man seen
at any time; Ioh. 1. 18. but the only begotten son, that is in the bosom of
the Father, he has revealed him unto us. We should be content with this, and
should labor to make a right use of this knowledge, purging our hearts daily,
that we may be prepared for the blessed sight of his countenance, with which
there is fullness of joy. This much of the Perfection of God; Let us now come
to the duties which we ought to it.

DAVID expresses this one, 12, Praise due to him.
That he should be greatly praised, Great is the Lord, says he, and greatly
to be praised. According to his greatness, so should his praise be. His
greatness is infinite, as we have showen: and therefore he is worthy of
infinite praise. He deserves to be praised not only for ever and ever, but
also with an infinite affection, if it were possible to us. It is true, all
that we can do in this kind is small; For what can our little tongue
contribute to the praising of the great God? yet we should labor to do what
we can to the uttermost. Our endeavors to praise him should be without end,
and our continuance in his praises, should be without end. This is a part of
service from which the blessed spirits of men and angels i^ heaven, are not
exempted. They praise him that sit upon the Thron and the lamb, saying,
Blessing, and glory, and power, and honor, and dominion be to him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever. Neither do they ever
intermitt or end this exercise. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
says DAVID, they are still praising thee.

For the more full clearing of this duty, We are to consider, That the due
consideration of the greatness of Gods excellency. First inflameth our heart
with sincere love of him, 13. Love the immediaet fountain of it.
and that love being kendled in our hearts, fills both our souls with joy,
and our mouths with praise. There arises from it joy in us, when we look upon
these inestimable perfections of the infinite Wisdom, Power, Joy and Bless
that are in God. If thou assuredly knew, that thy beloved son abounded in
wealth, honor, and all happiness, it could not be but matter of exceeding joy
unto thee: so it cannot but fill thy soul with joy, when thou considerest that
thy God and Father has within himself the infinite fullness of all good and
bless.

Secondly, From this love springs the praise of God. When we see his
perfections, 14. What praise proceeds from it.
and love him that has them, we cannot choice but praise and bless him, we
cannot but desire his glory above all things, being ready to employ all the
powers of our body and soul, to the promoving of it. We are not content to
praise and honor him our selves, but labor to draw all men with us to the
same exercise; As good Courtiours that serve a worthy Prince, so praise his
virtue and power; as that they labor to draw others to the love and obedience
of him; Even so, they that serve this great King aright, endeavor to bring all
others as much as lies in them to the knowledge of of his infinite Greatness,
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, etc. and to the love and reverence of him.
Neither labor they only by their words to do this, but also by their deeds,
and by obedience to him in their life and conversation; according to that of
our Savior, Let your light so shine before men, that all that see your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven.

This is the duty of all, and the practice of them that are good, 15. Our
undu^ifulnes in this.
but alace, how few such are there? We are so far, for the greatest part,
from praising and honoring God, and stirring up others thereunto, that we both
dishonor him our selves, and provoke others to do the like. We profane his
Name, his Word and other holy Ordinances: by the wickedness of our lives, we
contemn and misregard the greatness of all his perfections, and carry our
selves toward him, as if there were no greatness in him at all, and so lead
others to the like contempt and misregard, what a lamentable (...) this in man?
All the works of God, praise him in their own kind; The heavens declare the
glory of the Lord, and the firmament shows forth his handie work: and so it
is with the rest of the works of God, only man amongst these visible creatures
fails in this duty, albeit of all others he be most bound. God has made
him alone according to his own Image, has loaded him with infinite blessings,
and all for this end, that he should set forth the praises of him, Who has
called him out of darkness, to his mavelous light. His obliedgement to God, is
many ways infinite, and therefore his unthankfulnes is most worthy of infinite
wrath and punishment. Justly therefore, is the wrath of God revealed now against
wicked and unthankful man. We will not take the cup of salvation, and call
upon his Name with praise, therefore he justly presents unto us, the cup of
his fury: yea the wicked shall drink the dreggs of it hereafter: even
Everlasting pain; which shall make them so drunk and mad, that they shall curse
themselves, and blaspheme God himself. This much of the duty mentioned by the
PROPHET. 16. Our heart should be set upon him.


Beside this, we may learn from the consideration of Gods infinite
Greatness. First, That in him alone, we ought to seek the satisfaction and
contentment of all the desires of our hearts. Nothing can be desired by us,
which is not in him, and in him most perfectly. All good is in him, all truth,
all beauty, all honor and dignity, all power and strength, all riches and
treasures, all joy and comfort, all peace and bless and eternal life, which
comprehends in it; That which the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
and has not entered in the heart of man to understand. So there is in him that
which is able fully to satisfy all our desires. Why suffer thou then thine
heart to go a-whoring after the creatures? all the good whereof is as but a
shadow and vanity, when compared with that good which is in him. If a man we^
sitting under a most fruitful tree, where he might have abundance of most
delightsome fruits, if he would but look up and stretch out his hand, would he
not be thought mad: if neglecting this, he shall look only to the shadow of the
fruits upon the ground and follow after it. Far greater madness is it, to
follow after that shadow of Gods perfections, which is in the creatures, when
thou might enjoy that true, that solid and eternal good that is in God, if
thou would but look up to him, and stretch out the hand of thy soul to lay
hold upon him. If we had that all which is in this world, and have not him, we
have no more but a dream of happiness: but if we have him, suppose we had
nothing else, we should find in him true and solid bless. Let therefore all
the desires of our heart bend to this great God, the only center wherein they
will find rest. Thus David psalm. 27. 4. One thing I have desired and that I
will seek after: that I may see the beauty of the Lord, all the days of my
life, and enquire in his holy temple. And again psalm. 73. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and in earth there is nothing that I desire besides thee. Thou
art the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Hence our Savior said
to Martha, though b^ssied in serving himself; Martha, Martha, thou are troubled
about many things: leaving that good part, which shall not be taken away; namly
to sit at Christ's feet, to hear his word, that our souls may enjoy him.

But it may be, 17. Our desirs of him should be effectual.
ye will say; There is none of us who desires not God, and the enjoying of
that great goodness which is in him. I Ans. If thy desire were sincere and
true, it would be effectual, that is, it would make thee to do all that thou
can for the obtaining of them. As in natural things, That inclination which
they have to that which gives them rest and perfection, makes them to break
through all impediments, if they be able; Thus a stone if it had power, should
break through the very earth, till it came to the center: so if our desire of
God were true and sincere, we should do all that is possible unto us, for
finding of him. Now through his grace nothing is impossible, and therefore,
nothing should withold us from him.

Secondly, From the consideration of this infinite greatness of God, 18.
Nobility of GOD, service.
we may learn, that it is a most high and honorable thing to serve him. The
greater any King is, his service is the more honorable. Now, God is infinitlie
greater then any earthly Monarch, and therefore his service is far more
glorious then that of any earthly Prince. Yea, it is more honorable to serve
him, then to reign in this world: For to be set over men, is less then to be
conjoined with God, to have access to his presence, that we may present our
suits to him, to enjoy his familiarity, and to receive favors from him. Hence
DAVID who was a king over a mighty people gloried not in that, but in this,
that he was the servant of God, I am thy servant says he, I am thy servant
etc. And again, I had rather he a door keeper in the house of my God, then
to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

Thirdly, 19. Reverenes in our carriage to him.
This Greatness of God, should teach us to carry our selves before him in all
reverence and humility. The greater any King is, the more he should be
reverenced; God therefore, who is infinitely great, is worthy of infinite
reverence, if it were possible. Hence Abram though it pleased God to use him
very familiarly, said to him, Behold I am but dust and ashes, and I have taken
upon me to speak unto my Lord. Yea the most glorious spirits, the Ceraphims,
in acknowledgement of his greatness, and of their own smalnes and nullity: cover
their faces before him; saying, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts etc.
How much more becomes it us vile and sinful creatures to humble our selves
before this infinite Majesty? Of our selves we have no good, and can do none;
All the good we have is of God, and that has joined with it in us manifold
corruptions and miseries. Now we are in health, and incontinent sick again,
now in joy, and incontinent cast down with sorrow: now we live and incontinent
our breath goes out, we are filled with terrors within, and environed with
troubles without, and exposed to a thousand dangers. How vile then should we
be in our own eyes, especially when we come into the presence of this
infinitely great King, when he vouchsafes to speak to us, or we have liberty
to speak to him?

Lastly, The consideration of this infinite Greatness of God serves to give
us comfort and confidence in all our troubles. 20. Confide^^^ in him.
The Lord uses this argument to A^RAHAM to encourage him. I am God
Alsufficient, says he, walk before me and be upright, and I will be thy
exceeding great reward: so when he sent Moses to the children of Israel, to
assure them that he was to deliver them out of the Egyptian bondage, He
declared to him his Name, which signifies his greatness and commanded him to
reveal it unto them, thus shall thou say unto them, said the Lord, Exodus 3 14.
I am, or He that is, has sent me unto you. as if he would have said, fear
not, he has spoken it who is the great and infinite Being, who makes every
thing to be that he will, and gives being unto all his promises. In like
manner the Lord reasons Isal. 40. where he comfort the fainting hearts of
his people, and even ready to murmr with this consideration of his
greatness, Why say thou, O Jacob, why speak thou, O Israel, my way is
hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God? Have thou not
known? have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of
the ends of the earth, f^inteth not, neither is weary? of his understanding
there is no searching. He gives power to them that are faint, and to them
that have no might, he increases strength. Even the youths weary and faint,
and the young men shall utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run,
and not be weary, and they shall walk, and not faint. Thee is no trouble nor
distress, against which this infinite greatness of God cannot comfort us. Are
thou weak and thy enemies strong? yet remember that the power of this great God
of whose greatness there is no end, is greater then all thy weakness or their
might. Are thou oppressed with the greatness of thy sins? Remember that thy
sins how great soever; are small in respect of his mercies, who is infinitely
great in that, as well as in other perfections. Are thou perplexed and see no
outgate in thy difficulties? Remember the Wisdom of Him that is infinitely
great, can find out the way. In a word, His infinite greatness can supply us
in all our evils and wants. Let us therefore seek our comfort hence, against
the manifold evils which afflict us, or are imminent over our heads. Doct.
BARON his A^ath lamented.
There is no day almost which brings not some evil with it, and some tidings
that are sorrowful. I shall instance but in one particular, the death of your
Reverend and worthy Pastor, whereof ye lately heard. I may truly say, The
loss of him was not a small loss. He was a man endued with singular and
excellent gifts, especially of Learning and Devotion. His Judgment was solid
and piercing, his Conception was most clear, he was strong in reasoning,
distinct, and sweet; and pithie in his expressions: and by the diligent use of
these gifts highly esteemed at home, and famous abroad, amongst the best
learned, as I very well know. How comfortable his travels were to you, how
plainly and perfectly he instructed you, how sweetly and powerfully he
exhorted and comforted you from this place, I appeal to your own consciences.
But that which is most of all, I am persuaded, he had the true fear of God in
his heart, in his ways, he set him before his eyes, and was fervent and
frequent in the devot service of him. He made not a show of devotion: but God
Who sees in secret, I trust has now openly rewarded him. He had indeed an
apprehension of death, a long space before his end; and I very well know; that
he was most earnestly and devotly prepared for it. His preparation was
fruitful: for God gave him a sweet and calm, and holy departure, which joined
with integrity of his life assures us, that he is now translated from this
valley of tears into his Fathers house, and to that City that has
foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. For my self, I make no doubt at
all, but that he is with this great God, and is now entered into his joy. So it
is well with him, but alace, These and the like losses are matter of sorrow and
heaviness to us, yet as I said, we must not be too much cast down: There is
comfort against this in all our evils, in that infinite greatness and
sufficiency of God, whereof I have been speaking. The Lord grant us confidence
in him, and that for the merits of Christ Jesus; to whom etc.

A SERMON Upon the CXXXIII. Psalm. Jule, 22. 1638. A song of degrees of DAVID.
Verse. 1. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

2. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons heard, that went down the skirts of his garments

As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Zion, for there the LORD commanded the blessing: even life for evermore.


THis Psalm is one of the 15. 1. song of degress.
songs of degre^. The 1. whereof is the cxx. and the last the cxxxiv. Why these
Psalms are called particularly songs of degrees, it is not certain. Some
think they are called so, from the fifteen degrees, by which they ascended to
the temple of Jerusalem. whereupon they were sung, upon particular occasions.
Some think they are so called in reference to the ascending of the Jews from
Babylon to Jerusalem, after their deliverance from captivity, foreseen by
DAVID, by the light of Gods Spirit. But to leave things uncertain, This is
certain, that these Psalms are singularly excellent, and well agreeing to
men that are sojourning here, and ascending by degrees of piety and virtue to
the heavenly Jerusalem. They are full of divine instructions and affections,
whereby we may be directed and inflamed to make progress and ascend in the way
to our heavenly country and city. In particular this Psalm, which, of the
fifteen is the last except one: though short, is a most sweet and heavenly
song, wherein most divinlie DAVID commends brotherly love and the communion of
the saints, 2. Unity commended here.
he represents the beauty of it most lively and it is very necessar to all
to look thereupon, that they who have concord and peace, may be thankful to
God for it, and be careful to maintain it, and that they who have it not, may
desire and seek after it; And therefore it shall be fit for us this day, to
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity.

Behold, says DAVID, This word calls us to attention and to the present
view and inspection of the beauty of brotherly love. 3. Behold
He sets and presents it as it were before our eyes, and therefore says,
Behold. Beside he does not simply call us to the beholding of it, but if we
consider the occasion of this Song, he inviteth us to the beholding of it,
with a reference to the woeful and doleful evils of Division. when DAVID
entered into his kingdom, the kingdom of Israel was divided, and there was a
long and bloody war betwixt Israel and Iud^. (...) end, it pleased God to send
a blessed Unity and Peace both In the Church and State, so that both DAVID the
speaker, and they to whom he did speak, had experience both of the good of
unity, and of the evil of Division: whereby they had been brought almost to
utter desolation. Out of this experience he says, Behold, ye have tasted so
long of the bitter fruits of Discord, which has made you that were brethren,
to hate and persecute one another as cruel enemies, behold now and see, how
inest^^able is the benefit of Unity, and how good and pleasant a thing it is
for brethren to dwell together in it. Let us now see what it is which he
commends, and how he commends it.

That which he commends, is the dwelling of brethren together in Unity, 4.
Wh^^^ to dwell together in ^^^itie.
which also importeh the reason why this should be done, as we shall hear; To
dwell together in Unity, is not to dwell in one place. The Unity he speaks
of, is the unity of brotherly Concord, whereby, as the latin word imports,
the hearts of men are knit together, according to that Act. 4. 32. And the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul: This
Concord makes a man not only to do that which another wills, but also to
will that which he wills, and therefore presupponeth the union of minds and
judgments, (especially in things of importance, and is grounded upon the will
of God revealed to us) into a true and perfect Concord. So it is not true
concord or unity of hearts, when fear imposes a necessity of obeying or when
hatred, malice, envy, are clocked with outward shows of love. Fear commands
not this Concord, neither can subtlety of wit work it. Temporal gain cannot
buy it, neither can paper and ink keep it: but the God of Love and Unity, who
has commanded it; gives, confirms, preserves and keeps it. They that
have this Concord dwell together in unity, although they be in diverse places
and have many bodies, yet they have as it were, but one heart and one soul.

Who a^ they that should have this unity? 5. Brethren.
Brethren. All men in some sort are brethren, being descended of this same
first parents, and partakers of this same nature, but DAVID means those who
were more straightly tied together, as partakers of the same kingdom and
country, and members of the same Church. Those are brethren, and there ought
to be no division betwixt brethren. Let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between thee and me: for we are brethren said ABRAHAM to LOT, Genesis 13. 8.
Fear, and joy, and sorrow should be common unto brethren, and nothing more
hateful then that one brother should hate another, rejoice at his evil be
grieved at his good, or that he should cast him down and trample him under his
feet. So when he says brethren, he not only shows who, but also why we
should keep unity amongst our selves, even because we are brethren. Now we
have the thing commended. The unity and concord of brethren. Let us see how he
commends it.

How good and how pleasant is it, 6. Concord good and pleasant.
says he. It is not only good, nor only pleasant, but both good and pleasant.
Some things are good, that are not pleasant, as Travels, repentance, fasting,
Martyrdom, and some things are pleasant, that are not good, as many sinful
actions: but Concord and Peace are both good and pleasant. Beside he says not
simply, that it is good and pleasant: but How good and how pleasant, to
signify the excellency of goodness and pleasure that is in it; and therefore
the seaventie Interpreters render it thus, What is good and pleasant? but that
brethren dwell together in unity.

First then, 7. Goodness of it.
It is good, and so good, that without it nothing is good, and by it all
necessar good is attained; In natural things, every thing is that, which it
is by union or unity, and by that same unity is conserved in the being
thereof, and if it be capable of further perfection, is by that unity
strengthened, till it attain to that perfection which is due unto it. Nay
further the blessedness of God himself consists in unity, whereby he is
present to himself, and whereby he has all his divine perfections most
straightly and unseparablie united. In like manner the Wel-being of all Societies
civil or ecclesiastical, depends from their unity. When the Christian
Church was first planted, it consisted of a small number, but being of one
heart and of one soul, did soon spread it self throughout the whole world.
When Rome was first founded, it was scarce two miles of compass, but by unity
and warrlike virtue it came to pass, that in the time of Aurelian the Emperor,
it had the compass of fifty miles, and the dominion of the world almost. By
concord small things grow to an hight: and so it is good and profitable, but by
discord and division all things even the greatest things declyne from their
pryme estate, and are weakened, diminished, and in end perish. If the members of
the body should rise up one against another, if the right hand should cut off
the left, if the fingers should pull out the eyes, if one member should draw
the nourishment from another; the body could not stand: even so, no house, nor
city, nor kingdom, nor church divided against it self can stand.

Secondly, 8. Pleasantness of it.
As the unity of brethren is good, so it is pleasant and beautiful. That
which makes this World to be a beautiful frame is the unity that is in it.
So long as the heaven, the air, the sea, and the earth, and every thing therein
agree, and do their own duties, for which they were appointed calmly and
without perturbation, it has an incomparable beauty. But if things should
become confused and disordered, nothing should be more deformed: so is it in
respect of humane society. Nothing more beautiful and desirable then the
unity and peace thereof, and nothing more uglie and horrible, then divisions
and tuptures therein. Hence it is, that there is no man but he desires peace,
As all men desires to rejoice, so al desire to have peace says holy
Augustine: even Martial men, that have the sword in the one hand, and fire in
the other, they are seeking peace, such a peace, as they imagine to be right,
as the same Father observes in the 19. of the city of God, and 12 chap. In a
word, we desire it in our houses, in our wives, in our children, in our
friends, and in all things we wish to have peace. It appears by a sermon of
S. August. upon the CXLVII. psalm. That when he had uttered these words of the
Text, He makes peace in thy borderit The people at the hearing of the name of
Peace, incontinently cried out. What makes you to cry? said that holy Father,
I have said nothing on these words, I have not yet expounded them, and yet ye
cried out, at the mentioning of peace. This shows that ye loved it, and love
it ye could not, unless some way ye did see it, and see it with the eyes of
the body ye cannot, but it has an invisible beauty, which ravissieth the
heart, when it is presented to it: and what shall I say of it says he? I
cannot, I am not able to express the goodness and the beauty of it; so
writting on this psalm. he says that every man albeit he could not read, had
this verse by heart, Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren, to
dwell together in unity.

Before we proceed, 9. Unity in the church commanded.
Let us mark hence a lesson very necessar for these times, namlie, that if all
brethren should be so careful to keep unity, as a thing most good and most
pleasant, then especially ought Christians so to do, and Christians who are of
the same religion. They are called, and are most truly brethren, they have one
Father, to wit God, they have one mother, the Church, one Lord, one faith, one
baptism. And therefore above all others, should keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4. 3. Hence our Savior before his death, said to
them, A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another. Hereby
shall all men know, that yea are my disciples, if ye love one another. Ioh. 13.
34. 35. and praying for them before his death, he said, Neither pray I for
these alone: but for them also which shall believe on me through their word:
That they all may be one, as thou Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us, Ioh. 17. 20. 21. To this effect he said unto them, My
peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you, Ioh. 14. 27. yea, for this
end he dyed, that he might gather together in one, the children of God that
were dispersed. So the blessed Apostles recommended nothing more then unity
and peace. S. PAUL says 1. cor. 1. 10. Now, I beseech you, brethren, by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and there be
no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. and 2. cor. 13. be of one mind, and live in
peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you. So Philip. 2. If there
he therefore any consolation in Christ* if any comfort of love, if any,
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that
ye may be like minded, having the same love, being of ^ue accord, of one mind.

Accordingly all good Christians have ever thought the unity and Peace of the
Church to be a thing most precious, and o^ the contrar, 10. Fathers highly
esteemed it.
Schism and division to be most pernicious. Brotherly love says TERTULL. is
the treasure of Christian^; And in the 39. of his Apolog. he says, That
Christians in his time, called themselves brethren, and did bear such love one
toward another, that the Pagans astonished therewith, used to say, Behold how
the Christians love one another, and are ready to die one for another. So S.
August, upon this psalm. says, That the ordinar salutation of Christians in
his time, was, Thanks be to God, and when the Donatists did laugh at this. S.
August. asked at them, If a Christian had not good reason to thank God, when he
did see his brother well, with whom he was one in Christ. On the contrar Schism
or breach of Unity in the Church, they highly condemned. It is an hudge Crime,
says Optatus Milivitanus, and ye your selves cannot deny, that it is an
evil in the highest degree, says he to the Donatists, against whom he was
reasoning. S. August. in his first book against the Epistle of Parmenian chap.
4. calls it A sacrilege that exceeds all crimes. and in his 2. book of
Baptism, against the Donatists, chap. 6. he says, That they did heall men
indeed of Infidelity and Idolatry, but did wound them more deadly with Schism.
The punishment of Shism (says he) was greater then of idolatry: for Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram who made Schism among the people of God, were swallowed up
quick, by the earth opening her mouth to receive them, and to carry them down
quick to the pit. S. Cyprian in his book of the unity of the Church says,
That the blood of Martyrdom cannot expiat the sin of Schism: which sentence
Chrisost. on the 4. of the Ephesians. cites and approves, and with great
vehemency, in other words there condemns this sin. Eusebius. in the 6. book of
his history and 37. chap. reports a letter of S. Denis of Alexandria, wherein
he writteth to Novatus, who then perturbed the peace of the Church, wherein he
says, That all incommodities should be suffered rather then the peace of the
Church should be rent. Nay, says he, the (...) that is suffered for hendring
the Division of the church, is no less yea, in my judgment is greater then
that which is suffered for (...) sacrificing to an idol: for in this, says
he, a man profits but himself: but in that he profits the whole Church.
Hence S. August so much praised that blessed Martyr S. Cyprian in his (...) of
(...), against Donatists chap. 18, and in many other places, for that he would
not separate himself from the society of other good Christians,
notwithstanding he differed from them in judgment, anent the rebaptising of
them, who were baptized by heretics. God says he, permitted him to fall into
^n error, that his pious humility might be known, and might serve for a
medicine, both for that age* and for posterity. If Cyprian says he, being a
Bishope of so great a Church as Carthage was, and being a man of so^great
learning, eloquence, cowrage, and worth every way, bad separated himself; how
many had followed him? how glorious a name had he purchased to himself among
men? there had been more Cyprianists then Donatists; but he was not a Child of
perdition, but a Child of peace. He did not see the Truth in that point, but
God permitted that, that we might see in him, that which was better then that
Truth, even Charity: for that Truth without Charity would not have saved
him; but Charity without that Truth, obtained to him through the Mercy of
God, the Crown of Martyrdom, and so the cloud of error which creeped in his
bright soul, was banished away by the brightness of his blood (as it were)
shade for the love of Christ. I proceed now to the following words.

It is as the precious ointment upon the head, 11. Concord lik an ointme^t.
etc. Here by two excellent similituds the PROPHET shows the beauty and
goodness of brotherly unity and love. The first is taken from the sacred
ointment that was poured on the high Priest at his consecration, which you have
descrived Exodus 30. The similitude is remarkable, First, brotherly love whereof
concord and peace is the fruit, is like anoyntment. An ointment makes souple
and active, and Love makes us prepared and ready to every good work. 2. It is
like unto the Priestly ointment. That was an holy and an sacred thing: so
brotherly love consecrateth us to God, and is not to be found but among the
godly. Peace is the fruit of the Spirit, and springs not but from him that is
rooted in Christ; the peace of the wicked is no true peace. It is either not
sincere, but corrupted by some by respect of gain or pleasure, or not grounded
upon the right foundation which is God. 3. This Concord and Peace is not like
to any ointment poured on the Priests, but like to that precious ointment that
was poured on the head of Aaron the High Priest, and poured in suth abundance
upon him, that it did run down to his beard, and to the hemme of his garment
sending forth a most sweet smell, whereby all that were present were refreshed;
so is the peace and love among brethren. It is in it self a most excellent
thing, and most pleasant and comfortable to all that perceive it. Woe to that
man whom this sweet smell offends, he cannot be but miserable.

The second comparison follows. 12. Like the dew.
As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew etc. Here also an excellent comparison.
The similitude is taken from the dew, and dew descending on the mountains, even
the mountains of Hermon and Zion, which were in the holy Land among the people
of God, the one upon the one side, and the other upon the other side. The dew
is not only a pleasant but also a most profitable thing. Rayn is sometimes
harmefull, but dew is never hurtful. On the contrar^ it is most profitable to
the earth, especially to the mountains, upon which the rayn lies not: but
tunneth down to the valleys; so Peace and Concord is a most fruitful thing.
Where it is preserved, Religion, learning, justice, wealth and all good things
abound. 2. He compares this Concord to dew upon the mountains, and to the
ointment upon the head, running thence to the beard; to signify that this
Concord and Peace should be carefully kept by those who are Heads and Rulers
of people either in the Church or, in the state, that thence it may be convoyed
to them that are inferiors. If these that are most high and eminent be at
variance, what wonder? that those who are lower follow their example: but* if
they be joined in Unity, the like may easily be found among others. 3. The dew
comes from heaven; the earth has no power of it self to bring it forth; so
this brotherly Concord is the gift of God. It comes from heaven, and from
heaven it must be earnestly sought, by them who would have it. But why I pray
you, does all this good accompany brotherly Concord and Unity? The reason is
set down by the PROPHET in the next words.

For the Lord has commanded a blessing there, 13. Blessing follows it.
etc. Here is the Fountain, whence all that good flows, which accompanyeth
Peace, God has commanded his blessing to attend it, and where his blessing is,
there all good is; for what he blesses, shall be blessed indeed. He has
commanded not only the blessings of this life, to attend this unity and love
of brethren, but even life for evermore, which is begun in this life, by that
peace of God which passes understanding, that keeps our hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus, and shall be accomplished by that eternal peace, which
shall be in the sight of God for ever in the heavenly Jerusalem, which
signifies as much as the vision of peace. He that is united to his brother in
God, shall be blessed with that blessed union with God, and he that is divyded
from his brother to whom he should adhere in God, shall be separated from God
himself. He will say to him, Depart from me ye cursed etc.

Thus David has given us a short, but a divine portracture of brotherly
Concord, 14. The portr^cture of it.
whereby we may also perceive what Discord and Division is. If we look to
brotherly Concord, and behold her, as he comemndeth her; Nothing in her face,
but beauty and sweetnessee nothing in her heart, but love. The songs of joy
are in her mouth, Wheresoever she goes, she sends fourth a sweet smelling
savor, like precious ointment, or like a field which the LORD has blessed.
Her stepps drop fatness. She is from heaven, and heavenly blessings attend
her whersoever she goes, and in end, Eternal blessing crowns her. One the
contrar, Division is as an horrible and hellish Monster. Hatred is in her
heart, fury in her eyes, horror is in her face, destruction is in her hands;
she sends forth most filthy and noisome smell both to God and man,
wheresoever she steppeth, there is desolation. Did she meet with the fields
of Nin^ve or Babylon, where the garden of Eden was, she can make it a
Wilderness, and can make grass to grow in the streets of the most populous
cities. It is no blessing but a curse that follows her, and which will press
her down to eternal perdition. In a word, The very wicked spirits themselves
abhor this Monster of division among themselves, and labor as much to hold
her from themselves, as they are earnest to place her among others. For if
Satan's kingdom were divided it could not stand, says our Savior,

From all this, 15. we are been to dissentio^
observe first the corruption of our nature, which is such, that we stand in
need to be exhorted to a thing so good, so pleasant, so blessed as brotherly
unity; Neither need we only to be exhorted to it, but the Spirit of God
also thought fit to use reasons for this effect, taken from our own utilitie
and pleasure. He might have said, This is a thing that is righteous, and which
God has commanded; but he says* to alluire us to this excellent good. How
good and how pleasant is it for brethren to dwell together in unity. It is
like the precious ointment* and like the fruitful dew, and is acco^panyed by
assured blessing. All this argues our corruption and pronnes to dissension,
which we should labor to be sensible of, that we may strive against it, and
that we may earnestly beseech God, whose gift this is, as we said, to send
down this heavenly dew on our souls. Our corrupt and cankered nature striveth
against it, the devil labors by all means to deprive us of it. It is well
remarked by S. August* in his book of the profit of fasting. That the devil
cares not much for the dissension of them that worship a false god, because he
has them already: but he is most earnest to divide them who are the
worshippers of the true God, and have rejected his service. he sees he cannot
divide the true God, nor put an idol in his place, to make them to worship it,
and therefore he labors to make herefies, and schisms, and contentions
among them, that so at least he may overcome them. Beside all this, our
manifold sins deserve at Gods hands, that he should suffer us to cast away
this blessing of Peace, and therefore in all these respects we ought carefully
to take heed to it, to humble our selves under the hand of God, to turn from
our sins, Drunkenness, whoredom, profaning of the Lords Day, Pride, malice,
and others our abominations; and fervently to pray, That the Lord yet would
spare his people, and (...) give his inheritance to reproach, and yet of his
great goodness continue peace in our Church, in our State, and in this city
among ourselves.

Secondly, 16. Humility necessar.
Observe that in so far as we are exhorted to Unity and Concord, which
should be among the saints in the Church of God, we are also exhorted to
follow these virtues, without which it cannot be obtained nor preserved, and to
^lee these vices, which fight directly against it, or tend to the overthrow of
it. What are these ye will say? I shall give you but two, Humility and
Meekness. First. Humility is necessar. For by pride comes contention, says
the wiseman. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, says S.
Paul exhorting to unity. Philipp. 2. But let each one in humility think of
another better then of himself. So our Savior says, Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart. Alace if we had this humility, our contentions
might soon be at an end, it would make us think less of our own thoughts, and
not to despise others. Men that are given to trouble, would consider that they
are also men, and that they may err as well as others. To err in nothing
says S. AUGUST. is angelical perfection, to be deceived in somthings, is a
thing incident to humane infirmity, but for a man to love his own opinion: so
that for maintenance of it, he would fall in heresy or schism is a divelish
presumption, says he, in his 2. book of Baptism against the Donatists. What?
came the Word of God from you? or came it unto you only says S. Paul 1. Cor.
14. 36.

Secondly, 17. Meeknes necessar.
Meekness is required. Our Lord, the Prince of peace requires this also in the
place before cited. The serva^t of the Lord, says S. Paul 2. Tim. 2. 24. must
be gentle, apt to teach, patient, In meeknes instructing them that are
contrary minded, if peradventure God will give them repentance. The good
orthodox fathers of old, dealt even so with those that were heretics and
schismiticks. Optatus Milivitan', a godly ancient father in his first book
against Parmenia^ calls the Donatists brethren, albeit these Donatists would
no ways acknowledge him and his fellows for brethren. S. Augustine in his 14.
sermon, upon the words of the Apostle, speaking of them that were infected with
the Pelagian error, We would gladly wish that our brethren would not call us
heretics; we call them not so, albeit it may be, says he, we have reason.
we bear with them in the bowels of pity, that they may be healed and
instructed. They go too far, and it is hard to bear with them, and a matter
of great Patien^e^. Let them not abuse the patience of the Church, but be
amended, we e^h^rt as friends* and do not contend as enemies. They reproach
(...) but we bear with it. They misregard Rules: but cannot prevail against
the truth. And thus we have touched how Peace and Unity should be preserved,
if in humility and meeknes we subject our hearts unto it, that the peace of
God may rule in our hearts.

To conclude, 18. Exhortation to keep our unity.
I beseech you to think highly of your Unity, and to maintain it carefully
and earnestly. Ye have seen for a long space blessed be God, How good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. Ye have found it as a
most precious and sweet smelling ointment, and as a most refreshing dew* and
God has made many blessings to accompany it among you. I beseech you to take
heed that ye deprive not your selves of this benefit by hearkening to those
that would make Division among you. As for us that are your Pastors, as we have
preached truth, so we have preached always this unity and peace. We have
troubled the peace of none, nor have meddled with any that belong not to us.
We are sorry for the divisions that we see elsewhere. Ye know that God who is
the God of peace and love is grieved thereby, that good men are displeased
therewith, that weak ones are offended, and that to our adversaries, this is
great matter of rejoicing. We heartly wish peace every where, and continually
pray for it, and are ready to promove it so far as we can with a good
conscience. But we must not (as it is well said by Gregory Nazianzene in his
32. Oration) affect peace with prejudice of truth, that we may be called gentle
and meek. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, which we
are most willing to follow and maintain in love. The Lord open the eyes of all
that they may see the truth* and unite all our hearts, that we all with one
heart and one soul may say, Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity. The Lord grant this, and that for the
merits of Christ, to whom etc.

A SERMOM of Thanksgiving, Upon LXV. Psalm, November. 5. 1637.
Verse. 1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion: and unto thee (...) the vow
be performed.

2. O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.


BEside the ordinary service of this day, we are by Gods grace, to offer to
God an extraordinary sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for the benefit of
Fertility, wherewith he has blessed this year; For this benefit I say,
which this land stood in so great need of, and whereof we were likly to be
deprived, 1. Intention and sum of this Psalm.
by the tempestuous weather in the beginning of harvest. For the right
performance of this duty, I have made choice of a part of this most sweet and
divine psalm, and song of Thanksgiving, indyted by God to David, and that as
some think to be a pattern to the Church of God* whereby her praise and thanks
should be directed. The blessed Prophet, shortly compriseth in it the chief
benefits bestowed upon man by God. First he setteh down benefits spiritual,
namely the choising of men to be his people, the hearing of their prayers, the
pardoning of their sins, the sealing of them with his Spirit, by the light
whereof they know him, and by the sweetness whereof they are refreshed and
satisfied in his house, that is his Church. 2. He considers the goodness of
God, in establishing and defending the civil Estate; against the furies of the
devil and tumults of men, that humane society may be maintained and flowrish,
in honesty and peace as well as in piety. 3. He expresses the benefit of the
fertility and fruitfulnes of the earth, redounding to the comfort both of man
and beast, which in a most divine manner at length he descriveth.

In the first verse that I have read, The Thankfulness of the Church is
expressed, Praise, waits for thee, etc. In the second, an excellent benefit
is set down, 2. The waitting or silence of praise.
for which God should be praised, and vows should be performed to him. Praise
waits for thee etc. Praise is the proclaming of the Excellency of any,
especially manifested by worth deeds. This David says, waits for God. The
word rendered to waits, signifies properly to be silent, but for the
similitude and agreement of silence and expect^^^^ is rendered here, to wai^e
or expect. And if we so expound the word, the sense is, That God does so laden
his (...), and by (...) his (...) every morning furnish such matter of Praise
and Thanksgiving, that praise in the Church continually, as it were, waits on
to honor him. If we render the word, to be silent, as it properly signifies,
and which our Interpreters have put on the Margent, the meaning is, That the
benefits of God bestowed upon Sion or his Church, are so great and so many,
that even our Praise through astonishment becomes as it were silent, notable
to reach to the due commemoration and esteem of Gods bounty and benefits. And
indeed so it is. The benefits of God toward his people are such and so many
daily and hourly bestowed upon them, in general, in particular, known and
unknown, that no mind can sufficiently conceive, nor tongue utter them. In him
we live, move, and have out being. He makes his sun to shine and his rain to
fall upon us. He has endued us with reason and understanding. When we were
lost, he did not forsake us, but even when blinded with our own ignorance and
wickedness, and so his enemies; He redeemed our life from destruction, and to
this effect sent his own Son (which the Church now clearly knows) to be
born, and suffer, and by his most perfect sacrifice to purge all our sins,
and withal sends his Spirit in our heart to guide us through all
difficulties, till we attain to the blessed sight and joy of his Countenance.
Thus he compasses and crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies:
for which if we had a thousand hearts and a thousand tongues, could we give
him sufficiently praise and thanks? No, Praise it self is forced as it were to
stand here astonished and silent. And the saints say with DAVID, O Lord, What
shall thy servants say? What shall we render unto thee for all thy benefits
toward us? But where is this waiting of praise and the admiration of it?

In Sion. 3. Sio^ should praise.
DAVID had translated the Ark of God unto Sion. There was Gods Sanctuary, and
there was he wo^shipped; and therefore Sion here signifies the Church of God
then, and in all following ages. This is added for great reasons. First the
PROPHET signifies that Sion or Gods Church, has reason and ought to praise
God beyond all others, whom he has not chosen to be his people; for Gods
chief benefits are poured down upon Sion. It is the perfection of beauty, and
out of it God shyneth, Psalm. 87. God loves the gates of Sion, more then all
the habitations of Judah. It is the City of God, and glorious things ar spoken
of thee O City of God, says DAVID in the same psalm. Of Sion it shall be
said, such and such a man was born there. The Lord Himself counts and
writes, that such a man was born there* says DAVID in the place mentioned.
All the true Citizens of Sion are written in the book of God, even in the book
of life, by his own finger, and nothing is so great a matter of Thanksgiving
and Praise as that. Rejoice not in this, says our Savior, that the devils
are subjectunto you, but rather rejoice in this, that your names ar written in
heaven. So then in Sion, justly should praise wait for God. The Citizens of it
are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, and holy nation, a peculiar
people to set forth the praises of him, who. has called the^ out of darkness,
unto his mavelous light. 1. Pet. 2. 9.

Secondly, As Sion should, so Sion only can praise God righly. Praise is not
seemly in the mouth of a sinner, says the Wiseman, Ecclesiast. 4. Sion can
praise.
15. IT stands not so much in the words of the mouth, as in the devotion of
the heart, He that would rightly praise, must be affected with that which he
praises, truly believe it, and have an inward taste and feeling of it. Except
therefore he has tasted and seen how good the Lord is, he cannot praise as he
should, on the other part God also looks not so much to the mouth, as to the
heart of the praiser. He respects not so much the tongue as the Conversation.
What avails it to bless God with thy mouth, and blaspheme him with thy life;
this is an abomination, and therefore it is truly said by holy August, that a
wicked man cannot praise God. The discord of his life from his word, marreth
all the sweetness of his song of praise, and makes it unpleasa^t and
ungracious in the ears of God.

Thirdly, As Sion should, and only can, so also she will undoubtedly praise
God, and therefore rightly says the PROPHET, 5. Does praise.
that praise waits for God in her, as if he would have said, O Lord albeit
all other men would hold their peace of thy praises, yet Sion or thy church,
thy servants and saints will not. Though other men have not eyes to see, nor
minds to consider thy benefits, but bury them in ignorance or oblivion, yet thy
own people will set forth thy praises and magnify thy Name.

Hence, we may clearly see how necessare is this duty of praise and
thanksgiving. Gods Worship stands chiefly in this, that we be not
unthankefull unto him, 6. Necessit^^ of praise under the Law.
says holy August. in his book of the spirit and latter chap. 11. when God
first made the world he sequestered one day of every week, as for his service,
so particularly for a thankful remembrance of the benefit of Creation Under
the law he appointed one day in the month, to wit, the first which was the
feast of the new moon for a thankful remembrance of the benefit of
conservation of the world, he ordained the feast of the passover, for
celebrating the benefit of bringing his people out of Egypt, The feast of
Pentecost for remembering the benefit of giving the Law, The feast of
Tabernacles for remembrance of protection in the wilderness, and commanded that
yearly the first fruits of the land, should be offered to him be way of
thanksgiving. Thus under the law the duty of thanksgiving was most necessare,
and acceptable to God.

Under the gospel now, 7. Under the Gospel.
I may say, it is yet more necessar. The proper sacrifice of Christians is the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, every where vehemently urged in the new
Test. Our blessed Lord did institute the blessed sacrament of his body and
blood giving thanks, and for this end that we may give thanks to God, as for
all his benefits, so especially for that of our Redemption. By the right
performance of this duty, we begin our heaven on earth for the proper exercise
of heaven is PRAISE, blessed ar they that dwell in thy house, for they are still
praising thee. The blessed spirits are still singing blissing, and glory and
honor, and power and wisdom etc. Beside, thanksgiving for former benefits,
is a secret and real prayer drawing down new benefits, it preserves the
benefits we have received, and procures the increase of them, whereas
Unthankfulness depriveth us both of that which we have, and of that which we
ought to have looked for. Justly therefore says CHRISOST. that thanksgiving is
great wealth and treasures, an unexhausted good which while a man has he has
abundance, although he had lost all other thing. Have thou lost thy means? and
yet do thou praise God, thou have gained thy soul and GGDS favor in
greater measure then before. When all other things was taken from JOB, yet
having an heart to praise God, and to say, The Lord has given, the Lord has
taken, blessed be his Name. He was most rich, even in that his poverty. Let us
therefore earnestly apply our hearts and minds to this praise of God. And let
every one in his temple, think and speak of his glory. We proceed now to the
next duty.

And unto thee shall the vow be performed. As Praise, so vows and the
performance thereof belongs to Thankfulness. And therefore these two are
ordinarily joined in scripture. 8. A vow is a Promise.
For clearing of this point, we will shortly show what is a Vow. 2. How it
belongs to Thankfulness. For the first, A Vow is a religious promise, made
to God willingly of a thing acceptable to him. It is a promise. A purpose to do
a thing, is not sufficient to make a Vow, which is a kind of Contract betwixt
God and man, obliedging a man to the performance of something by way of
fidelity, which obliedgment cannot be without a promise or practical kind of
speech, as Schoolmen speak, whereby a man tyeth himself, as he tyeth another by
his commandment.

Secondly, 9. Made to God,
It is a Promise made to God. Unto thee says my Text, shall the vow be
performed. Vow, and pay your vows unto the Lord, psalm. 76. 11. Offer unto God
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High, psalm. 50. 14. In a word,
everiewher in holy scripture we find vows made to none but to God; And yet this
day the practice of the Roman Church is to make vows to saints. And their
Doctors labor to justify this practice. It is acknowledged by Bell. That a
vow in holy scripture is ever taken for a promise made to God, And yet, says
he, vows are rightly made to saints* A strange thing, How can these two
consist? Hear I pray you his answer, When the scripture was written says
he, vowing to saints was not in use. This certainly is true, but to confess
it, what else is it, but to condemn their own practice, as an innovation?
whereby the honor due to God alone, is given to the creature. O says he, The
saints are Gods by participation, They in a most excellent manner are partakers
of his natural glory, but by no distinction may the honor due to God be given
to any other, and by the same shift, they might allege offering of sacrifice
to saints, with which making of vows is commonly joined in scripture.

Thirdly, 10. Religious.
I say, It is a religious Promise. VOWING is a proper act of Religion, or the
worship of God. As by an Oath which is an proper act of worship, we profess God
to be the supreme truth, and the Maintainer of it, so by a vow, we profess
God to be most good, and to be well pleased with the doing of good: and indeed
a vow is not much different from a promisarie oath, except, That the Oath is
made to man, but the vow is made to God. 2. To vow to a false God should be
Idolatry, and therefore a vow to the true God, is true religion and worship,
which shall hereafter more appear.

Fourthly. 11. willingly.
It is a promise made willingly, God loves a cheerful giver and repelleth
that which is done by constraint or vnwilingly. A vow is as it were a private
Law, whereby a man binds himself, and differs in this from a general Law,
that a general Law binds a man whether he be willing or unwilling, but so
does not a vow, and therefore if made without the use of reason, or through
ignorance or fear; it obliedgeth not.

Fifthly. 12. Of a thing gracious.
It must be of a thing acceptable to God. That is of such a thing, the doing
thereof is better then the not doing of it. If the thing vowed cannot serve for
an good purpose, it is but the sacrifice of fools. If (...) a thing evil; as
was that of these who vowed not to eat or drink till they had killed S. Paul.
Act. 23. 12. It makes the vow abominable, for beside the wickedness of
intending or doing such a thing, he that voweth it commits akynd of
blasphemy in so far as by vowing it he confesses that God is pleased with such
an evil. The matter therefore of a vow must be a thing that may be done
acceptable to God. but these things are of two sorts, some are not necessare in
particular to be done, by such or such a person* some again are necessare. Of
both some doubt is made, whether they be a fit matter of vow.

Some Papists affirm, 13. A vow of a thing not commanded.
that our Divines deny that a vow may be made of a thing not commanded or not
necessar, but this is a calumny. Our learned Divines acknowledge that there at
some things, which if a man omit, he shall not sin, yet to do them were
better then not to do them, and consequently that a man may vow to do such a
thing; For example, such or such a man should not sin, not to give such a sum
of money to the poo^ or pious uses, yet if he would give it, he should do
better, and may vow so to do. The same may be said of Fasting or abstinence at
such and such times. That such things may be vowed is clear from scripture,
which every where almost speaks of such vows. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. 22. The Lord
commands That if a man make a vow be shall perform it, but says the Lord, If
thou forbear to vow it shall not be sin unto thee. To give such or such a
sum of money to the poor, is a good work without a vow, and pleasing to God,
being an act of charity, why then should it not be pleasing to God, when a Vow
is passed upon it? That which our Divines condemn in such vows is, That men
ascrive Merit unto them, account them works of supererogation, and by making
them rashly ensnare their own Consciences. These and like abuses being removed,
they acknowledge that vows made of such things are hindrances of sin,
nourishments of devotion, and profitable exercises, whereby the mind is
confirmed in good, and kept back from evil.

Neither is this Will Worship as some imagine; 14. Not Will Worship.
For Will Worship is to apply things vain and frivolous, and where with God
cannot be pleased to the honouri^^ of God, as the Jews did, who placed
Holiness in manifold washings of themselves, or as they against whom the
Apostle reasons, who abstained from some meats as unclean of their own
nature* or by virtue of Moses Law. Will Worship also is to place necessity in
things not necessare, when there is neither precept nor practice to be found in
Gods Word or in his Church to enforce any such necessity. This is Will Worship,
but no Will Worship, to promise to God a thing which being done may serve to
good and profitable uses.

If any man say, 15. Obliedgment to do good.
Are we not bound to do all the good that we can? I An. By way of gratitude we are, but not by virtue of strict Commandment, so that if we do not such or such
a thing we commit not sin, as was shown before.

As for things necessare, some Romanists affirm that they cannot be the matter
of a vow, but the best learned acknowledge, that it may be, 16. Vows of things
necessar.
and it is clear from scripture, For Jacob genesis 28. 20. 21. vowed that the
Lord should be his God. Which was a thing necessare, although he had not vowed
it. We are tied indeed to the doing of such things necessare and commanded by
virtue of Gods Commandment although we vow not, but notwithstanding we may
add to that bond the bond and obliedgment of a vow, to stir up and confirm
the more in the obedience of God, our languishing wills, even as a man* who is
already bound to another man by his promise, may bind himself also by his oath.
This kind of vow was made by the people of God, when turning back from their
sins, they renewed their covenant with him, and promised to walk in his
Commandments. And this much of the nature of a vow. I come to the second
point, which is, how this duty belongs to Thankfulness.

For clearing of this consider, 17. GOD honored by vows.
That when a man promises any thing to God, he does not so, that God may have
any gain or help thereby, but that he may give due honor to God. More
particularly by vowing a man honors God, in so far as hereby he
acknowledges, that God has a care and providence of humane effaires, and that
it is he, to whom we should have out recourse in tro^ble, and who alone can
help us, and from whom we receive whatsoever we have. 2. By vowing a man
honors God, in so far as he intends by the reverence and fear of God to
confirm himself in weldoing. 3. By vowing and performing of our vows we
honor our God, in so far as we direct the thing which we have vowed to the
service of God, or to the enabling of us to serve him more acceptablie then
otherwise we would do.

From this which has been said appears first, 18. vows lawful now.
That vowing may be now lawfully performed, though the legal and ceremonial
vows has ceased, yet all vows are not therefore abolished. Vowing is no lewish
ceremony. Our vows prefigure not Christ; And Jacob vowed long before Moses
was, yea vowing is not a ceremony at all. A Ceremony is a thing outward and
sensible, but vowing may be accomplished in the mind. I say more, though men
should not be rash to vow, yet sometimes some things when done out of a vow, ar
better then if they were done without any vow, because beside all the goodness
which they should have otherwise, they are done out of a religious affection
toward God, and done out of a more firm and unchangeable purpose, then
otherwise they should, and with a more full resignation of our selves, both
the work and the will, the fruit and the tree being given to God, and therefore
the scripture recommendeth this duty to us, and in the 19. 21. of Isaiah,
speaking of Christians, says, That they shall vow and perform their vows.

Secondly, We learn that we should be careful to perform the good vows that
we have made, 19. Vows should be performed
man's particular vows, I know not, This I know, that we all have vowed to obey
God by doing good and eschewing evil. This vow we have often renewed. Let us
perform it to the Lord, otherwise, we are not only unthankful, but also
sacrilegiously perfidious. Thou have vowed to eschew whooredom, drunkenness
malice etc. will thou look back again? remember Lots wife, who looking back to
Sodom was stricken in a pillar of sal^, to season thee by considering her
doleful example. It is true we cannot perform what we have vowed, by our own
strength, but the grace of God is sufficient for us, and he is ready to (...)
his grace to all them that call upon him in truth. As shall clearly appear by
the following words, which are.

O Thou that hear prayer. etc. Here is set down a reason, why praise waits
for God, 20. God hears prayer.
and why the vow should be performed to him. It is he that hears prayer.
Many most excellent things there are in God; Infinite Wisdom, Infinite Power,
Infinite Justice, but if we consider them with reference to us, and compare
Gods Riches, Glory and Majesty, with our misery unworthiness and sin, nothing
deserves greater thanksgiving then His Goodness and Mercy kything in hearing
our prayers and in the gracious relief and supply of our necessities. It is a
thing most wonderful, that He who is so High, should so regard us miserable
worms creeping upon the earth, that He who is most Blessed in Himself, should
care for our misery, that we who are de^^ed with sin should come in His
Presence, who is a consuming fire to seek any thing from Him, and yet His ears
are open to our cries, he invites us to pray. Trust in him ye people at all
times, pour out your hearts before him, for he is our refuge. He has promised
when we call upon him in trouble, to hear and deliver us, and to strengthen our
confidence, he takes to himself this sweet style of the Hearer of prayer. what
an unspeakable benefit is this, that we have the ear of God open to us, and
his hand ready to help? what can they want who have this? therefore our Blessed
Savior before his departure, promised his disciples for the making of their
joy full, that their prayers should be heard. The consideration of this made
David to break out in these words, blessed be the Lord, who has not put back
my prayer nor turned away his mercy from me. But whose prayer does he hear?

To thee shall all flesh come. 21. Of all.
says the PROPHET. See how ample the benefit is, As many as there are in the
earth, as distant as the places are, and as diverse as their troubles ar, he
can hear all, and has made the door patent to all, especially now under the
gospel and Christian Church, of the amplitude whereof, David here prophecieth.
All flesh he uses the name of flesh not without cause, which in scripture
imports calamity, misery and weakness. he says not all spirits, or all that
are holy, just, wel-deserving, wealthy, or noble, but all flesh shall come.
The poor have access as well as the rich, to pour out their heart before God,
the base as well as the noble, the unlearned as well as the learned, the sinful
Publican as well as the Pharisee, even the sinner I say, if he have begun to
count his sin a misery, may come to God and bevaile his misery, and implore
his mercy; All these I say may come and shall be heard. If any man come and is
not heard, it is because he comes not as he ought, nor seeks aright.

Here first consider, that latlie we came to God, and offered up our prayers to
him as for other benefits, 22. He has heard our prayers.
so for a seasonable harvest. We have found by experience, that the Lord has
heard our prayers though having in them many defects, and worthy to be cast
back as dung in our faces* We have found as the PROPHET speaks in the end of
this Psalm, that he has visited the earth and enriched it with the river of
God, and blessed the springing of it* has crowned the year with his goodness,
and has made his paths to drop fatnes. Let us no think that this was from
chance or nature, but let us with thankful hearts acknowledge it to be as
indeed it is, the visitation and blessing of God. Let every heart and every
mouth say, Blessed be the Lord who-hath not put back our prayers, but
notwithstanding of our sins, has so visited, blessed and enriched us.

Secondly* 23. Our duty.
if we would be still partakers of this great benefit, let us be careful to
continue our thankfulness still. There are many things that we stand in need of,
for which we must pray to him* to purge away our iniquities, as he says in
the next verse, To still the noise of the sea, and tumults of the people, to
bless the fruits that he has given us, that his wrath come nor upon us while
it, is betwixt our teeth. Let us therefore that it may be well with us for
ever, resolve to perform not only this day, but also all the days of our life
our vows of obedience, and to praise him with our life as well as with our
mouth. As for the earthly blessings which he has given us, as on the one part,
we should esteem highly of them, soon the other part, Let us remember they are
but the pleadges of better things abiding us in our country, if his riches be,
so great toward us in our sojourning, what may we expect, when we shall sit
down in his house at his table to be satisfied with the fatness of it? If the
river of God passing through the earth so refresh us here, how shall we be
delighted with that river of pleasures, which makes glad the city of God? The
Lord grant that our hearts may be there, and that we may walk in the way that
leads into it, and that for the merits of Christ, To Whom etc.

FIRST SERMON UPON the Lamentations of JEREMIAH. Chap. V.
Verse 19. Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever, Thy throne from generation to
generation.

20. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long-time?

21. Turn us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our days as of
old.


The holy PROPHET having made a pitiful complaint to God, of the great
desolation that had come upon Sion or the Church of God, Jerusalem being taken
and burnt, the people of God being killed or lead in captivity, 1. Intention
and division
he in end shuts up all, and closes with a fervent prayer, Thou O Lord
remainest for ever etc. In this prayer two things are to be considered. First,
the ground of the PROPHETS petitions. Thou O Lord remainest for ever, thy thro^
from generation to generation. Secondly, the petitions themselves, which are
espetially two, the first is set down by way of expostulation, wherefore do
thou forget us forever, and forsake us so long time? which includes this
petition; Lord forsake us not, but restore thy favor to us again, and renew
our days as of old. The second is in the next words, turn thou us unto thee O
Lord, and we shall be turned. To return again to the first part, which is the
ground of the PROPHETS supplication, and of his hope and confidence to be
heard, it is set down in the first words, we have in it three Prerogatives
ascrived to God, the first that he is UNCHANGEABLE. Thou O Lord remainest;
Says he, secondly, he ascriveth to him absolute Dominion, imported by this,
that He is the Lord and has a Throne. Thirdly, Eternity is ascrived both to
him and his Kingdom. Thou O Lord remainest for ever etc. Let us consider these
points shortly, both in themselves, and with a reference to the PROPHETS
petitions.

Thou O Lord remainest etc. Here the PROPHET to strengthen his hope and the
hope of the Church, 2. GOD unchangable in his nature.
fixes the eyes of his faith upon the Vnchangeablnes of God; thou say he
remainest. The word in the original signifies to dwell, to abide, or sit
still, and imports, when ascrived to God; his constancy and immntabilitie.

For clearing of this we are to consider, that this is in God in a most
excellent manner. He is simple Unchangeable both in his nature, and in his
decrees or purposes, both which are meaned here. In his nature and at his
perfections he is Unchangeable. If any change of this kind could have place in
him, it should be either from imperfection to perfection, or from perfection to
imperfection; but neither of these can be, no new perfection can have place in
him, because as we said before, in him is the infinite fulness of perfectio^n,
which is not capable of any increase o^ accession, Neither can he change to any
imperfection; for none of his infinite perfections can be lossed. They are one
and the same with his own nature and being. Now his being is necessar, for he
has it not from another, and therefore as it ever was, so it can never cease
to be, and consequently is Unchangeable, for Vnchangeablnes is nothing else but
a necessity of being that which he was before. Thus it i^ most evident that
God in his nature and essential perfections is Unchangeable, the acquiring of
any new perfection being repugnant to the infinite fulness of being that is in
him, and the loss of his perfection being contrate to the necessity or
infinite firmnes or stabilitie of his being or Nature.

Secondly, 3. In his Decrees.
as he is Unchangeable in his natural perfections, so in his decrees and
purposes toward us, we often change our resolutions and purposes: and the
reason is, we do not perfectly perceive and consider the good or the evil, the
conveniencie or inconveniencie of that which we are about, and therefore when
thereafter we find our own error, we change and retraite the will and purpose
which we had before. This cannot have place in God who from all eternity hade
a most clear sight of all the good and evil, expediencie and inexpediencie that
is in every thing, and therefore not subject to any error or change. Hence I
am. chap. 1. 17. calls him the Father of lights, with whom is no^
variableness, neither shadow of turning. Hence the Lord himself, says of
himself, Malach. 3. 6. I am the LORD, I change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed. Number. 23. 19. God is not as man, that he should lie, neither
the son of man, that he should repent: has he said, and shall be not do it? or
has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? To this same purpose David psalm.
102. speaking to God, says thou art the same, and thy years shall have no
end. Thou art not now one, and now another: but always one and the same. Thus
we see his being is the same always and so are his decrees, the counsel of
his heart stands, and his thoughts throughout all generatio^s. Thus we see
his unchangeablnes by reason whereof the PROPHET says here Thou O Lord
remainst.

Hence we may perceive that no change which we see in the creatures does any
way affect God, he made this world and all things in it, 4. No change in him
from his works.
he changed them from nothing to this being which they now have, but without
any change in himself. When the shadow of thy face appears in a glass, there
is no change in thy face from that which was before: when thy foot leaves an
impression or mark in the way, thy foot is nothing altered, now what is the
creature but as it were the shadow of the countenance of God, A footstepe,
impression or small resemblance of that perfection which is in him proceeding
from him without any alteration of him at all, so without any change he rules
and governs this world which he has made, albeit there be innumerable changes
or alterations in it, yet he is touched with no new affections, no new thought
or counsel aryseth in his mind. Whatsoever counsel or purpose, love or
hatred, lyking or disslyking is now in him, was in him from all eternity, and
what was in him, is yet, and shall be, for all eternity. Once for all before
the foundations of the world, even from everlasting he conceived and decreed
what he would have done or permitted to be done in all succeding ages, and by
virtue of that his eternal decree all things come forth in their own times, he
remaining fixed and firm and immutable in his most simple Unity and prime
estate; suppose that this world, have its being and all the creatures
especially men and angels concur to serve, to worship, to praise and enjoy
him, this adds nothing to his inward joy or bless, or to any his inward
perfections. He had in himself without them, the infinite fulness of that, and
he made them, not to ripe any comfort or gain by them, but to communicate the
super aboundace of his goodness, and to make them partakers of his riches so far
as they are capable. On the other part. Suppose the whole world and all the
creaturs therein should perish, it would diminish nothing of the joy and bless
of God. For he has infinite happiness in himself, which cannot be impaired, as
we have shown, and all the creatures ar in him, in a most excellent manner, in
his wisdom and in his power, for in himself he beholds them and delights in
them as well as in themselves.

But it may be some man will say, 5. How he is said to repent.
it* seems that there may be some change in God, since the scripture
ascriveth repentance to him, Genesis 6. 6. And it repented the Lord that he had
made man on the earth. And the PROPHET expostulateth with him for
forgetfulness. I Ans. That the scripture ascriveth these and the like things
unto God, condiscending to the weakness of our capacity, not to signify that
there is any such thing in God properly: but to signify, that such effects
come from him, as use to proceed from repenting and forgetful men. Repentance
properly taken in men presupposes an error or fault for the which the
Penitent is grieved. So Wrath includes the flame of an incensed mind: Mercy
imports the misery of a condoling heart. Jealousy some inward dispite and
envy. Thus it is that these things are ascrived unto men, but in God it is far
otherwise. His Wrath (A^g. 1. book, against the Adversary of the Law and
Prophets chap. 20.) is nothing else but the revenge of sin. His Mercy is a
succurring goodness, His Jealousy in his Providence, whereby he will not
suffer them to go free or unpunished, who love that which he forbids, so his
Repentance is nothing else but an unlooked for clearing of things that are in
his power. IT imports no change in him, but in the outward effects which he
alters, without any change in his Will or purpose. Hence in 1. Sam. 15. 29.
It is said, The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man
that he should repent, albeit it be said a little before in that same chapter,
That he had repented that he had set up Saul to be King. So when he repents,
he changes things, but is not changed, when he is angri^, he revengeth, but is
not moved, when he shows mercy, he helps, but is not grieved, and when he
is Jealous, he afflicts, but is not afflicted. In like manner, when he is
said to remember or forget; The speech is borrowed from men. His Remembrance
imports his Love, his Care and Protection, and his Forgetfulness, signifying
that he leaves or seems to leave men exposed to dangers; This much of his
Vnchangeablnesse.

Secondly, 6. unchangeablnesse proper to GOD.
It is to be observed, That the PROPHET ascriveth this Vnchangeablnesse to God
as proper to him, and competent to no other. Thou O Lord remainest as if he
would have said. This is thy prerogative, O Lord thou, and none but Thou
remainest. All other things whatsomever are changeable. This World we see is
full of changes and alterations, and nothing more certain then the uncertaintie
of it, and therefore the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. 31. compares it to a Show upon a
stage, where suddenly all things are altered, The fashion says he, of this
world passes away* So it is with our selves, our bodies, our souls and the
whole man. Our bodies are exposed to a perpetual change. Now they are in
health, and incontinent in sickness, now in strength, and again in weakness.
All flesh is grass, and the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the field.
Isai. 40 6. so that Every man, this way, in his best estate is altogether
vanity. When God with rebukes corrects us for iniquity, he makes our beauty
and whatsomever is desirable in us, as David's word imports, Psalm. 39. to melt
away, or to consume like a moth. Our souls albeit of a more excellent nature,
being spiritual and heavenly, ar in like manner tossed to and fro with
changes, now they know, now they are ignorant, now again they forget, now they
are moved with one affection, and again with the contrare; sometimes with love,
sometimes with hatred* sometimes with confidence, sometimes with fear, sometimes
with joy, and sometimes with ^orrow. The like changes the whole man is subject
to, his honor, his wealth, his contentment most changeable while he is here,
and in end there abides him a great change from his estate in this world
whatsomever it be, to an eternal estate in the world to come, either in well
or in woe. If we ascend to the things above our selves, the very heavens are
subject unto change, The heavens are the work of thy ^ands says David. They
shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea all of them shall wa^e old like a
garment, and as a vesture thou shale change them, and they shall be changed.
The heavens shall pass away with a noise says S. Pet. What speak I of the
heavens? The Angels themselves are not exempted from this change or
mutabilitie. As they came from nothing, so may they be changed to it, and would
be if God did not uphold them; and a great part of them have been actually
changed from enjoying the favor of God, to the suffering of eternal pains.
They kept not their first estate, says S. JUDE, and therefore are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. So all
creatures even the most excellent are changeable, and this is a maine argument
of our continual humility before God, and thankfulness toward him. But on the
other part, God himself is free from all change, as we have shown, and it is
remarkable, that he has this unchangeablnes joined with supreme glory and
majesty, as Chrysostom. observes upon the 5. psalm. Amongst men the things that
are most glorious, are most commonly changeable, the more high we are, we are
the more ready to fall, exposed to the more dangers, whereas they that are of a
low and mean estate are more sure and firm. But in God, supreme glory and
absolute immutabilitie are joined together. All things are in him most
excellently and with all most firmly; And thus we have shown both that this
perfection of immutabilitie is in God, and is in him alone. Now let us see to
what purpose it is mentioned here by the PROPHET. It is pertinently considered
by the PROPHET, in respect of both the petitions presented by him; 7 Comfort
hence against troubles:
For understanding whereof consider that the servants of God are in one of
these two cases, either they have not changed from their due obedience to God,
or they have; and in both, the meditation of Gods unchangeablenes is
profitable. In the first case, when we have not changed from the obedience due
to God, but still continue in his fear, and yet are afflicted with many
troubles, it is most profitable to think upon the immutabilitie of God, and it
gives us confidence to say with the PROPHET here, Wherefore do thou forget
us for ever, and forsake us so long time. In such troubles satan tempts us
with this, that God has forsaken us, and that if ever he had any love toward
us, he has now changed it: and therefore has given us over as a prey to
sorrows. But our comfort in this temptation is, The Lord changes not but is
still the same. Sion ^ath said, the Lord has forgotten me, and my God has
forsaken m^e; There the temptation, here the Lords answer Isai. 49. 15. 16.
Can a mother forget her Child, her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion upon the fruit of her womb^? yea She may, yet will not I forget
thee. I have engraven thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are
continually before me^. Where the Lord shows, that his love to his own is not
only most tender as is the love of mothers toward their young children, but
also most constant and firm. He is so far from forgetting them, that he has
them engraven even upon the palms of his hands, that they may be always in his
sight. Again albeit the love of fathers and mothers toward their children be
tender and change not, it may be, when they are young yet afterward it will
often change, especially from that tenderness which it had before: but so is it
not with God. Ye are borne by me from the belly and from the womb. Isa. 46.
And even to your old age I am he, and even to your hoar hairs will I carry you:
I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry and deliver you. And so Gods
love changes not from us at any time but embraces us at all times alike and
makes him to bear and carry us, as it were, still in his arms. To this
purpose he says most sweetly in the 54. of Isa. The mountains shall depart,
and the hills shall be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has
mercy on thee.

To conclude this point, 8. Gods Love cha^ges not from us in trouble.
no change of our outward estate should make us think that Gods love or purpose
toward us is changed, if our hearts be sound to him. No, on the contrare, thou
may be assured that God who unchangeablie loves them that fear him is with
thee, howsoever it fare with thee in outward things. Thy friends, it may be,
have changed their countenance, thy riches have taken the wings of the eagles
and flown away, thy honor has left thee, thy strength and health have failed
thee, yet for all this God is the same, and the same toward thee, and Christ
yesterday, and to day, and for ever is the same* and will not leave thee for
any change that can come, if thou leave him not. But you will say, How comes
it to pass then that my peace is turned into trouble, and my joy into
heaviness, if God be with me as before? I Ans. This may stand very well with
the unchangeablnesse of his Love, for He ch^stiseth every* one whom he loves,
and scourges every son whom he receives. He will have them whom he loves,
to be made conform to the Image of his Son, who went by his Cross to his
Crown: and suffered before he he entered into his glory. God can be with the
in trouble, as well as without it, and he knows how to deliver thee when he
thinks fit; And faithful is he who has promised, that he will not suffer
us to be tempted above our strength, but that with the temptation, he will
make a way to escape. Thus we see, if we have continued in Gods fear* His
Vnchangeablnesse is great matter of comfort to us in all our crosses.

Secondly, Suppose there be a change in us, we have departed from that fear
and obedience which we owe to God, in that case the consideration of Gods
Vnchangeablnesse serves to stir us up to present the second petition of the
PROPHET, namlie, Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. It
is a spur to repentance. If we have turned away from God; the unchangeable
God will not look upon us as he did before, unless we return unto him. 9. H^^
Vnchangeablnes a spurr to Repentance.
This is his unchangeable Nature to render good to them that do good, and evil
to them that do evil; Say unto the righteous, it shall be well with him: but woe
to the wicked, it shall ill with him. Tribulation and anguish upon the soul of
every one that does evil, etc. When thy face was toward God, his countenance
shyned upon thee: now thou have turned thy back to him, and what wonder that
thou find not the beams of the light of his countenance since he is
unchangeable? If thou would enjoy his face and favor as before, turn to him
again, and because of thy self thou cannot do it, say to him with the PROPHET;
Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned, heal thou me, and I shall be
healed. I come now to the second perfection of God, which the PROPHET here
considers in him.

IT is his Dominion or Kingdom, 10. GOD the supreme Lord.
employed in this, That he is the Lord, and has a Throne. He means, that he
is the supreme Lord, and that his Throne is exalted over all; both these
belong to him by way of excellency. There are many lords and kings, but not as
he. The greatest kings depend from him; By me kings reign, says he, Prove.
8. 13. Their power is his ordinance, Romans 13. and that is their chief dignity
that they are his anointed, He sets the Crown upon their heads: ps. 21. It is
he that has called the^ gods, ps. 82. 6. I have said, Year gods, And he has
their hearts in his hand as the rivers of waters* and ^urneth them whither he
will, Prove. 21. Beside, the dominion of other Kings, even of the most free
Monarchs depends in some sort from the subjects. They stand in need both of
their heart, and of their hands, and if they want these, what can they do? This
is the defect of all earthly Dominion; As the the servant stands in need of
the Master, so the Master stands in need of the servant, and has a kind of
dependence from him as August. observes upon the 69 psalm. Thy servant stands
in need of thy bread, and thou stand* in need of his travels: but it is
not so with God, he depends from none, for he stands in need of none; O my
soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my God; my goodness extends
not to thee.

Secondly, 11. His dominion Universal.
This Dominion of God, as it is supreme and independent, so it is universal.
Other kings are called so with a limitation, as the kings of France or Spain,
or of some other particular Country; but God is absolutely the LORD and
absolutely the KING. If thou ascend to heaven, it is his Throne; If thou look
to the earth, it is his Footstool; If thou look to hell, it is his Goal or
his Prison. All the creatures are his servants, even the unreasonable and
senseless creatures; the fire, the hail, the y^e, the snow, the winds and
tempests they all obey his Will and do his Commandments: and no wonder they
are all his, the Day is his and the Night is his. He made the Light, and he
made the darkness, he creates peace and he raises war, and in a word, He
made and creates all things by the Word of his Power, which none can ^^sist,
and therefore the very Angels in heaven adore his Majesty, and the wicked
spirits in hell tremble at his power. His dominion reaches as to all things,
so to all that is in them, our dominion goes no further then the superfice, as
it were, of things. And we have rather the use of things then the dominion; but
the dominion of God reaches to their very substance, which he has made, and
can preserve or destroy as he will. What say I of the things that are, even the
things that are not, and are only possible, are subject unto him? He calls
the things that are not, as if they were. If he should call, and but speak the
word, they should come forth out of that darkness of nothing wherein they lurk.
Thus he is the supreme and the true Lord and the King, before whom the glory
and Majesty of all earthly kings is but vileness, they depend from him and
others as we said, he depends from none; they have some subjects and riches, he
has all. They so rejoice in their crown and the glory of it that still they
have their own sollicitudes and fears, and therefore some have laid down their
crowns, but he reigns in all tranquillity, security and peace. Thus ye
have shortly his Dominion and Kingdom. Now let us see how the consideration of
it serves for the use of the PROPHET, and may serve for ours.

First, The consideration of this most perfect Dominion of God, is a most
notable comfort against the temptations that are raised in our minds in the
time of trouble and adversity, 12. Comfort hence against troubles. 1. reason.
when we think that God has forsaken us; and has left us as a prey to our
enemies, to be swallowed up by them. If thou be tempted by this, consider
first, that thou are the special and as it were the domestic servant of this
King, albeit all the subjects of a king be his servants, and that which they
have, his in some sort; yet he has some special servants that are nearer to
him and more particularly regarded. He has particular houses, and
possessions, and jewels, and treasures of his own, so it is with God; They that
fear him, are his particular servants, they are his House wherein he walks,
they are his Vineyard which he has planted, and which he manureth, they are
his Jewels and his Peculiar Treasure as he calls them himself: so it cannot
be but they are dear to him.

Secondly, 13. 2. reason.
Consider that he is such a King as is both willing and able to maintain his
own. Ye know that it is said in the end of the Lords prayer; thine is the
kingdom and the power and the glory. As the kingdom is his, so glory is
his, whereof he is jealous above all things and as the glory is his, so power
is his, he is able to vindicate his glory and to maintain his servants
against all that dare injure them. Earthly kings sometimes forsake their
servants for want of power: but the power of this King is omnipotent, able to
secure all his friends and to subdue al his enemies. If God be with us, who can
be against us? says the holy Apostle. Although the kings of the earth would
take counsel and princes would gather themselves together, yet he that sits
in heaven, but laugheth at them and has them in derision. He can break them
with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. His rod is
the rod of strength, he rules in the midst of his enemies, and stricketh
through kings in the day of his wrath Psalm. 110. So then if we believe that we
have such a Lord and such a king, why do we fear for the terrors and troubles
of this world? Hear what DAVID says Psalm. 99. The Lord reigns let the
people tremble. Suppose all the people of the world conspired against thee,
these three words steadfastly believed, the Lord reigns, is enough to give
thee comfort and courage. Whatsoever injuries are done this Lord sees and will
redress and revenge in his own time. The Lord reigns says that same DAVID
Psalm. 93. His throne is established, the floods have lifted up, O Lord, the
floods have lifted up their voice, the floods have lifted up their waves. The
Lord on high, is mightier then the voice of many waters, yea then the mighty
waves of the sea.

But it may be thou will say to me, 14. Why He permits our affliction.
how comes it to pass the that the servants of this great King are so many
ways afflicted and troubled? Consider I beseech thee, that in all thy
afflictions he has a supreme hand. Now all that thou have, is his; and he may
do with his own what he will. Thy wealth, thy promotion, thy children, yea thy
life, is his: he gave all and he may take back again all when he will. These
things he has but committed unto thee, reserving still the dominion of them to
himself, and therefore may require them back again at his pleasure. Beside I
appeal thy own conscience, did ever any thing befall thee so grievous in thy
life, but thy sins deserved as much, yea a thousand times more? lastly
consider, that as he is a most absolute, so he is a most Gracious Lord and most
wise, who deals with us so here as he knows is most fitting for our
eternal well. He looks not only to that which is present but also to
eternity, and afflicts us here that hereafter it may be well with us for
ever. 15. His power to convert us.
We are Judged by the Lord, that we perish not with the world.

Secondly, the consideration, of this great dominion of God it gives us
confidence to put up the second petition of the PROPHET and to say with him;
turn thou us O Lord, and we shall be turned. This great Lord and King has
power of the soul and spirit as well as the body, and can work upon it no less
then upon the body, the power of earthly kings reaches no further then the
body, they cannot draw the heart effectually and infalliblie, but God can
subdue the heart unto his scepter, and can make them that were averse and
unwilling to be a willing people. Psalm. 110. He can enlighten the mind,
create a clean heart, and renew a right spirit. He can take away the heart of
stone and give us a heart of flesh, he can put his spirit within us, and cause
us to walk in his statutes and keep his Judgments. Paul was a persecuter, but
no sooner did the heavenly light of this great Lord shine upon him, no sooner
did his hand touch his heart, but he cried out, Lord what will thou have me to
do? Before he was his enemy and persecuter, now his obedient servant, and
acknowledges him to be the Lord, and seeks no more but to know what he would
have done, or what he would have him to suffer, professing that he was ready to
obey. So albeit thou have turned away from this Lord, yet despair not, he is
so infinitely good and powerful, that he can, and will turn thee back again
to him, if thou seek it of him; as thou ought. Which the Lord grant unto us,
and that for the merits of Christ Jesus: To whom. etc.

SECOND SERMON UPON Lamentations of JERIMIAH Chap. V.
Verse. 19. Thou O Lord remainest for ever, and thy throne from generation to
generation. Verse. 20. Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, And forsake us so
long time. Verse. 21. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, And we shall be turned:
renew our days as of Old.
The holy Prophet, 1. proposition of the point intended.
in these words, as we said before, presents to God a fervent prayer for his
church, of whose distress he had made a most pitiful complaint in the words
preceding. He prays for two things, first that God would restore his favor
and the former fruits thereof unto his people. This he seeks first, secretly
by a loving expostulation, wherefore do thou forget us for ever etc. And
thereafter expressly and directly, renew our days as of Old. The second thing
which he prays for, without which the first could not be had, is their
conversion or turning again to God, Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, And we
shall be turned. The ground of these petitions, and of his confidence to be
heard in them is set down in the first verse, and it is Gods own nature and the
perfections thereof, Thou O Lord etc. Here three things are ascrived to God.
First immutabilitie. Secondly a dominion and kingdom. Thirdly eternity, which
belongs to himself and to his kingdom. Thou O Lord, says he, remainest for
ever, and thy throne etc. Of the second and first we have spoken already: let
us come now to the third. Which we shall handle in this order; first we shall
show what this eternity is. Secondly that it belongs both to God and his
kingdom. Thirdly we shall give you the uses of this doctrine.

To come to the first, 2 Eternity is one with Gods essence.
ye are to understand that the eternity of God, which is the only and
properly so called eternity, is not a thing diverse from his nature or
essence. There is nothing in God which is not God, and one and the same with
his divine nature. So the eternity of God is nothing else but this own divine
essence or existence considered as it abides and persevereth indeficiently and
unmeasurably without beginning or end. We cannot conceive eternity but after
the manner of time.
We cannot conceive this indurance of God but with a reference to the time of
indurance of the creatures, as we cannot conceive the immensitie of God but
with a reference to a bodily space, wherein the creatures are or may be, and
therefore the eternitio of God as conceived by us, includes a reference to the
duratio^ and continuance of other things, whereas in it self it differs from
them infinitely.

For the more particular understanding of this point ye are to consider that
the eternity of God has three notable properties. 3. It is unmeasurable.
First it is such a duration that has neither beginning nor end, but is
altogether unmeasurable time may be measured, and is measured by our minds, and
used as a measure of the continuance of other things. It had a beginning, and
since the beginning of it 6000. years are not a^ yet past. But if we should go
beyond this time 100000. years, yea millions of ages, we should come infinitely
short of Eternity which has no beginning at all. So time shall have an end,
but if we go beyond that end as many millions of ages as there are stares in
heaven, pickles of sand on the sea shore, drops of water in the ocean, yet are
we infinitely short of the length of eternity, which has no end at all. So it
is an indurance simply and altogether unmeasurable.

The second property of it, is that it is such an indurance as has no flux
in it, 4. It is all at once.
no succession of one part to another, but is all at once and altogether
indivisible. Time ye know is a fluid and passing thing. One part of it is gone,
which we call time bypast, another part is yet to come, and a moment only is
present which has no abiding, but passes away incontinent. Such are our joys
also that are in time, they remain not, though we would feign arrest them,
they are no sooner come but they are gone, and no sooner braid as it were, but
they die. IT is far otherwise with the eternity of God, and with that which
is truly eternal. Here nothing is bypast, nothing to come, but all at once
abiding, steble and stadfast. I^ is true we imagine two parts in eternity, one
already bypast before all ages that we can conceive, another as yet to come
behind all ages that we can imagine: but indeed there are no such parts in
eternity which is as it were a standing and permanent moment. In like manner
when we speak of God, we say, that he was, that he is, and is to come; but thus
we speak in reference to the things that have been or shall be, with which his
being does exist, otherwise if we will speak of him as he is in himself; Words
of the present time belong properly to him. All that which we conceive in him
as extended throughout the tract of infinite time, is in him united and
gathered altogether at once. As his immensitie gathers al his greatness together
as it were in a point, so his eternity gathers as it were all his duration
age and life into a moment, without any division or succession. Hence no vital
act, no knowledge, no thought, no love, no hatred, no liking nor disliking, no
joy nor bless is in God now, which was not in him from all eternity, whereas
the thoughts and words and affections of men and angels succeed one to another.
There is nothing that we can conceive which is to be done, which is not already
done with God. Nothing concerns us, which is not there already determined and
transacted. There we and all our actions are numbered and weighted. There our
eternal reward, or eternal punishment is prepared, and in a manner already
given. There we reign in glory with God and his angels, or burn in flames of
fire for ever with the devil and his angels. So Eternity still stands and
remains, whereas in Time there is a continual flux. I may compare Eternity
and Time to the Bank and the River. The Bank ye know stands still, but the
River flows under it continually: one part having past already, and another
comeing in the room of it; Eternity is, as it were, the Bank standing
steadfast, Time and the Things temporal are, as it were, the River running and
flowing under Eternity, one part having passed, and another succeeding in
place thereof. And so ye have the second property, which is very wonderful.

The third property of it is, 5. It is so of it self.
That of it self it has these former perfections, of it self, and without
dependence from any other. God who is Eternal and Eternity it self, is
unmeasurable in his indurance, and in all his perfections united and gathered
together at once. He has this, I say, of himself, and by virtue of the inward
perfection of his Nature, independently from the will of any other. His
Indurance leans not to any other thing, but one the contrare, is the ground
and foundation of the continuance of all other things, and that inexhausted
Fountain from which the duration of the creatures, and of all the branches
thereof flow: and that so far forth, that the indurance of any other thing
cannot be so much as conceived or imagined without dependence from it. This is
the third property. 6. It makes good or evil infinitel^e better or worse.


Before we go hence, we may remark that this is the nature of Eternity, to
make every thing good or evil, infinitely better or infinitely worse. This is
does first in respect of the infinite indura^ce of it. Ye know that any thing
which is good, is the better the longer it continue. That good which continues
a week, is better then that which endures but a day, and that which continues
a year, is better then that which continues but a week; but if it should
continue an hundredth years, it should be yet much better: if then this good
of Joy, or richet, or honor continue for ever, it must needs be infinitely
better then that which endures but for a time. So on the other part* The Evil
which continues a week, is worse then that which continues but a day; and if
it continue a year, it is yet worse: but if it endure for ever, it is
infinitely worse. 2. Eternity makes the good or evil upon which it falls,
infinitely better or worse, by reason it gathers together at once, in some
measure, all the good or evil which is in such a thing, and makes it in some
manner to be apprehended and felt at once. IT is true, The Eternity of the joy
or pain of the creature, does not unite and collect the good or evil, as the
eternity of God; yet in some sort it does it. Eternity of joy in the
blessed, includes an assurance of never lossing their joy, which makes all
that joy which is in Eternity to be in a manner present every moment: so
eternity of pain in the damned, includes a certainty that there shall never
be any ease or end of it, which being always before the eyes of the damned,
makes the whole weight of eternal pain to press them as it were at once.
This much of the first point; I come to the second, to show that this Eternity
belongs to God and to his kingdom.

First, 7. It belonges to GOD.
that it belongs to God, is most clear. Have thou not known? have thou not
heard? that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth
faints not, neither is weary? Isai. 40. 28. so Isai. 57. 15. He is called The
High and ^oftie One that inhabiteth eternity. What else is the riches and
treasure of God? but Eternity, says TERTULL. There is nothing more proper
unto God, or which is more fit to express his divine Nature.

Neither does this Eternity belong only to Himself. Thou O Lord, 8. His
Kingdom never began.
remainest for ever, says the Prophet here, and thy throne from generation to
generation. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures
throughout all generations, says DAVID, psalm. 145. If we look to the ages
bypast, before all ages, even from eternity God is King and Lord. There is
indeed some difficulty in explaining of this. Dominion imports a reference
to subjects; now the creatures which are subject to God, were not from
eternity, but made in time; and therefore it would seem that Dominion agrees
not to God but in time. TERTUL. moved by this argument, grants that the Title
of LORD, belongs not to God but in time. The Name of GOD, says he, is a
Name of nature and substance, and therefore belongs to GOD from eternity:
but the Name of LORD, is a Name of dignity and authority which God has over
the creatures, and therefore as they were not eternal, so this name agrees
not to him from eternity. S. August* in his 12. book of the City God* and 15.
chap. in modesty refuses to determine this question. Upon the one part he
says, that he dare not deny but God was LORD from all eternity, and one the
other part he says it is hard to conceive this, since Dominion imports a
respect to the creatures, which begane in time. But if we consider well, we
will find that the question is rather verbal then real. For clearing whereof
ye are to understand that there are two things imported by the Dominion of God.
The first which is the chief and principal is his power over all things that
actually are, or are possible. The second is a reference unto the creatures
subject unto God. This belongs unto God but in time: but it is nothing else
then an outward and secondarie respect: that which is inward and principal in
the Dominion of God to wit, his Power was from eternity, and therefore he is
truly from eternity LORD. His Dominion is grounded on his Power, which is one
with his essence and that is eternal. Neither is it the creatures that
actually are, who alone are subject to him. Even the things that are not, at
under his Dominion: he calls the things that are not, as if they were. They
obey his commandment; and commandment presupposes Dominion by virtue whereof
it has power. Thus the Dominion of God was from all eternity.

Secondly, 9. It shall never end.
It we look to following ages, this Dominion and Kingdom endures after them
to all eternity. This is true both of Gods Kingdom generally and particularly
considered. That is the Kingdom of his Power (as it is called) by which he
commands and rules all things. It is certain this Kingdom shall never end:
for God shall ever have supreme power over things that are or are possible. His
particular Kingdom, is that whereby he reigns in his church, and this also
shall have no end* Hence the Angel speaking of our Savior LUKE 1. says He
shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end. We must not think that this Kingdom of God and Christ shall end, when
this World ends; no, it shall be most perfected and established, when all
other Rule, Authority and Power shall be put down. Here it is the kingdom of
grace, God ruling in the hearts of his servants by his Spirit and grace:
hereafter it shall be the kingdom of Glory, wherein the glory of Gods Wisdom,
Mercy and Power shall be manifested in the eternal salvation of his own, and
the glory of his Power and justice shall appear in the eternal confusion of
his enemies. Now the Kingdom of God is, but not peaceable: now his enemies are
overcome, but not wholly rooted out and trampled under foot. Satan remains
yet, and goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Sin
and Death remain. As yet there are many that rebel against the Law of God, and
despise his Commandments: but all these enemies shall be hereafter rooted out:
Satan with his angels shall be chained in hell, and shall have no more leave to
tempt. Sin shall be banished also, in the godly it shall not be. Their flesh
shall no more resist the spirit, and the spirit God: and the wicked shall have
no more liberty to commit any new sin. Death shall be rooted out by the
resurrection; so that we may then sing, Death is swallowed up in victory, O
death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Lastly, wicked men
the rebels of this great KING, and disobedient to his Will, shall be subjected
to eternal pains against their will, whereas the servants of God shall be
advanced to the participation of his eternal glory. Thus this his Kingdom
shall be Eternal, and not only so in respect of himself, but also in respect of
his servants. Fear not little flock, says our Savior, it is your Father will
to give you a kingdom. To him that overcomes will I give says he, Rev. 3. to
sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his
Throne. Come ye blessed of my Father. (shall he say at the last day,) and
receive the kingdom prepared for you etc. This much of the Eternity of the
Kingdom of God; I come now to the uses of the Doctrine.

First, The consideration of this Eternity of God and his Kingdom, should
teach us to disesteeme the things of this World, 10. The vanity of earthly
things.
which are but frail and momentanie: suppose they endured never so long, yet
at last they have an end; and when that end is come; they are, as though they
had never been. Put the case thou had all the riches, and pleasures, and
honors, and dominions of the World, yet these should end, and being ended
leave thee nothing but a sad and sorrowful remembrance of them, and the more
sad and bitter, the more sweet and dear they were to thee when thou had them.
I will yet say more, these things not only have an end, but also end suddenly
to us. Their continuance is most uncertain and short. All our enjoying of them
is grounded upon this mortal life; and how frail that is, we know by
experience; and S. Jam. teaches us, Chap. 4. Go to now, saeth he, ye that say
to morrow we will go to such a City, and continue a year, and buy, and sell,
and get gain. And ye know not what shall be to morrow: for what is your life?
but a vapor that appears for a little while, and then vanishes away. Now
the life being ended, all this World ends to us. That which our Savior
says of the soul, I may say of the body also; What profit is it to a man to
gain the whole World, if he loss his bodily life? More, our health is more
uncertain then life, and without it we can enjoy no worldly thing. Take health
from a man, and what avail all the treasures of the earth? Set the most
dainty dishes before him, they are loathsome. Bring his Wife, children and
friends unto him, their sight is often grievous. Let him remember his former
pleasures, it breeds nothing but bitterness. In a word, What is the whole
man but, as it were, an earthen vessel, which God in whose hand is a rod of
Iron, is able to dash in pieces when he will. Albeit an earthen vessel were
never so pleasant: painted, perfumed, adorned with flowers, a crown set upon
it, yet if it be stricken with a rod of Iron, it goes in pieces; so it fares
with these earthen vessels of our bodies. Though we had the vigor and strength
of youth, the prudence of the aged, the knowledge and eloquence of the learned,
the treasures of the rich, if God but touch us with his rod, it is enough to
beat us to powder. Why then should we set our hearts upon these things that are
s^ frail and vain? We trouble our selve^ about many things which are needles
and worthles, but there is one thing only necessary, even to provide for that
good part, which shall never be taken away.

Secondly, The consideration of Eternity, and of that Kingdom wherein God
shall reign in us, 11. Comfort to the godly against travels.
and we with him for ever, should encourage us against travailes, and comfort
us against all troubles wherewith we encounter here. First it should encourage
us against all our travailes. Our flesh is ready to faint under the burden of
pains and travailes, that must be endured in the service of God: but all that
we endure this way, should seem light if righty compared with the reward of
this eternal Kingdom. In it is eternal rest; And Eternal rest says holy
AUGUST. is worthy of eternal traveles. Ye see what travailes Soldiers are
content to undergo for the hope of a small gain. They go to war in their
youth, they continue, it may be, almost al their days, that they may gain
some little thing to sustain them in their old age: which both is short and
uncertain; yet what are they not content to suffer for this? What hunger? what
thirst? What heat? what cold? To how many dangers, necess^ties and wounds do
they expose themselves? Alace should not we be content to suffer much more for
this glorious and eternal Kingdom? A Kingdom wherein we shall be equal with
the angels, wherein we shall be joint heirs with Christ, yea wherein we shall
be made one spirit with God, enjoying his in^inite Essence, and entered into
the fulness of his joy, wherein we shall continue not an hundredth or a thousand
years or ages, but unto all eternity. What travail or pains can we take in
serving God, which may be compared with this glory and the eternity of it? 12.
Comfort against troubles.


Secondly, This should also comfort us against our troubles and afflictions
that we mere with in the service of this great King. Hear what S. PAUL says
Romans 8. I reckon, that the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy to
be compared with that glory that shall be revealed in us. And again, The light
afflictions that endure but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. Blessed are these sufferings which draw after
them this great and eternal Reward. Blessed is that hunger and thrist, which
brings us to be satisfied with the fat^es of Gods house, and to drink of the
rivers of his pleasure for ever. Blessed is that contempt, which is followed
with eternal honor. Blessed is that poverty, which is followed with eternal
treasures. Blessed is that sorrow, which is followed with eternal joy. we ought
not therefore to faint for the miseries and distresses that we mee^e with here,
for God and his righteousness. We may not think that he forgets or
forsakes us because we are exposed to them: he looks to this eternity, for
which by these sufferings he prepares us. Who could be more mi^erable then
Lazarns, who was full of sores, and could not have so much as the crumes that
fell from the rich man's table? who seemed more happy then the rich man, who
swimmed in wealth and pleasure; yet now experience teaches, that far more
blessed were the sufferings of the one, then the pleasures of the other. Now
Lazarus finds being in Abraham's bosom, where he shall be to all eternity.
The truth of our Saviors sayings. Blessed are they that hunger and thrist for
they shall be satisfied: Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be
comforted. So, They that wandered in sheepskins and goat skins, in dens and
mountains and caves of the earth afflicted, desture, and tormented. Heb. 11.
37. 38. Would have seemed to have been men forsaken of God. But indeed were
dear unto him: and Now find by experience, That blessed are they who are
persecuted for righteousness, for great is their reward in heaven. 13. Terror
to the wicked from eternity.


Thirdly, The consideration of this eternity should make all men to tremble
and fear to offend God, the effects of whose wrath are everlasting. If thou be
the enemy of God, thou shall be deprived of his Eternal Kingdom, and there
can be no greater loss, for it is the loss of an infinite and eternal good.
Thou shall be subjected to most grievous and eternal pains. To the fire that
never shall be quenched, to the worm that never shall die. In a prison
eternal, and in darkness eternal. Who would for all the joys and honors and
riches of this world be content to burn a hundredth year in fire, and yet take
a thousand and ten thousand millions of ages from eternity, and it is as fresh
to begin as it was before. O dreadful eternity! who is able to conceive the
greatness of it? what strength of man or angel is able to endure the burden of
it? Alace we are afraied of nakedness, poverty, and contempt here. These seem
to us so terrible monsters, that to eschew them we care not what we do, even
against God, and against conscience: but what are these to eternal fire and to
eternal darkness and to the eternal company of the Devil and his Angels.
Would God this eternity were always before our eyes and deeply settled in our
hearts. It alone were enough to beat down all our pride, to break the hardest
heart, and daunt the stoutest courage of bold and impenitent sinners. It alone
were enough to make us detaste all wickedness from which this eternal evil
springs. Who would delight in the fulfiling of his Lust, if he considered
deeply that his Lust will kindle a fire, which will burn both the soul and the
body for ever, and that it will breed a worm which shall ever live to torment
him? who would delight in the inordinate desire of riches, if he considered,
that this is the root of all evil, which whill men follow after, pierces
them through with everlasting sorrows, and makes them to fall into a
temptation and snare, and in many foolish and noisome Lusts, which drown men
in everlasting Perdition.

Lastly, The consideration of this eternity should make us careful of the
right use of this present time. Since though it be but a moment; 14. Time
should not be spent* idly.
yet from the use of it our eternal well or woe depends in particular. First
this should make us careful, not to mispend our time in things unnecessare and
unprofitable. The time is short and precious in respect of the use of it; thou
are still hasting to the Tribunal of the great Judge, who is to pass an
eternal sentence of thy Body and Soul: what folly then is it, to spend the
short time upon things, which will availl us nothing then? He might be justly
accounted a fool, who having occasion of a market, wherein he might gain as
much as might make him rich all his life time, would go and spend all his money
and time in buying of trif^es of no worth: Even so is it with us who waste our
time by sport or idle conference, things not only unprofitable but also
hurtful, whereas employing our time aright we might treasure up to our selves
a good fundatio^ against the time to come, to lay hold upon eternal life.

Secondly, This should teach us not only to abstain from vain things, but also
earnestly to apply our hearts to the doing of these things which may further us
to the obtaining of this eternal Kingdom, 15, It should be employed in
weldoing.
We cannot come to this glorious Kingdom, unless GOD reign here in our
hearts, by his Grace and Spirit moving us to subject our selves to his Will and
Commandments. Who had better right to the Kingdom of God the^ his own chosen
and peculiar people the Jews? They are called the children of the Kingdom.
Math. 8. 11. The promise of it was made to them. The means of attaining it,
were so liberally offered unto them, that they were in a manner already in
possession of it: and yet our Savior says. That many shall come from the
East and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven* Whereas the children of the Kingdom shall be cast
out. To wit for disobedience to the will of God. When they ceased to hallow the
Name of God, says S. CYPRIAN. God continued his Kingdom no longer with them.
Let us not therefore flatter our selves with a vain hope of this Kingdom, if we
walk not in the high way of well-doing which leads unto it. If God reign not
in our hearts by his Grace here, we shall never reign hereafter in Glory with
him. Good reason it should be so. If we do otherwise, we but advance the
Kingdom of Satan his enemy: what is drunknesse, whordom, malice pride,
oppression etc. But the pillars of the devils kingdom; when we follow after
these things, we set up his thron in our hearts, howsoever we profess our
selves to belong to the Kingdom of God, and say daily with our mouths; Let
thy Kingdom come. No wonder therefore that he deprive such of his Kingdom,
and give them their portion with him whose subjects, or rather slaves they have
been. The Lord make us mindful of these thing* and that for the merits of
Christ Jesus to whom etc.

A SERMON UPON the XXVI. Chap. of ISAIAH.
Verse. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. Verse. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in
the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength.
THese words are a part of a song endyted by Gods Spirit to ISAIAH, 1.
Intention of the Prophet.
and delivered by him to the people of God, not only for the comfort of them
who were then, but also, for the comfort of all them who in following ages
should be in like manner distressed. The PROPHET had foreseen, and had
foretold also, that great calamities were to come upon the people of the Jews,
then Gods Church; Namly that they should be lead in captivity to Babylon, and
there, should be forced to endure what the fury of a cruel enemy, pleased to
inflict. The consideration of this, before it came to pass and much more the
feeling of it afterward, might have swallowed up that people with grief and
despair. Therefore the holy PROPHET endyts to the^ this song of thanksgiving,
not only that they might praise God after this manner, when they should be
delivered, but also, that in the time of their distress, their hearts might
be comforted and strengthened by the gracious Promises set down here, their
children might be brought up in this hope, and both the one and the other,
though banished, and as it were dead men, might espy as it were, Light in
Darkness, and Life in Death, that their comfort might be the more full; He
praises God, he she weth Gods gracious Purpose toward his people, instructs
them what to do, and exhorts them to the performance of these duties which
were required upon their part, to make them partakers of the Promises. All this
he sets down be way of a song, that it might be the more easily learned, the
more firmly retained, and the better remarked by all posterity. There is
nothing in holy scripture, which is not excellent both for matter and words.
But the songs of it especially excel, and of this kind there is none in all
ISAIAH but this, and that of HEZEKIAH in the 38. chap. for that which is called
a song in the 5. chap. though it have the matter, yet has it not the form and
style of a song, as this, and that other before mentioned. This much shortly
for the general. I am come now to the words. 2. Division.


Thou will keep him etc. In these words first is set down a gracious promise
with an eye to the calamitees of the Jews that were shortly to ensue as was
said. Thou will keep him etc. 2. we have an exhortation to them and to all the
godly to put their confidence always in God. 3. The first part.
Trust ye in the Lord Jehovah for ever etc. To return to the first, we have in
it first the benefit promised, to wit; That God will keep in perfect peace,
secondly the description of them whom he will so preserve, even them whose mind
is stayed on him and that trust in him. For thou will keep him etc. First a
little of the words then of the matter. The words are pregnant peace is doubled
in the original. Thou will keep him in peace peace. etc. In the hebrew
language Peace is used to signify not only that which we call so, but also the
abundance and affluence of all the good which we can wish, and the word is
redoubled in this place to signify the Greatness or Perfection, the Continuance
and Perpetuetie, of this Peace. Secondly it is not said only that God will give
this peace, but that he will keep a man in it, and the word is pregnant
signifying to preserve, to defend, to confirm, that every way the joy of the
godly may be full. But let us now come to the matter.

First, 4. Peace sought by all,
Peace is promised. Peace is all that which a man desires. All the endeavors,
all the actions of men bend to this, even of them who are most turbulent, by
fire and sword they seek for that Peace which is pleasant in their eyes. Every
one that follows his own will does or undoeth what seems good to him,
persueth after preferment, riches, pleasurs, but seeking Peace and Rest which
he imagines he will obtain, when he gets that which he desires. Wherefore does
the greedy man toil and tormoile day and night, but that he may say in end
with the Rich man in the gospel, Soul take thy rest, thou have much laid up
etc* In a word the desires of our souls ar, as it were, their motions, and their
Love their weight, whereby they are still poused and moved in the persure and
seeking of that which will give them Rest and Peace, which if they could
obtain they should be happy, for let the heart of man have once true Peace
and Rest, and it needs no more. But what is this Peace that is promised here
you will say?

It is not the outward or wordly Peace: 5. Out-ward peace not meaned here.
for this promise is made to men compassed about with worldly troubles and
calamities. The Church in this song professes so much her self. O Lord our God
say they, Verse. 13. other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us: and
again. Like as a woman with child, that draws near the time of her delivery,
is in pain, and cries out in her pangs: so have we been in thy sight, O Lord,
We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought
forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the
inhabitants of the world fallen. So by the way, ye may remarke, that the people
of God notwithstanding of this promise has not always that outward Peace and
Plenty which follow it. Our Savior Ioh. 16. tells his disciples. That
though they should have^ peac^ in him, yet in the world they should have
tribulation. So in the time of the Babylonish captivity which the PROPHET
looks unto, there appeared nothing but wrath, and, war, and, blood* and,
misery in the words and actions of God toward his people. If the people of
God rebel against him and vex his holy spirit, Isa. 63. He turns in some
sort their enemy and fights against them. If DAVID sin against God, He
breaks his bones and turns his moisture unto the drought of the summer. JOB
was a perfect man, doing good and eschewing evil yet when it pleased GOD to
exercise h^^, that the graces wrought by his Spirit in him might appear and be
the more perfected. He made his terrors, to march in array against him, and
did write bitter things against him, making him to possess the sins of his
youth. Job 13. He did write, as it were, books against him, and drew, as it
were, in his conscience the characters of his wrath.

Hence, It follows first, that the outward trouble and distress of any
people, 6. GODS people have it not always.
or of any man, is not a sure argument; that God hates and has rejected them.
The Church in the 44. Psalm. Says; Thou have covered us in the place of
dragons, and have covered us with the shadow of death. For thy sake are we
killed all the day: and counted as sheep for the slaughter. Yet have we not
forgotten thee neither have we dealt falsty in thy covenant. Our hearts have
not turned back, neither have our steps declined out of thy way. It is true
that these outward troubles are commonly the effects of Gods anger against our
sins, but that stands well with his love to our persons. For whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth. Heb. 12. Hence the Church in the 7. of Micah. 8. 9. 10.
Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall rise again, when I
sit in darkness, the LORD shall be a Light unto me, I will hear the
indignation of the LORD, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute Judgment for me* and she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her which said, where is the LORD thy GOD.

Secondly remarke, If Gods own people be not exempted from outward troubles and
calamities, what may the wicked look for? 7. Dreadful state of the wicked.
If judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end of them be who
obey not the Gospel! If it be so with Gods children, who are the children of
Peace, what trouble and indignation shall be to them, who are the children of
disobedience and wrath? flatter not thy self therefore with thy present Peace,
woe to thee if thou continue in sin, and have not made thy Peace with God, He
has whet his sword, he has bent his bow and has made ready the instruments
of death. The time comes wherein thou shall find such terror in his face,
that thou shall wish the hills and mountains fall upon thee, rather then that
thou should be made to look upon it. All the creatures in like manner shall
fight against thee to revenge the quarrel of God, none of them contributing so
much as a drop of water to quench the heat of thy tongue. Now let us proceed
and see what is the Peace here spoken of.

Since it is not the outward Peace, as we have said, and yet is a Peace
promised to the Saints even in this life, it must needs be the inward Peace and
tranquillity of the mind which they enjoy here. 8. Inward peace of mind here
understood
This Peace is nothing else, but such a state of the mind whereby it is so
disposed, that it is not shaken, either with prosperity or adversity, but
being stayed on God, has Rest and repose in him whatsoever fall our, eve^ as
the needle touched with the load stone, rests when it looks to the North,
or as the earth or water rest when they come to their own place. Of this Peace
our Savior speaks when he says Ioh. 14. Peace I give you, my Peace I leave
with you. This is that Peace of God, which passes understanding and which
keeps our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. It is so great a benefit, that
our understanding is not able to comprehend it. It keeps or guardeth as a
bu^wark our hearts and minds, our hearts that they turn not away from
righteousness or pieti^, by any temptation or persecution, our minds that they
fall not away to error, and that in Christ Jesus that we may abide in him, and
be more and more joined to him. It makes us fit to discern the truth, for it
clears the mind which cannot see aright, when the eye of it is troubled. It
gives joy to the heart, For a calm and peacable mind is a continual feast.
It raises up in us confidence and magnanimity. As confidence be gets
peace, so peace increases this confidence. When a man considers that he is
at one with God, has him to be his friend and Father, who has a most loving
and tender care of his children: when, I say, a man considers, weighs and
believes this, he commits himself wholly to God, that he will guide him
aright in all his ways, and defend him against all his enemies. Thus ye see
what the peace is which here is meaned; Now let us see whence it is.

Thou, to wit, O Lord, says the PROPHET, will keep etc. First. It is the Lord
alone who gives and keeps this peace in us, 9. God alone gives it.
Hence it is called; The peace of God, and he is called The God of peace. To
proclaim war or peace has been accounted the prerogative of Kings: Now God
is, The King of kings, and Lord of lords, and therefore to him alone belongs
to settle peace, especially in the soul. He is the Judge, and therefore to
him belongs to pronunce this sentence of peace. If a man be arraigned before
a Judge, his mind is not quieted, though all the standers by encourage him,
and bid him be of good comfort, till he hear absolution out of the mouth of
the Judge. So God is the supreme JUDGE of the World, before whom we stand
guilty, and till he speak peace, there is no solid calmnes in our minds. Beside,
our hearts naturally are full of trouble and tormoyle, and therefore cannot
have peace unless it be created in them. Now this is the proper work of God
who says, Isai. 57. to this purpose, I creat the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace to him that is a far off. Lastly, so long as sinful corruption is not
healed in our souls, their wound remains green, which suffers us to have
no rest. Now it is God alone, who can heal^ the soul, and therefore it is he
only who can give peace to it; Thus the working of this peace in us, is the
peculiar work of God. If he stand by, no man nor angel can give it. Hence
DAVID even after the tidings of peace brought unto him by NATHAN cries yet to
God for peace and joy, Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Upon the other part, as it is God alone who gives this peace, so for our
comfort we are to know, that he can easily give it, 10. He gives it easily.
and keep and preserve us in it. It costeth him no more but a word, if be but
speak peace, we are sure to have it. I will hear what the Lord God will
speak, he will speak peace unto his people. If he but speak the word it is
done; To this purpose we have a notable place Isai. 44. There the Lord is thus
descrived. The Lord who says to Jerusalem, be thou inhabited, and to the
cities of Judah be ye built, that says unto the depth be dried up, and that
says to Cyrus his servant, thou art my sheepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure. So the Lord needs no more but a word to build Judah, to make
Jerusalem inhabited, to remove all impediments out of the way of his people,
and to persuade the heart of Cyrus an heathen man to be their nursing father.
Thus Psalm. 44. the PROPHET says to God, Thou art my King O God: command
deliverance for Jacob. If God but send forth his Commandment, it shall be
obeyed. When the sea is most raging, and the waves greatest, if Christ say be
still, there shall be a great calm. This serves exceedingly for our comfort,
that our God whom we serve is able so easily to give us peace and calmnesse in
all our troubles and distresses. Ye found this latlie by your own experience;
When ye looked for the help of man, ye were disappointed and felt that the
Arm of flesh is a vain thing to trust into, but when your Troubles were come
to the hieght, and your (...) desperate, then the Lord spoke peace to you, and
wh^^ h^^aid, was performed. Would God that ye were sensible of ^his his
goodness, and O that ye may be always mindful (...) that by the consideration
of so great a benefit, ye may (...) always stirred up to praise him, and to
trust in his mercy (...) much of the benefit, Now I come to the description
of them to whom it belongs.

Whose mind is stayed on thee, 11. Stayednes of mind referred to GOD.
etc. The words in the original, signifies the mind or thought is stayed;
and by some are referred to God, by others to the godly. Learned CALVIN
writting; upon this place, refers the words to God thus. The counsel and
purpose of God, whereby he has decreed to preserve the peace of his servants
is unchangeable, and therefore he will keep them in peace. There can no
alterations fall out in this world, which may change his immutable mind; so
there is a secret opposition betwixt Gods thought and ours. My thoughts are not
as yours, Isai. 55. neither are my ways as your ways, but as high as the
heaven is above the earth, so high are my thoughts above your thoughts, and my
ways above your ways. The mind and the counsel of God is immutable, whereas
our thoughts are changeable every moment upon the least occasion. He is the
Lord and changes not, and therefore we are not consumed.

Secondly, The words may be referred to the godly, thus. Their minds are
stayed and fixed on God, 12. Reference of it to the Godly.
and therefore he will keep them in peace. Our Interpreters have so expounded
the words, and this seems best to agree with them. But ye will ask, what is
this to have our minds stayed on God? I answer unto this, first is required
that our hearts be withdrawn from all things else. We cannot have our minds
on God and the creature both, for We cannot serve two masters. Hence our
blessed Lord requires of his disciples that they deny themselves, and tells
them, that none can be his disciple, except he hate father, and mother, wise,
and children, etc. So it we would have our hearts stayed on God, they must
settle upon nothing besides him,

This is necessary for the obtaining of our peace, which we cannot enjoy so
long as our hearts are fixed upon any creature. The reasons are clear; 13.
Withdrawing of the heart from the creature necessary.
First, the creatures are transitory and changeable, and therefore the heart
set upon them, must needs change with them. 2. While as the heart is
inordinatly set on the creature, the affections are contrary to sound reason,
and our actions are contrary to God and, his Law: so during this inordinat
love, we have a war which stands not with peace. 3. As long as the heart
does cleave inordinatly to any creature, there must needs be a continual
fear, which is contrary to the Peace of the mind. For either we fear, that
we shall not obtain that which we love, or that we shall loss it when it
is obtained, or that we shall not recover it when it is lost. Either we fear
that our will shall be crossed, or suppose our desires second us in all things,
yet our guilty conscience accuses and tormenteth us. 4. There is no creature
how perfectly soever enjoyed by us that can give satisfaction to out souls,
without which they can have no peace. Such is the nobility of our soul, such
is the excellency of our minds and wills, that a world, yea a thousand worlds
known, beloved and possessed cannot give them rest and contentment. Either the
Object delighted in, is unproportionated to the soul, as the sound to the eye,
or the color to the ear, or at least is unable to equal the infinite desire
of it. This none can do but God* O LORD thou have made us for thy self, says
holy AUGUST. and our hearts are restless till they rest in thee. Thus when
ever we would have peace, or have our hearts on God, we must withdraw them
from the creatures.

The next thing that is required for staying our hearts upon God, 14.
Necessitte of settling our love on GOD, and submission to his wid.
is that we join unto him by sincere love, and by humble submission of our
desires and wills to his, so that we love nothing but in him or for him, desire
nothing but his Glory and the accomplishment of his will. This is the solid way
to Peace, when men will and nil the same things, then there is true friendship
and a sincere Peace. so it is betwixt God and us, when we desire absolutely
nothing but that which pleases him, fully resting upon his holy will and that
out of a unfeigned love to his Glory. When we are thus affected nothing can
trouble us. Not the fear of the want of any good. For if we have God, we can
lack nothing, since in him is all Good. If we seek his Kingdom, that is
himself and his will, all other things shall be casten to us. It costeth us
much travail and time to find that pleasure and rest in the creature, which we
desire, and often times we fail of that also, whereas if we would employ so
much time and pains in seeking God, we should undoubtedly find both solid joy
and rest. I may compare them who go a whoring from God to the creatures, to a
man, who being a thirst, and having a clear fountain near him, will needs go
in by-ways to a puddle, so that when all his travel is spent, he must needs
retu^ne, and go to the fountain, which he left, or else his thirst shall
remain unquenched. So is it with thee who leavest God The fountain of living
waters, and followest the broken cisternes of the creatures. Thou weariest thy
self in difficult and by-ways. Thou seek joy and Peace where it is not to
be found, whereas thou might easily have it in God who is the Ocean of goodness.
Come unto me says our Savior and ye shall find rest unto your souls. Ho
every on that thirsts let him come unto the waters* why spend ye your money
for that which is not bread and your labor for that which satisfies not?
Isai. 55. In like manner if our love be fixed upon God and our will subjected
to his, and consequently one with his, neither grief for by past evils, nor
fear of evils to come can trouble us. We shall not be grieved for that which is
bypast because nothing has befallen but that which it pleased God to permit,
whose blessed Will we adore and prefer unto our own. For the same reason the
fear of evils to come shall not disturb us, since we know nothing can befall
hereafter but according to the will of God decreeing or permitting to which we
have conformed our wills, and consequently nothing ca^ simply come against out
own will, which is one with the will of God. Hence an ancient truly said; That
the will of him is ever done and never crossed, who has resigned his own will,
and has submitted it only to the will of God.

If any man shall think this a hard task* 15. Equity of this, in respect of
GOD his excellency.
Let him consider that it is most reasonable, whither we look to God his
excellency or to our own profit. For the first God is the supreme Lord of al,
and has made all things for himself, his infinite dignity and excellency
requires that all things should be referred to his Glory and to the obedience
of his will. in respect whereof all other things are of no worth or moment.
what then art thou, being but a miserable worm, that thou will have thy own
will and thy own desires as if thou thy self were the last end of thy actions?
what else is this but to equal thy self to God, and to put thy self as it were
in his stead?

Secondly, Our own utilitie and advantage requires this resignation of our
selves and full acquiescing to the will of God. 16. Equity of it, in respect of
our profit
He from eternity has disposed all things according to the counsel of his
will, and according to the eternal Idea of his mind. Conform to this he made
all things, and now orders and governs all things. Nothing escapes his
providence, which reaches from the beginning to the end, and orders all
things sweetly and wisely and powerfully. The tree losseth not a leaf, the
air losseth not a bird, thy head losseth not a hair, without his heavenly
Will. He alone knows both his own particular ends, and the fittest way to
obtain them. Is it not then more profitable for thee to be guided by his will,
then by thy own? Thy will is blind; thou often think that to be harmfull,
which is most advantageous; and that to be most adva^tagious, which is
pernicious. Thy will is often perverse, and set upon the things that are evil.
But the Will of God is guided by his undeceiveable Wisdom, is ever holy, and
most profitable to thee, for he loves thee better then thou do thy self.
Who would not think that he were a mad man, who will stand up and say to God. O
Lord albeit thou know the way infinitely better then I, although thou be the
shepherd of my soul, and my most loving Father, yet will I not yield to thee,
the conduct of me, but will be lead by my self. To say so, were madness and
blasphemy, and yet in effect thou say as much, When thou repinest against
the Will of God*

To conclude this point, 17. This is the way to peace.
we may easily perceive from that which we have said, that the only and
undoubted way to tranquillity and peace of mind, is to settle our hearts upon
God the true center of our souls and absolutely to seek nothing but him and
his Will. We may indeed desire that which in reason seems good, and may use
our best endevoures for obtaining of it, but this ought still to be with a
submission of our will unto the Will of God, which should be so dear to us, as
that we should wish nothing to come to us against it. Thus the servants of God
have ever calmed their minds amidst their greatest troubles. When God had
loosed the hand of Satan upon JOB, upon his body, upon his goods, upon his
children, he found tranquillity in this. He sat down and worshipped, and said
Naked I came into the world, and naked shall I go out of it again, the LORD
has given and the LORD has taken, Blessed be the Name of the LORD. So when it
was told ELI of the vengance decreed by God against his house he calmed himself
with this, It is the LORD let him do what secmeth good to him. 1. Sam. 3. When
DAVID was flying from Absol^m he pacified his mind with the same
consideration. 1. Sam. 15. Take back the ark again: said he to Zadok, if I
shall find favor in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me again, and show me
both it, and his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee:
behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. So in like manner
Acts 21. When the disciples could not persuade S. PAUL to forebeare his journey
to Jerusalem where he was to meet with bonds, they said The Will of the LORD
be done. This ought to be the disposition of every good Christian, and if it
were in us as it ought to be, it would dry up all our tears* stay our sighs and
silence all our murmurings and complaints. Make your use of this. Ye have been
afflicted, ye have already seen and felt many evils, and are yet in fear of
greater, Where shall we find rest and quietness to our perplexed hearts? In
this, what have been done already, the LORD whose Will is ever to be adored
has done it. He gave and he has taken away, and blessed be his Name. And as
for the time to come nothing shall fall out but according to his Will, wherein
we ought fully to acquiesce. We may indeed say, Father if it be possible let
this cup pass from me: but with all we should add; not my Will but thine be
done.

But it may be, 18. Contentatio^ in evils prejudicial to God his Glory and
man's salvation.
Some man will say. Albeit this may satisfy our minds in worldly losses, yet
it seemath that it cannot give sufficient satisfaction in these evils which are
prejudicial to the Glory of God and well of men's souls. Thou art deceived if
thou think so, there is no evil in that kind which God does not clearly see
and which he is not able to amend. He has all things, all ages and eternity
it self before him, and knows what variety is best to make the just
proportion and beauty of the whole work. Cast not therefore a way the peace of
thy mind for these evils, but in them also reverence the Will of God. Pray
thou to God humbly, and do what becomes thee within the limits of thy calling
and as for the event refer it unto God. If thou cannot amend what is amiss,
remember that which our Savior says Math. 13. That sometimes the cares must
be let alone, lest the good wheat be plucked up therewith, until the harvest
come. And then a separation shall be made, the tares shall go to the fire and
the wheat to the barn. Consider That the blessed Saints in heaven, know well
that God is here exceedingly dishonored, and that many thousand souls are
ruined and yet they loss not their peace which they have in God. So we
according to our measure ought to do. This much concerning the staying of our
minds on God. The PROPHET adds;

Because he trusts in thee. If our minds be stayed upon God, we will trust in
Him, which also is a sovereign means to obtain peace and protection from God,
19. Confidence in GOD.
if there be any generositie in a man, he will be loath to deceive him who
trusts in him, yea he will hazard his means and his life for his safeguard,
how much more may we think that God will defend and direct them who put their
whole trust and assurance in him? Hence the PROPHET exhorts in the next
words, Trust in the LORD for ever, for in the LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting
strength. He exhorts not only to trust, but always to continue in this our
trust and confidence, and he gives most pregnant reasons; for He in whom we
trust is JEHOVAH the prime and infinite being, in whom is everlasting strength
or the rock of ages* That which he says of his strength, he understands of
all his other Perfections. As there is infinite and everlasting Strength in
Him, so infinite and everlasting Goodness, infinite and everlasting Wisdom,
infinite and everlasting Truth. If we look to these his Perfections by the eye
of Faith, we cannot choice but trust in him, and trust in him not for a time
but for ever,

Let us obey this Exhortation of the PROPHET, 20. Exhortation to it.
Blessed are they that trust in him, they shall not be ashamed. Ye have had
manifold experiences of his goodness and power, especially of late; all which
should concur to the confirming of your Confidence in him. He seemed for a
time to leave you, and yet ye cannot but acknowledge, that whatsoever ye
suffered came short of your deservings. It is of his mercies that we are not
consumed; And when he had a little afflicted you, he sent you wonderful
deliverance. He afflicted you that ye might turn to him, and delivered you
again, that ye might praise his Name and put your trust therein. He had
given you long his Word in purity and plenty, long peace and prosperity, but
we turned his grace into wantonness, and abused our peace and plenty to riot
and excess; What wonder then, that he should for a time send a scarceness of
the Word and Sacraments. That he should turn our peace into trouble, and our
plenty into want: but in his Wrath, he remembered mercy. He made his
countenance to shine, and we were saved. Let us therefore beware of our sins,
whereby we have provoked him before, and then we may trust in him securely for
the time to come. If the Lord has spoken peace unto us, let us not turn again
unto folly, lest our latter end be worse then the beginning. But if we turn to
him with all our heart, he shall keep us in perfect peace, according to his
promise, His salvation shall be walls and bulwarks, We shall be able to say with
DAVID, The Lord is my light and my salvation whom shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life of whom shall I be affrayed? The Lord grant this unto
us, and that for the merits of Christ Jesus; To whom etc.

A SERMON UPON the XXVI Chap. of MATTHEW.
Verse. 73. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, Mark, 14 verse
70. Luke 22. 59. John, 18. 26.
and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them, for thy speech bewrays
thee. Verse. 74. Then began he to curse and to swear, (saying) I know not the
man. And immediately the cock crew. Verse. 75. And Peter remembered the words of
Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. And
he went out, and wept bitterly.
IN these words we have set down the Sin and fall, 1. Peter speaks to us.
even the hight of the Fall of the holy Apostle, and his blessed Rising again
by repentance. This his Fall is registrated in holy scripture, not only to show
the truth of divine History, the Penmen whereof concealeth not the faults of
them that were most dear unto them, as commonly humane Historians do: but also
it was written for our instruction and comfort; That they who stand, may take
heed, lest they fall, and they who have fallen, may learn how to rise. The
registrating of this History is, as it were, a sending of S. Peter by God to
teach us this. I may say of him, as holy AUGUST. speaks of DAVID, upon 51
psalm. As Nathan says he, was sent to David, so David is sent to thee, whil as
his fall and repentance is registrated in holy scripture; When thou hear him
crying, Have mercy upon me O Lord, according to thy tender mercies, etc. He
cries, that thou may learn how to cry, he sigheth, that thou may learn
how to sigh, he weepeth that thou may join thy tears with him, and he is
amended before thee, that thou may learn how to amend. The same may I say of
S. Peter, who is set before our eyes in this history, that he may be a
preacher to us of our humane frailty, of the mercy of God, and a pattern of
repentance. That we may make our use hereof more fruitfully, We shall first set
down in order the Sum of the History, of that which we have read out of all
the four Evangelists.

The unlearned and unconsiderat READER might think, 2. The history and order.
That the Evangelists agree not well in relating this History: but if we
compare them together, we shall find a very sweet harmony, and that the cause
of the apparent disagreement is, only that one has that, which another
wants. Now according to them all, this is the History. Our LORD being
arraigned before Cajaphas and his Council the night before his death, S. Peter
having followed him to the HALL of the high Priest, and having twice denied him
there, is now the third time assaulted. First about the space of an hour after
his second denial, one comes to him, and affirms confidently or strongly
(as S. Luke tells us) and confirms his saying with this argument, That he
was of Galilee, where Christ for the greatest part conversed, and whence the
greatest part of his disciples were. By occasion of this some others standing
by, (as S. Matthew. and S. Mark imports) urge him in like manner, Of a truth,
say they, this fellow was with him, for he is a Galilean, and his speech
bewrays him to be such an one. There was but one language in the land of
Canaan, to wit, the Syriack at that time; but there was a diversity in the
pronunciation and manner of speech, betwixt the Galileans and others, as there
is in our own or any other country, betwixt them that are of diverse provinces.
Notwithstanding of all this, S. Peter stands to his denial. In the mean
time, There comes a servant of the high Priest, a kinsman of his whose care
Peter had cut off. (as we learn from S. John) and he pressed the Apostle more
perempterly; Did I not see thee in the garden with him, says he? as if he
would have said, How dare thou refuse? how canest thou deny? Did I not see
thee with these eyes of mine with him in the garden? Here the Apostle being
brought to a perempter perceiving himself to be in great danger, and fearing
that he should be arreigned as well as his Lord, and exposed to the cruelty of
the Jews as well as he; he is not content simply to deny him, but he does it
with oaths and execrations, swearing and cursing that he knew not the man, that
he did not so much as know what they said Now immediately while he is yet
speaking, the Cock croweth the second time, as S. Mark tells us, and Jesus
turning him about, looked upon S. Peter, Whereupon he remembered and called to
mind the words of Jesus, How he had said; Before the Cock crow twice, thou
shall deny me thrice: and thinking upon this, he went out and wept bitterly.
This is the History in order.

In it there are two particulars chiefly considerable. First, his Fall or sin,
3. Peter truly deuieth Christ.
secondly his Rising or repentance. For clearing the first, We shall consider
first; his sin* secondly the grievousnesse of it, and Thirdly shall show you,
what use should be made by us thereof. But before we enter into these
particulars, ye are to understand that some have excused or extenuated this
sin of Peter, that either they thought it no sin, or a very small one, but this
is well refuted by S Jerome, If says he, we affirm that Peter denied not
Christ, then we give Christ the lie, who said, Before the cock crow twice, thou
shall deny me thrice. To this same purpose holy August. in 66. Treatise upon
John: If Christ spoke truth, whereof to doubt is impiety, then PETER indeed
denied Christ. Let us not accuse Christ, says he, to defend Peter; let humane
infirmity acknowledge its sin, for in him that was Truth is self there could
be no lie. S. Peter himself acknowledged both the sin and the grievousnesse
thereof, he refuteth his defenders, and his tears are witnesses against them.
Let us come now to the first point, and consider his sin what it was.

First in that he denied the LORD, 4. Branches of his sin.
he sinned against Truth; and that two ways, first because he denied that he
knew him, whom indeed he knew very well. Secondly, because he break his
promise to his Lord, which was. That he would not deny him, though he should
die for him. 2. He sinned against faith; For the commandment whereby we are
tied to believe, binds us not only to believe inwardly, but also outwardly to
confess; For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation. 3. He sinned by perjurie, calling
(...) God and desiring him to bear witness to his lie. 4. He sinned by cursing,
and wishing all kind of mischief to himself, if he spoke not truth. All these
ways he sinned in this his third denial. Now let us consider the
grievousnesse of his sin.

For clearing of this point consider first. That he many ways offended before
his denial. 5. Grievousnesse of his denial.
First, there was in him too great confidence of himself and over-wee^ing of
his own strength. Hence when our Lord. Joh. 13. 36. Said, Thou can not follow
me now; he answered, Lord why cannot I follow thee now? I am ready to go with
thee both to prison and to death* and again, Though all men should ^e offended
at thee, yet I will never be offended. Secondly there was a kind of
misbeleeving the words of our Lord; for he forewarned him of his fall, and yet
he would not take heed unto it. Thirdly, he neglected that commandment; Wat^h
and pray that ye enter not into temptation. For the spirit indeed is ready,
but the flesb is weak. He was sleeping sound, when he should have been watching
and praying. Fourthly, when he followed Christ he followed him coldly, and a
far off, and did not cleave to him neatly and ferve^tly, as his true follower
should have done. Fifthly, by entering into the HAL of the High Priest amongst
his enemies, he did cast himself into danger, without necessity or any calling.
Thus many ways he procures his own Fall, which aggravateth his sin.

Secondly, 6. his cursing
There are many things concurring in his sin which does greatly aggravate it,
First, he not only denied Christ, but also he denied him with oaths, again and
again, and not content with this, he cursed and anathematized himself, if it
was not so, as he said. The word used in the original signifies that he
wishes himself to be an Anathema, which is as much as one that is accursed,
execrable and unworthy of the communion of good men, and that is devoted and
appointed for ^ell. The word which the Syrian Interpreter uses signifies to
destroy and abolish, and in the old Testament commonly signifies A thing
devoted to God, which cannot be redeemed, but must needs be abolished and
destroyed. So the Apostle by this anathematizing or cursing wished all
mischiefs to himself, both to his body and soul, which is no less then
eternal condemnation. Neither did he simply curse this way, but he did it
vehemently, as the word used by S. Matthew. imports.

Suppose there had been no more, 7. How grievous a sin it is.
This cursing was a grievous sin. God oftentimes even in this life has
declared his Wrath against it by dreadful judgments. In this kind we have a
notable example in Eusebius his ecclesiastic Hist. 6. book and 8. chapter.
There he reports, that three wicked men had conspired against Narcissus
Bishop of JERUSALEM, in the time of the Emperor Severus, who was a man of
singular holiness, but somewhat severe. These wicked persons fearing to be
censured by him, accuse him of Uncleanness, and to persuade men to believe
them, did use fearful curses and impreea^ions against themselves, if they
spoke not the truth. The first of them wished, that he might be burnt. The
second wished, that his body might rot and be consumed. The third wished, that
he might be blind, if it was not true which they spoke. Notwithstanding of all
this, the people were so persuaded of the holiness of their Pastor, that they
believed them not; And in the mean time, ere it was long the judgment of God
came upon these three. The house of the first took fire, and in it, he and his
family was burnt. The second fell into a grievous disease, which consumed his
body away. The third considering the vengance of God that had come upon his
fellows, is brought to repentance, confesses publicly the whole matter, and
shed tears so abundantly then and afterward, that he lossed the sight of his
eyes. So the curse of every one of them fell upon themselves. Thus we may
perceive that the Apostle his cursing did much aggravate his sin.

Secondly, 8. Grievousnesse in respect of the matter.
the matter which he denied with oaths and execrations was most great and
important. It was no less then his LORD and SAVIOVR, even he to whom before he
had said, Lord whether shall we go from thee, for thou have the words of
eternal life, and we know and are sure that thou art the Christ the son of the
living God. 9. In respect of the person.


Thirdly, he who denied this was no mean person but a great and prime Apostle
which aggravateth the offense, it was Peter whose name Christ had changed, and
whom he had called Peter to signify that the strength and firmnes of a rock
should be in him. It was Peter who had been so familiar with his Lord, had seen
him work so many miracles and had wrought miracles himself in his Name. Peter
who had been with him in mount Tabor, had tasted there the heavenly joys and
had heard this voice from heaven, Thou art my well beloved son etc. Peter to
whom the Father had revealed this, That Jesus was the son of the living God.
Math. 16. And to whom our Savior said, To thee will I give the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound
in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth shall be loosed in
heaven. 10. His pusillanimitie.


Fourthly, In this his denial, appears great pusillanimitie, weakness and
distrust of God. for at the first assault of a handmaid and doore-keeper he
denied That he knew Christ. Behold, says holy AUGUSTINE, The most firm
pillartrembls wholly at one small blast of the air. Where now says he is
thy former confidence, and bold promises? where now are these words I am ready
to follow thee both to prison and to death? Is this to follow thy Lord, to deny
that thou know him? Is this to lay down thy life for him, to deny him at the
voice of a damsel? for preserving thy life? how strangely is thy voice changed
now? and yet thou art not brought unto public, thou art not presented yet
before kings or governors, thou art not yet put to the rock or torture. It is
not a scribe, or pharisee, or priest, or soldier, or executioner, that
demands of thee, but a woman, a servant, and a doorekeeper. Thus we see there
was in him exceeding great weakness, and fear.

Lastly, 11. His obstinacy.
There was a kind of obstinacy in his sin, for he denied and swore again
and again and the third time. There was betwixt his second and third denial
about the space of an hour, wherein the had time to recollect his confounded
thoughts and to call to mind what he hade done, that he might have repented,
or at least might have eschewed a new sin; but notwithstanding of this he
continued still unmindefull of Christ and what he had done. Thus we see his
sin in many respects was grievous, which we have discovered not for the
reproach of that great and holy Apostle (God forbid) but that we may learn
these uses from it, Which the spirit of God would have us to learn, which is
the third point propounded by us.

The first use that we should make of this fall of the great Apostle is, 12.
Humane weakness.
we may perceive clearly in it humane weakness and infirmity, how great it is,
and how little it should be trusted unto. This great Apostle was by nature
fervent and ve^ement, and had received many excellent graces and privileges
from Christ as we said before, yet when he trusts to much in himself, and is
for trial and humiliation left to himself, he falls and that most foullie.
He that assured himself of victory before the fight, trembles now before the
sound of the trumpet: he that should not have denied Christ, although the sword
had been at his throat, denies him now at the voice of a damsel. The like we
may see in DAVID, who was a man according to the heart of God, and yet fell
both in adultery and murder. This should teach us all humility, fear and
watch fulness, and to trust in nothing but in God and his Grace^ S. Peter
himself learned these things by his fall. When our Lord after his resurrection
asked him whether he did love him more then others did, he did not prefer
himself to any, but was content to express his own sincerity, saying; LORD
thou know that I love thee. So in his 1. epist. 1. chap. He says, That we
are kept by the power of GOD through faith unto salvation, and in the 5. chap.
of that epist, he gives this exhortarion to all, Be sober, be vigilant: for
your enemy the devil, goes about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour. Let us in like manner learn to be humble, and to fear and watch. If
the strong pillars and mighty cedares be so shaken and so soon, what may
become of us, who have scarce grace rooted in our hearts in the day of our
temptation? What is man without the Grace of God, says holy AUGUSTINE, in his
124. Sermon of time, But that which Peter was when he denied his LORD? yea
suppose thou had never so much grace, yet thou have this treasure in an earthen
vessel, thou art like to a rich ship full of precious wares, that is tossed in
the sea, and in danger to be swallowed with the waves, or to dash upon the
rocks. Be not therefore high minded, but fear. Let him that stands, take
heed lest he fall. Remember that S. PAUL has said, Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling: And that he himself did beat his body down and kept
it in subjection, Lest by any means when he bad preached unto others, he
himself should be a castaway. Our security is to fear always; our strength
is to distrust our own strength, and to put all our confidence in the Mercy of
God, and Merits of Christ, Who has prayed for us that our faith fail not.
Let us therefore say to God every one of us, LORD thou have been my help leave
me not, neither forsake me, O GOD of my salvation.

Secondly, we may perceive from this fall of Peter, that one sin especially,
13. One sin draws another after it,
if it be grievous; draws another after it and that without stay, till Christ
look again upon the sinner. Hence sin is called by S. PAUL, The s^ure of the
devil. Ye know when a bird is taken in a s^are, she is still more and more
fastened and entangled. If thou give place but to a light lust at the first, as
Peter did to the servant-maid, one to a hundereth, but from that, thou shall
fall into a greater sin, and from that, to worse again, as S. Peter from
denying, came to swearing, and from swearing, came to extreme cursing of
himself. This should teach us not to give any place to the devil, but to resist
him steadfastly, and to pray with DAVID, Order my steps in thy word, and let no
iniquity have dominion over me.

Thirdly, 14. Necessity of compassion in pastors.
It is observed by holy AUGUSTINE in the place before citted; that this fall of
S. Peter was permitted by God to make him the more ready to compassionate
others when they should fall. He was by nature vehement as appears by many
passages of the Gospel, and particularly by cutting off the ear of Malchus.
He was to be a prime pastor and ruller of the Church, and to receive the keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven. An innummerable multitude of people was to be
committed unto him, laden with manifold iniquities. Now if he had never fallen
himself like enough it was, that he would have been the less inclind to pi^tie
and comiserate others, Therefore says holy AUGUSTINE. The secret of Gods
providence was so disposed, that he himself was permitted first to fall, and
that foullie, that he might temper the severitie of the sentence against
others, by the remembrance and consideration of his own fall. Thus God has
taught us also by his fall that it is most necessar in a pastor to have a
tender heart ready to pity and compassionat others. He will never act the part
of a pastor faithfully that can do nothing else but rule with authority,
terrify, censure, and punish. That is not the way to win men to God, but to
drive unstablished souls from God, and to cast those that are weak and
distressed into despair.

Fourthly, 15. We deny CHRIST alse
It is to be observed that a man may deny Christ; although by his mouth he say
not that he knows him not, as S. Peter did. We may profess that we know him
with our mouths, and yet by our works deny him, as S. PAUL teaches us Tit. 1.
we deny him also when we deny our selves to be his disciples as we see in S.
Peter here. Now our Lord has told us, That he that will not take up his cross
and follow him, cannot be his disciple; and that hereby all men shall know that
we are his disciples, If we love one another. And That we must abide its his
word, and do the will of his Father, If we would be his disciples, So also S.
PAUL says. That they that are Christ's has crucified the flesh with the lusts
thereof. If therefore thou art not content to take up thy cross with patienc^,
if thou love not thy brother, abide not in Christ's words, art not careful to
do the will of his heavenly Father, and to crucify thy flesh with the lusts of
it, thou denies thy self to be his disciple, and consequently denies him. In a
word Christ is the truth, and therefore if thou believe him not, thou deniest
him. Christ is the way, If thou follow not him, thou do deny him. Christ is
the life, and therefore if thou be given to the dead works of sin thou
deniest him. Thus alace many ways and oftentimes have we denied him, and so
have deserved that he should deny us before his Father and his Angels, and have
need to sly to the mercy of God, whereof we may see a notable demonstration
in Christ his dealing with S. Peter. But there is mercy with God, as ye will
see most clearly in the next part of my text to which now I come. 16. ^is
repen^ance,


S. Peter having fallen in the manner before declared, immediately whill he was
yet speaking, the Cock crew the second time and with all Jesus turning looked
upon him, where upon he remembered and called to mind the words of Jesus how he
had said, before the cock crow thou shall deny me thrice, and so went out and
weeped bitterly. Here is the history of his rising, or repentance, Two things
are to be considered in it, First the cause of his repentance, 2. the
repentance it self* for the first; the cause of his repentance was Jesus turned
and looked upon him. Some think that the Look of Christ was only spiritual,
and that he did not look upon him with his bodily eyes; But the Text shows
that he did this also: for it is said, That be turned and looked upon him. Now
to what purpose should his turning been mentioned, if he had not looked upon
him with the eyes of his body. But say they S. Peter was without, and could not
be seen with the bodily eyes of Christ. Yet this convinces not, but it may be
that he was brought to the court wherein Peter was, or that being in an upper
room, as the Gospel shows; he might from thence being turned about see him,
with the eyes of his body; Nevertheless it is certain that his spiritual look
was that which pierced into the soul of S. Peter, and cleansed and renewed his
heart.

For clearing of this more fully, 17. Gods looking in justice.
ye are to consider that the spiritual look of God as it is descrived in
scripture, is sometimes in Justice, sometimes in Mercy, sometimes to Humble,
sometimes to Exalt, sometimes to Reward, and sometimes to Punish. In Justice he
looked upon the first world, when all flesh had corrupted their ways, and the
effect of his Look, was an universal diludge of waters. Thus he looked upon
them that were building Ba^el, Genesis 10. and the effect of his look, was the
confounding of their languages, and the scattering of them upon the earth. He
looked thus upon Sedom and Gomorrah Gen, 18. I will go down says the Lord and
see if it be according to the cry which is come up unto me, and the effect was
the destroying of them with fire and brimstone from heaven. Thus he looked upon
S^nnacher^b Isai. 37. And the Angel of the LORD that same night smot a
hundredth fourscore and five thousand of his army. He looked thus upon Corah
Dathan and Abiram numb. 16. and was displeased and in his fi^ie indignation he
consumed them, Of this Look DAVID Psalm. 104. says, He looks upon the earth,
and it trembles, He toutbeth the mountains, and they smoke.

Secondly sometimes he looks in Mercy and Favor, 18. His Look in mercy.
of this DAVID speaks Psalm. 25. Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and
for give all my sins. And Psalm 119. 132. Look upon me, and be merciful unto
me, as thou usest to do to them that love thy Name. It was with this Look that
he beheld S. Peter at this time, as appears by the gracious and merciful
effect thereof, for it wakned him out of security and brought him to
remembrance and consideration of that which he had done etc.

Here first, 19. Necessity and power of Christ's grace.
observe the necessity and power of Christ's Grace. The necessity, for till
Christ looked upon. Peter he neither remembered what he had done, not considered
the hynousnesse thereof. The cock crew again and again, and this should have
been a memorial of his fall and an admonition to repent: but all this availed
nothing till Christ looked upon him. Likewise so powerful was this Look, that
no sooner does Christ look upon him, but he remembereth and considers, his
heart melts, and his eyes gush out with tuares. They whom Christ looks upon,
bewail their sins, says S. AMBROSE as without it there is no saving good,
so where it is there is all good. Whence was it that the blessed Virgin was
the Mother of our LORD? It was because God had Looked upon the low estate of
his handmaid. Whence is it that we enjoy any good in this life or in the life
to come more then others? it is because it pleased God to look upon us from
eternity, with the eyes of his mercy. Hence that prayer of the ancient Church,
Lord look upon me with these eyes wherewith thou looked upon Marie Magdalen in
the banquet, wherewith thou looked upon S. Peter in the hall, and wherewith
thou looked upon the thief upon the cross. Grant unto me that with Marie
Magdalen I may perfectly love thee, with Peter, I may bitterly ^walle my
sins, and that with the thief, I may see thee for ever.

Secondly, 20. Readiness of it.
we may observe here the readiness and willingness of God to show mercy even
to most grievous sinners. Our Lord at this time was arreigned before his
enemies, bound, buffered, condemned or ready to be condemned. On the other part
S. Peter had forsaken him, denied him, and that with Oaths and curses: yet
forgetting the injuries done to him both by his enemies, and by his own
Apostle; he remembereth him and looks upon him, and plucketh him out of the
mouth of the Lion who was ready to devour him. This and the like examples of
mercy, serve much to encourage and comfort distressed souls ready to despair
through the sight of their own sins. S. AUGUSTINE in his 9. and 10 sermons on
the words of the Apostle 1. Tim. 1. 15. has a sweet meditation to this purpose
of the Mercy of God shown to, S. PAUL; suppose (says he) an excellent and
skilful physician should come to a place where he is not known, and having
wrought a rare cure upon a man desperately diseased, would say to him whom he
had cured, go thy: ways now to other men* who have the like disease, show them
what I have done unto thee. Bid them be of good courage; I am able and willing
to cure them also, If this man, should come to a person so diseasea as he was,
looking for nothing but death, and should say to him, be of good courage I have
seen the like disease and have had the like my self, and have been cured by him
who is willing to cure thee also, and has hiden me tell thee so much: This
could not be but matter of great comfort unto him. Even so says he S. PAUL,
healed by the Great Physician CHRIST JESUS says, unto thee who are ready to
despair, He that cured me sent me unto thee, and he said unto me go and tell
distressed fowls* what I have done to thee, what I have cured in thee, and how
soon with one voycel called thee from heaven, with another I did cast thee
down, with the third I raised thee up, and with the fourth I healed, perfected
and crowned thee, say unto thee sick, cry unto them that are ready to despair,
This is a true and faithful saying that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. Why fear ye? why doubt ye? I am the chief of them, and I
obtained mercy for this effect, that in me he might show forth all long
suffering, for a pattern for them that should there after believe upon him to
everlasting lif. I was a persecuter and blasphemer, I kept the garments of
them that stoned his first Martyr Steven, I breathed nothing but surie and
thirsted nothing but the blood of the Saints. I was in a spiritual fr^necie
and did strick my physician, and yet he suffered me long, and in end took away
my disease. Thus S. PAUL speaks to us, and so does S. Peter and many others,
which is matter, as I said, of unspeakable comfort. This much for the cause of
his repentance. The repentance it self follows.

And PETER called to mind the words of Jesus. Being Looked upon by our LORD;
First he remembereth his words and no doubt considered and weighed his own
sin. 21. Peter's remembrance
This remembering or calling to mind imports, that before he had forgotten,
or at least considered not Christ and his Words. It is strange that he should
have forgotten him with whom he was so familiar, who that night had washed his
feet, and from whom that night he had received the holy sacrament: but such is
the corruption of our nature that most quickly we forget GOD and his Word.
Hence we are compared to lacking vessels that rune out. Hence the LORD Deuteronomy. 4.
says ^ke heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the
thing which thine eyes* have seen, and that they depart not from thy heart for
ever. And again Deuteronomy. 8, Take heed to thy self that thou forget not the LORD
thy GOD, in not keeping his Commandments, and judgments, and statutes etc.
who would give himself to wickedness, if he remembered and considered the Goodness
of God bestowed upon him? and laid up for him, if he remembered and considered
the end for which God made and redeemed him, even that he might serve him in
holiness, and righteousness, all the days of his life, if he considered the
filthiness that is in sin, and the great evils that it brings upon the
body and soul, both here and hereafter. It is most manifest that we forget or
consider not these things when we give place to sin. This is the cause of our
offending God, and is in it self a great offense. There is no moment wherein we
taste not of the Mercies of God, and therefore there is no moment wherein we
should not remember him. We should not breath oftener then we should remember
him. Woe to them that regard not to forget him, the time shall come when they
shall be forced to remember, and that remembrance shall be one of their
greatest torments. What greater torment have the damned then to remember how
often, and how willingly. God called upon them? and yet they refused to hearken
unto him. What greater torment then to remember how easily they might have
escaped these infinite and eternal torments? and how easily they might have
attained unto eternal joys. Let us therefore take heed than we forget not
Christ, and if we have forgotten him, let us call to mind again as S. Peter
did whose remembrance was most fruitful, for;

He went out and weept bitterly. There was bitterness and grief in his heart,
22. His tears.
and abundant tears in his eyes. Neither at that time only did he weep; but as
it is reported by Clemens, as long as he lived He weept when he heard the cock
crow, so that at last his tears drew furrows in his cheeks. We read not his
words, which may be were chocked with abundance of his tears, but no doubt
since he called to mind his sin, and repented fruitfully, he had thoughts or
inward words both of sorrow and confidence. When he thought upon his sin, we
may well think he said within himself, Alace miserable man what have I done?
How do I yet live who have denied him who is the life? what wonder though the
earth should swallow me up who have denied my Lord and redeemer? O wicked
mouth! how could thou deny that thou knew him who has bestowed so many
benefits upon thee? cursed tongue! how could thou abjure him who has showed so
many tokens of his love unto thee? In like manner while he thought upon these
words of Christ, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, we may think
that he has said within himself; I will turn to him who has turned to me, I
will look to him who has looked to me. It is he that has said, As I live I
love not the death of a sinner. I will cast my self down at his feet, and say,
Master and LORD, I have sinned against the heaven and against thee, and am no
more worthy now to be called thy Son.

Would God we would imitate the Apostle in these tears of unfeigned sorrow. 23.
Exhortation to mourn.
Nothing more pleasing to God. No face so beautiful in his Eyes, as that which
is bluddered with tears. The tears of a penitent are the pearls which he
delights in. Nothing more profitable to us. Have thou lost thy goods? thy
tears will not recover them again. Have thou lost thy children? thy tears will
not bring them back again. Have thou lost health? thy tears will not make thee
better, but rather worse. But if thou have lost GOD and his Favor, the tears
of unfeigned sorrow can bring him back again, and who would not for recovering
of so great a good, with Peter here weep bitterly, with Mary Magdalen, wash his
feet with tears, and with DAVID make his bed to swime with them.

But it may be ye will say to me, 24. Christ looks on us.
I would do so, if Christ would turn and look upon me. Is not Christ turned to
thee, when he speaks to thee in his Word, and inviteth thee to come to him?
does he not turn and look unto thee when he offers to thee his own Body and
his Blood? Look therefore unto him and look unto thy self, Look to him sweating
his own Blood, crowned with thorns, scourged, buffetted, denuded of his
garments, and all for thee. Can thou look upon this sight without tears? what
are the tears of thine eyes to the Blood, of his sacred Body, and to the
sorrows and travailes of his Soul? look upon thy self, consider thy
ungratitude, the filthiness and defilment of thy soul and body, and how thou art
exposed by thy sins to his dreadful and eternal wrath. If thou can consider
this aright, it will make thee to say with the PROPHET, O that my head were
waters, and that my eyes were fountains of tears, that I might weep day and
night. Blessed are they that so sow in tears, they shall reap in joy; but ^o
to them that will needs laugh now, for they shall mourn and that without
comfort for ever. The Lord make us wise in time, and that for the merits of
Christ, to whom with the Father etc.

A SERMON UPON the XV. Chapter of MATTHEW.
Verse. 21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and
Sidon. Verse. 22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and
cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me O LORD, thou Son of David, my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. Verse. 23. But he answered her not a
word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying. Send her away, for she
cries after us^^. Verse. 24. But he answered and said. I am not sent, but unto
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Verse. 25. Then came she and worshipped
him; saying, Lord help me. Verse. 26. But he answered and said, It is not meet
to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, Verse. 27. And she said,
Truth Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbes which fall from their Masters
table. Verse. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy
faith: be it unto thee even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole, from
that very hour.
I Have made choice of these words at this time, which contain a most notable
history, 1. Fitness of the text for humiliatio^
and most fit for the work which we have in hand this day: for in it is set
before us an exact pattern teaching us how to pray, and how to wrestle with
God, so as we may prevail and have a blessed success, as the woman here
mentioned had, who prayed with such faith, confidence, humility and invincible
constancy, that not only obtained she her desire, but much more, O woman! said
our Savior unto her, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will.
The history is very easy and and plain and requires not so much to be
explained, as to be remarked and applied. Three things are chiefly considerable
in it. First the description of the person so much commended here. Secondly her
carriage toward Christ, 2. Discriptio^ of the person here spoken of, from her
sex and country.
and his behavior toward her. Thirdly the obtaining of her suite and praise of
her faith.

To come to the first. The person that was here a supplicant to our Lord was a
woman. One of the weaker sex, by which the devil first prevailed against man,
and expelled him from paradise and the joys of it. Secondly she was a gentile,
or a heathen woman, as S. Mark tells us, she was none of the peculiar people
of God, but a greek as it is in the original, which according to the phrase of
scripture, is as much as a gentile, and so a stranger from the Commonwealth of
Israel, and had her being among them who worshipped the devil in stead of the
true God. Thirdly yet more, she was a Canaanite as S. Matthew calls her. S.
Mark calls her a Syrophenician both which agree very well. Phenicia where
Tyrus and Sidon here mentioned were, was possessed by the postoritie of Canaan,
as we may see in the 10. of Genesis Where Moses tells us, that the sons of
Canaan inhabited both Judea and this part also, and the eldest son of Canaan
was Sidon, who gave the name to that ancient and famous town expressed here. So
then these whom the greeks called Phenicians from the abundance of Palm trees
that grew in their country were called by the Isralites Cananites. Hence in
the 5. of Joshua, those that were called in the hebrew, kings of Canaan, are
now called by the seaventy INTERPRETER 9. kings of Phenicia. S. MARK adds,
that she was a Syrophenician, not only because that Country was a part of
Syria, but also because it was particularly termed Syrophenicia: in respect it
was next adjacent to the chief part of Syria. Thus ye see, She was not only an
heathen woman, but also a Cananite; That is one of the worst of the Heathens,
who for their grievous and unnatural, sins were very abominable.

This part of her Description is set down not only to show, 3. Why this is
mentioned.
That the Spirit of God does breath where it pleases, but also that the glory
of the grace of God wrought in this Woman and manifested by her at this time,
might appear the more. When the Jews, the Scribs and Pharisees who had the LAW
and PROPHETS daily in their hands, did fly from our Savior, Who followed
them, and made him at this time to retire from them for a while, because of
their unworthiness, yet this woman follows him, though in appearance flying
from her, and would by no means leave him, till she obtained her suit. Besides
the benefit bestowed upon her, was a presage, as it were, of that mercy which
was to be taken from the Jews, and to be bestowed upon the Gentiles, and by
which the devil who so long and so grievously had vexed their souls, drawing
them to so many errors and sins, was to be expelled from them.

Lastly, She is descrived from her distress and misery. Her daughter had an
unclean spirit says S. MATTHEW, 4. Her distress.
and was vexed thereby. So it was affliction that drew her unto Christ, and was
the occasion of this singular manifestation of the grace that was in her. IT
would have seemed that none had been more miserable then she, but yet
experience taught that it was good for her that she was so afflicted. Had it
been otherwise with her, it may be she would not have taken such notice of
Christ as she did, when she heard of him, and it may be would never have come
to him. So it was good for Manasses that he was bowed down with heavy bonds,
that he could not lift up his head nor get any release, that did drive him to
God, and made him seek God most humbly and earnestly, who also heard him and
was entreated of him. It was good for the Prodigal son, that he could not get
so much as the husks that the swine did eat. This made him come to himself
again, and to return to his father, who received him graciously. It was good
for the Thief who^ our Savior converted, that he was nailed to the Cross; if
it had been otherwise, i^ is like enough he should not have been in Paradise as
he is now. So look not to the cross and to the bitterness of it, but look to
the fruit thereof. Happy is that cross, although it were to beo vexed with a
devil, that sends a man to Christ, to get salvation in him. But let us now
come to the behavior of this Woman.

Here ye have first her address to Christ, and the manner of it. 5. She comes
to Christ.
2. The mighty temptations which her faith meet with and overcame. First being
sensible of the greatness of her own misery, and understanding that Christ was
come to these parts, although as man he labored to keep it as secret as could
be, and having no doubt heard that he was called the Son of God and the
Messi^s, and that he had proved himself to be such an one by many miracles, and
that he lovingly received and powerfully delivered all that came unto him; She,
I say, having heard this, comes to him full of faith and confidence, that she
will be also relieved by him. She goes not to Inchanters or Socerers, to drive
out one devil by another, as appearantly has been the practice of these
heathen parts where she lived, but forsaking these impieties, she goes to
Christ to seek help. And mark, I pray you, how she comes.

She goes not as CHRYSOSTOM. observes to Peter, James, or John or any of the
Apostles that they might get her access; 6. Her faith
but she goes to himself immediately, and she comes to him with a prayer full
of faith, fervencie; humility and most fit to stir up pity and compassion.
SHE cried after him, who seemed to hasten from her, and cried far louder with
her heart, then with her mouth, Have mercy upon me O LORD, thou son of
David, for my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil, O LORD says she; see
her faith, she acknowledges by this style his Deietie and almighty Power. Thou
Son of David. Here her faith acknowledges that he was the Messiah and
promised Savior of the world: for it is manifest by many places of the
Gospel, that the Messiah was commonly so called be way of excellency, because
he was to come of his seed, and to sit in his throne. This was the ground of
her confidence. It might have been said, If he be the LORD, how dare thou so
importune him? but her faith was ready to reply, he is the Son of David also
and the Savior of the world. For this end came he down from heaven, has
humbled himself, and has assumed such flesh as I have, that I might have
access unto him, that I might not be affraied to speak unto him. Therefore
says she, O LORD thou Son of David, have mercy upon me, for my daughter
etc.

The reason of her cry is expressed in these words, my daughter is grievously
vexed with a devil. 7. Expression of her misery.
This was a lamentable case and could not well be fully expressed by words. We
may easily conceive how much this distress afflicted her. What a doleful
spectacle was it for her, to see her daughter daily so tormented as they are
whom the devil gets power to vex? We know that some natural diseases breed
so terrible convulsions and such intolerable pains, as hardly can we endure
to look upon them, that are in such a case. The eyes are like to burst out of
the head, the mouth fometh, the face is turned about, sense is taken away etc,
How much more miserable may we think the estate of this woman was, who was
vexed with a devil. Fathers and mothers who have sense of natural affection,
may conceive this better then I express it: her loud and importunate cries
show how sensible she was of it* she might have said, Alace, O LORD my torment
is intolerable. What shall I do? whether shall I go? I cannot leave my
daughter, she is so tormented. I cannot stay with her, The beholding of her
sufferings is so grievous unto me, she is not dead, and yet a thousand times
worse then dead, O LORD therefore have mercy upon me.

This is her suit, that he would have mercy upon her. Mark the words, 8. She
seeks mercy.
I pray you. she says not, Pray to God for me, but Lord have thou mercy, and
it shall be well. Thou art the LORD, I have not brought her to thee. Thou sees
that which is absent, Thou know that which is hid. I desire thee not to go
to her, nor yet to speak a word that she may be whole, only have mercy, and
that will put away the devil, and subdue all his power. See here the wonderful
strength of her faith. Secondly she says not, have mercy upon my daughter,
but have mercy upon me. She counts the misery of her daughter her own, it
touched her as if she had been in that same estate herself. Secondly it seems
she has thought her daughter was so afflicted because of her sins, which she
desires to be removed by mercy, that so her daughter might have health. Lastly
it is remarkable that the thing she requires is the exercise of mercy. Mercy
is but one word, but comprehends under it all Good that we stand in need of,
and with all includes a confession of our own misery, as if she would have
said, O LORD it is not in confidence of any worthiness or righteousness in me,
that I present my self unto thee, I fly to thy mercy the haven and harberie of
sinners. My misery is great, but thy Mercy is greater. The disease is
grievous, but nothing to thee the Great and merciful Physician.

Hence we may learn what we should fix our eyes upon this day, 9. Why it
should be sought by all.
after we duly viewed the great miseries wherein we are plunged either by
reason of our sins, or by reason of their woeful effects. Where to shall we
look but to the Mercy of God in Christ? and say with this woman, have mercy
upon me O LORD etc. With the Publican, be merciful to me a sinner, with DAVID
Have mercy upon me O LORD, according to thy Loving kindness, and according to
the multitude of thy compassions, blot my transgressions out. This Mercy is the
refuge of sinners. This is our maine comfort that our God is the God and Father
of Mercies, that his Mercies are over all his works, and reach even unto the
heavens. Mercy is the name wherein God delights most, The LORD, The LORD
Merciful etc. and wherein our strength against despair lies, and as we said,
it comprehends all the good we have or would have. If we say God is Light,
that imports but one thing, if we say God is our Strength, that imports but
the strengthening of us, but when I say, that he is the God of my Mercy, that
imports all whatsoever we are, whatsoever we have or desire, in nature, in
grace, in intention, in conversation, in faith, in hope, in love, in
deliverance from evil or enjoying of good, that is all of his Mercy, and his
Mercy can give it all.

Come therefore O man, 10. Invitation to it.
if thou have a penitent heart, fix thine eyes this day upon this Mercy of God,
be not swallowed up with the greatness either of thy sins or sorrows. Art
thou polluted with uncleanness and filthiness of thy flesh? yet cast not away
thy confidence, remember what this Mercy of God did to that unclean and
sinful woman who washed the feet of Christ with tears, in the 7. of Luke Have
thou been a murderer, thief or oppressor? remember what the Mercy of Christ
did to that Thief who was crucified with him. Many villainies, it may be, had
he done, yet when he with a penitent heart said, LORD remember me when thou
come to thy kingdom, this Mercy answered, verily to day thou shall be with
me in paradise. have thou been a persecuter and blasphemer? Remember what this
Mercy did to S. PAUL, it made him who was before a wolf, to be a pastor, it
made him to be an Apostle, who was before a persecuter, and to be a prime
builder of that Church which before he wasted. But let us proceed, and see how
this fervent and devote Prayer was accepted.

It is said by S. MATTHEW that he answered her not a word. 11. Christ his
silence.
What a strange thing was this? this miserable woman prays, cries again and
again for mercy, and yet the Savior and lover of mankind, gives no answer,
he that is the eternal Word, is silent. He that was the opened fountain,
seems to be closed, he that was the great and most kind Physician, seems
to deny all cure. This was the first assault of this woman's faith, and it was
not a small temptation. She might have thought with herself, alace I heard he
received all that came unto him graciously, but now I find by mine own
experience, that either this report is false, or at least, I am extremely
unhappy, man cannot help me, and God will not hear me. What shall I do? but
such thoughts entered not into the devot heart of this woman. For all this she
continues crying still, as appears by the following words.

Hence we should learn that which our LORD often urges that we should pray
and not faint. 12. Her perseverance.
There is in us naturally impatience, whereby we weary soon when we are not
heard. If God hide his face for a while, and seem to forget us. we give over.
O say we, we have prayed and it may be again and again, and yet we had no
answer returned us. But consider, although thou have prayed, yet it may be,
thou have not cried, thou have not been earnest nor fervent in seeking God.
Alace how often do our hearts wander, when our lips move in prayer? and we do
not so much as remember that we are praying. Secondly suppose thou have cried
with fervency to God, yet that is not enough, thou must also persevere and not
weary. Thou must still ask and seek and knock. God has not promised to grant
our desires upon the first or second or third petition. This assurance is only
given to them who continue without fainting. Abraham was an hundredth years old
before he obtained Isaac that was promised him. No doubt the mother of Samuel
has poured out her heart often before God, err she conceived. Simeon waited
long for the consolation of Israel, before he got Christ in his arms, Luke 2.
So Anna the prophetess departed not from the temple, but served God day and
night with fasting and praying, err she was blessed with the sight of our
Savior. O LORD says DAVID Psalm. 22. I cry to thee in the day time, and by
night I am not silent. So then perseverance in prayer is necessary for
obtaining our suites. Neither need we fear that this importunity will
displease God. It is not with God as it is with the great ones of this world.
If they vouchsafe not an answer to our petitions, and yet be again and again
importunated, this is the way to offend them and make them more difficult. But
a restles importunity and a kind of violent urgeing of our desires, is most
acceptable to God, which if we use rightly, we are sure to obtain that which
we seek or that which is better. Now let us proceed to the second temptation
wherewith the faith of this woman was assaulted.

The disciples of our Lord moved either with pity or impatience at the hearing
of the frequent cries of this woman, 13. The disciples entreat for her.
desire him that he would dismiss her, send her away, say they, for she cries
after us. Her cries troubled them and, it may be, caused the people to gather
about them. To this our Lord answers, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep
of Israel. Strange! and as it would seem very uncomfortable words for this
woman.

The meaning of the words is not, that he came not to redeem any but the Jews,
14. how christ is sent to the lost sheep of Israel.
The scripture clearly tells us, That he is the propitiation for the sins
of the whole world: and that God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son to the death, that whosoever should believe on him, should
not-perish, but have eternal life. In the 1. of Mal. it is promised by God,
that through the Messiah, his Name should be great among the gentiles, from the
rising of the sun, to the going down of it. In the 2. of Haggai he is called
The desire of all nations. Isai. chap. 11. foretold that the root of Jesse
should be an ensign to the people, and that to it the gentiles should seek.
Before him DAVID prophesied Psalm. 2. That the heathen should be his
inheritance, and that the outmost ends of the earth, should be his possession.
And long before him Jacob said, That when Shilo came or the Messiah, to him
should be the gathering of the nationes. What then ye will say, does our
Savior mean by this, that he was not sent but unto the lost sheep of Israel?
I answer, he means that he was sent to be Borne among them, to work his
miracles among them, to be visibly conversant with them, whence he is called
The Minister of the circumcision. Romans 15. God carried that respect to the Jews
because of the covenant made with their fathers, that the Messiah was both to
come of them, and to do his wonderful works among them, not going nor sending
to others, til they had made themselves unworthie of his presence.

This is the true sense of his words, 15. her victory over this temptation.
yet the woman might have easily conceived them, so as if they hide simply
excluded her from his favor, as not belonging to his care. This was a mighty
assault, yet is she not dashed for all that. On the contrary the strength of
her faith does kyth the more, in greater servencie and greater devotion, for
now she runes before him, and falls down at his feet, worshippeh him
acknowledges her own unworthiness, and his infinite excellency, and withal
renews her petition, saying, LORD help me. Her faith wisly passes by the
words of our Savior, she gives not a direct answer to the^, but still
inforceth her suit, as if she would have said, O LORD, I cannot reason with
thee, I cannot answer thee one of a thousand, thy Words are above my reach. Yet
one thing I know and believe, that thou art the Savior of the world, who came
for them that are miserable and lost, and such an one I am, therefore LORD,
help me. Let them be affraied of these thy Words, who seek the not, but as for
me I seek thee, and will not leave thee, until thou have mercy upon me, and
sure I am, thou not only may, but will do it, howsoever thou hide thy Love for
the time.

Here we may learn, 16. How we should imitate her.
how to encounter with a dangerous temptation which sometimes is suggested unto
men, namely that they are none of those whom God has chosen, or upon whom he
has set his LOVE, and to whom his special Care belongs. If Satan assault
thee this way, do as this woman did, go thou and fall down at the Feet of
Christ to worship him, and lay, LORD help me. Search not into the deep mis^ery
of Gods Predestination, which thou art not able to wade through, secret things
belong to God, and things that are revealed to us. say thou therefore to him, O
LORD thou have revealed, that thou came To seek and save that which is lost,
and that thou willest not the death of sinners, I am a sinner and I am lost, O
LORD, therefore have mercy upon me and help me. Say or do what thou will, I
will never depart from thee till thou bless me. Now let us here the answer of
our Savior to the woman's renewed petition. 17. The third assault of her Faith.


Suffer The children to be first satisfied, said our Savior unto her, as it is
in S. Mark, For it is not good to take the bread of the children, and to cast
it unto dogs. What I pray you could seem more harsk then this? he represents
her unworhines unto her in respect of the Jews, to whom, he said before, he was
sent. He calls them children and her a dog, and insinuates that suppose she
were to get any help from him, yet was it not to be expected at this time, since
the children were not yet satisfied, whose bread ought not to be casten unto
the dogs. This was the third comptation and a mighty one. She looked for a
gracious acceptance at the first; and yet finds herself still rejected, and
that with a reproach in end, yet her faith is so far from being broken with
this, that the vigor and strength of it still increased. A little flame is soon
quenched, but a great fire the more it is opposed becomes the more violent: so
a strong and lively faith, overcomes al impediments, and makes a man to say
with Job, although the LORD should slay me, yet I will trust in him.

Hence this woman claspeth yet faster to her Savior and his Mercies. Truth
LORD, said she, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters
table. 18. Her victory over it
Strange! and wonderful words full of humility, modesty, faith, and wisdom.
Humility for she acknowledges herself to be a dog, as she was called.
Modesty, for she expresses only what is due to dogs, not inferring what was
due to herself, but leaving that to be inferred by our LORD. Her faith also
shines in these words for she professes that she believed the miraculous
deliverance of her daughter to be but as it were a crumbe, in respect of these
great things which his Mercy could give. Her wisdom also, appears greatly in
these words, for she takes advantage of our Savior his own words, and uses
that as a most pregnant argument to persuade him, which he used as an argument
to repel her, as if she would have said, O LORD, thou call me a dog, and I
confess that in truth it is so: but in the mean time, even dogs have liberty
to eat of the crumbs that fall from the tables of their masters. this is all I
ask. I take not upon me to sit down at the table, nor to take a way the bread
of the children. That which I desire is but as it were a crumbe in respect of
these great miracles, which thou have done and can do for the Jews that are the
children. Neither can they be justly offended that this crumbe is cast to me
though a dog, since I am in such extreme necessity.

Thus ye see how strongly she wrestleth with God, 19. Joincture of humility
and confidence necessary.
and that with the arms of humility and confidence, which are most fruitfully
always joined together, for confidence without humility, leads to
presumption, and humility without confidence, leads to despair. Hence we may
learn how to behave our selves in the like temptation. Sometimes our troubled
conscience represents unto us the greatness of our unworthiness. It tells
us that notwithstanding of so many favors bestowed by God upon us, yet we have
turned with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the mire again; and
therefore are unworthie to be any more regarded by him. In this case; we should
in all humility acknowledge our unworthiness, and say with the Prodigal
sone, I have sinned against the heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy sone, make me but as one of thy servants. Yea and with this
woman should confess that it is well for us if we be admitted to the least
crumbe of Mercy. On the other part, we should with confidence cleave fast to
God, being persuaded that he will not deny us a crumbe of Mercy, and that one
cru^be being granted will relieve us. For were our sins never so great, yet
are they nothing as it were in respect of the infinite Mercy of God. When a
king says CHRISOST. upon 51. Psalm. Though he be but a man as we are,
commands a malefactor to be set at liberty, the governor, the jaylour, the
authority of the laws cannot hold him in. how much more is the King of kings,
who has absolute Power both of men and Angels* able to deliver us not only
from punishment, but also from the bonds and chains of our sin. Thus we have
seen the wrestling of this woman, now let us behold her victory.

O woman says our LORD, 20. her praise
Great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. He cannot longer
conceal his Love and affection and therefore breaks out in words of Praise
and admiration, signifying that his former silence and refusels proceeded not
from want of love which was so great in him that with great difficulty he had
hid it till now. Great is thy faith says he. Thy faith is not common nor
ordinary but singular and great; GREAT in respect of the great things which
thou beleevest of me. Great in respect of the invincible strength and firmnes
of it. Great in respect of the small means of faith which thou have had. Thou
have not seen me cure the leprous, open the eyes of the blind, or raise the
dead, and yet beleevest so firmly so great things of me. Be it therefore unto
thee as thou will. This great faith of thine is not only able to obtain this
benefit which thou ask, but also whatsoever thou will. Thus ye see her
difficult sight ends in a sweet and glorious victory, 21. Why God delays to
answer his saints.
the vehement tempest wherewith she was tossed, ends in a most pleasant calm
and tranquillity.

Hence we may perceive first, that God hides himself from his own, though
vehemently crying upon him, not for any want of Love and care, but for his
greater Glory, and their greater Good. Wherefore did he so much reserve himself
from this woman, but that the Glory of his Grace wrought in her, might appear
the more, that he might draw forth the treasure which was hid in her heart, and
that the trial of her faith being much more precious then that of gold which
perishes, might be found to Praise, and Honor, and Glory both in this world,
and also at his appearing. Hence where ever the Gospel has been, or shall be
preached from the east to the west, from the south to the north, this woman and
her great faith shall be praised and commended. So does he often with other
his saints. He answers them not, for a time, that their virtues being
exercised, may be tried and perfected, and that they may rejoice the more and
be the more thankful for his Favors, when after long delay they are obtained.
With them that are weak, He deals often as with them that are infants, giving
them their petitions at the first, whileas for the former reasons he exercises
them long and hardly, who have greater Strength and soliditie of Grace. Grudge
not therefore at the delay of GOD his gracious Answer, but be assured that his
time is always most fit and most convenient.

Secondly, 22. The power of Prayer.
We may perceive here the wonderful power of Prayer when it is rightly
qualified. It obtains that from God which for greater reasons would seem
should be denied. It makes him in a manner to change his sentence, and so
wrestleth with him that is invincible, that it prevails with him. The
scripture is full of examples. MOSES had the Egyptians behind him, and the red
sea before him: he cried to GOD, and the sea was devyded, so that the children
of Israel went through as if it had been dry land. Hezik^ah spread the
blasphemous letter of Senacherib before the LORD and prayed unto him, And the
Angel of the LORD smote 185000, of the enemies. Neither should we think but
many wonderful things are and shall be still obtained by Prayer. If we knew
all the passages of GODS Providence throughout the world, this would be evident
unto us. I mean not that men should now expect miracles, but this I say, If it
be fit for us to obtain the thing prayed for, GOD will give it although
miraculously, and so has he often also done. I shall give you but one example
which S. AUGUSTINE in the 22. of his books of the City of God 8. chap. says,
he was an eye witness of, and therefore we have no reason to distrust it there
he reports, That a man of good worth in Carthage having received him into his
house, being then but young and newly come from Millane, had fallen into a
grievous disease. Once he is cutted by the advice of the Physicians, yet
something escaped them, which again renewed the corruption. The Physicians
being again consulted, assure him he could not live, unless that part were
cutted anew. This bred an exceeding grief to him, wishing rather to die then to
endure such an intolerable pain. Always in end he condescended to it, and
the day is appointed. The night preceding it, AURELIAN Bishop of Carthage and
other pastors come to visit him. They pray for him, who joined with them in
most fervent and devote prayer. Therefore he entreats them to return to
morrow and to recommend him to GOD. Accordingly then they come and pray. The
Prayer being ended, the Physicians look to the part being to use their cure,
But there they found all to be whole and sound.

But ye will say to me, 23. how prayers are not heard, for want of the sense of
our misery spiritual.
whence comes it then to pass, that our prayers have so small effect? I
answer, we pray not aright and therefore find not the wished fruit of our
prayers. We follow not this patron which is proposed unto us. She cried and
prayed fervently being sensible of her great distres, but our prayers have no
life in them, and that because we have not a due sense and feeling of our
misery which is far greater then hers. But you will say to me, there is none
of us (blessed be God) vexed with a devil, and how the^ can we be in such or a
worse estate then she was? The answer is easy, for first, the devil vexed but
the body of her daughter, and amongst us many have their souls fully subjected
to his power through grievous sins. Sin is a great devil says CHRISOST.
writting upon this place, at least it is an argument of his presence in a most
woeful manner. The bodies of good men and women may be vexed with Satan: and
that makes them to be but the objects of pity, but when sin reigns in the
soul, men are wicked; and the objects of the wrath and Hatred of GOD. Now how
much the devil prevails by sin, and holds men captive at his pleasure,
the great abominations of this land and city do plainly testify, the Love and
Fear of God is not in the hearts of men, his Name is profaned, his Sabbaths
are violated, Superioures are disobeyed, the hearts of men are full of hatred
and malice, every place is polluted, with whooredome, falsehood and oppression,
lies and slanders abound. What a strange power then has Satan gotten over us?
if there be any sense in us, how great reason have we to mourn and sigh for all
our own sins, and for all the sins and abominations done in the midst of
this land.

Secondly we have great reason to fear that Satan and his instruments shall get
power over our bodies and estates. 24. For want of the sense of our misery
worldly.
When I pray you is the devil more loosed in this kind then in the time of
wars? If at any time, his Throue is then set up: for then the exercise of
religion is banished or much hindered, Justice has no place, the authority of
laws is contemned. Men give themselves to uncleannes, to drunkenness, to the
oppression of the weak and poor, The bodies of men are murdered, their means
are spoiled. This is one of the most terrible Plagues of GOD, whereto David
preferred the pestilence. Now this we justly fear, and have we not reason then
out of the deep sense of so great an evil to cry unto God mightily; this woman
cried vehemently for one, but among us many thousands are in danger.

Secondly, Her prayer proceeded from a true and lively faith, whereby her heart
was purged from her former sins, 25. For want of amendment of life.
and now set wholly upon God. But alace we continue still in our iniquities,
and what wonder then that our prayers are not heard. Would we have God to do
our will, when we rebel against his most Holy Will? Though ye multiply your
prayers I will not hear, says the LORD, when ye spread out your hands, I will
hide my face, because your hands are full of blood. And again, Is this the fast
that I have required, for a man to hang down his head as a bulrush? is not this
the fast that I have required to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the
heavy buedens, and to let the oppressed go free? Isai. 58. Hence it is, that
our manifold humiliations and prayers bring not forth the desired fruit. Some
will acknowledge their sins, and promise to amend them, but in the mean time
bring forth no fruits worthy of amendment of life. Some will not so much as
acknowledge their own sins, but stand still in the maintenance thereof. We
read Jeremiah the 42. and 43. that IOHANAN and the remnant of the Jews that
were with him after the destruction of Jerusalem desired JEREMIAH to pray to
God for them, and promised to obey the Word of the LORD whatsomever it was.
JEREMIAH did, so and brought him back this answer, That if they would stay in
the land of Judea, it should be well with them and that they needed not fear the
king of the Caldeans, of who^ they were affraied for the slaughter of Gedaliah,
for God would incline his Heart to favor them. whereas if on the other part,
They would go down to Egypt as they intended, They should perish by the famine,
by the sword, and by the pestilonce. IOHANAN and the rest of the proud men
having heard this which was contrary to their humor replied, That this which he
said was false, and that the LORD had not spoken so, but that BARUCH the son
of NERIAH did set him upon them, to persuade them to stay in the land, that
they might be delivered into the hand of the Caldeans. Even so it fares with
many: They promise indeed to obey the Word of the LORD, but when the Word of
the LORD is told them, if it cross their intentions and desires, they say it
is not the Word of the LORD, and so continue in their evil courses. No wonder
then that GOD hear not their prayers, not the prayers of others for them. If
we would be heard, we must wash our hearts from wickedness, and put away our
vain thoughts from us, and as we said before, most still continue knocking at
the door of Gods Mercy. This if we do, we may be sure God in end will give us
a comfortable answer; which the LORD grant, and that for the Merits of Christ
to whom etc.

A SERMON UPON the XVIII Chapter of S. MATTHEW.
Verse. 18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind one earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.
OUr blessed Savior having declared in the words preceding, 1. Intenti^^^^
in what manner, a sinner that is obstenate and disobedient to the voice of the
Church is to be dealt with; Namly, that he should be accounted as an heathen and
as a publican. He now in the words that I have read, shows what is the
efficacy and power of the Sentenco of the Church, even that it is no less,
then if it were pronounced in heaven, and by GOD Himself. A man rejected by the
Church, and ordained to be accounted as an heathen, and a Publican, might have
thought within himself: what albeit such or such men esteems so of me, if they
misregard me, and account of me as of an heathen or publican, I shall do the
like to them, and shall as much disesteeme them. No says our Savior, it is
not only their bare sentence and esteem, that is to be looked too. That which
they do rightly in this kind is ratified, confirmed and allowed by God in
heaven. And he that will despise them, must despise GOD and Heaven, and
therefore they against whom this Sentence of the Church is pronounced, are not
only liable to the contempt and disesteeme of men, but also to the Judgment
and Condemnation of GOD, for says our Savior, Verily, I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven.

The words ye see, 2 The promise made to all the Apostles.
contain a promise. Therefore we shall shortly first consider to whom this
promise is made. Secondly, we shall consider the promise it self. for the
first, it is to be observed that the promise is made not to one of the Apostles
but to all, for it is said in the plural number, Whatsomever ye shall bind
etc. in the 16. of S. Matthew. Our Savior says particularly to S. Peter, to
thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsomever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. But here that same power is
expressly promised to all the Apostles, and was accordingly performed in the 20
of S. Joh. when our Savior says to all the Apostles, and not only to S. Peter;
A^ my father sent me, so send I you, receave the holy Ghost; whose sins ye
remitt, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. It
is manifest therefore, that nothing more was promised or given to S. Peter,
then to the rest of the Apostleis It is true, that some do affirm that the
keys promised to S. Peter imports a greater power, then is this of binding
and loosing: but Cardinal BELLAR, in his first book of the bishop of Rome and
12. chap. rejects this conceat as new and unheard of, and affirms that the
full and perfect effect of the keys is to bind and loose. The power and
authority promised, says he, is expressed by the keys, and the use thereof
by binding and loosing, which our Savior sets forth in these terms, to
show that the power expressed by the keys, rather then by opening and
shutting, is in borrowed terms: and that heaven is opened or shute, when men
are loosed from their sins or bound therein. So the Iesuet Maldonat writting
upon the 16. of S. Matthew, says, that the power of opening and shutting
heaven, is Mataphorically expressed by the keys, and the same power, says
he, is thereafter declared by another Metaphor of binding and loosing. Thus it
is clear, that as all the rest were equal unto S. Peter, in the power of
binding and loosing. So were they equal to him in the power of the keys, and
therefore S. Hilarie in the 6. book of the Trinity, says of all, O holy and
blessed men, who did obtain the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and power to
bind both in heaven and in earth. 3. And to their Successors.


Secondly, It is to be observed, that this power of binding and loosing, was
promised to the Apostles, not as a personal privilege which was to die with
them. It was appointed and given by our Savior for the benefice of his Church
unto the worlds end, and without it his Church had not been sufficiently
provided of helps necessary for the preservation of it, as we shall see
hereafter. This power therefore was promised to the Apostles, as they were
pastors of the Church, and to their successors in that office, even to them, to
whom the Ministry of reconsiliation ordinarily belongs; whence this power has
ever been exercised by them in the Church of Christ, as may appear by the
innumerable examples, and canons of the christian Church. But we come now to
the promise it self. 4. What should be bound.


Whatsoever (says our Savior) ye bind etc. First when he says that
Whatsoever they bind shall be bound in heaven, he means not that he was to
give the Apostles or their successors an absolute power to do in this
whatsoever pleased the^. No he sent them as he was sent, in his own vice, and
stead, to bind such as he will have to be bound, and to loose such as he would
have to be loosed. In this he has not left them to their own judgment, but
will have the^ to follow his direction set down in his word, he will have them
rightly to use and govern the keys, and if they do that, his promise is, that
whatsoever they bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. etc.

Secondly, 5. A man is bound by his own sin.
The thing whereto the promise is made, is their binding and loosing upon
earth, Whatsoever ye bind etc. For clearing of this consider; that a sinner is
bound by his own sin, before any sentence of the Church be pronounced against
him. He is bound first by it in so far as being overcome by his own corruption,
he is made the servant thereof, unable to do good or eschew evil. Secondly,
he is bound by his sin with the guiltines of eternal death and condemnation.
Hence sinners in scripture, are so often compared to prisoners and captives,
and the effect of Christ his grace, is called a deleverance from this
Captivity. But this is not the Bond that is meaned here, for it is not the
Church but the sinner himself, that binds himself in this kind.

There are some who think that this loosing of the Church, 6. To loose is not
to preach.
is nothing else, but the preaching of the Gospel, and that the power to loose,
is only a power to preach the Gospel. This Exposition cannot stand, for first
the seaventie disciples received a power to teach the gospel. Luke 10. but
they had not the power to bind and loose, which was given to the Apostles, and
not to them.

Secondly, The Apostles had the power of preaching given to them long before
this time, as we may see Matthew. 10. Thirdly, A man may be well taught, and yet
not loosed from his sins, and on the contrary, many are not bound in this
manner that our Savior speaks of, who are not taught as all these who are
without the Church, to whom the power of the keys extends not. 7. The power
of binding and loosing is not only declarati^^.


There are others who think, that to bind and loose here, is nothing else, but
to declare that a man's sins are bound or loosed by God. But first, this
agrees not with the words of our Savior, who says not, Whose sins ye
declare to be bound, shall be bound, but Whatsoever ye bind, shall be bound;
so JOHN. 20. he says, Whose sins ye retain, are retained, and whose
sins ye forgive, they are forgiven, and in the 16 of S. Matthew, he promises
this Power under the name of the keys, as we said, now if a man had only power
to declare a door to be opened that was open before, or a man to be loosed
that was loose before, how could he be said truly to have the keys of the
house? or to have the power of binding and loosing? such a man certainly, if it
were thus, it should not be so much pastors as sinners themselves, who should
have the keys of heaven, and the power to bind and loose. Secondly, suppose
it had been the mind of our Savior, to give a true and proper Power of
opening and shutting heaven, of binding and loosing sinners, of retaining and
forgiving sins, how could he have expressed it more fully then in the terms
which he has used, To the will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
whatsoever ye bind on earth, it shall be bound in Heaven etc. Whose sins
soever ye retain, they shall be retained etc. Thirdly, the manner of our
Saviors speech, when he promised this Power, which is with a serious and
vehement attestation, Verily I say unto you, and the ceremony used at the
performance of it, which was by breathing on them, with these words, receive
the holy Ghost, these circumstances I say do show, that our Savior intended to
give, and did actually give a greater power, then is that of declaring a thing
to be, which already is. beside the Repentance of men is a thing, which pastors
cannot perfectly know, and therefore they cannot certainly declare a man to be
loosed from sin. For these and other reasons I make no doubt, that the Power
promised here by our Savior, is not barely a declarative, but also an
effectual Power, which works some effect upon men. So the holy Fathers have
understood this. CHRISOST. in his 3. book of the priesthood says that Christ
has given to men that are upon earth a power to dispose of things that are in
heaven. This Power says he, he has not given to the angels or A^changels for
to whom of them has he said, to the will I give the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth etc. Earthly kings. says he,
have power to bind and loose also, but their power extends to the bodies of
men only, whereas this Power reaches unto the soul and unto heaven. That which
the servant does here beneath, the LORD confirms above, and the LORD in a
manner denizeth to follow the servant, the binding on earth, being prior (at
least in order of nature) to the binding in heaven, and the loosing on earth,
being before the loosing in heaven. So writting upon the 20 of S. John, on
these words, Whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained; he says, that
our Savior endued his Apostles with such a Power, as a king gives to
governors under him, when he gives them power to cast into prison, and to
take out of it, and writting upon these words, To thee will I give the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 16. he says that Christ has given to a
mortal man the Power of all things that are in heaven, for this cause our
Savior adds here these words, on earth whatsoever ye bind. (On earth) To
what purpose is this aded? but to signify the amplitude and greatness of his
Power, and that how soever it be done by earthly men, yet it shall have an
authority and force of a sentence and law in heaven, as if a mighty Emperor
would say to one whom he much trusted, and to whom he had given a most ample
commission, Whatsoever thou will do in the remotest parts of my dominion. I
shall allow and ratify it. The farrer that servants are from their Masters they
use to take to themselves the greater liberty, and it is a token of great trust
in the master, when he commits power to them in such a case. Thus we see
that Pastors have properly a power to bind and loose sinners, let us now
consider more particularly in what manner they do bind and loose, and how
their binding and loosing is accompanied with binding and loosing in heaven.

The Bond wherewith Pastors by virtue of the keys do bind sinners, is
directly and immediately an ecclesiastical bond, exercised about sinue, as it
as an offense of the Church. 8. What is the binding and loosing of the church
So their loosing is directly and immediately an untying and loosing of that
ecclesiastical bond, wherewith they have bound a sinner, whence of necessity
their binding most go before their loosing, in this kind they can loose
nothing this way, but that which before they have bound. But how then ye will
say does their binding or loosing reach to a man's sin, as it is an offense
of God? I Ans. This is not but mediatly and indirectly, in so far as they do
such a thing; upon the doing whereof, Christ has promised to bind or loose
the sins of a man. The like we have in haptisme, wherein sin is taken away,
if he that is baptized put no impediment, all that the minister does, is but a
washing of the body, and an incalling of the blessed Trinity, yet this Action
as an instrument or condition, carries with it the remission of sin, and
purging of the soul: So in the matter that we have in hand the pastor binds
the person guilty with an ecclesiastical bond, directly, and again loses
that same bond by ecclesiastical absolution or reconciliation, yet by virtue
of Christ's promise set down in these words, upon the doing of this, GOD in
heaven does bind or loose the sins of such a man. Thus we see how God not
only principally, but also alone immediately takes away sin, for the minister
only performs an ecclesiastical action, upon the doing whereof, GOD by
virtue of his own Promise, takes away the sin of such a man.

Secondly, 9. It consists in exco^mie nication.
Ye may ask wherein this ecclesiastical bond consists, I answer, it
stands in a certain excommunication whereby a grievous offender is separated
in whole or in part from the Church of Christ, and from the society of the
faithful, and according the loosing opposed hereunto consists in the
reconciliation of such an one to the Church or in giving him the peace thereof,
whence our Savior said in the preceding words, If he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee, as a heathen or a^ a Publican. 10. The lesser
excommunication.


This excommunication is of two sorts, the one is called the lesser
excommunication, the other is called the greater. In that a man is bound for
some grievous offense by debarring him from the society of the faithful in
some things, especially in the participation of the blessed mysteries of the
body and blood of out LORD, and by imposing of the works of penance and
humiliation, this is called a ponetentiall and medeoinall excommunication,
because the chief end of it, is to cure him that has sinned, from that
disease, wherein he has fallen. This kind of binding we use toward grievous
sinners, who submite themselves to the direction of the Church, and in the
ancient Church, it was used with great vigor and severitie. In the first 300
years, when the devotion of Christians was fervent, and their purity great,
men were not ordinarily admitted to this outward repentance, till for a long
time, with many tears, and with great tokens of unfeigned forrow, they had
earnestly entreated to be admitted in the number of public penitents. when
that was granted, then they were not immediately received to their public
repentance, but were thrust down, as it were, first to the degree of the
catechumeny, or those who were yet unbaptised, and did but learn the mysteries
of the christian religion, and in this degree they were called hearers, because
of new they were again instructed the mysteries of christian religion. For it
was presumed, that they who had so grievously fallen, had never rightly learned
these heavenly mysteries, and therefore were taught again, especially
concerning the terror of GODS Judgments against sin, that they might the
more willingly undergo what was enjoined them. This done they were received to
their repentance, wherein for diverse years, sometimes for seven, more or less
according to the greatness of their offense, they were exercised with most
laborious works of humiliation and mortification. TERTUL. in the 9, chap. of
his book of repentance says, That they did humble themselves in sackcloth and
ashes, they did lie prostrat upon the ground, they did nowrish their prayers
with fasting, they did weep and mourn and cry to GOD, and did humbly beseech
pastors and all faithful people, to pray for them. S. CYPRIAN, speaking of
this same matter, says to them that had fallen, That it behoved them to pray
earnestly, to pass over the day in sorrow, to spend over the nights in
mourning and tears, to humble themselves in sackcloth and ashes, to despise
the garment of the body, since they had cast away the garment of Christ, and to
despise the food of the body, since they had eaten at the table of the devil,
they thought not that such works of humiliation could merit any thing at the
hand of GOD, but they were enjoined as means appointed by GOD to promove
unfeigned sorrow and detestation of their sin, which men after great faults
especially, do not ordinarily attain unto, without those exercises of fasting,
prayer and humiliation. They were enjoined as means of mortifying those carnal
lusts, whereby they had been stirred up, or whereby thereafter they might be
stirred up to offend God, and as expressions of their sorrow for their sins,
and just indignation against themselves because of their sins, that so God
through Christ might be moved to have pity upon them, that good christians
might be assured of their unfeigned conversion, and that all who did behold
might be edified by their good example, as they had been before offended by
their fall. When all this was done, they were not yet admitted to the
participation of the holy sacrament of the Body and Blood of our LORD, but
after a good space of time, wherein they had given full proof of the truth
and sincerity of their conversion.

Neither was it only those of the meaner sort who did subject themselves to
these ecclesiastical bonds, 11 Imperour^ subjected to it.
two christian Emperors submitted themselves thereunto. The first was Philip,
the first christian Emperor, of whom ye may read in the sixth book of Eusebius
his ecclesiastical history, That when he would have come to the participation
of the holy mysteries, the bishop (to wit Fabianus) debarred him refusing to
admit him thereunto, because of his loud life, till he had made satisfaction by
public repentance, which he yielded unto. The second was the glorious Emperor
Theodosius. He, as ye may read in the 5 book of Theodoret, his ecclesiastical
history 17. chap. after a great murder committed at Thessalonio^ by a rash
commandment of his, being come to Millane, where S. Ambrose was bishop, and
intending to enter into the Church and communicate, was encountered by S. Awbrose
without the Church, who freely told him of the grievousnes of his sin, and
that though he was an Emperor, yet was subject to him who is the LORD of
heaven and earth, and that those whom he had killed were partakers of that same
nature with him, and made according to the Image of GOD as well as he. With what
eyes says he can thou behold this temple, or how can thou trade upon this holy
ground? how can thou stretch out these hands embrued with blood, or open that
mouth, which has commanded so much innocent blood to be shed, to receive the
sacred Body and Blood of Christ? depart therefore, said he, and add not a new
sin unto thy former sin, but accept of these bonds, wherewith he that is
LORD over all has commanded thee to be bound: for these bonds have a power to
put away the disease, and to restore health unto thee again. The good Emperor
hearkened unto him, and returning did give himself to mourning and humiliation;
after he had been excercised thus eight months, the feast of the nativitie of
our Saivour was come, in which he begane most grievously to mourn and weep,
being demanded of one of his chief courteours Ruffinus, why he did so, alace,
said he, you understand not the evils wherein I am. Servants and beggars have
access to the House of GOD, but I am debarred both from the Church and Heaven.
For I remember that sentence of our Savior, Whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. Afterward when he was admitted by S. Ambrose,
the historian says, That when he entered into the Church he did not stand nor
kneel praying, but that he did fall down upon the ground saying these words of
DAVID, My soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according unto thy word,
and began to strick his face, and to rive his hair, and to water the ground
with his tears. If so great and so glorious an Emperor disdained not in such
a manner to submitt himself to ecclesiastical censure, is it not strange, that
every one almost now, who is any thing in their own eyes, disdaineth to embrace
this remedy which Christ has appointed for grievous offenders. S. AUGUST.
speaking of this purpose says in the 49. Sermon of his book of fifty homiles,
Let no man say, I will transact secretly betwixt God and my self, I shall have
sorrow in mine heart etc. Then says he, The keys of the kingdom of heaven
were given in vain, and in vain it was said, whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven. Shall a Senator, says he, be ashamed to do that,
which the Emperor Theodosius did? shall a craftsman or a merchant be ashamed
to do that, which so glorious an Emperor did? I come now to the other sort of
excommunication whereby men are bound.

This is the greater excommunication, which is a most fearful and dreadful
anathema and eurse. 12. The great excommunication.
By it a man is wholly separated from the communion of the faithful in
meetings, in prayers, and in all other sacred fellowship. such an one is fully
cast out of the Church, and cut off from the body of Christ, as a rotten and
corrupt member, by reason whereof, he is subjected to unspeakable evils. For if
he be so cut off from Christ's Body. he can no more be partaker (while he is in
that estate) of the vital and saving influence which comes from Christ the
HEAD. Being separate from the Body of Christ, he can no more have his Spirit,
then a member of the body cut off from the rest, can be quickened with that
soul, which gives life to the rest of the body, and if a man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is not his. Such an one is no more partaker of the
intercession and prayers of the Church, and of the blessings, which thereby are
plentifully obtained to those that are within it. In a word, such an one is
left to himself as a wretched and forlorn creature, destitute of the presence,
assistance, and protection, which God graciously gives to his Church, and to
the Members thereof; and wherewith he covers it, as it were, as the cloud did
the tabernacle, and so is exposed to the will and the fury of the devil, as a
sheep without a shepherd to the Wolf, for the kingdom of the devil is
especially without the Church of God; There he rules and reigns in the
children of disobedience. Hence, according to the judgment of many, such are
said, 1. Cor. 5. To be delivered over unto Satan; albeit, it be true also, that
in the Primitive Church, for the greater terror of disobedient persons, who
suffered themselves to be excommunicat^; Diverse of them were given over to
Satan as to an Executioner, to have their bodies afflicted by him. So some
think that the incestuous Corinthian 1. Cor. 5. was not only excommunicated,
but also delivered to the Devil to be afflicted bodily, and so they think also
of Alexander and Hymeneus of whom S. PAUL says, 1. Tim. 1. That he had
delivered them to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. This is the
most dreadful sentence of the Church, which Christ promises here to ratify
and confirm in heaven. It were better for a man, says Augustine in his first
book, against the Adversaries of the Law and Prophets and 17 Chapter, that he
were stoned to death, or killed with the sword, or torn with the teeth of
beasts, then to be stricken with this sentence. He that is bound this way,
says he, is bound with more grievous and terrible bonds, then if they were of
iron and adamant.

The principal Intention of the Church, is not to reclaim the person guilty
in this Excommunication, for it is exercised against such, 13. Equity of it.
who are incorrigeable and refuse to hear the voice of the Church. It is true,
the reclaiming of such an one is secondarlie intended, for he is separate from
the society of good Christians, that he may be ashamed: that so he may come in
end to a sense of his own sin; but the maine intention of the Church is, to
purge it self from such rotten and infecting Members, which obstinatly go on in
an evil course, and there is none but may see that this proceeding is full of
equity, if a member of the body be corrupted, and the rest of the body in
danger to be infected thereby, it must needs be cut off. In all well governed
Cities, Leprous persons and those that are infected with the Plague at
separated from others; in a word, Those that are obstinatly disobedient and
refractarie in any well governed society, or at least cast out of that society:
and is it not reason, that they who are disobedient to the voice of the Church,
who are ready to infect others with an infection that tends to everlasting
death, be removed and debarred from the fellowship of the faithful.

Hence ye may observe first, 14. A reason of delaying the sentence.
what is the reason that we so slowly proceed to the pronouncing of this
sentence of excommunication, against those that are disobedient to the voice of
the Church. Some that have zeal but without sufficient knowledge accuse us for
this as negligent, or favoring the errors of those persons. God knows we
detaste their errors, and that the true cause of out leasurlie proceeding is,
that knowledge which we have of the terror and dreadfulnesse of this sentence.
A physician will use all means to cure a diseased part of the body, before he
proceed to the cutting it off, and when he is forced to do that, he will not do
it but with grief and sorrow. It is reported of the Emperor Titus, who was
called the delight of mankind, that even at the just executions of malefactors
he used to sigh and monrue. Though Absalom had rebelled against his father
David, and would have taken from him both his crown and his life, yet when his
army went out against him, he said, Deal gently with the young man, and when
he heard that he was killed, he cried out, O Absalom, Absalom, my son, Absalom,
would God I had died for thee, and yet the love of spiritual father ought to be
greater toward their children, then the love of any carnal father can be, as
CHRIS. observes. Is it any wonder then that we are loath to cut any off by the
terrible and dreadful sentence of excommunication, and to deliver them to
Satan the enemy of man's salvation, especially, since we are taught by the
Apostle 2. Tim. 2. That the servant of the LORD should he gentle, and patient
in meeknes instructing them that are contrary minded, if GOD will give them
repentance, to the acknowledgement of the truth, that they may escape out of
the snares of the devil, who holds them captive at his will.

Secondly, 15 Woeful estate of the excommunicat.
Ye may perceive hence, how woeful and lamentable is the state of those
persons, who by their obstinate disobedience to the voice of the Church, draw
upon themselves this fearful and terrible sentence. It is not without cause
that such are compared by an ancient writter to those that are mad. Mad
persons, though they be most strongly bound, yet they esteem nothing of their
bonds, for they are not sensible of their own misery: so is it with those of
whom I speak. They contemn all that is done to them in this kind, and yet in
the mean time they are bound both in earth and heaven, by GOD and by man.
Would God that their eyes were opened, that they might see the miserable estate
of their own souls, which are fertered with most strong chains, that will draw
them unto eternal condemnation, Heaven and Earth may pass away, but this Word
of our LORD shall stand firm. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven. Let them not therefore flatter themselves with this, that they see not
now the visible judgments of God immediately ceasing upon men and women, that
they see not their bodies afflicted by the devil, or any such thing. GOD is a
Patient and Longsuffering GOD, but in end recompenseth the delay of punishment
with the weight of it, if we despise his Goodness, and by so doing, Treasure
up wrath to our selves against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous Judgment of GOD.

Lastly, 16. Duty of christian people toward the^
I beseech you all to remember that it is your duty to esteem those to be
bound both by GOD and by his Servants, whom we do bind by this fearful
sentence of excommunication, and to carry your selves toward the^, as if they
were heathens and publicane. So is the Commandment of our Savior urged again
and again by the Blessed Apostles, who requires that we withdraw our selves
from such persons. In the ancient Church they did so shune the company of
persons excommunicat, that scarce they would abide to look upon them, let be to
speak with them. Alace, it is a pity to see the company of excommunicat
persons so much haunted, as it is by some among you. This is to transgress the
express Commandment of God, this is to disappoint the Gracious Intention of
GOD, which is, that such Persons may be ashamed of their sin, yea this is to
confirm and barden them into their sin, and to make your selves partakers
thereof. I beseech you therefore to esteem such as we cast out, to be indeed
cast out of the society of the faithful, and unworthy with whom good
Christians should converse. The LORD imprint these things in our hearts, and
that for the merits of Christ to whom etc.

THE FIRST SERMON Upon the XII. Chapter of LUKE.
Verse. 15. And he said unto them; Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a
man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
Verse. 16. And he spoke a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully. Verse. 17. And he thought within himself,
saying, what shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?
Verse. 18. And he said, This will I do, I will pull down my barns and build
greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits, and my goods.
THere is no time of the year, wherein ye are more distracted about worldly
cares, then at this time. To the end therefore, that you exceed not due
measure. 1. Intention.
I thought good to present to your meditation these Words of our Savior,
wherein most powerfully he diswadeth from covetousness. First, ye have his
dehortation, Take heed and beware of covetousness. Secondly, it is enforced by
a pregnant reason, for the life of man etc. Thirdly, this reason is confirmed
and cleared by a most divine parable, where. in, to the life, is represented
the folly, wickedness and punishment of avarice. And he spoke unto them a
parable, saying. Let us return to the dehortation.

And he said unto them take heed etc. Before we consider the words; 2. Occasion.
ye are to understand that this dehortation was occasioned by the discord of
two brethren, of whom one came to our Savior, as ye may read in the
preceding words, desiring him to move his brother to divide the inheritance
with him. It was covetousness, which made the one to retain that part of the
inheritance which was not his own, and which made the other to have recourse to
our Savior, not for the health of his soul (as he should have done) but for
redress in his temporal estate. It made him more mindful of his patrimony in
earth, then of that which is in heaven. Hence our Savior takes occasion to
exhort him, and all these that were present, and in them us all, to take heed
and beware of covetousness.

Take heed and beware of covetousness. 3. Covetousness what.
This is the duty which he recommendeth. That which he wills us to beware of, is
covetousness. Elsewher it is called The love of money, but the word used here,
is more large, signifying, a desire and seeking after that which is more then
is needful and sufficient, whether in money, or houses, or lands etc. It is a
vice in defect contrary to liberality, whereby a man esteems, loves and
delights in earthly riches more then he ought; whence he exceeds just
measure, in retaining or acquiring of them. Thus one is guilty of this sin.
1. when against the tenth commandment, he coveteth that which is not his own,
or against the eight commandment violently or fraudulently takes it. 2. when
he sets his heart upon that, which is his own, and places his delight
therein: or, which follows thereupon niggardly, tetaineth it, when by justice,
or love, or mercy he is oblidged to co^municat it to others. This is the vice,
from which here our Savior diswadeth, neither says he simply, Be not
covetous, but;

Take heed and beware of it. 4. We must beware of covetousnes.
(Take heed) fore see, or consider, we cannot be aware, except by sound and
right judgment what is good and to be desired, what is necessary, and what
not. This he will have us to consider and weigh and with all that present
effect of covetousness among these brethren, and the like woeful effects,
which avarice brings forth. This is not enough, we must also beware. We must
carefully watch, and strongly guard our hearts, that this enemy get no
access. By this our LORD insinuates two things, first that covetousness is
insidious, next, that it is also a pernicious evil.

First, We must beware of it, because it is an insidious evil. It subtily
creeps into the heart of man. 5. Avarice insidious.
To this purpose it bath often the mask and the appearance of virtue. sometimes
it seems to be frugality, somtims justice, and pretends titles of just and
right. Thus easily it prevails with our earthly minds, and therefore almost
there is no vice so universal. it entered into the society of the holy
Apostles, and overthrew Judas there, amongst the primitive Christians, it
poisoned the heart of Ananias and Saphira: the courts of kings and the cottages
of poor men are easily tempted by it, as experience teaches.

Secondly, It is a most pernicious evil. S. PAUL 1. Tim. 6. says, The love of
money is the root of all evil; distrustful anxiety, lying, 6. Avarice a
pernicious evil.
fraud, perjury, thift, oppression, discord and murder spring from it, There
is nothing more wicked then a covetous may, says the wiseman Ecclesiast. 10.
9. for such an one will set his soul to sail. There is no law of man, no law of
God or nature, which it will not make men to trample under foot. That same
Apostle says, It is Idolatry. It makes a man to yield that honor to his
gold, which he owes to GOD. That he believes, that he trusts to, that he
delights in, to it he offers sacrifice upon the altar of covetousness.
Cursed is that altar, says CHRISOST. in his 18. homile upon the epist. to the
Ephesians. The sacrifices offered upon it, are the bodies and souls of men, if thou
go to the altars of pagan Idols, thou shall find the blood of sheep and oxen:
but the altar of avarice smoaketh with the blood of men. There the skin is
plucked from the flesh, and the flesh from the bones of the Poor, There their
flesh is eaten, and their bones brocken, and choped in pieces as for the Pot.
MICAH, 3. 3. On this alter a man often sacrifices himself. He kills his soul
with deadly wounds, and often his body. How many has it made to drown or
hang or steb themselves? no wonder therefore that the Apostle calls it the
serving of an Idol. They that serve it, may say to it, For thy Sake we are
killed all the day, as holy AUGUSTINE, marketh in his 100, sermon upon the
saints. Besides it is a vice almost incurable. The older men grow, it cleaves
the faster to them, when they are nearest to the earth and grave, they cover
often most for it, and cannot be satisfied, till their mouths be filled with
the gravel of it. Thus ye see, that it is not without cause, that our blessed
Savior so earnestly desires us to beware of so deadly a pest. If a physitia^
should say to thee beware of such an herb, it is poison, if thou but taste it,
thou art dead, thou would take heed to beware of it: Our heavenly Physician,
whose skill cannot be deceived, has recommended to us most earnestly to beware
of this weed of avarice, which of it own accord springs up in our hearts.
David was a man according to the heart of GOD, and yet he prays earnestly,
Incline mine heart to love thy testimonies and not to covetousness. Let us
therefore fear, and beware of it, if we love the health and life of our souls;
which that ye may the better do, we will proceed and consider our Saviors
reason which is;

For man's life consists not in the abundance of these things that he
possesses. The chief reason that moves men inordinatly to desire and covet
riches is, 7. Reason against covetousnes.
they think, that when they have gotten an abundance of them, they shall have a
happy and a joyful life. This our Savior plainly contradicts, stricking at
the very root of avarice, that the cause being taken away, this pernicious
effect may cease; As if he would say, It is not as men think, that when they
have abundance, they shall live, and live happily; it is not so, Man's life
consists not etc. The life of man, is neither the longer, nor the more
joyful because of the plenty of these things.

First, 8. Man's life consists no^ in abundance.
The life of man is not the longer for this, yea often it falls out, that it
is thereby shortened. Abundance often draws men to drunkenness and leachery:
which cutteth away innumerable in the midst of their days. It draws men
often to other grievous sins, for which God in his justice often depriveth
them of life. 2. It makes not the life more JOYFUL. The love of money, says
S. PAUL, is the root of all evil, which while some have followed after, they
have erred from the faith, and have pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. They that would be rich, says he, fall into temptation and a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men into destruction and
perdition. As avarice brings forth the evil of many sins, so the evil of
many sorrows. God has joined these two together, that the daughter may
scourge the mother. He has so disposed that the covetous heart is the
afflicter and tormenter of it self. Let the abundance of the covetous be what
it will, his covetousnes is a chain whereby the Devil draggs him through the
thorns of piercing cares, through the snares of temptations, through the
down-fals of error, deadly sin, and remorse of conscience. It makes a man
to loss the joys of heaven, and yet suffers him not to enjoy the good of
the earth, and so like Judas to be hanged, as it were, betwixt heaven and
earth. Achab and Jezebel thought that Naboths vineyard would have made their
life more happy, but indeed it was the way to poison it. It brought Achab
viole^tlie to his grave, and made the dogs to lick the blood of Jezebel.
Achan thought the Babylonish garment, the two hundredth shekels of silver, and
the Wedge, Josh. 7. would help to make a joyful life, but it made him to be
stoned to death, and all that he hade to be burnt with fire. Ananias and
Saphrya thought that a keeping back of a part of their moneys, would have
bettered their life, but it brought them to a sudden and fearful death. The
Two talents covered by Gehazi, brought him to Leprosy instead of happiness,
2. King. 5. Thus we see, that neither out life nor the joy of it, depends
from our means or plenty of them. It is not by bread that man does live, but
by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. It is the blessing of the
Lord, which both makes rich, and adds no sorrows with it. This shall
appear far more clear by the following Parable, which out Savior brings
for this same purpose, and therefore now we come unto it.

And he spoke unto them, saying, 9. The Parable.
etc. To confirm and clearc the former reason, our Savior brings a most
divine Parable or Similitude, because this may be more easily understood and
firmly retained. That which he teaches by it, is most necessary to all,
therefore he sets it down most perfectly, and after a manner most effectual
to persuade. First, ye have the outward and worldly estate of this Wretch. 2.
The disposition of his mind. 3. Gods judgment upon him for his covetousness
4. Our Saviors application. 1. His outward estate.

The field of a certain Rich-man brought forth plentifully. 10. God gives
temporal good things to the wicked,
Behold, here abundance of outward means; The Field of this man brought him
forth plenty of fruits according to his hearts desire. Was he the better or
the more happy for this? No, but worse and more miserable, as shall appear by
that which follows. It is demanded here by some of the Ancients considering
this place. Why God gives abundance to such men, whom he sees will not use it
aright, and to whom it will be occasion of greater condemnation? To this they
answer first, God does so out of his great goodness and bounty, which is
such, That he makes his sun to shine upon the good and the bade, and his
rain to fall upon the just and the unjust. And this his goodness does, that
he may draw them to repentance: For he delights not in the death of a sinner,
but would have all to turn and live. 2. He does this, that his Justice may
appear the more clearly in their condemnation, if they remain obstinate in
their impiety: for in that They have despised all his long suffering and
goodness, which should have lead them to repentance, appears that they are
the cause of their own perdition, and That they have treasured up wrath against
themselves, in the day of wrath, and of the revelation of his righteous
judgment. 3. Wicked men have sometimes some good, which God out of the
immensitie of his equity, will reward with temporal good things; As he
afflicts often his own servants for some evils that are in them, that being
purged therefrom, they may escape eternal punishment. 4. That we may know that
these earthly things are not much to be esteemed or desired, since God gives
them to his enemies, to them that hate and blaspheme him. 11. Gods Favor not
to be measured by earthly things.
Hade they the worth which many apprehend to be in them, he would not do so, He
will not cast pearls before dogs and swine, which he has forbidden us.

Here, by the way, we may observe, that we cannot judge of GODS Favor, or want
of it, by the abundance or scarcity of these earthly things. Many wicked abound
in them; and many of Gods dear servants are pinched, yea often the wicked have
greatest plenty, this way. It is well observed by Greg. That a physician when
he sees the state of his patient to be desperate, he cares not what he take,
he suffers him to have whatsoever his heart desires, but if he have good
hope of a man's health he puts him to a diet, and restrains him from many
things. So God cares not to let the wicked whose amendment is desperate,
glute themselves with the things of this world: but to his own saints and
children, he gives no more, or permits them to have no more nor he knows
is convenient for their eternal health. I come now to the disposition of this
man his mind.

And he thought within himself etc. I am richer now then before, 12. His
poverty and care.
but never a white the better, yea by abundance he became worse: as shall
appear by his disposition manifested here. This disposition of his heart our
Savior expresses, first by his consultation, next, by his resolution. His
consultation. And he thought within himself, saying, what shall I do etc. Where
first observe the poverty of this wealthy wretch. What shall I do? and I have
not; are the words of men that are in poverty and distress, as S. BASIL
writing upon these words marketh; and yet such are the words of this wretch.
Thus you see, his poverty increased with his riches. Observe 2. his anxietie
and SOLICITUDE, For what shall I do? is the expression of anxietie and care.
His abundance gives him not quietness and tranquillity of mind, but makes him
more anxious and perplexed. Who would not pity such a miserable man, says S.
BASIL, Miserable was he in that which he had, and more miserable in that which
he expected. The earth says he, has not brought forth fruits unto thee, but
sorrow, unxietie and cares to prick and sting thy heart like so many thorns.

Thirdly, Observe his wickedness and folly. That which he advised on, was where
to find room for his corns, he had so much of old stuff, 13. He cosults not
with mercy.
and so great an increase had newly sprung up unto him, that his barns were not
able to receive al. Being perplexed with this, he consulteth what to do, but he
consulted not with love and mercy or spiritual prudence, which would have soon
resolved him where to have bestowed his fruits, more securely and profitably,
then he did. Hade he consulted with love and mercy it would have told him,
there was many empty house, and hungry belly of the poor where he might have
bestowed a part of that which was superfluous to him, love would have taught
him quickly to have resolved thus, this I will do, I will satisfy the hungry
souls of the poor, I will open my barnes and supply their wants; as GOD has
dealt with me liberally, so I will make a magnificent PROCLAIMATION, Come unto
me all ye that are poor and indigent, and be partakers of that which GOD has
given bountifully unto me; He has opened unto me a fountain* and ye shall
drink of the streamt of it. 14. He co^sults not with spiritual prudence.


In like manner had he consulted with spiritual wisdom, it would have bidden
him, if he had loved his riches, lay them up in heaven, or at least, a part of
them: for they might have been preserved to eternity. It would have said unto
him, now thou will have a fair gain, thou may purchase things heavenly by
things earthly, and things that are permanent, with these that are transitory.
Lay up thy treasure, according to the Commandment of the most High, and it
shall profit thee more then gold, Shut up alms in thy storehouses, and it
shall deliver thee from all affliction, and it shall fight for thee against all
enemies, more then a mighty shield and spear. Ecclesiast. 29. But this covetous
wretch used not these COUNSELERS. He thought within himself, says our
Savior, he consulted not with GOD, with his law or servants, but with his own
corrupt heart. He thought upon nothing but this life, and thought all he had,
was but for himself, and therefore forgetting both the law of nature and of
GOD, he resolves most uncharitably and wickedly as follows.

And he said this will I do, 15. His resolution concerning his goods.
I will pull down my barnes, and build up greater, and there will I bestow all
my fruits and my goods. At last his anxious and perplexed mind resolves on
this, to pull down his barnes because they were not capacious enough, and to
renew and enlarge them so, as that they might receive all his new fruits, and
all his old corns, which he calls his goods, for other goods ye know use
not to be laid up in barnes. This was his resolution concerning his goods which
was seconded with a wicked resolution concerning himself set down in the next
verse. Here mark first his folly. He assured himself of these his fruits
which, as yet; were exposed to many dangers of rain and wind and hayle. 2.
mark his UNSATIA^LNES, I will build up greater, says he, and when that is
done, what if thy field bring forth as plentifully the next year says S.
BASIL, That these barnes are not able to contain these thy fruits? will thou
cast down these again, and build greater again? what a folly is that, for a
man to weary himself with endless pains, ever to be building up, and ever to
be casting down again? This is the nature of covetousness, it can never be
satisfied. The more the covetous man has, the more still he desires. Thirdly
mark his hard heartedness; he designed nothing for the poor, but resolves
to hord up all for himself, as appears by the following words. No mind had
he of the necessities of others, no probable fear of want ^o himself or his
family, for he had old stuff, and a plentiful field, and yet he would hord up
all. foolish therefore and wicked were these words. I will pull my barnes etc.
If his intention had been right, well might he had resolved, says S. BASIL,
to have pulled down his barnes. Miserable man says he, pull them down with
thine own hands, for they are barnes of iniquity, barnes that has never done
good to any. Pull them down to the very ground. Overthrow these houses of
ma^mon, bring forth to the Sun thy hot, and mothy corns, give liberty to the
goods, which thy covetousness has poisoned and fettered there. But he had no
such intention, he would pull down to build greater.

Here first ye see what covetousness may be, in retaining that which is our
own, 16. covetousnes in retaining our own,
as well as in desiring or taking, that which is not our own. This man, as holy
AUGUSTINE observes, Was not thinking upon another man's field, nor of removing
his neighbors marches. He was not thinking how to spoil the poor, or
circumveen the simple; but thought and resolved to hord and treasure up his own
goods, and yet GOD condemns and punishes him at a covetous wretch. There are
many, that think that they are well enough, if they take not the goods of other
men. O say they, this is my own, I have it by inheritance, or by my travailes
and industry. I have labored for it. I have been in hazard both by sea and
land for it. I have not purchased it by perjurie or fr^nds, but by good and
lawful means. So it is mine own, and I may do with mine own as I think good.
These men consider not the doctrine of o^ Savior here and els-where. It is the
bread of the hungry, says S. BASIL which (...) back, it is the garment of
the naked which thou retaines^, It is the money of the poor which thou
treasurest up, although it were thine own, It is covetousness not to
distribute of thine own. It is true, that men are truly masters of their own,
and to keep it up, is not against justice strictly so called. Yet it is against
charity and liberality, it is against that fidelity also which thou ought to
thy sovereign Lord who gave thee these things. Whence have thou these goods of
thine? from thy self? Naked came thou into the world, and naked must thou go
out again. From fortune? to say so, it were impiety. It is GOD then who has
given them. It is God that makes both the rich and the poor says SOLOMON.
And why has he made the rich and another poor? could he not make him rich
also? certainly he could; but he has made him poor and thee rich, that he
might try thee by riches and him by poverty, that thou might obtain the
reward of bounty and fidelity, and he the reward of patience. Thou art the
steward therefore of GOD, and he has committed these goods unto thee, not only
for thine own use, but also that thou might dispense the^ to others. Therefore
when thou stand before his Tribunell. He will crave (...) count of thy
dispensation. He will say, What have thou done with that, which I have trusted
the with? Whose necessity have thou suplied? What poor and diseased person
have thou succored? What fatherless or widow have thou relieved? Will thou
answer? it is true, I have kept mine own within fast doors and locks, I have
secured it, and preserved it with all vigilance and care; but I have neither
robbed nor stolen from other men. If thou have no more to say, hear that
dreadful saying of our Savior, When I was hungry ye^ fed me not whom I was
naked ye clouthed me not, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Secondly, 17. Against hording up of victual* for a dearth,
Observe here, that the goods that this man horded up were corns. It is a
remarkable thing, that our Savior intending to set down the pattern of a
covetous man, makes choice of an Horder up of corns. Ye see this man was a
Vutualer, who resolved to keep up his corns to his best advantage, and mark I
pray you, that he went nor through the country to fere stall by boying from
other men, but only purposed, to hord up that which had grown up in his own
land. S. BASIL upon this place considering this, gives a most grave and
serious admonition to these that desired to gain by Victual. Beware, says
he, That thou wait for the necessity of other men, that thou may sell dearer.
Go not to shute up thy barnes, till the prices he raised. He that raises the
prices of corns, draws down upon himself the curse of the people. Desire
thou not famine that thou may have gold, wish not the public clamity for thy
gain. Be not thou a couper of humane calamities: l^st while thou seek
gain, thou find the Wrath of GOD: take heed, that thou afflict not them whom
GOD has afflicted. Thou see gold, and know the stamp and goodness of it;
but considerest not the necessity, and sore hear of thy brother. Thus S.
BASIL, who thereafter represents the distress and misery of a poore-man in
time of death, brought to that necessity, that he is fain to sell one of his
children to be a slave, to have Victual to the rest. He has no gold, says
he, and it may be he never hoped to have any; he has no other meant almost,
but is constrained to sell his own children, etc. S. AMBROSS. in the 5. chap.
of his book of Naboth, says, He saw a poore-man brought to this strait. what
distress, says he, was in this man's soul? while he consulted, which of his
children he should sell? shall I sell the eldest? but he is my first borne, and
the first that called me father: shall I sell the youngest? mine heart bloodeth
for his tender age: shall I sell this child looking to the third? but in him I
see mine own face, or the face of his mother: shall I sell the fourth? but he
is of a pregn^^t ingine, and of a sweet inclination. What a strange cambate was
here betwixt natural affection on the one part, and necessity, on the other?
natural affection suggested, what? miserable man^ will thou sell thine own
children? will thou be more cruel then the beasts? can thou return to this
house, which thine own hands have bereaved of thy children? can thou eat that
bread which is bought with the blood of thy children? Notwithstanding of this,
necessity prevailed telling him, this thou must do, or else, thou must die and
all thy children before thine eyes. What heart if not of stone? if not of a
tygre, but would be moved, with such a misery? Let us therefore, I beseech you,
beware of sinning against God and our brethren in this kind. Bread is the
immediate means of maintaining man's life and therefore to raise the print of
it, is to take away the life of poore-men, their wives and children. Look not
to the color of the gold which thou gets by this uncharitable dealing, look
not to the dainties which by that gold thou was furnished with: but remember,
remember the blood of the poor, if God would open thine eyes, thou should see
thy table droping with their blood, thou should see, that it is not wine that
thou does see in thy cup, how delicious soever it seems unto thee, but the
very blood of the poor people. The LORD grant that we may rightly consider
this, and that for the merits of Christ etc.

THE SECOND SERMON Upon the XII. Chapter of S. LUKE.
Verse. 19. AND I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Verse. 20. But God said
unto him thou Fool, This night thy soul shall be required of thee, etc.
We have seen the Plenty of this covetous Wretch represented here by our
Savior: 1. Comexion and sum.
We have heard his foolish Consultation, and wicked resolution concerning his
goods? Now follows his resolution concerning himself; In the first verse. now
read, And I will say to my soul, Soul, Thou have much goods etc. 2. The
Judgment of God concerning him, and his Sentence pronounced against him, but
God said; Thou soole this night etc. Concerning himself, he resolves to
promise himself rest and joy, and that because of his abundance, as if his life
had (...) therein.

And I will say to my soul. 2. The foolish ground of the rich man.
He addresseth his speech unto his soul, and labors to persuade it of rest
and happiness; for it is the seat of joy or sorrow, and the fountain of (...).
He groundeth the hope of that happiness which he promises to his soul, upon
this, That he had much goods laid up for many years, wherein he shows great
blindness and folly. He says his goods were laid up, which were not yet win.
Secondly, though they had been laid up, yet err long time, he might have come
to poverty, as many have done from great abundance. Thirdly, though they had
continued, yet he might have lost health, without which they cannot be
enjoyed. Rourthly, he had no assurance of life it self. He thought that as his
corns were increased, so his days and years were multiplied, but indeed his
life was not to endure till the gathering in of his fruits. Fifthly, he thought
only upon this temporal life and of providing for it, that he might eat,
drink, and be merry. Here, exposing his soul to the danger of eternal want
and sorrow.

Here first observe more particularly, he was deceived, with the hope of long
life, which in like manner beguileth many. Strange it is that we should be so
deceived! 3. Shortness of our life.
What is our life but a vapor, that appears, and incontinue evanisheth
again. I am 4. 14. What is man but as a flowr, that comes forth? but as a
shadow that flies and continues not? Job. 14. 2. The days of our years are
but seventy, and if of strength, but ordinarily fourscore, and very few there
are that attain to an hundredth. FLEGON a curious writter after diligent search
of the Roman Registers, could not find so many men and women of an hundredth
years of age as to fill up one leaf of paper: but had he taken notice of them
who had died before fifty, forty, thirty, or twenty, he might have filled up
many Volumes But put the case, our Age were ten times more, what is it in
respect of Eternity? Thou have made mine age as an hand-breadth, and it is as
nothing before thee, says DAVID Psalm. 39. A thousand years in thy sight, are
as yesterday when it is past, and as a Watch is the night, says Moses psalm.
90. The length of our days is not to be regarded, and far less to be
expected from the abundance of these worldly things, which was another error
of this Wratch. MEANE-MEN live as long, and many of them longer, than they that
have the greatest abundance. Of all the Emperor's we read but of four,
Gordian, Valerian, Anastasius, and Justinian who attained to eighty, or some
more. And of these four, the first three died by a violent death, Of Popes
scarce four or five have attained to that age.

Secondly, Mark that he calls his goods and his corns, the goods of his
soul, 4. Riche^ not the good of the soul.
SOVLE, says he, thou have much goods, etc. O foolish word, says S. BASIL,
O'words of singular madness! How can that be the good of the soul, which is
cast out into the draught? It is but folly to think, that any temporal thing
can be the good of the soul. These things are not simply good; for, if it were
so, they should make their Possessours good, and the more we had of them, the
better we should be; which is contrary to experience. They can give directly no
perfection to the soul, and but little to the body: They cannot simply give
unto it, either health, or beauty, or strength, or perfection of Senses or
length of life. All their goodness stands in this, that they may be
instruments of doing good unto them, who will use the^ well. Riches may be
indeed used as means to propagate Religion, to defend the Commonwealth, to
promove the salvation of others, and to purchase to our selves a greater degree
of glory: and so may be godd through the good use of them; but commonly as they
are evil purchased, so they are evil used: The minds of men being blinded,
that they see not how they should be used, or their affections perverted, that
they will not use them aright. Hence at they spent in Leachery, ambition, or
vanity; They raise up in us foolish desires, and are instruments and means to
put these in execution: so then they cannot be esteemed the good of the soul;
That is wisdom or vertus, to draw near to God, as David speaks, and to be
familiar with him, and to see the light of his countenance here, and
thereafter: Many say, Who will show us any good? but thou O Lord, lift up the
light of thy Countenance, for thereby, says David, thou shall put more joy
into mine heart then when their wine and oil does abunde. This is the good of
Gods Chosen: but these outward things are the good of them whose portion is in
this World. Such was the rich Glutton, Luke 16. to whom it was said by ABRAHAM,
My son, remember that thou did receive thy good things in thy life. Woe to
that soul which has no other good but this. We come now to the use, that he
intended to make of these Goods.

TAKE thy rest, 5. riches give not rest to the souls.
says he, to his Soul. Being secure of abundance and length of life. He
labors first of all to persuade his soul of rest and contentment. He
thought he needed no more anxiety or solicitude to scrape together, and
therefore now should have case and rest to his soul. Foolish man! as Riches
are not the good of the soul, so they cannot give it rest. How can that which
is earthly and temporal satisfy the desire of the soul, which is heavenly and
eternal? and whose capacity is infinite. He that loves money Eccles. 5. 10.
shall not be satisfied with money, and he that desires abundance, shall not be
satisfied with increase. They are so far from giving satisfaction or rest,
that when multiplied, they increase our trouble. Riches are, as it were, a
garment of thorns, says CHRISOST. which cease not to prick a man on every
side. Covetousnes says Pelusota in his 3. book, 42 cpist. is like the desire
of Drunkards; the more wine these drink, they thirst the more; so the more gold
the Avaricious gets, the more he desires. Avarice says holy Ambrose in
his 2. chap. of Naboth, is a fire which is not quenched, but more inflamed by
gain, even as a little water cast into a furnace of fire serves but to
increase the beat of it; hence ar the manifold vexations of the Wealthy, their
manifold distastes of that which they have, and seeking after that which they
have not. Their continual motion shows that they are not at rest. They are
like a sick-man, who turns now to the one side, and now to the other, and if
he lie still, it is rather for unability to move, then for happiness of
repose. O crooked ways of men, says holy AUGUSTINE, turn thee to thy back,
to thy belly, to thy side, thou will find all hard, none of these things will
give thee rest. Woe to that bold and perverse soul, that thinks that it will
get rest, when it departs from God. But how thought he to have this rest by
his goods? This follows.

Eat, drink, and be merry. He thought upon nothing but upon this life, 6.
Epicurism of this man
and therefore he expects rest from bodily pleasures, from eating, drinking,
and solemn banquets wherein he thought to cheer himself and rejoice, for that
is imported by the word used here, There is an extremity of many rich-men who
have abundance, and yet have not grace to eat of it. Ecclesiast. 6. 2. This he
thought to have eschewed, but he falls into another extremity of Epicurians.
What else would thou have said says S. BASIL, If thou should had the soul
of a swine, whose soul serves them but in flend of salt.

Two errors may be observed in these words, 7. riches give not ever pleasures.
1. he thought his abundance of goods would give him abundance of bodily
pleasure. This was an error, pleasure often times accompanies not that
abundance it is marred often by sickness, and by many distempers of body and
mind. They that have bur competency of means have often more joy in eating, or
druiking though their fair be course then they that swime in wealth. They have
a sauce better then that which the most exquisite cooks can devise, namly
hunger, which seldom comes to the table of the wealthy. Hence craftsmen and
the like have better health, greater strength, a sweeter relish of meat or
drinks, more quiet sleep, and calmer minds, then they that have greatest
abundance. To this purpose holy AUGUSTINE says, 8. bodily plea sures give not
rest.
That health is the patrimony of poor men. Secondly, Put the case, his
pleasure in feasting had been as great as he imagined, yet could it not give
him and his soul the rest of happiness. That and the like pleasures, are but
the good of the body and not of the soul. Eating is but the solace of that
misery which is in hunger, and drinking of that misery which is in Thirst. yet
this pleasure is but a sauce, as it were, whereby God has appointed these
actions necessary to conserve our life or kind to be seasoned, because
otherwise we would have abhored them, it is a good that is common to the
beasts, a good, wherein if we be excessive it destroys the body, effeminateth
the minds, overthrows all virtue, and draws us headlong to all kind of
vice, and leaves behind it a most bitter sting of remorse of conscience.
Hence it is manifest that such pleasures cannot give rest to the soul. And yet
would God there were not many christians who seek their rest and happiness in
these pleasures of their flesh. All their travalls are for gain and their
gain is intended for this, that they and theirs may eat, drink and be merry,
these may have the name of christians, but indeed Their belly is their God,
their glory is their shame, and their end will be confusion. This much of the
inward disposition of this man. The third maine point follows, which is GODS
Judgment of him, 9. Gods Judgment.
and Sentence against him.

But GOD said thou fool. He spoke but secretly, and within himself, yet his
words were heard and examined in heaven, and thence he gets an answer,
wherein first God declares him a fool. Thou, says S. BASIL, shvorest nothing
but the flesh, are wholly given to thy belly, and art a slave of thy base
affections and therefore here a style worthy of thee, which no man but GOD
himself has given thee, THOU FOOL. Thus he is called by a kind of mockrie
and derision, which is no small part of the punishment of the wicked. It
breeds them unspeakeable grief, to consider their own solly, in contemning
things heavenly for this earth, and to see themselves so contemned by GOD.
Hence The damned Wisdom 5. 3. brought to a sense of their folly shall gr^an for
anguish of their spirit, and detaste their own folly.

Thou fool. 10. His solly.
Many crimes might have been objected to this man. He was impious and wicked,
for he acknowledged not that GOD had given him these goods. He thanked not GOD
for them, not prayed to Him, to give a blessing to them, or to give himself
grace to use them aright. He was hard hearted and unmercifull, for he intended
not the relief of his poor brethren. He was unfaithful, for he thought to
have kept all to himself, which was given to him also for the benefit of
others: he was base and an abject, for he minded nothing, but ^ating drinking
and carnal pleasures: yet God designed him by this name Thou fool. Under this
all his impieties may be comprehended, and it directly crosses, that wherein
he applauded himself most, for he thought he had taken a wise course, in
providing so well for himself. This he thought was wisdom but God whose Word
must stand, said, in so doing he was a fool. A fool, because he thought that
his life consists in his abundance: A fool, because he thought these things
to have been the good of his soul: a fool because he thought length of life a
most certain thing, which was must uncertain: A fool, because he did not fot
see and provide for these dangers, which he might so easily fallen into, but
was securely ploting and dreaming of felicity, and in the mean time he was
incontinent to be hailed to judgment and tormant: A fool, because he
thought only of this temporal life, and not of that which endures for ever,
which he might have so easily provided for, by giving a^mes of a part of his
abundance and super fluety: A fool, because for the love of the things of this
life he lost eternal life, he lost his own soul which of all follies is the
greatest, For what can the whole world profit a man if he loss his own soul?

Let us mark this his folly, that thence we may learn to be wise. his folly
principally consisted in this, 11. Our last End.
that he considered not his true final end, and therefore directed not his
course aright to it. True wifdome and prudence therefore on the contrary fixes
the eye upon our last end, and orders all things, as is most convenient to
obtain it, for the end is the rule of the means, and they must be directed
and squared according to it. If you say, what is this our last end? I answer,
he who is our first beginning and author, GOD. It is he that has made us of
his own bounty, and according to his own Image, and that for himself in an high
degree. He is the Center, as it were, and natural plain of our hearts, as
some Anoients speak. As heavy bodies when moving down-ward can have no rest,
till they come to the Center: even so our heart moved by the weight of
affections, finds no repose till it obtain GOD. O LORD Thou have made us for
thy self, and our hearts are restles till they rest in thee. It is not then to
live after our own lusts, for which we were made. It is not to seek after
riches, delights or honors; that were to make our selves or the creature our
last end, whereas of God, and for him are all things, and in particular man is
for this end; that he may see GOD, enjoy GOD, and be blessed as his Angels and
as himself is. This is our salvation and this is our last end, and the right
way leading to it, is to know GOD here, to Love Him, to Reverence, Praise and
Serve Him in holiness, without which none shall see His Face. 12. The end of
other creatures.


To help us forward to this end GOD has made these inferior creatures, and
has given us the use of them. They all proclaim to us the Perfection and
Excellency of their Maker, and invite us to know and love Him, in Whom these
Perfections are infinitely greater then in them, and who has given them these
Perfections, more for our good then for theirs. They are appointed as means to
help us to serve our LORD, and to save out selves and that this might be done
the more effectually and cheerfully, He has made so many, so beautiful, so
admirable creatures, serving not only for necessity, but also for delight.
Hence the beauty of colors, harmony of sounds, pleasantness of odours,
sweetness of meat and drink, softness of raiment, plenty of fruits,
preciousnesse of gold, silver and jewels etc. All this, I say, is not that our
hearts may go a whoring after these things, but that by them, we may be
furthered toward our last end, to wit, GOD Himself. 13. Happiness of obtaining
our last end.


This if we attain unto, happy are we. We have obtained the true good in which
there is no mixture of evil; the perfect good in which there is no defect; and
in which is all perfection. GOD is an Infinite Ocean of Goodness, Able to
satisfy our desires in all things. In Him is infinite Light, Beauty, Truth,
Love, Power, Safety, and therefore in the possession of so infinite a good,
there is an unspeakable joy, and perfect peace: but on the contrary, if we
loss this true and last end we have lost all true good, all joy, all peace,
and in stead thereof, incur Damnation and Eternal Torment.

Hence follows, 14. Earthly Things should be desired with respect to our end.
That if we would be truly wise, and eschew this damnable folly, we should take
heed, that our affection be not inordinate in any thing, whether in our wealth,
or pleasure, or health, or life. These things should be desired of us, only so
far forth, as they are able to procure our salvation, and promove us in the way
to our last end. It is therefore neither health, nor sickness, nor riches, nor
poverty, nor honor nor dishonor that we should seek, but that which is most
fit to bring us to our true end, and so much of that, as God knows to be
expedient: for true wisdom teaches not to take more of the means then is
convenient for the end.

Secondly, Hence follows, that nothing in true wisdom, should be extremely
shuned, 15. Sin only contrary to the obtaining of our end.
but that which is contrary to the obtaining of this our end. That which
directly crosses it, is neither, sickness, nor poverty, nor basnes of birth,
nor disgrace, nor rudnes of knowledge; for a man may have all these, and yet be
saved; but it is sin, By this directly we go out of the right way, we deny
GOD in effect, and place our last end in some of the creatures, and therefore
S. PAUL says, That the belly of the glutton, and the gold of the covetons is
his GOD. So give a man all the world and let the whole country think him the
wisest man therein, if he sin against God he is a fool: if he have no other
thing else, yet if he serve him, he is truly WISE. Who is wise and he shall
understand? who is prudent and he shall know these things. Hos. 14. 9. But let
us now come to the Sentence of GOD.

This night etc. 16. This night
He proves his folly from the effect of it, as if he would have said, behold,
thy folly and imprudence, thou think to live many years to enjoy thy goods,
but thou shall not live so much as to the morrow (For this night etc.) This
night. This she weth, that his consultation was in the night time, the care of
his riches bereaved him of sleep and made him anxiously to be thinking on them,
when he should have been at rest. This is not one of the least evils of riches,
that the care to gather, preserve and employ them, spend so much time unto us,
which is a thing most precious, so that often they give us no leisure to
natural refreshment, and farrelesse to do that which belongs to the Service
of our GOD and salvation of our souls. THEOPHYLAC adds, That it was sitly in
the night, that he had such thoughts, for the desire of his riches had blinded
him, and had made him to be in a night of gross darkness, whence all his
thoughts and consultations were but dreams of felicity. 17. Sudden death fear
full.


Observe here, how dreadful is the Sentence of GOD against this man. 1. His
death is sudden, even that same night. It is a fearful and dangerous thing to
be taken away in a moment. Job 34. 20. To be snatched away suddenly, there is
none, but would shune this, and therefore it has been one of the petitions of
the christian Church in her service; From sudden death LORD deliver us. To die
leasurely is more painful indeed for the body sometimes, then to be despatched
suddenly, but very advantageous for the soul. It gives a man time, to call
himself to just account of things past, it gives him leisure to censure
unpartially, the pleasures of sin and vanities of this world, to detaste
them, and to mourn for them, and so to perfect repentance. The Joys of heaven
have leisure also to present themselves unto our mind; and thus a man by means
of departing at leisure, may exercise noble acts of faith, love, hope and
patience. By means of it, he may also do great good to others. It gives him
occasion to advise prudently of bestowing charity. It gives opportunity of
giving instruction and comfort to others, and of prayer for them, and in a word
of teaching men how to die a right. Thus Moses Josh^ah and David died, and so
all good men would wish to die. but this was denied to this wretch, he is
snatched away suddenly even away that night.

Secondly, 18. Death in time of folly.
He dies in his folly, which was yet far more fearful. If a man be in a
right and wise course, though death come suddenly, yet it cannot prejudge his
salvation: but to be seized upon by death, in the very hight of our folly, is a
very dreadful thing. The godly want not their own folly, but they perceive and
amend it in time. This is the misery of the wicked, that they perceive not
their folly, till they be taken in it, and feel the smart of it by death and
judgment.

This should teach us to pray to God, 19. We should be ever prepared for death.
to give us respet at death, if it be his Will, and howsoever, that death take
us not in the midst of our folly, but that in respect of our prepared minds, it
never be sudden, for this cause we should be ever on our guarde always
careful to shune that folly, which migh prejudge our souls, if death should
overtake us in it. Hence our Savior has commanded us, To watch always,
because we know neither the day nor the hour of our LORDS coming. Every day
and hour, we should have our loins girded, with the girdle of mortification of
our affections, and the torches or lamps of good works shining in our hands. If
thou give thy self but to folly this night, what know thou but thy sentence
shall be, This night thy soul etc. What assurance of thy life have thou more
then he? let us learn to be wise by such examples. They teach us a most
profitable lecture, they who have been so overtaken, say to us, as it were, as
my Judgment was, so also shall it be with thee: yesterday to me, and the day to
thee. Yesterday I was, where thou art, I had this same thoughts of long life
and happiness which thou have here, and yet even then my body was condemned to
the dust, and my soul brought before the Tribunal of GOD, to give an account
and to receive the sentence of justice. What knows thou but it shall be so
with thee to day. Would God we did rightly consider this, That we might number
our days, and apply our hearts to wisdom, esteeming of every day as if it
were our last day, and doing that in it, which we would wish to be doing, if
death were come. 20. Taking away of the soul.


Secondly, he says, They shall require thy soul. He says not, he shall die,
but That his soul shall be required or taken away. The words import first, that
this should be done to him against his will, resisting and struggling to the
contrary. 2. that this should not be done by chance, but by justice, that he
might receive his sentence according to his doings. 3, It is said, They shall
take, to signify, that the devils as the executioners of GODS Justice were
ready to execute vengeance upon him. Here is a dreadful sentence, whereby the
soul is taken away. The soul, the precious soul, the redemption whereof cease
for ever. The soul, which is of more worth then all the world. What profits
it a man to gain the whole world, if he loss his soul? The soul, which is our
divine part, the Breath of GOD, and Stamp of his Countenance. The soul, for
which the precious Blood of Jesus was shed. The soul, the soil, which if it
were rightly manured, should bring forth the fruit of immortal joy. That this
soul should be taken away unavoidably, first to judgment, and thence to
intolerable torment, what woe and misery! 2^. Anguish of the wicked as death.


Hence we may perceive what sorrow and anguish was in the soul of this covetous
man, or in any like wretch. When Belshazzar Daniel 5. 6. saw the hand-writting
against him on the wall, that he was numbered, weighed and divided, His
countenance was changed, his thoughts were troubled within him, the joints of
his loins were loosed, and his knees did smite one against another; such is the
anguish and the agony of the wicked, when GOD puts forth his Finger, and
writteth on their body, by an incurable disease; that their days are numbered
and finished: when he wakens their conscience, and writteth therein, that they are weighed and found to be light, and that they must be divided from their
houses, lands, wife, children, friends, yea and that the soul must be divided
from the body, and that the one must go to be the meat of worms, and the other
to eternal fire. If such a man look back to his life, his sins which he
thought evanished, his negligence and coldness in Gods service, ambition,
covetousness, malice, whordom^ etc. rush upon him like so many furies to gnaw
his conscience, and to rent his heart in pieces, and tell him that as he has
had their sweet, so must he have their bitterness. If he look before him, he
sees GOD ready to cast him away, and to say, depart from me thou cursed etc.
The good Angels ready to forsake him, and the devils ready to snatch up his
soul. He sees that within half or quarter of an hour, he must change his bed,
it may be of repose, which his children and friends stand about, with a bed of
fire, with a company of horrible spirits, with everlasting chains and
everlasting darkness. O what unspeakable anguish is this! what is there in this
earth that can countervaile it. 22. Joy of the Godly at death.


It is not so with the death of the Godly. Though nature in them also shune
death, yet grace in end prevails. Their soul is not taken from them, but
they deliver it and recommend it into the hand of GOD the Father and redeemer
of spirits, In thy Hands I recommend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it O
Lord GOD of truth says David Psalm. 31. 5. They are content to go out of the
body, as out of a prison and grave. They desire to be disolved and be with
Christ. They depart in peace, because their eyes have seen the Salvation of
GOD. They count the last day of their life, the first of their happiness, the
birth day of eternity, which shall draw aside the courtaine, and make them
clearly see, which before they saw but obscurely. They know that day shall free
them of all storms, and put them betwixt the Arms of their Father, And turn
their trouble into rest, and their mourning into joy and their basnes into
glory. They have reason therefore, to be content when it pleases GOD to call.
The LORD grant that we may live their life, that so we may die their death, and
that for the merits of Christ etc.

THE FIRST SERMON Upon the VI Chapter of S. JOHN.
Verse. 43. JESUS therefore Ansirered and said unto them, murmr not among your
selves. Verse. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day.
OUr blessed Savior having entered upon a most heavenly discourse concerning
the Dignity of himself, 1. Intention.
and the happiness of them who receive Him as they ought; having entered I say
upon this discourse in the preceding words, He takes occasion from the
murmuring of the Jews, at that which he said, to prosecute this same discourse
more particularly and more fully, in these words that I have read and in many
after following, Particularly in these words, ye have to consider the occasion
of this discourse, which was the murmuring of the Jews, insinuated there, And
Jesus answered unto them, saying, murmr not among your selves. 2. Ye have an
heavenly instruction given to them, and to us all in them, concerning the way
by which we come to Him, No man can come to me, except the Father which has
sent me draw him. 3. Ye have the happiness of them who are so drawn by virtue
thereof unto Christ, And I will raise him up at the last day.

And Iesuus answered and said unto them, 2. Murmuring of the Jews.
murmr not among your selves. These words insinuate as we said, that the
occasion of our Saviors following discourse was the murmuring of the Jews,
whereof ye may read immediately before my text. They murmured because he said,
I am the bread that came down from heaven. They said is not this the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how then is it that he says, I came
down from heaven? They were so far from believing and receiving thankfully
his heavenly Words, that they murmured at them and condemned them within
themsolves. Beside they had heard and seen his great Miracles, which he wrought
to confirm his Word. He had fed five thousand with five loaves, as ye may
read in the beginning of this chap. He had healed many sick, and had raised
the dead. These things might have persuaded them that he was more then a man,
and that he had a divine Nature, since for confirming of his Deiety, these
Miracles wet wrought by him^ at least by these wonders they might have been
induced to think, that he was such an One, who would not speak but Truth, and
that therefore they should have humbly received his Words though not understood
by them, and that they should have devotly searched after the true meaning of
them. Yet misregarding both his divine Words and wonderful Works, they turn
to culumnies and murmuring. The reason is clear from the text, which our
Savior opens up more fully hereafter. They were carnal, and savored only
the things of the flesh. Their hearts were upon their bodily food, whereof
while they had expectation, they received him as the promised Messiah, and
would have made him a King as ye may read before, but this hope being gone
when they heard him speak of an heavenly bread which came down from heaven,
they despise himself as vile, and murmr at his Words as false. Such is the
corruption of our blind and perverse nature, that we reject and condemn,
whatsoever savoureth not to our carnal sense and judgment, by which we
presume to measure things divine, which when understood should he believed, and
when not understood should be reverenced and adored. But of this by GODS Grace,
we shall have occasion to speak more fully hereafter. Therefore we come now to
the second point.

No man can come to me, 3. Instruction of our Savior.
except the Father which has sont me draw him. Here is the instruction given
by our Savior to them, whereby also he confoteth their murmuring as if he
would say, ye murmr unjustly, there is no falsehood in my doctrine; but ye
do not understand nor believe it. because none can do this, But he which is
drawn and enlightened by the Father that has sent me, which ye are not,
through your own default. Put the case a man of great learning were teaching in
schools, of high and sublime mysteries, which cannot be understood by them who
are unlearned: if rude and unlettered men should come in and hear him, and
condemn what he said as false and untrue, he might justly say to them, it is
not the falsehood or absurdity of my doctrine, which makes you to disassent
from it, but it is your want of learning, without which this doctrine cannot be
understood. So our Savior tells these carnal hearers, that there was no
default in that which he had said, but that they wanted that preparation
without which they could not embrace his Words. He might have said ye beleev^
not what I shy, because ye are blind, carnal and perverse, but he choiseth
rather to tell them of the necessity being drawn by the Father who sent him,
for this end that he might be understood and believed. This he does first to
show that his doctrine was not false nor contrary to God, but a true and divine
doctrine to the belief whereof, the Father himself draws 2. to show that it
is not in the power of man to understand and receive so high mysteries, but
that the special aid and assistance of GOD is necessary thereunto. 3. He
speaks this to strick them with a just terror, by considering that they were
not enlightened and drawn by GOD, and to stir them up humbly to beg this
heavenly Favor at the Hands of GOD. 4. Drawing is calling.


This much for these words in general. For the more full understanding of
them, we shall by GODS Grace open up more particularly what this drawing of
the Father is, Without which no man can come to the Son. Many things may be
and are curiously disputed here-anent; but we shall of purpose forbear them,
and insist upon these things, which may serve more for your edification. first
then ye are to understand, that this drawing of GOD is the Calling of GOD, as
our Savior himself expounds it in the verses immediately following. But every
calling, is not this Calling whereof chiefly he intends to speak here. 5.
General Calling.


There is a general Calling of men by God, common both to the reprobate and
elect, and there is a calling peculiar to the Elect. 1. There is a calling
common to both, by which God calls men both outwardly and inwardly. He
calls all that are within the Church by his Word heard and read, publicly
and privately. He calls by prosperity and adversity, by allurements and by
scourges. Sometimes he hedgeth up the ways of men with thorns of affliction,
That they may turn back from their evil way, to their God whom they have
forsaken. Hos. 2. 6. Sometimes He loadneth them with blessings, that thereby he
may draw them, as it were, with cords and hands of love. Hos. 11. 4. So also
inwardly his divine illustrations and inspirations are in some measure
communicated both to the good and to the bade, They taste of the good Word of
GOD, and of the heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come. Heb. 6.
5. They are brought to some belief and consideration sometimes of death and
judgment, of the pains of hell and joys of Heaven, and by all these means
GOD calls and knocks, as it were, at their hearts that they may open, yea
not once but often does he this, 6. Effectual calling.
as all may find by their own experience.

This calling in some sort may be called a drawing and it is not excluded here,
yet is it not that whereof our Savior chiefly speaks, for he speaks of that
calling which makes men effectually to follow it, as appears by the next
verses. Therefore I said, there is another calling proper to the Elect, whereby
God so concurreth with the means used by him, that he effectually enlighteneth
the mind, changes the heart and draws it after him, by his Grace
preveening, exciting, assisting and accompanying them powerfully, till they
attain unto the end of their faith, which is the salvation of their souls.
Hence our Saviont says, a little before, All that the Father gives unto me,
comes unto me, and him that comes unto me, I will in no ways cast out. So
they that are thus drawn are given by the Father; Of him they hear and learn,
as he says in the next words, and therefore undoubtedly come to Christ, This
is that Gift and Grace of effectual Calling, which overcomes the hardest
heart that it meets with, and is rejected by none, as holy AUGUSTINE
speaks. This is that which the devote soul desires in the first of the
Canticles 4. Draw me and we will rune after thee.

Of this drawing chiefly, 7. this drawnecessary.
as I said, these words are to be understood. It has sundry excellent
properties. whereof I shall touch but some. 1. It is so necessar unto us, That
without it none can come to Christ, as our Savior says here; which he also
mainly intends in this place. If out Savior had not called upon Lazarus when
he was in his grave with a mighty Voice saying, Lazarus come forth, he should
have remained there still, until he had returned into the dust. Even so except
the Voice of GOD Call and Draw us out of our corruption, we can never come out
of it. Without me says our LORD, Ye can do nothing. We are not sufficient of
our selves as of our selves, to think a good thought, but all our sufficiency
is of GOD. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Our minds are full of blindness, vanity and
forgetfulness: our wills are perverse and bent to evil and our spiritual
enemies are mighty, Yea beside that, these actions whereby we must follow GOD
are sublime, heavenly and supernatural, which nature of it self can never
reach unto. If the body of a man be able and found, he may indeed walk and
rune; yet can he not sly, because that is above the reach and power of nature:
even so, although there were not that corruptions in us, which is indeed in us,
yet without the special Assistance of GOD, we could never mount up to these
high and heavenly actions, whereby we follow Christ, by believing his Truth, by
loving his Goodness and hoping in his Mercy. It is necessary therefore that we
be furnished by him with new Strength, whereby he draws us, and inableth us
to follow after him. He gives us the eye of Faith, whereby we may believe,
meditate and contemplate these mysteries which are necessary to be known for
our salvation. God says S. PAUL 2. Cor. 4. who commanded light to shine out
of darkness, has made his Light to shine in our hearts. He gives to our souls
the spiritual feet, or rather wings of Hope and Love, by which we may follow
after him. They that wait upon the LORD Isa. 40. 31. shall renew their
strength: they shall mount up as the ^agels, they shall run and not be weary,
they shall walk and not be feign. Love and Hope which are the affections of the
soul, are as it were, the feet of it, whereby it moves toward that, which it
apprehends as Good. Love is the chief affection and, as it were, the right
foot. Thence arises desire of Good when it is absent, joy of Good when it is
present: hatred of the contrary evil, fear of that evil when it approaches,
and sorrow for it when it seizes on us. Hope is, as it were, the least foot of
the soul, whereby we move toward that Good which is hard to be obtained. From
it arises boldness, courage, magnanimity, constancy to endure travails and
troubles, anger and zeal to resist impediments. But this Love and Hope simply
considered will never lead us in the way to Christ, and therefore as God
gives us Faith to be a spiritual eye, so he gives us supernatural Love and
Hope, to be the feet of our soul whereby we may move and run after Christ in
the way of the obedience of these commandments, which by the light of faith
are manifested to us, yet so as we chiefly lean to the Love of GOD and our
neighbor, which is, as I said, the right and chief foot, whereby our hope is
strengthened and confirmed, For hope makes us not ashamed, because the Love of
GOD is shed abroad i^ our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us. Romans 5.
5. To conclude this point then. This drawing is so necessary, that without It
none did ever come or shall ever come to Christ. Of our selves we can, with
these Jews, murmr at his Words and disassent from them, but cannot believe
them, farrelesse can we love him and trust in his mercy. Without common calling
spoken of before, none can come at all in any measure, and without this
effectual drawing, none can come as he ought. 8. continuance of it necessary.


Secondly, This drawing of the Father is not necessary only for one moment, but
is a continued and perpetual assistance. We cannot begin without it, nor
without it can we end. It is GOD that works in us both to will and to do.
Some thought that the beginning of our conversion is from our solves, but most
falsely. There is no good thought nor good affection in us but from God. till he
preveene and excite us, we can neither seek nor desire as we ought. The devote
soul had never said, Draw me and we will ran after thee, except in some
measure before she had been drawn and excited to seek and to desire to run
after Christ. Therefore our LORD says; Behold I stand at the door and I
knock. He knocks before we open, yea he softneth and he opens it, as he did
the heart of Lydia. Our endeavors are none at all says S. BERNARD except they
be excited. He says, Seek my Face, before we answer, Thy Face LORD I will
seek, hide not thy Face from me, neither cast away thy servant in displeasure.
So on the other part our endeavors are but in vain, if they be not still
assisted and accompanied by the powerful Grace of GOD. Hence David says in
that same place before cited, Thou have been my help, leave me not neither
forsake me O GOD of my salvation. I have labored more abundantly then all the
Apostles says S. PAUL, yet not I but the Grace of God that is within me.
Albeit we be set in the right way, yet can we not go a foot except Christ be
with us. Except thy Presence go with us, take us not hence said MOSES to the
LORD, Exodus 33. who answered him, My Presence shall go before thee and give
thee rest. Whence is it that Godly men do not only follow Christ, but think his
yoke easy and his burden light? because Christ and his Grace is always with
them, supporting, strengthening and comforting them. Hence the denial of
themselves, seems easy, their patience sweet, their humility glorious, their
prayers and devetion pleasant and joyful. Christ going before them also, as it
were, from whose precious ointments so sweet a smell proceeds, as allureth
and draws after him those that do perceive them. His divine Perfections are,
as it were, these precious ointments, especally his Mercy, Wisdom and Holiness,
all which send forth a sweet and flagrant smell which is most powerful to draw
after him: what are his gracious Promises and manifold Blessings, his heavenly
Illustrations; his divine Consolations, and most sweet affections of devotion?
but, as it were, the sweet and flagrant smell of his Mercy. What is his word
which is the word of life? that discovers to us the way of salvation, but, as
it were, the sweet savor of his Wisdom. So all these excellent virtues that
were in him, were, as it were; the savor of his Holiness, whereby it diffuseth
it self for alluring and drawing men to him, and that still nearer and nearer.
Thus his drawing of us, continues still while we are here, Nevertheless, I am
continually with thee, says David, Psalm. 73. Thou hold me by my right
hand, thou will guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me into Glory.
9. Some reciprocatio^ in it.


Thirdly, This draught of us by God is in some sort reciprocal and mutual. As
he draws us, so in some sort, we draw him. We draw God to us by our prayers,
sighs and groans, yea by them we hold and bind him in a manner. Let me go said
he to Jacob wrestling with him, For the day approaches. Let me alone said he
to Moses that my anger may vaxe hot. Thus by every virtue, patience,
chastity, mercy etc. And by every good work, we draw God in some measure to
us, who the better we are, draws the nearer to us, and delights the more in
us. But especially, we draw him to us by love, which GOD himself who is Love
does always accompany. He that abides in love abides in GOD, and GOD
abides in him says S. JOHN. If any man love me, says our LORD, I will love
him, and my Father will love him; and my Father and I will come and dwell with
him. Thus being drawn by God, we draw him to us in some manner: but yet
absolutely we draw not him, but by him are drawn to himself; For it is he who
gives us all that strength of beauty, virtue and love which pleases him, and
he gives it for this effect, that we may be united more and more to Him
wherein our Happiness stands.

Fourthly, 10. It is not violent.
This draught of GOD is not a violent draught, but most sweet motion of us,
whereby we who were before unwilling, are made now willingly and gladly to come
to Christ, yea and to run after him.

The Manichees, as CHRIGOST. here reports affirmed, that man was drawn to GOD
violently, and that his will was forced, for which doctrine they alleged this
place, No man can come to me etc. This was a foolish and absurd doctrine. A man
comes not to Christ by bodily motion, but by the belief of his mind and love
of his heart, which cannot be against the will. Thou may come to the Church,
says holy AUGUSTINE, against thy will, thou may come to the altar against thy
will, thou may take the sacrament also against thy will, but believe, can
thou not against thy will, for with the hear^ man beleaveth unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, and
again, If thou come against thy will thou beleevest not, and if thou
beleevest not, thou come not at all.

Neither does the word of drawing, 11. Drawing imp^rteth not alwais violence.
necessarly import, that violence is always used toward the thing that is
drawn. Both in scripture and in other writes, things are said to be drawn which
are not forced. Men are said to be drawn by their own desires and delights.
Trahit sua quemque voluptas said the Poet, which testimony S. AUGUSTINE cites
here, And if men says he, be truly said to be drawn by their own pleasure,
how much more may they be said to be drawn by truth and righteousness,
happiness and eternal lise, all which Christ is. Thus in holy scripture, Hos.
11. The LORD says, That he drew the people of the Jews, with the bands of
men, and with the cords of love, meaning his benefits which he abundantly
poured upon them, which might have served as cords to draw them unto him.

But it may be ye will say, 12. why drawing used first.
if men be not forced to come to Christ, why then is the word of drawing here
used since properly it signifies a moving of any thing be way of force. I
answer, this word is used here* not without great reason. For first, That
Action of God whereby he brings us to himself, is like to drawing in this,
that as when a thing is drawn the power is outward by which the thing draws is
moved, and without which it should not be moved; even so in the first drawing
of us to God, by his illustrations and inspirations, the power is without us,
and independent from the liberty of our will. This Calling of God preveeneth
our will, yea we are so far from willing it. that oftentimes we resist and
strugle against it, and would be gladly quite of these heavenly inspirations,
that we might the more freely follow our carnal joys. In this respect this
Calling of God, may Justly be called a drawing, without which we can no more
move toward GOD then, a weight can move upward except it be drawn.

Secondly, 13. Secondly why.
Our effectual Calling is called a drawing, to signify the vehement and
mighty power whereby GOD changes the heart of man, when it is his purpose to
bring it home to himself. drawing imports vehemency and strength, and what
is so mighty and strong, as this change of the right hand of the most high.
Thereby sometimes suddenly he so works upon the soul of man, that he who was
before drowned in vice, and long accustomed to it, begins now to abhore that
which most vehemently before he loved, and on the contrary to desire and love
that which before he abhored. By this power he that before was the enemy and
persecutor, it may be of Christ, When the heavenly Light had shined about S.
PAUL: yea when it had shined within him, and when God had stretched out his
Hand, and had taken hold of his heart, he incontinent cried out, LORD, what
will thou have me to do? Now he acknowledges him to he his LORD and the
Lawgiver, whom before he esteemed a Transgressor of the law. Now he offers
himself to do his Will, whom before he persecuted, although he himself should
therefore have been persecuted. This Calling indeed was extraordinary, yet some
thing like thereunto we may find in every one that is effectually called. This
is shadowed forth in the parable of calling to the marriage. Luke 14. All were
called indeed, but some were but simply called, and after their refusal no
more urged, but others were not left until they were brought in; the king
commands to compel them to come in. So God deals with his elect. he so
calls, that he leaves them not till they answer, and follow him. Till then
he still urges, by persuasions, exhortations, reprooffs, benefits, scourges,
illustrations and inspirations, though they be blind; he by calling gives them
sight to know the way to the banqueting house, although they be halt and
maimed, he gives them feet to walk unto it. And in a word no less powerfully
brings them unto himself, then if he did use violence unto them.

Thirdly, 14. Thirdly, why.
Albeit no violence be used to the soul of him that is converted when he is
called; yet there is violence used against satan, from whose power he is drawn
by the mighty Power of God, that he may no more be the slave of satan, but the
Servant of GOD. There is also a kind of violence inferred to our sinful
corruption for so great is the Power of GOD given to us by his Grace, that
violently, as it were, we break the bands whereby our natural corruptions has
hitherto tied us. The Kingdom of heaven says our Savior suffers violence,
and the violent enters by force. Thus we see our effectual calling is not
without cause called a drawing of us by the Father who of his infinite Goodn^s,
and by his almighty Power works so on our hearts, that of unwilling he makes
us to be willing, 15. this should teach us humility.
to go to Christ and to run after him.

This doctrine serves first to teach us al humility. If thou have any good,
thou may perceive from this which has been said, that it is not of thy self
but from God. O man who has discerned thee? what have thou, but that which
thou have received? and of thou have received it, why ^oustest thou as if thou
hadest not received it? No honor herein is due to us, but all the glory
belongs to him, From whom every good gift and every perfect giving
descends. Again, if as yet thou have nothing which is truly good, blame not
God, but thy self; through whose default it is that thou art not drawn by him.
No man indeed can come to him except he be drawn, but if any man be not drawn,
this is to be imputed to his own wickedness. As GOD draws none but out of his
free Mercy, so he leaves none but out of his uncontrollable justice. Humble
therefore thy self, and acknowledge as the truth is, that thou have not used the
means a right which he has given thee, but on the contrary, has abused his
manifold Blessings. Lastly, This serves also to work in us humility, while we
consider the different dealing of God toward diverse persons, of whom some are
drawn and some are not drawn by him. Go not to inquire curiously, why this man
is drawn, and that man is not drawn, although, it may be, that he that is
drawn, is no less if not more unworthy, then he who is not drawn. If thou
search into this, it is presumption; humility contenteth it self with this,
that if any be not drawn, it is through their own fault, and if any be drawn,
it is of the bounty of God, who may do with his own what he will. Humility
makes us cover our faces with the Seraphims and to adore this great mystery,
and to cry out with them Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD GOD of Hosts, Holy is be
in all his ways, Holy is he, both when he draws and when he draws not,
when he calls men to him, and when he rejects them. It makes us to cry out
with S. PAUL, O the deep of the riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
GOD. how unsearchable are his judgments, and his Ways are past finding one.

Secondly, 16. Invocation of GOD.
The consideration of this doctrine should stir us up to earnest incalling on
God for his Grace at all times. Inquire not, says holy AUGUSTINE upon this
place, Why GOD draws this man, and why he draws not that man: but
understand and receive this counsel, if thou thy self be not drawn, pray to
God that thou may be drawn. Are we not yet converted, we should carefully use
the means especially of prayer that we may be converted. And suppose we be
co^verted, yet should we still call on God, that he would yet draw us more, that
we may run after him. We should say with David; Thou have been mine help, leave
me not neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.

Thirdly, 17. Carefulnes to answer our calling
This should stir us up to be careful obediently to answer the Calling of
God, that we through our default deprive not our selves of his saving Draught.
Remember he that calls thee is infinitely Excellent, and most Worthy whom thou
should hearken unto, He has no need of thee, but thou stand in great
need of Him, and without him cannot be but miserable. To him thou art
infinitely bound, he is the Creator and thou the creature; he the LORD and thou
the servant, he the Red^^^^r and thou the captive. 2. Consider that thou art
most unworthy to be called by him, but most worthy to perish in thine own
sinn^s. 3. That from which he calls thee (...) sin the greatest of evils,
and death the wages of sin. 4. That which he calls thee unto is perfect
Happiness. He calls thee to life, even the life of Grace, he calls thee to
Peace, even to that peace* that passes understanding, he calls thee to the
Gifts and Joy of his Spirit, yea to the participation of his, blessed. Spirit
himself. He calls thee to the great banquet, wherein thou art to receive not
earthly food, but the bread of life which came down to give life to the world.
And will thou not hearken unto him? woeful and miserable shall thy estate be,
when some refused to come to the feast of the great King, Luke 14. He vaxed
angry, and said, they should never taste of his banquet. If Wisdom call and we
answer not, if she stretch out her hands and we regard not. Prove. 1. 24. She
also will laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear comes: we shall
call but she shall not answer, we shall seek her early but shall not find her.
The Lord make us wise, that we may consider this aright, and that for the
Merits of Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father etc.

THE SECOND SERMON Upon the VI Chapter of S. JOHN.
Verse. 44. (...) And I will raise him up at the Last day. Verse. 45. It is
written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of GOD. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father comes unto mee^.
Ye have already heard the instruction given by the LORD unto the murmuring
Jews; 1. Connection
namely, That none can come to him except he be drawn by his Father who sent
him. In the words now read, he shows first the happy estate of them who are
drawn by the Father, and come unto him, confirming withal his former discourse
where at they murmured. 2. He proves the necessity of that drawing before
mentioned and more fully explaine^h it, It is written in the prophets, Thy
shall be all taught of God.

And I will raise him up at the last day. These words are added here by our
LORD, 2. Why he ^deth the raising of men at the last day:
first to preveene the misinterpretation of his former words, wherein he said,
that men cannot come to him, except they be drawn by the Father. Some might
have thought because of this, that he was inferior to the Father: therefore he
says, That he shall raise him up at the last day; which imports no less
power then that is whereby men are drawn by the Father. 2. These words ar added
to confirm that which he said before; namely, That he is the bread of life,
and came down from heaven. To confirm this, I say, especially in the minds of
believers. For if he raise up men at the last day, undoubtedly he is not from
the earth: but from heaven and if he give life to them that are dead, he may be
justly called The bread of life. 3. He adds these words to comfort Believers,
and to terrify unbeleevers. For no greater comfort can be to them that receive
him by a true and lively faith, then the assured hope, that they shall be
raised up by him from death, to a glorious and immortal life, and on the other
part, it is matter of exceeding terror to the unbelieving and wicked, that they
shall not be partakers of this blessed resurrection, but they shall be raised
up to shame and confusion.

This point is urged diverse times hereafter by our LORD; 3. the happiness of
the Godly, and unhappines of the wicked at death and Resurrection.
and therefore, it may be, we shall have occasion to speak of it more fully.
Only now consider that this is a point which we should at this time deeply
meditate upon. He who calls us and offers himself unto us, is no less,
then he who has power of life and death, even of eternal life and of eternal
death. If we answer him and embrace his Calling, we may look to have
confidence, joy and glory at our death and resurrection, but if we do
otherwise, we can expect nothing but terror, sorrow and confusion. Though we
think little now of death and resurrection, yet they will come; It is appointed
for all men once to die, and after death comes judgment. The soul will be
called out of the body, the body will be called out of the grave, and both will
be called before the Tribunal of GOD. If thou hearkened devotly and obediently
to his Calling here, Thou shall lift up thine head then, being confident that
thy redemption draws near. When GOD says to thy soul at death, Come out,
thou shall encourage it, and say. Go (...) my soul, fear not, it is the Voice
of my Beloved, calling not to destroy but to save thee. It is the voice of him,
who has often called me before, and whom I have answered by his Grace. It is
the Voice of him that I was longing for. He said to me before, Behold I come,
and I have answered even so, Amen LORD Jesus come. But on the contrary, if thou
have despised his gracious and merciful Calling here, thy terror shall be
unspeakable at death and at the resurrection. He shall call, when thy Lamp is
not prepared, and albeit thou would not be drawn by his Mercy, his Justice
shall draw thy soul out of thy body at death, and thy body out of the grave at
the resurrection. although thou call then, he will not hear; but will say,
Depart from me I know thee not. Long have I cast open the door of my Mercy
unto thee, but thou would not enter, and now it is shute. O how terrible shall
this Calling or rather Drawing of justice be to the disobedient soul and body!
Feign would they draw back into that very nothing out of which they were
brought. Therefore the wicked shall say then unto the hills and to the
mountains, fall upon us, and cover us from the Face of him that sits upon
the Throne: and from the Face of the Lamb. Let us therefore while we have time,
think both upon his Mercy and Justice. These are the two arms of his
Providence whereby he draws to good, and from evil. MERCY is, as it were, his
Right Hand, which is alluring and comfortable: justice, his Left Hand, which is
terrifying and dreadful. Let us labor, That his left hand may be under our
head, as the Spouse speaks, and that his right hand may embrace us, that is,
let us think upon his gracious Promises, that we may be allured to obey him,
and withal consider his dreadful terrors, that we may stand in awe to
despise his invitations. I will speak no more of this. Now I proceed.

It is written in the prophets, 4. where this testimony is written.
And they shall be all taught of GOD etc. Here he confirms and clears what
he said of the drawing of men to him by the Father. He confirms it by the
testimony of scripture. It is written says he in the prophets, they shall be
all taught of GOD. This testimony is expressly set down, Isaiah 54. 13. Where
the PROPHET speaking of the happy estate of the Church of the new Testament
says to her; All thy children shall be taught of the LORD, and great shall be
their peace. According to the sense it is also to be found elsewhere,
especially in the 31. 33. of I^r. where the LORD speaking of the Church of the
new Testament says, After those days it shall come to pass, that I will put
my law in their hearts and writ it in their inward parts, and they shall be my
people and I will be their GOD: and they shall not teach every man his brother
and every man his neighbor, but they shall know me from the highest to the
least says the LORD.

For clearing of this, 5. What to be taught of GOD.
ye are to understand that to be taught of God, is nothing else, but to have
our minds enlightened by the knowledge of him, and to have his love ^^^ed abroad
in our hearts, so that we obey him, and that not out of the fear of punishment,
but out of the love of righteousness. Of this teaching the Prophet spoke when he
said Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, and teach out of
thy law; and when he said again, Teach me to do thy Will O GOD for it is good.
This our Savior manifests in the next words, wherein he explaineth what it
is, To be taught by GOD, saying, That such an one hears and learneth of the
Father and comes to him, that is, he that is so taught, understands and
believes that which the Father reveals, and embraces it by sincere love and
affection, and so comes to Christ by faith, by hope, by love and obedience.

Hence, 6. This further explained out of Augustine.
S. AUGUSTINE in his book of the Grace of Christ 12. and 13. chapters infers
That this doctrine of the Father, is nothing else, but his heavenly Grace
communicated to us, whereby he makes us not only to know what we should do,
but also to do what we know, whereby he makes us not only to believe that
which should be loved, but also to love that which we believe. This is the
doctrine of the Father, whereby from on hye, by his unspeakable Power inwardly
he manifests his truth, and communicates to us the love of himself. This
also is manifest as S. AUGUSTINE observes there from the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. where
S. PAUL says; As for brotherly love ye have not need, that I should write
unto you, for ye are taught of GOD to love one another. So the Teaching of GOD
makes us not only to know what should be done, but also to do that which we
know. And he that knows and does not, is not caught by God. He is not taught
according to grace but according to the law, he is not taught according to the
spirit but according to the letter.

Secondly. Ye are to consider that our Savior by urging this Teaching of GOD,
this hearing and learning of the Father does not condemn the outward
ministry of preaching, 7. Out-ward Ministry not conde^^ed.
or deny the necessity of it ordinarily. For our Lord himself at this time was
preaching outwardly the word, and S. PAUL accordingly Romans 10. 17. tells us;
That faith is by hearing, for which effect preaching is needful, and therefore
he with the Prophet says there, how beautiful upon the mountains, are the
feet of them that bring glad tidings, that bring glade tidings of good things?
Hence we read in the 8. of the Acts that when it was the Will of God to
convert the Ethiopian Eunu^h, he miraculously sent Philip to him by an angel,
8. Why this doctrine is is ascrived to God.
but he would not convert him by the Angel.

But you will say, If man have any hand in this teaching, Why is it called the
teaching of God? I Ans. It is called so justly; First, Because the Word that is
preached, is not the word of man, but the Word of God. 2. Because man
concurreth only but outwardly as an instrument proposing the Word, but it is
God who works inwardly upon the soul, he has his Chair in heaven that
teaches the heart, without whose powerful assistance, all our words are but
an empty sound, as S. AUGUSTINE speaks in his 3. Treatise upon the 1. Epist.
of S. John, so writting on the same place, he says, God is the teacher of
them that learn, because that which is given and revealed within, is from him.
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that gives the increase,
so neither is he that planteth, nor he that waters any thing, but God who
gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3. 7. So then our Savior by commending the
teaching of God, the bearing and learning from the Father, does not exclude the
necessity of the out. Ministry, but shows the power and efficacy of God, Who
is the principal Agent.

But it may be some man will yet say; If no more be imported here, 9.
Preheminencie of the New Testament
by this teaching of God, then that which has been said; it would seem, that
there should be no difference in this, betwixt them who lived under the Old
Testament, and those who live now under the New; Which difference is plainly
intended both by our Savior and by the Prophet. There would seem I say, to be
no difference, because God concurreth with his word preached then also, and it
was he that did work faith and love in the hearts of men, I Ans. This is true,
yet notwithstanding, there is a great difference, for the teaching of God then
ordinarily was limitate to one Nation: whereas now it is offered to all the
world, and throughout all the world, all the Children of the church of the
Faithful are made really partakers of it. 2. The manner of teaching now, is
more excellent; because the Revellation of God is more clear, and the Love of
God more abundantly poured into the hearts of men; Whence the PROPHET Isaiah;
Chap. 11. 7. speaking of this time says. That the whole earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. 10. private
revelations not to be relayed o^.
Now, let us come to the Uses of this Doctrine.

First, We may learn hence; That we have no ground from this place, to lean
to private Revelations and motions not warranted by the Word of God, as if
without the Means, we might be taught by God and learn from him. Some
Fantastic persons in this last age, have gone exceeding far this way: and
by this mad conceat, have stirred up horrible Confusions and have drawn many
with themselves into perdition. Far be it from us to imagine any such thing.
God has ordained means, whereinto although he has not tied himself, yet has
he tied us to these means, to wit, his Word, his Sacraments; Prayer and
Meditation, these ar, as it were, the conduits of his grace, and as it were, the
veins by which we must search after the heavenly Wisdom. If thou neglect the
means, thou but temptest God, and deceivest thine own soul. And though the
means seem to thy carnal mind base, yet remember they are the Ordinances of
God. N^aaman thought little of the the waters of Iordon, he said, The revers of
Damascus were better th^n all the waters of Israel; he disdained to go there
and put off his clothes and wa^h seven times in it, at he was commanded: but
had he not used this mean^, he had gone home as Leprous as he came forth.

Secondly, 11. Great deceatfulnes of our hearts.
We should consider, That our Heart is deceatful, and Satan is subtle, who
can transform himself into an Angel of light and make us believe, that his
Illusions and Fancies of our own hearts, are the Inspirations of God, when we
take not heed unto Gods word. Many are deceived in this kind, Some think their
own Conceats to be the very light of God, when indeed there is in them nothing
but darkness, their carnal affections, to be the motions of Gods Spirit;
their wrath, they think Zeal; their pride, courage etc. And this deceat is
commonly incident to proud and presumptuous men, yea sometimes the saints of GOD
are in some measure this way deceived, and think the Indictment of their own
spirit, to proceed from God himself. So we see Nathan being consulted by David
concerning the building of the Temple, said unto him; Go and do all that is in
^hine heart, for the Lord is with thee, and yet in the mean time, the Lord had
not said so, as Gregory observes. For he appeared immediately thereafter and
forbade the Work, albeit he approved the Intention. Upon the other part men
sometimes are so deceived in this kind, that they think that to be but a
Fancy of their own, which is indeed the motion of the Spirit of God, and so
also it pleased God, sometimes to exercise his own in time of temptations, that
they may be the more tried, and that they may grow in humility and other
virtues. These are like to the Disciples, S. Mark, 6. 49. who in the Tempest,
when they saw our LORD himself walking on the waters, they thought it was but a
Ghost. Thus sometimes we take evil for good, and good for evil, and therefore
we must not separate the inward Word from the outward; We must not believe
every spirit, but we must try the spirits, if they be of God. We ought to try
them by the Word of God, and should have our recourse diligently to them to
whom the dispensation of the Word is committed, who should be more skillfull in
discerning of the spirits, according to Gods Word, which is committed unto
them. To conclude this point then we ought not to despise the outward meant,
but should highly esteem of them, and should greatly praise GOD for the
occasion which we have of them. We have particular reason of thankfullnes in
this respect. There is no Nation under heaven, with which GOD has dealt more
bountifully in this kind, then with us who live in these three NATION ES. No
Nation has the Gospel in greater plenty and purity. No Nation (for ought I
know) has had so great peace and prosperity joined with the profession of it.

The second thing which I would have you to observe is, 12. GOD the most
excellent Master 1. in respect of Wisdom.
that albeit the outward means are much to be esteemed, yet we are to depend
chiefly upon the Instruction of GOD. He is the chief Master, and in respect of
him none is worthy of that name, call no man your master, says our Savior,
upon earth. First there is no master which has such Wisdom and Knowledge. GOD
is essentially and of himself Wise. He has not had nor could not have any
Teacher, Counselor or Book of which he might learn. His Wisdom is of
himself, and in himself he sees all things that are to be done. Therefore his
Knowledge is unbounded, and He is only Wise, as the Apostle calls him. All
others of themselves are ignorant, their knowledge is from him and has narrow
limits, and has much error and ignorance joined with it. Whence often the
doctrine of others is pernicious to them that learn of them, but that which
GOD teaches is always true and saving and such as may lead us to deliverance
from the greatest evils, and to the obtaining of our sovereign good.

Secondly, 13. secondly in respect of communicating of it
As God infinitely excels others in Wisdom so in his Ability of
communicating it. Put the case the knowledge of a man were never so great, yet
can he not make others learned, except they have ingine and take pains: but
our heavenly Master is able to make the most rude to learn every truth that he
pleases. He is absolute LORD of our spirits, and can speak in them what he
pleases. Again suppose we understand the truth, yet, it may be, we are not
moved, not can be moved by the doctrine of our Master to love it, but God is
able to make us love what we know, without force and constraint: yea with
exceeding joy and delight. In a word the knowledge which we have by man i^ dry
and puffed up, but that which is from God does satiate the SOUL: knowledge
obtained by man reaches to the understanding, but that which is by God
reaches to the affections also. That is ^peculative, this is practical and
effectual. That is, as it were, a shyning light, this both shines and
burns. That makes learned, but this marke^ SAINTS. It is the knowledge of
salvation, or the saving knowledge, (...) 1. 97. And therefore should be
chiefly desired.

Thirdly, Observe that he (...) hearing to the SOUL, every one that hears and
learneth of the Father. 14. Spiritual senses.
As the body has five senses, whereby it perceives things profitable and
pleasant, so the soul has actions answerable to these senses, whereby it
perceives the things that are spiritual, and in scripture are called by the
name of SENSES, seeing, hearing, smelling etc. We hear God inwardly, when we
receive his Inspirations; which are words, as it were, whereby he speaks
inwardly to our heart. This is that hearing, without which, the outward
avails nothing. It is the Voice of God, as we said, that changes the heart,
which softeneth the hard heart and makes it to melt, which inflameth the cold
heart and makes it to burn, as we read of the two disciples going to Emaus,
which pacifieth the troubled heart and secleth it in tranquillity. Thus God
speaks sometimes to SINNERS, He makes them to hear a voice, as it were
behind, them, saying this is the good way, walk in it, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls, but most commonly this way he speaks to the Godly
instructing, comforting and exhorting them to a continual progress in piety.
2. There is a spiritual sight, while as God infuseth a clear light in our
minds, whereby with Moses, We see him that is invisible, apprehending divine
mysteries more firmly and clearly then we did before, and in such a manner, as
is fit, to raise up love, desire and joy in our hearts: for this fight the holy
Apostle did pray Ephesians. 1. 17. 18. When he desired, That GOD would give them
the spirit of Wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of
their mind being enlightened, they might see what was the hope of his Calling
and the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the saints. So there is a
spiritual SMELL. Christ is anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. His name is as oyntmen^ poured forth. The good ointments of his
divine Perfections and heavenly virtues send forth so sweet a savor, as makes
the Spouse in the Gant. to say, Draw us and we will run after thee. This the
soul perceives by a spiritual kind of smell, and the feeling of it raises
up most ardent desires, and stirs up to most earnest endeavors of the things
that are heavenly. Like wise the soul has a spiritual taste. There is an
unspeakable Sweetnet in GOD, in his divine Mysteries and Obedience, which may
be tasted by the soul of a spiritual man. O taste and see how sweet the LORD
is, says David, as if he would say, If ye taste, ye will know the sweetness
of his Goodness, Mercy, Liberality and Power. So we may say of every divine
mystery, Taste and see how sweet it is, and of every virtue, Taste and see how
sweet is obedience, patience, humility, chastiry, charity, etc. Lastly, There
is also a spiritual touch. Hence the devote soul Cant. 2. 6. says, His left
hand is under mine head and his right hand does embrace me, and again, I have
found him whom my soul loved, I held him and would not let him go.

But why do I insist so much upon this? 15. Gods goodness in communicating
himself to us.
first, To show the admirable Goodness of GOD, who vouchsafes so many ways to
communicate himself to us, and makes us so many ways able to receive him. All
this proceeds merely from his infinite Goodness. There should be no loss to
him, although we should never SER his Beauty, HEART his Voice, SMELL the sweet
Savor of his Precious Ointments, TASTE his Sweetness, or EMBRACE him in the
arms of our love, this should nothing impair his Felicity, which from
eternity he perfectly enjoyed, and might unto all eternity enjoy, without our
enjoying of him: but all this proceeds from his admirable Goodness which
delights to commucat it self to his unworthy creatures.

Secondly, 16. Sight of Christ in the holy mysteries.
I have insisted upon this at this time to move you, to stir up all the
powers and faculties of your fouls, to receive him who offers himself at this
time most abundantly to be participated by us first, Christ offers himself
to be seen by us in these sacred mysteries both as GOD and man. Here we may see
him by the eye of faith as GOD, not simply as GOD, but as GOD made man, and as
made a man of sorrows for us, and as made the bread of life unto us. What a
wonderful sight is this! how can the Angels of heaven but admire to see the
only begotten Son of God, who is in the bosom of the Father, The brightness of
his Glory and the express Image of his person, eternal and omnipotent as the
Father is, Infinite in Majesty, Wisdom, Goodness, Power etc. How can they, I
say, but admire to see him demitt himself so far for us and to us? As man
also he offers himself to be seen by us spiritually. Here we may see him and
should look upon him as he suffered and was crucified for us. Here thou may see
his Head crowned with thorns, which should have been, and now is crowned with
Glory: His Face spitted on and bussete^^, which should have shined and does
shine with the beams of heavenly Light: His Hands and Feet pierced and in a
word all wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, and now
giving his Body that was broken, and his Blood that was shed, as the food of
our souls unto eternal life. O what a wonderful and sweet sight is this! what
reverence and humility, what love and thanksgiving should it raise up in us.
Do thou see what thou receivest in these sacred mysteries and from whom? and
will thou who art but dust and ashes refuse to humble thy self in body, and in
soul? or can thou consider his infinite Love to thee, which made him to give
himself for thee when thou was his enamie, and to exchange, as it were, the
Throne of his Glory with the ignominy of the cross, can thou, I say,
consider this and not be inflamed with love, and break out in thanksgiving?

Secondly, 17. The hearing of him therein
He speaks to us in these sacred mysteries most sweet and comfortable words,
which we should hear and answer unto. He says, I am the bread of life etc.
that we may answer, LORD evermore give us this bread. He says, I am the water
of life, that we may answer LORD give us of this water that we thrist not
again. He says, This is my Body which is broken for you. This is my Blood
which was shed for you, he that eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me and I in him, that we may answer, Whence is it that our LORD comes to us
O LORD we are unworthy that thou should enter under the rooffe of our unclean
souls, but let it be unto thy servants according to thy word. Here he reaches
us, as it were, from his cross all the precepts of divine virtue. He says,
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart, I humbled my self and became
obedient to the death of the cross, when I was stricken I revenged not, I gave
my life for mine enemies, I prayed for them, in my greatest distres, I cleaved
most firmly unto God, thus he speaks unto us, and we should devotly answer
him. But the time is spent and therefore I forbear to proceed further. The
LORD imprint these things in our hearts and that for the merits of Christ to
whom etc.

A SERMON UPON the II. of the CORINTH. chap. VII.
Verse. 10. For godly sorrow works repentance to salvati^^ not to be repented
of: but the sorrow of the world works death.
THe holy Apostle, in the former words speaks of the effect of his former
Epistle unto the Corinthians, 1. Intentions
wherein he had rebuked them for not censuring the incestuous person that was
among them, of whom ye may read in the 5. chap. of that ^repist. This his
reprooffe of them had grieved them and made them sorrowful; but he tells them,
that if it could have been, he wished not their sorrow. If it might have stood
with their wel-being, he would have been glad, that thy had not been sorrowful
at all. Yet in the mean time, he declares, that this their sorrow, which his
epistle had wrought in them, was matter of joy unto him, not for that they were
grieved: but because they had sorrowed in a Godly manner, and that unto
repentance, unto the Glory of God and good of their own souls. He confirms
this particularly, by the general doctrine of the fruit of Godly Sorrow in the
place that I have read,

For Godly Sorrow; 2. Division
says he, works repentance etc. Here he commends Godly Sorrow, of which
nature that was, which his epistle wrought in the Corinthians. first, The very
name he gives it, contains an argument of commendation, for the Sorrow which
he speaks of, is a Godly Sorrow or a Sorrow according to GOD. 2. He
commends it from the fruit of it, it is such a Sorrow as works repentance;
even a repentance that is never to be repented of, because it is unto
salvation. 3. He commends it by opposing the contrary Sorrow, namly the
Sorrow of this world which works death. That we may proceed the more clearly,
we shall begin at this last point.

The Sorrow of this world, 3. Sorrow of this world
says he, works death. He opposes as ye see two kinds of Sorrows; the
one to the other: the Sorrow which is according to God, and the sorrow of this
world. The sorrow of the good Corinthians had this good in it, that it was not
a sorrow of this world, which is no matter of joy, for it works death. All
sorrow presupposes love, for no man sorroweth, but for the loss or want of
that which he loves: therefore where this worldly sorrow is, there is also a
love of this world. Such is the sorrow that men have for the loss of worldly
things, wealth, honors, delights or friends. If their heart and love be set
upon these things, they foolishly, and without the fear of God, rejoice in
them when they have them, and being drunk with that transitory happiness, they
seek for no more. On the contra^y when they loss or want them, their hearts
are cast down, and they are pressed down with Sorrow inordinatly. Such a
Sorrow, the Apostle recommendeth not, nay, he dehorteth from it, for it works
death. This Sorrow can do no good. When a man has lost his riches, if he
sorrow for that, this sorrow will not restore his wealth to him again. If a
man has lost his honor, the sorrow which he has for that, will not recover
it again. If he has lost his friends or children, should he mourn never so
much for them, his sorrow will not bring them to life again. So this sorrow
can do no good: yea on the contrary, it does great harm, it works death. It
makes the way to bodily death, especially when it is inordinate; The heavines
of the spirit dries up the bones. says SOLOMON Proverb. 17. 22. Sorrow has
killed many, and there is no profit in it, says the WISEMAN, Ecclestast.
Chap. 30. 23. And which is worst of all, this sorrow leads to eternal death:
For God is offended with it, it stirs up a man to do many things, whereat God
is offended; and makes a man guilty of eternal death. so this sorrow is no
matter of joy but the sorrow that was in the Corinthians, and which ought to be
in us all, was of another kind. It was a Godly sorrow or a sorrow according to
God.

For better understanding of this; 4. sorrow according to GOD.
Consider first, That this sorrow which is according to God, is such a sorrow
as a man conceives for the offense of God, or because he has done that which
is displeasing and hateful to God, and therefore this sorrow which is
according to God, is a sorrow for our sins. Nothing offends him but sin;
and every sin offends him: for all sin is done in Thought, word or deed
against his eternal LAW, and his eternal LAW is his supreme and eternal
Reason, which is nothing else but GOD himself, so that whosoever sins,
shakes off the Yoke and Obedience of GOD and turns his enemy, and in some
sort trampleth his Law under foot.

But here, it is to be observed, that every Sorrow for sin is not this godly
sorrow, 5. every sorrow for sin is not this Sorrow.
or sorrow according to God. For first, a man may be grieved for his sins,
because there is in them a repugnancy and filthiness contrary to the honesty and
beauty of humane reason, Such a Sorrow a natural man may have, but if he rise
not up higher, he has not come unto that Sorrow which is according to GOD. 2.
A man may be grieved for his sins because of the harm and damnage that he
has thereby, because thereby he has lost his credit or good name, his means,
his health, and which is most of all, because thereby he has lost eternal
joys, and has encurred endless and intolerable pains. If a man in his Sorrow
regard no more but this, he has not yet attained to that Sorrow which is
according to GOD.

If one man have offended another, suppose he be grieved for that he has done,
6. Sorrow according to God wha^
yet if in this grief he has no respect to him whom he has offended; that
his Sorrow avails nothing for obtaining reconciliation with the party
offended, even so whatsoever he a man's grief for his sins, if he have not
regard to God in that his Sorrow, it avails nothing, Therefore this Sorrow
which is according to God, is not only for our sins, but also and chiefly it
is for this, that thereby we have offended God, and have deprived our selves of
his Favor. Such a Sorrow is justly said to be Godly or according to GOD, for
the ground of it is the Love of God, which makes us when we have him to
rejoice, and to acquiesce in him as our true and sovereign Good, which we
declare by a contempt of the world, whileat we use the good things of it as if
we used them not, and rejoice in the midst of the tribulations of it. According
to that, In the world ye^ shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have joy: And
on the contrary, when we loss GOD, it makes us grieved above all thing, that
we have offended him and are deprived of him. 2. This Sorrow is justly called a
Godly Sorrow, for it is God that works it in us. By nature we are blind, and
see not the Offense of GOD, nor how great an evil it is, and we are so far
from being grieved for these things which offend him, that on the contrary we
take delight therein. It is only God that opens our eyes, and takes away the
heart of stone, and molifieth our hears that they may melt with Sorrow, for
the offense of him. 3. This is a Sorrow according to God, because we undertake
this Sorrow that we may restore to God his Honor, which by sinning we have
impared, so much as was in us, and that we may pacify him, and by recovering
his Favor again may obtain health and life unto our wounded and dead souls,
which life stands in the Favor of God, and in our union with him.

Thus ye see what is that Sorrow according to GOD, 7. how great reason sinners
have to Sorrow thus.
here recommended to us. There is no man knows what God, and what himself is,
but may easily perceive how great reason sinners have, to have this kind of
Sorrow. GOD is Almighty, whose Power none can resist. What and how lamentable
madness then is it for us miserable worms, to lift up our horns against him!
who can trample us down in a moment to the lowest hells. GOD is Alsufficient,
and stands in need of none. our goodness extends not to him, Psalm. 16. How
much then is it to be lamented, that we who in him live, and move and have our
being, and most daily beg from his infinite bounty, all that we stand in need
of, should forget and despise him? GOD is the rock of ages, he alone has
immortality, his estate is immutability, He remains still the same, and his
Years change not. Alace then what madness is it for us, Whose life is but a
vapor quickly vanishing away, who begane to be but yesterday, and tomorrow are
not, What madness is it I say for us so frail creatures, to provoke such in
one? he is only WISE, Searching the heart and trying the times, so that nothing
can be hid from him; what folly then, and what matter of Sorrow is it, that we
should trust so to our (...) as if we could hide our wicked counsels and
course^ from him? ^. GOD is the (...) and supreme Lord is of all his
crea^^res, so of us, and therefore when we sin we withdraw our selves from
his Obedience, (...) against him, and set up the creature in his stead. Lastly,
He is our loving and bountiful Father, who has loadened us with BLESSINGS. He
has made us and not we our selves: He has redeemed us by the Blood of his
Son: He upholdeth us, and provideth for us every moment: He has called us to
the hope of his Glory; As many members as there are in our body: as many
creatures as there are in this world: as many days and hours as have gone over
our heads, so many testimonies have we of his Goodness and Love. And what a
monstrous thing then is it, that we should be so wicked children, that not
only we forget; but do also what we can to trample under our feet so good a
Father? Beside all this, wherefore do we offend so great a LORD and so loving a
Father? for some triffling pelf or transitory pleasure. We lay this in the one
scale of the balance, as it were, and GOD in the other, and prefer this
pelf and this pleasure even to God himself. Who can consider this, and keep
his heart from melting with Sorrow? which if any attain unto, he has obtained
this Godly Sorrow, or that Sorrow which is according unto GOD.

Thus ye see what kind of Sorrow we ought to have for our sins, 8. We
should labor for this Godly sorrow for our own sins.
which if it be kindly we will never sufficiently satisfy our selves in it.
Marie Magdalen had such a Sorrow, and it made her to wash the feet of Christ
with tears, and to wipe them with the hair of her head. Luke 7. 38. DAVID had
this Sorrow, and it was so effectual in him, that he says in the 6. Psalm. I
am weary with my groaning, all the night I make my bed to swine, and I water my
couch with tears. So if this Sorrow were in us, It would make our eyes to run
down with tears, and our eye lids to gush out with waters. Ier. 9. 18, But
alace how far are we from this? who testifies this Sorrow by the abundance
of his tears? It may be ye will say to me, we cannot attain to this: yet if
thou rightly look upon thine own sins and be truly grieved, because thereby
thou have offended GOD, and have deprived thy self of him, his Grace and
Spirit, thou may first value, as it were, and estimate how great a Sorrow thy
sins deserves, and be so disposed, that nothing is so displeasing and
hateful to thee as thy sins are. Thou may come to this, that with an upright
heart thou may say to GOD, O LORD, these my sins, so many, so grievous, so
long continued in, so often fallen into; deserve to be bewailed with tears of
blood if mine heart could possibly have them. 2. Thou may wish from GOD, That
thy head were waters, and that thy eyes were fountains of tears, that thou
might lament as thou ought to do. Ier. 9. 1. Thou may pray to GOD* that he
would give thee, the grace of tears, and that he who brought water out of the
hard rock, would soften thy hard heart, and make it to melt with this Godly
Sorrow. 4. Thou may endeavor more and more, and work upon thine own heart for
obtaining this unfeigned grief. This if we do, God will accept even of our
imperfect sorrow, for the perfect. Sorrow of Christ Jesus, and for these strong
cries and tears, even the tears of blood, which he shed for us in the days of
his flesh.

Before we go hence, 9. Sorrow for the sins of others.
it may be demanded, whether or not this Godly Sorrow is only for our own
sins, I answer, it must be also for the sins of others. There is no man
that has Zeal to the Glory and Honor of GOD, and love to the souls of other
men, but he must be sorry, when he sees them by their sins despysing the
Majesty of God, trampling his Law under foot, and casting themselves headlong
into perdition. Hence the blessed Patriarchs and Prophets, who were the most
sincere friends of GOD, are so freq^ent in holy scripture, in mourning for the
sins of others. Horror has taken hold of me says David Psalm. 119. Thy
Zeal has consumed me, Rivers of tears gush out of mine eyes, because the
wicked despise, thy Law and forget thy words. O that mine head were waters,
says Ier. 9. 1. Complaining for the sins and miseries of his people, and
that mine eyes were fountains of tears that I might weep day and night. Thus
the righteous soul of LOT, was vexed continually, because of the abominations
that he did hear and see in Sodom. We are commanded to pray continually, that
the Name of GOD may be hallowed and glorified and therefore it cannot be but
great matter of grief to them that love GOD, to see his Name daily dishonored
and prophened. Hence. They that were marked Ezekiel. 9. were such as did sigh and
mourn, not only for their own sins, but also for all the sins and
abominations done in the midst of the land.

Secondly, It may be asked, does this Godly Sorrow only reach to our sins
and to the sins of others, 10. sorrow for our imperfection and absence from
heaven.
I answer it reaches also to the consequents of sin, and first to the
imperfection that is in us in serving of GOD. This is matter of grief, even
unto the most Godly. They are affected with a Godly Sorrow for this, that they
serve not God so perfectly as they should. They say with S. PAUL, with grief
of heart, The evil that I would not do, that I do, and the good that I would
do, that I do not. O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death. 2. This Godly Sorrow also extends it self to the desire of our
heavenly country. The Godly mourn that they are so long absent from the Lord,
and continue so long in the place of their exile. They say with David, Woe is me
that I sojourne in Mesech, and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. The children
of Israel mourned because of their exile in Babylon. By the rivers of Babylon,
said they Psalm 137. we sat, and we weeped, and we remembered Sion. They were
spoiled by the Babylonians of their goods, of their lands, honors, children
and friends, and yet the chief matter of their grief was that they wanted
Sion, albeit that was but an earthly Sion, and now spoiled, burnt and sacked,
how much more have we reason that sit by the waters of Babell, that is, of the
transitory pleasures of the confusion of this world, to weep when we remember
the permanent joys of the heavenly Sion which cannot be spoiled? and whereunto
no dart or enemy can have access; but the Apostle speaks here not of this
Sorrow, but of the Sorrow which is for our own sins; and for the sins of
others, and unto it he ascriveth this blessed effect that follows, which is.

To work repentance unto salvation not to be repented of. 11. How sorrow
works repentance.
It may be demanded how this Godly Sorrow works repentance, since this Godly
Sorrow is a chief part of repentance, it is answered first. By some, that the
Apostle says not simply, that it works repentance* but that it works
repentance unto salvation, that is, it makes our repentance true, profitable
and saving: for it is as it were the life of our repentance. So we say that a
sober-man makes a healthfull-man, or that a man addicted to studies makes a
learned-man. 2. This Godly Sorrow also works repentance it self, in respect
of diverse parts thereof. Repentance has many things in it, and some of them
are wrought in us, or greatly promoved by this Godly Sorrow.

For clearing of this consider, that repentance is wrought in us after this
manner. 12. Sight of our sins 1, wrought in penite^ts
1. Our mind is enlightened, and the eyes of it are opened, that we may see our
sins, the hynousnes and the deformity of them. Unless we have this sight, we
will never be grieved for them. Therefore David says Psalm. 51. I acknowledged
mine iniquity, and my sin is continually before mine eye. So it is said of the
prodigal son Luke 15. 17. That he came to himself. His eyes were opened to see
his own misery, and his sin which was the cause thereof. With this sight is
joined a sight and sense of the Wrath of GOD kindled against us for our sins.
For no man can rightly see his own sins, but he must see that God is offended
therewith, whence anguish and terror and trouble arises in the conscience.
Hence David in the 38. Psalm. says Lord reprove me not in thy wrath, nor
chastise me in thy hot displeasure. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thine
hand presses me sore. There is no soundnes in my flesh because of thy Wrath,
and there is no rest in my bones, because of my sin, my sins are gone over mine
head and they are too heavy a burden for me.

Secondly God works in the heart of a penitent, 13. Effects of Godly sorrow.
some love of himself, which makes him to hate and detaste his sins, whereby
he offended God, and to have in him this Godly Sorrow because of them 3. This
sorrow promoves the work of our repentance. It makes us to humble our selves
under the mighty hand of God. It stirs us up to an holy indignation, and the
taking of a just revenge of our selves: because we have offended God, as the
Apostle shows in the next verse. Hence the renting of our hearts spoken of by
JOEL, and the smiting of our breast, which we find in the Publican. This sorrow
also venteth it self by confession Psalm. 32. When I keped silence, my bones
waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. Day and night thy Hand was
heavy upon me, my moisture was turned into the drought of summer. Then I said,
I will confess my sins, and mine iniquity will I not hide: I acknowledged my
transgressions unto the LORD, and thou for gave the iniquity of my sin Sela.
This Sorrow also expresses it self by tears. by fasting, by sackcloth and
ashes, but which is most of all; This Godly sorrow stirs us up to
conversion, to turn from our former evil ways, and to walk in the way of
righteousness. A steadfast purpose of so doing, is the maine part of our
repentance, and this is wrought in us by this Godly sorrow. For he that is
truly sorrowful and displeased for that he has offended God, will in time
coming eschew that which may be offensive to him, and will be careful to do
that which may be pleasant in his Sight.

This is that which the LORD chiefly requires, 14. Of turning to GOD.
if the wicked man shall turn from his evil ways, and keep all my statutes,
his former unrighteousnes shall be no more remembered Ezekiel. 18. 21. 22. Turn
unto me says the LORD with all your hearts Joel 2. 12. our life is, as it
were, a journey, and the end of our way, is happiness, which is not to be found
but in God, In whose presence there is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. Therefore our steps or our eyes should never
be turned from him, but alace such is our corruption and such is the power of
satan, that oftentimes he draws us out of the way of Gods commandments,
which lead us to that end, by setting before us some triffle of pleasure or
honor or commodity, and so brings us in the way of sin and perdition.
Therefore if we would repent, we must turn again, and turn again to God,
and that with our heart, even with all our heart. It is not enough that the
mind be changed, farlesse that we turn our face, that may be for shame, or
that we turn our feet that may be for fear, but we must turn our heart and
affections, and that wholly, from al our sins and from all the occasions
thereof, so far as lies in us, that we may walk in newnes of life, even in
the good way, wherein we may find rest unto our souls. So the prodigal son
resolved to go to his father, and indeed went unto him, saying, Father I have
sinned etc. Thus Godly Sorrow works repentance, for it serves powerfully to
put a holy indignation in our HEART, tears in our EYES, words in our monuths,
and in all our CONVERSATION, fruits worthy of amendment of life. The Apostle
adds that this repentance;

Is to salvation not to be repented of. 15. this repentance is not to be
repented of.
Albeit this repentance will seem grievous and bitter because of the sorrow and
humiliation that is in it, yet indeed it is such, that no man will ever repent
of it. If we have not this repentance, we shall be forced to repent for the
want and neglect of it. What is the worm of conscience which tormenteth the
demaned, but a continual repentance, as it were, whereby they accuse and
condemn themselves, for not using aright the means of grace, and repenting
while they had time? But this is unprofitable repentance though most painful
and eternal. The Godly shall not so repent of their repentance, it shall never
displease them, but shall be ever matter of joy and rejoicing to them. The
reason is set down here, namely;

This repentance is unto salvation. 16. It is unto ^lvation
There can be no salvation without it, Except ye repent, says our Savior,
ye shall all likewise perish. Repent and do thy first work, else I will come
suddenly to thee, and take thy Candlestick out of its place; says our Savior
to the Church of Ephesus. Upon the other part, if we repent, we are sure of
salvation; we may have great hope to be delivered from the evils threatened in
this life, and howsoever that be, we shall be sure to escape the wrath that is
to come. If the wicked man says the Lord, turn from his evil ways and keep
my statutes, he shall surely live: he shall not die. Wash you and make you
clean Isa. 1. 16. Cease to do evil, and learn to do good, and though your
sins were as crimson they shall be made white as snow, and though they were
as scarlet they shall be made as wool. If we be careful by the tears of true
and unfeigned repentance to blot out our sins out of our conscience, God will
hide his Face from them, and blot them out of his register, and remember them
no more against us. 17. the love of our selves requires our turning with tears.


Thus then we see how great motives we have to repent and turn to God. First,
The Glory of God requires this, by our sins we have dishonored him, and
therefore ought by repentance to restore to him his Honor again. 2. The love
which we ought to our selves requires this, since without repentance we cannot
be saved, but must needs perish if we want it. Put the case a man were walking
in a way, wherein if he went on a little, he would undoubtedly fall head-longs
over a rock and dash himself into pieces. If that man would not do so much as
turn back for the safety of his life, ye may justly say, that he were a
murderer of himself. How much more cruel is thy murder of thy self, who
rather then tho wilt turn from thine evil way, will drown thy self in the lake
of brimstone and fire where the most bitter and eternal death is.

Lastly, we have yet another pregnant motive to persuade us to sorrow and
repentance at this time, 18. Our country and church requires this.
that is, the danger of our Church and country. Who sees not a fire kindled
in the Wrath of God, which threatens this Church and Land with desolation.
Alace how can we be without regard to this? S. AUGUSTINE in his first book of
the City of GOD and 6. chap. Reports this fact of Marcellus, which there also
he commends. While he was taking in the city of Syracuse in Sicily, in the
mean time that the armies were sighting he went up to a turret to behold.
Perceiving from thence men running in fury each one against another, hearing
the cries of them that were wounded and killed, seeing fire cast on houses, and
the smoke ascending to heaven, and hearing the noise of the houses falling to
the ground, he break forth in tears, albeit sure of the victory. He weeped to
see men though his enemies subject to so great miseries. Alac^ then how great
reason have we to mourn for these dreadful miseries, which are like to come
upon our brethren, and upon our selves. What other can we expect, except we
turn from our sins, and except the Lord turn away his Wrath from us. He
has given us the spirit of giddenes. We are like men that are drunk, every one
rising up, and ready to rush against another. How dreadful a token is this of
the Wrath of God, kindled against us because of our sins, and how great
reason have we to contribute our tears for the quenching of this fire?
Oftentimes we have foretold you that God would visit for the sins commitred
in this land, and that he would be avenged on such a nation as this. Many and
terrible examples also of the Judgments of GOD ye have had before your eyes,
by which the Lord has been saying to you, Except ye repent ye shall all
likewayes perish. But notwithstanding of all this we have gone one securely in
our sins. How many thousands in Germany and other parts, not long since, have
thought their feet as sure from falling as ye have thought yours? their eyes
have been as dry, and their souls seemed to be as sure of life, and yet their
feet have slidden, their eyes have been drowned with tears, and their souls
have tasted of DEATH. The Sword of God has devoured their flesh, and is become
drunk with their blood. This same cup which the Lord has given them, he now
presents to us, and if we pacify not his Wrath, whether we will or not he
shall force us to drink it out. Let us therefore follow the example of our
Savior. When the bitter cup was presented to him for our sins, he fell down,
and with tears of blood said, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from
me. Let us turn to God and do in like manner. Neither should we think it
enough to mourn this day, but should continue our mourning in private, that if
it be possible he may deliver us and our land from this great Wrath, or if he
have decreed otherwise, we may at least escape his eternal indignation. The
Lord grant this unto us, and that for the merits of Christ to whom etc.


