EFFIGIES REVERENDISS: JOSIAE SHUTE S: THEOL: BACCHA: COLCESTRIAE ARCHIDIAC:
PRECONIS LONG MELLITISSIMI. OBIIT 22o JUNII. 1643.
Surgito Lector, ades and Tibimet (...) Anglus,
Scilicet, egregius (SHUTIVS) ille preco:
Flexanimus vates, Animas Qui traxit in Aures:
Voce docens Sacrum (quod pede pandit) iter.
Malleus (...) constans, et (...);
Qui nequit a Recto (Spe-ve, Metu-ve) Trahi.
Hunc tulit in Portum Dominus, Minitante Processa:
Nec fucrant Tanto Saecula digna viro.
Vmbra dat Effigiem, resonat tibi Pagina Mentem:
Assolet ut Reliquis, gratus adesto Tibi.
Ed: Spark.

Here Is yt wise Charmer, whose Sweet Airs to Hear
Each Soul delighted so to dwell in the Ear:
Whose Life and Doctrine's Combined Harmony
Familiiarized St Paul's Ecstasy!
But now (from growing Evils) mounted high
(Change but the Soul her Seat from Ear to the Ey)
This bright Starr still does Lead wisemen to Christ
Through this dark Bochim, and egyptian Mist:
Nay here (what himself does in Heaven behoulde)
Even Blessed visions does his Book unfoulde.
T. B: Ed: Spark.

portrait of Josias Shute

SARAH and HAGAR: OR, GENESIS the sixteenth Chapter opened, In XIX SERMONS.

BEING The first legitimate Essay OF The Pious Labors of that Learned,
Orthodox, and Indefatigable Preacher of the GOSPEL, Mr JOSIAS SHVTE, B. D. And
above three and thirty years Rector of S. Mary Woolnoth, in Lombard Street,
London.

Qui credens in Dominum Jesum, non Circi Furoribus, non Arenae sanguine, non
Theatri Luxuria delectabatur; sed tota illi voluntas in Ecclesiae erat
Congregatione, charus omnibus, and loquendi Art gnarus. Hieronim. lib. 3.
Epist. in Vita Hilarionis. (...). Greg. Nazianzen, Oratione in laudem Basilii.
(...) Dan. 12.3. (...) He was a burning and a shining lamp, Joh. 5.35.
Published according to his own Original Manuscripts, circumspectly examined,
and faithfully transcribed, by EDWARD SPARK, B. D. of Clare-Hall in Cambridge,
and Rector of S. Martins Iron-monger-lane, London.

(...). Plato in Phaedone. LONDON, Printed for J. L. and Humphrey Moseley, at
the sign of the Princes Arms in Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

To the Right Honorable, JOHN Lord Viscount BRACKLEY, etc. And to the Right
Worshipful, THOMAS VINAR, Alderman and Sheriff of the honorable City of London;
And the rest of the well-wishing Parishioners and Auditors of the late worthy
Author: Both the upper and the nether springs of comfort.
Honored Sirs,
EVen Justice it self, without any other relation, challenges this Dedication
to you; unto whom God had given the Author, and the Author himself devoted his
Endeavors: so that whosoever alienates things of this nature to a private
Mecoenas, is justly to be redargued Parasitical, and as a moral Impropriator.
You know, the children of the bondsman are the goods of the parents master, Lev.
25.45, 46.
Levit. 25. and however hereby made more common, yet are nevertheless your own
in particular.

That the Eye therefore may no longer (now) envy the Ear, but both help the
Soul; these Sermons are presented to your view; and that without the least
suspicion of one Sense proving less candid then the other: appearing (here) as
not without some disadvantages, (in regard of that same Magisterial presence,
and Charming Elocution of the Author;) so not without some odds at other side,
for permanencie, and more leasurable instillation of the matter. And it is an
happiness obliging unto thankfulness, that God vouchsafes thus to feast his
people at both Senses. The lively sound, indeed, is the more piercing, (as
Saint Viva vox habet nescio quid latentis (...). In Prologo Galeato.
Jerome says;) but the Letter written, the more during; Litera scripta manet:
The one, as it were, like Lightning; the other, like the fire upon the Altar.

According to my Talent, I have endeavored some good both ways, not so much
fearing censure, as desiring the good of others; and that these Papers might
speak that permanently, to the eyes of all our Countrymen, which found such
favor in the ears of your Citizens, and entertainment in so many hearts. Yet
all this, but too narrow a confinement for his ample merit, which did so far
transcend the Pattern of his Predecessors, that he has laid a Task invincible
upon his Successors As was said of Chrysostoms successor, Quis, Cui? and after
Athanasius, that a storm followed a stream. Nazianzen.
: Vix dedit, vix dabit aetas parem.

But I know, Love and Sorrow need no Remembrancer. 'Twould therefore be
superfluous for me (to say no worse on it) if not infandum, renovare dolorem, to
echo to you his incomparable Parts and Arts; whose departure your love still
lamenteth; whose pious excellencies, so many painful years imprinted on your
Memories; and not there only, but, I hope, shed, with all their Celestial
influences, on your conversations; that as, in these writings, he being dead,
(as the Apostle says) yet speaks: so, in your Christian practice, the world
may see and say, that (albeit deceased) he still lives. 2 Kings 23. 2 Chronicles.
35.
Nor has he so altogether forsaken us, (though This, like that other good
Josiah, subductus aevo pessimo, taken from the evil to come;) but that (as
Nazianzen (...) Naz. Oratione in laudem Basilii.
said of Basil) he still does us good, besteads us still: yet that, not (as
they stretch his Rhetoric) by praying for us; but thus, by his instructions,
and profitable labors, teaching us. For here, your meditations (though but in
one short Chapter opened) are carried, as it were, thorowout the Universe:
sometimes, as in Elijahs chariot, up to heaven, to contemplate the Angels
there, and their good offices; the blessed spirits of just men made perfect; I,
and most frequently, the God of both of them, and him whom he has sent, Jesus
Christ, our dear Savior: sometimes alighting unto (...) lower objects,
pointing us to all the several mansions of the Virtues, and powerfully ejecting
that same Legion of Epidemick vices: sometimes aloft, from the top of the tree
of grace, shaking down the fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5.
: at other times again, stooping to inferior capacities, and regulating of
domestical relations: sometimes (as a Remembrancer from heaven) advertizing the
public Magistrate; strongly and sweetly moving all, to spiritual prudence, and
conscientiousness in their several Functions; chalking out to us (in these last
and worst times) the Christian Menagry of all these various events of Divine
Providence; with the profitable husbanding of both-hand-Temptations,
Prosperity, and Affliction: That so (like Music out of discordant sounds, or
wholesome Medicine from distastful severals, Romans 8.28.
all things may terminate unto Gods glory, Man's amendment and felicity. All
which (together with a grateful affection to the Authors memory, Acts 22.3.
at the feet of which Gamaliel I had the happiness to sit some years) conquered
me into this Undertaking; for which (as some of his near Correlates
acknowledge) these diverse years could not find out an Gedipus.

What care and travel is bestowed here, (in extricating the Character,
rendering the Languages, digesting of the Index, and transcribing the whole
business) I mention not; nor need I, unto such as have but seen his Copies: Yet
modesty need not blush to say, It was not each ones work; his Manuscripts
fulfilling that same Greek Proverb, (...).
As difficult as excellent: his Notes right Golden Oar, (though precious in
themselves, yet) worth but little, till dug out with art and labor, (as
some of your own eyes are pairs of witnesses:) so that, although the matter of
them be a divine Collyrium, or eye salve to the soul; yet, penned in so
diminutive a Letter, writ in so strict an Hand, (the wonder of Youth to read,
much more of Age to write it) that they appear like Basilisks unto the bodies
eyes: And that is the Remora (I suppose) that has so long detained them, and
hitherto deterred his dearest Affectionates from such perusal of them.

But it shall never be said, but that, for such an heavenly Paul, some of his
Auditors will dare even pluck out their own eyes also, Gal. 4.15.
(in this sense) and give them to him; at least, hazard such a Private
Darkness, to hold forth such a Public Light. It Is honor enough, in the
Sanctuary of God, (where all cannot be Lamps) to be but of those golden
Candlesticks, 1 Kings 7.49. Revel. 1.12.
1 Kings 7. Indeed, such metal was ordained for such service; and pity it is,
any coarser should support our Authors holy Flame: Yet alas, some part of it
(we see) has been obtruded to the world in brazen, as it were, if not wooden
sockets; burning but dim and ghastly, by reason of their dull reflections: Quem
recitas meus est, o Fidentine, Libellus; sed male, etc. Mart. Ep.
Sed male dum recitas; But the truth is, while thus mutilously they render him;
it is even their own dark Lanthorn, rather then his Taper: and therefore I have
used here both tongs and snuffers of the Sanctuary, to vindicate its proper
luster. And although some (perhaps) might have effected it more dexterously; yet
none could have more faithfully endeavored, that the Child might look like
the Father, and not like those Mephibosheths that halt abroad under his injured
name: which, however tolerably done too, as to such private men and families,
(the best use of Short-writing;) yet are right Short-hand-Sermons, Sermons far
short of that same hand that penned them; mere Skeletons, without all
lineaments and beauty. Indeed, vulgar Stenography, I mean, illiterate
Shorthand, is but the coarse fieve of Learning, and the very Executioner of
all Ingenuity; which it not only rifles and disornaments, but commonly
dismembers, and beheadeth; sucking indeed apace (like Leeches) but the grossest
blood. These, no such births blind with haste Canis festinans caecos parit
catulos.
, but delivered from his own Quill: These Sermons are no Hagarens, but children
of the freewoman, of the Authors own Minerva. Your Senses can witness to your
Understandings they are his; his totally, without any the least mutilation:
(Sermons, like their Author, Attested by his own brother, M. Tim. Shute, to be
his Sermons at large; and that he seldom altered a word or phrase.
complete in all their numbers:) And who dares draw a line after such an
exquisite Apelles!

And having showed they are his, I know how little need there is, either to
entreat your acceptance, or advise your use: it is enough to have presented
them into your hands, and, through them, to the Church of God; which they now
find (here) much like that wounded traveller, Luke 10. Luke 10.
and none more like the good Samaritan, then he: Oh may his wine and oil (of
comfort and instruction) help bathe, and search, and bind her bleeding wounds,
(our peace being bundled up in hers, as Jacobs life bound up in Joseph's. Genesis
44.30.
)

That God, who (above his other favors) has given you fixed hearts in looser
times, and stayed your feet in so many slippery places, add an increase of all
other heavenly graces, by this unworthy service of my weak endeavors. Mean
time, it is both my joy and thankfulness, to have done (though but thus
instrumentally) some little good: (in such things sure, Causa sine qua non, non
est causa stolida.) It Is at once a comfort and an honor to his poor servant,
that the great God of heaven has vouchsafed any way to use his hand, in the
Jest service of his Church.

These are but some Primitial handfuls, a few sheaves of that goodly The whole
stock of the Authors Sermons being in the hands of his Reverend brother, Master
Tim. Shute of Excoste; whence the Church may expect them, if he live to act his
promises, or leave such as may do it
Crop, which you may hope one day to reap, if God please to encourage
Laborers. I have presented you a fragrant Posie of his Flowers; future time
may make up the Garland: Facile est inventis addere. Here I have broke the Ice,
whereat Gods Flock may drink, and find the springs of comfort: I have spied
out this Canaan, and brought you here the first true cluster of the Grapes you
longed for. But there want not Discouragers: so that I shall either proceed or
stand, according as the Cloud or Fire admonishes.

These, in the interim, not only crave your entertainment, but bring along
their Recompense; their Recompense (I say) by seasonable Exhortations to piety
and wisdom. Had they come sooner to my hands, they had sooner come to yours: or
could civil importunity have purchased more, I should have given an account of
him in a larger Volume. Nor yet, having but these, would I be tempted to play
the Egyptian midwife with them, seeing the day of small things is not to be
despised, Zech. 4.10.
Zech. 4. glad of each good opportunity to turn a Grievance into an Advantage,
Psalm. 39.2, 3.
(having kept silence long, with David, not without pain and grief) by thus
improving an enforced Non-term, and overlong Vacation, in such a promulgating
the best of Laws.

Now therefore, as the sedulous Author has industriously composed, and his
Amanuensis ingenuously exposed them: so do you henceforth conscientiously
impose them on your actions; copy them out with a fair hand in all your
dealings, that they may work your riches into a Crown inviolable, and lead you
unto Immortality; that they may conduct you (like S. Peter's Angel) through this
tumultuous City of the world, Acts 12.9, etc.
nay through the Iron gate of death it self, into that City of the new
Jerusalem: To which end shall my prayers daily follow you; desiring therein a
Retaliation, for

(Sirs) The meanest of your servants, and least Spark on Gods Altar, EDWARD
SPARK.
From my Study in LONDON, November. 10. 1648.
TO THE Conscientious Reader:
FOr if thou be not such, (through Pride, or Ignorance, Faction, or
Profaneness) I take no further notice of thee, then to pray for thy
Conversion; knowing, thou will think the world has such things enough abroad
already, and that the Press is as sick of that Surfeit as the Pulpit: and 'twere
to be wished (I confess) that neither of them were cloyed with so many nauseous
and undigested Crudities. Yet, for all this, I shall not fear to add these to
the number. In things of worth, abundance is no burden: and by that time thou
have seriously perused them, I doubt not but the good Spirit will metamorphise
thy Prejudice to Piety, and all thy Grudge to Gratitude.

I know the world is furnished with this and other kinds of Writing,
Didactical and Polemical, even to satiety: but of those which labor the
reducing Christianity to Practice, by the sad event, it seems, there are yet
scarce enough. Wherein, these tendered to thee here, are eminently singular;
none more natively emergent, and satisfactory in Theological extractions; ('it is
a bold Truth;) none whatsoever extant, so copious and insinuative in the
Applications.

Now as all Music is but the multiplying of three parts, so is our Consort
here, in this Epistle; it consisting likewise of three parts, that is, three
Parties, sc. the Author, the Editor, and the Reader: each bears his part here
fairly, or makes discord.

First, for the Reverend Author, Master JOSIAS SHUTE, his very name is as a
silver Trumpet to his Reputation, sounding out a Quicquid doctiorum est,
assurgite huic tam colendo Nomini: Job 29.7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
with whom 'twas, as with Job appearing, Chap. 29. The young men hid
themselves, and the aged arose and stood up: when the ear heard him, then it
blessed him, and when the eye saw him, it gave witness to him. His Name, I say,
is an Aromatic Ointment, diffusing a more rich perfume then the choicest of
our broken Boxes; such as anticipateth all Encomium, and most Hyperboles; as at
once forestalleth mine expressions, and contracts them: Inopem me copia fecit;
a feast where I am puzzled with plenty: tanquam in Coena dubia; doubtful which
dish to onset; where to begin of him, unless (as Lib. 3. Ep. Ep. ad Eustochium.
Jerome of his virtuous Paula) Clarus genere, clarior virtute.

He was descended of a Learned Race, the son of an eminent Divine in
Yorkshire, and one of five famous brother-Preachers, somewhat like those five
fingers of the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9. James, Cephas, John, Paul,
and Barnabas.
Gal. 2. manus Dei, a kind of hand of God, by which (too) he brought mighty
things to pass, both for the Conversion of sinners, and Confirmation of his
people: Yet he was, in the best sense, the Saul of all his brethren, (or the
Paul, rather:) Fraxinus in sylvis, inter viburna cupressus: A chief of David's
Worthies; a man of that latitude of Learning, that length of Apprehension; of
that depth of Judgment, and height of Speculation; (one so complete in all
dimensions, so centred in the Circle of all Piety and Learning;) that I may
here justly renew that Admiration of Greg. Naz. in laudem Basilii magni.
Nazianzen, concerning Basil: (...): Where was there such a mixture of rare
parts and graces? what kind of Learning was he unacquainted with? or rather,
what kind had he not, beyond hyperbole, accomplished? having so encircled all
necessary Sciences, as others scarce have any one of them; and yet, again, so
accurate in each, as if he had endeavored but that only. And though he were a
man of but a single heart, (not (...) of an heart and an heart, Psalm. 12.2.
Psalm. 12.) yet was he one of diverse Tongues, able to speak to God without an
Interpreter, in his own sacred dialect; could read the Scriptures without the
spectacles of Translators; both drank and derived those holy waters out of
their sweeter Fountains: which however the old thick-scull'd Friars disparaged,
with Viperis and serpentibus pleni, that the fountains were full of vipers and
serpents, as being much corrupted by the envious Jews, (themselves more envious
to all such good Letters;) yet their own Lib. 2. de Verbo Dei, c. 2.
Bellarmine, in that, confutes them, acknowledging the great providence of God
in the Masorites restoration: and the Original (says he) in several cases of
necessity, to be made use of; as among various lections, in ambiguity of words
and sentences, in errors of Impression, and when the Idiom cannot be fully
rendered. Not that there was either any want of skill or faithfulness in our
deservedly-admired Interpreters; but that the Hebrew (as the firstborn of
Languages, and spoke by God himself) challenges an unimitable prerogative
above all others: And therefore, in Saint Lib. 2. Epist. Ep. 27.
Jeromes time, this Tongue was the ambition of both sexes, familiar to his
Paula, and her Eustochium: Origin studying it in his old age, as Saint
Augustine did the Greek, dolens non licuisse Ebraeam addere; lamenting that he
had not time to add the Hebrew. So afterward Erasmus, and others, as Sixtinus
Amama in Paraenesi, Ling. Hebreae.
One Commemorates. And Luther, and Melancthon (that same golden Pair) valued
their skill (says he) in the Originals, above whole Kingdoms; in that
Literaturae (...), that same real Reformation of Learning and Religion, (which
they chiefly managed.) So our grave Author here, like a wise Merchant, was well
skilled in the Tongue of the place he traded to; at least (...), if not (...);
master of those three Grandmother-Languages inscribed on the Cross of Christ,
besides some others of their progeny.

Filius Ecclesiae Patribus versatissimus; this son of the Church of England was
most familiar with the ancient Fathers, both of the East and West. Of the
Greek, Chrysostom lay in his bosom, (as thou will find, in the ensuing Work)
even till he did Patrizare, become like unto him, in his flowing style, and
golden eloquence. Among the Latins, Saint Augustine did command in chief,
(with him;) that Maul of Heretics, and Fountain of the Schools. How exact an
Historian was he, for Ecclesiasticals especially, those Records of the Church!
(the ignorance whereof, is the mother of many of our growing miseries and
indevotions) Nor was he less acquainted with the Schools, (though more
delighted to sit by the still waters of Siloah, Isai. 8.6. then those of Marah
and Meribah, Psalm. 106.32.) yet was he even Master of the Master of the
Sentences, and a Secretioribus unto the Councels, even of their Cabinet. And
because the Flock is not only to be fed, but cured sometime; he was a singular
Casuist, Gal. 6.1.
and spiritual Surgeon, that knew well (...), to set in joint again, Isai.
61.1.
and to bind up the broken spirit: contrary to those Idol-shepherds, as they
are termed, Zech. 11.16, 17. A soul Surgeon, right, for all those properties
of Heart, and Hand, and Eye: 2 Timothy 3.16.
none better at those several faculties, 2 Timothy 3. for Doctrine, A Character of
the Author.
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction: Quam nervosus in docendo! quam
cordatus in redarguendo! quam (...) in corripiendo! quam flexanimus in
exhortando! How full of arrows was his quiver of Instruction! how sharp those
of Reproof or Confutation! how sweet and vigorous his Exhortation! how
impartial in his Reprehension! how soft and tender his hand of Consolation! He
had digested so, and sorted all the Scriptures, as that he even was a walking
Concordance; and, like a skilled Apothecary, could go most readily to all the
severals, as occasion challenged. It Is Basils comparison of that Book of Books,
to such a shop well furnished: (...), etc. for there is no disease incident
unto the soul of man, (says he) wherein he may not find for it a remedy: That
was Liber Librorum to him, (as Lib. Epist.
Jerome calls it) the Library of all his Books: That was his Feast, (as Lib. 1.
Offic. c. 32.
Ambrose calls it) his Ambrosia convivium Sapientiae, the Banquet of Wisdom,
(the Flagons and Apples of the Spouse, Cant. 2. Cant. 2.5.
) Singuli libri, singula Fercula; where every Book's a several Course, each
Chapter as a Benjamins Mess, and every Verse a Morsel of the food of Angels.
Above all, I say, he was most intimate with these sacred Oracles, (as though
his Infancy had sucked none other milk.) He was another, a mightier Apollos;
(...), an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24.
Acts 18. one that taught (...), that is, diligently, says our Translation;
or, accurately, as the word imports: Take it which way you please; or rather,
both ways: Tertulli Eloquentiam habuit, non Amaritudinem; he had the Acuteness,
Chap. 24.2.
without the Acrimony of Tertullus. Theologus Rostris natus, cui suavitatis
conscius semper stilus.

Nor is it enough, once to have drank in his fluent Exercitations, though with
thirsty Ears: unless the Eye likewise may thus peruse them, one Sense would
quarrel the other, and the Schools take exceptions at the Church. Our Author had
accomplished Saint Paul's Charge, 2 Timothy 2. approving himself, both toward God
and Man, 2 Timothy 2.15.
(...), a workman that need not be ashamed; rightly dividing the Word of
truth. And as he did (...), The Motto of the Reverend Bishop Andrews.
(...), so likewise did he (...), walk answerably to his Dictations, (wherein
few are so happy:) He came up, in practice, to his own Instructions; (as
Nazianzen said of Basil) He did thunder in his Doctrine, and lighten in his
Life: (...), Joh. 5. His light shined before men: nor only that of Knowledge,
but also of Example; Example both of Piety and Charity: Piety was the Altar
sanctified the gold of all his eminencies; and Charity, of both kinds, his
well-pleasing sacrifice, Heb. 13. Heb. 13.16.
Of strict and severe life he was; yet affable, and full of sweet deportment;
nec tantum ab illicitis, sed etiam a concefsis abstinens; scarce indulging
himself necessary Relaxations, from rolling a Sisyphian stone; like Socrates,
envying any man should be earlier at his Trade, then he at his Study; thinking
it, in health, good manners still to usher in the rising Sun, and wait on his
recess with lucubrations: And all this, with unwearied constancy, with
perseverance to his End.

His End, (which was the echo of this well-tuned Cymbal) you have heard of: so
that I cannot better sum up all here, and give you a total view of his full
splendour, then by that apt Comparison (of Oratione in laudem Basilii.
Nazianzen concerning Basil) to the Sun: (...): that is, His Virtue was his
Brightness, his Learning was his Greatness, and his Course too, was from East
to West; of his whole Life, and all Divinity; and his Influence was the sowing
and distribution of his Doctrine: And therefore pity it is, (as that Father
there goes on) but the rest should be added; (...), Psalm. 19.4.
but that his sound should go forth into all lands, (as did his Fame)
especially thorowout our own.

But let not these jejune Eulogies of mine seem his Disparagement: for my
Design was but to hint a Character of him, and not write his Life: Nemo
Ciceronem, nisi Cicero: That indeed would require his own faculties, not mine,
-- linguae si centum, sint oraque centum; if every member were a tongue, (as
Lib. 3. Epist. in vita Paulae.
Jerome of his egregious Paula:) But to give only a brief (...) to the
unacquainted Reader; only an Essay of his Worth, as of his Works; Testimonium
Veritatis, and non Amicitiae; an Attestation more of Truth then Friendship.
None of his friends therefore shall need only so lament him, (as Cicero de
Arc. Poet.
Alexander bemoaned himself at the Tomb of Achilles) that there was not another
Homer to bestrew his Hearse: for, such a man was this, that were there such
another Poet, Homer himself, if present, Jeron. l. 3. Ep. in vita Hilar.
aut invideret Materiae, aut succumberet; would here either envy his own
Subject, or come short on it.

But now (Reader) as for thy Self, and Me, far fewer words will serve. First,
give a friend leave to caution thee of one main Adversary, (as Magna
Expectatio, magnus Adversarius.
Quintilian calls it;) and that is, an over-high Expectation: No Hercules able
to cope with it; no Parts can reach it: meanest abilities can look for more
then the sublimest can perform: (...). Not that I would take off that edge I
have set on thee; or think it can be failed, but that Thou weigh the Substance
with its Circumstances, (as thy best Gold with Grains:) Read; but withal,
consider the multiplied tasks of this our Author; Labor actus in orbem; by
whose burden, thou shall know the Atlas: Preaching three times a week by
constant course, (whereof These some of his Wednesday-Lectures;) besides all
accidentals, which with him were many; being (...) (as the Hebrew phrase is) a
man of Desires, a kind of Center of circumferent affections. Besides, (thou
know) a prudent Orator, (Divine especially) must imitate a wise Physician,
must agere ad patiens; not to flee always his own pitch, ((...), an eagle in
the clouds) but to act in proportion to his Patient: And so did he here, (like
the God he preached) often use a (...), that figure of Condescension; stooping to
the capacity of meanest Auditors: Cautions to the Reader.
yet not without strong meat for abler digestions; and sweetmeats too, for the
more quaint attentions. Omnia factus omnibus; a true Saint Paul to all; as he
was often wont to say, in that Apostles phrase, that he was a debtor unto both
the wise, and the unwise, Romans 1. and therefore was not rash with his mouth,
when he entered into the house of God; (as the manner of some is, to serve Him
of that which cost them nothing: I speak this to their shame:) But he, in all
his holy Disquisitions, -- miscuit utile dulci, so tempered the wine and oil
together, that none (but through his own default) might go away unbettered: His
speech distilled like the dew, and his words like the drops of rain; his
Sermons showers of Manna, pleasing each good palate.

For his His usual Method being Observation and Application.
Method, let no nice Philologist distaste it, as too Calvinistical; it being as
profitable, as perspicuous; as faithful, as familiar; and, as he ordered it,
like rarest Needle-works grounded upon Canvas; while many others set but their
slight Frost-works upon Satin. He was that (...), that well-instructed Scribe,
Matthew. 13.52. who brought forth of his treasure things new and old; that is,
Vetera Legis, and nova Evangelii, (as the Jerome in locum, Tom. 9. Hilar. Can.
14.
Fathers on the place;) the old terrors of the Law, to humble sinners; and the
new comforts of the Gospel, to raise drooping spirits: the sound instructions
both of the Old and the New Testament; not any of the old Heresies new dressed,
or any new Phangles of these wilder times. A true Evangelist, and Messenger of
Peace; not preaching Evangelium sanguinis, as was objected (by Vide Erasmi
Epist. 107. Ep. ad Lit. D.
them that more deserved it) unto some passionate Lutherans: But, therein,
rather of Erasmus temper, (who lived in Times like ours) and that was, neither
cold, nor lukewarm neither; but piously prudent. A somno prorsus
expergefacie^dus erat orbis; Indeed, the world was to be rouzed out of the
sleep of Sin and Error, and scintilla vigoris Evangelici resuscitanda; and the
spark of Truth Evangelical to be re-kindled, and blown from forth the choking
ashes: Sed utinam ea mansuetudine, curaque qua decuerat agi negotium omnium
sanctissimum; but Oh, would to God (says he) it had been done with that same
Christian care, meekness, and moderation, wherewith so holy a business ought to
have been transacted; and that there needed not be added, Habent semper in ore
Evangelium, Verbum Dei, Fidem, Christum, Spiritum sanctum; atsi mores spectes,
illi long aliud loquuntur: their words softer then Butter, (says he;) but War
in their hearts; open hostility 'twixt their words and actions, even to
desperate contradictions: Erasmus Epist. lib. 19. Ep. 113. ad lit D. p. 950.
as he prosecutes it home; and is worth thy consulting, in his 113 Epistle. So
was our candid Author here, more for the Bucket then the Bellou^s, in such
times of Conflagration; often pouring out the water of his tears upon our common
Flames, which others ventilated. He was the Apostles (...), 1 Pet. 3.8. a man
of yerning bowels, like Jeremiah, that (...) Propheta, (as Jerome calls him) a
Prophet of most soft affections; one after David's melting heart, as he was
after Gods: still spoke he of Peace, but, etc. -- praestat componere fluctus!

I had rather spend my time in Admiration of him, then Apology: for surely,
there is nothing in his Works but savours ecstasy, and spiritual ravishment.
And no thoughts (I confess) did ever steal away my time more sweetly, then
those herein employed; (the Comfort making me forget the Travel:) and, with
Gods blessing on them, none (I think) may more benefit others; and especially,
if read (judicio, and non praejudicio) but with that spirit of judgment and
candor that he writ them; that is, Animas magis alloquens, quam Aures; with
more reference unto Souls, then Senses. It Is true, these are no
strawberry-Sermons, picked and culled out with long vagaries, (like some, whose
brain, as the Elephant, goes two years with young;) but they are wholesome Food,
and healthy Medicine; prepared and administered in due season. Not
Almanack-discourses, calculated for any singular Meridian of Persons, Ends, or
Humors; but for the general elevation of the Pole of Virtue; for the common
good of Christian Conversation.

Read them then, but with such a grain of salt as intimated, and thou shall
light off from them like a laden Be, the hive both of thine head and heart
enriched, from this flowery garden: so shall thoure turn home unto thy self,
like a stored Merchant from the Isles of Spices, or the Golden Indies.

But if thou will be snarling at the Author, (bit by the mad dog of the Times)
thou will but hurt thine own teeth: if thou will needs be justling against his
firm sides, thou will endanger thine own empty pitcher: For all Apollo's Quire,
the whole Lettered Commonwealth, have deservedly already crowned him, That is,
swallowed up, as it were, of Learning, and all kinds of Virtue.
(...): To which if thou subscribest, thou do thy self an honor. But, not to
tell you of a Banquet, and make you Tantalize, I draw toward a Close.

For the Publisher, no great matter whether known to thee, or not, so this be,
That he has been faithful to his Undertaking: wherein, had thou but seen the
dark Originals, thou would (perhaps) have readily enough acknowledged, That
it is no less honor to Redeem, then to Create: and, as In Praefatione in
Editionem Jeronimi.
Erasmus sometime said, touching his Edition of Saint Jerome, Tantum operis in
Emendatione, quantum ille in Compositione; that there is almost as much travel
in the Restitution, as the Author spent upon his Composition.

The Book, indeed, is somewhat slender, (like the encouragements of Learning;)
yet a child capable of growth, if any thing well used abroad; if it be
estimable: Jewels of value may be vented singly: if otherwise, the Greek Yea,
(...): now adays, often a small Book, is a grand Evil.
Proverb is prevented; (...), That a great Book is a great Mischief: Pro captu
Lectorum habent sua fata Libelli. Such Books (like the best liquors) may be
wronged by foul vessels: Yet, if not too much tainted, this (I dare say) will
cleanse and sweeten the vessel of that heart receives it. These holy waters, I
will not parallel with those of the well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23. (though not a
little longed for, nor fetched without some danger; and therefore thus poured
out unto the Lord:) but (methinks) somewhat they resemble Samsons Riddle, Judge.
14. save only, as many years, well near, as he set days, Judge. 14.
being unresolved; which none could hitherto perfectly unfold, till at length,
plowing with his heifer, An Account of the Editor.
meeting with some of his own Manuscripts, and long acquainted with his Genius,
I have untied the Knot, How out of the eater came forth meat; for he was Heluo
Librorum, voracious only of his books; whence came forth meat of spiritual
nutriment, nourishing to eternal life: And, out of the strong came forth
sweetness; that is, out of his strong Abilities, both of Grace and Nature, the
sweets of plausible and profitable Instructions.

And now all the recompense I beg of God, is, (for my self and others) not any
change of raiment, but of sinful habit, David's change of heart, Psalm. 50.10.
Such Public good, is the sole scope my Labors; in a contented self-denial,
burying mine own poor Notions, thus to revive His, as a far more eminent and
eligible good. I, He was the wise Builder; I have but set a Bill upon the door,
or at most, only let the House: He was the Fountain head; I but the
Conduit-pipe that trustily delivers the same waters; yet perhaps somewhat
cleared in the Running: He was the expert Husbandman; I but one of the Reapers:
He the accurate Limmer, that drew so to life; I but withdraw the Curtain, and
present you the fair Portraicture: He the Archinaupegus, the unimitable Ship
wright that built this Ark of God; I but the careful Pilot, thus to Lanch it
forth into the Main. And if it shall escape shipwreck in these stormy days, and
God but prosper the Adventurers; there may be an endeavor of a further Voyage:
which I shall crave of him, in the Authors own close of every Sermon; Det Deus
ut perficiam, God grant that I may perfect it: which second with thy Prayers for

The Churches, and Thy faithful servant in the LORD, EDWARD SPARK.

INDEX RERVM. A Table of the things most material, digested according to the
page and order of the Sermons contained in this Book; wherein each Observation
is to be taken with its Application, Coincidencies, and References.
Sermon. I. GENESIS 16.1.
1. COnjugall reputation, is to be mutually preserved. p. 2 And Sermon 2.
Observation 2. p. 17. and Sermon. 7. Observe. 2. p. 72 and Sermon. 8. Observe. 3. p.
83. 2. Tentations incident unto both Sexes. See the 2 Observation, page 3. and
Sermon. 3. Observe.. 6. p. 30. 3. Patience and attendance upon God is ever well
rewarded. p. 5. See the 3. Observation; and the 5. Observe. p. 7. 4. Streights
and exigents, should never cause our diffidence. See the fourth Observation
page. 6 and Sermon 10. Observe. 7. p. 110. and Sermon. 18. Observe. 1. p. 186. 5.
Faithful expectation heightneth the Blessing and Honor of such waiters. 5
Observation page 7 and the 3 Observe. p. 5. 6. The Antiquity and Lawfulness of
domestical Relations. See the 6. Observation page 9 and Sermon. 12. Observe. 5. p.
132. 7. Religion is the most attractive Loadstone. See the 7. Observation page
11. 8. Gods providence is ever strictly, and gratefully to be observed. See the
8. Observation page 11. and Sermon 18 Observe. 2 p. 188. and Observe. 5. p. 194.
and Sermon. 19. Observe. 2 p. 201.
Sermon. II. GENESIS 16.2. p. 14
1. Of fruitfulness and barrenness, God only keeps the keys. p. 14 See the 1
Observe. 2. Conjugall Relations, should be mutually affectionate. p. 17 2
Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 1 p. 2. and Sermon. 7. Observe. 2. p. 72 and Sermon. 8.
Observe. 3. p. 83 3. Defects of any kind, may not be supplied unlawfully. p. 18
3 Observe. 4. Ill instruments are never wanting unto evil Actions. p. 20 See
the 4. Observe. and Sermon. 17. Observe. 1. p. 176. 5. The most dangerous
Tentations, are in the nearest Correlations. p. 22 See the 5. Observe.
Sermon. III. GENESIS 16.2. p. 24
1. Concerning Iealousy, with the causes and effects, and remedies thereof. p.
24 See the 1. Observe. 2. Good intentions can no way justify bad actions. p. 26
See the 2. Observe. 3. Posterity is the building of the house or family. p. 28
3. Observe. 4. No running into certain error, for any certain good, much less
for a Contingent. p. 30 See the 4. Observe. 5. Vxoriousness, often sinful and
unmanly. p. 30 See the 5. Observe. 6. The force of temptation, and fraylty of
the best. p. 32 See the 6. Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 2. p. 3
Sermon. IV. Genesis 16.3. p. 35
1. Of Polygamy, or the diverse wives of the Patriarchs, how far excusable; and
why not imitable p. 37 See the Questions and Apologies for Abraham and Sarah.
2. The serpentive motion of sin, and how each degree is worse then other. p. 37
See the 1. and 2. Observe. 3. The dearest servants of God have defections, but
yet with difference enough, from those of the ungodly p. 44 See the 3. Observe.
Sermon. V. GENESIS 16.4. p. 47
1. Impatience, distrust, and unlawful means, are Satan's threefold cord, go
commonly together. p. 47 See the 1. Observe. 2. Gods admirable dispensation,
that while he furnishes his children, still keeps them short in something. p.
50 See the 2. Observe. and Sermon. 1 Observe. 8. p. 11. and Sermon. 19. Observe. 2. p.
201. 3. Evil actions often prosper outwardly, yet no events can denominate
them; nor the divine permission be construed their occasion. p. 52 See the
third Observe. and Sermon. 17. Observe. 3. p. 179. 4. Natural pride bubleth up, on
every light occasion. p. 54 See the 4 Observation. 5. Servile dispositions,
ever most insolent, when exalted. p. 55 See the 5. Observe. 6. Ingratitude, how
odious both to God and man. p. 56 See the 6. Observe. and Sermon. 6. Observe. 2. p.
61. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 8. p. 11. and Sermon. 18. Observe. 2, 5. 194.
Sermon. VI. GENESIS 16.5. p. 58
1. Where God is not consulted, all projects are invalid, if not worse. p. 58
See the 1 Observe. and Sermon. 8. Observe. 5. p. 86 2. The ill offices of a friend,
still wound the deepest. p. 61 See 2 Observe. 3. Contempt, the heaviest burden
to ingenuous spirits, with the remedies against it. p. 62 See the 3 Observe. 4.
Of Shrewishness and effeminate passions, with the Allayes thereof. p. 64 4
Observe. 5. Rashness and unjust accusations, with their cautions. p. 66 See the
5 Observe. 6. Of clamourousness, and that it is rather a sign of guilt then
innocence. p. 67 6 Observe.
Sermon. VII. GENESIS 16.5. p. 69
1. Vpbrayding with courtesies, is vicious and sinful. p. 70 1 Observe. 2.
Distance and strangeness, is blameablein wedlock. p. 72 2 Observe. and Sermon. 1.
Obser. 1. p. 2 and Sermon. 2. Observe. 2. p. 17. and Sermon. 8. Observe. 3. p. 83. 3.
The best revenging of our selves, is the referring all to God. p. 73 3 Observe.
4. The impiety and danger of rash oaths and imprecations. p. 75 See the 4
Observe. 5. Against light and frivolous attesting God, and irreverent usurpation
of his Name. p. 76 See the 5 Observe.
Sermon. VIII. GENESIS 16.6. p. 78
1. Unseasonable silence often betray^^h a man's innocence, which otherwise is in
some cases virtuous. p. 78 See 1 Observe. 2. The piety and prudence of mild
answers and reproves, with Cautions and remedies for their contraries. p. 81
See 2 Observe. 3. Conjugall prudence, and masculine condescension, with the
contrary reprooved, p 83 See the 3 Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 1. p. 2. and
Sermon. 2. Observe. 2. p. 17. 4. Good minds will yield of their own right, for
piety and peace sake. p. 84 See 4 Observe. 5. Unadvised resolutions, are
commonly followed with distractions. p. 86 5 Observe. and Sermon. 6. Observe. 1. p.
58.
Sermon. IX. GENESIS 16.6. p. 90
1. Correction of servants lawful, with the several kinds and necessary
cautions thereof. p. 90 See 1 Observe. 2. The prudence and discretion of
corrections, with their contraries. p. 94 2 Observe. 3. Severity often
degenerateth into inhumanity. p. 97 See the 3 Observe. 4. The fickleness and
instability of popular affections. p. 98 See 4 Observe. 5. Most men are apt to
act, to the extreme of their Authority, if not exceed it. p. 99 See the 5
Observe. 6. Rigor and Severity end commonly in prejudices and manifold
inconveniences. p. 100 See the 6 Observe.
Sermon. X. GENESIS 16.6. p. 101
1. The flight of servants not justifiable by any hard usage, having more
lawful remedies. p. 101 See the 1 Observe. 2. Wicked persons often fare the
better, for their relation to the righteous. p. 104 See the 2 Observe. 3. Of the
good offices the good Angels do us, touching guardian Angels, and the duties we
are to return them. p. 104 See the 3 Observe. 4. Gods omnipresence, and man's
vain concealements. p. 106 See the 4 Observe. 5. Affliction brings in more
guests unto God, then does prosperity. p. 108 5 Observe. and Sermon. 12. Observe.
3. p. 128 and Sermon. 19. Observe. 4. p. 6. Such is Gods goodness, that his
mercies are still interwoven with extorted judgments. p. 109 See the 6 Observe.
7. God can supply comforts unto the most desolate places and cases. p. 110 7
Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 4. p. 6 and Sermon. 18. Observe. 1. p. 186. 8. The
fearful events of coffeehouse with the Christian remedies thereof, p. 110
See 8 Observe.
Sermon XI. GENESIS 16.8. p. 112
1. The condescension of the Angels, and how they conversed here with men. p.
113 See the 1 Observe. and Sermon. 10. Observe. 2. p. 104. 2. The great perspicacy
and knowledge of the Angels, yet limited; and how far inferior unto God. p. 114
See the 2 Observe. 3. Whatsoever man is of his own and others, God is an
impartial judge of all, both men and actions. p. 115 See the 3 Observe. and Sermon.
17. Observe. 6. p. 185. 4. Rigor and roughness is not to be used to those that
are already sensible, and humbled for their faults. p. 118 See the 4 Observe. 5.
Ingenuous acknowledgment often preventeth, still mitigateth punishment. p. 119
and Sermon. 12. Observe. 2. p. 124. 6. The want of usual comfort occasioneth a
sensibleness of sin. p. 120 See the 6 Observe. 7. The discovery of torments, as
the fruits, the best disswasion from evil courses, as the cause. p. 121 See
the 7. Observe.
Sermon XII. GENESIS 16.8, 9. p. 123
1. Ill servants and malefactors apt to cry out of their punishments, but to
conceal their offenses. p. 123 See 1 Observe. and Sermon. 10. Observe. 1. p. 101.
2. Of confession; with the qualifications and necessity thereof. p. 124 See the
2 Observe. and Sermon. 11. Observe. 5. p. 119. 3. The notable and good effects of
well-improved affliction. p. 128 See the 3 Observe. and Sermon. 10. Observe. 5. p.
108. 4. It Is a mercy of the first magnitude, Gods restraining us from evil. p.
129 See the fourth Observe. 5. Dominion and Servitude, stands well with
Christian liberty. p. 132. See the 5. Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 6. p. 9. 6.
Satisfaction for offenses, how to be rendered both to God and man. p. 133 See
the 6 Observe.
Sermon. XIII. GENESIS 16.10. p. 135
1. Gods and his Ministers method is, first to humble people, and then to
comfort them. p. 135 See the 1 Observe. 2. Gods promises run always with
condition of obedience, the defect whereof nulleth his obligations. p. 138 See
the 2 Observe. 3. Gods gracious imitable disposition woeth and inviteth, where
he might command and urge. p. 140 See the 3 Observe. 4. God investeth his Angels
and messengers with his own name and authority, to set the higher rate upon
them and their messages. p. 141 See the 4 Observe. and Sermon. 17. Observe. 5. p.
183. 5. The fond Affectation of great Names and families. p. 142 See the 5
Observe. 6. There is no arguing who are Gods Benjamins, from the greatest mess
of temporals. p. 143 See the 6 Observe. and Sermon. 14. Observe. 4.
Sermon. XIIII. GENESIS 16.11. p. 145
1. In doubts of mind, or weak persuasions, the confirmation of good Ministers
and other godly people (as it were) seals an assurance. p. 145 See the 1
Observe. 2. The woman's sense of the curse in childing, yet of the blessing too
in safe delivering, cautioneth the Abortion of her thankefulness and duty. p.
147 See the 2 Observe. 3. Importunate desires of children, and especially of
males, is a frailty of nature: true piety (in both,) contentedly attends Gods
pleasure. p. 150 See the 3 Observe. 4. The imposing of the Name, belongs unto
the Father; yet no Name, or other externals whatsoever, to be boasted of, or
deemd a privilege. p. 152 See the 4 Observe. and Sermon. 13. Observe. 6. p. 143. 5.
Significative (and not affected) names most ancient, and commendable Monitors;
either preventing, or much aggravating our crimes. p. 153 See the 5 Observe.
Sermon XV. GENESIS 16.11, 12. p. 157
1. The father of mercy often hears the miseries of his servants, before they
can put up their prayers. p. 157 See the 1 Observe. 2. The great comfort of Gods
accepting our devotions, with caution touching apprehensions of the contrary.
p. 158 See the 2 Observe. 3. God often delivers graciously, even those that
suffer deservedly. p. 160 3 Observe. 4. The most pious parents may have impious
children, and the contrary: Grace is not entayl'd by man, but only conferred by
God. p. 163 See the 4 Observe. 5. The strange Metamorphoses of sin. p. 164 See
the 5 Observe.
Sermon. XVI. GENESIS 16.12. p. 166
1 How sin is irritated and provoked by the law, yet that remaining good and
holy. p 166 See the 1 Observe. 2 Wicked minds are full of cruelty, and that an
infallible Symptom of an Ishmaelite. p. 167 See the 2 Observe. and Sermon. 19
Observe. 5. p. 205 3 Impious Spirits are always apt unto contention, as truly
religious hearts to peace. p. 182 See the 3 Observe. 4 Contentious persons as
they are troublesome, so hateful unto all men. p. 174 See the 4 Observe.
Sermon. XVII. GENESIS 16 12. and 13. p. 176
1 None so desperately wicked, but ever found abettours. p. 176 See the 1
Observe. 2 No respect or relation can restrain cruel dispositions that are backed
with power. p. 177 See the 2 Observe. 3 Gods permission of evil, both persons
and actions, vindicated (by manifold good ends and reasons) from being any
ways occasion of them. p. 179 See the 3 Observe. and Sermon. 5. Observe. 3. p.
52. (handled by way of question. 4 Unwarrantable courses, treasure up
punishment for after time. p. 182 See the 4 Observe. 5 The messages of Gods
faithful ministers, are his own words, and Embassages. p. 183 See the 5 Observe.
and Sermon. 13 Observe. 4. p. 141. 6 It Is both a consolation, and a caution, that
God beholds all; both our doings, and sufferings. p. 185 See the 6 Observe.
and Sermon. 11 Observe. 3 p 115.
Sermon. XVIII. GENESIS 16.13. p. 186
1 All earthly defects are made up to Gods children, with supplies from Heaven.
p. 186 See the 1 Observe. and Sermon. 1 Ob. 4. p 6. and Sermon. 10. Observe. 7. p.
110 2 True Christian gratitude looks through the means and instruments, up to
the main agent; through all second causes, to the first. p. 188 See the 2
Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 8. p. 11 and Sermon. 19. Obser. 3. p. 203. 3 The
imperfection of our knowledge here, and dullness of our apprehensions. See the
various expressions, etc. p. 191. 4 The substance of Gods mercy's much advanced
by the circumstances, and especially in that He loved first. p. 192 See the 3
Observe. 5 Grateful minds use all good means to keep up the memorial of Gods
favors. p. 194 See the 4 Observe. p. 192. and Observe. 2. p. 188. and Sermon. 19
Observe. 3 p. 203. 6 The favors of God to some, ought to be encouragments to
others, both for expectation and preparation. p 195 See the 5 Observe.
Sermon XIX. GENESIS 16.14, 15, 16. etc. p. 197
1 God is the sole fountain of life (the living God) and all other refuges dead
without him. p. 197 See the 1 Observe. 2. Gods providence is as watchful, as his
essence powerful. p. See the 2 Observe. and Sermon. 1. Observe. 8. p. 11. and
Sermon. 2. Observe. 5. p. 22. 3. Remarkable mercies, are to be treasured up to
all posterity. p. 203 See the 3 Observe. and Sermon 1. Observe. 8. p. 11. and Sermon.
18. Observe. 2. p. 188. 4. Happy that affliction which ends in reformation. p.
204 See the 4 Observe. and the contrary. and Sermon. 10. Observe. 5. p. 108. and
Sermon. 12. Observe. 3. p. 128. 5. Forgiving dispositions are badges of Gods
people, and the contrary. p. 205 See the 5 Observe. and Sermon. 16. Observe. 2. 3.
4. p. 167 6. Aqua vitae for old age, and what crowns that with comfort. p. 207
See the 6 Observe.
In this Table are 109 several Heads of Practical Divinity.

THE FIRST SERMON.
GENESIS 16.1. Now Sarah Abraham's wife bare him no children.
IN this Chapter is described the birth of Ismael, begotten of Hagar, Sarahs
handmaid: and it is a memorable story, as in many respects, so especially in
that of the Apostle, Gal. 4.24, Gal. 4.24.
making an Allegory of that abolishment of that Legal servitude and bondage
under the Old Testament, by Christ under the New: the bondwoman and her son
were cast out; and now we are not sons of the bondwoman, but of the free, as
the Apostle there shows.

The Chapter has four parts.

1. The marriage of Abraham and Hagar, in the three first verses.

2. The visiting of Hagar upon her conceiving; the jar that it caused between
Abraham and Sarah; together with Hagars flight upon her correction, verse. 4, 5,
6.

3. The Angels coming unto her, and persuading of her, after the discovery of
the cause of her flight, to return to her Mistress, and to submit her self unto
her; and his prediction concerning the child she went withal, to the 13 verse.

Lastly, the obedience of Hagar, together with the birth of Ishmael, to the end
of the Chapter.

For the first part, The first Part.
which contains the marriage of Abraham and Hagar, there is set down,

First, the occasion of it; Sarah had yet born no child to Abraham, and she
had a handmaid by whom she thought she might have a child.

Secondly, the causes of the Marriage. First, Sarahs complaint that God had
restrained her from bearing. Secondly, her advice to her husband to go in to
her maid. Thirdly, her desire and hope of Issue: If perhaps I may obtain
children by her. Fourthly, the yielding of Abraham to this motion.

Thirdly, is considerable the manner of knitting this Marriage: Sarah took
Hagar, and gave her to her husband Abraham, to be his wife.

Lastly, the circumstance of time is considerable: after that Abraham had dwelt
ten years in the land of Canaan. (I spare the division of the other parts of
the Chapter, till we come to them.)

For the first, it contains the occasion.

1. Sarahs not having born children.

2. A means ready at hand to supply that defect, by means of one that was her
servant.

Hagar described.
She is described, 1. From her condition, an handmaid. 2. Her country, an
Egyptian. 3. Her name, Hagar.


For the former clause, Sarah Abraham's wife bare him no children: Sarah
Abraham's wife: there may be something in it, that she is not only called
Sarah, but Abraham's wife.

Sarah why called Abraham's wife.
First, Ad distinctionem, to distinguish her from that wife which is spoken of
at the third verse: For Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to be his wife. (But the
difference of wives and concubines, who also were called Concubines, we shall
show, God willing, when we come to that verse.)

Secondly, she is styled Abraham's wife, In honorem; and it is no mean honor to
her to be the wife of so worthy a man as Abraham was, so renowned for all kind
of virtues, with whom great Princes came up to confederacy, as we see in the
fourteenth Chapter, and who was accounted as a Prince of God amongst them,
Chap. 28.

Observe. 1. Conjugal reputation is to be mutually preserved.
A worthy husband is a great credit to the wife. Abimelech calls Abraham, The
veil of Sarahs eyes, Genesis 20.^6. There be many interpretations of that place;
amongst the rest, this is one, That he was Ornamentum oculorum. He was an
ornament unto her: and certainly nothing that a woman can account a greater
ornament unto her, then to have a wise, understanding, virtuous husband. It is
said in the Law, that Uxor fulget radiis Mariti; a wife shines by the beams of
her husband; the more excellent he is, the more honor to her: What an honor
to the Church, to have God to be her husband! Isai. 54.4.
Isai. 54, the Prophet tells the Church that she shall not be ashamed or
confounded, nor remember the reproach of her widowhood. Why? For thy Maker is
thy husband. How does the Spouse in the Canticles triumph in her husband
Christ! it was both her reckoning and honor, Ezekiel. 16.14.
that he was the chiefest of ten thousand. Ezekiel. 16, the Prophet says, The
renown of the Church went forth among all the heathen for her beauty; for it
was perfect, through my comeliness which I had put upon thee; and so for that
among us, when Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.3, that the man is the head of the
woman, a Head. In the Hebrew, men are called (...), and women (...): some say
of (...), which is to forget, because the woman is more forgetful then the man,
who is called sometime (...), from his memory: or else per Aphaeresin men
Anashim, women Nashim, because the man is the Head of the woman: now a Head is
not only put for superiority, but for excellency: So that we may say, A
husband is the excellency of his wife, he puts an honor upon her. What an
honor was it to Ruth, to be the wife of such a worthy man as Beaz was! all the
people respected her for his sake. And Abigail was sensible of the advancement
that she should have by becoming David's wife; not so much in regard of his
greatness, for at that time he was under persecution, as in regard of his
goodness, 1 Samuel 25. 1 Samuel 25.


And even so on the other side, a good wife is a great honor to her husband.
Solomon says, Prove. 12.4, that she is the crown of her husband; as on the
other side, she that is naught makes him ashamed, and is as rottenness in his
bones. And so, Prove. 31.10, Prove. 31.10.
it is said of the good woman, that her price is far above rubies: and verse.
11, the heart of her husband trusts in her safely: and verse. 12, she will do
him good, and not evil, all the days of her life: mark, (says one) all the
days of her life. A good wife and husband are a mutual credit.
It is a happy thing where a wife does good to her husband so long as he
lives; but a virtuous woman will do good to him as long as she lives;
out-living him, she will carry her self so, that he shall be honored by her
carriage, even in his ashes. Again, verse. 23, it is said, Her husband is known
in the gates, when he sits among the elders of the land: She takes such care
for his apparel and ornaments, that every one looking upon him, sees how happy
he is in such a yoke fellow, that is so sollicitous for his credit, and so is
he credited by her.

I wish that this care were found between men and their wives, Application
that they would endeavor to credit each other, that the wife might be
honored for the husbands sake, and the husband for the wives sake. What credit
had Abigail by her husband? and what credit had Job by his wife? Could things
be kept within doors, it were another matter; but they flee abroad, and the
husband is discredited sometimes by the wife, and sometimes the wife by the
husband, and they are ashamed to be known of each other. A heavy case, God
knows! I would it were as easily amended, as it is deplored.

Lastly, shall we say that she is styled Abraham's wife, Lastly, why styled
Abraham's wife. Observe. 2. Tentations incident unto both sexes.
that we might take knowledge, that as Abraham had his tentation in the former
Chapter, so the wife has hers in this. He was troubled because he had no
child, and discovered some infirmity, which yet God took not advantage of, but
satisfied his fears. And now his wife is troubled; she had taken knowledge of
the promise, but yet seeing the time deferred, and that it was not said
expressly, that though Abraham should have seed, yet he should have it by her,
and therefore bethinks her self of a course. Thus man and wife may have their
turns in tentation, the one may be exercised as well as the other: and God in
his wisdom will have it so, that they may be a mutual comfort to each other
under their afflictions: Elkanah the husband was so to Hannah his wife, when
she was troubled for her barrenness, and vexed with the insultation of her
colleague, 1 Samuel 1.
1 Samuel 1. And the wife of Manoah was so to him, when he was troubled in that
he had seen the Angel, Judges 13.
and thought therefore he should die, Judge. 13. she raises up his spirits, and
puts him in heart again by her wise speeches.

Application
A miserable thing it is, when he that should dwell with his wife as a man of
knowledge (as Saint Peter says) cannot comfort his wife in her trouble, or
else regards not to do it, but leaves her to pine away in her grief: and also
when a wife seeing her husband in affliction, shall have no compassion of him,
nor speak comfortably unto him; nay, by her frowardness, add to his vexation,
as we see in Jobs wife, who was not (...), Basil.
but (...), as Basil of Seleucia says; not for a member of him, but a dart and
weapon against him, even to wound his heart, and to upbraid him with his
uprightness, yea, and to put him on to curse God and die. He had cause to have
said of her as he did of his visitors, S. Augustine.
She was a miserable comforter. Saint Austin says of an evil, Quanto interius,
tanto acerbius; The more inward, the more dangerous: and when the mischief
lies thus deep between man and wife, how grievous is it! That Father knew not
how better to resemble an ill conscience, then to such an unequal yoke fellow.
It Is the main comfort of marriage, to draw the yoke equally; but when it is
otherwise, it makes shackles of a golden chain. But to go on.

It is said, She bare no children to him. There is some difference in the
reading, Musculus.
as Musculus observes: but as he well says, it must be read according to the
Hebrew, (...); that is, she bare no children. For whom should wives bear
children, but to their husbands? For a married wife to have children by others,
or to entitle their husbands to those children which others have gotten, what a
fearful violation is this of the marriage bed! what an abominable sin against
God, against the husband, against her own soul, against humane society! Too
many such offenders there be in this kind, of all several ranks: and
certainly, were the water of jealousy now to be used, Numb. 5.
as of old, Numb. 5, it would discover a great deal of false dealing, and
detect many an unchaste piece, that like her in the Proverbs, wipes her mouth,
and says there is no such matter.

Oh in the fear of God, let wives take heed of this precipice, and husbands
also; let them know, Marriage is honorable, so the bed be kept undefiled: let
them know, only know each other, and ever possess their vessels in holiness.

But there will be fitter occasion to speak of this hereafter, Transition to
the Reasons.
and therefore I now come to examine the Reasons why it is set down here, that
Sarah Abraham's wife did not hear him children: and I find these Reasons given.

First, it was to show how God exercised the faith of Abraham, who though he
had given him promise of seed, yet delays for a long time the accomplishment of
that promise. S. Chrysostom in locum.
This is S. Chrysostoms Reason upon this place: Therefore (says he) are those
words used, Sarah bare him no children, that we might see, that after so great
promises made, and so many assurances passed, and yet the thing not done, nay,
(...), that all things seemed to go contrary, yet Abraham still believed:
(...), he looked not at the secrets or impediments of nature, but still trusted
in God, and waited on him, as knowing whom he had believed. Observe. 3. Patience
and attendance upon God, is ever well rewarded. S. Gregory.
The performance does not always hold the promise by the heel, as Jacob did
Esau; for where were then the trial of a man's faith? Faith is the evidence of
things not seen: for, Quod videtur, sciri potius quam credi dicitur (says S.
Greg.) Whatsoever is seen, is rather said to be known then believed. And it is
the true work of faith, to wait for what God has promised you, though there be
no likelihood, in the judgment of flesh and blood, that it should be
performed. Joseph had presages of his advancements in his dreams, and they even
so many promises of God unto him; and yet we see how long it was ere this took
effect: yea, God concealed from himself the time, though he was able by the
spirit of Prophecy to inform the Butler of his restoration; but still he held
himself to God, and waited the issue. And so David had a full promise of the
kingdom of Israel, yet we know how long God held off, and what danger he waded
through before he got to the shore: this interim was the time of the exercise of
his faith. So it was with the children of Israel in their servitude in Egypt,
and likewise in their captivity in Babylon; God deferred them till the last
moment of time, that their faith might have its due employment. I know that
Solomon says, Hope deferred is the fainting of the soul; and his father David
is at his Usquequo, Domine? How long, Lord? Psalm. 13. and many of Gods servants
are at that of Saint Austin, Quare non mode, Domine? Augustine.
Why not now, Lord? why not presently? and sometimes in their weakness are apt
to question Gods truth, as David says, he shall verily fall one day by the
hand of Saul; and to construe Gods delays absolute denials; or if they dare not
charge his Truth, yet they begin upon his deferring to doubt of his Goodness
and Love unto them; God has forgotten to be gracious, and has shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure.

But now in such a case, Application
we must take heed of giving way either to our own corruption, or Satan's
suggestion, or to join in both together, when blessings promised are delayed,
to overthrow our faith, to question Gods power, Gods truth, Gods goodness. We
must know, that Gods arm is not shortened, and he is Truth; Heaven and earth
shall perish, before one jot of his word fail: and he is as good as ever he
was, abundant in goodness and truth, though in his wisdom he do not satisfy
our desires presently. We must know, that as he is a powerful, and a true, and
a good God; so he is a wise God, and he knows best what makes most for his
glory and our good. There is nothing left us, Isai. 20.16.
but to pray, and believe, and wait; and he that believes will not make haste,
Isai. 20. It becomes not us to appoint God the time, or the means, or the
manner of his performing: it was one of the great sins of the Israelites;
(...), they limited the Almighty; and this is one way of limiting him, to set
him a time: now says God, Jerem. 49.19.
Who will appoint me my time? Jer. 49. It becomes us, I say, to wait, not force
the Lord: and, wait patiently for him, says David, Psalm. 37.7. Lam. 3.26.
and, Lam. 3. It is a good thing that a man should hope, and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord. That speech of Jehoram was fitter for an Atheist
then an Israelite; Why should I now wait for the Lord any longer? 2 King. 6.33.
Gods people have been wont to speak in another manner: Psalm. 40.1.
I waited patiently for the Lord, Psalm. 40, and Job says, Though God kill him,
yet he will trust in him, Job 13.15. And certainly there is nothing lost in the
close, by waiting upon God; the seed of Jacob shall not seek him in vain, Isai.
45. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me, Isai. 49.23.
Isai. 49. Though the vision tarry (says Habakkuk, Chap. 2. verse. 3.) wait for
it, for it will surely come. He who cannot lie has promised it, and the end
will certainly be consolation.

A second Reason of these words is (says another) because God would show, that
whenever Abraham and Sarah should have that seed which was promised, it
should be ex gratia, non ex natura; nay, it should be, not natural, but
miraculous; for she was now seventy five, and Abraham was eighty five, and yet
it was longer deferred: when therefore it shall be effected, it shall be Gods
miraculous power.

Observe. 4. Straits and exigents should never cause our diffidence.
God often defers, and suffers things to come to an exigent; Insomuch that they
be, says S. Chrysostom. (...), impossible, according to humane reason and
discourse, that he may manifest his own divine power, when nature is nonplus'd.
This we see in the three children, who were bound and cast into the midst of a
fiery furnace seven times heated: he could have freed them before, but he would
make way for a miracle: They shall walk in the midst of the fire as in a cool
arbor, Basil.
says Saint Basil, and when they come out, not so much as the smell of fire
shall be found upon them. So in Daniel, he suffers him to be cast into the
lions den, that he may work a miracle in preserving him among those fierce
companions, who, as is said, were kept hungry, that they might be more greedy
of their prey. And so he suffers Jonah to be cast into the sea, and to be in
the belly of the whale three days, for the manifestation of his miraculous
power. And our blessed Lord on purpose did defer that turning the water into
wine till all the wine was spent, that he might do a miracle, and manifest his
glory, as it is John 2.11. Joh. 2.11.
And so he deferred on purpose to come to Bethany till Lazarus was dead and
buried, and had lain so many days in the grave; the end was, the glory of God,
and that the Son of God might be glorified thereby, John 11.4. Joh. 11.4.
And so he did not deliver Paul and his company till all hope that they should
be saved was taken away, Acts 27.20.

And as God does it thus for the manifestation of his power, so for the
increase of men's thankfulness: for when they reflect upon their former
condition and estate wherein they were, that it was hopeless, and that all
natural means were unavailable, and that then God clave to their rescue; that
must needs oblige them the more unto him, and make them acknowledge him the
sole Benefactor, and their soul the Altar, erected Jovi liberatori, to their
Almighty Deliverer. When David considers how God did bring him out of the pit,
out of that horrible pit, in the bottom whereof he stuck in deep mire and clay,
he cannot but break-out into the praises of God.

Now for the Use of this.

Whenever things grow to an extremity; Application
when we see matters in a Kingdom come to a shrewd pinch; and in our own
particular, if we find things come near an extremity, and that in the
judgment of man there is no outlet to be hoped for: yet let us not throw away
the staff of our confidence; God is All-sufficient, he comes in at a dead lift,
and he is able to turn things in a moment, and to give us days of rejoicing for
our long days of mourning. And if it shall please God to bring things thus to
pass, let us be sure to reflect upon our selves the duty of thankfulness; and
if his favor have been in a fire, let not our thankfulness be in a frost: we
may learn both these from Abraham, in that passage of sacrificing his son; he
went to the place appointed, he made ready the wood, he bound his son, he laid
him upon the pile, and he was now fetching the blow: here was an hard exigent:
What supported him in this, even to the last? His faith in Gods power, that he
was able to raise him from the dead, and to restore him again unto him, Heb.
11. And when God stayed his hand, Heb. 11.19.
and is satisfied with what he had done (for, Affectum requisivit, actum
negavit, says my Author; God required the affection, but refused the Action;)
because Isaac is spared, a ram shall be offered; and he will give a name to the
place, that shall be a memorial to all ages, of Gods mercy, and his
thankfulness, Genesis 22. Genesis 22.13, 14


A third Reason may be given, why this is remembered, that Sarah was so long
before she bare a child to Abraham; viz. hereby God did provide for the honor
of Abraham: for usually the great works that God works in the behalf of his
servants, Observe. 5. Faithful expectation heightneth the blessing and honor of
such wait^^.
raises their rate in the world, and makes them more esteemed and reverenced,
as the favorites of the Almighty: When the world shall take knowledge that God
gave him a son at so great years, this will raise him in their opinion; and
they will conceive him to be no ordinary man, that has such an extraordinary
favor shown him, that God is even pleased to work a miracle for him. When the
Nations about take knowledge of those many successions of judgments that God
plagued Egypt withal for oppressing his people, and of the strange way he made
them through the sea, and drowned their enemies; Rahab tells the spies, Josh. 2.
Josh. 2, their heart did melt, and they were afraid of them, and there was no
courage left in them to oppose them: they thought them beloved of God, and
therefore not to be meddled withal. When the Persians saw what God had done for
the Jews, how he had secured them, and brought their greatest adversaries to
execution, it is said, Esth. 8, Esth. 8.10.
Many of them became Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them. When God
had showed that wonderful work in the preservation of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, in the sight of Nebuchadnezzar and all his Princes; it so affected
Nebuchad-nezzar, that he does not only call them the servants of the high God,
Dan. 3.26.
Dan. 3; but he promotes them in the Province of Babylon. David (Psalm. 86.17.)
desires God to show a token of his goodness toward him, that they which hate
him may be ashamed, that they may change that flat and base account they had of
him, and might take knowledge that the Lord was his God. And so ( Psalm. 90.16.)
Moses prays, Let thy works be seen toward thy servants, and thy glory upon
their children, that others might take knowledge of it, and might confess they
were beloved of God. When God was pleased to work those great works at Christ's
passion, the shaking of the earth, and darkening of the sun, the Centurion
feared greatly, and said, Truly this was the Son of God, Matthew. 27.52. Luke
23.47.
and, Luke 23.47, Certainly he was a righteous man: and in the next verse,
Others also smote their breasts, and returned; they went away with another mind
that they came, and had a better conceit of Christ then before. When God was
pleased, upon the prayer of that Christian Legion in the Army of Aurelius, to
give rain, and to discomfite the enemy by thunder and lightning; the Emperor,
that thought coursly of them before, now has a worthy opinion of them, and
sends to the Senate at Rome, (as you shall find his Letter in Justine Martyr,
Justin Martyr. Apol. 20.
20 Apol.) relating what was done, and charging that none should be injurious
to Christians; for they might be a great safeguard and protection to the State.

For the Use of this.

Application
When we shall observe men truly to be good, and make conscience of their ways,
and that God is pleased in some special manner to bless them, and to do
something for them out of the common road; let us take such knowledge of it, as
that we reverence them the more, and have the higher estimation of them, yea,
even seek their favor, as they who are like soonest to prevail with God for
us. When the people saw what power Samuel had with God, they entreat his
prayers. In the Courts of Princes, those whom they are pleased to grace most,
are soonest sought unto, to be sollicitors and intecessors for others. And so
Pharaoh sought to Moses and Aaron, when he saw what they were enabled to do.
And so the Isralites sought to Moses, and relied much upon his mediation. And
so much for the former clause.

We come now to the second, which speaks of the instrument which Sarah is
purposed to use, to help this defect of hers in childebearing, by a certain
party that belonged unto her; who is described.

1. From her condition, an handmaid. 2. Her country, an Egyptian. 3. Her name,
Hagar.
First, for her condition, an handmaid. The Hebrew word is (...); and the 70
render it (...), famula, a maidservant or handmaid. In all times ever since
the fall, there have been Masters and Servants, Mistresses and Maids. Abraham
had his servant Eliezer, and Sarah her handmaid Hagar. In the fourth
Commandment, Masters are enjoined to teach that their servants keep the
Sabbath. Observe. 6. The antiquity and lawfulness of domestical relations. (...)
Civil relations lawful.
The Angel in this Chapter wishes Hagar to humble her self under her
Mistresses hand. In the New Testament, servants are commanded to obey their
masters; and masters are charged to do that which is equal to their servants,
Ephesians. 6. Col. 3. The dearest Saints of God in all ages, have been, some in the
place of masters, some of servants. Many Parables does Christ teach, from the
power that masters have over their servants, and the subjection that servant
yield to their masters. Lastly, many promises has God made both to masters and
servants, that conscionably perform the duties of their place; and many
threatenings are found against such as are negligent therein: so that the
relation certainly, cannot justly be questioned.

The Anabaptists will have no difference between masters and servants; all are
a like, say they: and some of their reasons, The Anabaptists Objections.
for this unreasonable opinion, are these.

1 Ob. First, masters are either Infidels, or Christians; and so servants:

Sol. But we answer, rule and subjection, are things of civil policy; Sol.
and serve to the outward preservation in of Church and Commonwealth, and
family, in the world; but faith and piety, and such graces, are inward matters
of the soul, tending to the better life: these being thus different, one that
is excellent in the one, may be inferior in the other: though there be an
equality, in regard of spiritual things; there may be a disparity, in civil
and temporal matters.

2 Object. It is against nature for one to be servant to another; it Augustine,
non ex natura, sed ex culpa. Augustine


Sol.
Sol. admit, that in innocence there should have been no such subjection, as
now there is; yet it is not now against that order and course, wherein God has
now settled man. God has turned many punishments of sin, into bounden duties;
as the subjection of the wife to the husband, and a man's eating bread in the
sweat of his brows.

3 Object. It is the prerogative of Christians, to be all one, Gal. 3.28. Sol.
It is true; and so they are as members of Christ, which is a spiritual body;
and Sol.
but not as they are members of a politic body; a politic inequality, not
against a spiritual equality.

4 Object. Subjection is against the liberty which Christ has purchased

Sol. I Answer, it is not; for that liberty is from that curse and rigor of
the moral Law; and Sol.
and from the judicial part of the law, from sin and Satan, and hell and
damnation: But not from such degrees which God has established between man and
man, for the good of mankind: And therefore we shall find the Apostles
pressing upon christian servants, subjection; and an honoring of the Gospel,
by subjection: And Saint Cyprian will tell us that, servi cum crediderint, plus
dominis carnalibus servire debent: Believing servants ought to do the better
service.

Object. Lastly, they say, we are expressly forbidden, to be the servants of
men: 1 Cor. 2.3. and Sol.
1 Cor. 2.3.

Sol. To be a servant, there, is not simply to be in subjection to an other;
but (...); so to serve the will and pleasure of man, as that we are willing to
serve and please him, in any thing; though offensive to God; Chrysostom
as Saint Chrysostom shows fully, upon that place. Such indeed are (...),
men-pleasers, and the servants of men.

Well then for the Use:

Applicat.
Let those that be in the condition of servants, serve their masters honestly,
and faithfully: Let them do what they do, for conscience sake; looking higher
then their earthly master, even to him to whom they must be accountable for
their service; such an one will be as faithful at Lygorn, as at London; as
well when his masters back is turned, as when his eye is upon him; he will fear
his master in his heart; he will seek the good of his master; he will be ruled
by him; he will hearken to his instructions; he will be faithful in his
business, in his secrets; he will cover his infirmities. It is rare, I confess,
to find such current conscientious ones; who have such, let them respect them,
and be kind unto them; for certainly they have a great treasure.

Secondly, For her country, she was an Egyptian. That conceit which one of the
Rabbis has, that she was Pharoahs daughter: though Lyra incline unto it, has
no reason for it; and therefore is rejected by Paulus burgensis: she was an
Egyptian maid: and it is like, one of those whom Pharaoh is said to have given
unto Sarah: Genesis 12.16.
Genesis 12.16. Now in that she came into Canaan with Sarah, it is like, as Philo
the Jew says, that she was converted by being with Abraham and Sarah while
they stayed in Egypt; and so might come along with them, when they came for
Canaan; How attractive, and what a loadstone Religion is, I have showed you
heretofore: many of the Egyptians went from their own country, with the
Israelites: Exodus 12. Exodus 12.
And we see how Ruth was wrought upon by the conversation of Naomi, that she
comes with her into the Land of Judah. Observe. 7. Religion is the most
attractive, loadstone.
The Apostle wishes Christians to walk wisely in regard of those that were
without. And Saint Peter wishes them to whom he writes, to have their
conversation honest amongst the Heathen, that they might be brought to glorify
God: And he makes it possible for the believing wife, to convert the
unbelieving husband, by her conversation. Saint Alban was converted by
observing the pious courage of a christian soldier. And Justin Martyr tells
how the godly conversation of Christians wrought upon him.

And for the Use:

It should teach us, that when we come into strange places, Application
or into strange countries, amongst such as be profane, or heathenish, we be
careful of our ways; for certainly there is great power in this, to do good
upon them; Words will not do so much, as godly and pious actions; which are
(...), says Chrysostom, unanswerable Syllogismes: on the otherside if our
course be lewd, how do we dishonor God; and cause the name of God to be
blasphemed in Gath, and in the streets of Ascalon; and set men further off from
their conversion! For how should they like that way that is attended with so
bad actions? If it be true, the power of it will be seen in men's conversation.

Secondly, Musculus notes an other thing, Observe. 8. Gods Providence is ever
strictly and gratfully to be observed.
that it was a great providence of God, that Sarah should bring the Egyptian
maid along with her into Canaan; that as often as she looked upon her, she might
remember the great danger she was in in Pharaohs Court; and how miraculously
her chastity was secured; and so might be stirred up to a daily thankefulness,
for such a great mercy: and the same Author makes the use of it; that we should
observe the passages of Gods providence toward us; remember them, be thankful
for them; for he does his works so, that they ought to be had in continual
remembrance; our memories are frail and leaky; they do (...); they do, as the
Apostle speaks, run out like sieves; some blessings are so great, as that,
magnitudo non sinit excidere, (says Seneca;) that their greatness permits not
a slip from us; yet we make a shift to forget them; (as the Spanish invasion,
and gunpowder treason:) if at all we remember them, we are but slenderly
thankful for them: And therefore no wonder, though God hold his hand, as
unwilling to cast his seed into ground that yields him no better increase:
increase said I? Nay when he requires but thankfulness; and yet he cannot have
this interest: And therefore no wonder though he take away the principal; but
of this heretofore.

For the last thing, her name; in Greek (...); In the Arabian tongue, a
fugitive or relapsed stranger, from (...). It may be, from her were her
posterity called Hagarens, 1 Chronicles. 5.10. Psalm. 39.12.
or Hagarites, 1 Chronicles. 5. Where the Greek translates them (...), strangers.
For the Allegory which Saint Paul makes of Agar, which he makes Mount Sinai,
Gal. 4. we shall speak of it afterward: In the mean time, let us take heed of
grieving the Spirit of God; for mentioning those circumstances; it is not in
vain: They that deal in gold (says a Greek Father,) will not neglect (...),
Observe. 9. and Applicat.
the least fylings; and the least syllable in Gods word, is sacred: he that
thinks or says otherwise, is profane and Atheistical.

Preached, May 5. 1641.
THE SECOND SERMON.
GENESIS 16.2. And Sarah said unto Abraham, Behold now the Lord has restrained me
from bearing, etc.
THe last day (dividing this Chapter) we told you that in the three first
verses was set down the Marriage of Abraham with Hagar; The Introduction.
and herein we observed four things.

1. The occasion of it, in the first verse. 2. The causes of it, in the second
verse. 3. The knitting of the knot, in the third verse. 4. Together with the
fourth thing, The circumstance of time, when this was done.
We have spoken of the Occasion; now we come to the Causes of the Marriage, and
they be four, set down in this second verse.

First, Sarahs barrenness. The four parts.


Secondly, her advice to Abraham, to go in to Hagar her maid.

Thirdly, her hope to have a child by her.

And fourthly, Abraham's approbation of this counsel.

For the first of these: And Sarah said, The first.
The Lord has restrained me from bearing: it is in the Hebrew, (...), has
shut me; for (...) is clausit, He has shut up: And so the 70 render it here,
(...), from (...), which is claude, to shut: thence (...) for a key; and is
used to shut up a place. Our Savior bids a man, when he will pray, to enter
into his chamber, (...), that is, shutting the door, then to pray. And 1 John
3. He that has this worlds good, 1 John 3.17.
and sees his brother in need, (...), and shuts up his compassion, or, locks up
his bowels from him, how is the love of God in him? The phrase of shutting up
the womb is used, when it pleases God to restrain the woman from bearing of
children. Genesis 20. God had closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech. 1 Samuel 1.5, Genesis 20.19. 1 Samuel 1.5.
it is said of Hannah, that God had shut up her womb. Job, in his paroxysm,
wishes that the doors of his mothers womb had been shut up, Job 3. Job 3.10.
Isai. 66.9.
and Isai. 66.9, causing to bring forth, and shutting of the womb, are opposed.
It is very well rendered in our Translation, God has restrained me from
bearing, (...). And in this speech of hers, Saint Chrysostom would have us
observe (...); Chrysostom.
that is, How emphatical the word is.

Observe. 1. Of Fruitfulness and Barrenness God only keeps the keys. God only
shuts and opens the womb.
She makes her want of children to be Gods work: (God has restrained me:) and
seems to say to Abraham, says that Father, (...); that is, As we use to shut
and open our houses; so God, that great Master of Nature, does by the wombs of
women, locks them or opens them, restrains them from bearing, or gives them the
ability to bring forth children: and certainly it is his work to afford and
ordain children: as he shut up the wombs in Abimelechs family, and the womb of
Hannah; so he is said to have opened the womb of Leah, Genesis 29, Genesis 29.31. and
30.32.
and of Rachel, Genesis 30.

The Hebrews speak of four keys that God keeps in his own power, and gives them
not (as they say) to any Angels, no not to the Seraphims.

The first is the key of Rain, of which it is spoken, Deuteronomy. 20.12, The Lord
shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heavens to give the rain unto thy
land in due season.

Psalm. 104.28.
The second is the key of Food, of which it is spoken, Psalm. 104, Thou openest
thy hand, and they are filled.

Ezekiel. 37.12.
The third is the key of the Grave, of which Ezekiel. 37, Behold, O my people, I
will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves.

The fourth is the key of the Womb, (as you have heard before:) God remembered
Rachel, and opened her womb, Genesis 30.

Some have added to these four keys, the key of the Heart: for it is said, Acts
16.14.
God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to Paul's preaching, Acts
16.14. But this is not one of the Hebrews keys, they mention only the four
former. And for the last, which is the key of the Womb, certainly it is in Gods
own keeping. Children are the inheritance of the Lord, Psalm. 127.3.
and the fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm. 127.

Now for the Use of this.

Application
First, it may teach man and wife, in the want of children, not to murmr
against each other, and to challenge each other of insufficiency; for it is God
that restrains the fruitfulness of the womb: and we see that those that are in
their youth and strength, and most likely in the judgment of flesh and blood,
want issue; and why so? Because God keeps this key. The Philosopher said, Sol
and homo generant hominem; The sun and man beget a man: but he looked not high
enough; for children are the gift of God, as Jacob tells his brother Esau,
These are the children which God has graciously given thy servant, Genesis 33.
Genesis 33.^.


Who takes not knowledge of the complaints and repinings that are between
married couples in this kind? Which are certainly unreasonable and unjust,
because they challenge each other for that which is not in their own power. We
see how passionate Rachel is, and how she seems to cast the fault upon her
husband; she says unto him, Genesis 30. Give me children, or else I die. Genesis
30.1.
But he answers her very wisely and fully, with a just acrimony and sharpness:
His anger was kindled against her, and he said, Am I in Gods stead, who has
withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? A just Reprehension of several
offenders.
And so sometimes the husband is ill conceited of the wife: and those unkind
murmurings Satan takes such advantage of, that he puts them on to drink of
stolen waters, and to try elsewhere, that they may be satisfied in their own
sufficiency; which is a fearful precipice, to sin against God, and against
their own bodies, and against the Marriage Bed, only to give themselves
satisfaction.

Away then with querulous complaints against each other; and if it has pleased
God to restrain children, let them not upbraid each other, but love each other
the more tenderly; S. Chrysostom in locum.
and by mutual comfort ease the common grievance. S. Chrysostom observes of
Sarah here, She did not lay any fault upon her husband, nor did he upon her:
(...); He upbraided her not with her barrenness; but she honored him, and he
lovingly respected her. 1 Samuel 1.
And the like we shall see in Elkanah, who gave unto his wife Hannah a worthy
portion, for he loved her; but the Lord had shut up her womb, and her adversary
provoked her, to make her fret: He considered that she was barren, and that she
was vexed for it by her colleague, and therefore he is the more kind unto her;
and when she weeps from day to day, and refuses her meat, he speaks kindly
unto her, Why art thou grieved? am not I better to thee then ten sons? Here was
a loving husband indeed, 1 Samuel 1.

Secondly, it may also stay that proud spirit of insultation that is in many,
who are apt, not only to lift up themselves above others, but to reproach
them, if they have children, and the others barren. Why, do they consider that
it is God that restrains women from bearing of children; and dare they reproach
them for that which is not in the power of their redress? This was Peninnahs
fault in regard of Hannah; she had children, and Hannah had none, therefore she
insulted over her, and vexed her. Such has been the corruption of peoples
minds in all times, that barrenness has been accounted a reproach; therefore
Rachel said, Genesis 30.23. Luke 1.25.
when she had conceived and born a son, that God had taken away her reproach,
Gen 30. And Elizabeth the mother of the Baptist, says (having conceived, Luke
1.) Thus has the Lord dealt with me, in the days wherein he looked on me, to
take away my reproach among men. But certainly it is an unjust reproach, nay it
is irreligious; for it does imply a denial, at least a questioning, of that
power and sovereignty that God has over the conception and bearing of children.

Thirdly, if God restrain from bearing, it will not justify those that do what
is in them to restrain themselves from bearing of children. Some base ones,
that they may more freely give themselves to their lust, use means that they
may not conceive: others that be in the married estate, do it for fear of the
pains and terror of childbirth: and others, by their ungodly and sinful
courses, make God keep from them this blessing. Levit. 20.20.
God threatens the incestuous copulation with want of children; They shall die
childless: Justum est (says one) ut steriles e mundo, that they should go
barren out of the world: And so Michal, for her mocking of her husband, had no
child till the day of her death. And even those that having conceived by their
wanton hoytings, or needless watchings, or Epicurean feeding, prevent
themselves of bringing forth in due time; Hosea 9.14.
they draw that upon them, which God threatens as a judgment, ( Hos. 9.) a
miscarrying womb.

Fourthly, If it be God that restrains the bearing of children, then they that
want them know to what fountain to come to draw this blessing; Genesis 15.2. and
25.21.
even unto God. To him did Abraham address himself, Genesis 15.2. And to him did
Isaac pray, when his wife was barren. Genesis 25. Luke 1.13.
And to him did Hannah seek, and pour out her soul, 1 Samuel 1.10. And to him did
Zachary and Elizabeth sue, Luke 1.13. Let people be as passionate and
tumultuous as they will, as we see in Rachel, yet they can have no child, till
God open the womb; (they must pray to God:) And again it teaches them who
have received the blessing, to whom to be thankful: let them not look upon
their own bodies, but look up to Heaven, from whence every good comes; and say,
as you heard Jacob before; these are the children which God has given me; and
as his wife Leah, who gives names to her children, Genesis 4.3.
that carry the acknowledgment of Gods gift unto her; as Eve did, who having a
Son, said, I have gotten a man from the Lord, Genesis 4. And let me add, that as
parents acknowledge with all thankfulness the gift, so let them use their
children as Gods gift, and to the honor of the Doner. The parents of Sampson
were glad they should have a child, but withal they desired, that the Angel
may come again to inform them, Judges 13.
what they shall do to the child, when it shall be born; that nothing may be
defective on their part, to make him an instrument of Gods glory. Judge. 1. And
we see that as Hannah is glad of her son, and in the name she gives him,
acknowledges Gods gift, Samuel; so she dedicates him to the service of God.
Let your care be whom God blesses with children, to give them to the Lord, vow
them to his service; and when they be capable, inlay them with the rudiments of
Religion, that they may even suck it in with their milk; (as it is said of
Saint Basil;) that they may be acquainted with it, Timothy
as Timothy was with the Scripture, even from a child; and set them too a good
example for this (...), as the Greek Father speaks; Chrysostom.
this domestical pattern of goodness is very prevalent.

Thirdly, Follow them with your prayers; by this means they shall be semen
sanctum, i.e. an holy seed; your sons shall be holy plants, and your daughters
as the polished corners of the temple.

Lastly, Not to stay too long upon this point, not only in regard of children,
but in the want of other blessings, that we stand in need of, and do desire;
we should observe the restraining hand of God. If we have not the latitude of
health that we would have, we must acknowledge it to be Gods doing; if we have
not the proportion of estate that will serve to maintain our charge, we must
make account it is the Lords dispensation; if we want the inward comfort that
our souls long for, we must know that it is God that restrains it, and has put
our sun behind a cloud: So in regard of the public; if we have not fruitful
seasons, if we lack the first and latter rain, if the times be more cloudy and
fuller of distraction, if the Gospel has not so free a passage, we must see
Gods work in all these things; There is no evil in a City, which the Lord has
not done, (as the Prophet speaks:) he enlarges or restrains himself, as he
pleases: If we could thus look up to him and his hand, we could not stick in
second causes, which begets murmuring and meditation of revenge; we would seek
to him, and till he answer us, wait with patience.

We now come to the second cause of the marriage of Abraham and Hagar; and that
is Sarahs request to her husband, to go in to her maid; the connection of
which with the former, Saint Chrysostom makes to be such, that he may free
Sarah from all blame; Saint Chrysostoms Apology for Sarahs request.
that he notes (...), the sweet disposition of Sarah, and makes her speak unto
her husband in this manner. (...); Though the God of nature has made me
childless, it is not meet that thou should be deprived of the hope of issue,
seeing God has made thee the promise of comfort, being my dear and loving
husband; thou have born patiently my sterility all this time; and now I
propound thee a course, that is likely to make thee a father, though not by me;
and the child shall be as dear to me, as if of my own body, because that it
will make for thy comfort: Thus was she willing, says that Father, (...),
Observe. 2. Conjugal relations, should bemutually affectionate.
to manifest her great affection to her husband. Now thus in the face of it,
(though, as afterward we shall show, God willing, there was weakness and sin in
it) in the face of it (I say,) it carries that true respect, which the wife
should have to the husband; to tender his contentment above her own: We shall
see that when Jacob moves his wives, for his return to his own country; though
they must needs have a great affection to their Country, and their Fathers
house; yet seeing it was their husbands pleasure, grounded upon Gods command,
they willingly submit to follow him. Genesis 31. Genesis 31.16.
Michal did well in that, 1 Samuel 19. 1 Samuel 19.
That she sought the safety of her husband, though with her own peril; for it
was very doubtful how Saul her father might deal with her, for this care of her
husband; for in the next Chapter, he throws a spear at Jonathan his worthy
Son, for speaking in his behalf; but she knew, the bonds of a wife were
stronger then those of a daughter. God laid this upon the woman, Genesis 3.16.
Genesis 3. that her desire should be subject to her husband: she must prefer his
will, before her own; and his contentment before her own; and certainly else I
see not how she answers the end of her Creation; which was, to be a meet help
for him.

Application
Now it were much to be wished that this lesson were taken out: but out of
doubt, as it has been in former times, so there is still a great defect this
way. The love that Lots wife bare to Sodom, was a great means of delaying of
her husbands coming out of that place; she sought her own contentment, rather
then his, or her own safety: The reason why Moses forbear the circumcising of
his second child, was the offense that his wife took at the circumcising of
the first; no question he had acquainted her with the danger of the omission!
but what cares she so she may content her self, to expose him to a judgment!
And are there not too many so affected in these times, that care not, so they
have their content, though it be to their husbands prejudice: They must dwell
where they have a mind, not where he desires: they must have these and these
clothes, and these and these Jewels, though oftentimes these be the sick
feathers of a declining estate, that they are plumed withal; many a wife makes
the husband in the latter end, sit down and complain in the words of Adam;
mulier quam dedisti, the woman whom thou gave me, has deceived me. Let the
husband be sick, they will be of those that shall do least about him; they will
not break their rest and sleep, to attend him: Let the husband stay at home,
mourning for want of his society and assistance, while they take their
vagaries, and please themselves in their recreations: this is not to be a
daughter of Sarah, and to do as she did, who is said to have obeyed him, and
called him Lord, and in all things studied his contentment, and was most
earnest to do that which she thought might most comfort him. Thus far have we
followed S. Chrysostom.

Observe. 3. Defects of any kind may not be supplied unlawfully.
But by the leave of so great a Father, whatsoever intention she had to content
her husband, she makes a very bad inference from the former words; Because God
had restrained her from bearing, therefore Abraham must go in to her maid. If
God do not answer our expectation, must we go use indirect means to supply our
wants? God forbid. Shall a man, because he lacks a wife, go and steal one?
Because his wife bears him no children, shall he get them on others? Because a
man wants money, shall he purloin, or use unjust courses? Because he wants
honor, shall he contrive himself into it by lying, and flattering, and base
supplantation? The want of things discontenteth people; and then, forsooth,
because God restrains his hand, they will furnish themselves. Because David
is still pursued by Saul, and that God does not put an end to his troubles;
shall he throw himself amongst the Philistims? 1 Samuel 27.
1 Samuel 27: that was a tempting of God, and a coffeehouse with his estate;
and if God had not been the more merciful, it had been the next means of his
confusion. Because Saul is not answered of the Lord, 1 Samuel 28, neither by
dreams, 1 Samuel 28.
nor by Urim, nor by prophecy; shall he seek out for a woman that has a
familiar spirit, and enquire of her?

For the Use of it:

Let us take heed of this: If we suffer want in our estate, Application
let us not use unlawful means to better it: As Abraham would not be enriched
by the King of Sodom, so much as a shoe-satchet; so let us scorn to be
beholding to the ways of fraud, for increasing our means. There is no
comparison between (...) and (...), (says Peleusiota: Peleusiota.
) between Poverty and Impiety: better be poor to a Proverb, as Job was, then
that it should be said, Satan has made us rich. Want we meat, (though, I
confess, that is a great exigent) yet let us not steal, to satisfy hunger. Our
Lord, though he was an hungered, would not hearken to Satan, to make bread of
stones; neither would he fall down and worship him, to gain the whole world.
Have we lost our goods, or are we in great want of health? Shall we run to
Wizards and Wisemen, (as they falsely call them) to be helped? or use Spirits
and Incantations? Oh no! This is to cast out the devil by Beelzebub; when God
has wounded us, to make Satan our physician. Are we in terror of conscience,
and shall we betake our selves to drinking, and swilling, and unlawful kinds
of sports? Will this help us? Is this the harp that will conjure that ill
spirit? Will not this be bitterness in the conclusion? Will not this be as cold
water taken in the height of a hot Fever, which makes the broyling drought,
after a while, the greater?

Why, (but will some say) what would you have us do, when comfort and ease
blows from no corner?

I answer, Be dumb before the shearers, and still wait upon God, and remember
that power and sovereignty that he has over us; how all things that he gives
us, he gives them, and takes them from us: and taking but his own, must he
lose a friend of us?

Secondly, It may be God keeps us under the hatches, for our future good, and
to do us good in the later end, (as Moses says.)

Thirdly, Let us know, that all the means that we can use, without God, may
soon prove unavailable; nay not only so, but pernicious; and both increase our
sin and condemnation. I say, finally, let us use no unlawful means, but wait
the issue that he will give to our temptation.

Again, observe here how quick ones wit is, to the invention of that which is
evil. Sarah has in a readiness, that if God fail her, she knows presently
what to do: (...), (says Gregory Nazianzen*) evil is ever at hand; S. Gregory
Nazianzen.
it requires no long study; (nay in this case can act ex tempore:) So Lots
daughters, being alone with him in the cave, they have a sudden, but a fearful
invention, Genesis 19. to make their father drunk, Genesis 19.
and to make use of him in that intemperance. Rachel has no children; she has
a present invention: she says to her husband, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in to
her, Genesis 30. Genesis 30.3.
When the steward is like to be discharged, Luke 16.4, his wit quickly serves
him what to do, that when he shall be cast out, he may find favor among the
debtors. Were we as nimble at that which is good, how happy a thing were it!
But there we are dullards, and to seek, and our wit serves us not to light
upon it: It is true of us, Jer. 4.22.
which the Prophet speaks, Jerem. 4. They are wise to do evil, but to do good
they have no knowledge.

Why, (but may some man say) why does she propound this, that he should go in
to the maid? How did she know but the maid might deny such a service as this
was?

It may be thought that she was persuaded of her servants obedience in this
kind; and she might presume upon that command that she had over her, being her
servant.

Observe. 4. Evil instruments are never wanting unto evil actions.
Instruments shall not be wanting, if evil acts be to be done. I confess it is a
gross abuse of that dominion that God has given to masters and mistresses over
servants, to engage them into sin, and make them serve them in base ways; to
make them panders or bauds to their lust; to make them oppressors of their
tenants; to make them lie, and swear, and forswear, in their behalf; to make
them executioners of their unjust revenge. And it is no less fearful on the
other side, when servants lose all sense of conscience toward God, to show
their obedience toward their masters: for they are tied only to obey in
Domino, in the Lord; so to serve their earthly masters, as they may answer it
to their Master in heaven.

And therefore for the Application:

Application
Let them look to it; let them obey no further then Gods Word will license them.
Pharaoh is full in his charge to the midwives; but they obey him not. Saul
bids his guard fall upon the Priests that wore the linen Ephod; but they do
it not: it is true, that Doeg did it; and Absalons servants slay Amnon, because
their master bids them. But that great Tribunal, before which these facts must
be answered, will not admit of this plea, I did as I was commanded. I told you
the last day, the Apostle flatly prohibiteth being servants unto men; that is,
serving them in sinful courses, and being subservient unto them in their lusts.
Art thou a Governor? Do not require any thing of thy servant that is unlawful:
for thou drawest a great sin upon thy score, and a woe upon thine head, because
by thee the offense comes. Art thou a servant, and an unlawful thing is
enjoined thee? Remember Saint Peter's rule; It is more fit to obey God then man:
Thy master cannot secure himself from vengeance, and how can he help thee? And
do not tell me, If thou will not do it, another will: thou ought to be most
sollicitous for thine own soul: Josh. 24.15.
Be of the mind of that holy man, Let others choose what God they will serve,
but thou will serve the Lord thy God.

Further: There is an Expositor upon my Text, that observes the modesty of the
phrase here used; Go in unto my maid. I will go in unto my wife, says Samson,
Judge. 15. Judge 1^.1. Isai. 8.3.
and David is said to have gone in unto Bachsheba. And so, Isai. 8. He went
unto the Prophetess, and she conceived. Amos 2. A man and his father go in unto
the same maid. Amos 2.7. Deuteronomy. 23.13.
It is said, Adam knew Eve, Genesis 4. So when the Spirit speaks of the privy and
unseemly part, it calls it our nakedness, Genesis 9.22. and the flesh, Genesis
17.13. and our shame, Isai. 47.3. And speaking of the necessary evacuation of
the body, he calls it a sitting down, and a covering of the feet, Judge. 3.24.
and so 1 Samuel 24.3. The Spirit of God is a pure Spirit, and cannot endure
filthiness. On the other side, Satan is called the unclean spirit, Matthew.
12.43. that delights in filthiness: and as the serpent feeds upon the dust;
so Satan (...), (says Clemens;) He feeds upon obscenity and corruption.

Now for the Use of this:

How should it teach us to abhor all filthiness! yea, that it should not be
once named among us, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 5.3.
as he which has called us is holy; so should we be holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. Our thoughts should be clean. I made a covenant with
mine eyes; why then should I look upon a maid? Job 6.31. Our very speculative
and contemplative uncleanness, is the lusting of the heart: the unclean roving
thoughts of men, are sins before God.

2. Our looks and aspects should be free from filthiness: for the Apostle
speaks of eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2.

3. Our apparel should be modest. 1 Timothy 2.9. 2 Pet. 2.14.
Let women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and
sobriety. And that woman, Prove. 7.10. is said to have the attire of an harlot.

4. There should be modesty in our speech. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always
with grace, seasoned with salt: and, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to edifying, that it may
minister grace unto the hearers.

And why?

First, our tongue is our glory, so called more then once by David in the
Psalms: and it is that member, above all, that is given us to glorify God
withal: and David says, he will praise God with the best member that he has.

Secondly, there is great force in broad and unclean speech, to corrupt the
heart, and set it on fire with filthy lust. Be not deceived, 1 Cor. 15.33.
(says the Apostle) evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. and therefore
they be called (...); that is, rotten communication, Ephesians. 4.29. because they
are apt to corrupt and putrify those that hear them. The Naturalist tells of
one creature that conceives by the ear; and so it falls out, that by the ear
wickedness is conceived, and the soul tainted.

I would this were well remembered: for we may say as Isaiah, we dwell in the
midst of a people of unclean lips. People speak most filthily, so that they are
a burden to any civil ear: and they will call for songs, that are full of
nothing but ribaldry; which is all one, as if they spoke them themselves: and
what will they say for themselves? Though they speak thus, yet they mean no
hurt; their hearts are as good as the best; but this not possible, for those
things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart, and defile the man.
Mat. 15. Mat. 15.18.
and Mat. 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: Is the
fountain sweet, that sends forth stinking water?

Secondly, They say they speak but in mirth: but I say, this is a fig-leafe too
narrow to cover that nakedness; for cannot man be merry without offending God?
Foolish talking and jesting are not convenient (says the Apostle: Ephesians. 5.4.
) Ephesians. 5. and is it to be matter of merriment that grieveth the holy Spirit of
God? Ephesians. 4.30.

Thirdly, say they; if we speak a little idly and vainly, and do no worse, is
is no great matter: No? when the Apostle had spoken of such language: Ephesians. 5.6.
Let no man deceive you (says he;) for such things, among others, comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Mat. 12.36.
And what says our Savior? Math. 12. Of every idle word that man shall speak,
etc. Et si de otioso, Quid de pernicioso? If every idle word; how much more
every evil one, (according to its several qualifications) to be accounted for;
at the day of judgment?

Observe. 5. The most dangerous tentations, are in the nearest correlations.
Lastly, to shut up for this time, consider who it is that moves and advises
this: and then see, that temptations may lie in those, that are nearest to us.
The servant tempts the master; as we see in Peter, dissuading Christ from his
passion: insomuch that he says unto him, Come behind me Satan; thou art an
offense unto me: The master tempts the servant, and persuades him to ill; as
we see in in the examples of the last point save one: And in David, persuading
his servant to fetch him Bathshebah: One friend persuades an other, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
and tempts him to evil: the Lord supposes, Deuteronomy. 13. That a friend, that
is as is own soul, may entice to Idolatry. The mother may tempt the daughter,
as we see in Herodias; that puts on her daughter, to ask John Baptists head
in a platter: And so the daughter the mother; as it is likewise supposed in
that place of Deuteronomy. The husband may tempt the wife; as we see in
Ananias, Acts. 5.
that works Sapphira to tell the same lie he had told. Acts. 5. And the wife
the husband: who tempted Adam to eat the forbidden fruit, but his wife? who
tempted Solomon to Idolatry, but his wives? who provoked Ahab to sin so
desparately, but his wife Jezabel? who tempted Job, to curse God and die; and
upbrayded him with his constancy in his uprightness, but his wife? who was
relicta in tentationem, says Saint Ambrose? when the devil had stripped him of
all, he left him her, to be a snare unto him: The Historian tells of
Agripina; that she mingled the poison for her husband, in that meat which he
loved best; and satan lays his snares for us, in those persons we affect
most, and whom our love will not suffer us to deny any thing. Now for that Use
which concerns the susteiners of such temptations, I shall sp^^^ of it, when
I come to speak of Abraham's yielding to this motion of his wife: in the mean
time, this application shall serve: Application
That we have our eyes in our heads, as the wise man speaks; that we be very
vigilant and circumspect, for there may lie a snare where we least suspect
danger; and danger may grow from the corner where we least dreamed of it; who
would think of any danger from a friend, a child, a father, a mother, a wife
that lies in the bosom* And yet even these may betray us into sin. There was
one was praying unto God, to deliver him from his enemy; an other over-hearing
him, did correct him, and bid him pray that he might be delivered from his
friends: for his enemies, he might easily beware of them; but they that made
semblance of friendship, might soonest do a man a mischief. I think they might
be both corrected, and a man fittingly taught to pray to God, to deliver him
from himself: for such is a man's corruption, that he is the greatest enemy to
himself: and as the spider works her web out of her own bowels; so a man's
destruction is from himself, (as the Prophet speaks,) If a man had no violent
hand to kill him, yet he has that in his body that will be his bane. So in the
soul; if there were no men to tempt him, no Satan to inject evil motions into
him; if he were abstracted from men, and should live in a wilderness: yet he
should have enough mischief wrought by himself; and should have reason to say
with that holy man that had retired himself, that he might be free from
temptation; Omnia reliqui, cor autem non reliqui; I have left all things, but
not my heart, behind me. This heart of ours is deceitful above all things; it
will ever be bubling up in untoward motions: and if we cannot trust our selves,
but may be drawn away by our concupiscence; we may justly fear temptation from
all others. Certainly we had need walk wisely and circumspectly, and fear
wheresoever we are: and blessed is the man that so fears always: For, Qui
pavet, cavet; and qui cavet, non cadet: He that fears, bewareth; and he that
is wary, will not fall. Where this fear stands Sentinel, we are not easily
made a prey to our adversaries.

Preached, May 12, 1641.
THE THIRD SERMON.
GENESIS 16.2. It may be I may obtain children by her. And Abraham hearkened unto
the voice of Sarah.
WE come to the third cause of the marriage of Abraham and Hagar. It was the
hope that she might have a child by her.

Why, (will some say) what was she the better, if Hagar were with child by
Abraham?

Yes; she being her handmaid, or bondwoman, the child that she should have,
was reckoned as the mistresses. When Rachel had no children, Genesis 30.3.
she said to her husband, Genesis 30. Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her, and
she shall bear upon my knees: that is, what she shall bring forth, I will
educate upon my knees, that I may also have children by her. And so did Leah,
in the same case, give Zilpah her maid to her husband; making account, that the
children she should bear, should be hers; she would adopt them for her own.

Observe. 1. Concerning Jealousy; with the causes, and effects, and remedies
thereof.
Now here both Pareus and Musculus do observe, how free Sarah was from
jealousy: she feared him not, that he should lay siege to the chastity of her
maid: for here she offers her to him. A rare and a strange thing, as Saint
Chrysostom notes upon this place, that a wife should (...): That a wife should
do thus, and advise her husband thus, and give such liberty of her bed to her
maid. Now, though we cannot justify her in this fact; yet we cannot but
commend her, with the former expressions, that she was free from jealousy.
Zelotypia (according to the Schoolmen) est vehemens motus amantis in rem
amaram, Aquin. 1, 2. q. 28.
ut non patiatur consortium in re amata: Jealousy is a vehement passion or
affection of the mind toward a beloved object, not suffering any rival or
co-partnership in the thing affected. Jealousy, in it self simply, is not
reprovable: God himself is said to be a jealous God, in the second Commandment:
2 Cor. 11.2.
and Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. that he was jealous over
them with a godly jealousy. And who can blame him that loves his wife
heartily, if he be fearful of any that would share with him? But the jealousy
that is reprovable, is, when husbands or wives, upon light and slight grounds,
(nay, oftentimes, upon no grounds, but their own conceits and apprehensions,
grow suspicious of each other, and so make their condition uncomfortable: for
the most ingenious malice could never invent such a torment as this. They that
are vexed with this ill spirit, can take no delight in any thing: sometimes
they grow mad and desperate; but too too often fall upon revenge, and even
wound the innocent.

Tully tells how Thebe, the wife of Alexander Pheraius, Pertinent Histories.
slew her husband, because she suspected him of incontinency. And Zonares tells
how Eudoxia, a worthy woman, and wife to Theodosius the younger, having
received of the Emperor her husband an apple of an incredible bigness, she
gave it to Paulinus, a learned man Paulinus not knowing from whom the Empress
had received it, gives it, as a rare gift, to the Emperor. Hereupon, the
Emperor sends for his wife, and asks her what she had done with the apple.
She (because he did so earnestly enquire after it) fearing, that if she had
said she had given it away, he would have been displeased, answered, that she
had eaten it. He urging her to tell the truth, she swore she had eaten it.
Whereupon, the jealous Emperor slew innocent Paulinus, and hated his wife: his
jealousy was stirred, and he broke out into this unreasonable revenge. This is
that which Solomon says, Prove. 6.34, 35. Jealousy is the rage of a man;
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance: he will not regard any
ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou give many gifts. And some
have made Jealousy to be a compound of Love, Fear, and Anger: a man loves,
and therefore he fears partnership; and therefore is enraged, even out of the
suspicion of it: if he dare not revenge, he pineth away, and eats up his
heart in a secret coffeehouse.

For the Use of this:

First, Application
let it teach man and wife to take heed of giving way to idle and vagabond
phancies and suspicions; not to think, because they are fair, they are like to
be false; or to judge an affable and cheerful carriage, to be an ensign of
lewdness; or every look cast upon another, to be a broker for lust; or to be in
company of such a one, unless they are dishonest: This is rash judgment; nay,
this is not judicium, but vitium; this is not judgment, but vice, and passion;
contrary to true love, that, as the Apostle says, hops all things, believes
all things, and is ready to interpret doubtful things to the best: this is to
wrong thy yoke fellow; and Satan purposely casts in, and fomenteth such
suspicions, merely to sour this sweet condition: and this is to make way for
thine own torment: this is not tollere crucem, to take up thy cross, when it is
laid upon thee; but creare crucem, to make a cross, and to lay it upon thy self.

But now in the second place, speeches, sometimes in their gestures, sometimes
in their too frequent conversing with others, and seeming to take delight in
their company, that they stir up a suspicion: and because they are conscious to
themselves (perhaps) of their own honesty and loyalty, they think they offend
not in this. But as Caesar said of a wife, so I say both of man and wife; They
must not only be free from act, but even from the suspicion of evil: and the
Apostle wishes them to abstain from all appearance of evil; which if they do
not, they sin against God, sin against their neighbor, in giving him occasion
to judge uncharitably; sin against the married estate, by which they are bound
to study each others contentment, and not willingly to do the least thing that
may distaste each other. S. Jerome.
Saint Jerome brings in one saying, Sufficit mihi conscientia ^^a, ego habeo
Deum judicem conscientia: My conscience clears me sufficiently, and I have
God the judge of my conscience. But, says he, A^di Apostolum dicentem; Hear
what the Apostle says; Provide things honest, not only in the sight of God,
but in the sight of men. Conscientia Deo, fama proximo: Thy conscience lies
open unto God, thy credit to thy neighbor: which ointment if a man and woman
shall not keep, as free as they can, from the least fly, they fulfill not Gods
commandment.

To go on.

If I may obtain children by her. Here the Fathers and Expositors do acquit her
of lust, and take knowledge of her desire only to have a child; and that not
only for the contentment of her husband, but that the world might be made
happy: for God had promised a blessing to the world in Abraham's seed.

I do easily condescend unto them, that she had no unclean purpose; August.
lib. 16. de civit. Dei.
nay I willingly, with Saint Augustine, excuse both her and her husband, in
that particular: Ab uxore causa prolis ancilla marito traditur, a marito causa
prolis accipitur; ab utroque non culpae luxus, sed naturae fructus requiritur:
For issue sake, the wife here gives her handmaid; and for the same cause
Abraham takes her; by both of them, the fruit of the womb, and not the
pleasure, is desired.

But yet to justify her or him in this action, which the Fathers endeavor, I
cannot: For, Observe. 2. Good intentions can no way justify had actions. Romans
3.8.
How good soever the intention be, it will not justify a bad action.

We know the peremptory rule of the Apostle, that evil must not be done, that
good may come of it, Romans 3. When Lot prostituted his daughters, he intended
good in it; and that was, The preservation of the laws of hospitality, and the
security of his guests: but he cannot be justified in it, because the thing
which he did, was simply unlawful in it self. I know what is said, that, Of two
evils, he did choose the less: he desired that they should coire secundum
naturam; (seeing their wicked resolution) that they should keep the course of
nature, rather then, e contra, at once to violate nature and hospitality. But
this will not serve the turn: for though in evils that be poena, evils of
punishment, a man may choose the less; ubi homo inermis invenitur, (says Saint
Gregory;) as, S. Gregory.
when a man unarmed is surprised by his desperate enemy, it is lawful to leap
down some opportunity of escape: yet in those which be culpae, those evils of
sin, neither is to be chosen: And therefore they speak more truly and safely,
that make it an infirmity in him, and cast only this cloak over it; that he
did it animo perturbato, out of a troubled mind, suddenly, and not being well
advised. The midwives of Egypt could not preserve the males alive, but by
inventing some cleanly shift, whereby to delude Pharaoh; and therefore they
resolve upon a lie. But certainly they did evil, that good might come of it,
and therefore worthy of censure. And though it be said, that God built them
houses, Exodus 1. yet Saint Augustine will tell us, Remunerata est benignitas
mentis, S. Augustine.
non iniquitas mentientis: that God did there recompense the tenderness of
their mind, not the iniquity of their lie. Saul pretended a good end, in
sparing the fat things of the Amalekites, that therewith he might sacrifice to
the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. but that would not excuse him; 1 Samuel 15.
for he flatly transgressed Gods commandment. Uzzah intended the safety of Gods
Ark; he stretched out his hand, to stay it from falling: but God interpreted
this, presumption, and accordingly punished it: for it belonged not to him, so
much as to touch the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 2 Samuel 6.
Doubtless Saint Peter meant no harm, but rather good to Christ, when he took
him aside, and dissuaded him from his passion: But we see how sharply Christ
rebukes him for it. Certainly no intention, not of the best end, and the
greatest good, will bear a man out in the doing of that which is simply evil.

And the reason is, because (as the School speaks) malum non est in numero
eligibilio um; evil is not in the number of things to be made choice of; and
therefore neither to be chosen for its own sake, nor yet propter aliud bonum,
for any other good consequent whatsoever: for, actus peccati non est
ordinabilis in bonum finem: no act of sin is in its nature orderable to any
good end. In moral actions, if, for any intended end, we make choice of such
means as by the Law of God (which ought to be our rule) are ineligible, that
action cannot be justified.

Secondly, Bonum est ex causa integra, malum ex partiali: Any partial or
particular defect, in object, end, manner, or other circumstance, is enough to
make the whole action bad: but to make it good, there must be an universal
concurrence of all requisite conditions, in every of these respects. To make
the face deformed, the want of an eye or nose is enough: but to make it comely,
there is required the due proportion of every part.

For the Use of this:

This point may serve us to great purpose; Application
in the Church of Rome we know, how they impose upon credulous minds, with
lying miracles, and themselves have christened them, pias frauds, i.e. holy
deceits: they have counterfeited Relics, and made large Legends; they use
equivocations, and they break Covenants; they plot treason, Against the Church
of Rome
blow up Parliament houses: and all this they excuse, because their intent is
the promoting of the Catholic cause: They have forgotten, or at least will
not remember, that a good intention will not justify a bad action; and that
evil must not be done, that good may come of it; it is too common among us to
tell untroths, officious lies as we call them, S. Augustine.
to procure the benefit of them; but this cannot be justified, for Saint
Augustine will tell us; that nullo bonae causae obtutu, no pretense or intent
of any good will justify us, in doing of that which is evil; and he will not
have one lie for the preservation of another chastity, of another life; nay
ad sempirernam salutem nullus ducendus est opitu lante mendacio; no man is to
be led unto eternal life it self, by the conduct of a lie: the glory of God is
the greatest good, and the highest end, and yet a lie may not be told for that.
Job. 13.7.
Job asks them, Chapter 13. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? and if not for the glory of God; Certainly not for any
inferior end. A man scrapeth and raketh together unjustly, and purposes to
build an hospital with that he has so gotten; he is wicked, and so he may
call that pile Acheldama, for it is the monument of a bloody devotion. Shall a
man steal leather, to make the poor shoes? Shall a man purloyn from his
master, or the wife from the husband, to bestow it upon works of charity? Satan
takes great advantage from hence, that men can plead an intendment of good;
for by this means, sin is not only boldly committed, but stoutly defended; as
we see in those our Savior speaks of, Ioh. 16.2. Acts. 26.9.
Joh. 16. That when they kill the saints, think they do God service: and Saint
Paul says of himself: Acts. 26. He verily thought, that he ought to do many
things, contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Let us therefore always
remember, that good intentions do not make good actions: the means must be
good, as well as our meaning, if we will have our actions pleasing unto God.

Further, If I may obtain children by her: It is in the Hebrew (...) Si
aedificer per ipsam; if I may be built by her: for (...) is aedificavit, or
extruxit, to build; and from thence is the Hebrew word (...) filius, and (...)
filia, a son and a daughter: and it is to be observed; because it shows, that
children are said to build the house; they keep up the name of the parents, and
make them and their house known when they are dead. S. Jerome. Deuteronomy. 25.9.
Diligenter nota (says Saint Jerome) quod procreatio liberorum est aedificatio.
Deuteronomy. 25. God would have the next brother (the elder dying without issue,) to
marry the wife, and raise up seed unto his brother; if he did refuse to do it,
Observe. 3. Posterity to the building of the house of family.
the wife was to complain to the Elders; and if he stood to it, to refuse it,
she was to pluck off his shoe, and to spit in his face, and to say thus shall
it be done to the man that will not build up his brothers house: (...). Raising
up seed and building the house, are the same; so the prayer of the inhabitants
of Bethlehem, in the behalf of Boaz and Ruth, chap. 4.11. That the woman that
comes into his house, may be as Rachel and Leah, which two did build the
house of Jsrael; and how did they build it? even by bearing of children to
Jacob their husband: it is said of Absolon, that in his life time he had reared
up for himself a pillar in the Kings dale; for he said, I have no Son to keep
my name in remembrance; and he called the pillar, by his own name. 2 Samuel 18.
Because he wanted the other building, 2 Samuel 18.18.
(he had no son) he would be known to posterity, by this monument.

For the Use of this:

It meets with a great number in these times, Application
who forget that children are the builders of their house; for by their lewd
woeful courses, they are the ruin of them: There is a son that causes shame,
Prove. 17.2. and a foolish son; that is, he that is ungodly, is the calamity of
his father; he shameth himself and his father, and his family; yea he pulls
down the house, from whence he came: A great man sometimes in this kingdom,
whose progenitors had been careless, would be drawn with a trowel in his hand;
and this word out of his mouth, ad aedificandam domum antiquam: to repair an
ancient house: but how many have we, that come of ancient houses, and by their
misdemeanors, and living as the Prodigal did, (...) riotously, by being
scatter-goods, bring themselves to that which Solomon speaks of; in their hand
is found nothing, Eccles. 5. Eccles. 5.15.
The father did not so diligently use the rake, as they the forke; as if an
estate had been left them only, ad dissipandum, to be scattered; people look
upon them, and call them the ruin of their house: what have those to answer
for, that suffer the light of their family to go out by their inordinate
courses! that having had good education, and great estates left, discolor from
the one, and dissipate the other! that dishonor God, and undo their souls;
shame their progenitors, ruin their posterity!

In the second place, let it teach children to keep up the house, as much as in
them lies; if their parents and ancestors have been virtuous, let them tread
in their steps; let them put them on, (as it was said of the sons of
Constantine,) (...), that they put on all the virtues of their father; and let
them chiefly and wisely preserve that estate, which has been left them; this
is to keep up the house; if they have been bad and ill husbands, let them by
their course make amends, for former defects; and repair the breaches that
have been made in their family: how acceptable are such to God? and how
gracious are they, in the eyes of all good men? who lends them not a good
word? and spends not a good wish upon them, that they may go on and prosper?
but I stand no longer upon this.

There might be further observed out of this clause, that she says (...),
perhaps I may obtain children; so that we see, she falls into an error, out
of hope of a future, contingent, casual event: it is no more, but perhaps, or
it may be; nay the truth is, she was not built by this means, as she hoped;
for this child that she aymeth at, proves afterward a vexation unto her; for
he mocked the son of her own womb Jsaac; which does so trouble her, that she
cannot be quiet, till both he and his mother be cast out, as you shall find,
Genesis 21.
at the twenty first Chapter of this Book: yea and the posterity of the child,
proves adversaries and enemies to the posterity of Jsaac: Psalm. 83.6.
as we shall find, Psalm. 83. Among the enemies of the Jsraelites are the
Hagarens and the Jsmaelites: so do peoples projects fail them, which they have
laid without consulting, or asking counsel of God: Observe. 4. No running into
certain error for any certain good, muchless for a contingent.
they take up their arrow, and shoot by the mark they aimed at; nay like an
ill-charg'd piece, their plots recoil upon themselves; and they find their own
counsels a snare unto them; but should they succeed, what folly is it, with
Sarah, to do that for the present, which is unwarrantable, upon a peradventure?
an hope of Sonship, that is only contingent and doubtful? And yet such fools
there are, too many in the world: they take untoward courses, out of an hope to
make themselves rich; and yet it is but a perhaps, whether their lives shall
hold, or not: they use vicious ways, to get honor; and yet its but perhaps,
whether they shall attain unto it. Application Omnia nactus sum, and nihil
expedit.
For, how many may say with that heathen, (...): I have got all things that I
aimed at, and yet nothing profited: Yea, when they have thought to reap their
harvest, have with Ixion embraced a cloud, in stead of Juno. How many go on in
sin, to the present wounding of their souls, upon an hope that they shall have
a time of repentance, and be able to recollect themselves? A perhaps only. And
often have we known those that have cast themselves upon this perhaps, to have
been taken away suddenly, or to have died suddenly, without any signs of
contrition for sin. Alas! do we think what shall come afterward? This is only
known to God, what a day may bring forth; and therefore let us look to our
ways, and that we do nothing but what we can justify; and that will bear out
it self.

I come now to the fourth cause of the marriage of Abraham and Sarah; and that
is, Abraham's yielding to the motion of his wife: (...); He liked of the counsel
and resolution, to follow it: Observe. 5. Uxeriousness often sinful and unmanly.
Which howsoever the Fathers would palliate, yet we cannot but charge him with
a sinful uxoriousness. It should seem, he had some fresh desire, upon her
speech, to be a father, though by this by-way: And again; his wife pretending
so much care of him, and affection unto him, and study of his contentment; he
thought, by neglecting her advice, he might displease: Et metuit contristari,
Tostatus in loc.
(as Tostatus says) he was loath to grieve her. This (I say) was a sinful
uxoriousness, such as was in Adam, that was persuaded by his wife, to eat of
the forbidden fruit: and Espensaeus.
one says, He fell not so much out of an error of judgment, as ex sociali
necessitudine, and amicabili benevolentia; out of the attraction of society,
and friendly compliance with his partner. So it was the fault of Moses, that he
would yield so far to his wife, as to neglect the circumcising of his child,
to give her contentment. And Solomon was uxorious, in yielding to his wives for
the practice of idolatry: the same (says Solomon) pay not, as he did, because
he would not dalicius contristari; practiced as they did, lest he should offend
his concubines. Thus uxorious was Ahab, who was swayed by his wife, to do as
she would have him, 1 Kings 21. 1 Kings 21.
he is said to have done evil by the instigation of Jezebel. And instances are
very frequent in these times, of those, both Magistrates and others, that
listen so much to the counsel of wives, and their pleadings, that businesses
are wrong carried, and their husbands discredited, yea sometimes ruined.

For the Use of this:

Let husbands beware of this uxoriousness. Application Genesis 21.12.
Wherein wives advise well, let them hearken unto them: as God says to
Abraham, Genesis 21. In all that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her
voice. And it had been well for Haman, if he had listened to that which Zeresh
said to him; If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have
begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him. And for Pilate, if he had
hearkened to the message his wife sent him: Have thou nothing to do with that
just man.

But when they shall advise that which is evil, we must ever take heed of
hearkening to them: we must rather choose to displease them, then God. God
gives caution, that if the wise that lies in a man's bosom, shall entice him
to idolatry; he shall not hearken unto her, Deuteronomy. 13.6. And it was a worthy
disposition in David, who, when his wife reproved him for dancing before the
Ark; answers, in effect, that if it were to do again, he would do it; his
edge should not be taken off by her flout; yea, he would be more vile before
his God, 2 Samuel 6. And it was a good Spirit in Job, 2 Samuel 6.
when his wife moved him to that which was evil; he rejected her, and tells
her, She speaks like a foolish woman: and so she did indeed, that upbraided
him with constant uprightness, and would have him curse God, and die. It is
true, that much may be done in things indifferent, to give the wife
satisfaction: for else there may be that in an house, which Solomon calls a
continual dropping. But in things unlawful, for an husband to yield to the
wife, is that which offends God, and forfeiteth that authority which God has
given him, in regard of his wife. And let me advise wives, not to presume upon
the interest they have in the affection of their husbands, to pursue upon them
that which they may not lawfully do. They are ill yoke-fellows, that would wish
them to offend God, for the giving of them satisfaction: to slight sin against
God, so they may have their will. They should be helpful, and not hurtful: they
should make their judgments to submit to their husbands, and no way affect
that their passion should conquer his reason.

Again: observe, how free Abraham was from the thought of any indirect course,
to hasten Gods work, till this was propounded by his wife; he did patiently
wait Gods leisure: And though every day he grew older, and more unlikely, in
the judgment of flesh and blood, to have a child; yet he gave credit to Gods
promise, and in much meekness expected the accomplishment: and now, upon this
suggestion of his wife, we see how he goes in. We may see Observe. 3. The force
of temptation, and frailty of the best.
How apt we are to fall, when temptation comes.

Indeed, we know not our selves, or our own strength, till then. And therefore
they are called (...), temptations: for they do (...), or (...), broach the
vessel, and see what is in it: Talis quispiam, qualis in tentatione; for, such
is every one, as he is in temptation.

Genesis 12.
Abraham's danger in Egypt, Genesis 12. was a bold temptation; and we see there how
he carries it. Moses, that was the sweetest spirited man in the world; yet at
the waters of strife is tempted, and speaks unadvisedly. David, that was free
from lust before; yet, upon the sight of the woman washing her self, was
tempted and overcome. And so it was with his son Solomon; and with Hezekiah,
upon the coming of the King of Babels messengers. And so it was with Peter, for
all his former protestations; yet, being tempted, through the fear of losing
his life, he was conquered: And so afterward, when he halted between the Jew
and the Gentile, Gal. 2.

Who finds not this? Though we can bid defiance to temptations when they are
absent, and say, Oh, we would not be thus and thus; yet when they present
themselves, we are too soon foiled by them. Places and Offices have corrupted
some men, that were honest before: Company has tempted those, that came in
pure: Some occasion offered for theft or lust, has subdued a man suddenly,
that never before had the like motion.

For the Use:

Application
Let us pray then, as our Savior bids us, that we enter not into temptation.

Secondly, labor we to fortify our hearts with grace, and fear them with the
fear of God; that when temptations come, we may be able to resist them. It Is
nothing for a man to be chaste, where there is no tentation to uncleanness; for
a man to be temperate at a poor and lean table; to be meek and moderate, when
we are not provoked: nothing for the servant not to steal, when his masters eye
is upon him: But, when temptation comes, then to stand upright, argues the
power of grace: As we see in Joseph, solicited by his mistress; and David,
when he had Saul in the cave, and all circumstances invited him to take revenge.

Thirdly, whenever we are foiled by temptation, let us blame our selves; for
did not we yield, we could not be overcome: it is not in the power of any man
or woman living; nay not of Satan himself to hurt us, if we could keep our own:
Satan suadere potest, cogere non potest, (says the Father:) non extorquet
consensum, sed petit. The devil may persuade, but he cannot compel; he does
not enforce consent, but beg it: He may (...), but not (...). i.e. He may
seduce, but he cannot necessitate us: Sarahs temptation had been frustrate, if
Abraham had not yielded; and therefore let us lay the blame, where it should
lie; challenge not God, nor men, nor Satan, but our own deceitful hearts; for
every man (says the Apostle) when he is tempted, is drawn away by his own
concupiscence.

Lastly, Observe here, that though Abraham had before been tempted, and stood
it out manfully; yet here he yields and gives in: when he was called out of
his own country, you may well think he suffered a shrewd assault, to leave his
dwelling, his friends and kindred, and all his accommodations, and yet he
overcame those difficulties; afterward when dissension was between his and
Lots herdmen; and no question, he was tempted to stand upon his seniority and
precedence; he had been the maker of his nephew under God; and therefore why
should not he submit to his conditions; and yet for peace sake, he conquereth
himself so far, as to yield of his own right, and to give Lot the liberty of
choice. Again, there was a tentation lay in the King of Sodoms offer of the
spoils unto him; and yet he is so resolute, that he will not be enriched, so
much as a shooe-latchet by him: and yet now, when this tentation comes, here
he yields, and hearkneth to the voice of his wife: why did he not say to her
upon her motion? My dear wife, I am not so blind or stupid, as not to discern
the great care that thou have of my contentment; and how willingly should I
embrace it; but that the thing is not lawful in it self, and would argue
diffidence in the promise of God, on which I have depended all this while: both
thou and I are to yield our selves to God, and not to prescribe him the time or
manner of bestowing the blessing: I dare not condescend unto thee in this
particular; but none of all this said he, but as soon as she mooveth, he
consents; and thus we see;

That it is possible for the child of God, Observe. 7.
that quitteth himself well in one temptation, to be foiled by another. David
that bore himself well, in that untoward carriage of Saul toward him; yet
fails when he is provoked by Nabal, and presently voweth revenge: and though
he carried himself well, in the railing of Shimet; yet not so well at Absolons
death: Job at first was so patient, that he did not sin with his mouth; but
afterward he speaks unadvisedly: And Jonah, that is of a meek spirit when he
is detected in the ship, is in a Voge because of the gourd; and we find it
thus ordinarily: he that quitted himself well in a temptation to ambition, has
failed when he has been tempted to covetousness; and he that quitted himself
well in both the former, has failed in a temptation to lust and uncleanness:
He that has resisted drunkenness, yet has yielded to gluttony.

For the Use of this:

Application
First, for others: Let us be tender in our censures of them, when they are
carried away, by this or that temptation; it is incident to the best; and we
know not how their temptations have been edged: neither let us despair of them,
because they have been foiled, that they will still hereafter go by the worse;
no, they may recover themselves, and be more valiant; (as it is said of Castiis
and Emilius in Saint Cyprian, S. Cyprian.
) fortiores ab ignibus facti sunt, quibus ante cesserant; their christian
fortitude was the more kindled, by the sight of those flames, which before they
startled at; the old saying was, he that flies, may fight again.

1 Cor. 10.10.
Secondly, For our selves, let us not presume on it; (as the Apostle says; 1
Cor. 10.) Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall; Let us not be
high-minded, but fear, considering how many snares lie in our way, and how weak
we are of our selves. And Thirdly, Let us beg of God, his confirming and
strengthening grace; gratia ad singulos actus requiritur, (was the Fathers
saying against the Pelagians:) if Gods grace be not ever at hand to help us;
though we have stood it out, in an hundred great temptations, we may be foiled,
in a poor and contemptible occasion.

Preached, May 19. 1641.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.3. And Sarah, Abraham's wife, took Hagar her maid, the Egyptian, after
Abraham had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan.
THe three first verses of this Chapter, (as I told you in the division of it)
contained the marriage of Abraham with Hagar, Sarahs handmaid. And therein four
things observable.

1. The occasion of this marriage, in the first verse.

2. The proper causes of it, in the second verse.

3. The knitting of this knot, in this third verse.

4. Together with the fourth thing, which is, the assignation of the time when
this marriage was made: namely, After Abraham had dwelt ten years in the land
of Canaan.

We have done with the Occasion, and the Causes: Now we come to the knitting of
the knot: And Sarah, Abraham's wife, took Hagar her maid, the Egyptian, and gave
her to her husband Abraham, to be his wife.

And here two Questions are made:

First, Two main Questions answered.
Why Sarah would not rather make choice of some freewoman, to give unto her
husband, then a bondwoman?

And it is answered, That by giving him a bondwoman, she was sure, that the
children that she should bear, should be accounted her own; for, as her
mistress, they belonged unto her: Whereas she had failed of this, if the party
had been a freewoman: for she would not have yielded her right unto another.

Secondly, it is demanded, How Hagar is said to be given to Abraham to wife,
when Sarah was his wife already? What kind of wife was Hagar?

The Patriarchs, in the Old Testament, had two sorts of wives; Two sorts of
wives among the Patriarchs.
primary, and secundary: both of them were reputed lawful and true wives, and
therefore the children of both were accounted legitimate.

The former wives were called (...), primary wives: some say, (as I told you,
not long since) from (...), which is to forget; either because the memory of
the woman is not so strong as the man's; or rather, because the fathers family
is forgotten, and in a manner extinct, in their daughters, when they are
married. And it is the common saying of the Hebrews, Familia matris, non
vocatur familia; that the mothers family, is not called the family. And for the
contrary reason, a male-childe is called (...), from memory; because the memory
of the father is preserved in the son; 2 Samuel 18.18.
according to that speech of Absalon, 2 Samuel 18. I have no son, to keep my name
in remembrance. And the Euripides.
heathen man could say, (...): that males are the pillars of the house.

The other sort of wives, they call (...), secundary wives, or half-wives; from
(...), dividere, to divide; and (...), uxor, a wife: as one would say, Uxor
divisa and dimidia; a divided or half wife. The English translateth them
concubines; and not unfitly: for sometimes the Hebrew word it self signifies a
strumpet or harlot.

The difference between these primary and secundary wives, was this:

The differences of the two sorts of wives.
First, there was a disparity in their authority, or houshold-government. The
wife was as mistress; the concubine, as an handmaid, or servant: she had jus
tori, a right to the marriage bed, as the chief wife had; otherwise, she was in
all respects inferior; as appears in this story of Sarah and Hagar: Sarah
disposes of her to Abraham; and Abraham tells his wife, that she is in her
hand, to do to her as it pleases her; and she corrects her: and the Angel,
meeting with her when she was fled, charge her to return, and to submit her
self to her mistress.

Secondly, the betrothing of these wives was different. The chief wife, at her
espousals, received from her husband certain gifts and tokens, as pledges and
testimonies of the Contract. Thus Abraham's steward gave, in Isaac's name, unto
Rebekah, jewels of silver, and of gold, Genesis 24.53.
and raiment, Genesis 24. This custom also was in use among the Grecians, who
called those gifts (...), dona sponsalia, nuptial-tokens, (says Suidas: Suidas.
) (...): gifts which the bridegroom presented to his bride.

Again: the chief wife received from her husband a Bill of writing, or
matrimonial Letters: whereas, the concubine received neither such gifts, nor
such Letters.

Thirdly, only the children of the chief wife succeeded the father in his
inheritance: the children of the concubine received only gifts or Legacies.
Abraham gave his inheritance unto Isaac: unto the sons of the concubines he
gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, Genesis 25.5, 6.
while he yet lived, Genesis 25. Neither did it hinder, though the concubine
brought forth before the chief wife; as we see here, in Sarah and Hagar; and
afterward, in the case of Rachel, and Bilhah her maid, Genesis 30.
Genesis 30. the children of the chief wife, though later born, were preferred
before the children of the concubines. And let this be sufficient for the
satisfaction of the Questions.

Now we come to Sarahs fact.

Sarah, Abraham's wife, took Hagar her maid, the Egyptian, and gave her to her
husband Abraham to wife.

Here is the knitting of the knot; and here we may observe,

First, How sin goes on by degrees: Observe. 1. Of Polygamy, or the diverse
wives of the Patriarchs; how far excusable, and why not imitable
And

Secondly, How one degree is worse then another.

She had, before, only had this device in her head, out of a diffidence and
distrust of having any children her self: then, she resolves upon the putting
it in practice: then, she communicates it to her husband; and seeing him taken
with it, hastes to perfect it. The first Observation's twofold
Sin is first in semine, in the seed; then it is in the blade; then it comes
to an ear, and so to maturity: It is in the root first, and then in the leaf,
and then in ramo, in the branch; and lastly, in fructu, in the fruit. The woman
saw the fruit, and it was lovely to look upon: and then Satan suggesteth, that
it was good for the improvement of knowledge, and they should be as gods,
knowing good and evil: and then they resolve to taste it. Si bona, cur non
tangi? si mala, cur in paradiso? (as Saint Bernard makes the woman to speak:)
If the fruit be good, S. Bernard.
why not to be touched? and if bad, what does it in paradise? And so, at last,
they eat it. So, there was a lustful mind in those sons of God; and this was
stirred, by seeing the daughters of men to be fair: and then they proceed to
take them to be their wives. So was it in the case of Joseph's mistress, and in
the brethren of Joseph; they came, by degrees, to perfect their sin. And so in
David, and the enemies of Daniel: in Haman, in the high priest, and diverse
others. James 1.14, 15.
Saint James lays down this, Chap. 1. 14. first, there is lust; that is the
seed: then this lust conceives; and then it brings forth sin; that is, in
outward action.

Secondly, as I observed, Every of these steps and degrees, Observe. 2. The
serpentine motion of sin, and how each sin is worse then other. Jerem. 4.14.
is worse then other. There is the serpents root, Isa. 14. and out of that
comes forth a cockatrice; and that grows to be a fiery flying serpent. It is
very bad to have naughty thoughts: Prove. 15.26. The thoughts of the wicked are
an abomination to the Lord. And Jer 4. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long shall vain thoughts lodge
within thee! And it is well known, how Gods dearest Saints are grieved with
their untoward cogitations, though they come not into the eye and observation
of the world: even in this respect, they call themselves, with S. Paul,
miserable men, because they are sensible daily, not only of such thoughts as
are injectae, cast into the soul, on a sudden, by Satan; but such also as be
ascendentes, (as the School distinguishes of them;) that ascend out of their
own corrupt hearts. In this respect it is, that Saint Augustine cries out, S.
Augustine.
Quando? ubi innocens fui, Domine? When, Lord, or where have I been innocent?

But now evil words are worse then evil thoughts. Pro. 30. says Agur, Prove.
30.32.
If thou have been foolish in lifting up thy self, (that is, in choler, and
desire of revenge:) and if thou have thought wickedly, lay thine hand upon thy
mouth. And again: actions of evil, are worse then either thoughts or words, and
a greater sign of a wicked heart; to do ill, then only to speak or think ill.
Isai. 3.8.
Isai. 3. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their tongue and
their doings are against the Lord. The reason is good: For,

1. It argues, that sin has got a more full dominion and sovereignty over a
man, when it comes into the outward man, and is perfected in outward action,
then when it rests in the heart. There is no man can free his heart from
corruption in this life: Who can say, his heart is clean? Prove. 20.9.
Prove. 20. no more, then he can say of his body.

You will say, What man is free from sin, in word and deed? For, In many things
we sin all, James 3.2.

But yet this is easier then the other: a man may more easily keep himself from
the outward action, then the inward cogitation. Many a man has thoughts of
lust, yet keeps himself from the act: many a man has thoughts of revenge,
yet does not shed his brothers blood. And therefore the Apostle advises, that
we should not let sin reign in our mortal bodies, Romans 6.12.
Romans 6. and that we should not make our members (...), weapons of
unrighteousness: though we think evil, against our purpose; yet to take heed of
bringing it forth into practice.

A second reason is, When a man's corruption breaks out into action, God is
more dishonored, and men are the more damn fied. The man himself is only hurt
by his ill thoughts: but when it breaks out into action, men are hurt. If ill
words corrupt good manners, (as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.33.
1 Cor. 15.) why then surely, evil actions: And therefore Satan puts on men,
not only to think, but to work all iniquity with greediness.

For the Use of this:

Application
1. Let our care be, to stop sin in the beginning, as near as we can; to dush
these children of Babylon against the stones, when they be young; to kill the
cockatrice in the egg; to quench the fire while it is but a spark: For it is
of a growing nature; and if a man give way to it, non obtinebit ut desinat; he
shall not conquer it into a cessation.

Set we our selves even against evil thoughts; pray against them, strive
against them, dislike them when they rise, and lament and mourn for them: But
do not tumble this sweet bit under thy tongue; do not take delight to dwell
upon ill cogitations: for then the fire kindles further, by this complacencie;
and the next thing will be, a resolution to speak or do: Qui minima contemnit,
paulatim decidit: he that contemns small sins, by degrees falls into great
ones. And Saint Augustine shows it, S. Augustine.
in the example of his mother, when she was a maid; how she came to be overcome
with a love to wine, and was thereupon called, by a servant in the house,
Meribibula, that is, a wine-bibber. A little rent in a garment, is apt to be
wider; and a small breach in the bank of a river, will soon be wrought to a
greater latitude. Sin begins in thought, and proceeds to ill speeches, and
worse actions.

Secondly, It should teach us with might and main, to withstand the perfection
of sin; though we cannot be so happy, as to be without ill motions; yet let us
keep us from evil practices, when we have ability and opportunity for the
acting of them. Let us then do as David did, who having in his wantonness and
curiosity, lusted after the water of the well of Bethlehem; yet when it was
brought unto him, had that power over himself, that he would not drink it, but
poured it out upon the ground. So though we have lusted and coveted, and had
unclean thoughts and resolutions; let us take heed of perfecting them, for this
wounds the soul the deeper, and makes the recovery more difficult. Not to
have ill thoughts is (as Eccumenius.
one says;) (...), i.e. inevitable; and therefore though they be faulty, God
will be the more merciful upon our repentance; but when we proceed to action,
and accomplish our ill thoughts and purposes, voluntarium auget peccatum,
deliberation heightneth the sin: the more of the Will in it, the greater the
sin; and the more deliberately done, the harder satisfied: and when we are kept
from the outward commission of sin, let us not thank our selves, for it is Gods
grace that restrains us; I kept thee (says God to Abimelech, Genesis 20.) That
thou should not sin against me: Genesis 20.6.
Corruption in the soul knows no pause; and therefore if God keep it not
back, a man shall not cease till he come into profundum peccatorum, into the
depths of sin, and be, with Lazarus, even dead and buried in the grave of his
sin; the Stoics that thought the Right and practice of virtue, and refrayning
of evil, to be in a man's own power, did err the whole Heaven; for if God do
not keep us, we shall fall into as fearful precepices, as ever Cain, or
Pharaoh, or Ahab, or Judas, or Julian, did.

But now for the fact of Sarah and Abraham; a great question is employed,
whether it were lawful or no: lib. 22. Contra. Manich.
And there be two extremes about it: Faustus the Manichee, as (appears in
Saint Augustine,) does make holy Abraham guilty: turpis and nefariae libidinis,
of base and flagrant lust; and that being mad on issue, he wallowed in
uncleanness with a base Harlot; he does likewise challenge him with infidelity,
that God having promised him issue by Sarah, he would seek a child by another
woman: A great question.
But Saint Augustine there freeth him from both these imputations.

First, That Abraham was not lustful; for he never thought of this way, till
his wife did suggest it unto him, and press it upon him.

Secondly, He was not guilty of infidelity, or distrust of Gods promise, (says
he;) because though God had promised him seed, yet he had not made known unto
him, whether he should have it by Sarah, or some other woman; Genesis 17. and 18.
for he reveals it unto him in the seventeenth and eighteenth Chapters, that
he should have issue by Sarah. The other extreme is, of those that wholly
acquit both Abraham and Sarah, from any fault at all in the transaction of this
business; so do many of the ancients: some upon light grounds, others upon
those that are more dangerous; I will briefly set down some of their reasons,
for the excuse of either party.

Lib. 1. Antiq. C. 11.
And First, for Sarah, so Josephas says, that she did this (...), i. e. at the
call of God; God commanding her so to do: but how does this appear? there is
not the least footstep of it; though God approved of her advice, for the
casting out of the bond woman and her son: Genesis 21.
Genesis 21. It follows not, that he liked of the counsel that she gave to
Abraham, to go in to her maid: Bellarmine seems to come near to this reason:
for he says, non credibile est, Bell. lib. de matrimoni^. C. 11.
Saram faeminam sanctissimam id facturam fuisse, nisi licitum esse scivisset:
It is not to be believed, that such an holy woman as Sarah was, would have done
this, or any thing, that she had not known to be lawful. But by this reason, a
man might defend those actions of holy persons, which are worthy of censure: it
might be said, that when Sarah laughed and denied it to the Angel, that she
would not have done either, if she had not known it to be lawful: This might
be a ground to justify David, upon both his adultery and murder.

Apologies for Sarah.
A Second Reason is, that Sarah did what she did, studio quae^endae prolis: she
desired only to have seed, that the Church of God might be enlarged, yea that
the world might be blessed, according to Gods promise to Abraham: and this
Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, and Saint Chrysostom go upon: But this will not
serve the turn; for as I showed the last day: Good intentions, will not
justify bad actions: Romans 3.8.
and the rule is peremptory; Romans 3. A man must not do evil, that good may
come of it.

Thirdly, It is said in defense of Sarah, that she did but use the right that
she had over her husband; 1 Cor. 7.4.
for the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. The husband has not power over his own body,
but the wife; to which I answer: That the wife has a power and right, over the
husbands body; but not to persuade him, or urge him to uncleanness with an
other, contrary to the laws of marriage: her power only extends, to the
challenging of her husband to her self; and he is so hers, that he has not
power or right, to offer his body to another. It is easy to abase the power
and right that people have; as some parents to their children, and some masters
to their servants, and some in place of authority, to those that be inferiors:
and so she here makes a perverse use of that power and right that God had
given her, over her husbands body, in giving up her right to another; whereas
she might not alienate it, or transfer it upon any; a wife cannot give leave to
the husband, to take another. Now for Abraham's part, these reasons are brought.

First, That he did it not out of a lustful mind, but of a desire of issue:
But this was answered before. Whatsoever his end was, the means is unlawful;
and not only the meaning, but the means must be good.

Secondly, They say he did not do it of his own accord, S. Augustine, l. 16.
de. Civ. Dei. c. 25.
but by the persuasion of his wife; and this Saint Augustine much stands upon;
he says of him, non implevisse voluptatem suam, sed Illius; accepisse non
petiisse, feminasse non amasse: that herein he fulfulled not his own, but his
wives will; that he accepted, but desired not Hagar; that he uses her as a
Seminary, not as an Amoretta: For afterward he says to his wife, that the
maid is in her power, and thereupon the Father magnifieth him, that he used
vocore temperanter, Apologies for Abraham.
ancilla ob temperanter, nulla intemperanter; his wife temperately, his maid
obediently, neither inordinately: But this will not satisfy; the pleasure of
his wife was not to be hearkened unto, but the will of God; I believe that Ahab
himself would never have taken that course that Jezabel did, if he had been
left to himself, for the getting of Nabaoths vineyard; but yet it was his
fault, that he lets her do what she please; and use his seal to what purpose
she thought fit. Surely Moses would have circumcised his Son, if his wife had
not dissuaded him; but he is censurable for gratifying her in it. Might sin be
excused by the persuasions of wife, and friend, and brother, and the like,
thousands would be guiltless.

Thirdly, Saint Augustine says, mos erat, ergo crimen non crat; it was a
custom, and therefore thought no crime.

But we answer: First, That it was no custom, P. Lombard.
though Peter Lombard, and those upon him, say, the Patriarchs say it was in
use: For we read of no man before the flood that had two wives, but only
Lamech, and he was of the stock of Cain; it was he first, S. Jerome.
says Saint Jerome: Qui unam costam primus in duas divisit; that first divided
one rib into two; and after the flood, not any of the holy children of Seth,
till Abraham, had two wives.

Secondly, If it were a good argument, that because it is a custom, therefore
it is not sinful; we might wipe out many sins, and acquit men of them, when
they are customarily committed; against Polygamy.
for custom is not to be our rule, but Gods word.

Why but then Fourthly, they say, there was no law to forbid more wives then
one: therefore Abraham did not offend in taking of another. I answer, though
there was no Law written, yet there was a Law of nature, or of Creation; and
that contained a flat prohibition, of having more then one wife at once; as
appears in that there was but one rib taken from the man, and but one woman
made of that rib: and that it is said of the man, he shall cleave to his wife,
not wives: and again, they two shall be one flesh, not three, or more: And
therefore that speech of Saint Ambrose will not fit, S. Ambrose.
in Legem non commisit, sed Legem praevenit. He committed nothing against the
Law, but prevented it, living before it.

And in the Fifth place, the same Father would excuse the fact of Abraham, Gal.
4.24.25. S. Ambrose.
because it was a mystery; as appears, Gal. 4. quod putas peccatum, advertis
esse mysterium? (says he:) do thou consider that to be a mystery, which
thou accountest to be a sin? I answer, we deny not but Saint Paul makes it an
Allegory, but what then? The mystery lies, not in the marriage of Abraham and
Hagar, but in the servile condition of Hagar, and the casting of her and her
son out of the Family: that typified the servitude of the Law, and that carnal
ordinances were to be cast out of the Church. We do not (says Saint Augustine)
justify the fault of Lot with his daughters; because it signified something.
Because there was a mystery in Hosea's taking a woman of fornications; is
fornication justified? Shall we excuse theft, because the sudden coming of
Christ is likened unto the coming of a thief in the night? Is a man licensed to
play the unrighteous steward, because Christ draws a Parable from them
likewise?

Sixthly, Some say, that Abraham offended not in this, because we find
afterward, that God promises; to bless the child that was born.

I answer: It is a fallacy non causae; of that pretended for a cause, which
was not the cause of that same blessing. God blessed Ishmael for his fathers
sake; but not for the lawfulness of his generation. God blessed Jephtah, that
was base born, and he became the ruler of the people: but this does not
justify that mixture from which he sprung.

Lastly, that which is said in justification of this fact, is, that Polygamy
was not unlawful, and that God dispensed with it in those times.

The Polygamy of the Fathers was a fault.
But, as far as I perceive, this cannot be made good: For, besides that, (as we
showed before) it was against the law of Nature; there is a parity of
matrimonial right, between man and wife; each others body, in each others power.

And secondly; Would God have that to be in families, that should be the cause
of discord? But such is Polygamy, as we see in the family of Abraham, in that
of Jacob, and in that of Elkanah.

Thirdly, had Polygamy been lawful, surely it should have been permitted most
of all in the beginning of the world, for the multiplication of mankind: But
then God did not suffer it; for he then said, For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, and cleave to his wife: not wives, but wife; as speaking of
one.

The Polygamy of the fathers, then, was a fault. And let not men wonder, that
it should never, in all that time, be reproved: For, we do not find Lots
incest with his two daughters, or Jacobs marriage with two sisters, reproved;
and yet both worthy of reprehension.

Secondly, it is observable, that most of the Polygamists were reproved in
deeds, if not in words; either by the vexation they had from their wives, or by
the crosses they had in their children.

Why but then, if it were a fault; what shall we think of the Patriarchs that
lived and died in this sin?

It is commonly said, that they sinned not against their consciences, but of
ignorance and infirmity, as in other things; this being not yet clearly
revealed unto them; and God, in his gracious indulgence, upon their general
humiliation for all their sins, was pleased to pass by this: For, who is not
guilty of many sins, that he knows not perfectly to be sins? And those are
washed away, through Gods mercy, by a general repentance. Who understands his
errors? Psalm. 19.12.
(says David:) O cleanse thou me from my secret sins.

Now for a word of Application:

Let no man dare to imitate the Patriarchs in this: For, if it were a fault in
them, it ought to be avoided, not imitated: Instruunt nos, Application
and docentes, and errantes (says the Father:) They instruct us, at once
erring and cautioning: we should be warned by their falls. It is a profane
trick, to encourage our selves in evil, by the errors of holy men, (as too
many do) pleading Noah's excesses, and Abraham's lying, and Lots incest, and
David's adultery: Si David, cur non ego? S. Aug. in enar. sup. Psalm. 51.
Saint Augustine makes it the speech of one; If David did thus and thus, why
may not I do so? And so Peter's denial of his master. These are not set in
exemplum cadendi; sed, si cecideris, resurg^ndi; (says that Father:) Not as
examples of falling; but, if thou be fallen, of arising.

Again, for this particular that we have discoursed upon, much may be said, to
extenuate the fault of the Patriarchs. We cannot plead, if we do offend in the
like kind: Why? Matthew. 19.8. Mark 10.
Because our blessed Lord has perfectly cleared the case, Matthew. 19. and Mark
10. ab initio non fuit sic: From the beginning it was not so.

2. The Apostle says, that every man must have his own wife, and every woman
must have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7. and 1 Timothy 3. 1 Cor. 7.2. 1 Timothy 3.2.
a bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife: so that he is
reprovable, that has two wives; that is, together: for it is to be understood
de Polygamia simultanea, of many wives at the same time; not of Polygamy which
is successiva, diverse wives one after another: for it is not forbidden for a
man to have one wife after another. Why then beware of this rock; and let us
know, If, after such light, we run our selves upon it, our fault is far greater
then that of the Patriarchs; for we have a Sun, to their Candle: and, the
greater light, the more perfectly should our steps be ordered.

Well, by that which has been said, we see, that both Sarah and Abraham failed
in this business. We will not be so wicked, and foul-mouthed, to charge Abraham
with gross lustfulness, and lasciviousness or make Sarah a bawd unto him: S.
Augustine.
Saint Augustine might say it truly of the Patriarchs; Castius utebantur
pluribus, quam nunc una: that they did more chastely use many, then many now use
one; but on the other side, we must needs note the infirmity of these holy
persons: and yet that railing Friar Fevardentius, Fevardentius.
taxes this in reverend Calvin; he takes no knowledge what that holy man has
said, indeed as much as can be said, to extenuate the fault of this matrone:
but because he cannot acquit her of error, he sticks not to say, that Saram
multis vexat contumeliis; The Friars slanders of Calvin.
that be asperseth Sarah with manifold reproaches; yea belyeth him in that
manner, that he makes him say: Saram voluisse domo sua erigere lupanar, Et
mariti Laenam esse: that Sarah would set up a Brothel-house in her own, and
became vitiatour of her husband: But let him bark as long as he will, neither
he nor all the world can acquit Abraham and Sarah of a fault in this matter:
Saint Ambrose that had said as much for Abraham, as possible he could, yet
makes this fact a fault; and therefore he fell into it, ut cognoscas non
superioris cujusdam naturae and substantiae suisse, sed e numero and
fragilitate universorum hominum: that thou may know, that Abraham was not of
any superior nature, or Angelical substance; but one of the frail number of
mankind.

Observe. 3. The dearest servants of God have their defections: but yet with
difference enough from those of the ungodly.
And here we may see, That even the dearest Saints of God have their failings:
even after they are called into the state of grace, they may be overtaken with
errors.

Let us turn us unto any of the Saints (as Job speaks) and we shall find
this made good. Righteous Noah was overcome with excess and incestuousness:
Jacob dissembled, by the persuasion of his mother; and Judah, his son, polluted
himself with Tamar: and Reuben climbed up to his fathers bed: and Simeon and
Levi, how cruel were they against the Sichemites! Moses was diffident at the
waters of strife; and Aaron and Miriam murmr against their brother: besides
that, Aaron was engaged in the business of the golden calf: And we know how
David failed grossly; and so did his son Solomon; so did Jehoshaphat and
Hezekiah; and so did Jonah; and so did the Apostles of our Lord; yea, even he
that some would have to be the chief, by his being shaken with the blast of a
damsels mouth, plainly discovered, he could not be the Rock of the Church: yea,
after this, he halted between the Jews and the Gentiles, and drew many after
him in his dissimulation. I know no Saint that ever was in the world, that had
not reason to complain in this kind.

Now whence comes this, that Gods people are so subject to failings?

Certainly, First, Satan is most spitefully bent against them; and he desires,
especially, to winnow them as wheat; and does more rejoice in the folling of
them, then in an hundred others: he seeks to impair their comfort, and to
bring a blemish upon that Truth which they profess.

Secondly, the best have corruption in them, and carry about with them a body
of sin: though they be wholly justified, yet they are not wholly sanctified:
perfect sanctification is reserved for another life: and here, corruption will
be still working.

Thirdly, the Lord in his wisdom suffers it to be thus

1. To abate their natural pride, by letting them have a sense of their own
infirmities.

2. To make them cleave more closely unto him. And

3. To make them more compassionate toward their brethren, in their weaknesses;
and (...), to set them in joint (as the word imports) with a more easy hand,
as a man would do a member that is dislocated.

For the Use of this:

It confuteth the opinions of those mad brains that think it is possible for
men to be without sin: yea, Application
the Antinomians have not stuck to say, Be in Christ, and sin if thou can.
Saint John then must be a liar, who calls that man liar, and says the truth
of God is not in him, that says he has no sin. And Saint Ambrose told that
Catharist that said he had no sin, that that very word made him a sinner. But
such mad ones have more need of a Physician to purge them, then of a Divine to
confute them.

Secondly, here is ground of comfort unto those that mourn daily under their
defects: it is none otherwise with them, then with the dearest Saints: if they
would weep their eyes out, they cannot weep themselves free from sin: nay, let
them this day have repented never so seriously; by tomorrow, yea (God knows)
long before tomorrow, they shall be overtaken again.

And as I desire this may comfort the disconsolate spirit; so I would be loath
it should encourage the profane: for they are apt to bolster themselves in
their gross customable sins, by saying, Every one has his faults; we have all
our infirmities. But let them know, there is a great and broad difference
between their sins, and the infirmities that Gods children are chargeable
withal.

First: What I hate, that I do, says S. Paul, Rom 7. Romans 7.15.
The children of God are convinced in their judgments, that it is a sin; and
hate it. The wicked man cannot say so: for he loves his sin, he huggeth this
Dalilah.

Secondly, at verse. 19. Saint Paul says, That which I would not, Verse 19.
that I do. The purpose, will, and resolution of the children of God, is
against sin. So cannot the wicked say of himself; for he purposely and
deliberately sins: He does not succumbere somno, but vacare; he does not nod
against his will, but purposely sets himself to sleep.

Thirdly, Saint Paul calls himself (verse. 24.) miserable man, Verse 24.
in regard of his sin: The good man is much troubled and grieved, when he is
overtaken; it is a great burden to his soul, and he rests not, until he have
made his peace. It is not so with the wicked.

Fourthly; the good man walks not after the flesh; he does not make sin a
trade: but the wicked man does; it is his daily walk. See then, whether there
be not much difference between the infirmities of Gods children, and the
irregularities of the wicked: and therefore little reason to comfort themselves
in this, That all have their failings.

Lastly: As I would be loath the dogs should snatch the childrens bread: so I
would be as loath, that the children should play the wantons with their bread;
that because they persuade themselves they are in the state of grace, to slight
sin, and to be padling in those dirty kennels; yea, to adventure upon some
grosser ones, that are sweet and gainful: This is a piece of the devils Logic;
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down. Oh what horrible ingratitude is
this! Is he merciful, that thou should be sinful? Shall the kindness of the
father, or master, make the son or servant more loose? Joseph reasons, from
his masters favor, to faithfulness: will thou reason, from Gods mercy, to
iniquity? Why, the Psalmist tells thee, There is mercy with the Lord; that he
may be feared. May not thou suspect thy self, that thou have deluded thy
self with a vain hope that thou were in the state of grace? For certainly, no
gracious heart can reason thus: God has called me by his grace; therefore I
will sin, and will take the liberty to offend God. But if thou be under
grace, then be assured, that this thine argumentation will, after a while,
spoil thy peace, and bring thee into such anxieties and perplexities, before
thou recover thy former feelings of Gods love, that thou will say, thou have
had an hard penyworth of thy sin. Remember but David, how his bones were
broken, before he was restored in the fear of God. Let the sense of Gods warm
favors melt us into all possible obedience: and the nearer he has brought us
to himself, and the more he has manifested himself unto us, the more observant
let us be of him, and the more tender and fearful to do the least thing that
may offend him: this will show the love of God to be shed abroad in our hearts:
And that love which makes us here holy, will make us hereafter happy.

Preached, May 26. 1641.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.4. And he went in to Hagar, and she conceived: and when she had
conceived, etc.
THere remains one thing of the former verse; and that is, the circumstance
of time, when this plot, of Abraham's marrying of Hagar, was put in practice;
after Abraham had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan.

Now this time is mentioned, (say some Hebrews) because this was the time set
for trial, Whether the wife was like to be barren or fruitful. But Rebekah was
twenty years barren. Cajetan thinks, Cajetan.
it was to show, that Sarah now past hope of children, she being was seventy
five years old, ten years younger then Abraham. S. Chrysostom in locum.
S. Chrysostom says, There is mention of the time, to give us to understand,
(...): how long the Patriarch waited, how many years he stoutly bare out his
unfruitfulness, and how, being above all passion, he declared his great
continence and wisdom: notwithstanding his wives barrenness, never thought of
having children by any other then his wife.

But surely, this circumstance of time having reference to the marriage of
Abraham and Sarah, it shows thus much, That Abraham having now continued ten
years in the land of Canaan, and having had a promise of seed, and no
appearance of it in all this time; at the end of ten years, Sarah bethinks her
self of this project: and herein, discovers,

First, her Impatience: she was weary of waiting any longer.

Secondly, her Diffidence: she distrusted that any issue should come by her. And

Thirdly, her attempting of an unlawful course.

And these three are usually linked together: Observe. 1. Impatient distrust,
and unlawful means are Satan's three fold cord, and go commonly together.
that people of Israel while they were in the wilderness, often murmured and
were discontented, for this and that which they wanted, and grew so impatient,
that they do not only fly upon Moses and Aaron, but they distrust God, they
question his presence; is the Lord amongst us? and his power; can God prepare a
table in the wilderness? Nay, they grow not only to wishing that they had dyed
in Egypt, but they say one to another, let us make a captain and return into
Egypt; they are impatient, they are diffident, and that makes them think of a
desperate course; and makes them resolve of going back to that place, wherein
they had endured such miserable slavery, to the emb^^^ering of their lives;
Impatience, distrust, and ill courses go together.
and from whence they were freed, by a most miraculous hand. Yea thus it was
with David, while God deferred the accomplishment of his promise; and that Saul
still hunted him (as he says) like a partridg upon the mountains: he grows
impatient in his spirit, and that works to a diffidence; for he says, all
men are liars; and that which they have said unto him, has been but to gull
and delude him; nay his thoughts bubble up against God, as if he had forgotten
to be gracious; and he flatly says, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul;
and what follows upon this, but a desperate act, he casts himself amongst
the Philistines; which if God had not been the more merciful, had been the next
means of his confusion. This we see in Job, when the hand of God continued
heavy upon him, and that not only his body was pained, but his mind was
afflicted, he grows impatient, and is weary of bemoaning himself; and then he
grows distrustful He cries (as he says,) but God hears not, Job. 30.20.
he stands up, and God regards not: Job. 30. And he sticks not to think,
yea to say, that God has a purpose to make an end of him; c. 7. 15.
nay, see what this comes to, at some time: Job. 7. My soul chooses
strangling and death, rather then my life: And yet this man is propounded, as
an example of patience. James 5. To let us know, that the best graces in Gods
children while they are clothed with flesh, are mingled with imperfection.

And Secondly, that in those infirmities which escape us under some tedious and
piercing afflictions; (so we see them, and strive against them, and be grieved
for them as he was,) God will be merciful unto us. In experience we find how
ordinary it is, when men have long waited for deliverance from this or that
cross, or long sought this or that blessing; they grow impatient and tumultuous
in their thoughts; and from that they come to diffidence and distrust, 2 King.
6.33.
and say with Iehoram, 2 Kings. 6. Why should we wait on God any longer? Either
they distrust his power, that he cannot help; or his goodness, that he will not
help; and then follows, by the suggestion of Satan, and their own corrupt
hearts, an using of unlawful means and courses, 1 Samuel 28.
to satisfy themselves: Some men like Saul, run to the witch at endor, because
God answers him not; and some men's diffidence grows as sower as despair,
and they cast themselves out of this life, into an eternal death.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
Labor we to stop this course in the head; and whenever God exercises us, or
how long soever, let us possess our souls in patience. Now I do not make
patience to be an insensibleness under Gods hand, for I find that considered
as a fault, Jsai. 42. Isa. 42.25.
He has poured out the fury of his anger upon Jacob: the fire burned him, and
he laid it not to heart. And Jerem. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have
not grieved. If a parent should correct his child, and should find in him a
stubborn indolence, would he not be displeased with it? This is Asinina
patientia, an asses patience; neither do I mean by patience that strength of
spirit, and manlike resolution and courage, that is found in some; out of pride
of heart scorning to complain, as that party says, Jerem. 10. Ierem. 10.19.
Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it: This is Obduratio or durities, (as
the scool calls it:) hardness and obduration; and Job calls it, an hardening
of a man's self in sorrow,s Job. 6. But I mean, by patience, Job. 6.10.
a meek submission of ones self to Gods dispensation; out of a consideration.

First, Of Gods sovereignty, and power.

Secondly, Out of a sense, of our own deserts by sin.

Thirdly, Out of a persuasion of that comfortable issue, hovereth in the close,
that God will give to our trial, if we can depend upon him. This, I say, we
must labor for: and though the exercise of our patience belong, yet we must
not give out: Sarah here waited ten years; I confess, many of us would have
been sooner weary: but if God should not answer us in twelve years; so long had
the woman been troubled with a bloody issue, Luke 8. Luke 8.
and had spent all her living upon physicians, and could not be healed of any;
nay rather grew worse: Mark. 5. Though not in eighteen years; Mark. 5.26.
as that woman that was bound by Satan, Luke 13. Though not in six and thirty
years, as it was with the palsied man, that lay at the pool of Bethesda; yet we
must patiently wait till God coms: patience must have her perfect work; yea
though God, mean to exercise us all our days, we must submit, our desires must
be rather Erudiri then Erui, (as Saint Bernard speaks; S. Bernard.
) rather to have the afflictions sanctified, then removed; and we must think
(for the establishing our selves in the interim,) of what we should have, and
what we shall have; we should have torments endless, and we shall have joys
everlasting, if we thus obediently wait upon God; such joys, as all the
afflictions in this life are not worthy of Romans 8. Romans 8.18.
such joys that it is but, (...) light affliction, and but for a moment, in
comparison of that (...): that far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory:
2 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 4.17.
For what is Sarahs staying, ten, twenty, thirty, forty years, yea Methuselah,
age, unto eternity? Let this strengthen our patience, and ever keep us from
thinking of any unlawful means to rid our selves from the cross that is upon
us; but do as those worthies, Hebr. 11. Heb. 11.35.
Who would not accept of a deliverance, (that is, upon ill conditions) that
they might obtain a better, resurrection.

Another thing; I observed from this circumstance of time in this ten years
that Abraham had dwelt in Canaan, God had blessed him with a great estate; he
had given him favor, in the eyes of the greatest inhabitants of the land, and
they were confederate with him; he had gotten a notable victory over certain
Kings, which much raised the rate of him, in the opinion of the world: and God
had appeared unto him, and given him great encouragement; and yet his wife was
barren; he has no child.

Observe. 2. Gods admirable dispensations, that while be furnishes his
children, still keeps them short in something.
Thus is God pleased to dispense his blessings, that he keeps people short in
something: though they have much, they have not all they would have.

The son of Abraham, Isaac, has a great estate, and a good and a beautiful
wife: but she is barren twenty years together. Rachel is beautiful, and beloved
of her husband: but yet she has not a child. And so it was with Hannah; she
has her husbands heart: but God has shut up her womb. 2 Kings 5.1.
So we see in Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5. he was the captain of the host of
the king of Syria, a great man with his master, and honorable; a mighty man in
valor, and had gotten victories: but he was a leper. Asa was a great Prince,
and had a prosperous reign: 2 Chronicles. 16.
yet he was diseased in his feet, 2 Chronicles. 16.

And we see this in experience: God gives some man a great estate; but he
wants honor, (and, it may be, he is happier in the want of it, if he could
see it:) yet he wants it, because he earnestly desires it. Another man has
Honor and Wealth; but he wants Health; and envieth the poor labouring-mans
good stomach. Another has all three, and yet wants children; and, it may be,
is distressed more how to dispose of his estate, then ever he was to get it.
Yea, many have Children also; but they want comfort in them: and they are
beaten, often, with that which should be the staff of their age. Many a man is
comely and proportionable; but he wants an inside, and has animam pro sale,
his soul only as salt, to keep his body sweet. Many are of excellent
abilities: but they are deformed, and lack the symmetry of parts. Gods
admirable dispensations.
Some man has a good Invention; but he wants Judgment: and some have both,
in a good measure; but want Memory. Some men are excellent for conception of a
matter; but they want expression. Many have an (...), a circle of all Learning:
but they are condi, but not promi; as it were cisterns, and not conduit-pipes:
they have not the faculty of communicating themselves; you must pump hard, to
get any thing out of them. And some great learned Ministers, are poor
Preachers: or, if they be good at the Doctrinal part, they are not so good at
Application.

And as God does justly in all this; (for he may do what he will with his own:)
so most wisely: for such is our corruption, and so much flesh is in us, that if
we should have what we desire, in these outward things, we should neither know
God, nor our selves, as we ought: Psalm. 104.6.
God is not in all the thoughts of him that says in his heart, I shall never
be removed, and fears not adversity: Nay, such people say unto God, ( Job
21.) Depart from us; Job. 21.14.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: and they forget themselves even to be
men; as it is Psalm. 9.10.

Secondly, we should be so in love with this life, that we would never desire a
better; we would say, as Peter in the mount, Bonum est esse hic; It Is good for
us to be here: We would choose to have our portion in this life; and to be filii
hujus seculi, children of this world. For, take a man that has the affluence
of all these outward things; that has health, and wealth, and friends, and
children, and a fair dwelling; and bathes himself in his pleasures, and wants
none outward accommodation: and how infrequent and cold are his thoughts and
desires of the life to come! how loath is he to part with This! Haec sunt quae
faciunt invitos mori: these are the things which occasion an unwillingness to
die. He is almost of that Cardinals mind, that preferred his part in Paris,
before his part in paradise. Therefore, I say, God, in great wisdom, keeps
us short in some things, that we may not cor apponere, set our hearts upon
these temporal contentments.

For the Use then:

Let us be content to want some things that our hearts stand unto: Application
We cannot say, we are thankful for what we have, if we murmr for what we
want; if the want of one blessing, makes us overlook all the rest: As we see
in Ahab, who prized not a Kingdom, because he wanted a poor Vineyard: and
Haman, that took comfort in nothing, because he wanted Mordecai's knee. Yea, it
was Abraham's infirmity, when he says to God, What can thou give me, since I
go childless?

Secondly, if we have many things that others want; why should we not be
content to want some things that others have?

Thirdly, with all our wrangling, we cannot have the thing we desire; we cannot
make an hair white or black: no man can receive any thing, but from above.

Fourthly, God thinks fit, that we should, as abound in some things, so want
others. Si non fit quod petitur, non expedit ut fiat, S. Augustine.
(says the Father:) if it be not granted which thou prayest for, God sees it
not expedient for thee.

Lastly, let us prepare our selves for heaven, and, by a meek and holy
carriage, fit our selves for it: and in that place there shall be no want; it
shall give every one satisfaction: though the vessels cast into the vast ocean
may be of different, capacity, and so, degrees of glory; yet the least vessel
shall be as full as it can hold: and whereas here, (as the Schoolmen acutely)
quiescimus in desideriis, we are fain to be contented with desires of rest:
there, shall be desideriorum quies; an absolute and blessed rest of all desires.

We come now to the next verse; in which, and in the two following, are set
down the Consequents of this marriage of Abraham and Sarah

First, her conception. Secondly, her insolent carriage upon her conceiving.
Thirdly, the expostulation of Sarah with her husband. Fourthly, Abraham's
yielding of the power into Sarahs hand. Fifthly, Sarahs correcting of Hagar;
together with her flight.
For the first, He went in to her, and she conceived. For the phrase of going
in unto her, we spoke of it before, at the second verse. For the other clause,
and she conceived, this may be observed;

Observe. 3. Evil actions often prosper outwardly: yet no events can denominate
them, nor the divine permission be construed their occasion.
That evil actions oftentimes take effect, and prosper: that is, attain that
end which the plotters and contrivers aim at.

Satan, at first, laid his bait, and it took with our first parents: And Cain,
his firstborn, accomplished what he intended; he had his brothers life. And so
the brethren of Joseph succeeded in their enterprise against their brother.
Ziba prospers in his cheat; and Gehazi in his attempt. The ambitious man's
lines hold; and the man that uses unjust courses, heapeth up wealth. And the
slanderer finds such as receive his defamations, and are wrought into an ill
conceit of their brethren, by such incendiaries. The revengeful man fulfilleth
his own desire of touchiness: And the voluptuous man, having laid his plot,
satisfies himself, and catches that he fished for.

God, though the Permitter, not the Author of sin.
And God permits it to be thus: for, though non vult peccatum, God wills
not sin; yet permittit volens, and non invitus; that God permits sin freely,
and not unwilling: Yet his permission and his will, have two several objects.
His permission is referred to the sin it self; his will, to that good end that
(by his wisdom) he is able to bring out of it. S. Aug. in Enchiridion, c. 94.
Certain it is, (says Saint Augustine) non fit aliquid, nisi omnipotens fieri
velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse faciendo: nothing is done, unless the
Almighty will it to be done, either by suffering it to be done, or doing of it
himself.

And again, secondly, non dubitandum est Deum facere been, etiam sinendo fieri
quaecunque fiunt male: it is not to be doubted (says he) but God does well,
even in permitting those things to be done, that are done ill.

And thirdly, the good God would not suffer it, unless he knew how to fetch
good out of it. Man may censure him for this permission of evil to be done, and
to take effect, that he is the author of sin. Just reasons there be (as you
have been taught heretofore) why God does not hinder the wicked in their
course; yea, lets them prosper in their evil actions.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let us learn, never to justify an evil action, because of the event. Hagar
here conceives; and so many a base woman has children, as soon, and with more
easy labor then those that came honestly by them: Shall they, therefore,
justify their unclean mixture? A thief prospers: but this justifies not his
course. Good purposes and intendments do oftentimes fail; they must not be
condemned for that: no more must wicked actions, for their success, be
justified. Careat successibus opto, quisquis ab eve^ti^ facta not^nda putat:
May he want success, that draws his conclusions from events. It is a thing
that swayeth much with carnal minds, that if they prosper in their ill way,
and they have that which they aim at, they think it is a blessing; and hence
are apt to justify their actions. Foelix scel^^ virtus vocatur (says the
Heathen.) And Dionysius having a fair wind; after he had robbed the temple of
Aesculapius, stuck not to say, That the gods did approve sacrilege. It may be,
it made Jeroboam think the better of his idolatry, because the Prophet that
spoke against the altar at Bethel, was destroyed by a lion. And those in Jerem.
44. Jerem. 44.
justified themselves in offering cakes to the queen of heaven, by the plenty
that they had upon it. Antonius, Archbishop of Florence, Archbish. of Florence,
the third part of his Hist. p. 18. c. 6.
tells of the mother of Peter Lombard, and Petrus Commestor, and Gratian;
(the first, the compiler of the Sentences; the second, of the Scholastical
History; the third, of the Decrees:) being all children born in adultery and
uncleanness; That when she came to confession, she told the Priest, she could
not repent her of her adultery, because of the good success of it, having
brought into the world three such worthy men. And still this reigns in men's
minds, that so far as they prosper in ill ways, so far they are blessed of God.

I will shut up this Point with one known thing. Many men and women commit foul
acts, and it pleases God to suspend his judgments, nay to suffer them to
thrive and prosper, and to live in all possible jollity, without the
controlment of any the least judgment: O how do they bless themselves in this,
and think themselves in better estate, by far, then Preachers would make them!
But, if they would look into Gods book, they should find, that it is one of
the greatest judgments that God lays upon man in this life, than he
suffers them to thrive in sin. He tells the people, Ezekiel. 16. Ezekiel. 16.42.
that he will make his fury to rest, and his jealousy to depart from them, and
he will be quiet: Which when Saint Augustine, upon occasion, took into
consideration, he cries out, Qu^^ta poena vulla poena! How great a judgment
is no punishment! And, Hosea 4. he says, Hosea 4.14.
he will not punish their daughters when they commit whoredom, nor their
spouses when they commit adultery* And a Father, as wise as he was devout,
cries out, Nulo hanc misericordiam, Domine; I show me no such mercy, Lord. For
there is Terribilis lenitas, a terrible clemency; and Parcens orudelitas, a
merciful cruelty: for God, oftentimes, makes such way for the sinner, as he
did for Pharaohs chariots, even till her came into the midst of the sea; and
then he glorifieth himself in his destruction. Well then, though Hagar
conceived, it justifies not her fact: We must not make this a rule, to
justify an action simply from the success of it.

The next Consequent is, Hagars insolency: When she saw she hid conceived, her
mistress was despised in her eyes.

Where, first, we may observe,

Observe. 4. Natural pride bubleth up, on every light occasion.
How the pride of our hearts shows it self, upon the least start or
precedence we have of others.

This handmaid has a child, and her mistress has none; and she despises
her. So it is in regard of wealth; the old proverb is, The Blood rises with
the Goods. David speaks of the scorning of those that be at ease, Psalm.
123.10. Prove. 18.23.
or wealthy, Psalm. 123. And Solomon says, Prove. 18. The rich answers
roughly, because he has an high conceit of himself. And Chap. 22. 5. And 22.5.
The rich rules over the poor: he thinks he may command him as his
underling, yea, may take any thing from him, and he must hold his peace; And
30.9.
as the rich man, in Nathans parable, took the sheep from the poor man. And
therefore well did Agur, Prove. 30. pray against superfluity of riches, lest he
should be proud. Saint Paul says, Charge rich men, that they be not high
minded, 1 Timothy 6.17. for, (says Saint Augustine) As each fruit has a worm
growing out of it; Natural pride.
so vermis divitiarum superbia, Pride is the worm of riches. And how stately do
some men carry themselves toward others, if they have more of this worlds
wealth then others! So for honor: if a man be exalted, how he bussles! (as in
Haman:) nay, if he have but the meanest office, we see how he is blown up. So
for Knowledge: 1 Cor. 8.1.
certain it is, the property of that is, to puff up, 1 Cor. 8. and they that
have a greater measure then others, scorn others (as the Pharisees did the
people; John 7.
) they scorn them as ignorant, and those that know not the Law: And Caiaphas
tells the chief Priest and the Pharisees, And 4.9.
that they know nothing at all, John 4. If a woman has more beauty, she
despises her that has less: nay, even a better garb of clothes, (that case of
rottenness) is a ground of quarrel.

I may extend it further, even unto spiritual gifts; those also are haunted
with this evil spirit of Pride: and they that have a greater measure of them,
as they think, then others, they are not only proud in themselves, Revel. 3.
(as we see in the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. that said she was rich; and
Saint Paul had the messenger of Satan sent, on purpose to buffet him, that he
should not be exalted above measure with his revelations: 2 Cor. 12. Isai. 65.5.
) but exalt themselves above others, and despise them; as we see in those,
Isai. 65. that say, Stand by thy self, come not near me; for I am holier then
thou: and in that Pharisee, Luke 10. that preferred himself before the
Publican; yea, spoke of him with scorn; as this publican. And I fear, the world
is too full of This, in these last and worst times: For people are blown up
with such a conceit of their own Knowledge and Sanctity, that they despise
others the dear servants of God, it may be short, though not in truth, yet in
degrees; and so prove (at once) both proud and uncharitable.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let us watch over ourselves, and pray to God for his grace, that if God shall
be pleased to advance us in any thing above others, yet our hearts be not
lifted up. God would not have the Kings heart lifted up above his brethren,
Deuteronomy. 17.10. Let not these outward things, (these trappings) make us disdainful
toward others: they be but Pompatica and volatica, but phancies and
accoutrements; and God can soon unplume us, and take away that which swells
us so.

Nor, in regard of spiritual things, let us be lifted up, overweening our
selves, and despising our brethren. The most laden tree boweth it self; and
the heaviest ear hangs down the head; the Sun casts the least shadow, when it
is at the highest; the violet hides it self with its own leaves, and grows
low, though it smells sweet. And I would wish all people to take heed of
this pride; for this smoke may be in a cottage, as well as a palace: the
bramble has proud thoughts, as if he were fit to be King; and the thistle
sideth with the cedar of Libanus: And therefore let all strive against pride,
all mortify this sinful lust; and let nothing in the world puff us up: for, in
true judgment, it is pride without wit; yea, without grace, without true piety.

Again, Observe an instance of a servile disposition: Observe. 5. Servile
dispositions ever most insolent, when exalted.
Here is a poor hand-maide, in the condition of a bondwoman; and now having
gotten the start, how copped she is! how malepert and insolent! And so it is
often seen, that those that are raised from a flatt ground, they are the most
proud and scornful, of all others, when they get aloaft: (...) (says Saint
Chrysostom: Chrysostom in locum.
) for this is commonly the manner of servants, that when a little liberty or
emolument is indulged to them; they quickly presume (says he) (...); They can
scarce contain themselves; within domestical limits, but forgetting their
condition, run into ingratitude: (as it was here with Hagar.) It is wont to be
said, asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum: Nothing is harsher, then a
prostrate man exalted: and it is well expressed in our english proverb; set a
beggar on horseback, and he will gallop, to come from one extreme to an other;
and it is well where moderation is kept: preferment to one of mean condition,
raised from the dunghill, to sit with great ones, it is like strong drink, it
makes him gyddy. Well might Agur reckon these amongst those things which did
disquiet the earth, and which the earth could not bear; Prove. 30. Prove. 30.22,
23.
A fervant when heraigneth, and an handmaide heir to her mistress. Jeroboham
rose from a mean condition; and we see how insolent he was: 1 Kings. 11. So
Zimry, of a captain becoming a King, 1 King. 11. 1 King. 16.
how proud and cruel he was! 1 Kings 16. And Haman was but mean at first, yet
when he got up, the sun never looked upon a prouder courtier, and a more
insolent favorite: And Zonares tells of Michael Balbus, servant to Leo
Armenius, how base a servant he was; yea doomed to execution; and his death
being adjourned, through the means of the Empress, because it was the feast of
the nativity, the Emperor that night was slain, and this wicked servant
proclaimed Emperor; and no sooner possessed the chair of Majesty, but he was
proud and cruel, toward both the Empress, and others. I do not say, it always
holds; for we have examples of those that have risen from a mean fortune, and
yet have carried themselves in their preferment, humbly and wisely; as we see
in David, that was taken from the sheepfold, from following the ewes great
with young: And Elisha from the ^ough; and Amos from the herds; in Hester,
Ruth, and diverse others: But it too too often falls out, that those that be
taken from a mean estate, and have been promoted in the world, they have
quickly forgotten the rock out of which they were hewn, and the pit out of
which they were dug; they have forgotten their old acquaintance, yea have
even scorned their mean kindred, and proved insufferably supercilious, and
stately: as Plinius Secundus says, of Largius the Macedonian; that he was
Superbus dominus and saevus, Plin. Histo. r
qui servi isse patrem suum parum meminit; that he was an haughty and a cruel
master, and one that would not remember, his Father to have been a servant.

For the Use of this:

If this be so incident to those of a servile condition, when they are
promoted, to be so proud; let people labor to subdue this proud humor by
grace; and let the thought of their unde, of their mean beginnings, be as the
ballast to poyse them, and make them steady: when with Jacob, they look upon
their two bands; let them with him remember their staff, with which they went
over Jordan: It is said of Agathocles, that being by birth but a Potters son,
and having attained to be King of his own country, he caused his cupboard to be
fournished with earthen cups, and his table to be served with earthen dishes;
that he might thereby be put in mind of his mean and poor parentage: S.
Bernard.
En quis es (says Bernard to Eugenius the Pope:) sed noli oblivisci etiam quid
fueris, opportune nimirum cum eo quod es, etiam quod ante eras, consideras;
haec te confidenter teneat intra te, nec avolire sinat ate. Behold who now thou
art, but with all forget not what thou have been; seasonably now with what thou
art, may thou consider what thou were: Let this consideration anchor thee
within, and not suffer thee to flote from thy self, abroad: by this we shall be
moved to thankfulness for what we have, to humility, modesty, and lowness of
mind: and to carry our selves moderately to those that are yet, as we were,
sometimes: I know no one piece of morality, fitter to be taught many in this
city, then this; who being raised from nothing to great, both wealth and
dignity, love not to look back, but carry themselves in that stately and proud
manner, that they are hated while they stand, and not pitied when they fall,
Observe. 6. Ingratitude how odius both to God and man.
nor bemoned when they are dead.

Saint Chrysostom again here observes the ingratitude of this bondwoman: (...)
She over looks all the long care and solicitude her mistress had showed unto
her: what, had she taken such care to bring her from Egypt, and give her a
liberal education thus long, and now had yielded unto ^e^, her place in her
husbands bed; and does she thus requite her with scorn and disdain? this sin of
ingratitude, I have diverse times spoken of and therefore I will not offend your
taste with coleworts twice sod; nor grate your cares, with drawing my saw the
same way again; examples of it have been infinite in all times: Men have
suffered most from those of whom they have best deserved: the child that has
been loved best, Ingratitude.
the servant that has been most made of, the friend that has lien nearest the
heart, has proved ungrateful and treacherous: Thus was Moses served from the
Israelites, and David from the men of Keilah, and from Saul; and the children
of Iehoiadah from Ioash; our Lord from the Jews; and Saint Paul, from those
that went for brethren; and so successively; and it continues to this day. As
one observes, there be some beasts and birds that are only to be found in some
countries; and cert^in weeds grow up but at certain tim^s, and in certain
places: but ingratitude is found out in all places, and at all times. And when
one asked, Why there was not a prison for such offenders; it was answered; Then
every house must be made a prison. And certainly a gross sin it is, even
against the light of nature: nay, brute creatures have been observed to be
thankful: the dull earth is responsory for that it receives: only men are
unthankful: But, Ingratum si di xeris, omnia dixe is: We need say no more; we
can say no worse, then to call a man unthankful. For the Use: Application
Let all men know themselves bound, both by Reason and Religion, where they
have received courtesies and favors, to be thankful, according as they have
ability and opportunity. It is sordid in him that does a favor for thanks; and
it is base in him that receives a courtesy, and is not thankful.

Let us ever take heed of being unthankful toward God, our best benefactor. It
is to be feared, we are sick of ingratitude; we forget Gods favors, or we
thank our selves for them, or we prize them not as we should do; nay, in stead
of being thankful for his benefits, we anger and provoke him, and turn the edge
of his blessings against himself, and dishonor him with his own gifts: we heap
up sins, and pile up iniquities, in stead of thanks. Haeccine reddis Domino,
popule stulte and insipiens? Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? Is it a soloecism in manners, amongst men, to be unthankful? and is it
not a foul fault in the eyes of God? Are we weary of his blessings? The way to
forfeit them, is to be unthankful: the way to continue them, is Thankfulness:
like the well that Solinus tells of; that while men sing and play, it
flows; but when they cease, it falls as fast: So the fountain of Gods
favors. The vapors that are exhaled from the earth, are restored again in
sweet showers: and so our thanks and praises for Gods blessings, produce more;
and make God delight to do us good, yea ever to continue to do us good.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.5. And Sarah said to Abraham, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
maid, etc.
THe next Consequent of Abraham's marriage with Hagar is, Sarahs expostulation
with her husband; wherein she challenges him with doing her wrong, and makes
him the cause that she was despised by Hagar.

2. She challenges him with ingratitude: she had given her maid into his
bosom, and she is contemned by her: wherein she takes it for granted, that he
did soment it.

3. She breaks out into a kind of imprecation; The Lord judge between me and
thee; that is, The Lord reward thee according to that I unjustly suffer from
thee.

But before we come to these particulars, we will premise some things:

Observe. 1. When God is not consulted, all projects are invalid. Musculus in
locum.
First, observe we, with Musculus, Quomodo cedant humana consilia, citra Verbum
Dei praesumpta: How plots and projects succeed, wherein God is not consulted.

You know the plot that Sarah had, and how she did accomplish it; and she
expected no little comfort from it: and behold, in stead of comfort, she
meets with contempt and scorn. And again, it proves an occasion of a
difference between her and her husband, who had hitherto lived so sweetly
together, that there had not been the least touch or tang of coffeehouse
between them. Our own contrivements, when God is not called to counsel, no
wonder though, like an ill-charged Piece, they recoil upon our selves: Just
like that staff of reed, Isai. 36.6.
Isai. 36. which does not only fail a man, but runs into his hand, and does
him hurt. The builders of Babel join heads and hands for the erecting of that
tower; and their aim was, 1. To get them a name: 2. To prevent their scattering
upon the face of the earth. The failed in both: for they reaped reproach from
this attempt; and they were the sooner scattered abroad one from another. There
was nothing of God in that plot of Joseph's brethren against him; and therefore
it succeeded accordingly, on their part: for they hasten that promotion of his,
which they would have prevented; and they treasure up for themselves matter of
sorrow and repentance: For we know what perplexity they are in in Egypt, when
they reflect upon this unnatural fact of theirs; and how jealous of their
brother, when he has discovered himself, lest he should pay the old score.
What a plot had Pharaoh upon the people of Israel! Come, (says he) let us work
wisely: He oppressed them with hard labor, thereby to exhaust their strength,
that they might be disabled from generation, and so he might prevent their
multiplication: and behold, the more they were oppressed, the more they were
increased, even as the fishes of the sea: he was disappointed in that which he
aimed at, and, no doubt, vexed to see himself so disappointed. Saul did not ask
counsel of God, when he laid that plot against David, that he should marry his
daughter, and give an hundred foreskins of the Philistims, for a dowry: his aim
was, that he might be cut off, but see, he reapeth nothing from his plot, but
that which grieveth his heart, the improvement of his honor whom he hated.
Jeroboam had a plot for the strengthening himself in his usurpation, That he
would erect two calves in Dan and Bethel, and so keep the people from going to
Jerusalem to worship; and This the very means of the destruction of him and his
posterity. The world ringeth of the plot that Haman had against the Jews: and
you know the issue of it; the Jews are preserved, and himself is executed.
Jonah had a plot to subterfuge his employment to Nineveh; he will flee to
Tarshish; and applaudeth himself in that quietness he shall enjoy at such a
distance: But see the issue; God dispatcheth a message after him, in the mouth
of a whirlwinde, and he is thrown into the sea. The plot of the Highpriests
and the Rulers, was, to take away Christ's authority. And those husbandmen to
whom the vineyard was let out, Matthew. 21. Matthew. 21
and when Christ came among them, they said, This is the heir: come, let us
kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours. Occidistis eum, and tamen
haereditas non est vestra, (says Saint Augustine:) You have killed him, S.
Augustine.
and yet the inheritance is none of yours: Nay, that which they were so
studious to prevent, they hastened by this means: for, the Romans came, and
took away their kingdom; they were scattered abroad, and under that miserable
dispersion they yet lie; and the blood of our Lord is upon them, and their
children, unto this day.

And are not we able to seal to this in our own experience? How the lustful,
covetous, revengeful plots of men, have not only failed, but brought much
grief and danger to the contrivers: that as the bird is limed with that which
grows out of its own excretion; so they have reaped the sorry fruit of their
own way; and their own projects have been their punishments.

And who can expect it should be otherwise? For, can any thing prosper without
God? Nay, does he not denounce a woe against Those that ask counsel, but not of
him? Isai. 30. Isai. 30.1. And 8.9.


Secondly, does he not say to the Prophet, (Chap. 8.) Take counsel together,
And 19.3.
and it shall be brought to naught? Does he not say, Chap. 19. that the spirit
of Egypt shall fail in the midst of it, and he will destroy the counsel
thereof? Does he not say, that Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel? Hos.
10.6.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let us, in all our intendments and purposes, advise with God, and project
nothing but what we have warrant for from him. If it be of God, (as Gamaliel
sometime said) it will stand: but if it be only of man's own brain, it will
come to naught, and not only fail us, but foil us; prove a detriment and grief
unto us; and the more vexatious, because we owe it to our selves, as the
authors of it.



Sol. S. Augustine.
And do you call this Prosperity? Lucrum in arca, and damnum in conscientia,
(says that Father:) Gain in the coffer, and loss in the conscience. What? a
man to go to hell, to make his son rich? Is there any comparison between
winning of the whole world, and the loss of the soul? (...): sure, nothing is
of equal value with that. Besides, has he not treasured up a curse for
posterity? For, how have we known such estates moulder away to nothing, in a
generation or two!



Sol.
It may be so in the outward man, which God, in his wisdom, may suffer; as we
see in the children of Israel, that were twice discomfited by the Benjamites,
and overthrown with a great slaughter, (though, both times, God commanded them
to go out) for the exercise of their patience, and punishment of their sins, to
move them to servent humiliation and invocation. I say, It may be thus in the
outward man; but never in the inward man, as not damnified there, because he
has his conscience to witness unto him, that he has done things uprightly and
lawfully: and this testimony is a good harbor, in the miscarrying of any
business.

I renew then my Exhortation: Let us not look for comfort in any business,
wherein we do not ask Gods counsel, be our helps and means as probable and
likely as may be. Let us look, non confirmari, sed infirmari, (as one says:)
not to be strengthened unto the end, but weakened therewith: expect God to cross
us, to give us mourning, in stead of all the mirth we looked for; penury, in
stead of plenty; ignominy, in stead of dignity; contempt, in stead of comfort:
as we see here in Sarah, whose plot is paid home, with the insolency and pride
of her servant, that she had preferred to her husband. Which are two things
further that we are to consider of, as those which did edge her expostulation
with her husband.

First, the ingratitude of her maid I told you of the last day, Observe. 2. The
ill offices of a friend, still wound the deepest.
how ill it was in Hagar: now let me tell you, how deep it cut her mistress:
that she, whom she had loved and dignified, should be thus malepert against
her; and certainly, ingratitude after good and great deservings, will affect
much: Joseph thought with himself, how ill his master must take it from him;
that he, whom he had so respected and advanced, should wrong his bed: we know
what David had done for Keilah; he had saved it from the Philistims; those
ungrateful ones, for all that, had a purpose to deliver him into Saul's hand; it
much troubles him, insomuch that he asks God, once, and the second time;
will the men of Keilah deliver me? Can they be so unthankful for a benefit so
fresh in their remembrance? 1 Samuel 23. David knew well what he had done for
Nabal, 1 Samuel 23
how he had saved his flocks; and therefore, when he forgets his kindness,
and sends him such a churlish answer to so modest a motion; he is put into a
passion, is much troubled, and resolves upon a speedy and sharp revenge, 1 Samuel 25. 1 Samuel 25.
You shall see how the same David bemoaneth himself; Psalm. 41.9. that his
familiar friend in whom he trusted, and who did eat of his bread, whom he put
in his bosom, He lift up his heel against him: (and as he says else where,)
had it been a stranger, or an adversary, he could have born it; but from such
an one as he had loved, and done good unto this grieved him: there is much
Emphasis in that one word of Christ to Judas, betrayest thou the son of man
with a kiss? Thou, my Domestic! thou that have been so near unto me, yea whom
I trusted to be my pursebearer! Thou betray me! and when Caesar was slain in
the Senate, all the wounds he received from the rest of the conspiratours, were
not so grievous unto him, as that of Brutus, (...); what, thou my son! a cold
wind from the South is most unnatural; and unkindness from those that we have
most favored, is intolerable.

Now for the Use of it:

Because we may be exercised with this trial among others, Application
and that we may find people ungrateful unto us; and those most, of whom we
have deserved best; and because, it is a thing apt to work upon us, and disturb
us; let us fortify our selves against it, by these things.

First, let us consider the vitiousness and depravedness of man's nature; as
there is in man a (...), a seed-plot and seminary of all sin; and among the
rest, he is apt to be guilty of ingratitude; we should therefore wonder no more
at this then at other sins; for the fire will burn, and the fountain will
bubble up, and corrupt Nature will show it self; every thing will do according
to its kind.

Secondly, to pacify us, let us know we are not alone in this; in all times
men have had experience of others unthankfulness. Moses from the people, to
whom he did so many good offices; the Egyptians soon forgot Joseph, who, when
time was, was only, under God, the preserver of their Country: Israel showed
not kindeness to Gideon according to all the goodness that he had showed to
Israel; Judge. 8.10.
Judge. 8. our Lord suffered in this kind from the Jews, yea from Judas his own
Disciple; and who are we, that we should be exempted from this trial?

Thirdly, let us think often of our carriage toward God, how he has heaped up
blessings upon us; yea, tyled one favor upon another: and that (...), that is,
day by day, every morning, his mercies are renewed; he does not only prevent us
with them, and follow us with them; but even compasses us with them: we are as
a Center, wherein the lines of his blessings from every part of the
Circumference, do meet: and yet how unthankful are we! every day provoking him,
every moment sinning against him; as if we would outvie his mercies, with our
sins: as if like the Sycamour tree, we were the more barren for the oftener
watering; it should less trouble us therefore, when men are unthankful unto us,
when we consider the measure we offer to God; nay, we should take it as a just
punishment of our ingratitude toward him.

Fourthly, we should not do good turns to others for thanks, or to oblieg them
unto us; but we should do, what we do, ingenuously, out of a conscience of Gods
commandment; that tyeth us to do good offices to them, out of a sense of our
brothers necessities; or out of a feeling of what true friendship and charity
requires of us: For when we aim at thanks, in the collation of favors, and
think to bind men unto us, it more affects us when they prove unthankful.

Lastly, the best way is to leave such persons to God, who is a sure play master
to those that are guilty of this moral defect, this breach of good manners; in
experience, he has seldom suffered ingratitude, even in men toward men, to go
unpunished; now if God will revenge it, why should we afflict our selves with
it? Idoneus Sequester, Tertullian.
Is (says Tertullian in this case:) He will remember it, when we have forgotten
it.

A second thing that edgeth Sarah, is, contempt and disdain, that she finds
of her self, Observe. 3. Contempt is the heaviest burden to ingenious spirits,
with the remedies against it.
in her servant; she was despised in her eyes: and it cannot be denied but that
was a shrewd temptation; it was not so much by far, to be unthankful, as to add
scorn unto it: the generous nature of man does doubtfully conflict with this;
and it can brook any thing rather then contempt: above hell there is not a
greater punishment, then to become a Sannio, a subject of scorn: Samson more
patiently endures the boring out of his eyes, then the Iudibrious scoffs of
the Philistims: the insultation of her colleague, was that which vexed the soul
of Hannah; David bemoaneth himself to God, Psalm. 69. Thou have known my
reproaah, and my shame, Psalm. 69.19, 20. etc.
and my dishonor: and verse 20. that you may see how it affected him, (he
says) reproach has broken mine heart; and Psalm. 119.39. he prays God to
turn away the reproach which he so feared; and Psalm. 123.10. he says, our soul
is filled with the scorning of those that are at ease: Alexander did profess
that neither the proscription of his goods, nor his banishment nor the wounds
received in his body; were so grievious unto him, as one scornful word of his
enemy Ctesiphon: and when the height of Gods anger is set down against the
wicked, He is said, to laugh them to scorn; Psalm. 2. and amongst his sorest
punishments, he threatens to make wicked men a scorn, and hissing, and a shame
and reproach to others.

For the Use of it:

This may befall us, (who had rather suffer a blow then a jeer, Application
a wound then a word of disgrace;) and therefore we must arm our selves against
it, by considering,

First, that others, and those dear Saints of God, have suffered the like; how
was Joseph scorned by his brethren? they style him, in contempt, the dreamer;
and how was Moses used by the people? as for this Moses, we know not what is
become of him; S. Chrysostom
which Saint Chrysostom says, was spoken (...); in way of contempt, and
contumely: and so we see how Job was despised when he was down the weather;
yea, even by those, whom, when he prospered, he would scarce have set with the
dogs of his flock: and David was fully exercised in this kind, the very
abjects despised him, and the drunkards made Songs of him: and Jeremy
complains, Chapter 20. Jer. 20.7.
J am in derision daily, and every one mocketh me: how was our blessed Savior
despised, and rejected of men! as it was prophesied, Isa. 53. they vilified him
in his life, and gave him base language; he was a sinner (in their mouths) a
friend of publicans and sinners; he was a Samaritan, and had a devil: and in
his death, he that was Clarus imperio, was plenus opprobrio, (as the Father
speaks,) he that was bright in Majesty, was full of ignominy; he was undervalued
to a wicked murderer, he suffered between two thieves; and when he was upon
the Cross, one of them reviled him: and those that passed by flouted him, and
wagged their heads saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it up
in three days, save thy self; how were the Apostles contemned? thought to be
full of new wine; and so Saint Paul amongst the rest, disparaged as a babbler by
the Athenians, as a pestilent fellow, by Tertullus, as a mad man by Festus.

Why then, let not contempt and scorn afflict us too much, seeing we have such
partners in it.

Secondly, to stay us, let us consider of Gods hand in it; we suffer according
to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4. 1 Pet. 4.10.
and David stayed himself with this, that God bid Shimei rail, 2 Samuel 16. God
has many rods, to scourge us withal; and if he please to take this of
Contempt, who are we, that we should murmr?

2. God does it for good ends:

First, to exercise our patience.

Secondly, to keep us from seeking the praises of men.

Thirdly, to assure us that we are in the right way that other of his servants
have been in: for they have gone through good report, and bad report, 2 Cor. 6.8.
2 Cor. 6.

3. A third thing that I prescribe, for the better bearing of Contempt, is, to
labor the subduing of that pride which is in our hearts: for, because we think
too well of our selves, and have an overweening of our own parts, we are
impatient of the least scorn. Haman was a proud man, and therefore it brake his
heart, almost, to find disrespect but from one poor Jew. The Pharisees were
proud, and highly conceited of themselves; and therefore we see how they scorn
the man that had been blind, and think themselves disparaged that he should
teach them.

4 We should be often in the meditation of our sins: for when a man seriously
considers of them, and groaneth under them, he makes nothing of men's taunts
and reproaches. When Sin lies heavy, Contempt lies light: but where sin
lies light, every disgraceful passage is a burden. Psalm. 38.
David says, Psalm. 38. being exercised with a sight of his sin, when his
enemies did vent their scorn and reproaches against him, he was as a man that
heard not, and in whose mouth were no reproofs.

5. Lastly, let us seek, in all things, to approve our selves to God, and then
we shall be able to say, with Saint Paul, I pass not to be judged of you, 2
Cor. 4.
1 Cor: 4. as knowing, that he is not commended, whom man praises, but whom
God commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. While a man knows that he is in Gods books,
what need he care for the Contempt that the world puts upon him? A Pearl
loses not its value, because it is tumbled in the dust: I will be base in my
own sight, says David. It will appear, another day, of what high account God
makes his despised servants; and they shall have glory for that scorn they
have suffered: and our blessed Lord despised the shame, for the glory that was
set before him, Heb. 12.
Heb. 12.

But now to come to the Expostulation:

First, she challenges her husband of doing her wrong: and we may observe,

1. How bitter and vehement she is in her language.

2. How unjust her challenge was.

She was bitter. These were harsh terms for a woman, but especially for a wife,
and to such a husband as Abraham was to her. But, as Chrysostom says, Observe.
4. Of shrewishness, and effeminate passions; with the allays thereof.
(...): the words of a woman right, and of the weakness of that sex; a woman's
words transported with passion: which is a thing that often befalls those of
that corporation; they are not only acrimonious and sharp, but bitter in their
language. There was too much bitterness in that speech of Zipporah to Moses,
Exodus 4.25. Surely a bloody husband thou art unto me: and she goes over it
again: (for the clack, when it is once a going, does not soon cease:) a bloody
husband thou art unto me. And what a bitter word was that of Michal to David,
and mingled with much scorn! How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who
uncovered himself in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the
vain fellows uncovereth himself! She makes him not only uncivil, but no
better then a fool, 2 Samuel 6.20. And was not that speech as bitter, of Jezebel
to Ahab, when he lay sick upon his bed, because Naboth had denied him his
vineyard? 1 Kings 21. 1 Kings 21.7.
Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? As if she should have said, I am
ashamed that thou should be called a King, that art of so poor a spirit, to
afflict thy self for the denial of that which thou may command: if thou
can not have it by fair means, extort it by force. She does upbraid him with
pusillanimity. And as bitter a speech was that of Jobs wife to her husband, Job
2.9. Do thou still retain thine integrity? Art thou so vain, to serve that
God that thus afflicts thee? Art thou so in love with blows? Much good do
thee with thy Religion. She makes him even senseless and foolish, that would
endure so much, and not rid himself of life. And some such wives has the world
known, (I would it did not still know) that are bitter in their speeches upon
occasion, that a man may judge the poison of asps to be under their lips; their
tongues cutting like a sharp razor: So sharp is their language, that many a
Xantippe puts Socrates to the practice of his best Philosophy: So sharp,
that Solomon compares them to a continual dropping, Prove. 19. Yea, he says,
Chap. 21. Prove. 19.13.
It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious and angry
woman. Some men have reason to wish, either their wives quieter, or their
houses larger: (women being all Linguists, but some more nimble then others, of
everlasting motion.) Yea, S. Augustine.
Saint Augustine finds none so fit a resemblance of an ill conscience, as a
scolding woman. God help the man that is so vexed; he has his purgatory in
this life: And some of the Hebrews had a conceit, that such an one should never
come into Judgment, because he had a sufficient punishment here.

For the Use:

Let wives take heed of the waspish stinging tongue: Application
let them not use sharp and provoking language: let them labor for that which
Saint Peter makes a chief ornament of that sex, and to be of great price in
the sight of God; and that is, a meek and a quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 1 Pet. 3.4.
Let them control their passions, and never suffer them to break out into
intemperate speeches, to the kindling of such a fire, as God knows when it may
be quenched. The Rabbis observe, that in the holy Tongue, (...) signifies a
man, and, (...) a woman: the first and the last letter make (...), which is as
much as (...), God: but take away those two letters, and then remains nothing
but (...), and that is fire. Where God is not, to rule the passions, and to
control the corrupt affections; there is nothing but fire; and such a fire, as
will quickly burn up the family.

Secondly, observe, that as she was vehement and bitter, so she challenges her
husband unjustly: for how was he in fault? nay, she knows not; she has not
yet examined, whether Abraham gave any encouragement to Hagar to be thus
malepert; she only supposes it.

Observe. 5. Rashness and unju^t accusations, with their cautions:
An untoward and sinful thing it is (though it is too common) to challenge
another without true ground.

Rachel speaks passionately to her husband, Give me children, or else I die,
Genesis 30.1. as if he were in the fault that she had none. He presently let her
see her error: Am I in Gods stead, (says he) that has withheld from thee the
fruit of the womb? The wife of Potiphar seems to accuse her husband in the
presence of her servants, that he had brought in an Hebrew to mock her: and so
Zipporah challenges her husband that he was the cause of that act that was so
horrid unto her; the circumcising of the child. David says, they laid to his
charge things that he knew not; and we find how Shimei charged him with that,
that he was altogether innocent of, bloodiness against the house of Saul: And
so we see what a jealousy the servants of Ammon put into his head concerning
David's Messengers, that they were purposely sent to spy out the weakness of the
land. Jeremy was challenged, to stand on the Chaldeans part: our blessed Lord
was challenged for an enemy to Caesar; and so were his Apostles, falsely
accused: and so were those Primitive Christians, that in their antelucani
Coetus; their early devotions, they did practice a promiscuous uncleanness,
that they worshipped an Asses head; that they did sacrifice their own children;
all which, even Plinius Secundus himself does acquit them of

For the Use of it:

Application
Let us take heed of this precipice, of accusing others falsely; it is the devils
trade: he is (...); and he has that name, for accusing; and false accusers, as
his own children, are called (...), Titus. 2. challengers of others falsely,
without just ground; and that argues;

First, want of wisdom; for a wise man will be assured of the fault, before he
challenge one for it.

Secondly, want of charity, for love will rather cover a fault, when it is
known, then pick an hole where there is none.

Thirdly, it is the next way to make one that is a friend, to be an enemy; for
it is harsh to any ingenuous nature, to be challenged for that which he is not
guilty of, as we see in Ishbosheth, who challenging Abner for going in to his
fathers concubin, (of which some think he was guiltless; and it was only
Ishbosheths suspicion, 2 Samuel 3.
) he made him fall off from him, to the house of David; 2 Samuel 3.

Again, we may learn here, that if jealousies and ungrounded suspicions, do
work such ill abroad; what will they do in the Family, and in the man and wife
between whom there is the straitest relation; when they only suspect one
another, and thereupon fall to challenging each other without sure ground, oh,
what a distraction it works, and how it does sour that sweet estate of
wedlock! makes a disorder amongst the Children and Servants, and it may be, a
siding; and the breach is hardly made up again! the purer the love is, and the
less conscious of any just occasion, the more sensible: you may do that to a
stone jugg, that you cannot do to a Venice glass; it must be used tenderly: I
wish ever therefore that wisdom and charity between man and wife; that they be
not forward to suspect evil of each other and never to proceed to challenging
of each other without apparent ground; and even then with that mildness and
moderation of spirit, as becomes those that are so near; as we see in Joseph
toward Mary, though but espoused.

Thirdly, you have seen she was vehement and rough in this challenge: but
suppose she had just cause, there had been more reason she should have charged
her self before her husband; for says Saint Chrysostom, (...); why do thou
oh woman, S. Chrysostom, in locum.
accuse him of doing the wrong? did not thou lay the plot, and persuade him
by arguments, to go in unto the made? did not thou bring her unto him; and
give her to him, to be his wife? did the just man ever seek her, or any other,
save thy self, to have children by? nay, had he ever any such thought? We see
then here, Observe. 6. Of clamourousness, and that it is rather a sign of guilt,
then innocence.
that which oftentimes falls out in the world. They that are most guilty are
apt first to complain, and cry out of injury; the mistress of Joseph that was
all in the fault, yet cries out to her servants, that Joseph would have abused
her; and as soon as her husband comes home frames a formal accusation against
him: when the two Hebrews did contend, Saint Stephen notes, Act. 7.27. Act.
7.27.
that he that did the wrong to his neighbor, is the most clamorous, and
thrusts Moses away, and will not endure to hear of a reconciliation; Zipporah
sharpeneth her tongue against her husband, and calls him bloody, because of
the Circumcision, whereas she was in the fault, and the cause that the Angel of
God met Moses in the Inn, and would have killed him: Saul complains against
David, and David had more just cause of complaint against him: Ziba that
plays the knave with his Master, complains of his Master: Hist. Susan.
and the Elders in Daniel complain of Susanna, when themselves were capital
offenders: who has not heard of Fimbria the Roman, his complaint against
Scaevola, because he did not Totum telum recipere; receive the whole weapon
into his body. It is Saint Ambrose his saying, Festinat loqui, qui timet vinci;
He makes haste to complain, that has the worst end of the staff: and we have
known it in Domestical quarrels, that the wife has cried out of injury, when
her self has been in the fault. Application
And so on the other side too, let not people be of that bold front to accuse
others of that wherein they are most culpable; for it is a fearful thing to go
against the light of a man's own conscience: though they may get something with
men by clamor, yet they offend God, and wrong their inward peace: in stead of
quarreling, they should say as Judah; she is more righteous then I. I am to
blame, and therefore I have reason to challenge my self, rather then another.

Secondly, It should teach those, to whom belongs the hearing, and judging of
causes; not to be too hasty in determining them, upon the first complaint, or
to give credit to the first information: For, as we say, one tale is good, till
another be heard; and Solomon says, Prove. 18. Prove. 18.17.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous, but his neighbor comes,
and searches him out. It was the infirmity of David, that upon the information
of Ziba, he passed sentence; ^um verba mentientis audiant, Sententiam contra
innocentem pronunciant, (says Saint Gregory: S. Gregory.
) while they hear the false accusation of the guilty, they pass sentence
against the innocent. On the other side, it was commendable in Alexander, that
he professed he would keep one ear for the party accused: Exodus 23.3. Tostat^^
and Calvin. in locum
the Lords command is, Exodus 23. Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his
cause: that is, says Tostatus, praeter merita causae: Thou shall not respect
him in judicature, beside the strict demerit of his cause; and Calvin says
very well, major quandoque est pauperum audacia, and temeritas. Sometimes the
poor are bold, and rash, and ready to do wrong, and still complain; and to
think they shall be heard because they are poor: whereas there is more reason,
in such a case, they should be punished, then relieved: I say therefore again,
let those that are to decide controversies, be wise and diligent, and
tractable, and weigh things equitably; for they shall find those that are most
faulty, to be most forward to complain: even as it was here with Sarah, that
had reason to have plucked her self by the sleeves; and not have challenged her
husband, for doing her wrong.

Preached, June 9. 1641.
THE SEVENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.5. And Sarah said unto Abraham, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
maid into thy bosom.
IF you do not remember the Division was made of this Chapter when we entered
upon it, I will again repeat it.

It has four Parts.

In the first, is set down the marriage of Hagar and Abraham, in the three
first verses.

Secondly, the Consequents of it, in the three next; which are, 1. Hagars
conceiving. 2. Her insolency upon her conception. 3. The expostulation of Sarah
with her husband. 4. Abraham's yielding of the handmaid into the power of Sarah.
5. Sarahs correcting of Hagar; together with her flight upon it.


In the third Part, is set down the Angels meeting of Hagar, and his persuading
of her, upon the discovery of the cause of her flight, to return to her
mistress, and to submit her self unto her: and his prediction concerning the
child she went withal; from the beginning of the seventh verse, to the end of
the fifteenth.

In the last part, is set down the birth of Ishmael; together with the age of
Abraham, when Ishmael was born unto him: in the two last verses.

We have quite dispatched the first Part, which contains the marriage of
Abraham and Hagar; and are entered into the second, which entreats of the
events of this Marriage: and two of them we have handled; Hagars conception,
and insolency upon her conceiving: And have in part touched the third, which is
the expostulation of Sarah with Abraham, in this fifth verse.

I must tell you what has been observed, and then proceed to that which
remains.

First, more generally, we noted the ill success of plots and projects, wherein
God is not consulted.

Secondly, more particularly, we showed, how she challenged him for doing her
wrong. Her words (as I told you) were, 1. Bit^e^. 2. Unj^^^. 3. More unjust,
because (if there were cause) she had reason to have challenged her self,
before she should have challenged her husband.


Now we go on.

Observe. 1. Vpbraiding for courtesies, vicious and sinful.
I gave my maid into thy bosom. Which, at once, Commemorat, and quasi exprobat
beneficium, (says a learned Expositor upon my Text) does commemorate, and
withal challenge him for a courtesy. If it were a kindness she had done him,
she did upbraid him, and (as we say) cast him in the teeth with it. This humor
seems to have been in the Sodomites, who, when Lot did dissuade them from
violating the Laws of hospitality, Genesis 19.9.
and offering injury to his guests; they say, Genesis 19. This fellow came in to
sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge. They upbraid him with that favor they
had afforded him, in suffering him to inhabit amongst them, being but a
stranger. And the same spirit we may imagine to have been in the Hebrew that
contended with his fellow, between whom Moses would have composed the
difference; he says to Moses, Exodus 2.14.
Exodus 2. Intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? As who
should say, Meddle no further in this business; it is sufficient that I would
have informed against thee for killing the Egyptian. It is very likely that it
was one reason why Saint Paul, when he was at Corinth, and took pains amongst
them, would not be beholden to them for any contribution; he knew they were a
proud people, and that, by the instigation of the false Apostles, they would
have been ready to have laid in his dish what they had done for him, and have
twitted him with it; and therefore he would rather labor with his hands, 2.
Cor. 12.13, 14
then to be supplied by them, 2 Cor. 12.

This exprobation is a soloecism in good manners, and a foul transgression
against the virtue of Beneficence. Q. Curtius.
Curtius tells us, that it was the saying of Chilon the Lacedemonian, Dati
beneficii decere oblivisci, accepti weminisse: That it becomes a man to be
forgetful of a benefit bestowed, and mindful of one received. And so says
Seneca, Haec beneficii inter duos lex est, alter statim oblivisci debet dati,
alter accepti nunquam: This is the Law of beneficence between two, Senec. lib.
2. de Beneficiis.
(says he) that one presently forget the collation of a benefit, the other
never the reception. Quousque dices, (says he) Ego te servavi, ego te eripui
morti; admonitio taedium facit, exprobratio odium: As long as thou shall say, I
have saved thee, I have snatched thee out of the jaws of death; this admonition
causes irksomness; this upbraiding, odiousness. Lacerat animum, and punit,
frequens meritorum commemoratio: The often mention of deservings, rendeth and
teareth the mind of the obliged. And as it dies the cheeks of him that has
received; so it spoileth the gift that has been bestowed. Datum offuscat,
Glossa interlinearis.
qui improperat, (says the interlineary-Gloss:) He sullieth his gift, that
upbraideth him to whom he has given. And Rabanus says, Obfocat datum, qui in
properio lacerat proximum: He choaketh his own credit, that gives a favor and
a jeer together. And there is never an ingenuous man in the world, but he is
more troubled and grieved with upbraiding, then ever he was helped or delighted
with that which was bestowed. Yea, the Heathen man says, Beneficium in
injuriam convertit; such an upbraider, turns his bread into a stone, his
courtesy into an injury.

For the Use of this:

We should take heed of this foul, yet frequent fault in the world; Application
which is, When men have done kindness to others, to nose them with it, and
report it to others. The Wiseman makes it an ill thing, to rate a man with
harsh language, and then to bestow something upon him: such a gift may be
thought rather Injuriae satisfactae, then Beneficii collati: to have more of
satisfaction for that injury, then of conferred kindness, in it: And so, after
a benefit bestowed, to upbraid him with it. Let us take heed of both: for, he
that gives with ill words, gives panem lapidosum, bread with gravel in it: and
he that upbraideth afterward, he spoileth his gift, and loses his thanks:
It Is nimium liberalitatis, cum exigit gratiam; more bounty then was wished for,
that extorteth thanks: and is far from the example of God, of whom it is said,
James 1. James 1.5.
that he gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.

Why, (but will some say) may not a man, at any time, tell a man what kindness
he has showed him, and tell others of it?

Yes, if they shall be grossly ungrateful, either by forgetting or slighting
the benefit received, or by returning ill for good. As the Lord speaks much
to Samuel, what he had done for Saul; and by the mouth of Nathan, what he had
done for David; and by Isaiah, Isai. 5.
what he had done for his vineyard: and Christ himself upbraideth those Cities
wherein he had done most of his miracles, because they repented not, Matthew. 11.
Matthew. 11.20.
And thus David tells what he had done for Nabal, when he saw him so
ungrateful, that he would not gratify him with a little of his superfluity, in
the time of his necessity, 1 Samuel 25. And Jacob tells Laban to his face, what
good offices he had done for him, when he was so injurious. But else, it is an
unfitting and uncivil thing, for a man to upbraid another with the good he has
done him: he does but put his brother to the blush, and even retract and make
void his own benefits: And if he blow his trumpet in the hearing of others,
and tell, that this and that he has done; it argues rather pride and
vainglory, then true beneficence and charity.

One word more, of the phrase here used: I gave my maid into thy bosom.

It is said, verse 3. that she gave her to her husband, to be his wife. From
whence we may collect,

Observe. 2. Distance and strangeness, is blameable in wedlock.
What is the neerness and intimacy of the wife to the husband.

She is the wife of his bosom; so often called in the Scripture: Deuteronomy. 13 6.
If the wife of thy bosom shall tempt thee. So, Deuteronomy. 28.54. The wife of his
bosom. By that sheep that lay in the poor man's bosom, 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 12.3.
Verse. 8.
is meant, the wife of Uriah, whom David had defiled, and taken to wife, after
the slaughter of her husband: and, verse. 8. Nathan tells him, he gave him his
rich wives into his bosom. So, Micah 7.5. Keep the door of thy lips from her
that lies in thy bosom. The Spouse says of her Husbend, Cant. 2.6. His left
hand was under her head, and his right hand did embrace her: it argues she lay
in his bosom. I say, This argues the neerness and intimacy of the wife to the
husband: And those familiar gestures, and loving dalliances that are often
used, are but expressions of it. It is said, that Abimelech saw Isaac sporting
with Rebekah, Genesis 26.8.
Genesis 26. in such a familiar, yet sober and decent manner, that it persuaded
him that she was his wife, whom before he had affirmed to be his sister: for he
well understood, that Isaac, being an holy man, would not have been so familiar
with any but his wife.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
Is she the wife of the bosom, and his own; yea, his own flesh? How comes it
to pass, that many are so strange to their wives? They can take more content in
the company of others, then their own; and express more mirth among strangers,
then with their own wives: yea, thrust their wives from them, while they put
others into their bosom. I would they would but read and meditate upon that of
Solomon, Prove. 5.19, 20.
Prove. 5. who, speaking of the wife, gives this advice: Let her be as the
loving hind, and as the pleasant roe: Let her breasts satisfy thee at all
times, and be thou ravished always with her love. And why will thou be ravished
with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? The harlot is the
stranger, or the strange woman: a man's wife is his own: and what if not so fair
or wise as another? yet she is his own. Nemo amit patriam quia magna, Seneca.
sed quia sua, (says Seneca:) No man loves his Country because large, but
because his own. And men love their conceits, non quia vera, S. Augustine.
sed quia sua, (says S. Aug.) not as they are true, but as their own. She is
his; and his love and affection must be confirmed to her.

There is, oftentimes, as great a fault in the wife toward the husband: he is
called the husband of her bosom also, Deuteronomy. 28.56. And yet some women can be
free and familiar with other men, with the neglect (I had almost said contempt)
of their own. Job complains, that his breath was strange to his wife, Job
19.17.
Chap. 19. and he was then in affliction, when she ought most to have comforted
him. And there be many, that, both in prosperity, and adversity, set too light
by their husbands.

Let man and wife take heed of this strangeness. By this phrase, the wife of
the bosom, and the husband of the bosom, is intimated their eerness, and
strictness of affection, that should be between them; that comfort, and
contentment, and solace, that they should take in each other. The bosom is the
place of warmth and refreshment; and therefore it is, (say some) that Heaven is
called Abraham's bosom; in which place those will hardly meet, that are so far
from each others Bosom, that they come not near each others Bed or Board; nay,
the same House or Town will not hold them: and may we think that, living and
dying on these terms, the same Heaven will hold them?

To go on:

She instanceth the carriage of her maid, and taxes her both of Ingratitude,
and Insolency. In the last part of the verse, she desires God to judge between
her and her husband: which some will have to be a simple referring of her self
to God; as if she had said, What now I sustain in this passage, let God judge
it; I refer the cause to him. And if so, she sets us a good example, That we
should not revenge our selves, but commit our cause to God. Observe. 3. The best
revenging of our selves is, the referring of all to God.


So did Joseph: when he was so hardly used by his brethren, that neither
prayers nor tears could prevail, he yields up all to God, and submits to
the issue that God will give. And so did Moses: when his brother and sister
murmured against him, he replieth not, nor seeks any revenge against them;
but leaves it to God, who quickly interposed for him, Number. 12. Thus David,
Number. 12.
when he had Saul in the cave, and could have there paid him home, for all his
unkindness toward him; he does it not; he only expostulateth with him, and
closes with this, 1 Samuel 24. The Lord be judge, 1 Samuel 24.15.
and judge between me and thee; and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out
of thine hand. And so, Psalm. 41.1. Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against
an ungodly nation. And thus Job, being tired out with the cavils and unjust
calumniations of his friends; he appealeth unto God, as the judge of his
innocence and uprightness. Zachariah, the son of Jehoiadah the Priest, having
reproved the people for their idolatry, at the commandment of that unthankful
King, Joash, is stoned: and when he died, he said no more but this; The Lord
look upon it, and require it, 2 Chronicles. 24. And above is that exemplum
indeficiens, 2 Chronicles. 24.22. 1 Pet. 2.23.
(as the School calls our Lord:) of whom Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. that
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but
commits himself to him that judges righteously.

Now for the Use of this:

It meets with those hot spirits, in these days, Application
who cannot brook any injuries: They will revenge themselves; they will not
stay the judgment, either of God, or of his substitute, the Magistrate; which,

1. Is most unreasonable, that a man should be Accuser, Witness, Judge, and
Executioner, all in his own cause.

2. It is sinful: for it is an usurping of that power which belongs unto God:
for, vengeance is his, and belongs to him, and to such as he has delegated,
who carry not the sword in vain. People are apt to think it base and unmanly to
complain: but, in the mean time, they think not how they trespass against God
and his Ordinance.

3. It is preposterous: for, nondum vindicatus est Christus, (says Saint
Augustine: S. Augustine.
) Christ himself is not yet avenged on his adversaries; and must they have
present satisfaction?

4. It is very foolish: for they prevent themselves in that which they would
have, by their haste: For, would they leave it to God, he would not only
avenge their cause, sine perturbatione, without passion, which they cannot do;
but acerbius vindicaret, he would revenge it more sharply, then they can do
hastily: They cannot inflict so much upon the bodies of their brethren, as they
do wrong their own souls: for while they revenge themselves upon those that
have done the injury, S. Augustine.
duo mali, (says the Father) there are two sinners; the one offends in
offering injury; the other, in revenging it: And all the difference (says he)
is, That the one gets before, and the other follows after unto judgment.

5. In the fifth place, therefore, let us commit our wrongs unto God, to avenge
them: The Apostle so expressly says, Avenge not your selves, Romans 12.19.
Romans 12. but rather give place unto wrath: and he also directs to whom to
commit the cause, even to him who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay
it. Si apud illum deposueris injuriam, ultor est, (says Tertullian: Tertullian.
) If thou lay down thy wrong at his feet, he will take up thy quarrel, and
revenge it. Christ would have his disciples buy swords; yet, when time came, he
forbade Peter to use it. Saint Ambrose wonders at this: O Domine, gladium
emerejubes, and ferire prohibes? Lord, command thou to buy the sword, and
yet forbiddest thou to strike therewith? What may be the reason? nisi ut
prompta sit defensio, and non ultio; unless to show a readiness of defense, we
may have, but not of revenge: potuisse vindicare, non voluisse; that the world
might take notice, they were able to have avenged themselves, but not willing.
We must be patient, and leave that to God, to take vengeance. And howsoever
Revenge be a very pleasing thing to flesh and blood; and the wicked Hamans of
the world applaud themselves in it; ( an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a
wound for a wound: and sic juvat ire per umbras: they think they shall have
more content in their death, by this means:) yet such wrath works not the
righteousness of God: and they shall find, when they come before him that must
judge all, that they have wronged their souls, in taking revenge.

But now I must tell you, that some Expositors make this an Imprecation; as if
she desired God to judge him for her carriage in this business; and to punish
him for fomenting and nourishing the handmaid in her malapertness and
insolency: for so she conceived it. And thus the Septuagint render it, as if it
were a prayer for vengeance.

But now I must tell you that some Expositours make this an imprecation, as if
she desired God to judge him for her carriage in this business; and to punish
him, for fomenting and nourishing the handmaid in her malepertness and
insolency, for so she conceived it: And thus the Septuagint renders it, as if
it were a prayer for vengeance.

Imprecations are fearful, Observe. 4. The impiety and danger of rash oaths and
impre^ations.
for they grow usually out of Passion and distemper, and that impotency that is
in people to brook injuries, and subdue their tumultuous thoughts. As we see in
those Israelites, who when they conceived Moses his motion to Pharaoh for their
dimission, to prove the means of their vexation; they break out into an
imprecation: Exodus 5. Exodus 5.21.
The Lord look upon you and judge, in that you have made us abhorred of Pharaoh
and his servants; and have put a sword into their hands to slay us: The mother
of Micah was in such a rage, for the silver that was taken from her, that she
cursed: Judge. 17. Judge. 17.2. 1 Samuel 17.43.
Thus the uncircumcised Philistines in their pride, and disdain, and rage,
cursed David: 1 Samuel 17. Thus Shimei cursed him also, out of a rancorous
spirit, 2 Samuel 16.5. And Jeremy says, the people cursed him, Jerem. 5. Why,
but will some say, Jer. 15.10.
we find the holy servants of God in Scripture to have used imprecations
against others: It is true, but the Fathers will tell us.

First, that they are not so much curses, as prophesies.

Secondly, that they did it not in their own cause, but in Gods; and not ex
livore invidiae; but ex Zelo justitiae: they did it not out of any gaul of
envy, but merely out of zeal of justice.

Thirdly, that they were led by an extraordinary spirit, and by that spirit
they also discovered those whom they cursed to be incorrigible. Why, but will
some say again, do not ministers use curses against drunkards and blasphemers,
and other gross sinners? yes, but they do declarative, only declaring what
shall come upon them if they repent not, but they have no quarrel of their own;
and they do it, or should do it, as out of faithfulness, so with compassion,
that any should deserve that heavy doom.

For the Use then of this:

It should teach us to take heed of imprecations; Application
and that we may avoid those the better, we should labor to subdue our Passion
of anger; for it is that which brings forth direful curses: it discovers it
self not only in looks and gestures, but in dreadful curses. Where can a man
go that his soul shall not be vexed with the hideous execrations of men, that
they send out against their brethren? the Plague! the Pox! We have not the less
of both those at this time, Cursings and imprecations horrid sins.
for this wicked practice. Yea, they desire the confusion of others, and whom
do they spare? not servants, not children, not wives, not the brute creatures;
no not their own souls: how commonly do people wish God to forsake them, to
judge them, to damn them! In the fear of God, let us take heed of these
imprecations; if God should not be more merciful to our brethren, and us, then
we are to them, and ourselves, what should become of us? And let us bridle our
anger; the Apostle quickly adds after that, be angry and sin not, neither
give place to the devil: Ephesians. 4.26, 27.
Ephesians. 4.26. as if that were a door that he entered by, as soon as any; and when
he gets in, how does he put on people to cast out words of death, deadly
curses, which are unfit for the mouth of any man, much more of a christian! who
is called to be an heir of blessing: 1 Pet. 3.9.
1 Pet. 3. and seems to desire to be accounted the child of God, which
cannot be, if he be given to cursing, Mat. 5.45. He pretends to bless God
with his tongue; and will he curse his brother with the same tongue? Does a
Fountain send forth sweet and bitter waters? Jam. 3.11.
Jam. 3. Oh bless, and curse not, (says the Apostle,) Romans 12.14. Yea, though
they be thine enemies. If you do delight in cursing, you may have enough of it;
for your curses against others may return upon your own head, it may come into
your own bowels like water; Psalm. 109.18.
and like oil into your bones: Psalm. 109. And God owes you yet more, because
you have loved to curse, and not to bless; at that great day of account you
shall hear that dreadful sentence; Depart from me you cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

Observe. 5. Against light and frivolous attesting God, and irrevereut
usurpation of his name.
Again, here is one thing further; as there was want of charity to her husband
in this her wish; so there may seem also to be some defect of piety toward
God: for being only suspicious, and having not yet examined the truth of
things; nay out of a long experience of her husbands respect to her, having
reason to think the best to call upon God to judge him, or to be judge, may argue
want of reverence of that dreadful Majesty of God: they must be severe
occasions, and of which we are well assured, that must make us appeal to God,
and call him to be a witness unto, and revenger of. Every light Passion, or
suspicion, must not make us summon him, as it were, and engage him to our
quarrel. There is a too frequent use amongst us, a rude and ungodly
familiarity, not only with the Name of God (foisting it up and down in common
communication and oaths; so the very Jews with their superstition, shall rise
up in judgment against us. They held it (...), not expressible, and would not
utter it, and we profane and sully it with common use;) but also with God
himself; and upon every trivial occasion we call him to witness; and we call
him to judge and revenge, and to be the executioner of our wrath: we will have
him to judge where we distaste, and lay on those judgments that we have wished
upon our brethren; nay we will be judges, Isa. 43.24.
and he must be the executioner. So that the Lord may take up that complaint,
Isa. 43. You have made me to serve with your sins: Surely there is not that
esteem and awful respect of God, Application
that ought to be in men's minds; for if they were persuaded of his greatness
and Majesty; neither would his Name be so cheap, and trivially used; nor would
he be so often called unto, for witnessing and judging: they would not mention
God without fear, nor would they appeal to him, or wish him to do any thing,
but upon sad and weighty consideration. Who durst be so rude, God not at all to
be attested, without awful reverence.
and unmannerly, and bold, as to call the King to witness, upon every flight
passage? or dare say, Let the King judge this man, or revenge my wrong upon
thisman? And yet thus bold are men with him that is the King of kings, and Lord
of lords; that binds nobles in chains, and princes themselves in links of
iron. Certainly, those minds are profane, that have not awe and dread of God;
that tremble not to think of his dreadful majesty. Abraham, that was the
friend of God, yet, speaking to him, kept his distance. And Moses, a great
favorite of his; yet coming before him, did fear and quake. And Daniel, though
a man greatly beloved; yet fainted, and was sick with fear, when he had to do
with Him. Such awe has been always in good minds: if they have rejoiced in
him, Psalm. 2.11.
it has been with reverence, according to that, Psalm. 2. And certainly,
whosoever they be, whose confidence eats out their reverence, they are more
bold then welcome.

Preached, October 13. 1641.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.6. But Abraham said unto Sarah, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand.
THe next event is, Abraham's yielding up Hagar into the power of her mistress.

We have heard how bitter Sarah was to him; how she had expostulated with him;
charged him unduely; and concluded with an imprecation.

S. Chrysostom, in locum.
(...), (says Saint Chrysostom) (...); What does this adamant, now, this
generous soldier of the Lord? Why, says he, (...): he gives proof of that
habit of virtue that was in him; and bears all that had been said, patiently
and wisely.

And first, we will observe, that he replieth.

Secondly, the manner of his reply; wherein he shows himself, both ways, a
discreet man, and a loving husband.

Musculus.
The first: Objurgatus ab uxere, non tacet, sed respondet, (says Musculus:)
Being chidden of his wife, he is not silent, but replieth: And he did so, for
two Reasons.

Observe. 1. Unseasonable silence, betrayeth a man's innocence.
1. If he had replied nothing, it would have more provoked his wife; it might
have seemed a sign of contempt. It is observed of Xantippe, that vixon, the
wife of Socrates, that when, upon her clamorous invectiveness, her husband gave
her not a word, it madded her the more: for she interpreted it as a kind of
scorn.

2. If Abraham had not answered, it would have confirmed his wife in her unjust
suspicion of him; and she would have said, See, he has nothing to reply;
self-guiltiness bungs up his mouth: for, were he faultless, why does he not
speak, and purge himself? but he well knows, I have charged him with nothing
but truth: he has animated my maid to her base carriage toward me, and
fomenteth her still in her petulancy. And therefore, cum clamat conscientia,
silet eloquentia: when the conscience is clamorous, the tongue is mute. He had
reason therefore to answer, that he might clear himself. And certainly, as, in
regard of the former Reason, it is a fault in a man, when he sees another
angry, to do anything whereby he may be provoked to a further measure of
passion, (though some take a delight to do it:) so, in regard of the second, a
man is not to be so cruel to his own reputation, as not, by a modest and sober
answer, to wipe off the dirt that is cast upon him. It is not enough to say,
(as the man in Jerome) Sufficit mihi conscientia mea, 8. Jerome.
and habeo Deum judicem conscientiae: my conscience is sufficient for me, and I
have God the sole judge of my conscience: For Job had both Testem in coelo, (as
himself says) my witness is in heaven; and he had his conscience witnessing
for him: and yet he stands up against those friends of his that unjustly
charged him, and would needs have his sufferings to be the punishment of his
hypocrisy. And so did Jeremiah open his mouth against his adversaries: and so
did Steven, and Saint Paul, and diverse others. To be innocent of a crime
objected, is a great blessing of God; and therefore, for a man not to stand up
in the defense of his innocence, but to suffer dead flies to be cast into his
ointment, and not to cast them out thereof, but to stand silent; he betrayeth
his innocence; nay, he seems to despise so great a blessing: and he may, for
the present, lie under an unjust disgrace; which, to an ingenuous nature, is no
little affliction; so he may, another day, be judged pro otioso silentio, as
well as pro otioso verbo, (says Saint Ambrose; S. Ambrose.
) for that same idle silence, as well as for other idle words. It is true, we
read in Scripture, that when reproaches have been sent out against holy men,
they have been silent: but it was not out of a neglect of their credit, but out
of some other swaying considerations, to which even credit it self was to give
place. Numb. 6. Numb. 6.12.
Aaron and Miriam speak against Moses, and use words of diminution: Tostatus in
loc.
Tostatus makes it a question, Whether Moses were present to hear them, or no;
and he thinks it more probable, that he was not present: But it is like enough
he quickly heard of it; and yet (says he) non legitur quod respondit; it is not
mentioned that he answered. What might be the reason of that? Was it because he
took knowledge, that God had took knowledge of it, and he would leave it to him
to revenge? Certain it is, that the less a man striveth for himself, the sooner
God espouseth his quarrel, and becomes his champion.

Or, secondly, was there not another reason of it? namely, that if he should
have made a reply, and so a contest and altercation about it, he feared it
would have been matter of rejoicing to those that loved none of them all: for
they did not more emulate him, then many of the people did them all.

Thirdly, Quia Mosen in Ducem, Aaron in Sacerdotem, Miriam in Prophetissam,
elegit Deus; (says Ferus; Ferus in locum.
) because God had chosen Moses for a Leader, Aaron for the Priest, and Miriam
for a Prophetess unto his people; to some of whom, this would have been a
delight, to see brother and sister against brother; to see the Prince, and the
Priest and Prophetess, clash: Therefore, rather then he would give cause of
insulation to malevolent and envious spirits, tacitus voravit injuriam, Calv.
in locum.
(as reverend Calvin says;) he swalloweth the injury, with a patient silence.
So we read, that when Shimei railed at David, and cursed him, he answered not,
though he were within hearing, 2 Samuel 16.
2 Samuel 16. For,

1. He was a contemptible person.

2. It was no time for David, being in his flight, to answer him.

3. He saw no hope, by answering such a rabidus canis, (as the Father calls
Julian) such a mad dog, Silence, in some cases, virtuous.
to quiet him: and therefore he wisely forbore a reply. It may be he has
reference to this, Psalm. 38. where he tells how, when men did speak mischievous
things against him, he was as a deaf man, that heard not; and as a dumb man,
that opens not his mouth: he was silent. It may be, by answering them, he
should have provoked them further; and therefore he would prevent their sin.
Our blessed Lord, before the High Priest, being accused, held his peace, Mark
14.61. And Chap 15.
and answered nothing, Mark 14. and, Mark 15. being accused before Pilate, and
the Highpriests, he answered nothing. Saint Chrysostom gives the reason; He
knew he should nothing advantage his cause, nor persuade them; but inflame them
further: And he would not answer Herod, Luke 23.9.
when he earnestly questioned him, Luke 23. So would not he answer a word, when
these did maliciously accuse him. Nay, there is one example above all the rest,
(save Christ:) When railing Rabshakeh had spoken most blasphemously against
God, it is said, The people held their peace, and answered him not a word; and
that Hezekiah had commanded them not to answer him, 2 Kings 18.36.
2 Kings 18. It was not only to spite the railer with silence; but Hezekiah
knew, by a reply, he might be exasperated, but not reformed.

And secondly, the rebounding of those multiplied blasphemies, might make some
ill impressions in the multitude; and therefore they suffered him to lie in his
own smoke.

To shut up this Point:

Application
It is true, in such cases as these, silence is fit, nay necessary: if God may
lose glory, or our brother thereby rendered the more sinful, or if no fit time
or place for speaking: For it is a great piece of Prudence, to know when and
where to answer. But all this hinders not, but that a man or woman, when unjust
aspersions are cast upon them, may reply unto them, and make a just apology;
vindicate their reputation, and do what they can, to set themselves upright in
the opinion of those that misjudged them. The servants of God have done it, in
all times: God himself has put into the mouths of his Prophets, answers to
those cavils and exceptions that people have made against his proceedings. The
Son of God himself did it, as it appears in the Gospel: and we may lawfully
do it; always provided, we do it modestly, as Abraham did here. And so we come
to the manner of his replying.

S. Chrysostom.
Wherein, (as Saint Chrysostom says) is observable, (...): the admirable
prudence of this righteous man, and the multiplied exaltation of his patient
temper; for he is not only not offended with the harsh words that were given
him, but (...): (...) Observe. 2. The piety and prudence of mild reproofs; with
cautions and remedies for their contraries.
he makes a very gentle answer; and here he plays the part of a discreet and
religious man, (as I said before) and of a prudent and a loving husband.

First, he shows himself a discreet and religious man; for both discretion
and religion guide a man to pacify wrath by fair and easy language; and not
to irritate it further, by retorting provoking words; yea, though a man be
innocent, yet he must not be passionate; and though the party incensed be
justly to be reproved, The prudence and piety of mild reproofs, and answer.
yet neither is that the time for sharpness. For as the Physicians rule is,
Remedia in remissioribus applicanda: Medicines are to be applied, not in the
paroxysm, or strength of the fit, but the abatement: So a man is not to be
reproved in his careir; as good talk to a man that is absent, as good talk to a
drunken man: Abigail said nothing to her husband being overcome with wine,
until the next morning; and as it is no fit time to reprove another in fury, so
neither is harsh language the way to do it, for this adds but fuel to the
fire; S. Augustine.
and (as Saint Augustine says in the like case) Quemvis correctione facis
pejorem: In stead of amending him, thou will make him worse, and more
outrageous. But there is prudence and piety in a meek answer: the Cannon shot
loses its force when it lights upon soft earth or wool; so the violence of
anger is mitigated, when it is not resisted, but meets with a meek spirit. This
is that which wise Solomon has, Prove. 15.1. Prove. 25.15.
Prove. 15. A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger,
and are as oil to the flame: and so Prove. 25. A soft tongue breaks the bones;
or as it is in the original, (...), twill break a man of bone (...), such an
one as is most stiff and obdurate: a notable example we have of this in Gideon,
who when he had gotten that glorious victory over the Midianites; was set upon
by those of Ephraim, to charge him with ambition and pride, as unwilling to
have any sharers in his conquest; the text says, Judge. 8.1.
they did chide with him sharply: Judge. 8. He could not but be sensible of the
affront, where he deserved thanks, to be quarrelled for what he had done; but
what did he in this case? Sure that which became a pious and prudent man: he
did not upbrayd them with their cowardliness, in that they did not offer
themselves to the battle; mildeness a conquering virtue.
or tell them that after the exploit done, every coward can be valiant; and
after the fray ended none speak bigger then the fearfullest: nor does he twit
them with their unthankfulness for his good service done unto them and all the
people; but he gently speaks, and extenuateth his own act, and advances
their performance; his was but a gleaning in comparison of their full vintage;
he gives them good words, and the issue is, Verse 3. Their anger was abated
toward him, (says the text. Verse. 3. Joshua 22.
) An other example we have, in Josh. 22. When the Reubenites had set up an
Altar, their Princes send a sharp message unto them; they begin with a
challenge, and charge them not only with transgression but apostasy and
rebellion; their words are very sharp and full of wrath; now had the Reubenites
been as hot in their answer, as the other were in their charge, there had grown
a bloody war, even out of a misprision; but their answer was mild and
moderate; they thought with themselves, this act of ours though it was well
meant, yet might be by interpretation scandalous; and therefore good reason our
mildness should give satisfaction for that offense which we have not
prevented: and their answer was so pleasing, that the anger of the other is
appeased; and they go away with comfort and contentment: an other example we
have in Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.
1 Samuel 25. when her husband had churlishly, and unworthily, and most
unthankfully answered, David's messengers, that sent for a little relief and
had deserved it, ex condigno, to the full, by their securing of his servants,
and flocks: and that she was told what danger her husband, her self and family
were in, thorough the justly incensed displeasure of David; away she gets her
with a present unto the place where David was, and falls humbly before him,
ingenuously confessing the folly and indiscretion of her husband, beggs pardon
for the fault, instanceth David's merits, foretells his solemn praise and
glory; and lays before him the happy peace of his soul, in refraining from
innocent blood: what was the issue? David relents upon this modest and wise
speech, and in stead of revenge he blesses God for sending Abigail to meet
him, and her for her counsel; and rejoices more been vinci, quam male vincere:
to be overcome with gracious words, then to have a revengeful victory.

For the Use of this:

Application
I wish it were taken up into our practices; for it is too customable in these
days, if men see others enraged, and in their fury, they grow as furious as
they; and because (as they conceive) that they have right on their side, they
think then they may give as bad as they bring, and bandy word for word; and
execration for execration: yea, and being heated a little, they are then become
ambitious of the last word, S. Basil.
and keeping the field last; though (as Saint Basil says in an other case)
(...); all the reward of their victory is but sin: a man would blese himself to
see the carriage of that people, how furious and passionate they are, how they
scorn to yield, how earnest to overcome in a Barrating way? Cautions and
remedies against common barratings.
Oh, what respect is here had to the honor of God; or the credit of our
profession! which should make us Doves, and not Vultures; Lambs and not Lions!
What poor love do we show to our brother, while we enrage him more! what
mischief do we show to our own souls, by venting our spleens! what offense do
we give unto all civil persons, who much loath these uncharitable contestations!

Well, to conclude this point; if we will show our selves prudent and pious,
let us seek peace, and pursue it: if we see them enraged, and they fly upon
us, give them peaceable and fair language, and, by gentleness, fetch them off
from the shelf whereon they stick: Violence will not do it; but Meekness will.
This, it may be, will be accounted a (...), a poverty of spirit: but I am sure,
it is pleasing unto God, and the greater maintainer of love: for Patience and
Charity are put together, Tit. 2. yea, Tirus 2.2.
it gives a man great peace in himself, when, though his brother be furious,
he is meek and courteous; he overcomes, without striking a stroke.

Secondly, he carries himself as a wise and kind husband. Observe. 3. Conjugal
prudence, and masculine condescension; with the contrary reproved. S.
Chrysostom on the place.
Abraham had well observed the acrimony and sharpness of his wives words; and
withal, was conscious to himself of his own integrity, in regard of the thing
objected; and how little he had deserved, at her hands, this hard measure. He
might have been soon as sharp as she, and have told her her own, (as one of the
Fathers lays it down:) Why, Sarah, do thou suspect me, as guilty of the
miscarriage of thine handmaid toward thee; or that I support her in her
malepertness? Had I ever thought of taking this woman into my bed, but by thy
motion and persuasion? I did herein respect voluntatem tuam, non voluptatem
meam; thy will, and not my pleasure. Or do thou think, that she that is so
lately joined unto me, (though she be pregnant) can have more favor in mine
eyes then thou, (though barren) with whom I have so long conversed? Has not my
former carriage to thee, been as loving and respective as became an husband?
Did I ever, in all the time that thou have been my wife, give thee any occasion
of offense? Why should thou now, after so long experience of my constant
love, grow into a jealousy and suspicion of me? Thou art led by Passion, and
not guided by Reason But now, that thou may see how free I am from what thou
chargest me withal: I give thine handmaid into thine own power, to do with her
as thou please.

Now the reason why he was so gentle to her at this time, was,

First, he considered she was his wife, and as near unto him as his own flesh.

Secondly, Calvin on the place.
(as Calvin says) He considered how loyal and obedient she had been unto him,
all her time; she had never displeased him hitherto; and therefore this present
error was the more to be born withal: the first offense, where the whole
course has been formerly fair, pleads for pardon: Even Balaams ass can plead
that, when she crushed his foot against the wall, and fell down under him: Was
I ever wont to do so unto thee? Numb. 22.30.

Thirdly, Conjugal love and prudence.
Abraham wisely considered the strength of the temptation that his wife had:
for, to be scorned and despised by an inferior, yea, by such an one, that one
has raised and advanced to what they are, is no small affliction.

Fourthly, he considered also, that jealousy (which is an excess of love) has
sudden and shrewd effects.

And lastly, (which is the main of all) he considered her sex; she was a woman;
and Passion is incident to that sex: and therefore he bare with her infirmity.
He practiced that which Saint Peter afterward gave in precept, 1 Pet. 3.1.
1 Pet. 3. for husbands to dwell with their wives, as men of knowledge; and to
favor them, as the weaker vessels.

And here is an high and holy example for husbands to follow, how to carry
themselves toward the infirmities of their wives.

Infirmities are of two sorts:

Husbandly condescension.
1. Some are natural, inward imperfections; as, slowness of conceit and
apprehension, shortness of memory, hastiness.

2. Outward: as lameness, blindness, deafness, or any other defect, or
deformity of body. These should have pity, compassion, and commiseration, yea a
greater tenderness and respect. Abraham did not love Sarah the less, because
she was barren; nay, Elkanah gave his wife a double portion, because of this.

Secondly, infirmities are not all transgressions and breaches of Gods law; as
shrewishness, waywardness, peevish sullenness. Now these, though they may be
seasonably, in due time and place, touched; Prove. 19.
yet, where the matter is not great, as good not take notice of them: it is the
glory of a man, to pass by an offense, Prove. 19.

Such a bearing there must be with the wife, and that upon the Apostles ground,
she being the weaker vessel. Precious things, whereof we make account, the
weaker they be, the more tenderly and charily they are to be handled: as
China-dishes, and Crystal-glasses, and the like. Of all parts of the body, the
eye is most tenderly used and touched. Now what things, what persons are more
precious then a wife? and yet withal, a weak vessel, and therefore to be born
withal. Besides, the husbands count themselves stronger: now the strong are to
bear with the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1.
Romans 15. we know the language of Zipporah to Moses; and we read also of his
meek carriage toward her. Yea, when Jezebel had used those upbraiding words
toward Ahab, and reproached him with a flatness of spirit, as if he were not
worthy to sway a Scepter; he replieth not.

For the Use of this:

Application
It meets with some husbands in these times, who, if the wife be a little moved,
they are presently on the house top, and are as passionate as they; nay grow to
vilifying and depraving words; as if the wife had been taken out of the foot,
and not the side: and they stand so much upon their headship and authority,
that they think the wife offends, but they do not. But where is the wisdom
that should be in those Heads? Do those dwell with their wives as men of
knowledge? Are those men strong, that are subject to this impotence of passion,
and show themselves rather women then men? Is this to bear with the weaker
vessel; or rather, to crush and shatter, what they should but tenderly touch.

In the second place, let it teach husbands, as they take knowledge of their
dignity, so to learn their duty; and that is, to bear with the infirmities of
their yoke-fellows. And let it be thought no digression, if I press it upon
both of them. Marriage, as it is honorable, so it is a comfortable condition^
yet, as sweet as it is, and as loving as possibly the parties can be; there
will intervene something, that will require each others patience and
forbearance.

Now there be certain things, that conduce much to make the married estate a
peaceable condition, and to make it an harbor unto them: where there may be
peace and security, when the world, like the sea, is full of tempests.

First, let them not willingly give each other offense: for offense causes
contention.

Secondly, if an offense be given by the one, (if it be but slight) it must not
be taken by the other: for if both be angry together, the fire will be the
greater.

Thirdly, if the one must be reproved, let it be done privately, and not in the
observation of others.

Fourthly, children or servants must not be bolstered up by the one, against
the other.

Fifthly, they must not twit each other with the husbands and wives of others,
or with their own former wives or husbands: for comparisons, in this kind, are
very odious.

Sixthly, take heed of unjust jealousies and suspicions of each other: for this
is the bane of domestical peace.

Seventhly, they must take heed of divulging each others infirmities; which
some take delight in; but it is an ungodly practice: had they any sore about
them, they would be loath to talk of it: And, did man and wife esteem each
other one flesh, they would be loath to reveal each others weaknesses.

Lastly, in all things that may stand with a good conscience, they should seek
to please each other; and rather suffer themselves to be crossed, then to
discontent each other. Saint Paul makes this a mutual duty between man and
wife, 2 Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 7.33, 34.
and expresses it by a word that signifies more then ordinary care; (...).
(...), which signifies a dividing of the mind, a casting this way and that
way, how to give best content.

If these things be observed, there will be no bitterness in the estate of
Wedlock; of which it ought to be free: and therefore the Heathens threw out of
doors the gall of the Sacrifice that was slain at weddings: There will be love;
yea, God will be there: Now if he be not there, there will be a fire: for, (as
the Hebrews observe) (...) signifies the man, and (...) the woman: (...) and
(...)
the first and last letters whereof, make (...), that is, God: if those be
taken away, there is left (...), that is, fire. Where love is not, God is not:
and where God is not in the family, there is nothing but Fire; and such a fire,
as God only knows when it will be quenched.

Application
Another thing Calvin adds, which I will wind up, in way of Application of
this Point.

Abraham's family was now the Church of God: and as in his family there fell
this discord; so, in the Church of God, are apt to be dissentions. It must be
the care of the members of the same, to bear with each other; and quietly to
take up differences, lest Religion suffer by it. It is true, that not only for
the divisions of Reuben, but of Levi, are great thoughts of heart: and when
some a little forget themselves, others are as violent against them; that
neither will yield unto each other, but, by their altercations, make the breach
every day wider; and so tear that coat of Christ, that the soldiers themselves
would not divide. I am sure, it is the duty of us all, to follow after the
things that make for peace: And while we do the contrary, (through Pride, or
Faction, or Schism, or Ambition, or novel conceits newly drunk in) we cannot
love God; for he is the God of peace and love: S. Augustine
Non habent Dei charitatem, qui non diligunt Ecclesiae unitatem, (says Saint
Augustine:) They are not in unity and love of God, that love not the unity and
peace of his Church: And we cannot love the Church, while we make her groan,
and say as Rebekah did, upon the struggling of the twins in her womb, Why am I
thus? We do not love the Faith that we profess: for these intestine differences
are gravissimum Fidei excidium, S. Hilary.
(says Hilary;) the most grievous destruction of the Faith. We only gratify
Satan, whose best music is our division: he does captare inquieta tempora,
even hunt after such unquiet times: they are his opportunities, his harvests;
and he finds it good fishing in troubled waters; and works men not only to a
defection from the Faith, but to flat atheism and profaneness. God make us wise,
to foresee, in time, the dismal effects of our Civil Midianitish wars, and to
prevent them.

To go on: Observe. 4. Good minds will yield of their own right, for piety and
peace sake.
Thy maid is in thine hand, to do to her as it pleases thee.

Why, (says one upon the Text) Abraham might have a little more stood upon it,
and have said to Sarah, Thy maid is now in another condition then she was
before; she is become my wife, with thine own consent; and now she has
conceived, and that issue will belong to me: she is mine, and the child she
goes withal is mine; and I must have a care of both: I may not suffer thee to
have thy will of her. There is none of this; he calls her ancillam here, her
maid; and yields the power of her to Sarah: She is in thine hand; do to her as
it pleases thee. Where my Author observes,

How good minds are willing to yield of their own right, for peace sake. Genesis
13.
This Patriarch had done so once before, Genesis 13. when the estates of Lot and
himself grew so great, that there fell a difference between their servants, and
so a necessity of parting; though it had been fit, Abraham, being the elder,
and his uncle, and, under God, the maker of him, should have had the power of
choice; and Lot should have taken his leavings; yet (...), S. Chrysostom.
(says S. Chrysostom) gives him all the authority of the election, and bids
him choose what part of the Country he likes; and leave him the rest. Isaac had
right to those Wells which his fathers servants had dug yet when the
Philistims stop them up, he contends not? And though he might have kept those
Wells which his own servants dug; yet when they strive with him for them, he
leaves them unto them, and digs elsewhere, Genesis 26. There was no reason that
Jacob, Genesis 26.
keeping Labans sheep, should make good that which was torn of wild beasts:
yet he bare the losses of it, for peace sake, Genesis 31. And Chap. 31.
We see this in Nehemiah: Chap. 5. Neh. 5.14, 15.
there was a certain allowance due to the Governor; yet Nehemiah would not
take it, because he found the requiring of it had been burdensome to the people.
Our blessed Lord coming to Capernaum, Matthew. 17. Matthew. 17.10.
tribute was demanded of him; he first shows that he was not bound to it; but
then, because he would not trouble the public peace, or give occasion of
contention, ( lest, says he, we should offend them) he enableth Saint Peter to
work a miracle, for the getting of money to discharge it. This was the spirit
that was in Saint Augustine, and other Bishops with him, S. Augustine.
in his time, as appears in his Book de Gestis cum merito: They were content,
for peace sake, to admit of Coadjutors into their Sees: yea, pro Christi
unitate, Episcopatum deponere; to preserve Christian peace, even to lay down
their Government; which they did not account (as they said) perdere, but Deo
tutius commendare; that it was not to lose their Reverend Authority, but to lay
it up safer, by recommending it to God. And Saint Jerome, of Nazianzen, both in
his Life, S. Jerome, l. 2. c. 9. touching Nazianzen.
and on Ruffinus; that after he had taken a great deal of pains in
Constantinople, and Satan stirred up some ill minds against him, who did
desire his removal thence, (though others as earnestly desired his stay;) he
perceiving this, is content to leave the place: Absit (says he) ut mei causa,
aliqua simultas oriatur inter Sacerdotes Dei: God forbid (says he) that, for
my cause, there should be the least discord among the Priests of God: adding
those words of Jonah to the Mariners, Si propter ^e tempestas ista, tollite,
and mittite in mare: If for my sake this great storm come upon you, take me,
and cast me out into the sea.

Thus did these holy Fathers resemble the true mother before Solomon; who
rather gives the living child wholly away (though her own by right) then
suffer it to be divided. So they preferred the peace of the Church, before
places or lives. Saint Paul might have commanded Philemon, but he shakes off
his right, and chooses rather to entreat him, Philem. verse. 8, 9. Philem. v. 8,
9.


For the Use of this:

Let us bear in mind that of the Apostle; Application Phil. 4.5.
Let your moderation of mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4. under that (...),
that moderation, is this yielding of our right for peace sake. We must yield
our right, our own right: for we must not be so bold with that which is our
brothers, unless we have authority by our place, as Magistrates; or that, by
consent, businesses are referred to our arbitrament or umpirage, to do as we
see fit: much less may we give that which is Gods; the Orthodox would not
(...), not prostitute their cheap instructions; they would not suffer the hems
of Truths garment to be cut: Neither must men take liberty to give away part of
Gods day to profane pastime. But in our own case, it is fit that we abate of
our right, for peace sake.

Who hears not, with grief, those kind of passages; It is my right, and I will
stand upon it, (and, it may be, the thing but a trifle;) and I will defend it
as long as I have a groat? So again, Who grieves not to see men take
extremities? Forfeitures of Bonds, voiding of a man's Lease, for not paying of
his rent at the day; and saying, It is my right, and the Law gives it me. So
again, I will make the most of mine own, to keep a man in prison, when not able
to pay.

It may be, these things may hold in judicio soli, but not poli; in the
judgment of earth, but not in the judgment of heaven. O let us then abate of
our right, for peace sake. Our Lord did so; came down from heaven, emptied
himself of glory, to make peace between God and us. The holy servants of God
have done it: it is Love, Charity; for that seeks not her own. And yet there
is no loss in it: for, as the Prophet said to Amaziah, when he was troubled for
the hundred talents, God is able to give thee more: God is able to make up, and
will, whatsoever we lost for Peace sake; when those that grasp and grope all
that they can pretend any right to, (and much more;) and that will part with
nothing for Peace, (no, nor for Justice sake) shall find God blow upon it,
and make it uncomfortable.

Lastly, Do to her as it pleases thee.

Was not this too great a power given to his wife over the servant, considering
she was now with child, and her mistress in such passion?

Observe. 5. Unadvised resolutions, are commonly followed with distractions
Good man, what a distraction was he in! He knew nothing wherein he had
offended: his wife is sharp against him; and so sharp, that he is fain to yield
to that which was against his breast: To have one that was now his wife, and
with child by him; and, it might be, of the promised seed, (for so he yet
conceived;) and to leave her to one in her passion, that was like to afflict
her in so severe a manner, that might be to the hurt of the woman, and the
miscarriage of that she went withal.

This is part of that punishment of his unadvised yielding to his wives motion,
in taking Hagar to wife: For, that he sinned in entertaining the motion, as
well as his wife in propounding it, we showed unto you before.

Certainly, when men will be taking by-ways, they meet with sloughs; and their
own devices, prove their snares and entanglers: The best side of such courses
is perplexity and distraction; and they come into those straights, they know
not which way to turn them.

And therefore, in the fear of God, Application
let us only venture upon that which we are assured is warrantable, and which
we dare beg Gods blessing upon: for if not, we shall come into the briers, and
we shall not know how to extricate our selves; into such a Maze, that we shall
hardly wind our selves out: we shall toss up and down, and hardly come to an
anchor; and we shall mourn to feel our unadvised resolutions scourged with such
following distractions.

Preached, October 27. 1641.
THE NINTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.6. And when Sarah dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.
HEre is an other event of the former marriage: Sarah having expostulated with
her husband, and he having yielded up the maid into her power, she deals
with her so hardly, that she flies upon it: Sarah corrects her maid, and
certainly her petulancy and malepertness, and her contempt of her mistress, did
deserve it.

Observe. 1. Correction of servants lawful; with the several kinds and
necessary cautions thereof.
It is lawful for masters and mistresses, to correct where there is just cause.
There is no question to be made of it. There is a correction by looks. (...) in
the Hebrew signifies the nose, (and by a Synechdoche, the whole face;) and the
same word signifies in that tongue anger, because that anger discovers it
self in the countenance. Cains countenance was cast down, when he was angry
with his brother. Genesis 4. Genesis 4.5. and 31.2.
and Genesis 31.2. It is said that Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, that it
was not toward him as formerly: and therefore there may be a reproof, by an
angry look, by a frowning countenance; Solomon says, Prove. 25.23.
Prove. 25. As the North wind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance a
backbiting to^^^: Therefore there is a reproof of a talebearer, even in the
looks. Haman could read a reproof in the kings face, of his doings, and a
determination of his punishment, Esther 7.7. Luke 22.61.
Hest. 7. When Peter had denied his M^ster, it is said, the Lord turned and
looked upon Peter, Luke 22. Certainly there was a reprehension of him in that
look: and it made a deep impression in Peter, that he was filled with confusion
in himself; and therefore went out and wept bitterly. When Elymas sought to
pervert the Deputy (who was prima ecclesiae spolia as Espencaeus says; the
first triumphs of the Church by the ministry of Saint Paul;) it is said that
Saint Paul, Act. 13.9.
(...), set his eyes upon him; he did cast such an angry look upon him, That
was his first correction: As there is approbation and love in looks, in oculis
indulgentia, favor in the eyes. Jacob says, he had seen the face of Esau, as
the face of God; he discerned by his cheerful countenance, that he was pleased
with him, Genesis 33. Genesis 33.10.
and it is said of that man that had made so fair a progress, that Christ
looked upon him, and loved him, Mark. 10.21. So there is dislike and reproof
in looks; this then is one way of correcting servants, and that is by the
countenance.

Secondly, there is a correction by words, and such sharpness and acrimony in
it, that many a man had rather endure verbera then verba; blows then bitter
words: and in this way it is lawful for masters to correct servants, upon just
occasion. So did Elisha first correct Gehazi by words, and reproves him for
running after Naaman for a bribe: and Moses thus corrects his servant
Joshuah, for emulating Eldad and Medads prophesying. So David reproves Abishai,
Number. 11.
when he would have put him on to the taking away of Shimei's life; now he had
submitted himself, and acknowledged his fault, 2 Samuel 19.
2 Samuel 19. Our Lord corrects his disciples with words, when at one time he
challenges them for their want of faith; at another time for their ambition,
at another time for their sleepiness and drousiness: and we see how sharp he is
with Peter, when he disswades him from his Passion, come behind me Satan, thou
art an offense unto me; thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the
thigs that be of men. Mat. 26. Mat. 26.23. and chap. 28.
And so the Master that had delivered the talents, first corrects the evil
and unprofitable servant by words.

Thirdly, there is a correction also by blows, which it is lawful for the
master and mistress upon just cause to use; for as Solomon says, Prove. 29.19.
A servant will not be corrected with words; that is, Prove 29.19.
a servant may be so obstinate and untoward, that words will do no good: and
therefore there will be need of blows and stripes, of which our Savior makes
mention, Luke 12.47. Luke 12.47,
The servant that knows not his masters will, shall be beaten with stripes;
but he that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. The Philosopher will tell us, that a man owes his servant, (...);
work, August. lib. 19 de civit. dei, c 1.
and food, and correction: and Saint Augustine says, that a servant that is
disobedient, may be corrected, verb and verbere, sive alio quolibet genere
paenae, justa and licit^: both by word and action, by any kind of just and
lawful punishment.

Further yet, it is said of the house of George Prince of Anhault, that it was
an University, a Court, and a Church: If it were a Church; we know, in the
Church there must be discipline, or else, all will go to ruin. A family is a
little commonwealth; now if there be not animadversion of offenders in the
commonwealth, magna regna magna latrocinia, (says the Father,) great States
will be great robberies; they will be rather waste Deserts, full of wild
beasts, then societies of civil men.

Again, servants are in next degree to children in a family; nay according to
the scripture phrase, they are children, they call Naaman father: ga^er
familias, is the style of an householder, the father of the family: Mat. 8.6.
the Centurion sending to Christ, in the behalf of his servant; says (...), my
child is sick, Mat. 8. for so it signifies: and Beza upon the place
observes, that (...) signifies both filiu^^ and servum, both a son and a
servant. Now what is required in parents toward children? Among other things
to give them correction when they deserve it: not only to correct them with
looks and words, but even to use the rod; Withhold not correction from the
child (says Solomon) Prove. 23. Prove. 23.13
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye: therefore a servant
may, and must be corrected when there is cause, as well as set at work, fed and
clothed: yea correction is sometimes as necessary as meat; for by this are the
ears opened, (as he in Job says) to instruction.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let masters, as they have authority to correct, so make conscience of doing it,
as well as of others things which they are bound to do to their servants; and
let them make conscience of keeping up that authority that God has invested
them in: I can tell you of several ways whereby masters and mistresses lose
their authority.

First, when they are light in their behavior, and foolish in their carriage,
in the sight of their servants; or when they are excessive in the observation
of their servants; Nabal was such an one, and therefore his servants despised
him; and would say, he was a son of Belial, 1 Samuel 25. 1 Samuel 25.17.
There is gravity required in those that be in place of government; and their
carriage should be such as should render them awful unto servants. This is that
which David did profess; that he would behave himself wisely, and so walk-in
midst of his house, Psalm. 101. Psalm. 101.2.


Secondly, when masters and mistresses are too indulgent to their servants, and
make them hail fellow well met; when they thus let fall their authority, that
servants do not know their distance; no wonder though they grow despicable:
Solomon says, He that delicate by brings up his servant, Prove. 29.21.
shall have him become his son at length, Prove. 29. It is thought that this
proverb has reference to Jeroboam, whom Solomon had showed great affection
unto, and had indeed tendered above the degree of a servant; and it is well
known how insolent he grew: and the like may be thought of Ziba, that
Mephibosbeth did use him so familiarly, that the perfidious fellow grew
insolent; and even so bold, lib. de legibus.
as to delate him to the king, 1 Samuel 16. And it is an advice that Plato
gives, that masters should not be familiar with servants, for they are apt to
take too much heart by this; and to grow cross, in stead of obeying;

Thirdly, governors lose their authority, when they are overruled by their
servants, to do any thing that is unlawful, and unjust; as we see in Joash, 2
King. 24.17.
that was drawn by his servants to Idolatry; 2 King. 24. and Zedechiah, who
gave the Prophet Jeremy into the hands of his servants, Jer. 38.5.
Jer. 38. with this base and abject speech; the king is not be that can deny
you any thing, do any thing against you: thus will servants soon prove masters;
and when they come to this high pitch, they will prove intolerable: for this
is one of the four things that the wise man says, the earth cannot bear; a
servant when he reigns Prove. 30. when the servants ride on horses, and the
masters walk on foot: Eccles. 10. how pitiful is it! Prove. 30 22. Eccles. 10.7.


Fourthy, they lose their authority when they come within the lurch of their
servants; that is, when they know those things by them, that they are afraid
they should reveal; and so dare not correct or punish them, for fear they
should open their mouths against them: as it is said of him in Tacitus;
Tacitus.
validior erat apud libidines Principis, quam ut poena afficeretur: he was more
intimate to the vices of his Prince, then to suffer any punishment from him.

Fifthly, they lose their authority, when they are so remiss, that they pray and
entreat servants, where they may command them; howsoever this might be called
mildeness, if they had to deal with equals; yet when with servants, it is
dullness and flatness of spirit, and a forgetfulness of that power which God
has put into their hands: for the Centurion by his own speech did otherwise. I
say to my servant, do this and he does it; come, and he comes; go, and he
goes; and so the Church in the Canticles, Cant. 3.5.
taking upon her the person of a mistress, says I charge you not to do this.

Lastly, they lose their authority by not correcting of servants when there is
just cause; and giving them blows when they deserve them: for what will they
say? I know my master or mistress will scoul or frown, it may be they will
chide, but they will not fight; and therefore the frown is easily digested, and
the words are but counted wind, and so they come to despise them: but masters
must know they do not perform their duty toward God; nay they betray the
power which God has given them; when they do not correct, in looks, in words,
yea by blows if there be desert; and they are guilty of those further
misdemeanors that their servants run into: and God has the same quarrel with
them, that he had against Eli; his sons made themselves vile, he restrained
them not, 1 Samuel 2. 1 Samuel 2.12.
He dealt too mildely with them, and he stroked those heads he should have
wounded; he gave but only soft words, too easy a dose; for it did rather stir
and irritate the humor, then purge out the humor, and therefore both he and
his sons perished for it.

Secondly observe, she dealt hardly with her; lib de Ab. c. 4.
though she had power to correct her, yet as Saint Ambrose says, immoderatius
permissa ultione utitur; she uses lawful correction unlawfully, immoderatly:
and so the word (...) seems to import she humbled, The root in (...) only
Call. sign. respondere; but in piel, (...) duplicat sensum
or afflicted her: for it was used in the former Chapter, Verse. 13. to set out
the affliction that Abraham's seed should have in Egypt, which was with great
rigor, as appears, Exodus 1. We then cannot but take knowledge of this in
Sarah, and so in any master or mistress, immoderatly to correct servants. The
taskmasters in Egypt did cruelly beat the Israelites, if they fell short of
their work, Exodus 5. And for this cruelty of both Pharaoh and his taskmasters,
God gave in charge to Israel, Levit. 25. Levit. 25.43.
that, in regard they had been servants in Egypt, they should not rule over
such with rigor. Exodus 21.20.
And we shall find, Exodus 21. that if a servant died under his masters hand,
when he corrected him, (though he did not intend to kill him) he was to be
punished: and if he did smite out an eye or tooth; he was to make him
recompense, verse. 26. And because he foresaw that men would be prone to too
much cruelty in correcting, he set the number of stripes, which might not be
exceeded, Deuteronomy. 25.3. And 22.6.
Deuteronomy. 25. The Lord was ever against Cruelty toward the very brute creatures:
Exodus 23.19.
he would not have them seethe a kid in the mothers milk, Exodus 23. and Deuteronomy.
22. therefore he would not have them take the dam with the young. In his
Commendatur Clementia and Humanitas, (says one;) In these things are Humanity
and Mercy recommended. If they must not be cruel to beasts, much less to men.
God opened the mouth of Balaams ass, and she taxes her master for striking
her, Numb. 22.
Numb. 22. Were the mouths of beasts opened now, what cause were there to
inveigh against the rage and fury of some men against their beasts; who lay on
them, and torment them, and torture them in that manner, that it yerns a man's
bowels to observe! Well, the Lord having such care of beasts, surely he would
not have servants used cruelly and inhumanely.

For the Use of this:

Application
It meets with those that show too much rigor toward servants: When they
correct, they know no mean: they lay on, as if they had brute creatures to deal
withal, nay stocks and stones: Yea, they will take any thing that comes next to
hand, be it never so hard or sharp; and thus, oftentimes, wound, and bruise,
and lame them, and disable them all their days; yea, sometimes they give such
strokes as take away life. Do those think that they deal with their own flesh?
for, we are all made of one blood, Acts 17.
Act. 17. Do they think their servants bear the superscription of the Great
Caesar, as well as they? Did not one hand create them both? Did not one Christ
redeem them both? May not the servant stand as high in the favor, as the
master? And is not the servant heir of the same glory? Have not they a Master
in heaven? who, if they do not to their servants that which is just and equal,
will call them to an account for it, Colos. 4.1.
Col. 4. Do they know what may befall their children, when they shall come to be
servants unto others? For they are not sure (for all the means that they leave
them) but that they may come into that condition; and so may feel the like
cruelty from others, that their parents have showed to others.

Observe. 2. The prudence and discretion of Corrections; with their contraries.
In the second place, let it be an instruction to all masters and mistresses, to
be wife and discreet in correcting of servants.

Now this discretion consists in these things:

First, there must be a fault, else there will be more hurt done, then good,
(besides the unrighteousness of it.) If a corrasive be laid where there is no
sore, it will make one. A man must not correct, to show his authority, and that
it may be known he is a master: this is that which is called correcting
according to their pleasure, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.10.
This is naught; there must be a cause, and the must be fault made known to the
servant, whom a master does correct; he must be convinced of it, as we see God
dealt with our first parents, and with Cain, before he punished them.

Secondly, discretion is seen, in putting a difference between those men that
correct servants in years, and servants under years. And again, it is fittest
for the master to correct the menservants, and the mistresses the maids; as we
see Abraham here gives Hagar into the power of her mistress.

Thirdly, discretion and wisdom is seen, in the order of correcting: Correction
by words, must go before correction by blows: and if words will do, the other
needs not. And he that does thus, imitateth God, who does rebuke and chasten,
Rev. 3. and shows, that, like God, Rev. 3.19. Lament. 3.33.
he does not punish willingly, Lam. 3. Physicians, before they give a strong
potion, will give a preparative: and Chirurgians will take all courses, before
they use burning or amputation.

Fourthly, discretion is seen, in the manner of correction.

1. That it be in love: All things should be done in love, 1 Cor. 16. 1 Cor.
16.14.
and therefore This, which carries in it a show of anger. God does thus: and
we must correct with a desire of the reformation of the party; and therefore,

2. We must join prayer with it: I do not mean, a formal and set prayer; but a
lifting up of the heart to God, that he will be pleased to make that correction
useful to the party.

3. Correction must not be given in passion: for, when one is disturbed by
passion, there is a mist comes over the understanding, and it is apt to blind
Reason. Seneca tell of Socrates, that, Seneca.
being incensed against his servant, he deferred to correct him, saying, I
would beat thee, if I were not angry. O that we could rob this Egyptian of this
jewel! how shall he rise up in judgment against such governors, as, in the
height of their fury, in the very paroxysm, fall upon servants; and care not
what they do in their rage.

4. People should correct with reflecting upon themselves, and calling to mind
their own sins, by which they have much more provoked God, then their servant
has them; yea, and justly punishes their contumacie toward him, with the
servants negligence and disobedience to them. Again, they should think how they
would be used, if they should offend; and therefore they should do as they
would be done unto; and then they would correct with compassion.

Lastly, discretion and wisdom in correction is seen, in observing a right
measure; it must be given, according to the nature and quality of the offense,
(as you heard before, out of the Gospel;) there be fewer and more stripes. If
it be but a fault out of weakness, or in advertencie, or ignorance, an easy
reproof will serve the turn: if it be a wilful error, it requires more: If it
be an offense against God, if it be scandalous, if it be often committed, the
more severity is to be used. Still, a wise man poenas irrogat aequas, gives
proportionable correction. And this is according to Gods example; who, (though
he does reward ultra condignum, beyond all desert; yet) punishes citra, Ezra
9.13.
less then any merit; as Ezra says, Chap. 9.

I wish these things may be observed: for people are apt to turn a duty into a
sin; and correct so, that they make themselves liable to Gods correction.

Shall I add a little more, without the challenge of a digression? A master
may use a servant hardly, not only in regard of Correction, but in other
things; which I wish may be taken knowledge of.

First, in regard of Food, they may use them hardly; when, out of a miserable
humor, they will not allow them enough to fill their bellies. It should seem,
the master of the Prodigal dealt so with him; for he was fain to eat husks with
the swine. Or, secondly, when they give them enough; but it is of such stuff,
that they buy for cheapness sake, and is scarce man's meat; yea, that which is
mustie and unsauoury: This is fearful. The good houswife provides meat, and
wholesome meat, Prove. 31.
for her family, Prove. 31. And the Prodigal could say, that, in his fathers
house, the hired servants had bread enough.

Secondly, Masters may use servants hard, in regard of apparel: the good
houswife, again, provides clothing for her servants, Prove. 31. But we see how
ragged and tattered the servants of many be, who are known to be of that
ability, that they could provide better for them, if a base, and fordid, and
miserable spirit did not insoul them, and that their conscience were not still
tied up in their purse.

Thirdly, they may use them hardly, in regard of labor, when they put them
upon employments above their strength; which was the Egyptians usage of the
Israelites: but that cried to God, and drew down wrath; and therefore let
masters take heed of the like cruelty, of using servants like horses, yea
worse: Yea, and denying them seasonable rest; which is another way of ill
usage: and one end that God had, in ordaining the Sabbath, was, that the
servant might rest; and therefore they are contrary to God, that will defraud
servants of their rest, whereby they should repair their spirits, and refresh
their bodies.

Lastly, masters and mistresses may deal too hardly with their servants in time
of sickness. The king of Syria had so much care of his servants infirmity, that
he commends him, by letters, to the king of Israel, 2 Kings 5. Matthew. 8.6.
2 Kings 5. and the care that the Centurion had for his sick servant, is set
down, and commended, Matthew. 8. But these times are full of such as the
Amalekite was, who left his servant, because he was sick, 1 Samuel 30.13.
1 Samuel 30. had not David lighted upon him, he had perished. send them to some
out-house, and take no further care: I know that those people would take more
care of their beasts; some will take care in such a case, but it shall be at
the poor servants cost; if they have not present money, if they recover, they
will abate it of their wages, is this to undo heavy burdens? or rather is not
this to make the burden heavyer? Or if they will pay it themselves, yet they
mutter and grumble, and say they make themselves sicker then they are, and they
may rise if they will. So that the poor servant is more troubled with these
discontented speeches, then with his own sickness; and so forces himself to
strive above his strength, even to his undoing. I could tell you of some other
kinds of hard dealing with servants; as when masters and mistresses will not
teach their servants that, for which they come; if they do, when they are near
out of their time, and think they will part from them; they will disgrace them,
and disable them; and whereas they should send them away with encouragment and
reward (if they have been faithful;) for so God commanded, they must not go
away empty, Deuteronomy. 15. Deuteronomy. 15.13.
they will malign them, and envy them, and do them the worst offices they can:
Laban could have been content Jacob should have stayed with him still; and
therefore if he go away, he will not only vex at it, but pursue him with
hostility. I could speak of hard usage of servants, while their wages are
either detained altogether (which is no less then a crying sin, Jam. 5. which
enters into the ears of God, Jam. 5.4.
and does interpellare pro vindicta, solicit him for vengeance;) or else
detaining them so long, that it moves them to filch and steal, to supply their
necessities. Do these masters and mstresses in these several ways of
injustice, consider that which the Apostle minds them of, Ephesians. 6. That they
have also a master in Heaven: Ephesians. 6.9.
Job durst not despise the cause of his servant, Chapter 31. 13. 14. because if
he did, he did not know how he should answer God, when he did visit; Oh think
of this, when you use your servants with rigor; how you will be able to give
account for this, when God rises up to judgment.

But I have held you too long in this. I come therefore to something else; for
we have not yet done with Sarah, sharp correction.

May we not further take knowledge,

First, of great inhumanitie in her, Observe. 3. Severity often degenerateth into
inhumanity.
that would be so severe to her servant being now with child; such a one
(though there be just cause of displeasure) is to be the object of mercy and
compassion: and in all times it has been held cruel and inhumane to use such
harshly, to beat or strike them, when they knew them to be pregnant, as being a
double hurt, both to the party her self, and the issue she went withal: we have
Gods law, Exodus 21. That if one did hurt a woman with child, Exodus 21.^^.
he was to be severely punished: our law is so merciful, that if a woman be
convicted and be found with child, her punishment is respited till she be
delivered. It was the cruelty that Elisha tells Hazael he shall practice in
Israel: To rip up women with child, 2 King. 8. and so Menahem, 2 King. 15.
ripped up the women with child: and in that bloody persecution under Q. Mary,
we read that a woman great with child was brought to the stake, and that her
womb burst in the flames, and they took the child, and threw it in, and burned
it with the mother. It is true, this was an excess of cruelty; but to do wrong
to a woman with child, by beating her (though it be a lesser degree) is bad
enough; Application
and I wish all people to take heed how they be guilty of it.

Observe. 4. The fickleness and instability of popular Affections.
Again, let us observe with Musculus, the change of Sarahs passion: how full was
she, not long since, of desire to have issue, though by her maid? how earnest
was she to persuade her husband to yield to this course? as a woman free from
all jealousy, she puts her maid into the bosom of her hushand; and now to
see, how passionate she is: why did she not bear with the miscarriage of her
maid, for the hope she had now of issue by her, she having conceived? See
(says my author) nihil stabile in humanis affectibus: no thing is constant in
humane affections; that which we seem now most arciently to desire and affect,
after a while we despise and tread under our foot, the wind does not sooner
shift from one point to another, then men's affections are mutable; there is as
much constancy in the moon, as in them. When Jacob comes to Laban, he is his
bone and his flesh; and he is so just, that he shall not serve him for nothing;
and when the time of payment comes, he substituteth one sister for another; he
changes his wages ten times, and he hates him in his heart. Could greater
love be in a brother and sister toward a brother, them was in Aaron and Miriam
toward Moses? and yet we see this great affection turned into emulation. How
kindly does Saul speak to David in the cave? and how does he beg his favor to
his posterity? and yet suddenly after, he is pursuing him for his life: after
Am^on has satisfied his desires upon Thamar, it is said, the hatred was
greater with which he hated her, then the love wherewith he loved her; 2 Samuel
13.15.
2 Samuel 13. How passionate was David for the water of the Well of Bethlehem?
yet, when he had it, he would not drink it, he poured it upon the ground: the
people that came out to meet our Lord coming to Jerusalem, cut down boughs
from the trees, and spread their garments in the way; and within a few days
after, the deadly enemies of Christ; and had nothing in their mouths but,
Crucify him crusifie him him; how were those at Lystra, taken with Saint Paul,
insomuch that they would have offered sacrifice to him, as to a God* and within
a while after stone him: and so those Barbarians at Malta account him a
murderer, and by and by, esteem him a God. We now love things, and by and by
we loath them; now we make much of things, and anon we cast them off; as we do
with nose-gayes, wear them all day in our hands, and at night throw them away:
we do admire some persons, and after a while we deprave them: we are pleased
with this and that thing, and on a sudden distaste it; and, it may be, know no
just reason for either. It is a great part of our natural corruption, that we
are swayed by Passion; constant in nothing, but Inconstancy. And therefore we
should pray for Gods grace to guide us, that those which should be our
servants, may not be our masters: that we may wisely desire, and love, and
rejoice; and then we shall not alter, but upon just cause and ground.

Thirdly, How easily people abuse the power that is given them! Observe. 5. Most
men are apt to act to the extreme of their authority, if not exceed it.
Abraham had given power to his wife, to correct the insolency of her maid; and
see, she exceeds terms of moderation. Yea? (thought she) has my husband
given me leave? I will lay it on, to some purpose. The taskmasters having
authority from Pharaoh, we see how they raged against the poor Israelites: No
question, they exercised their power to the full; nay, it is probable, that
they exceeded their commission, or else the people would not have complained to
Pharaoh against them. You see how glad the Jailer was to have Saint Paul put
into his hands; and we see how harsh he was toward him: he was only bid to
keep him safely, and he puts him into an inner prison, and makes his feet
fast in the stocks. Socrates tells us, that the Officers of Julian did vex
the Christians, Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 12.
(...), beyond the commands of the Emperor; which he coming to the knowledge
of, (...), he over-looked: and when the Christians complained of it, he turned
them off with a flout, saying, that they were taught to bear afflictions
patiently. And we see in the world usually, if men get but into a Place,
(though but a mean one) and that they know they have a power, they will not
only do, but over-do. Some, out of a pride of heart, because they will show
themselves what they are; and some, out of a sinful officiousness, and
subservience to others humors, whom they think to please by their busy
doings; they are apt to do things they should not do. And when we see a
revengeful man, that has gotten power into his hand, we shall be sure to find
him to stretch his power and authority to the farthest, for the wreaking of his
own spleen and malice. When Pilate bid the highpriests take Christ, and judge
him according to their law; you may well think, that if they could have
entertained this offer, they would have done it, and made use of it to the
full, for the punishing of him whom they hated.

For the Use:

Whatsoever the power is, that is granted us over others, Application
let us use it fairly, and let us not do all we may do; for then we shall be
apt soon to do that we should not do. They that will live at the extent of
their power, they will quickly transgress their limits; And it is dangerous
walking on the very brink of the river. Moderation in that power which is
committed to a man, has ever been held praiseworthy.

Secondly, it should teach those that are in place to derive power upon others,
not to trust passionate, and proud, and revengeful men with it: for, being
transported with passion, and not knowing how to keep a moderation, they are
apt, with Phaeton, to burn the world.

Observe. 6. Rigor and severity, end commonly in prejudices, and manifold
inconveniences. 1 Samuel 25.10.
The last clause in the verse, contains the flight of Hagar: And this event,
oftentimes, has too severe correction of servants by their governors. I do
not justify Hagar in it; nor can any be justified that practices it: But, I
say, thus it falls out, that too rigorous correction sets servants going.

Nabal could say, when David sent for some relief, 1 Samuel 25. There be many
servants that break away from their masters; and no question, but many of them,
through rigorous usage. Whether Shimei's servants did so upon the same ground,
or no, I cannot say; but they ran away, 1 Kings 8.30.
1 Kings 8. But sure I am, many do so in these days: nay, the cruelty of
masters has made some, not only to run away, but to do worse; to kill master,
or to kill mistress, or children, or to fire the house; and other outrageous
acts, that are not to be named.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let masters and mistresses take heed of cruelty, and rigorous severity. The
Apostle would have masters to be (...), to forbear threatenings, Ephesians. 6.9.
Ephesians. 6. He does not absolutely forbid threatening, but calls for a moderation
therein. Now, if they must be moderate in threatenings, then certainly in
blows: for, excess this way, is offensive to God, and, it may be, prejudicial
to a man's estate, in forcing away a servant: yea, it may be the undoing of the
servant; as Hagar was in the way, by this flight, to have been undone, if the
Angel of God had not met her.

Use your servants fairly. Satyrus, in Athenaeus, was called (...), that is,
Good to servants, because he was (...), because he was kind and indulgent to
his servants. Let Christians affect this title: let them perform that which is
equal and just to their servants: Let them make much of them when they do well,
and, when they do ill, let them correct them; but let it be in love, and with
moderation, and never immoderately. Let them but think of what they have done
against God; and that if he were extreme to mark what is done amiss, how they
are not able to abide it: if he should deal with them after their sins, and
reward them after their iniquities, they should even suck out the dregs of the
vial: they should not only be beaten with rods, but with scorpions; and suffer
the punishments both of this life, and that which is to come.

Oh be ye therefore merciful, as your Father in heaven is merciful; and be such
masters to your servants, as you desire to find God a Master to you.

Preached, November. 3. 1641.
THE TENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.6, 7. And she fled. Verse. 7. And the angel of the Lord found her.
WE told you, that it was ill in her mistress to use her so hardly; but yet she
cannot be justified in her flight. That now remains; and the Point is, That
though masters and mistresses be rigorous, Observe. 1. Flight of servants not
justifiable, by any hard usage; having more lawful remedies. Psalm. 123.2.
yet servants must not flee away.

A servant is to yield both active and passive obedience.

First, Active, in performing the lawful commands of them. David makes it the
property of a servant, to look to the hand of the master; and of a maid, to
look to the hand of her mistress, Psalm. 123. Thus did Eliezer, the servant of
Abraham, Genesis 24. and the servant of Elijah, 1 Kings 18. and the Centurions
servant, Matthew. 8. he said to one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and
he comes; and to another, Do this, and he does it. On the other side, it was
wicked in Ziba, who, being commanded by his master to saddle the ass, went
away, and did it not, 2 Samuel 19. and so in Jobs servants, who, being called, 2 Samuel 19.26.
would not answer, Job 19.

Secondly, there is a passive obedience required of them, and that is in regard
of Correction and Reproof; and that not only in looks, when they are
brow-beaten, as we say, and frowned upon, and that anger appears in the
countenance; but also, when it is in words. Tit. 2.9.
The Apostle charge this upon servants, Tit. 2. where he will not have them
to be (...), to answer again. Not but that a servant, when he is unjustly
challenged, may reply, so he do it seasonably, and modestly; as we see David
did to Saul in the cave, 1 Samuel 24. 1 Samuel 24.
But servants must not rashly, spitefully, in a spirit of contradiction: yea,
they must patiently rather endure words. Yea, thirdly, if it come to blows,
they must endure it. 1 Pet. 2. Servants, 1 Pet. 2.18.
be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle,
but to the froward, those that be (...), harsh and rigorous; they that will not
only frown and talk, but lay on, and that severely; for he speaks presently of
buffeting. And we see how patiently Joseph endured imprisonment, Genesis 39. Genesis
39.20. Psalm. 105.18.
yea, fetters, and iron chains, Psalm. 105. And the Collator tells of a certain
religious young man, who, having a blow given him by his governor, that was
heard to the farthest part of the room, where many were assembled, he was so
far from murmuring, that he did not so much as change his countenance; but,
holding his tongue, was as modest and humble in his behavior, as if he had not
been smitten at all. Now this patient enduring, is flatly against fleeing, as
Hagar did here.

For the Use of this:

Application
It meets with diverse servants in these times, whose stoutness is such, that
they will not endure any kind of Correction: If it be but in frowns, you shall
have them as sour as their masters and mistresses; and they will pout, and
lowre, and vie with them in this way: If it be in words, they will presently
chop Logic, and bandy word for word, without any modesty or sobriety: And if
it come to blows, by no means they will endure this; they scorn to be beaten,
they came not for that end; and therefore they will struggle and strive with
master or mistress; yea, sometimes, even strike again; and if they cannot make
their party good, then they will run away; as she here in our Text.

Why, (will some say) Why should any one be subject to the unlimited humor of
another? We may be misused, and maimed.

I answer: Where masters and mistresses be unreasonable in correction, Servants
flight unlawful.
and make a practice of it, it is lawful to seek redress, by means of friends;
and if that will not do, it is lawful to seek to the Magistrate, for his help:
but for any ill usage, it is not lawful to run away.

And therefore, in the second place, though it be durus serme to servants, an
hard saying, that they must endure correction at the hands of their governors;
they must digest it: And there be many things to help them in the swallowing of
this bitter Pill; diverse of them are pressed by S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.18.
in the former place, 1 Pet. 2.18, and so forward.

First, he says, If the punishment be deserved, there is no great thanks in
suffering: Quae venit ex merito, poena ferenda; That mulct is to be born
patiently, that comes deservedly.

Secondly, but if we suffer unjustly, then it is thank-worthy; and glorious, to
be patient.

Thirdly, it is acceptable to God; and surely he will remember to reward us for
it.

Fourthly, he says, We are hereunto called, verse. 25. Our Christian calling
requires to turn the other cheek, Matthew. 5.39.
Matthew. 5. to give place to wrath, Romans 12.19. to overcome evil with goodness,
verse. 21. And if Christians must show such patience to all men, even to their
equals; how much more, servants to masters?

Fifthly, he makes servants, by this, conformable to Christ, who being
reviled, reviled not again; and suffering, threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously.

There may be added to all this, sixthly, that a servants patient enduring of
correction, may be a means (through Gods mercy) to work the ster to more
mildness and greater gentleness for aftertimes; whereas sullenness and
impudence does more incense and harden him; and makes him upon the next
occasion, more violent. Greg. lib. 1. dialog.
Saint Gregory commends one Libertinus, who having a stool thrown at him by
his Abbot (with which his face became blew and swelled,) he took it so
patiently (confessing it to be his own fault and not his masters cruelty;)
which patient carriage of his, so wrought upon the abbot, that he became a very
mild man; and so says Saint Gregory, humilitas discipuli, magistra facta est
magistri, the patience of the scholar became the successful instructor of his
hmaster

Lastly, let it be remembered by servants, that when upon correction they fly
away, they add but one sin to another; and if they think to be revenged on
their masters this way, it is worse; and what a poor revenge is it, to hurt
ones own soul, to be revenged on another! this was the practice of Thamar
toward her father in law. Fearful it is, when we will revenge our selves; nay
hurt our selves, yea our souls, to hurt another body; such wrath works not
the righteousness of God.

One other Use of it:

And that is to us all; we censure servants for impatience under their
corrections; I would we would reflect upon our own carriage toward God, when
we are in the way of sin; we are told of the judgments of God that will inherit
it, we regard it not, we will do what seems good in our own eyes; and yet,
when we suffer for it, we murmur, and repine, and take on, as if we had hard
measure: we are apt to expostulate with God, why am I thus? and wherefore is
this come upon me? and our hearts boil up with tumultuous and discontented
thoughts against him. Thus what we find fault withal in servants, we practice
in our selves; we despise Gods comminations, and yet are vexed when we suffer
for our transgressions; we might have prevented it, and yet angry when punished
for it. But more of this hereafter.

We come now to the third part of this Chapter, from the beginning of the
seventh Verse, to the fifteenth; wherein is contained the Angels meeting with
Hagar, being fled from her mistress.

Secondly, his questioning with her about the cause of her flight.

Thirdly, the direction he gives unto her, upon the discovery of that cause.

Fourthly, his prediction concerning the child that she went withal.

In the first of these (laid down in the seventh Verse) we may observe two
things.

First, that the Angel of the Lord found her.

Secondly, where he found her; by a Fountain of water in the wilderness; by the
Fountain in the way to shur.

S. Chrysostom on the place.
For the former, that the Angel found her; Saint Chrysostom would have us here
observe (...); the kindness of God, that he overlooks not, or despises any:
(...) though she were but a servant, yet (says he) this was not, (...), not so
much in regard of her, as of just Abraham, by whom she was with child; God
would take care of her, out of respect to him; and this is a truth, Observe. 2.
Wicked persons often fare the better for their relation to the righteous.
That the servant fares the better for the masters sake; and the child, for the
fathers sake.

God is good to Solomon for David's sake, yea to Rehoboam: yea even to Hezekiah
long after; for he faith, he will defend Jerusalem, even for David his servants
sake; the whole company for one good man's sake, as we see in the ship where
Saint Paul was, Act. 27. A neighbor, for a neighbors sake; and as spiteful as
the wicked of the world be, against the Godly that come amongst them; and as
desirous as they are to be rid of them, they fare the better for them; and were
it not for their sake, they should be soon be consumed: and whenever God
shall gather these flowers, the weeds will soon be rooted up; whenever he
removes these pillars, the building will be ruined. Application
When Lot is gone out of Sodom, we know what follows: it might make the
wicked so wise as to make much of godly people, for whose sake they fare the
better; they are pledges of their peace, and the pawnes of their tranquillity,
when they persecute and hate them; they, like mad men, wrong their best
friends, and they cut off the right hand with the left; and they hasten but
their own judgment, by seeking to extirpate them; they are a blessing
wheresoever they come; by their presence, by their prayers, they do good, and
stand in the gap to divert Gods wrath. But I stand not upon it.

Observe. 3. Of the good offices the good Angels do us: touching guardian
Angels, and the duties we are to return them Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11.
The Angel of the Lord found her. If this were a created Angel, we see what
good offices those blessed Spirits do for men.

First, they do reveal things unto them, as we see in Daniel, and Saint John
in the Revelation; and so to Saint Paul, Act. 27.

Secondly, they direct men what they shall do, as we read the Angel did Philip,
Act. 8.

Thirdly, they protect them from danger, they pitch their tents about Gods
people, as we read, Psalm. 34. and Psalm. 91 and they carry them in their hands,
that they hurt not their foot against a stone.

Fourthly, they bring them out of danger, as the Angel did Saint Peter out of
prison, Act. 12.

Fifthly, they comfort them after troubles, as we see Luke 22.

Sixthly, they revenge them on their enemies, Exodus 12. and so the Angel of the
Lord slew in the Host of Sennacherib, an hundred four sure and five thousand
in one night.

Seventhly, they convey the souls of Gods people to happiness, as the Angels
carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom, (...) (says Saint
Chrysostom;) and a sweet burden too, S. Chrysostom.
an acceptable service unto them; yea they take care of their dead bodies; as
Moses: there was a contestation between Michael and the devil, about the body
of Moses. In a word, they are ministering spirits sent forth to minister for
them that shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. It is not to be said what good
offices they do for Gods people, Heb. 1.10.
both privately and positively.

For the Use of this:

First, Application
it lets us see the happy and honorable condition of Gods servants; David
having said, Psalm. 34.7. that the Angel of the Lord pitched his tent about them
that fear him, he adds, Verse 8. Taste and see how gracious the Lord is: to
wit, in allowing of his children so glorious an attendance. It is accounted a
great matter of state in the world, to have a large train of followers, in
silks and gold chains; alas, this is but beggary to the attendance of Gods
people. It was a great favor to poor Mordecai, to have Haman the Kings
favorite to wait upon him when he rode through the city; what honor then for
a poor man that is the child of God, to have those glorious sons of the
morning, those (...) (for so they are called;) those gods to wait upon him? the
very little ones have their Angels, Mat. 18. Mat. 18.10.
and Solomon in all his magnificence and royalty, S. Bernard, super Psalm. 91.11.
was not like one of these: Saint Bernard upon the Psalm 91. Qui habitat,
loses himself in this meditation upon those words; He has given his Angels
charge over thee: Quis? Quibus? de Quo? and Quid mandavit? Who? to whom?
concerning whom? and what is it that is here commanded? Deus mandavit, and
Angelis suis mandavit, and de te homine mandavit, and ut custodiant te in
omnibus viis mandavit: Domine Quid est homo! It Is God that has commanded, that
has commanded his own Angels, his Angels concerning thee, I, and to keep thee
in all thy ways; Lord what is man!

Secondly, this should be a comfort to Gods people in regard of those many
afflictions that they are like to meet withal in the world; they have a good
guard. The question concerning guardian Angels.
It has been a question much disputed, whether every man has his particular
Angel. And it cannot be denied, but that most of the Greek Fathers, and many of
the Latin, and all the Schoolmen; yea, and some of the late writers, and those
of the Protestant party, have gone this way: taking encouragement from Mat.
18.10. and Saint Peter's Angel, Act. 12. but what should we need to trouble our
selves about it, when not only one, but many Angels, wait upon every child of
God: And they are all ministering spirits, sent forth for their good: there is
comfort then in this: it is true, we see not these good Angels our guardians;
no more do we the evil ones: and yet we doubt not, but they are ready to do us
hurt; why then do we question the good done to us by the other? If our eyes
were opened, 2 Kings 6.
as Elisha's servants were, 2 Kings 6. we should see, that there are more with
us then against us.

Thirdly, let us carry our selves fittingly, in regard of those glorious
spirits that are still about us. Saint Paul advises the women to carry
themselves decently in the Church, 1 Cor. 11.10.
because of the angels, 1 Cor. 11. If we may grieve the Spirit of God by our
evil conversation, Ephesians. 4.30. surely we may grieve these blessed spirits: If
they joy at our conversion, Luke 15.10.
Luke 15. they must be grieved with our badness; and we may make the service
they do us, tedious unto them; yea, for them going.

I know, we may do too much to the Angels, and that is, in adoring them, in
invocating them, and making our prayers unto them; a thing condemned in
Scripture; and so in the ancient Council of Laodicea, Ne adoremus Angelos, We
may not worship Angels. Their juggling tricks of adornemus Angulos, will not fit
their turns; Let us adorn the corners of the temple: Binius Council.
In the Greek, it is (...), as Binius cannot but acknowledge it Angels, (though
he put Angulos, in the corner, as a different reading.) Again, they are servi
Dei, the servants of God, and may not have their Masters honor: Nay, they are
conservi, our fellow servants; and upon that ground, the Angel refused
adoration from Saint John, Rev. 10.
Rev. 10. Now, as I say we may give them too much; so we may give them too
little, while we will not show our reverence unto them, by an holy carriage;
but distaste them, S. Basil, in Psalm. 34.
by our profaneness. Saint Basil says, upon Psalm. 34. (...): As the smoke
drives away Bees, and noisome smells the Doves: so will our sins profligate and
put to flight these guarding-Angels.

Fourthly, let us learn of the glorious Angels, that as they are willing to
serve us, so we should be willing to do good offices for our brethren; and
though we be above them in place, yet to serve them in love. Thus we, that look
one day to be (...), as the angels, should be like them in This. Yea, we have a
greater example, and that is from the Son of God himself, that emptied himself
of glory, and came as low as the form of a servant, and stooped as low as the
Cross, to do us good. If he had stood upon his dignity, where had our Salvation
been? Therefore, Let the same mind be in us, that was in Christ Jesus.

Observe. 4. Gods Omnipresence, and man's vain concealments.
Some do think, that this was no created Angel, but the Son of God himself, the
second Person in Trinity; who did, in the Old Testament, appear oftentimes to
holy men. And the reason of this conceit is, because he says, verse. 10. I will
multiply thy seed exceedingly; which is the work of God, and not of any
creature. But this is no convincing argument; for such words might be put into
the mouth of a created Angel, as speaking from God. But be it so, that it was
God himself that found Hagar, it will help us to this Observation, (as one has
it upon my Text;) God can find out people in any place.

For, says my Author, Abraham, no question, after he missed her, (out of his
love to her, especially to the child she went withal; and, it may be, out of
worse, for the scope that he had given to his passionate wife) sought for her
in every corner, but could not light on her: Though he could not, yet God
finds her; being in all places, nothing can escape his eye and observation.
Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar off? Jer. 23. The Rabbis call him
(...), Jerem. 23.23.
The Place, by way of excellence; or, Place: not that all things are in him, ut
in loco, as in their place; but that he fills all places. And another says, He
is a Sphere, whose Center is everywhere, Gods Omnipresence.
and his Circumference no where. He is intra omnia, and extra omnia; supra
omnia, and infra omnia, says Saint Gregory: Within all things, and without all
things; above all, and beneath all things. It is true, he is sometimes said to
come unto a place, and to depart out of a place; and to descend: but we must
know, this is (...), (as the Greek Father says) a condescension to our
weakness; for he changes not place, who fills all places: but it is to be
understood of the manifestation of himself, by the effects of his Mercy or
Anger; and so, only, he is said to come or depart.

Now for the Use of this:

It should teach us all, to take heed of sinning against God, Application
upon hope to convey our selves from him. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit;
or whither shall I flee from thy presence? Psalm. 139. Psalm. 139.7. etc.
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell thou art
there: if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of
the sea, even there shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
If I say, Darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me; yea,
the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day: the
darkness and the light are both alike to thee. Men may by flight escape the
judgment of men; but they cannot escape Gods hand: As he is (...), and (...),
many-handed; and heavie-handed; so (...), long-handed, and can reach us at the
greatest distance. Jonah thinks he has dealt subtly, in getting into a ship,
and going to Tarshish: but God knows his flight, and overtakes him. It is a
strange infatuation of men's minds, that they should think they can either
conceal their evil facts from Gods knowledge, or their persons from his
punishment. It seems to be the thought of those wild ones in Job, and the
ancients in Ezekiel: But it is a foolish thought; for, Ezekiel. 8.
all the ways of men are before the eyes of the Lord, (say both David and
Solomon;) he knows all their natural, all their moral actions; and he needs
no information, for that which is done in the most private cabinet, or darkest
vault. And for men's persons, they are not hid from him: Thine hand (says the
Psalmist) shall find out thine enemies; Psalm. 21.8.
and thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee. And therefore I renew
mine Exhortation.

Let us stand in awe, and sin not: for if we sin, upon a presumption that we
shall conceal either our actions or persons from God, it is a forlorn hope; our
iniquities will find us out, (as Moses told the Beubenites:) and we that have
sinned secretly, may (perhaps) be punished openly, in the eye and observation
of others.

The second thing is, the place where the Angel found her; In the desert, by a
fountain. A great way had this poor woman wandered; and, after a good while
wandering, the Angel meets her. He could have met with her, and spent that
reproof upon her which afterward he does, quickly after she removed from
Abraham's house, in the beginning of her flight: but he lets her alone (says
Musculus upon my Text) for a certain time, Musculus in locum.
till her proud stomach was a little come down, and that now her necessity had
abated her spirit, and that she began to bethink her self: What, have I (for a
few blows, for which I cannot say but I gave the occasion) cast my self into
this exigent? Am I in a place destitute of comfort and relief? What shall
become of me? I shall either be a prey to wild beasts, or else perish with
famine.

Observe. 5. Affliction brings in more guests unto God, thou does Prosperity.
Jer. 4.24.
God oftentimes spares dealing with people for their faults, till they be a
little pinched with the effects of their own error. For, while they are in
their heat, they have no ear open to instruction; but when they smart a little,
then they will be docible. Jerem. 2. the people of Israel are compared (by the
Prophet) to a wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind: In
her occasion, who can turn her away? They that seek her, will not weary
themselves; that is, they will hold it vain to run after her: but in her month
they shall find her. So the people were so impetuously set upon their lusts,
that there was no speaking to them; all admonitions and threatenings were spent
in vain upon them: but yet in their month, when they should come to be in pain
with that which they carried in their womb, they would then be more pliable to
instruction. Job 33.14, 15, etc.
Elihu says, (in Job) that God speaks once and twice unto men, and they
perceive it not; in a dream, in a vision of the night. Those be easy ways,
Chap. 33. but then, verse. 16. He opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction: that is, he deals with them by way of correction, and so opens
their ears: and the reason of this, he gives in the next verse, to be the
abatement of men's pride: their proud hearts must first down, and then they will
lend an ear; and, as it follows, verse. 22. When the soul draws near to the
grave, then is the messenger of peace gracious unto him. When Israel is in her
jollity, Hosea 2.
Hos. 2. she will hear of none but her wanton lovers: but being a little
punished, and finding thorns in her way, then she says, She will return unto
her first husband; for then it was better with her then now. Hosea 5.10.
So, Chap. 5. God says, I will return unto my place, till they acknowledge
their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction, they will seek me early.
And the next words are, Come, let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn us,
and he will heal us. How mad was the Prodigal upon the satisfaction of his
voluptuous humor. No thought of father, or fathers house, till all was spent:
But when he came to be pinched with famine, then he began to think of
returning. When Paul was in his full carreer, there was no talking to him; he
was mad upon his way, as himself says: but being thrown from his horse, he
trembled, and was astonished; and then he began to listen: nay, God suffers
him (for the more mollifying of him, and fitting his heart for the impressions
of his grace) to be three days in terror of mind, without use of his eyes,
without sustenance.

For the Use of this:

Let us acknowledge the wisdom of our good God, Application
in dealing with us: He sees our disposition, how, in our jollity, we hearken
not unto him; we forget both him and our selves: and therefore he changes his
hand, and suffers us to come into some straight, before he will parley with us:
yea, it may be, he lets us continue a good while in perplexity; for upon the
first laying on of the rod, it may be, we will stamp and chase; but when it
still lies on, and (like the bird caught) we struggle but only to our further
entanglement, we lie quiet, and then our spirit comes down, and God may have
some reason at our hands. It is like enough, that this Hagar in our Text, when
she broke from her mistress, came away in such a passion, that she cared not
what became of her, rather then stay there; and her mistress should see how
little she cared for her service: But by that time she is bitten with weariness
and want, she becomes more pliable. God knows how to take down the stoutest
stomach: and though they storm and rage, (when touched by him) and be like a
wild ball in a net, Isai. 51.20.
Isai. 51. yet he will humble them at last. When one has struck a great fish,
he plungeth and flounceth: well, the Angler gives him line, and lets him weary
himself, even till he may be taken up with the hand of a child. And let us all
learn to submit to Gods courses; let him do with us what he will: let us be
content that plaster lie on, (though it smart) till it have done the work. We
must be softened, before we can be molded. God is the Physician and Healer of
his people, and he knows the fittest means and season for redress.

Again: He found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness. See, Observe. 6.
Such is Gods goodness, that his mercies are still interwoven with extorted
judgments.
(says my Author) In deserte reperit fontem, she finds a fountain of water in
the desert. She was weary and thirsty, in this vast and uncomfortable solitude;
and now she finds a fountain to refresh her: And what could be more
acceptable to her, at this time? This is the goodness of God, that in the midst
of anger, he remembers mercy, Hab. 3. He corrects in judgment, not in fury,
Jer. 10. Hab. 3.2. Jer. 10.24.
Though this woman deserved to have tasted more deeply of that cup, yet God
mingleth some comfort with it: In measure will he debate with his children,
Isai. 27. Mercy lays hold upon his Justice, Isai. 27.8.
and suffers not his whole displeasure to arise. All the ways of God are
interweaved with mercy; yea, the very damned in hell find this: Application
for though a greater judgment could not befall them, extensive, in regard of
continuance, (for it is everlasting;) yet, intensive, he could lay more upon
them: he could lay more upon them then they suffer.

Secondly, we may observe again,

Observe. 7. God can supply comforts unto the most desolate places and cases.
That God is able to furnish us with comforts, in the most desolate places: and
when men think their case most dark and desperate, he can make light break out.
In deserto fons; a fountain even in the desert.

When Jacob is full of grief, and lies in the open field, and has heaven
only for his canopie, and an hard stone for his pillow; God refreshes him
with a sweet vision. Joseph is sold into Egypt; and yet, even there, he finds
good entertainment: and when he is cast into prison, there also he finds
favor: And he finds cause to call his first son Manasseh, because God had
made him to forget his trouble; and his second, Ephraim, because God had made
him fruitful in the land of his affliction. When Moses is exposed to Nilus,
there is one takes him up, and gives him a liberal education. When Elijah
faints under the juniper-tree, 1 Kings 19.
there is meat provided for him, 1 Kings 19. Did the children of Israel want
any thing, in the vast wilderness? There is a fourth to the three children,
even when they are in the fiery furnace. S. John, in the place of his
banishment, has his Revelations. How many of us have found friends, where we
least looked for them and comforts, where we least expected them!

Application
And therefore, let none of us distrust the care of a good God, who can furnish
out consolations, in our greatest perplexities; and can give us that which
shall sweeten our bitter Potion: he that can give honey and water out of the
stony rock; he that can make a dry stock bloom, and blossom, and bring forth
ripe fruit: Why then do we doubt, O we of little faith!

There is yet another thing: By the fountain, in the way to Shur; which (as S
Jerome observes) was directly in the way to Egypt, her own country. So that
Expositors do collect, that, by her taking this way, she was purposed to return
to Egypt, and so to renounce the true Religion that she had embraced; and so,
Sus ad volutabrum, (as the Apostle says;) The sow to the wallowing in the
mire. And here we see, Observe. 8. The fearful events of Coffeehouse; with
the Christian remedies thereof.
What fearful events of coffeehouse there sometimes be.

She was so vexed at the sharp correction of her mistress, that she is not
only neglective of her body, what misery that come into; but regardless of her
soul, that she is ready to relapse into her old way of Idolatry.

This is too often seen: When people are discontented, they take strange
courses. Saul is so vexed that he has no answer, by Urim, nor the Prophets,
that he runs to the witch of Endor for counsel. David is so discontented at
Saul's continued pursuit of him, that he casts himself among the Philistims;
which (if God had not been the more merciful) had been the next means of his
confusion. Jacob is so discontented for the loss of Joseph, that he will not be
comforted: And so Rachel, for the loss of her children, Jer. 31. Tamar, out of
a discontent (as I told you before) makes her self a whore, Jerem. 31.
to be revenged of her father in-law ^^^hophel is discontented to see his
counsel rejected, that he goes home, and hangs himself. And how many ^^d
instances have we had, in the like kind! People, upon coffeehouse, and some
sharp affliction, have laid violent hands upon themselves. And for that
particular of apostatizing from the Faith, Tertullian.
Tertullian says of Valentinus, that missing of a Bishopric, he took it so
ill, that he set on foot his desperate Opinion. And so Julian, (against whom S.
Augustine writes) Theodoret says, S. Augustine. Theodoret.
being discontented for missing of the like preferment, turned Pelagian. And
upon the same ground, we have known, in these later times, both Clergymen and
Laymen, to turn Papists. And Theodoret tells us, how Arrius, out of his
envy and coffeehouse at the preferment of Alexander, that good man, set on
foot his devilish Tenet against the Consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father.

The Use is this:

That we pray to God for his grace, Application
that we may bear afflictions patiently: for if they work upon us too deeply,
the devil is a subtle adversary, and (as the sons of Jacob did by the
Sichemites) he will fall upon us while we are sore; he will bring all our sins
to our remembrance, and aggravate them by all possible circumstances; and he
will do what he can, to make us injurious both to our bodies and souls. God
knows, we are too much flesh, the best of us; and when our sins and afflictions
make too deep impressions in us, Satan has such a fast friend of the flesh,
that they join hands together, and put us on to that which is both against
Reason and Religion. Yea, let Ministers and others speak unto them, it is with
them as with the children of Israel, when there was an improvement of their
vexation, Exodus 6. Exodus 6.9.
They hearkened not to Moses, for anguish of spirit, and cruel bondage. We grow
careless, and care not what door we go out at, what issue comes of it. Oh that
we could but admit of these thoughts in our afflictions: Who are we, that we
should not sometimes have occasion of coffeehouse! And why should we look
always to fail with wind and tide? Are we better then our fathers, and others
of Gods people? 2. Have we not deserved that God should change his hand? 3.
Has not God the chief stroke in all afflictions; and dare we murmr against
his dispensation? 4. Has not he promised, that if we patiently submit to our
trial, and accept of the punishment of our iniquity, (as the phrase is, Levit.
26.) he will do us good? 5. Levit. 26.
Is this the way to cure our grievances, to run into further evils; and because
the body is afflicted, to hurt the soul? Is not this, when God has made us
sick, to make the devil our Physician? Oh let us in patience possess our souls,
Kiss the rod, and wait the issue which God will give to our temptation.

Preached, November. 9. 1641.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.8. And he said, Hagar Sarahs handmaid, whence came thou?
HAving showed where the Angel found Hager; now we come to that which he said
unto her: and it contains,

First, matter of question.

Secondly, of admonition.

Thirdly, of prediction.

In the first we have,

First, a compellation of her, by her name, Hagar.

Secondly, by her condition, Sarahs maid: and a double question, whence came
thou? and whither go thou? and then follows her answer, upon which comes
in his admonition, or correction.

To begin with the first, And he said unto her. Have Angels tongues? Saint
Jerome did a little too hard press that place, 1 Cor. 13. Though I speak with
the tongues of men and Angels, and would have them men as Angels to have
tongues; 1 Cor. 13.1
but on the 1 Cor. 13. he seems to acknowledge in the Apostles words only an
(...), a supposition or concession, a Si quae sint Angelorum linguae; if at
least Angels have any tongues: some conceive the Apostle to use that phrase by
way of excellency, (as if he should have said,) though I were of the most
excellent elocution, and had even an Evangelical expression, and had not
Charity, it were nothing; which well suiteth with a like phrase in the 78.
Psalm. 78.25.
Psam. Man did eat Angels food, speaking of Manna: not that the Angels do feed
upon meat, but that Manna was so excellent, that it was fitting for no less
then Angels: certain is is that they are Spirits, and spiritual substances, and
have no tongues; we might as well give them hands: and 91.10, 11.12.
because it is said, Psalm. 91. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to
keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee in their hands: or eyes,
because it is said, They always behold the face of God, Mat. 18.10. Phil. 2.10.
Mat. 18. or knee, because it is said, Phil. 2. That every knee shall bow, of
things in heaven.

Well, it will be then asked, how this Angel did speak to Hagar?

And it is answered, in corpore assumpto, in a body assumed, that was framed
for him for this negotiation: in such bodies assumed Angels did truly and
really sit down, and walk, and remove from place to place; did truly eat meat
set before them, and did truly speak, so that their words were audible and
intelligible to those with whom they had to deal; though there be great
dispute, de colloquio Angelorum inter se: how one Angel does communicate his
conceptions unto another; yet there is no doubt made of the truth of imparting
themselves to men and women in bodies assumed. That which may be observed
hence, is that which we touched but in one word, the last time; and that is,

The condescension of the Angels to the service of man, for his good. Observe.
1. The condescension of the Angels, and how they conversed here with men.


For it is not, by far, so much for the greatest nobleman, to put on the habit
of the meanest serving-man; as for those glorious Spirits (the sons of the
morning) to assume an humane body; and why should we think much to abate of our
height, and descend from our altitude, and be serviceable to others? The wife
of Theodosius, lib. 12. cap. 24.
(as Nauclerus tells the story) did not think it any disparagment unto her, to
go (...), into the Hospitals, and there not only to touch the pots, and taste
the broths of the diseased, but to hold the pots unto them, yea with her own
hands to do (...), to do all offices of maids and servants: and the like might
be found in those noble women that Saint Chrysostom mentions, Procula,
Pentodia, and Sylvania, who thought not much to wash the feet of the Saints;
and held those feet more honorable, then the heads of the profane. Again, the
Angels in assuming bodies, and so speaking and conversing with them, did comply
with men's necessity; for if the people could not look upon Moses, when God put
that splendor upon him, till he veiled himself; men could endure much less,
the glory and splendour of Angels, if they were not clothed with a body: when
they have thus appeared, it has stricken a great terror into people; Gideon
thought verily, upon the appearing of the Angel unto him, he should dye, Judge.
6. and so thought Manoah the father of Samson: Judge. 6. and 13
and when the Angel Gabriel comes to the blessed Virgin, he is fain to begin
with fear not, Luke 1. and so to the shepherds, Luke 1.30.
when the Angel of the Lord appeared unto them; The glory of the Lord shone
round about them; they were sore afraid: and he is fain to say unto them also
fear not, Luke 2. and 2.9 10.
So when the Angels stood by them in the shape of men, in shining garments,
they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, Luke 24.5.

Now to shut up this point:

If the sight of an Angel be too excellens sensibile, Application
too excellent an object, which we say, destruit sensum, that it destroys the
sense; how unable should we be to behold God! we should be oppressed with his
glory. When Peter saw that glory of Christ in the transfiguration, he spoke he
knew not what, and was sore afraid, Mark. 9. Mark. 9.6.
Moses his request was, to see Gods glory: he answers him, that no man can
see his face and live; yet he gratifieth him so far, as to see his back-parts,
being put into the clift of a rock, and with an hand upon his face. All which
intimates the imperfect sight we have of God in this life; and how unable we
are to behold his full glory: Oh let this work us to a reverence and fear of
this great God, and to stand in awe of him, and not to sin against him; for if
he be full of glory to those whom he loves, how fearful shall his presence be,
when he comes in wrath to be revenged of men! no wonder though they then
desire the hills to fall upon them, and the mountains to cover them from his
sight.

But to come to the compellation:

First, he calls her by her name, and then he mentions her condition; he knew
her name, and he knew her state.

Observe. 1. The great perspicacy and knowledge of the Angels, yet limited: and
how far inferior unto Gods. S. Augustine.
Great is the knowledge of Angels. What by their sublime reasons, and
experience. Secondly, what by their own observation. And thirdly, what by Gods
revelation unto them.

The schoolmen, from Saint Augustine, ascribe to them a twofold knowledge:
Matutinam and vespertinam, the morning and their evening knowledge (the one far
exceeding the other,) they dispute subtly of their knowledge of all individual
things; of the mysteries of Grace; which the Apostle says, they desire to look
into: of the several actions of men, and things that fall out in the world; I
dare not follow them in their way, neither would it be to your edification to
acquaint you with their niceties; let it suffice us, that the Angels are of
great knowledge; the Philosophers could call them Intelligences; they are (...),
that is, scientes, creatures of knowledge and Dionysius says, they have,
Deiformem cognitionem, a knowledge that though it come short of Gods knowledge,
yet it comes nearer by far unto it then the knowledge that men have, though
they be never so understanding. 2 Samuel 14.20.
The woman of Tekoah says to David, 2 Samuel 14. My Lord the king is wise,
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all things that are in the
earth. The Angel of the Lord that appeared to Moses, calls him by his name;
Exodus 3. and so does that Angel that was sent to Daniel, call him by his name;
and so does that Angel that came to the blessed Virgin, Act. 10.
Luke 1. so does another Angel call Cornelius by his name, Act. 10. and he tells
him of the house of Simon the Tanner at Joppa, where Peter lodged. And that
Angels know, and observe the actions of men, is plain by that which the Apostle
has, 1 Cor. 11.
1 Cor. 11. where he wishes women to carry themselves orderly in the
congregation, because of the Angels.

The Use I will make of this, is only thus much; that if the knowledge of Angels
be so great, Application
how great is the knowledge of God! He knows the names, and conditions, and
actions of all men, He calls the stars by their names; he knows all men,
Universos ac si singulos, all men as well as any one singular man; yea he
knows more then any Angel can do; not only our down-sitting, and uprising,
but our thoughts, and those (...), long before they be minted, as David says,
Psalm. 139. and so, Deuteronomy. 31.21. Psalm 139.2. Deuteronomy. 31.21.
I know their thoughts even now (says God) what he will do, before I bring him
into the land which I swear. And if Angels or Men may come to know the thoughts
of men, yet there is a broad difference between Gods knowledge and theirs: For,

First, he knows them of himself; they, by revelation from him: So Samuel
could tell Saul all that was in his heart: 1 Samuel 9.19.
And Elisha could tell Gehazi what was in his hypocritical heart, 2 Kings 5. 2
Kings 5.
And Saint Peter could discover the hypocrisy of Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5.
And there were those, in the Primitive Church, that had the spirit of
discerning, 1 Cor. 12.9. But that phrase of the spirit of discerning, shows,
that they discerned not men's hearts, of themselves; but by the special work of
Gods Spirit: so that if they had not plowed with Gods heifer, they had not
known the riddle. But now, God knows the retired thoughts of men, of himself.

Secondly, God only knows the hearts of men certainly; others, only
conjecturally. Counsel in the heart of a man, Prove. 20.5.
(says Solomon) is lik deep water: but a man of understanding will draw it
out. Natural wisdom and sagacity, is like a bucket let down into a Well, to
bring up the water of it. But this is but ghessing, in comparison of Gods
knowledge, which is certain and exact.

And should not this now teach us to beware of Hypocrisy? Application Psalm.
12.2.
of having (...), as the Hebrew phrase is; of being (...), (as Saint James
calls it,) being double-minded, of halting before God? (...), Heb. 4. All
things are naked, and dissected, Heb. 4.13.
and anatomized in his presence. Though we may impose upon credulous men: (
Absalon may blind his fathers eyes, with pretending the paying of his vows in
Hebron; and the people may be conceited well of Jezebel, when she proclaims a
fast; and Jehu may make Jonadab believe, that he is full of zeal for the Lord
of hosts; and the wisemen may think, that Herod does truly intend to worship
Christ:) Yet God knows what a treason Absalon is plotting; what a murder
Jezebel is contriving; that Jehu's heart is not upright; and that Herod intends
not servire, but savire; to worry, and not to worship him. He cannot be
deceived with a (...), a form of godliness: 2 Timothy 3.5.
hypocrisy he hates as hell: hypocrites shall have the lowest place, and the
hotest therein: the wicked servant shall have his portion with hypocrites. If we
be sincere, God will bear with many imperfections, as we see in Asa: but if we
be hollow, though we make never so fair a show, (like painted sepulchers) God
sees our rottenness within. We are not hid from our own consciences; they can
challenge us for our hypocritical dealing: and if our consciences condemn us,
God will, much more; and he will twice hate us: for, Dissembled Holiness is
Double Iniquity.

In the second place; he calls her Sarahs maid. He calls her not (as Masculus
well observes) Abraham's wife, but Sarahs maid. Herein is couched a secret
reproof of her fault: It should seem, she had presumed upon that relation she
had to Abraham, being his wife; and had forgotten her condition of a servant,
and therefore has carried her self insolently and malepertly toward her
mistress: And when for that her mistress had corrected her, her stomach rises
against it, and she scorneth to be used as a servant, now she is a wife: But we
see, when the Angel reckons with her, he styles her by the title of Sarahs maid.

Observe. 3. Whatsoever man is, of his own and others; God is an impartial Judge
of all, both men and actions.
Whatsoever conceit people have of themselves, and their actions; God censureth
them as they are, and judges them with righteous judgment.

The sons of Jacob thought they did well, in revenging the dishonor done to
their family by the Sichemites, in the deflowring of their sist^^ but the
Spirit of God, in the mouth of Jacob, calls it, as it was indeed, cruelty, and
cursed rage; and tells them, they had dishonored Religion, and made him and
his family noisome to the inhabitants of the land. Saul had a conceit, he
should have thanks from God, for sparing some of the Amalekites goods, to offer
a sacrifice unto the Lord: but Samuel, from the Lord, styled his fact, as it
deserved, disobedience and rebellion; and makes it as bad as the sin of with
craft. Jonah thought he had reason for his passion, when God spared Nineveh:
but the Lord tells him, He did not well to be angry, (Jonahs words spoke not
that which was right;) it was his distemper, that he should cavil at Gods work:
and he convinces him of it by Reason: for, if he would have had his gourd
spared, how much more should that populous city be preserved? Peter thought he
spoke like a loyal servant, when he dissuaded his master from his passion: but
Christ censures it, and discovers Satan in him. The Pharisees were conceited
of their own wisdom: but our Lord calls them foolish and blind, Matthew. 23.
Matthew. 23. James and John did think they did well, when they called for fire
from heaven upon those unhospitable Samaritans: but Christ censureth it in
them, and tells them, They did not know what spirit they were of. And when Saul
thought he ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth; then
that same Jesus from heaven tells him, that his zeal was persecution of him,
Jerem. 17.9.
in his members. The heart of man is (...), deceitful above all things; and
such a guile is in it, that it is apt to think it does well, and deserves
commendation, when it is worthy of reproof. We are apt to call that
Magnanimity, S. Augustine.
which is Hastiness and Insolency; that Studium scientiae, a desire of
Knowledge, which, Saint Augustine says, is a sinful Curiosity: we think that
to be Liberality, which is Riot and Prodigality: we think that only to be
Neatness and Cleanliness, which is Pride; and that a lawful Policy, which is a
devilish Matchiavilianism; that to be Fortitude, which is Fool-hardiness and
Rashness; that to be Thriftiness, which is base Niggardliness, and sordid
Covetousness; that to be Good fellowship, which is Excess and Riot; that to be
Zeal, which is a fiery; furious, indiscreet Impetuousness and Vehemence, that,
in stead of hearing the house, is apt to burn it: those practices of some,
Coloss. 2.
that seem to express nothing but Humility, the Apostle styles Will Worship,
Coloss. 2. and those doctrines that seemed to relish of nothing but
Mortification, 1 Timothy 4.
the Apostle calls the Doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4.

Now then for the Use: Application


This being the guile of our own hearts, and Satan complying with it, who can
transform himself into an angel of light, and set a fair gloss upon naughty
wares; we must not rely upon our own judgment, but bring things to the Beam
of the Sanctuary, and there weigh them. The Word of God ever gives right
judgment: God sees not as man sees, nor judges as man judges: 2. Cor. 10.8.
and he is only approved, whom God commends, (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.)

Secondly, it may be fit for those that have power of reproof of others, when
they see them lifted up above that which is meet, to abate the tumor, by
remembering them of their condition. He calls her here, Sarahs maid; so she
had been, nay so she was still, for all she was Abraham's wife. Is a Child
saucie with the Parents? He must be told, that he is a child, and must keep
his distance. Is a Servant insolent? He must be minded; what it is to be a
servant. Samuel tells Saul what he was in his beginning, and how God raised
him; yea, and for the present, he was but tenant at will; God could turn him
out, not only his government, but his life. And, Psalm. 82.
Psalm. 82. lest Princes themselves should be puffed up with that, I have said
ye are gods; he minds them they are but men, S. Bernard.
and shall die like men. Saint Bernard was afraid that Eugenius should be
puffed up with his high dignity, and therefore he minds him, that, in his
height, he was Villicus, and non Dominus; but a Steward, not the Lord of the
house; and therefore must not carry himself as a lord over Gods heritage, as
Saint Peter says: yea, he must ever be subject to the higher powers: for, Qui
conatur excipere, conatur decipere; he that endeavors to exempt,
endeavors to deceive. And thus he would ballast him, that, like a tottering
vessel, he should not be overset. Yea, when we see in men a spiritual pride, in
regard of inward endowments, we are to mind them of their natural corruption:
that Jebusite that will still dwell within them, they are flesh, as well as
Spirit; and, by means of that, if they have laudem, they have Iahem; their
defects as well as their deserts; and their best actions are imperfect; and if
the Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, they were never able to
abide it. And again, to tell them, that, if they conceit too highly of
themselves, they are blind, and poor, and naked, as Christ told the Church of
Laodicea: yea, that God is better pleased humilitate in malis, quam superbia in
bonis; with humility in evil, then with pride in goodness: that he likes better
a poor, then a proud spirit; an humble Publican, then a boasting Pharisee. Thus
the pot must be cooled, when it is ready to run over; and thus must people be
told of their defects, when they will vaunt of their perfections.

Yet further:

There being a reproof couched in these words, as you have heard, and so you
will find in the words following: yet we may see, in this mild compellation,
it is a Pill wrapped up in Sugar: The Angel does not take her up in bitter terms;
Now, you Runaway, what do you here? your proud spirit must needs rise up
against your mistress, that had done you so much favor: and when she did
chastise you for despising of her, you must take you to your heels. None of
this; but only, Hagar, Sarahs maid. Certainly, he had respect to that
affliction she was now under; desolate, and destitute of all worldly comfort;
and therefore he would not be rigid toward her. Besides, it may be she had in
part recollected her self, and did repent of her foolish carriage, and
therefore he bears the more gentle hand over her. And this is a good example
to those that will reprove:

Observe. 4. Rigor and roughness not to be used to those that are already
sensible, and humbled for their faults. Gal. 6.1.
That when people are under some pressure, and that they are become, in some
measure, sensible of their fault; they should not be too rigorously handled.

So did Moses, oftentimes, by the Israelites: and so did Samuel by the people:
and so did the Prophet by Jehoshaphat: and so did Peter by those he preached
unto. It is true, that people are to be told of their sin, and not to be spared
for the affliction that is upon them; nay, that is the fittest time to use
reproof; and if they have some sense of their fault, yet they are to be
reproved, that they may be brought to a greater measure of humiliation: but yet
it must be done in love; a man must (...), set in joint the part that is
dislocated, with an easy hand, without bitterness, and foul terms, in the
spirit of meekness; that they may see, their shame is not intended, but their
amendment. Nihil tam spiritualem medicum probat, quam alieni morbi tractatio,
S. Augustine.
(says Saint Augustine;) Nothing so proves a man a spiritual physician, as the
gentle curing of another malady. If a man be not his arts-master, he may
prove corrosor, in stead of correptor, a consumer, in lieu of a chastiser; and
he may make a new wound, in stead of healing the old; or else make the old
worse.

And for the Use of it:

Application
Too many such there be in the world, who (having no pity of the afflictions
that people lie under, nor yet of that sense that they have of their fault,)
fly out in such terms, even Shimei's language: Thou murderer, Thou man of
blood, Thou son of Belial: They are so sharp, that they set the soul further
off from God, that they should draw nearer to him; It was the gross fault of
Jobs friends, that they had no regard to the heavy load that was upon him, nor
yet to the acknowledgement of his righteous dealing; but rated him, as one that
had been an hypocrite all his days, and that he was justly made exemplary. We
must not do as the sons of Jacob did by the Sichemites, fall upon them when
they are sore, and slay them right out; but, like the good Samaritan, they must
(finding the man wounded) pour in wine and oil, and help to cure him.
Certainly, the severest Reprehension must be ministered in love and affection.

But to come to the Questions, which are two: Whence come thou? Whither go
thou?

But first, we must know, Observe. 5. Ingenuous acknowledgement often
preventeth, still mitigateth punishment.
that the Angel moves not the one or the other, as being ignorant of either:
Non ignorando quarit, sed ut responsionem eliciat; to draw from her an
ingenuous answer and confession. And this course has been often used. God
himself says to Adam, Where art thou? It is not so much interrogatio, as
increpatio; not so much an interrogation, as an objurgation, (says Saint
Ambrose; S. Ambrose.
) a reproof of him: He seems to be ignorant, that he may bring him to an
acknowledgement of his sin. Where art thou, was not so much (says that Father)
In quo loco? in what place? as In quo statu? in what condition: Quo te
perduxerunt peccata? whither have thy sins led thee? Quod Deus fugis, quem ante
querebas; that now thou fleest God, whom thou did seek before. And so he
dealt with Cain; he asks him, Where is Abel thy brother? Ignorantiam simulat,
ut confessionem ut geat, (says the Father;) he dissembleth his knowledge, that
he might bring him to confession. So Elisha questioneth Gehazi, Whence he came:
not but that he knew where he had been, and what he had done; but he would have
had from him an acknowledgement of his fact, and the foulness of it, 2 Kings 5.
2 Kings 5.
So Peter questions with Ananias and Sapphira, whether they sold the land for
so much: not that he knew it not, but that he would have it from their own
mouth, that they had done it, and offended in doing of it, and so their
acknowledgement might have prevented their punishment.

The Use that I will make of it, is but this:

That seeing God knows perfectly what we have done, Application
we should be free and full in the confession of our faults; for hereby we
acknowledge God to be omniscient. And therefore, when Joshua would have Achan
confess fully, he says unto him, Josh. 7. Josh. 7.20.
My son's give glory unto God; and namely, the glory of his omniscience: Thou
see already, that the depth of his knowledge; is greater then the depth of
thy deceitful heart; confess thy sin therefore unto God, even the whole
circumstance of the matter. A malefactor would not conceal any thing from the
Judge, if he were certain the Judge knew all.

2. Hereby a man shows his dislike of his own evil, and that he favors it
not, while he does not conceal it, but reveal and discover it fully.

3. Hereby a man disposes himself to the pardon and remission of his fault:
for, if we confess, it is just with God to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.19.
1 John 1. But on the other side, Solomon says, Prove. 28.13. He that covers
his sin, shall not prosper. And we shall see that Job disclaims the covering of
his transgressions, as Adam, Job 31.33.
and hiding his iniquity in his bosom, Job 31. The Lazar, to stir compassion in
those that pass by, lays out his sores to the full: So should men confess
their sin, and make it as sinful as may be. Annescis quid sit contrahere
peccatum, ubi speras remedium? (says Saint Ambrose: S. Ambrose.
) Do thou not know what it is to contract sin, where thou do hope a remedy?

4. Lastly, it is but a fruitless thing, for a man that has to deal with an
All-seeing God, to seek to hide his sin: for he knows it, and can set all a
man's sins in order before him. Or to tell them in gross, as Nebuchad-nezzar
told his dream; I dreamed; so, to say, I have sinned, is vain: for he perfectly
understands each particular. But I shall have occasion to speak more of this,
upon the last clause.

The Questions.
But now for the first Question, Whence come thou? It is not barely an enquiry
from whence she came; but withal, a secret intimation of the happiness she had
deprived her self of, by coming from the place where she was: as if he had said
unto her; What folly was in thee, to leave Abraham's family! Were thou not there
beloved of Abraham? though thy Mistress were a little sharp, his affection was
able to make a compensation; and, through his mediation, thou might have been
preserved from all ill usage for aftertimes. Have thou not left the comfort of
thy soul? For thou were in that family which was the Church of God, and where
thou did enjoy the Ordinances of God, which did serve to build thee up unto
salvation: Thou have, even as Cain, banished thy self from the face of God: for
there he is, where his Worship is truly exercised. Again, Art thou not come
from the society of godly persons, which is a special contentment to a good
soul? And further, Though thou had no care of thy self, yet thou should
have been regardful of the child thou go withal: for, what has the poor
infant deserved, that it should, through thy passion, be deprived of all the
comforts it might have had, in so good a place? And what wrong have thou done
to Abraham, that did solace himself in thy conception, and comforted himself in
the hope of this issue? We see then, Observe. 6. The want of usual comfort,
occasioneth a sensibleness of sin. Genesis 3.
The way to humble people, in the sense of their evil, is, to make them know the
good they have deprived themselves of, by their irregular courses.

God, in questioning with Adam, Genesis 3. makes him see what an happiness he had
lost, by hearkening unto the voice of his wife, and she unto the serpent Satan
had told her, that their eyes should be opened, to know good and evil: and so
they were indeed; for they saw the good that they had lost, and the evil that
they had plunged themselves into. Samuel labors to bring Saul to remorse for
his fault, by showing unto him how he had lost himself out of Gods favor,
besides the loss of his Kingdom. And so Jeremiah works upon the people, Jer.
5. he tells of the former and later rain, Jer. 5.25.
and the fruitful seasons that they had formerly had: but their iniquities had
turned away these things, and their sins had withholden good things from them,
verse. 25. What is the reason that Israel returns to her first husband? She
remembers, that it was better with her, while she continued with him: By
wandering, in her affection, toward strangers, she found the miss of the
comforts she formerly enjoyed, Hosea 2. Hosea 2.7.
And the Prodigal began to be humbled, when he thought of the abundance of his
fathers house, and how fully he fed there, where the very hired servants have
bread enough, Luke 15. The Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. Luke 15. Revel. 2.5.
is wished to remember from whence she is fallen, and to repent. The liberties
that Gods people had enjoyed in Jerusalem, humbled them, insomuch that they
say, Psalm. 137. Psalm. 137.1.
By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered Sion.
Miserrimum est, fuisse foelicem; the most miserable thing in the world, to have
been happy.

And therefore for the Use:

Let this be practiced, to bring men to be humble; Application
let us make them sensible of what they have lost. I dare appeal to the sad
experience of many a Christian, who having been carried into some evil course,
by the strength of tentation, and there kept by the power of Satan; how, when
he has come to recollect himself, he has mourned for the comfort he has
formerly enjoyed: he apprehended Gods favor; now he sees his face clouded
toward him: he had joy in his spirit; now there is heaviness: he took delight
in God service; now he is dead unto it: he could come with boldness to the
throne of grace; now he is afraid to appear before God: he had peace in
himself; now nothing but disturbance. Had he not known so much of Gods
comforts, this present state could not have been so troublesome; but now he
mourns and weepeth, and cries out, with David, to be restored to his former
joy, and he will never more return to folly.

The second Quere is, Whither go thou? What way can thou make for thy
self, in this desolate place, in this vast wilderness? Nay, certainly the Angel
knew that she was minded to return into Egypt, her own country; and therefore,
in the Quere, he would insinuate the danger that she casts her self into: as if
he had said, Thou have ill provided for thy body, by thy forsaking of thy
mistress house: for there is nothing to be expected here, but hunger and death:
But thou have worse provided for thy soul. Have thou left the Church of God, to
return to that wicked place again? Were thou in mercy rescued from that
idolatrous country, to return to thy former vomit. Do thou mean to ruin both
body and soul together?

They that will draw people from their ill counsels, Observe. 7. The discovery
of torments, the best disswasion from evil courses, as the courses.
must acquaint them with the fearful issues of them. So did Noah by the old
world, and Lot by the Sodomites: so did Moses by Gods people; laid before them
all those judgments that should inherit their transgression. So did Jonah by
the Ninevites; and the rest of the Prophets, to those to whom they preached. So
did the Baptist tell them of the wrath to come, and that every tree that
brought not forth good fruit, should be hewn down, and cast into the fire. So
did the Apostles make their hearers see, that if they persisted in their wicked
courses, their souls would be everlastingly lost.

For the Use of it:

Application
You must give us leave, (that are the Ministers of God, and his Angels, in our
way) to acquaint you with the fearful conclusion of your sinful premises. It is
not only your body, and estate, and name, and good of wife and children, and
family, that are in danger; but your precious souls; they are in the highway
to be lost, by your walking in the broad way, the leads to destruction: And
how lost? Non ut non sint, sed ut semper male sint, S. Gregory.
(says Gregory;) Not that they should cease; (annihilation were, in that case,
a felicity;) but be for ever miserable.

You love not to hear of this black train of sin; but we must be faithful; and
still cry unto you, in the Angels words to Hagar, Whither go you? Why do you
make such haste to hell? Why will you lose your souls in the error of your
lives? You had need have a good bargain of sin, that must pay so dear for it,
even your souls. I wish you could better brook these warnings; Pathetical
Dehortations from sin.
and from my soul I desire, that every of you would say to your selves, when
you are tempted to this or that wickedness, Whither go I? When I am tempted to
the Brothel-house, whither go I? Even to the place that Solomon tells me, leads
to the chambers of death. When I am led by excessive company, whither go I?
Even to that place where I shall deform my body, and besot my soul, and ruin
both. I am tempted to an idolatrous place; whither go I? Even thither where I
shall infect my soul. Shall I leave God, and the ways of holiness, to tread the
paths of wickedness? will not this be bitterness in the later end? Shall I not
have infinite thousand years of sorrow, for my few hours of pleasure? Shall I
be able to return, when I have run out my race? Oh no!

Oh let us be so wise, as to foresee the issues of our sinful courses; and
whither we are going, before we go hence, and be no more seen: and sure we will
not dare to damn our souls, for the momentany pleasures of sin.

Preached, November. 24. 1641.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.9. I fly from the face of Sarah my mistress. And the Angel said,
return, etc.
THe Angel having questioned her whence she came, and whither she went; in
these words she makes a reply unto him: now, because the questions were
intended to draw from her a confession of her fault; some Expositors do judge
this answer of hers defective; and that there is not in it an ingenuous
acknowledgment of her error.

I pass by that of Saint Ambrose, who censureth her in this speech, S. Ambrose.
immodice tumoris, of too much insolency: Ut primo nomen diceret, and tum
Dominam significaret; that first she should use the name of Sarah, and then
style her mistress: for so indeed it is in the original, (...), from the face
of Sarah my mistress I am flying.

But with the leave of so great a Father, it deserves not such animadversion:
for with reverence enough she might mention her mistresses name in the first
place. Lippoman.
Lippoman observes that she does not answer unto both the questions of the
Angel; she concealeth, that she was flying into Egypt, which was a gross fault
in her; Observe. 1. Ill servants and malefactors are apt to cry out of their
punishments, but to conceal their offenses. Calvin. in locum. S. Augustine, in
50. Epist.
that she should upon a coffeehouse, return to that idolatrous place again,
having been through Gods special providence and mercy, rescued from thence, and
planted in the Church of God. Calvin says, crudelitatis Dominam suam oblique
insimulat, she seems obliquely to charge her mistress with cruelty; but she
does not confess her own insolency, that was the cause thereof; and Saint
Augustine seems to incline to this; he says that Hagar complained of
persecution, but she deserved that punishment which she suffered. It is too
often seen in servants; they will complain of the hard usage of masters and
mistresses, and how severely they have corrected them: but they will not as
fully discover and acknowledge their own miscarriage, that caused that usage:
and it is not so with servants only, Application
but with others, the Brownists and Familists; when they are questioned and
punished, they cry out of hard usage, and they are persecuted; but they will
not confess their errors; as if every conceit were conscience; A reprehension
of both Papists and Sectaries.
and every groundless opinion were religion: Quid laudas paenam, and non
ostendes causam?

What do thou praise the punishment, and not show the cause. August. de gestis


non poena sed causa, (says the Father) the cause it is, and not the
punishment that makes the suffering good; unless a man's cause be good, and a
man's conscience good, and his carriage good too, his sufferings will amount to
no more then to a condign punishment. So those of the Popish part complain
with open mouth, and in their writings divulge to the world that we are no
better then savages; we stock, we whip, we burn, we hang, we draw and quarter
those of their religion amongst us; yea, they make us to exceed Turks, Goths,
Saracens.

Now First, that which has been done unto them, is far short of their
relation, and they grossly belie us.

Secondly, those that have suffered, have not (as is made plain) suffered for
their religion, but for their sedition and rebellion, or doing that which is
contrary to the laws of the kingdom; they will not tell the world the cause
wherefore they suffered, but only cry out of their sufferings; the cause was
such, that (let them file them up in the catalogue of martyrs) we will be bold
to say, that their suffering (as Saint Cyprian has it) was not Corona Fidei,
Cyprian. Cum emerito persecutionem patimini, non a nobis, sed a vestris factis.
August. to the Donatists. You are persecuted, but not from ours, but your own
actions.
sed p^^na perfidiae, not any crown of faithfulness, but the just Mulct of
their perfideousness: they that will be hatching of treasons, absolving
subjects from their alliegeance, stabbing or poisoning of Princes, seducing of
men to idolatryes, blowing up of Parliament houses; surely fools only will
account such martyrs; wise men, I am sure, must needs applaud the hand of
justice, that cuts them off.

Nay lastly, this is not only the carriage of men, toward men, but of men
toward God: for when the hand of God is upon them, they are querulous and
complaining, and still speaking of their affliction; but will not be known of
the procreant cause of the affliction; and hence it is that they are so
impatient under their trouble, so tumultuous, yea oftentimes like the chaff,
flying in the face of him that winnoweth it rising up in their thoughts against
God, and charging him with cruelty; whereas if they would seriously reflect
upon the cause, and see how worthy they are not only of rods, but of Scorpions,
yea to suck out the very dregs of Gods viol; they would not murmur at their
chastisement, yea they would take shame to themselves, and give glory to God;
and say (as Mauritius the Emperor) Justus es o Domine, and recta sunt judicia
tua, righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments; Micah. 7.9.
and as the Church in Micah. 7. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him.

Observe. 2. Of confession, with the qualifications and necessity thereof.
But now I must tell you, that the greater stream of Expositors runs the
other way; that this reply of hers contains a full and ingenuous confession of
her fault; and though every thing is not set down in terminis (the Historian
studying brevity,) yet it is employed: and because we must interpret things
doubtful, to the best: we will take it for granted, that it was sincera
confessio (as Musculus says) an entire confession of sin: I touched a little
the last day, and promised then to add a little more unto it. This has ever
been practiced by those that have had true remorse for their sins, as we see in
the people of God, 1 Samuel 12. who mention their capital sin, 1 Samuel 12.
that (like Saul himself) was higher then the rest, the asking of a king (in
imitation of the Idolatrous heathen, when God was their miraculous Governor;)
and so David confesses, 2 Samuel 12. So Nehemiah: and those that heard John,
Matthew. 3.6. They were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins; and so
the prodigal, Luke 15. Luke 15.17.
Father I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee; and am no more worthy
to be called thy son: and those that were converted by Saint Paul's ministry at
Ephesus, Act. 19.18. Many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their
works; and to this course the Spirit of God has directed them, as the readiest
way to find comfort and pardon of their sins; Numb. 5. Number. 5.6, 7.
God prescribing a course how sinners should make their atonement, he says,
When a man or a woman shall commit any sin, to trespass against the Lord, then
they shall confess their sin which they have done: So Jer. 3.12, 13. Return
thou back sliding Israel, says the Lord, but how must they return, and make
themselves capable of Gods mercy? it follows in the next words, only
acknowledge thine iniquity. And we shall find that the Lord has bound himself
by promise unto them that sincerely confess their sins; that they shall find
mercy: Levit. 26. If they shall confess their iniquity, Levit. 26.40.
and the iniquity of their fathers, with their own trespass, which they have
trespassed against me, and that they have walked contrary to me; then will I
remember my covenant that I have made with Jacob, and my covenant that I have
made with Isaak, and my covenant that I have made with Abraham: and 1 John 1. 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, and leave them, God is faithful to forgive us our
sins; and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And this have Gods people
found by experience: David, Psalm. 32. did but say, he would confess his
iniquity, and God forgave it; and when he had confessed, Nathan tells him,
that God had put away his sin, he should not dye; the Prodigal found it so: and
so did the Publican, after he had cried, God he merciful to we a sinner: he
went away justified.

Now the qualification of this confession is evident in many places of
scripture; as,

First, that it must be hearty, (that is) with a feeling of the burden of sin,
as David, Psalm. 38. My sins are gone over mine head, Psalm. 38.4.
and are too heavy a burden for me to bear; yea with a bleeding heart, Ezra.
9.6.
as the same David, Psalm. 51. yea, with sorrow and indignation, as Ezra. 9. O
my God! I am ashamed and confounded to lift up my face unto thee; for our
iniquities are increased over our heads: so did Job abhor himself, and repent
in dust and ashes, Job. 42.6. and the Publican for shame durst not lift up his
eyes to Heaven; and in indignation against himself he smote his breast, Luke
18.13. Saul will say he has sinned; but yet he seems not so much to have a
sense of his sin, as of his discredit, honor me (says he) before the people.

Secondly, confession must be with an honest heart, that is joined with
unfeigned hatred of sin, and resolution to leave it: Shekaniah says, Ezra. 10.
Ezra. 10.2.3.
We have trespassed against our God, and taken strange wives, now let us make a
covenant with God to put away these strange wives: What have It do with Idols
any more (says Ephraim, Prove. 28.13.
Hos. 14.) and Prove. 28. He that confesses his sins, and forsakes them, shall
find mercy: Some men confess their sins, and yet continue them; Pharaoh makes
an ample confession, Exodus 9.27.
Exodus 9. and yet at the 34. Verse. It is said, He sinned yet more, and hardened
his heart: And Saul confessed his sin against David, 1 Samuel 24. and yet
pursues him as eagerly as before. And so many of those of the Church of Rome,
after confession renew their sins; yea even by confession are emboldened unto
it: even as the Drunkard vomiteth, that he may take in the more drink.

Thirdly, confession must be in faith and confidence of Gods mercy; not as the
fellon, to the judge, knowing he shall dye; but as the Patient to the Physician,
Dan. 9.9.
hoping for cure: So Dan. 9. To thee O Lord God belongs mercy and
forgiveness, though we have rebelled against thee: and Ezra. 10. Ezra. 10.2.
We have transgressed against God, and have taken strange wives; yet there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing; So the Prodigal. Cain confesses his sin,
but despairing of mercy, Genesis 4.13. My sin is greater then can he forgiven; and
Judas confessed he had sinned in betraying innocent blood; but yet it seems he
distrusted pardon, and therefore went out and hanged himself. All these might
be stood upon; and it is probable all these were in Hagar: She did confess with
shame and sorrow, and she did resolve never to run into the same error again;
and she hoped to find mercy upon her confession and submission.

But that which is for our purpose, is a fourth qualification of confession,
and that is, that it must be full without mincing of the business, or biting in
any thing; there is regard in this confession, unto God; not only a confession
in gross, but a particularizing, as we see in Paul. 1 Timothy 1 a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.13.
a persecutor, an oppressor.

Secondly, an aggravating of sins; Solomon supposes that the people will say,
1 King. 8.47.
1 King. 8. We have sinned, we have done perversely; we have committed
wickedness: as who should say, we cannot express how heinous our sins are; Act.
26.10.11, etc.
So Paul, Act. 26. Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison: and when they
were put to death, I gave my voice against them; I punished them often in their
Synagogues, and compelled them to blaspheme (...). And being exceedingly mad
against them, I persecuted them unto strange cities. So Dan. 9.5, 6. We have
sinned, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly, and have rebelled.
So Ezra, ch 9. Aggravateth the sin of the people, as having been committed
against the manifold experiments, that they had both of the severity and mercy
of the Lord. Mark. 14.10.
And it is said of Saint Peter, Mark. 14. Weighing that with himself, he wept:
weighing the circumstances by which his sin was aggravated, he was soon melted
into tears. This full confession some understand by that phrase, Lam. 2. Lam.
2.19.
of pouring out the heart like water before the face of the Lord: pouring out,
and that the heart, and that like water: Not like oil; for then some of the
substance would remain: nor like milk, for then some of the color would
remain: nor like wine; for then some of the taste and relish would remain: But
like water; where every drop goes out, and not so much as the color is left;
but the vessel is even as though nothing had been in it.

But now for the Use of this.

How far, first, Application
are people from this ingenuous confession of their sins? They will deny flatly
that they have done such or such things. God asks Cain where his brother is,
that he might bring him to confession; and he says, he knows not. There is
in his answer,

1. Defectus veritatis, a defect of the truth: he lies.

2. Charitatis, the want of charity: he is not bound to be his brothers keeper.

3. Humilitatis, a failure of humility: mark how peremptory he is, to the face
of God himself, to retort an interrogation; Am I my brothers keep? Thus Sarah
denied that she had laughed: and Gehazi, when his master asks him whence he
came, he says, Thy servant went no whither. Thus Ananias and Sapphira denied
that which they had done.

Secondly, if people cannot deny, they will justify their evil acts. Saul will
not, a good while, be beaten off, but that he has obeyed the voice of the
Lord. And Jonah, when God challenged him for being angry, he says, he does
well to be angry, yea to the death. And the sons of Jacob, in stead of
confessing their fault, say, they have done nothing but that which was fitting,
for the rescue of the honor of their family.

Thirdly, if they cannot justify it, they will excuse and extenuate it; and
so, like the unjust steward, set down fifty for an hundred: And they will
lessen the fault, sometimes by the good intention, as Saul would his sparing
the Amalekites goods, by his purpose of a sacrifice. Sometimes by the examples
of others: they can tell how Abraham lied, and Noah was excessive, and David
failed, and Peter denied; and they have but done the like: Nay, they can say,
though they have done thus and thus; yet they are not so bad as others: God, I
thank thee, I am not as other men are, nor at this publican, Luke 18. Luke
18.11.


Fourthly, if this will not do, they will translate the fault from themselves,
upon the corruption of nature; and say, as Saint Paul, Romans 7. It is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Alas, he speaks of infirmities that
are mental. 2. He maintained a fight against the flesh: whereas these men would
put off foul and gross sins to the flesh, and such as they no way oppose: how
can they, when they are all flesh? Sometimes they translate their sin upon the
Times, and places where they live: But Saint Paul would have men redeem the
time, because the days are evil: and there have been some godly men in the
worst places. Sometimes upon occasions that offer themselves; whereas there is
no trial of virtue, but by such occasions. Sometimes upon Satan; whereas,
though he can suadere, he cannot cogere; S. Augustine.
though he can tempt, he cannot compel, (says Saint Augustine;) non extorquet
consensum, sed petit; he cannot enforce consent of us, but begs it. Sometime
upon God himself: The woman that thou gave me, says Adam: But let no man
say, (says Saint James) when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God; for he
is drawn away by his own concupiscence. Sometime upon their brethren, and their
importunity: so Aaron would cast his fault upon the tumultuousness of the
people: and the Fathers say as much for him; Tumultuantibus populi clamoribus
cessit; that he gave way to the impetuous clamours of the people: But that is a
fig-leaf too narrow to cover his nakedness. And so Saul said, he feared the
people, and obeyed their voice. And Pilate thought to cast all upon the
violence of the people, or the persuasions, or the commands of others. I might
be much larger in this way.

Tertullian.
By all this, see, how true that of Tertullian is; Quod malum est, nolumus esse
nostrum; that what is evil, we would not have to be ours: we are content to act
sin, but we are loath to own it. But how vain all this is, and how fruitless,
considering we have to deal, in confession, with the All-seeing God, who
searches the hearts and reins, and knows us better then we do our selves; let
any man judge.

In the second place, therefore, if we will confess our sins, (as we must do)
let us deal ingenuously; let us not hide or palliate them. Some people have
diseases about them, that they are loath to reveal: but, Plus memores pudoris,
quam salutis, (says the Father;) they are more mindful of their shame, then of
their health. And so people, in the acknowledgement of their sin, will not
speak out. Do they think thus to conceal it? or do they think God will shame
them for their open dealing? Oh no! While we deal apertly, he is willing to
cover, and cast a mantle over them. We may conceal our transgressions; but it
will not be from his knowledge, but to our own woeful prejudice.

Here further we may observe, the notable effect of affliction: Observe. 3. The
notable and good effects of well-improved affliction.
When God is pleased to awaken the conscience thereby, then there is a free
acknowledgement, and serious humiliation.

This we see in Joseph's brethren; we know of what an unnatural act they were
guilty; their conscience troubled them not for it, for a long time: but at
last, being in a great perplexity in Egypt, and questioned for no less then
treason, their conscience awaketh, and they reflect with grief upon that foul
fact of theirs, Genesis 42.21.
Genesis 42. And thus it was with Manasseh; when he came to be in fetters, then he
awaked, and humbled himself in the presence of God. Job 36.8, 9.
Elihu says, ( Job 36.) If they be bound in fetters, and tied with the cords
of affliction; then will he show them their work, and their sin; because they
have been proved. In the glass of affliction, a man sees himself fully: yea,
those errors that lay dormant in prosperity, will come then within his view;
as Job says, that in his trouble he did possess the sins of his youth; his
loose olims came then to his remembrance. And so much we may gather from that
speech of the Sareptan widow to Elisha; Why art thou come to call my sins to
remembrance, and to slay my son? 1 Kings 17. 1 Kings 17.18.
Then does God set our sins in order before us, and make that register,
Conscience, to produce many a forgotten sin. And thus it was with the Prodigal;
his affliction made him see his error, and whipped him home unto his fathers
house. Before I was afflicted, (says David) I went wrong: but now I have
learned thy statutes. And therefore it is most sure, that vexatio dat
intellectum; affliction teaches understanding. Schola Crucis, schola Lucis;
the cross is the school of light. And Saint Gregory says sweetly, Oculos quos
culpa claudit, poena aperit; S. Gregory.
punishment opens those eyes which sin shuts: It is like the clay and
spittle that Christ applied to the eyes of the blind man, by which he
recovered his sight.

For the Use of this:

First, it must teach us to justify God in his proceedings, when, Application
in stead of smiling, he frowns upon us; in stead of prospering us, he does
afflict us. It is true, he does not afflict willingly, Lam. 3.33. nay, in his
peoples affliction, he is afflicted, Isai. 63.9. he delights in mercy, Micah
7.18. and the execution of judgment is opus alienum, his strange work, Isai.
28.21. But there is a necessity of it: Jer. 9.7. Thus says the Lord of hosts,
I will melt them, and try them: for how should I do for the daughter of my
people? As if he should say, How should I save them? how should I keep them
from perishing everlastingly, if I should not correct them? Now for a season,
if need be, (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.6. you are in heaviness, through many
temptations. As if he should say, You should not be in heaviness, no not for
that short season, if there were not need: but the dross will not be purged
out, without this fire; the rust gotten off, without this file; nor the vicious
humors purged out, without this sharp dose: you would not be sanctified here,
or saved hereafter, without this. And therefore David says, that God, of his
exceeding goodness, caused him to be troubled: And Saint Paul says, that when
we are judged, we are chastised of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world.

Secondly, it should teach us to examine, whether the affliction that God sends
upon us, have this effect in us; whether our conscieences are awaked in this
storm, as Jonahs was; whether it bring our sins to mind; whether it makes us
search and try our ways, Lam. 3.
as it is Lam. 3. and makes us sift our selves, as it is Ephesians. 2. and bethink
our selves of former errors, that we may purge them out by humiliation. We
have not the first degree of profiting by affliction, unless we see our sin.
Yea, we should labor to find out the Achan, the main cause of our trouble,
and beg of God to show wherefore he wounds us; and with Job, Job 10.2. And
13.23.
(Chap. 10.) to show us our rebellion and our sin. A fearful thing it is, when
a man shall be in their case that Jeremiah speaks of, Jer. 10.6. Ezekiel. 16.43.
Chap. 10.6. No man said, What have I done? and of those, Ezekiel. 16. I have
brought thy way upon thine own head, yet have thou not consideration of thine
abominations. A man to be afflicted, and to have no sense of sin; to have his
heart in him as Nabals, like a stone, no consideration of the cause, most woeful.

But now come to the next verse, which contains the direction that the Angel
gives to Hagar, to return to her mistress, and to humble her self under her
hand. And here, first, we may observe the goodness of God toward this woman;
that whereas she was hastening to her own woe, and in the highway to ruin her
soul, by going into idolatrous Egypt; God keeps her from this precipice, and
suffers her to go no further.

Observe. 4. It Is a mercy of the first magnitude, Gods restraining (...) from
evil.
It is a great mercy of God, to be restrained from evil. I kept thee (says God
to Abimelech) that thou should not sin against me, Genesis 20.6. God kept the
sons of Jacob from shedding of the blood of Joseph, by that persuasion of
Reuben. God kept David from perfecting his resolution against the house of
Nabal: he had committed a fearful sin, if, in his rage and fury, he had acted
what he had intended. And when he had Saul in the cave, and that all
opportunity did smile upon him, yea invite him to take revenge upon his
well-known adversary that sought his life; God kept him from imbruing his hands
in the blood of the Lords Anointed. How many have we known, that when they have
been bound upon this and that design, something has intervened, that has
taken them off, and kept them from doing that which they purposed; which was
Gods care and providence over them, to prevent their sin, and not to suffer
them to be so bad as they would have been.

For the Use of this:

Application
Let us, every of us, account it a mercy, and bless God for his restraining
grace: we have the seed of all sin in us; yet there are some sins that we never
felt the least inclination unto; as Luther says, he never knew that he had the
least motion to covetousness: and therefore, when one thought fit, for the
stopping of his mouth, he should be tempted with gold, it was answered by
another, Germana illa bestia non curat aurum; that that same German beast cared
not for gold. So, many a man is never so much as tempted to theft, or sodomy,
or murder: this is Gods mercy, that he should thus keep them down, and cast
them, as it were, into a sleep; as he did Saul, and those that were about him,
1 Samuel 26.
1 Samuel 26. It is not, that we are naturally better then others, that every
lust does not bubble up in us: we must acknowledge, it is Gods mercy that
keeps them down, and consider who it is that makes us to differ, (as the
Apostle speaks in another case, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.7.


Secondly, we have had motions and temptations to this and that sin, that
others have fallen into; but they have not prevailed with us, to the commission
of them. And what has been the cause that we have not hatched these
Cockatrice-eggs, and that they have not come to a fiery flying serpent?
Certainly, God has restrained us; he could easily have given us up to our own
hearts lusts, as it is, Psalm. 81. Psalm. 81.12.
and have said to our corruptions, as he did to the deceiving spirit that went
to Ahab, Go, and prevail, 1 Kings 22. but he has kept us: it is his goodness,
and we must acknowledge it with all thankfulness. When we hear men engaged in
these foul sins of Idolatry, and Murder, and Blasphemy, and Oppression; we must
pity them, and thank God for preserving us, who else should be as bad as the
worst. It was a pious mind in Saint Augustine; he would praise God; pro
peccatis quae fecit, and quae non fecit; both for the sins he had committed,
and had not committed; for the remission of the former, and the prevention of
the later. I observe sometimes, that people, being resolved upon this and that
wickedness, and being prevented of the perfecting of it, by the failing of some
instrument or opportunity, or some sickness, or inability in themselves, that
they chase and fret. Oh that their eyes were but opened, to see what a mercy
this is, that they murmr at; how good a friend God is to them, while they are
their own enemies! They would ruin their souls, and God will not suffer them.
That holy Father could say, Utiliter vincitur, cui peccandi licentia eripitur:
He is happily conquered, that is restrained from sin; yea, though God stop his
way with thorns, and by some heavie-armed affliction on him: for, by this
means, though the body suffer, yet the soul may be saved. On the other side, it
is the greatest judgment that God can lay upon a man, on this side hell, to
let him thrive in sin; when he says, as to Ephraim, in Hosea, Hos. 4.17. (...)
(...), Let him alone; let him go on, to make up the measure of his iniquity;
let him that is filthy, be filthy still; I will not stop or stay him. Thus God,
in his judgment, does by many a man, as by Pharaoh and his army; make them
fair way, even into the midst of the sea, and then take them off.

Oh let us all pray, that when our foot slippeth, the mercy of God may hold us
up, and keep us from falling, Psalm. 94. for, we being tempted unto evil, and
inclineable in our nature, not only to resolve upon it, but to pray that we
may be kept by his grace; and that the knife may be taken from us, with which,
like madmen, we would wound our selves.

We now come to the direction it self, which consists of two things.

First, she must return to her mistress.

Secondly, she must humble her self, under her hand.

First, she must return. Musculus moves the question, Musculus in locum.
why the Angel would have her return; seeing after a while, she was to be cast
out of Abraham's house? And he answers; that first, it was a considerable
time, that she stayed in Abraham's family; even till her son was grown: he was
fourteen years older then Isaac; and after Jsaac was born, his mother and he
staid so long, till Isaac and he could play together; and he could mock Isaac:
(as appears, Genesis 25. Genesis 25.
) which was the cause of his ejectment. For the injunction, there might be
something observed out of it, (if it had not been before touched:)

Observe. 5. Dominion and servitude stand well with christian liberty.
As first, That he would have her return: therefore he condemns her flight. This
we spoke of before; and showed, that the flight of servants, upon ill usage by
their masters or mistresses, was unlawful.

Secondly, He says here, return to thy mistress; as justifying the order that
God has set in the world; A brief reflection on Sermon. j. Observe. 6.
of government, and subjection: Some must be masters, and others in the
condition of servants: of this we have spoken heretofore, largely; and showed
that by the commandment that God has given to masters, to govern their
servants, (both in the old and new testament:) by the many directions he has
given both to masters and servants, for their carriage: (as appears in Moses,
Solomon's And the Apostles writings:) by the examples of Saints and holy men,
that have been, some masters, some servants; by the rewards propounded both to
masters and servants, upon the conscionable performance of their duty; it
appears, that God approves of the condition of servants: and therefore the
Anabaptists are but vain, in their objections against it. They say, that it is
against nature, for one to be servant to another: servuus nomen non naturae sed
culpae, says Saint Augustine; Servant is a name, not of nature, but of sin and
punishment; be it so, that it is against perfect nature, and the state of
innocence, wherein there should not have been That dominium despoticum, that
masterly power, that is now exercised; yet it is not against that course of
nature, wherein God has now settled man: God has turned some punishments of
sin, into bounden duties; as subjection of the wife to the husband, and man's
eating his bread in the sweat of his brows: But again say they, it is against
grace, and that liberty which Christ has purchased; but I say it is not; for
Christ has set us free from the ceremonial law, and from the curse and rigor
of the moral law, and from Satan, sin, death and damnation; but not from that
order, and those degrees, which he has established in the world. But we are
all one in Christ (say they;) there is neither bond nor free: True, as they are
members of Christ's spiritual Body; but not as they are members of a politic
Body: a politic inequality, is not against a spiritual equality: Onesimus is
as good as Philemon in Christ; yet Onesimus is Philemons servant: this kind of
reasoning was in the very Apostles time; servants presumed upon their liberty
by Christ; and therefore they would shake off the yoke of subjection,
especially to the aliens: But we shall see how earnest the Apostles are, to put
strength in This; and tell them that their spiritual estate, may not dissolve
civil order, but they must be subject to their masters, whether christian or
heathen, so long as they were servants, even for conscience sake; but no more
of this.

Secondly, humble thy self under her hand. This is harsher then the former:
Gods commands lie not always in smooth ways; they charge that which is
contrary to our corrupt disposition, but they must be obeyed; though it be to
the pulling out of the right eye, and to the cutting off of the right hand: but
we will defer this, till we come to show how Hagar performed This which the
Angel enjoined her: In the mean time we must observe, that she had been guilty
of faults.

First, flying from her mistress.

Secondly, insolency toward her mistress.

Now the Angel fitteth the medicine unto both these maladies.

First, she must make amends, for her flight, by her returning.

Secondly, she must humble her self under her mistresses hand, Observe. 6.
Satisfaction for offenses, how to be rendered both to God and man.
to make amends for her insolency: and here might be observed, that
satisfaction is to be given to such, whom we have offended; we must confess our
fault, and crave their pardon, and carry our selves fairly toward them for
after time: we see it was done by Joseph's brethren, and Aaron; and it is that
which our Savior approves: that if our brother have any thing against us, we
should be reconciled unto him; which cannot be done without confession, and
submission: And Saint Paul undertaketh for Onesimus, that he shall return and
deprecate his fault, and be ever after a faithful servant. This is a bitter
pill to many men: when they have done wrong, they are loath to confess it, or
to seek pardon for it; but if they shall not do it, they shall find, that as
they are still debtors to men, so they are to God also; and incur his wrath, by
not obeying this commandment of God. But I will conclude with that which is
required of men, in regard of God: as they have gone away from him by their
sin, so they must return unto him; and as they have lifted up themselves, in
the pride of their hearts, against him, 1 Pet. 5.6.
so they must humble themselves under his hand: 1 Pet. 5.

First we must return. How often are sinners called upon by the Prophets;
Return unto the Lord: the Father allegorizeth that place of the wise men,
returning into their country another way; the sinner that has gone out by the
way of uncleanness, he must return by the way continency; if by the way of
excess, he must return by the way of temperance: if by the way of pride, he
must return by the way of humility: Return we must, for the longer we keep off
from God, the worse we are: like to Absalon, who having offended his father,
fled to Geshur, and there stayed three years. 2 Samuel 13.38.
2 Samuel 13. But we must return to our father, as the prodigal did.

Secondly, we must humble our selves under his hand; we must confess our fault
with grief and shame; and we must acknowledge his justness, in the affliction
that he lays upon us; justify him and condemn our selves, and accept of the
punishment of our iniquity? as it is, Levit. 26.
Levit. 26. And we must earnestly beg his pardon, and vow better obedience
toward him: and all this we must do ingenuously; as it is here, we must humble
our selves: there be many that be humiliati, sed non humiles; humbled, but not
humble; as we see in Ahab: many have their hearts broke, and yet their stomach
is not broken. But we must freely and willingly humble our selves before God.
And as the word here used, is in the conjugation Hithpael, and signifies a
continuation of the Act: Hagar must humble her self; yea and continue humble,
all the time she stays with her mistress. So must it be with us, having after
offending God, returned unto him; and having confessed our sins, and begged
pardon, and vowed obedience; we must continue humble, and so in humility walk
with our God, and provoke him no more. We see in too many that optimi dum
infirmi (as he said;) when God has met with them in some affliction, they seek
God, and confess their sin, and beg pardon, and a releas from the judgment: but
after a while they grow proud against God, and provoke him; and have forgotten
the days of their pressure. But it ought not to be so, my dear brethren: we
must make conscience of walking in an humble course (after our deliverances,)
and an endeavoring to please God ever after; for else there may be just reason
to question all our former humiliation; and fear for the time to come, of some
further measure of indignation; for we know who it was that said, sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Preached, December. 1. 1641.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.10. And the Angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply, etc.
THese be the three sorts of words that the Angel uses to Hagar, words of
prediction.

And first, he foretells the multiplication of her seed, verse. 10.

Secondly, the name of her son that she should bear, who was to be the root of
so numerous an issue, Ishmael: together with the reason of his name, verse 11.

Thirdly, his quality and condition: He shall be a wild man: his hand shall be
against every man, and every man's hand against him; and yet of that power, that
he should dwell in the presence of all his brethren.

But before I come to these particulars, give me leave to observe, in general,
Here is a great comfort propounded to Hagar; but the Angel gave her not this
comfort, till she had been humbled. And this is Gods manner of dealing;

First to humble them, and then to comfort them. Observe. 1. God and his
Ministers method is first to humble people, and then to comfort them.


So it was in the former Chapter, (verse. 12.) with Abraham; an horror of great
darkness fell upon him, and after that, God speaks comfortably unto him. So
Jacob was in great distress and perplexity, through the news of his brothers
coming toward him; and then the Angel of the Lord comes unto him, and
wrestleth with him, and assures him of protection, Genesis 32. Genesis 32.
And so Joseph is in great trouble, and afterward lifted up. And so Moses, and
diverse others.

But to speak of that which we especially intend:

The soul God will have humbled in the sight of sin, and sorrow for it, before
he comfort it.

This we see in David; he confesses and mourns, before God speaks peace unto
him. And so it was with Manasseh; he is first humbled for his sin, and then he
is refreshed with comfort. God promises to restore comfort to the mourners,
Isai. 57. they mourn first, Isai. 57.18.
and then they have comfort. And when our Lord says, Matthew. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted; (Matthew. 5.) he
shows the manner of Gods proceeding. And the like we see, in that sweet
invitation of his, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden; and I will refresh you: We must find sin a burden, before he
will ease us. The woman that was a sinner in the city, was humbled, before
Christ told her, that her sins were forgiven her. And so it was with that poor
traveller, Luke 10.13.
Luke 10. he is wounded, before the good Samaritan comes and cures him. And so
it was with Saint Paul, Acts 9. he was humbled, and lay in great perplexity a
good while, before God sends Ananias unto him. And the Jailer was cast down in
the sight of his sin, before he was raised up by spiritual comfort, Acts 16.

And certainly, this course that God takes, is full of wisdom: For,

First, God looks there should be a receptivity, a fitting capacity in that
heart that he means to comfort: nay, he should but throw away his comfort, if
the subject be not prepared. The earth must be plowed, before the seed be
committed to it: the wax must be chafed, before it will receive impression: the
vessel must be cleansed, before the sweet liquor be put into it. Gregory
Nazianzen.
(...); (says Nazianzen;) Who puts precious ointment into an unsavory vessel?
The seed seems but lost, to be thrown upon the unbroken earth. And to what
purpose, to set the seal upon wax that is hard? And unless the vessel be
rinsed, and made clean, the sweet water, that is put into it, is spoiled. And
so, unless the heart be humbled, comforts are cast away; they cannot be
received.

Secondly, God intends, that those whom he will refresh, should find
sweetness in his comforts: Psalm. 34.8.
Taste and see how gracious he is, Psalm. 34. but it is preceding humiliation,
that must work this relish; even as we see, P^st frigora, dulcior ignis; fire
is the more chearing, after cold; and after a dark lowering night, the clear
morning is more comfortable: S. Basil.
And, (...), (says Saint Basil;) Fasting and abstinence sauceth best the use
of meats: And, to the hungry soul, even a bitter thing is sweet, (says
Solomon.) And Seneca says of Health, Seneca.
Magis placet reddita, quam retenta; that it is more apprehended, and more joyed
in, being restored, then when not interrupted. They that have truly mourned
for sin, and have felt some anguish and distress of spirit for it, Oh how sweet
is comfort to them! How beautiful are the feet of those that bring gladness!
yea, the least light, (by the smallest crevise) to one that is in that
darkness, is acceptable.

Thirdly, God intends, that men should make much of those comforts that he
has given them, and preserve them: Now they cannot be so chary and so choice
in the keeping of them, unless they have had, first, a sense of the want of
them: the receiving of them, after much longing for them, makes men fearful,
(by any miscarriages) to lose or forfeit them. Psalm. 85.8.
Psalm. 85. God will speak to his people, and to his Saints; with this
intention, that they shall return no more unto folly.

The Use of this is,

First, to us that be the Ministers, and you that are the people: To us,
Application
in the speaking comforts, and to you, in the receiving of them. We must not
comfort, before we see you humbled for your sins. God gives his Ministers the
tongue of the learned, to minister a word in due season: but to whom? to him
that is weary, Isai. 50. We must, Isai. 50.4.
like the good Samaritan, pour in, first wine, and then oil: we must purge by
Potion, and then comfort by Cordial: we must use, first, verbera, the stripes
of the Law; and then draw out uhera, the breasts of the Gospel.

I know that people are greedy of comforts, and, like the sons of Zebedee, they
would have a grant of sitting on the right hand, and left, in Christ's Kingdom,
before ever they have drank of the cup that he did drink of, or have been
baptized with his baptism: they send for the Minister, and desire him to give
it them; but discover not any measure of humiliation, upon which to ground this
comfort. Now, if we should satisfy them in this, we should be unfaithful to
our Master, and bad stewards of that allowance which he gives us to dispense;
yea, it may be, we might be guilty of giving childrens bread unto dogs. And as
we should be unfaithful to God, so we should be helpless to men; we should do
them no good with comforts, being not disposed for them by humiliation: nay, we
should do them much harm: for the great Master of Physic tells us, that,
Hippocrates.
in an impure body, (...), omne nutritivum est nocivum; that which nourishes,
hurts. There must be first an evacuation of humors, where there is Plethory;
and then nourishing things do well. As we must be, therefore, careful, in our
way, to give every one the portion of meat in due season; so, do not you
require comforts of us, till you come to a sight of your sins, and have true
remorse in your souls for them.

A second Use may be this, even to abate the joy of some people in the world,
who brag of those comforts that they have in themselves, and persuasion that
they have of their good condition; and yet cannot say, that they have been
truly and sensibly cast down for their sins. I may say, Their rejoicing is not
good, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5.
(1 Cor. 5.) in another case: They may suspect such a building, as has no
better a foundation: They may justly fear, that their comfort is not of God,
because they have it not according to Gods order and method: For, on whom has
he ever bestowed the spirit of adoption, who have not first had the spirit of
bondage? What spirit has ever God raised, that he has not first, in some
measure, cast down? I say, In some measure: for I know, the same measure of
humiliation is not required of all. As there may be in the soul false fears;
(Satan has his (...), (as the Greek Father calls them; S. Chrysostom.
) his vizards, to terrify people withal; and to make them fear, when there is
no just cause of fear:) so there may be false joys; and people may triumph in
some comforts, that yet are not the joy of the Spirit: Remember we it every of
us; True joy in the Christian soul, rises out of sorrow for sin: And that is
the truest consolation, that we find in our selves, after true humiliation.

A Second thing is this. Here is a promise of a great blessing to this woman,
but mark how it is inferred; even upon the direction that the Angel had given
her in the former verse: If she shall return and humble her self, under the hand
of her mistress; acknowledging her fault, Observe. 2. Gods promises run always
with condition of obedience: the defect whereof Nulleth his obligation. Deuteronomy.
8.29.
and carrying her self fittingly for after time; then she may expect the
accomplishment of that blessing, which the Angel here foretells: The
promises of the blessings of God, run with a condition of our obedience: If
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted (says God to Cain, Genesis 4.7.)
Acceptance there is a full word; it includes the blessings both of this life,
and that which is to come; but there is also a condition of doing well: So
Deuteronomy. 8.29. Oh that there were such an heart in this people, to fear me, and
keep all my commandments always; that it might be well with them, and with
their seed for ever. God engages himself to be good unto them, and to their
seed; but there is a condition of obeying him, and keeping his commandments:
c. 28.
and this Moses fully lays forth, in Deuteronomy. 28. Where he mentions a world of
blessings, but withal mentions the condition of enjoyment of them, even the
keeping and observing of Gods commandments; David gives none encouragement to
Solomon to receive Gods blessing, 1 Chronicles. 28.
but upon condition of his obedience: Psalm. 122.12.
1 Chronicles. 28. And it was none other, then God himself, had told him, as he
relates it, Psalm. 122.12. If thy children shall keep my covenant and my
testimony, that I shall teach them, thus and thus it shall be unto them: Psalm.
84.11. The Lord is a Sun and a shield; he will give grace and glory, no good
thing will he withhold; (here is good measure, pressed down, heaped up, and
running over;) but for whom is all this, or what is the condition? You shall
find it in the next words; Isai. 1.19.
Those that walk uprightly: upright walking, is the condition of these
blessings. Isaiah. 1.19. If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the
good things of the land. Where see, that those (...), the things that concern
this life; (as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 6.3.) are promised with a
condition; and for the blessings of the life to come; They run with a condition
also: as we may gather from that speech of our Lord, Mat. 19.17.
Mat. 19. to the young man, who desired to know what he should do, to obtain
eternal life; (for he made account, he must do some thing for it:) Christ tells
him, If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: God has made a
promise of blessings, both here and hereafter; but to what? Saint Paul will
tell us, 1 Timothy 4. Godliness has the promise both of this and that life which
is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life, says
our Lord unto the Church, Revel. 2.10. The promise is upon condition of
practice.

For the Use of it:

It meets, first, with a great many in the world, who are urging God with the
performance of his promise; yea, and challenging him for not performance;
while, in the mean time, they regard not at all the performance of the
condition. What? do men think, that, having entered into Covenant with God,
that he must be tied by his part, and not they by theirs? Must he be fast, and
must they be loose? I wonder with what face they can complain of God, where
they are conscious to themselves of their gross and foul neglects, contrary to
their vow in Baptism, contrary to their Covenant renewed in the Lords Supper,
and contrary to many private engagements, upon occasion of some mercy
experienced, or judgment feared or inflicted. I dare not think they are so
desperate, as to imagine that nothing is to be done on their part; that they
make account to go to heaven in some whirlwinde; that the Kingdom of heaven
will come with expectation; or that there is no more required, but some languid
or faint wish, to make them happy; like that of Balaam; Let my soul die the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his: that once being within
the compass of the Church, (like passengers at sea) they shall be brought to
the haven, even sleeping; like the lilies clothed without spinning, and like
the birds fed without sowing. Certainly, they must think, that something is to
be done on their part: And if so, Why do they not do it? Why do they not
strive, that they may be crowned? Why do they not run, that they may obtain?
Why do they not fit themselves for Gods blessing, by holy living? At least, why
are they not ashamed to lay claim to the Obligation, when they have not
performed the Condition? If they miss what they would have, let them thank
themselves. God was, and is still ready to do what he has engaged himself; but
we fall to obey his Commandments, and therefore fall short of our hopes and
expectations; and that we be forced to say, as Nehemiah, The Lord has done
righteously, but we have done wickedly; and as our Savior; he would, but they
would not.

In the second place, let it teach us all, that, having a promise of blessings
from God, we be careful to do what is required of us. Desideranda est
promissio, sed consideranda est conditio; the promise (says one) is not more
to be desired, then the condition to be considered. The Apostle having
mentioned, 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5. toward the end.
that God would dwell among them, and be their God, and they should be his
people; that he would be a father unto them, and they should be his sons and
daughters: in the first verse of the next Chapter, he says, Having therefore
these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness, both of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Do we look to be made free
by our Master, and not serve our time? Do we think to have our bargain, and not
perform conditions? And do we think to have the good things of this life, and
not walk in the fear of God? Surely we may have something, but not in mercy,
and for eternal life. Vis esse beatus, S. Augustine.
and non bonus? (says Saint Augustine;) would thou be blessed, and not good?
Certainly no: without holiness, no happiness* without holiness, no man shall
see God. If a man live a deboist life, and so die, and think to have heaven at
last, he is miserably deceived; he may as well look for grapes from thorns, or
figs from thistles: The way is truly laid down by Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1.5.
2 Pet. 1. Join unto faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, Verse 11.
etc. and verse. 11. Thus an entering in shall be ministered unto us, into the
kingdom of our Lord. Haec via ducit ad urbem; this is the way unto the new
Jerusalem. Let us perform the condition; and he which cannot lie has promised,
and will perform: heaven and earth shall perish, before he fail.

Calv. in locum.
I might add a third general thing, out of Reverend Calvin upon this place: Ut
mitiget quod in praecepto grave erat, solatio aliquo lenat, benedictionem
promittit, in foetu quem gestat: That he might mitigate what was irksom in the
command, and alleviate it with some consolation, he promises a blessing in the
fruit she buds with. It might seem an hard command to her, to return to her
mistress, and to humble her self under her hand; he therefore sweetneth it with
the promise of a blessing. And he goes on; Poterat Deus praecise injungere
quod justum erat, sed quo liberius faceret quod sui officii est, quasi
blanditiis eam allicit ad parandum: God could have strictly enjoined her what
was just; but, that she might the more cheerfully do her duty, he even wooes
her to obedience, with pollicitations. And this is the gracious disposition of
God,

Observe. 3. Gods gracious imitable disposition wooeth and inviteth, where he
might command and urge. Hos. 11.4.
That what we are bound to do, yet he is willing to invite us to the doing of
it, by sweet promises;

and so draws us (...), (as the Prophet speaks;) with the cords of a man. Non
vult serviliter trahere, ut quasi coacti praestemus quod mandatum est: he will
not draw us in a servile manner, (like the horse and mule) that we perform his
precept by compulsion. God might say to every man, Obey me; thou owe it unto
me, as my creature; I am thy Lord, and thou art my servant; and see thou do it,
upon pain of damnation: But he adds to his Commands, Promises of blessings,
both temporal and eternal; so that what we do out of duty, we yet shall not do
without a reward. We see this through the whole Book of God; and we shall find,
he has not been more free in promising, then sure in performing: for, who ever
kindled a fire in vain, upon Gods altar?

Application Against Merit.
And this may silence all conceit of Merit: God, of his good will, inviteth us
by promises to do our duty; and shall we think the doing of our duty to be
meritorious of that which God has promised? Shall his encouragement be
accounted a debt; and that (as they say) he cannot in justice deny the reward?
It is true, he is a debtor, promittendo nobis, by promising something to us;
non accipiendo a nobis, but not by receiving ought from us. We may in humility
say, Da quod promisisti, Give us, Lord, what thou have promised; but we cannot
stand upon terms, and say, Read quod accepisti, Restore what thou have
received from us. Nay, he is so far from being any way indebted to us for that
which we do, that he is fain to help us to do our duty; to furnish us with
money, and help us to pay him his own debt. When he invites us to do our duty
by a reward, and helps us to perform that duty, which he in his mercy has
promised to reward; I bless my self to think where merit should creep in! Nay,
I cannot but judge such gross contemners of the grace of God, and to merit
eternal misery, that cannot be content to be saved by Gods sole mercy. If a man
should encourage thee, by promise of a reward, to do that which otherwise he
might exact of thee, and that thou could not do that thing without his
assistance; were it not a gross part in thee, to challenge that reward as a
debt, and say, he were not just, if he did not pay it? This is the very case
between God and us.

But I pass by this, and come to the substance of the verse, which contains
the first prediction of the multiplication of her seed.

But here it is questioned, how this party, being but an Angel of the Lord,
could say, I will exceedingly multiply thy seed. Angelus se facturum promittit,
quod unius Dei proprium erat, (says my Author; Observe. 4. God investeth his
Angels and Messengers with his own Name and Authority, to set the higher rate
upon them and their messages.
) the Angel here promises to effect that, which is only the proper work of
the Almighty. But, (says he) nihil obstat, it is usual in the Scripture, for
the Angels to use the name of God; as that Angel said to Gedeon, I will be with
thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man, Judge. 1. because God is
pleased (says he) inducere personam suam ministris quos mittit, quo magis
constet verbo suo authoritas; to lend the representation of his person to those
messengers he sends, that the greater may be the authority of his Word, which
they deliver. The Ministers that divide the Word unto you, are Angels; and God
investeth them in a great power, and deriveth upon them his own authority;
insomuch that they are called Salvatores, no less then Saviors, Obad. v. 21.
1. Tim. 4.10.
in Obad. verse. 21. and they are said to save, 1 Timothy 4. and yet salvation
belongs properly to the Lord, Psalm. 3.8. Saint Paul says, he has begotten
the Corinthians to Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.19.
and yet Saint Peter tells us, that God has begotten us to a lively hope, 1
Pet. 1.3. Ministers are said to loose and bind sinners; which yet is the
proper work of God: for none have power to forgive sins, but God only. They
are said to bless the people; and we know this is the proper work of God, and
he is the God of blessing. Ministers are his ambassadors; and we know what
kind of power is committed to such kind of Agents, by Princes.

And therefore, in one word, for the Use of it:

It should raise the rate and estimation of Gods Messengers in our hearts: and
when they speak unto us in the name of the Lord, Application
we should not receive it as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of
God; which works effectually in all those that believe. We look upon the
persons of Gods servants, but not upon their Office, and that authority
wherewith God has furnished them; and therefore, like the Pharisees, Luke 7.30.
Luke 7. we reject the counsel of God against our selves. But we should know,
that what the Minister faithfully delivers, by virtue of his Office, is to be
received, as if God had immediately spoken it: If we do not, we shall find
that true that our Savior says, Luke 10.16.
Luke 10. He that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

But to go on:

I will multiply thy seed exceedingly. It is in the Hebrew, (...),
multiplicando, multiplicabo; In multiplying, I will multiply thee. It is the
manner of speaking in that holy Tongue, where it will show the certainty and
fullness of a thing: As Genesis 2. (...), moriendo, morieris; In dying, thou shall
die. I have seen, I have seen; Videndo, vidi; that is, have certainly and fully
observed: And (...), Genesis 50.24.
visitando, visitabit; He will surely visit you; yea, fully, and in a great
measure do it. So here, he will certainly multiply, and he will exceedingly
multiply.

What might be observed out of this manner of speaking, I have heretofore
touched; and therefore I say no more of it.

But now here it is said, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly.

Observe. 5. The fond affectation of great Names and Titles.
The Question is, Why the Angel calls it her seed, and not Abraham's; seeing
Ishmael was his son; and the seed, and issue is reckoned to the man.

And it is answered, It is, to distinguish the promised seed, which was Isaac,
and to be born of Sarah; and that child which came of the handmaid, that was
but the resultance of a carnal device. The Ishmaelites (as we shall see) are
reckoned unto Hagar, not unto Abraham; and therefore called Hagarens: And Sarah
intends thus much, Genesis 21.10.
in that speech of hers, Genesis 21. she does not say, Cast out the bondwoman,
with thy son; for thy son shall not be heir with my son Isaac: but, Cast out
the bond woman, with her son; for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir
with my son: and ever after, they were distinguished, the Ishmaelites from the
seed of Isaac. They were content, at first, with the name of Hagarens: but, in
the pride of their hearts, considering that Hagar was but a bondwoman, they
would not be called Hagarens, from Hagar; but Saracens, from Sarah, the
freewoman, and principal wife. Application
Even as in these times, some proud minds rising to wealth and place in the
world; and being ashamed of the obscurity of their offspring, will needs
derive themselves from some great family of their own name, and assume unto
themselves the Arms of that family. Oh how much more wisdom were there in those
people, to labor for Virtue, which is true Nobility, then to be beholden to
this borrowed, yea mendicated and begged dignity? I have read of a Pope of
Rome, that bragged he came ex illustri dome, of an illustrious house; which
upon examination, was a poor cottage, into which the shun did shine, through
the many breaches of the same: but if he had been virtuous, he might have put
honor upon this mean place; and it would have been no disparagement unto him,
in the judgment of wise men; to have been born so meanly. But no more of this.

I will multiply thy seed exceedingly. We see whose blessing Issue is; I will
do it, says God.

Secondly, from whence the Multiplication of issue is; and that it is a
blessing.

But both these I fully handled else where.

To shut up then for this time: Observe. 6. There is no arguing who are Gods
Benjamins, from the greatest most of Temporalls.


Here was a great temporal blessing bestowed upon such as were without the
covenant. God is pleased to bestow temporal favors, with a full hand, upon
such as are Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. We see this in manifold
examples; how God has made the cup of the wicked run over with these outward
things: Esau had the fatness of the earth, for his portion; and those Sodomites
that were so profligately wicked, yet dwelt in a place, that was as the garden
of Eden: And the Canaanites whom God cast out, and were so notorious for all
kinds of abomination; had a land, that flowed with milk and honey. The rich
glutton in the Gospel, was clothed in purple, and fared deliciously every day:
Luke 12.
and that other, Luke 12. had his barnes full, and looked to receive his
incoms: They have had, and have, honor and great places, and offices: they
have had children at their desire; they have had goodly dwellings, and gotten
great victories, and been succesfull in many enterprises: and there be many
reasons of this.

First, God will show his bounty, even to the vessels of wrath; there shall be
none but shall partake of his favor.

Secondly, some good may be found in the most desperate persons, some moral
good; some action (though not in their intention, yet) in the event, that has
some goodness in it; and the least good, God will not suffer to go unrewarded:
As Saint Ierom observes, upon Ezekiel 29. S Ierom. Ezech. 29.
In Gods giving of Egypt to Nebuchodonosor, for his service against Tyrus.
Intelligimus etiam Ethnicos, si quid boni fecerint, absque mercede, in Iudicio
domini non praeteriri: We hence understand, (says he,) that very heathen men
(if any good they do,) are not dismissed without a recompense, from the justice
of the righteous Lord.

Thirdly, God will hereby render them inexcusable; if they be not allured by
his favors, he will be justified in his judgments upon them. Saint Augustine
seems to add a fourth reason; drawn from the nature of these outward
blessings. Dantur bonis, ne putentur mala; dantur malis, ne putentur sum
bona: They are given to good men, lest they should be thought evil things; and
they are given to evil men, lest they should be thought the chiefest good.

For the Use of this:

Application Eccles. 9.2.
Let not men crow, upon the enjoyment of these outward things; for they are no
arguments of Gods special love, Eccles. 9. neither love nor hatred, by all that
is before them: the wicked may have them, and have them ex largitate, sed non
ex benignitate dei; Out of Gods royal bounty, as a benefactor; but not out of
his tender love, as a Father.

Secondly, let not the godly envy the prosperity of the wicked; this temptation
they have had; Psalm. 37.1. etc.
as we see in David, Psalm. 73. and Job 21. and Ierem. 12. But what says the
Psalmist? Fret not thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious
against the evil dooers; they taste of his common bounty, but not of his
spiritual love: and besides; they stand in slippery places, their table is
their snare. Et faelicitas implorum fovea ipsorum; The prosperity of fools
(says Solomon,) is their destruction: They are but fatted to the day of
slaughter; they receive all the good they are like to have, in this life; as
Abraham says, to the rich man in Hell: nay in steed of envying, let the godly
be comforted.

First, let them make account that God will give them that which is fitting for
them, even in these outward things; for if the dogs be so fed, surely the
children shall not want bread: But if God be pleased to keep them short in
these outward things, he will make it up to them in spiritual, yea, in eternal
blessings. Quid dabit eis quos praedestinavit ad vitam, Qui haec dedit eis quos
pradestinavit ad mortem? (says the Father:) what will he give to those, whom
he has ordained unto life; who has given such good things to those, whom he
ordained unto death?

Lastly, Let it be an Use to us all; that seeing even the wicked may have so
great a share in these outward things, we should labor for those things that
be most excellent; and that may put a difference, between us and them: these
outward things are gratis data; graciously and freely given; but there be some
things that be gratum facientia, carrying grace along with them, (as the school
speaks;) and making their receivers gracious; and such are true piety and
godliness, and the fear of the Lord: There is justification and sanctification,
and peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost: These be panis Filiorum,
the childrens bread; these be prima, the first and chief things; these outward
things, but the Et Caetera, the additionals. First, seek the kingdom of Heaven,
and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto you.
Let us labor to be in Christ, in God; and then we shall have more joy, then
all they, whose corn, and wine, and oil, is increased: Let us be adorned with
the sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit, (in comparison whereof, all the riches,
and honors, and pleasures of the world, are but dung and dross:) and the King
of Heaven shall take pleasure in our Beauty.

Preached, December. 8. 1641.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.11. And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with
child, and shall bear a son.
WE told you, the words of the Angel to Hagar were of three sorts:

First, words of Question.

Secondly, of Admonition.

Thirdly, of Prediction.

We have dispatched the two first, and entered upon the third.

The Prediction is of three things:

1. Of the multiplication of her seed, verse. 10.

2. Concerning the child she went withal, that was to be the root of that
numerous issue, verse. 8.

3. Concerning the quality and condition of the child, verse. 12.

The first Prediction we stood upon the last day: Now we are come to the
second; and this Prediction has many Consolations in it:

First, concerning her conception.

Secondly, that she shall bring forth.

Thirdly, that the issue shall be a son.

Fourthly, that his name shall be Ishmael. And

Lastly, in the reason of his name much comfort, in that God had heard her
affliction.

For the first, Behold, thou art with child: Lyra, and others, Lyra, Glossa
ordin.
read it in the future tense, Thou shall conceive. And they have this conceit,
that Hagar (first, in way of punishment for her sin, for her insolency toward
her mistress, and her flight from her; and secondly, through the weariness of
her journey) had suffered abortion: her former conception was frustrated; but
now God in his mercy (upon her humiliation) would revive that embryo, that was
dead within her. But Paulus Burgensis recites this as a Fable, Paulus Burgensis.
and confutes the reason that Lyra gives. And whereas Lyra says, It is read
in the future tense; it is wonder that so great an Hebritian should be so
mistaken: for it is not so: It is here a participle; and so Arius Montanus
renders it praegnans, Genesis 38.25.
being with child: And so it is, Genesis 38. when Tamar brought forth the staff
and the signet, she says, By the man whose these are, (...), am I with child.
And the Septuagint render it, here in our Text, (...), Thou art with child.
And where Lyra voucheth that place, Judges 3.5.
Judge. 13. where the Angel says to the mother of Samson, that she shall
conceive; the word is in praeterito, the preterperfect tense, (...); but it
must be understood of the future: Nothing hinders, but that we may say, that
Samsons mother had conceived him, even when the Angel spoke to her: for there
is not a word spoken of her conception, after the Angel departed; it is only
said, The woman bare a son, and called his name Samson, verse. 24.

But now then, in the next place, she was with child already; and what comfort
(will some say) in the Angels word unto her, Behold, thou art with child?

Yes; she might judge that she was with child, and yet not be so: it is no
strange thing, that women should be mistaken in that kind: Many have thought
themselves with child, and reckoned from such a time; yet it has proved but a
false conception: but now that the Angel of God assures her it is so, it must
needs add to her comfort.

Observe. 1. In doubts of mind, or weak persuasions, the confirmation of good
Ministers, and other godly people, (as it were) seals an assurance.
When a thing is doubtful and questionable, and that it is possible there may
be a misprision; for one to have the confirmation of another, strengthens
much. Yea, if a man be in a reasonable manner assured of a thing; yet when one
sets to his seal, and confirms it, that is (...), of judgment and credit, it
conduces very much to the establishing of the mind.

I am sure, this holds true in regard of the soul: there are oftentimes good
motions, and good desires, which are the conceptions of the soul: but because
there is in every one (even the best) much corruption, and a kind of spiritual
guile, and a self-love, whereby men are apt to think better of themselves then
there is cause; when a man that has piety and understanding, and has his
senses exercised to discern both good and evil, as it is, Heb. 5. shall, by
examination of things, Heb. 5.14.
find such motions to be good, and the resultances of Gods holy Spirit shall
witness them so to be; it gives great contentment to the heart of another, yea
even in those things whereof the heart is well persuaded, and in a manner
assured; yet the confirmation of another adds much to the comfort. Daniel (no
question) was persuaded of Gods love toward him; yet when the Angel tells him
that he is greatly beloved, Dan. 9.23. Application
Dan. 9. he receives (no doubt) far greater satisfaction. And such strength is
added to many, by the Angels of the Churches, which are the Ministers: when a
man finds these and these things in himself, and is persuaded of the reality
and truth of them; yet, when either in public preaching, or private
conference, the man of God sets to his seal, there is an increase comfort: Yea,
even private Christians may receive confirmation from each other in this kind:
else would not the Apostle have used such exhortations, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Comfort
your selves together, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Iud. 20. Heb. 10.24.
edify one another: and Jude. 20. edify one another, in your holy faith. When
they consider one another, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. and see the state of
their brother, upon perfect observation, to be good; and shall out of Gods
word, and their own experience, assure him of it; they do strengthen his spirit
exceedingly; so that if his own hold fail him, and that he have want of former
felicity, yet he is upheld and supported, by the testimony of his godly
brethren; of whom he is persuaded, that they have the spirit of God: It is
memorable, that our acts and monuments report of John Carles, Fox his acts and
monuments.
a poor weaver, who in a letter sent to Master Bradford, being at that time, as
he was often, in affliction of conscience; gave him assurance of the remission
of his sins: that holy Martyr professes, that he had received more comfort
by that letter, then he had in all the time of his imprisonment before. Such
helps may godly christians be, one to another; yea the meaner to those of
greater gifts.

A Second comfort that the Angel gives her, is; Observe. 2. The woman's sense
of the curse in childing, yet of the blessing too in safe delivering,
cautioneth the Abortion of her Thankefulness and duty.
that she shall bring forth. And who doubts, but This is an addition to the
former; considering how many conceive, and yet suffer Abortion. It is part of
the sentence of the woman, for her First transgression; I will greatly multiply
thy sorrow, in thy conception; and in sorrow shall thou bring forth, Cen. 3.
How many are the faintings, the longings, the nauseating of this and that food?
The unwealdiness of women, while they go with child? how apt are they to
miscarriages; upon any slip, or fright, or fever? and when she comes to
travel, and that her hour is come (as our Savior speaks, Joh. 16. Ioh. 16.21.
) She has sorrow; grievous pains, throws, and fearful convulsions: so that
oftentimes the child dies, and never sees the light: or if the child be
brought forth, the mother dies! as we see in Rachel, and the wife of Phinees;
and many thousand examples more. The difficulty, and danger of childe-bearing
is such, Euripides.
that Helena in Euripides says: she had rather stand ten times in the front of
the battle; then once bring forth a child: Yea the Scripture makes it a
resemblance of the greatest afflictions, that befall men in this life: Isaiah
chap. 13. Isai. 13.8.
Speaking of the judgments that shall come upon Babylon; says, They shall be
afraid, pains and sorrow shall take hold upon them, they shall be in pain, as a
woman that travelleth: So Isaiah 26.17. c. 26.17.
Like a woman with child, that draws near unto the time of her delivery, is
in pain, and cries out in her pain: even so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.
Ierem. 6.24. Anguish has taken hold of us, and pain, Ier. 9.24.
as of a woman in travel, Mich. 4.9. Pangs have taken thee, as a woman in
travel: yea the Scripture finds no resemblance of the pangs of Hell: the
sorrows of Hell compassed me about: Psalm. 18. (...): Psalm. 18.6.
the word properly signifies those sharp pangs, which women have in travel;
from (...) (in Pihel) that signifies Parturivit. She has traveled in
childe-birth: Hos. 13.14. (...)
and they are called, Hose. 13.13. (...), the pains of a traveling woman. Our
Lord speaking of those troubles that should preceed the day of judgment, says,
these be (...), the beginnings of Sorrow, Mat. 24.8.
Matt. 24. (...) being properly the sorrow of a woman in travel: The rich man
in hell says (...); I am tormented in this flame; And Abraham uses the same
word again to him in the next verse. These things set out unto us, the
difficulty and danger of bringing forth; and therefore it may be justly
accounted a great blessing here promised; that she shall not miscarry, but
bring forth.

The Use of this is:

Application Unto wives.
First, To women that are with child, that seeing it is Gods blessiing, they
should direct their prayers unto him, for their happy progress in this great
work: Not unto Lucina, as the Heathens; or as the Papists to the Virgin Mary,
or any other Saint or Angel; but to God; whose sole blessing it is both to
conceive, and to bring forth. Secondly, they should not be guilty of any thing,
whereby they may prevent this blessing; such intemperance is in some, such
hunting and violent agitations of their bodies, that they oftentimes miscarry,
and are the causes of much woe to themselves; besides the contemptuous
repelling of Gods blessing, that they are guilty of. Thirdly, It should teach
them, after their childe-bearing, to give God thanks; and that not only in a
perfunctory and formal manner, or in some concealed way, as if they were
ashamed of it: but to do it solemnly, and even to require the assistance of the
congregation: for there are but few deliverances temporal, that hold weight
with the delivery from the pains of childbirth; and certainly, if Gods mercy
be in a fire, our thankfulness must not be in a frost: if we shall be earnest
to cry to God in our wants, and not return to give thanks, a worse Leprosy
sticks to the souls of those in the Gospel, then they under the Law were
afraid of in their bodies.

To husbands.
Secondly, It is an Use to Husbands, that seeing this is such a blessing, they
should do their part in praying unto God, in the behalf of their wives; that
they may have an happy passage, through such great Sorrows, and may safely
bring that into the world, which they go withal. Thirdly, they should favor
them all the time, both in contenting them, to their power, with such meats as
they have a mind to: 2. not putting upon them hard or difficult employments.
3. in providing things necessary against the time that they shall lie down; and
at that time, being tender over them, and comfortable unto them. And certainly,
were there not Religion to enjoin this, Reason and equity would require it,
That seeing the woman has the pain and sorrow, and the man free, (whose child
it was, as well as hers) he should be respective of her, and loving unto her,
and not be wanting in any thing necessary for her.

To children.
Fourthly, it is an Use for Children. Is it such a blessing of God, to bring
them through such difficulties and dangers into the world?

1. They should be thankful to God. To children.
How did he preserve them so many months, in the dark receptacle of the womb!
Nazianzen calls men (...), that is, twice buried; once in the womb of the
mother, and again in the womb of the earth. Gregory Nazianzen.
How did God make them grow and increase, there and bring them forth! They
might have been brought to the birth, and no strength to bring them forth; or
they might have been brought forth dead. God has brought them forth alive, and
therefore it is worthy of their best acknowledgement.

2. It should quicken their love, and respect, and obedience to their mother:
the mother bought this blessing dearly, and they owe the mother much. Matri
debes longa fastidia, (says Saint Ambrose) longa discrimina; Thou owe to thy
mother many longings, many loathings, many tedious dangers: Tibi jejunavit,
tibi comedit; S. Ambrose.
for thee she fed, for thy sake she fasted: fasted oftentimes from the best
diet, and fed sometimes on things worse, for thy sake: Yea, Cum ediderit quod
optavit; (says he) partu absolvitur, non timore; when she has brought what
she desired, she is free from her burden, but not from her fear and care; she
has her hands full still, and her head full still, and her heart full still,
and still is anxious for thy well-doing. It is true, such is the corruption of
man's nature, that he that will respect the father, is not so respective of the
mother: she is the weaker vessel, and men take a liberty to step over the hedge
where it is lowest. But we shall find father and mother joined, in the
Commandment: Jacob is said to have obeyed his father and his mother, Genesis 28.
and Solomon, at least twenty times in the Proverbs, mentions both father and
mother: And we shall find, Levit. 29. Genesis 28.7.
the mother put before the father; You shall fear every man his mother and his
father: as if he would on purpose meet with that neglect that is of the mother.
Levit. 29.3.
But were there not this charge, yet the consideration of the many pains and
pangs that the mother has endured, the many watchings and much trouble that
she has had for the childs good, would obliege every one that has the least
spark of good nature, to a due love and respect unto her. Upon this ground, old
Toby counsels his son, to love and reverence his mother, and not to be
wanting unto her all his days. Oh then, having been brought into the light
through so much trouble to the mother, let every child love her, honor her,
never suffer her to want. Our Savior did take care of his mother, when he was
leaving of the world. This is (...), 1 Timothy 5. to requite their parents: this
is Vicem reddere parentibus, (as Saint Augustine says of his mother Monica; 1 Timothy 5.4.
) to reflect some of the good offices of parents: This is (...), as the young
stork does by the dam: This is that which will bring a blessing upon the
childs head: And it was never found, that a child that was pious in this
kind, went away unrewarded: but on the other side, to neglect the mother, and
despise her, is the next way to a curse: for such a one, (says Agur, Prove. 30.
Prove. 30.17.
) the raven of the valleys shall pick out his eyes, and the young eagles shall
eat them.

3. A third advancement of her comfort is, that she shall bring forth a son.
The Angel comfort her, Quoad sexum prolis, promittendo masculum; according
to the sex of her seed, by promising a male.

Observe. 3. Importunate desires of children, and especially of males, is a
frailty of nature. True piety (in both) contentedly attends Gods pleasure. Genesis
15.2. And Chap. 25. And 30.1.
Great and earnest have been the desires of people after children.

Abraham seems, in his infirmity, to overlook all the blessings that God had
or could bestow upon him, in comparison of a child, Genesis 15. What can thou
give me, seeing I go childless? And we see how earnest Isaac and his wife both
were for a child, Genesis 25. and how passionate was Rachel in this case! Give me
children, or else I die, says she to her husband, Genesis 30. And how did Hannah
take on, for this defect of issue! 1 Samuel 1. And Gehazi suggesteth this to his
master, as the only way to gratify the Shunamitish woman for all her
kindness, 2 Kings 4. to beg a child, of God, for her. And the women were then
earnest, not only out of an instinct of Nature; for it is natural to desire
children; not only out of a desire to give contentment to their husbands; but
secondly, out of a fear of the reproach and shame of barrenness. God has taken
away my reproach, says Rachel, Genesis 30.23.
after she had born a son, Genesis 30. and so says Elizabeth, Luke 1.25. God has
looked upon me, to take away my reproach among men. And as, upon these reasons,
they were desirous of children; so of a male-childe: their hearts stood most to
this of old, because every woman in Israel was desirous, yea ambitious to be
the mother of the Messiah, who, they knew, should be the seed of the woman. And
still the affections of mothers are carried to a male: whether it be in regard
of the dignity; (for the male is more excellent then the female, even from the
creation;) or whether it be in regard of the perfection: Nature does intend a
male, Aristoteles.
(says the Philosopher;) and the female he would have to be (...), an
aberration of Nature. God would have the males consecrated to him: All the
males shall be mine, Exodus 13.12. Mal. 1.10.
Exodus 13. and the Paschal Lamb, that was to typifie Christ our sacrifice, was
to be a male: and, Mal. 1. he is cursed, as a deceiver, that has a male in his
flock, and offers that which is corrupt or imperfect. Or lastly, whether it
be because the male does longest continue the name of the family: for it dies
in the female, being planted into another stock; I do not determine. But,
commonly, the affection of the mother is to the male: and therefore Sarah is
told, she shall have a son; and the mother of Samson is told, she shall have a
son: Hannah, being barren, one would have thought, should have been contented,
1 Samuel 1.11.
even with a female; yet you shall see, 1 Samuel 1. that her desire is for a
man-child. And for the increase of the Shunamitish woman's comfort, 2 King.
4.16.
2 Kings 4. he tells her, she shall not only have a child, but she shall
embrace a son. So the Angel to Zacharias, knowing what would best suit both
with his desire and his wife's, tells him, that his wife Elizabeth shall bear
him a son, Luke 1.13. Luke 1.13.
And so the Angel to the Virgin Mary, Thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear
a son, verse. 31.

For the Use of it:

A son is Gods blessing, Application
and it is not simply unlawful to ask it of God; but it must be with
submission of our desires and requests to Gods good will and pleasure: and if
it shall please God not to answer us in the thing we desire, yet not to be
tumultuous, or murmr at it: For,

First, Beggars must be no chusers: it were an insolent part in a beggar,
because he could not have what he would, to despise that which is given. Omnes
mendici Dei sumus, (says the Father;) we are all beggars to the Almighty; and
he will give us what he thinks good, and we are bound to take it thankfully.

Secondly, we must know, that he does more for us, in giving us any children at
all, then he owes us.

Thirdly, if people had no child, they would be glad of any.

Fourthly, it may be, though God does not hear us ad voluntatem, (says the
Father) yet ad salutem; according to our will, yet he does, to our welfare. In
denying us that which our hearts much stand unto, he preventeth our sin (as
foreseeing we would too much dote upon it) and our sorrow: if he should take it
away, we should be more afflicted: and crosses soonest come in those things we
love most. Or if that child should miscarry, by a lewd course, it would be so
much more vexation, by how much our affection has been greater; as we see in
Absalon, whose ruin was the more grievous to David, because he passionately
loved and affected him.

Secondly, let it teach us, that when God satisfies our desire, in the
particular thing we desire, whether it be male or female, to be truly thankful
for it, and to make right use of it. We have but little reason to expect, that
God should gratify us in the very individual thing that we desire: for, how
often, when he calls for this and that at our hands, do we put him off, and
send him away empty? And if we do any thing, it is no further then it stands
with our own liking; so that we rather please our selves then God. And
therefore when (notwithstanding the ill measure we offer him) he shall give us
our desires in the very thing we ask, we have reason to be thankful, and put
such a blessing to the best use, even that which may make most for Gods glory:
so did Hannah, as appears, 1 Samuel 1. 1 Samuel 1. the two last verses.
For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my portion which I asked
of him: therefore also have I lent him unto the Lord; as long as he lives, he
shall be lent unto the Lord. So say every of you, when you look upon this or
that child, and can say, This is the son of my desires, this is the daughter
of my prayers; I begged earnestly for him or her, and God heard my request: be
more careful to bring them up in the fear of God; and provide that they may
honor God in an especial manner: And let not a fond and carnal affection and
indulgence, make you forget the blessing you have received; God has fulfilled
your desires, seek to fulfill his, which is to be most honored with those
blessings, that he has bestowed upon your importunity; if you fail in this,
there may a curse lie in that which you have most earnestly desired, and
obtained; and you may smart to purpose, for your unthankfulness.

The fourth consolation in this prediction is in the name, and Reason of the
name: The repetition of that passage.
Thou shall call his name Ishmael. This was not to give power to her to impose
the name, for it properly belonged unto the husband: and so we shall find
afterward, that Abraham called his sons name (which Hagar bare,) Ishmael: And
so Jacob altered the name that his wife had given, from Benoni to Benjamin: if
we find in Scripture, Observe. 4. The imposition of the name belongs unto the
Father; yet no name, or other externals whatsoever, to be boasted of, or deemed
a privilege. Ruth. 4. 1 Samuel 1.
that women gave names to their children, we must suppose the consent of their
husbands; not that they did it by their own authority. The wife of Manoah bare
a son, and called his name Sampson; the women, the neighbors of Naomi, gave
the child a name, Ruth. 4. but we must suppose, it was suggested unto Boaz,
and he appointed it. So Hannah gave Samuel his name, no doubt with the consent
of her husband Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1. Elizabeth, likewise, when the child was to be
circumcised, and the neighbors would have him called Zacharias, after his
father; she said no, he must be called John; yet was not that ratified, till
the father himself was consulted; and when he said it must be so, they called
him John: but I let that pass; Cajetan in locum.
he shall be called Ishmael, nec praeterea, says Cajetan, take knowledge that
Ishmael is the first, in Scripture, that God gave a name unto, before he was
born: but withal another observes, that he was the only ill in Scripture,
whose name is foretold: The next was Isaac and Josias, in the old testament;
and the Baptist and our blessed Savior, in the new: But in or before the birth
of these four (whose names were foretold,) there was some miracle showed; Isaac
born of Sarah at ninety years of age: when Josias was named, the Altar clove in
sunder, 1 Kings 13.2.
1 Kings 13. When the Baptist was promised, his Father was stricken dumb; and
Christ was born of a virgin: but in the foretelling of Ishmaels name, no
miracle, that we read of, was wrought; unless we will give way unto the fiction
of the Hebrews, (that we mentioned in the beginning;) that the child was dead
in Hagars womb, upon her long travel; and miraculously revived again. Well
then, the foretelling of Ishmaels name, though (as Saint Chrysostom observes;
S. Chrysostom
) it shows the care that God had of Hagar, by mentioning such particulars;
yet it is not to be boasted of; nor any of those outward things else, wherein,
men out of the covenant, have as great a share as others, yea oftentimes a
greater then others; as if they were certain evidences of Gods special love:
Eccles. 9.
no, they fall alike, both to good and bad, says the Preacher, Eccles. 9.
There is a conceit, that possesses the mind of many a man in the world; who
being guilty of gross sins, yet because God blesses him in these outward
things, and makes him prosper; faith, surely God would not thus favor me, if
he did not love me; is it like I should enjoy this abundance, if God did not
bear a special affection toward me? Application
But this is a gross mistake for Esau was hated of God, and yet the fatness of
the earth was his portion. Psalm. 17.4.
These be those, that have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17. and yet, have
no part in Heaven: Let no man therefore think, these outward things and the
full enjoyment of them, assurances of Gods special love; but let him labor (as
I said the last day) for the graces of Gods Spirit; which are panis Filiorum,
the childrens bread; and the dogs of the world shall have no part in them:
Gifts are bestowed upon Ishmael, and the sons of the Concubine; but the
inheritance, is reserved for Jsaac: God only loves with a special love, and
the affection of a Father, whom he has ordained to salvation. Observe. 5. The
strange metamorphoses of sin.


But now for the reason of the imposition of this name, because the Lord has
heard thy affliction: Where we may observe, the reason of the imposition of
names: 1. It has not been only used, to distinguish one party from another;
but 2. in the second place, to signify something to come. So Hevah had her
name, because she was to be the mother of all living: and Abram was called
Abraham, because he was to be the Father of much people; and Sarah, because she
was to be the mother of Princes. And Isaac had his name from laughter* not only
because of the present rejoicing of his parents, but because he was to be cause
of joy to posterity, in regard the Messiah was to spring from him: And Joseph,
because God would add another son. And Solomon, because he was to be a peaceful
Prince. And Jesus, because he was to save his people from their sins. 3. Names
have been imposed, to keep in fresh memory, some blessing past; and so we see
Jacob has the name of Israel, to put him still in mind of his wrestling with
God, and how he prevailed with him. So Joseph called his elder Son Manasses,
because God had made him forget his affliction; and his younger, Ephraim,
because God had made him fruitful in the land of his affliction. And so Moses
had his name, from being drawn out of the flaggs. And Samuel, because he was
begged of God; yea to this purpose, that Gods people might remember his
mercies, they have given names to places: Abraham calls the place where God had
spared Isaac, Genesis 22. c. 28.
and provided another sacrifice in his room, Iehovah-jireh; the Lord will
provide, that he might never forget the experiment he had, of Gods gracious
providence: Jacob changes the name of Luz, into Bethel, the house of God, Genesis
28. that he might ever remember how graciously and comfortably God had revealed
himself unto him, in that place: Iehosophat, and the people, that they might
never forget the mavelous comfort that they had received from God, in a
strange deliverance, from an invincible army of the Ammonites and Moabites, and
Edomites, called the place (where they met together to praise God for his
mercy) the valley of Berakah (i. e.) the valley of blessing, 2 Chronicles. 20.
2 Chronicles. 20. yea, they have given names to times: Mordecai and Gods people, to
keep in perpetual remembrance that deliverance of theirs from that conspiracy
of Haman, did not only keep those days wherein execution should have passed
upon them, as days of rejoicing, every year; but called them days of Purim*
Esther 9. Esther 9.
(...) is a Lot, and a Lot, we know, was cast upon them, for their extirpation.

Lastly, Names have been given unto men, as to mind them of Gods mercy to them,
so of their duty to him; that as often as they hear or remember their name, they
might be stirred up to thankfulness and obedience: as Judah, that is from
praising; Simeon, from hearing; and Benjamin, the son of his fathers right
hand; which carried his duty in it. So John or Jochanan, the graces of God; and
Theophilus, and Timothy, and diverse others.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
First, Let all Parents learn to give fitting Names to their Children, such as
may mind them of Gods mercy, and their duty; such as may be Monitors to them
upon all occasions, to remember God and themselves: Scripture Names are fit to
be given, for they have good instructions in them.

Secondly, Names of virtuous Predecessors, by whose examples they may be
stirred up to tread in their steps. They too too much offend, that care not
what heathenish Names they give to their Children; and some give such
ridiculous Names, that they are far from Christianity, or Civility: And some
again are so affected, and rather give Sentences, sometimes, then Names; that
(me thinks) it is a dishonor to God, in whose Name the Child is baptized; to
the holy Sacrament which is solemnized; and to the Congregation of Saints,
before whom the Name is given; yea, to the Child it self, who is like to carry
a mock and a brand, rather than a Name, all the days of the life of it.

Thirdly, When people have good and significant Names given unto them, let them
labor to make them good; so did John: He had the grace of God; and Theophilus,
He loved God. So did Timotheus, according to his name, He was a man that feared
God. So was Clemens, and Prudens: So was St. Jerome's Pannachius, and St.
Ambrose his Agnes: and Nazianzens Meletius: And Valentinian said of Probus, He
was vir sui nominis, that he was a man of his own name (i. e.) an honest man.
Those that have had ill names, have fulfilled them; as we see in Zeb and Oreb,
a Wolf and a Raven; and such they were against the people of God: And Nabal,
as his name was, so was he, he was a fool, and folly was with him: And
Achitophel made good his name, for (though he were accounted as a wise man, and
consulted as an Oracle, yet) he dyed as (...) (i. e.) The kinsman, or brother
of a fool; for seeing his Counsel despised, He went home, set his house in
order, and hung himself: Let those then that have good names, make them good:
But here is a gross defect, Absalon has a name that signifies the peace of
his Father, and we know full well what a disturbance and a vexation he was unto
him; Zedechiah signifies, the righteousness of God, and a most unrighteous man
he was; Antiochus was called Epiphanes (i. e.) illustrious; whereas he was
(...), the furious; and breathed out nothing but cruelty against the people of
God: And so the Pope of Rome that styles himself Servus servorum, the servant
of Servants, shows how he does affect to be Dominus Dominantium, A Lord of
Lords; it is a fashion of the Popes when they enter on the Popedom, to alter
their names: But Pollid^r Virgil observes, Pol. Virg.
He that called himself Bonifacius was Malefacius, He means an ill doer:
Urbanus was Rusticus, (i. e.) clownish; or as it was said of one of that name,
Turbanus, from his troubling so the Christian world; Innocentius, Improbus,
being most nocent; Pius, impius, being ungodly; Paulus, Saulus, being a
persecutor. And so the Jesuits have a glorious name, but (as one says of the
Philosophers) Nomen sibi solum retinuerunt, They have retained only the name
unto themselves; for how unlike are they to him whose name they do most
impudently usurp? He went about doing good, they go about doing mischief, like
their great master the devil, seeking whom he may devour. And as he comes
from compassing the earth, so they compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte,
though they make him seven times more the child of the devil then themselves.
His words and deeds were always full of compassion and mercy, theirs full of
rage and cruelty: None more meek then he, none more proud then they: None more
peaceable then he, none more tumultuous then they. As of old there was no Play,
but there was a Devil in it; so no Treason or Conspiracy, in these latter
times, wherein the hand of these Joabs, these Jesuits, is not. But not to lay
the Scene too far off, How are we our selves guilty in this kind! We have a
glorious Appellation, that which those of the Church of Antioch first had, and
no doubt triumphed in, Acts 11. And that is, Act. 11 26.
the name of Christians; we have it from Christ, 1 John 2.
and should have that anointing St. John speaks of, 1 John 2. And the same
mind should be in us that was in Christ Jesus, (as St. Paul speaks;) we
should learn of him, we should resemble him; and the very name is a strong
Obligation upon us. Bernard.
St. Bernard makes one of the graces of the soul to be Recordatio propriae
professionis, the apprehension and memory of her own Christian Profession; But
at the other side it is a foul disparagement to a man, vocari quod non est, to
be entitled what he is not, (Says S. Augustine.) Nomen inane, Crimen immane, a
frustrated name, St. August.
is an heinous crime; and yet how defective are we unto this our Denomination?
Called Christians, but live like Pagans. Oh what a Soloecisme is This? Our Lord
has redeemed us, and there is a virtue that proceeds from his Passion, to
make those whom he has redeemed, holy; He is our head, and thence is an
influence from the head into all the members; Too, we profess our selves the
Redeemed of the Lord, and find no virtue of his Death; Members of him, and find
no power conveyed unto us, for Piety: What will the Heathen say? Christians
and bloody! Christians and excessive! Christians and licentious! Christians and
fraudulent! Christians and malicious! Wherein are they better than we: They
shame their Master by their lewd courses. In the fear of God, as we have this
honorable Title, full of dignity, that we are Christians so let it mind us of
our duty, and let it be a tie upon us to walk worthy of that calling to the
which we are called: For else (as it was said in another case) Nomen Crimen,
the Name of Christian was their Fault; Tertul. in Apol.
(says Tertullian:) So it will be to us, the very Name will be our fault, and
the glorious Appellation will increase our condemnation.

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.11, 12. Because the Lord has heard thine affliction. Verse. 12. And he
will be a wild man.
THe words of the Angel to Hagar, were of three sorts:

First, of Question, verse. 8.

Secondly, of Direction, verse. 9.

Thirdly, of Prediction; and he foretells,

First, concerning the numerous multiplication of her seed, verse. 10.

Secondly, concerning the child she went withal.

1. That she should bring it forth. 2. That it should be a son. 3. That she
should call his Name Ishmael.
To which is added the reason of the Name, verse. 11.

Thirdly, he foretells the quality, and disposition, and course of this son,
verse. 12.

He shall be a wild man, his hand shall be against every man; and every man's
hand against him.

We have dispatched the words of Question and Direction; and in those of
Prediction, are come as far as his Name: Calvin in locum. Observe. 1. The father
of mercy often hears the miseries of his servants before they can put up their
prayers.
and have spoken something, concerning the imposition of Names.

Now for the Reason of this Name, here; Because the Lord has heard thine
affliction. Calvin upon this passage says, non legimus Agar in s^is angustiis
confugisse ad preces: we read not any thing of Hagars prayers, in these
straights of hers, and yet she is heard: God (says he) inclines to help
people, sometimes upon their supplication; sometimes even when they are mute,
and say nothing; makes his sun to shine, and his rain to fall, upon the just
and the unjust; he helps them; for the former, he is said exaudire preces; to
hear the prayers: for the latter, exaudire miserias; to hear the afflictions of
his people. It is certain, that God is so merciful, that many times he brings
those out of trouble, that never seek unto him in their trouble: and some
negligent ones are apt to plead this; and therefore when the hand of God is
upon them, they do not make supplications to their Judge; but such should know,
that that deliverance which comes without seeking, Application Dan. 9.23.
has not that comfort and satisfaction in it, which that has that comes
upon a man's pains: for it argues the love of God to a man, as the Angel
tells Dan. c. 9. At the beginning of thy Supplications the Commandment came
forth, and I am come to show thee, for thou art greatly beloved. Secondly, it
stirs up love in men toward God. I love the Lord (says David, Psalm. 116.
Psalm. 116.1.
) because he has heard my voice and my supplications. Thirdly, 1 Samuel 1. two
last verses.
It stirs one up to the greater thankfulness, as we see in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.
the two last verses, For this Child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my
Petition which I asked of him, therefore have I also lent him unto the Lord;
and as long as he lives he shall be lent unto the Lord: That estate which is
cast upon a man unexpectedly, has not that true sweetness in it, with that
which a man has gotten by his own industry: And therefore it is promised as a
special blessing, that a man shall eat the labor of his hands, Psalm. 128.2.
Psalm. 128. And so for a man to be freed from trouble, without any seeking unto
God, is not so comfortable, as when a man has prayed and begged hard for it.

But I hold you no longer in this:

For with the leave of so Reverend an Author as Calvin is, it may very well be
supposed, that Hagar did pray, in her affliction, unto the Lord; and that God
upon her humble prayer was inclined to show her mercy: and therefore the most
understand by this Phrase; He has heard thine affliction, the prayers which
she made in her Affliction; and so the Chaldee Paraphrase Translateth it,
Chald. Paraph.
Has received thy prayers. And what a ground of joy is this, to have a man's
Prayer admitted, and acceptable? Observe. 2. The great comfort of Gods accepting
our Devotions, with Caution touching apprehensions of the contrary Job 30.20.
Psalm. 80.4. Isa. 1.15.
Blessed be the Lord (says David) that has not turned away my Prayer, Psalm.
66.10. And he is often rejoicing, because the Lord had heard him. On the other
side, how grievous is it, for a man's Prayers to find none admittance, as we
hear Job complaining, Cha. 30. I cry unto thee, but thou do not hear me; I
stand up, and thou regardest me not. How long will thou be angry against the
Prayer of thy People? say they, Psalm. 80. So the Church, Lamentations 3.8. When
I cry and shout, he shuts out my prayer. So how God threatens his people,
Isa. 1. When you spread out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea,
when you make many prayers, I will not hear. Sometimes God not only not
admits, but he rejects the Petitions of some, that their prayer becomes
sin, Psalm. 109.7.
Psalm. 109.7. Yea, their prayer is an abomination, Prove, 28.9. So there is a
comfort, to have Prayer thought well of; and so is it for any other duty that
we perform to God; a great comfort to Abel it was, Genesis 4.4.
that God did accept his Sacrifice. The word (...) signifies, to look unto it,
Cum delectatione, with complacency and delight; the Septuagint renders it,
(...), he beheld. But Sy^^machus, (...), He was delighted with it; it is part
of that prayer of David, in behalf of the King, that God will accept his burnt
offerings.

The word (...) is there used, which signifies, turning into ashes, In Piel
(...) in cineres vertit.
which was a manifestation of Gods accepting of the Sacrifice, when by fire
from heaven he consumed it; as is said of Eliahs Sacrifice, and Solomon's; and
is supposed to be that testimony that God gave of his acceptance of Abels
Sacrifice; and therefore Theodosius turns the word that we had before, (...),
inflammavit, He has inflamed. Isa. 56.7
Isa. 56.7. God says, he will make his people joyful in the house of prayer,
(i.e.) whosoever therein should devoutly appear, their burnt Offerings and their
Sacrifices should be accepted: what a comfort was it to Cornelius, Act 10.4.
when the Angel told him, Act. 10.4.
that his Prayers and Alms were come up for a memorial before God: God did not
only take knowledge of them, and like well of them, but they were (...), as a
standing pillar in Gods sight: Well might Solomon say, Eccles. 9. Go thy way,
eat thy bread with joy, Eccle. 9.7.
and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for now God accepts thy works. It is
not to say, with what a delicious ravishing sweetness the soul is filled, when
it is persuaded of Gods acceptance of its services.

Again, Gods hearing of Prayer is not only an admittance and accepting of it,
but a resolution and purpose of satisfying the desires of his people, so far as
may stand with his glory, to give; and their good, to receive: When he is
described to be a God that hears Prayer, Psalm. 65. It is not only meant,
Psalm. 65.2.
that he lends an ear to Prayer, but he condescendeth to a satisfaction of
those Prayers: He fulfilleth the desire of those that fear him; he hears
their cry, and saves them, Psalm. 145. Psa. 145.19.


And therefore for the Use of it:

How may this encourage us to pour out our wants before God, Application
in the time of our Affliction? This is that course that Gods people have
taken, in any kind of distress; if it have been distress outward, either in
regard of enemies, we shall find Jehosophat seeking the Lord, when that great
Army came against him, 2 Chronicles. 20. If sickness, Hezekiah turns him to the
wall, and prays: Job 16.20.
If scorn and contempt, Job 16. My friends scorn me, but mine eyes pour out
tears unto God. Tears the strongest Oratory; And that which offers the
greatest violence to Heaven. If it be imprisonment, Manasses being in fetters
prays, and prays earnestly, 2 Chronicles. 33. 2 Chronicles. 33.


Secondly, In any inward desires they have used this means; as when they have
been troubled with some strong temptation: when the messenger of Satan was sent
to buffet St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. 12.8.
He ran to God by Prayer, For this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it
might depart from me: Or if their conscience have been wracked with a sense of
Gods wrath, They have betaken themselves to Prayer. Psalm. 18.5. David says,
The sorrows of hell compassed me about, Psa. 18.5, 6.
the snares of death prevented me; in my distress I called upon the Lord, and
cried unto my God. Yea, our blessed Lord, who was in a greater anguish of
spirit, then ever any man in the world was, (through the apprehension of Gods
fierce wrath against him,) sought comfort this way; he offered up prayers and
supplications, Heb. 5.7.
with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. Let us then take the course that Gods
people have done; and upon this receipt, there is a probatum in all times:
faithful prayer, has ever been as Noah's Dove, that has brought an
Olive-Leafe of peace at last: and if we have not, so soon as we desire, a
return of our prayers, (for some Reasons best known to God;) this may support
us:

First, that God takes knowledge of our prayers; he could tell Ananias, Acts
9.11.
that Paul prayed, Acts. 9.

Psalm. 141.2.
Secondly, they are pleasing unto him, Psalm. 141.2. as Incense, as odours.

Thirdly, he will certainly give an answer in due season, for he has bound
himself by promise. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
2 Chronicles. 15. If we seek him, he will be found of us; the seed of Jacob shall
not seek him in vain, Isaiah. 45.19. and this is our confidence, that we have
in him. 1 Ioh. 5.14. that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us: in the mean time, it is our duty to wait, to tarry the Lords
leisure.

An exception. Observe. 3. God often delivers graciously even those that suffer
deservedly
Fourthly, He hearing, certainly He will stablish our hearts. But now there is
an Objection against this; seeing God hears the affliction of Hagar. Why, she
suffered justly, for her insolency against her mistress, and for her
discontented flight; and therefore it was fit, she should smart for it; had she
been innocent, and had carried her self fittingly; reason she should have been
respected: for Gods care is for the innocent; David none other way expects a
blessing from God, for Shimeis cursing of him; but because he was innocent of
the crimes objected against him, 2 Samuel 16.
2 Samuel 16. and Psalm. 18.20. he says, The Lord did recompense him, according
to the cleanness of his hands. I Answer with Musculus; Musculus.
God delivers graciously, even those that suffer deservedly; and herein his
mercy appears: for were there no cause of suffering, but that men were
innocent, mercy had no place: If the best of us all, should have no further
hope of being delivered out of our afflictions, then we are innocent, we might
justly despair of deliverance: for what mere man in the world, ever suffered,
and did not deserve it? It is true, it may be in regard of some thing objected,
for which they suffer, they may be faultless, and men may be unjust in
prosecuting them; but considering the affliction as coming from God, there is
cause enough; and every man must lay his hand upon his mouth, and justify God
in his sayings, and clear him when he is judged. Though David knew he was
guiltless of any evil, done to the house of Saul, as Shimei charged him; yet
he understood well, that he was faulty otherwise; and that God did punish his
other sins, by this scorn of a malignant tongue: If he speak of Gods
recompencing him, according to his innocence; he does not quit himself from all
fault; but only take knowledge of Gods favor, in respecting his innocence, in
regard of the particular objected. Job suffered unjustly from his friends; and
his heart justified him, in that which they laid upon him: but yet he
acknowledges his own ill deservings, and that God justly does afflict him.

For the Use of this:

First, let it teach us to magnify Gods goodness, Application
and mercy toward men; who though they have justly incurred his wrath, and in
regard of their provocations, he might be deaf to their prayers, and not
deliver them; yet in the midst of wrath, he remembers mercy; and takes matter
of being merciful, from himself; hears their prayers, and brings them out of
trouble; he is a father of mercy, Tertullian.
and a God of all consolation: tam pius nemo, am pater nemo, (says Tertullian)
none so fatherly, none so compassionate: He knows whereof men are made, and
remembers that they are but dust; he deals not with them after their sins,
nor rewards them after their iniquities: though he might whip them with
scorpions, he will do it only with rods, and those rods he will remove too: the
rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous. Psalm. 125.3.
He will take them (...) (as the Greek Father calls it,) out of the furnace of
affliction. He will not suffer them to be tempted, (...) above what they are
able, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 10.13.
(...), not to be swallowed up: He may suffer them premi, sed non opprimi; to
be pressed, but yet not oppressed: it is true, there is desert enough, for the
continuance of his wrath; but yet he comes virga corrigente, non gladio
consumente; with a rod of correction, and not with a sword of destruction.

Secondly, Let this be another encouragement to us, to pray; some men apprehend
so deeply the extent of their sufferings, and are so conscious to themselves,
of their irritating of God, that they are discouraged from suing unto God; mine
iniquities have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, Psalm.
40. Psalm. 40.12.
And I wish that men could think of this, in the time of temptation to sin; how
fearful, how restless, how indisposed their sins will make them to prayer, in
the time of their need: But yet this must not be given way to; for God shows
mercy, even to such as he does afflict justly: when David had uttered these
words; my sins are more then the hairs of mine head, therefore my soul fails
me, Psalm. 40.12. v. 13.
Yet for all that, Verse. 13. He prays, be pleased O God to deliver me; O Lord
make haste to help me. Ezrah. 3.6.
And though Ezrah acknowledges Gods justice, and the peoples sinfulness, Ezra
3. yet he prays: The Prodigal had wilfullly cast himself out of his Fathers
house, and justly lay under the sad effects of his own disobedience and
profusion; and yet he resolves to seek to his father. So Nehemiah and Daniel,
see and confess the justice of God; yet they beg Gods mercy. 2. We must know,
it is a very good disposition to the mercy of God, to be truly cast down, in
the sight of our sin, Levit. 26.40, 41, 22.
as the procreant cause of our misery: the Lord says, Levit. 26. If they shall
confess their iniquity, and their trespass, which they have trespassed against
me, and that they have walked contrary to me, and that I have walked contrary
unto them, and have brought them into the hand of their enemy; if then their
uncircumcised heart shall be humbled, and they then shall accept of the
punishment of their iniquity, then I will remember my Covenant. 3. We must
know, that when we pretend that we suffer justly, and therefore have no heart
to go to God; our infidellity is a far greater sin, then any we have formerly
committed; for it opposes God in his Truth, and makes him a Liar; for he has
commanded us, to call upon him in the day of trouble, and has promised to hear
us; and yet we will not call, but say there is no hope: In the fear of God
therefore, let us in our afflictions, acknowledge our own desert, but withal
seek to God; the further we have run into Gods debt, the more need we have to
sue for mercy: and let us do this, not in regard of our own particular
afflictions, but of the calamity of the times: who sees not how cloudy the
times are, and how full of distraction; how the sides of the building, fly from
one another and the roof, ready to fall upon our heads? It is true, our sins
have deserved all this, and worse; yea the very dreggs of the vial: and we
must say with Mauritius, justus es O Domine, and recta judicia tua: just art
thou O Lord, and righteous are thy judgments; but because we are so deep, in
the procuring of the storm, shall we forbear to pray for the removing of it? O
no; let us cry earnestly, and mightily unto God, yea not to give over, though
things should grow to a greater extremity: cum duplicantur lateres, venit
Moses; when the Israelites taskes were doubled, then came the deliverer; and
man's extremity, is Gods opportunity. Let us pray and pray still, and join with
our prayers, a godly, sober, righteous, and peaceful life; and God is where he
was, and the same he was; he will not take advantage of it, in that our sins
have drawn this upon us: but he will be found of us, and will heal our
breaches, and return our peace and prosperity upon us, like a swelling flood.

(...)
One hint further: the name is Ishmael, i.e. God will hear: And the Exposition
is; God has heard thine affliction. The Angel seems to tell her, that as God
had heard her now, so her son shall carry his name; God will hear, if she carry
her self as she ought; she may be confident, that he that has heard her, will
hear her in all her necessities, and all his likewise that call upon him; yea,
all such as call upon him faithfully.

We come now to the next Reason:

Wherein is the Angels prediction concerning the quality and disposition of
Ishmael, S. Chrysostom in locum.
(...), (says St. Chrysostom,) He foretells the inclination of the Child;
and it is laid down in three Clauses.

First, He will be a wild man.

Secondly, His hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him.

Thirdly, He shall dwell in the presence of his Brethren.

All which argues the furiousness, and ferity of his disposition; that as he
shall be powerful, so he will be provoking and cruel; opposite to others, and
by that opposition drawing enemies upon himself.

But before I come to the particulars, Observe. 4. The most pious Parents may
have impious Children, and the contrary: Grace is not entailed by man, but only
conferred by God. 1 John. 2.12.
observe of whom this is affirmed, of Ishmael; why, He was the son of Abraham,
an holy, meek, courteous man, a great lover of peace, and this son contrary to
him in all these things: We may see then, that Godly Parents may have wicked
Children; Adam as he had a religious Abel, so a cursed Cain, who was of that
evil one and slew his brother, because his brothers deeds were good and his
evil, 1 John 2. Noah a just man in his generation had a wicked Cham; Abraham
had this Ishmael who mocked his brother, and persecuted Him that was born after
the Spirit, even Isaac. Gal. 4.29. Isaac had an Esau, a profane man, as he is
styled, Gal. 4.29.
Heb. 12.16. Eli a good man, yet had lewd sons, who by their wicked courses
made the Sacrifices of God to be abhorred of the people, 1 Samuel 2. Sons of
Belial: wickedness is not spoken in a stronger Phrase in all the Scripture.
Samuel a good man and upright, yet his Sons were not such; they walked not in
his ways, but after Bribes, 1 Samuel 8. 1 Samuel 8.3.
David a man according to Gods own heart, yet had he an incestuous Amnon, and
an ambitious Absalon, Jehosophat had a Jehoram: Hezechiah had a Manasses; and
Josiah had a Jehojakim. And what is found more true in experience, the Father
and Mother good, and the Child stark naught?

The Reason whereof is easily given: Grace is not traduced from the Parent to
the Child; the Father cannot conveigh holiness unto him, it is the gift of God;
Let him be a sanctified man, yet he begets a child as a man, not as an holy
man, by natural Generation, not spiritual Regeneration, Non ex principiis
novitatis, sed ex Reliquiis vetustatis, (says the Father;) Not out of the
principles of the new, but out of the Relics of the old man: Genesis 5.3.
Adam begot Seth in his own image; and David acknowledges (though he had
religious Parents) that he was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did his mother
conceive him, Psa. 51. Psalm. 51.5.
The Corn purged from the chaff comes up with it again, when it is sown: The
Circumcised father begets an uncircumcised child: And so the Serpent without
a sting begets a Serpent with a sting: So a godly person, though he can
perhaps transmith is goods unto his Son, can he leave him his goodness? Can he
conveigh his Graces, as his Lands? No, one man's goodness does not moralize
another.

For the Use of this:

First, Application
It must teach Parents to do what they can that their Children may be gracious;
They must instruct them: They must inlay them with Piety in their tender years:
They must follow them with good Advice: They must set them a good example, and
they must pray for them; they must correct them when occasion is, and unbind
the bundle of Folly that is in them; that so their Sons may grow up as the
young Plants, and their Daughters may be as the Polished corners of the Temple:
If there be a defect on their part in this, and that the Children grow wild
through want of their cultivating and care, they have much to answer for.

And secondly, If notwithstanding their care, the Children shall grow bad, they
must rest contented, they have freed their own souls, and the Childrens blood
shall be upon their own heads: They may plant and water, but it is God that
must give the increase; Grace is the gift of the Father of Spirits, and not of
the Father of the Flesh.

Thirdly, It should teach Children to labor for a goodness of their own, for
their Parents holiness shall not make them holy, nor their Faith justify them:
Some have a conceit that it is goodness enough for them that their Parents were
good; The Jews boasted that they had Abraham to their Father, John 3.
but St. John Baptist takes them off from this, and bids them bring forth
fruits worthy of life: And when our Lord perceived the same humor in them, He
denies them to be of Abraham, and says, They are of their father the devil,
Ioh. 8.44.
John 8.

Romans 11.6. 1 Cor. 7.14.
Why? but will some say, does not the Apostle say, Romans 11. That if the root be
holy, the branches are holy; and 1 Cor. 7.14. The seed of the Faithful is said
to be holy.

I answer, That holiness is to be understood only in regard of the Covenant, by
virtue whereof they are members of the visible Church, and have right to the
Sacraments, and partake of the outward Privileges: These be Foederati, (i.e.)
within the Covenant. God is the God of Abraham and of his seed; but they be not
Regenerati, not thereby regenerated in the Spirit.

Why, but yet they will say, The Promise is made to you and to your children.
Acts 2.35.
Acts 2.

I answer, Yes, but what follows? As many as the Lord our Goal shall call. So
in the second Commandment, He shows mercy unto thousands, but of them that
love him and keep his Commandments. Let the child then labor to imitate the
virtue of his Parents, and have a stock of Grace of his own; for else the Piety
of the Parent shall be so far from profiting him, that it shall add unto his
condemnation.

But now to make an entrance on that first particular Clause.

Observe. 5. The strange Metamorphosis of sin.
He will be a wild man. The Hebrew is (...) (that is) Onager, a wild Ass, a
man like a wild Ass; or as the Chaldee, A wild Ass among men; the Septuagint
render it only, (...), a man of the field, or wood; a wild man. This was
accomplished in Ishmaels person, Genesis 21.20.
who dwelt in the wilderness, Genesis 21. and so in his Posterity they were as
wild Asses. The wild Ass lives in the wilderness, is a beast of an untamed
nature, and unserviceable to man, Job 39.8, 9.10.
as we shall see him described Job 39. Therefore the Prophet likeneth
rebellious Israel unto a wild Ass, Jer. 2.24. Ier. 2.24.
So was Ishmael in regard of his Ferity, Fierceness, and Savageness. Whence we
may see, how sin un-manneth men, and makes them brutish; brutish in themselves,
and toward each other; whereof there being every where too much proof already
among us, almost in all professions, and for all brutish qualities; I shall
here only add this Caution: Let each one know and remember, that it were better
to be a Beast, then like a Beast.

Preached, Ian. 5. 1641.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.12. And he will be a wild man, and his hand will be against every
man, and every man's hand against him.
I Must acquaint you, with one thing further; Ishmael was the Son of Hagar; and
the Apostle makes her a figure of the covenant of the Law given in mount
Sinai, and of the earthly Jerusalem. As Sarah the free woman, figureth that
Jerusalem which is above, and the Covenant of the Gospel: as appears by the
Apostle, Gal. 4.
Gal. 4. Now, in that Ishmael is a wild ass; it argues the wild and fierce
nature of man, which by the Law cannot be tamed, but is made more rebellious:
Man, as an unbroken horse, when he is curbed and kept in, flings the more. This
is that which the Apostle says, Romans 7.8, 9, 13 Observe. 1. How sin is
irritated and provoked by the Law, yet that remaining good and holy.
Romans 7. Sin takes occasion, by the commandment; and verse. 9. When the
commandment came, sin revived; and verse. 13. By the commandment, sin became
exceeding sinful; sin is irritated and provoked by the law; not only because
(as Origin says,) quae prohibentur, magis desiderantur; such things as are
forbidden, are more eagerly desired, nitimur in vetitum; It Is a great piece of
the corruption of our depraved nature, to ambiate things most prohibited: And
some say, Eve did not so much long for the fruit, quia pomum, as quia vetitum;
for that it was pleasant to behold, as for that it was prohibited; but also
because when sin finds it self universally restrained, and meets with death
and hell, at every turn; and can have no subterfuge or evasion, from the rigor
and inexcusableness of the Law; like a river that is stopped, it rises, and
foameth, and swells: and thus the Law is said to strengthen sin; not per se,
aut ex intention legis, not by it self, or through its own intention; but by
accident, irritating and provoking that strength, which was in sin before;
though undiscerned, and less operative: for as the presence of an enemy, does
actuate and call forth that malice, which lay habitually in the heart before;
so the purity of the Law, presenting it self to that concupiscence that lay
before undiscerned, does provoke it to fiercenes and rebellions; and makes it
more outrageous; even as a mad dog, is the madder for his chayn: a strange
wildness, and fierceness, and stubbornness, there is in us naturally: we are
(...), and will endure no rule: nay, Tit. 1.10.
that which should hinder us, inflameth and enrageth us; and oftentimes we are
the worse, for being reproved.

For the Use.

We must labor to be recovered, Application
and to be subject to the Law of God; for if we will not suffer the law to be
froenum, it will be Flagellum; if it be not our Bridle to keep us from sin, it
will be our Scourge to lash us for sin; and so it has been to many wild ones
(the conscience being awakened;) the terrors of the Law have brought them even
to the brink of Hell, that they have seen nothing but Damnation before them.

But I go on.

The next Clause is, His hand shall be against every man; that is, He shall be
given to fighting and contention, to war and blood; as he shall be fierce and
cruel in his own nature, so he shall exercise this cruelty.

And we may here observe, Observe. 2. Wicked minds are full of cruelty, and that
an infallible symptom of an Ishmaelite. Ioh. 8.44.
That wicked minds are full of cruelty. We may fetch this as far as the Devil
himself, of whom our Savior says, that he was a murderer from the beginning,
John 8. from the beginning, that is, Non Creationis, sed Defectionis; not of
his Creation, but Defection; as soon as he was fallen, he sought the ruin of
mankind. So that Natales in Diabolo (as the Father says; in another case;) we
find the first beginning of cruelty in Satan: and from this evil one was Cain,
says St. John, 1 Epist. 3. who slew his brother; 1 Ioh. 3.12.
And such an one was Nimrod, who is said to be a mighty hunter before the Lord,
Genesis 10 9. a man of blood, that neither feared God nor man; Such were the
Egyptians that oppressed, and killed the bodies of the Israelites with hard
labor, and throwing their children into the River; it is called cruel
bondage, Exodus 6. Ezod. 6.9.
Esau was a bloudy-minded man; He was resolved upon the killing of his brother
Jacob; and when he returned from Mesopotamia, came with a purpose to have
effected it, if God had not taken off his edge; and we see how that malignity
ran in a blood, for the Edomites that were of Esau, were heavy enemies to the
Seed of Jacob: and in the day of Jerusalem encouraged the Adversary, and said,
down with it, even to the ground; yea, stood in the ways to cut off those that
escaped, as it is in the Prophecy of Obadiah. How bloody was Saul, and how did
he pursue the life of David? Charging his Servants to kill him, and sending
some to kill him in his bed. David speaks of the enemies of Gods people, that
blood and destruction was in their ways, and the way of peace they had not
known. What think we of Ahab and Jezabel? What think we of Amaleck? Of Herod
the great? Of Antiochus Epiphanes? who, besides the sacrificing of so many
innocent lives to his proud ambition, in the slaughter of the Children; even
when he was a dying (as if he would have his Sun go down fiery red, and in
blood,) gave order, that when he should dye, so many of the prime of the Jews,
whom he had cooped up, might be cut off, that so (whether they would or no) the
day of his death might be a day of Lamentations. The next Herod was a bloody
man, and made nothing of the blood of the Baptist, to content a wanton; and
Herodias was worse, whose thirst could not be satisfied without blood. And the
third Herod was bloody also, as appears by the killing of Saint James with
the sword, and his apprehending of St. Peter: Were not the Jews bloody, whose
hands were dyed in the blood of the Lord of Life? Acts 9.1.
And was not St. Paul full of cruelty before his Conversion? Acts 9.1. He
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord;
himself confesses, that he was even mad against them, and did persecute them
to strange Cities. Acts 26.11. Genesis 49.27.
Acts 26.11. Some would have that Prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49. concerning
Benjamin, That He should be a ravening Wolf, to allude to St. Paul, for he was
of that Tribe. Into this Catalogue of cruel ones we may reckon those Emperors
after the time of Christ. One of them writh is Laws in blood; Another wishing
even while he lived, to see the world mingled with fire; and that Rome it self
had had but one neck, that he might cut it off at a blow. What should I speak
of Nero that man of blood, and of Domitian, that when he was not killing of
men, must be killing of flies, to keep his hand in ure. And so of Severus, and
Decius, and Diocletian, under whom that issue of blood stopped for a while, but
was again opened by Julian, that (...), that grand Tyrant, that according to
the stamp of his Coin (which was the Bull) did goare the world. I might be
infinite in the instances of succeding times, how cruel many people have been;
even this Posterity of Ishmael, the Turks, how cruel have they been in all
times, and continue to this day* He is that great Senacherib, that if God did
not keep a hook in his nostrils, does earnestly desire to make all Christendom,
an Acheldama, a field of blood. And I could speak of some people in the world,
that have been so bloudy-minded, that they have taken a complacency, and
contentment in it: As Hannibal, who seeing a Pit filled with humane blood,
cried out, O formosum spectaculum! O most pleasant show! And Valesus (the
Proconsul in Asia under Augustus) having caused three hundred men to be slain,
walked among the dead bodies, and said, O rem regiam! A stately act indeed! And
these times want not those (...) (as the Hebrew Phrase is) men of bloods, whose
feet are swift to shed blood, who make no more of taking away men's lives then
of cutting off the heads, of Poppies: Yea, will not stick to brag and boast of
their shedding of blood, as of a Trophee of their valor. Yea, I might speak of
such, as out of their desire to give their bloody minds contentment, and their
wrathful hearts satisfaction, have done what injuries malice could invent, to
increase the torments of others, to make them dye twenty deaths in one; vt
sentiant se mori: as he said of old, make them feel themselves to dye, by
spinning out their lingering torments; one being to dye, desired that he might
be quickly dispatched; it was answered, by him that had him in his power,
nondum redij tecum (...) gratiam: nay soft (says he) we are not friends yet;
he made it good, Prove. 12.10
what Solomon says, Prove. 12. The very mercies of the wicked, it is (...) their
very bowels are cruel, and what then are their cruelties? But it may be you are
tired with this sad narration; if you be not, I am: and therefore I will turn
my self, to matter of exhortation.

And for the application of this point; Application
be we all exhorted to take heed of bloody mindedness, it is a thing
unbeseeming us as men: God sends man into the world as harmless a creature,
and as unapt to offer any injury, as any creature whatsoever; and sure he did
intend in it, that Homo, should be homini Deus, non Lupus: that one man should
be a God (as it were) unto another,, and not a wolf. He never meant, that a
man should be afraid to fall into the hands of men; (as David was, 2 Samuel 24.)
But that one man, 2 Samuel 24.14.
should be an Asylum and a Sanctuary unto another; he did intend him to be
(...), a sociable creature; and that men should live together, in a loving
fellowship.

And therefore, in the Second place, to be cruel and bloody, is a sin even
against humane society; nay even the beasts themselves, that be of the same
species, do not offer violence to one another: and what a fearful thing is it,
to see men embrue their hands in each others blood, Christians! Countrymen!
Neighbors! Brethren!

Thirdly, It is against Gods express commandment: how straightly does he
charge men, against blood and cruelty: and under what a penalty? Now how does
he forbid cruelty, Exodus 23.19.
even toward the brute creatures? Exodus 23. Thou shall not sees the kid in
the mothers milk: and Deuteronomy. 22. Thou shall not take the damm, with the young
ones: Deuteronomy. 22.6.
Levit. 22.28. The old and the young, must not be killed both in one day. Those
precepts were sepimentum legis, the hedge of the law: And the reason was,
commendare clementiam (says one,) to recommend clemency and gentleness to men:
Et ut mitiores essent erga homines (says another,) that they might be the more
tenderhearted, to each other; for certainly, they that are cruel toward
beasts, are in a disposition, to be cruel to men: And therefore the Athenians
wisely punished those boys, whose practice was to catch crows, and to put out
the eyes of them.

Fourthly, If it be against the Law, to be cruel; I am sure it is against the
Gospel, which is the Gospel of peace; which breaths nothing, nor commands any
thing, but that which tends to peace and mercy, and love, and compassion: and
nothing so contrary to christianity, as cruelty: Isai. 2.4.
It was prophesied of the Church of the new testament, Isa. 2.4. That they
should break their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning
hooks; and that nation should not lift up the sword against nation: c. 11.
and again, Isai. 11. That the wolf should dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leopard with the Kid; the calfe, and the young Lion, and a little child shall
lead them: that is, they that were of a fierce and savage disposition, should
be composed to meekness and love; but alas, if Nazianzen could put himself into
a passion at any time, by reading the lamentations of Jeremy: whose heart will
not bleed, to think of the wars amongst Christians? who like the Midianites,
have thrust their swords into each others sides; and dance, in one another
ashes: What horror is there in reading the late outrages in Germany! those now
fresh bleeding wounds of Ireland! where as cruel acts are done, as any former
story can parallel: and by brethren, by Christians against Christians! how have
people buried all sense of Christianity: the very beasts of different kinds,
while they were in Noah's Arc, did agree together, and those that are within
the fellowship of the same Christian Church, are bloody toward each other: how
have we taken off, a great part of the reproach of the Pagans of the world? and
strengthened their hand to impiety; while we that profess the Prince of peace,
and doctrine of peace, are at such deadly differences amongst our selves: In
the fear of God, let us take heed of cruelty: and first let us avoid some
special sins, that are apt to lead us on to this.

As First, ambition, and a desire of advancement; what made Zimri kill his
master, but ambition; or Absolon supplant his Father, but ambition; or Herod,
to kill the infants, (to take away the King of the Jews,) but ambition; and
the maintenance of his usurpation?

Secondly, Take heed of covetousness; those in the proverbs, are said to wait
for blood, that they might fill their houses with spoils: Habucuk tells of
such as aedificabant in sanguine, that did build in blood; That is, such as by
violence and oppression, force in their own interest, and cut their way to
possession: As Ahab hunted Naboths blood, that he might have his vineyard: And
those in the Gospel would kill the heir, that the inheritance might be theirs.

Thirdly, Let us take heed of envy, it was that which made Cain kill his
brother; (...) and (...), are not much distant from each other, malice and
mischief. Saul's envy seeks the blood of David: and the Pharisees and others,
did so envy the reputation that Christ had in the world, that they gave not
over, till they had his life.

Fourthly, Let us take heed of lust, it was that which put on David to the
murder of Vriah: Some prostitutes have had such power over their lustful
lovers, that they have put them on to the shedding of blood: The lust of
Herodias was the cause of the loss of Saint John Baptists head.

Fifthly, Let us beware of excess; who has contention, who has wounds without
cause? Prove. 23.29.
says Solomon, Prove. 23. but he that sits long at the wine; when wine has
inflamed the blood, and unthroned Reason, then a little occasion moves a
quarrel, and the hand is quickly upon the sword. Alexander killed his Clytus,
in his drunkenness; and examples are too numerous; (even in these times) of
those that have slain others in their wine.

Sixthly, take we heed of nourishing Anger and Displeasure long: for if we do,
the Apostle tells us, we give place to the devil; and we know, he is a
murderer, and will put on to blood. Anger retained, grows as sour as Malice;
and Malice has black and bloody resolutions: as we see in Absalon against
Amnon; who kept his wrath so long, until it burst out into blood.

I would, in the last place, advise to take heed of an erroneous Conscience, or
a Zeal without true Knowledge: for even this has put on many to blood; it has
made some sacrifice their own children; as we see in the Old Testament. Those
thought they did God service, while they killed his servants, Joh. 16. and
Saint Paul, Joh. 16.2. Acts 26.
in his blind way, (as himself confesses, Acts 26.) thought he ought to do
many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. And certainly, that
Apostle, reprehending himself for the cruelty which he exercised upon the poor
Saints, wills us to beware of the same.

And in the second place, there is something to be done, to keep us from
Cruelty; and that is, to get into our hearts a conscience of Gods Commandments:
Amongst those Laws that were given with such terror, this is one, against
blood: And if the Lion has roared, let us be afraid.

Secondly, Let us think how like we are to God by mercy, who is the preserver
both of man and beast: (...) perdidit. (...), solvo, destruo.
And how like by cruelty to Satan, who is Abaddon, and Apolyon, (i. e.) both
in his Hebrew and Greek name, a Destroyer.

Thirdly, Think we of that exemplum indeficiens, that exquisite Pattern of our
blessed Lord, who in all his time never did hurt to the body of any man; though
Moses plagued Egypt, and Elijah called for fire from Heaven, and Elisha for the
Bears, and Peter smote Ananias, and Paul Elymas with blindness, yet he never
hurt any; when they fell backwards that came to apprehend him, he suffered them
to rise again, and healed the ear of one of them: He came not to destroy, but
to save, as he tells his Disciples, who would have had him given way unto
them to call for fire from heaven upon those in hospitable Samaritans; and
should we not learn of him to be humble and meek? Should not the same mind be
in us that was in Christ Jesus?

Fourthly, think we how cruelty stains the soul, it makes it of a Scarlet, of
a Crimson dye, that many tears will not cleanse it; yea, it wounds the soul
in that manner, that much Prayer and Fasting will not be enough to heal it:
When David has this to answer for, he cries out, Amplius me lava Domine; Wash
me thoroughly O Lord, more and more; and he prays again, Deliver me from
bloud-guiltiness, O God.

Lastly, Often think of the Judgment to come, at what time the meek in spirit
shall be much set by, and the merciful shall find mercy, but a Judgment
merciless to such as have been cruel.

And now in the close of this Exhortation, Let us know that it is directed to
us all; neither is it needless to those that are very forward in Religion; for
as they have naturally the seed of all sin in them, so they are apt upon
Temptation even to be cruel: It was Simeon and Levy, whose anger their Father
cursed because it was fierce, and their wrath because it was cruel, Genesis 49.7.
Genesis 49. And how was David hurried into a cruel way? And so Jonah could have
been content that all Nineveh should have been destroyed; nay, took it ill it
was not so. And Theodosius an excellent Prince, and no virtue in him so eminent
as compassion, Beneficium se accepisse putabat, cum regaretur ignoscere: That
he thought he had received a favor of any one, that desired him to forgive;
And yet upon an occasion of an uproare at Thessalonica, wherein one of his
Servants was slain, he commanded an universal Massacre to pass upon the City
without distinction, so that in a short time there were seven thousand
butchered; which cost him dear before he could wipe it out, as they know that
have read Saint Ambrose his dealing with him. Even the Godly are subject to
fierce and intemperate affections; and had therefore need to keep the stronger
watch over themselves, lest they do that in their haste, which they must repent
at leisure.

And so I leave the Point, with craving of pardon for my length in it, which
the badness of these last times has driven me to, which are times of blood and
cruelty, of rage and fury; and but a few there are, that tread the ways of
love, peace, and sobriety.

There is another thing to be observed, in that his hand is against every man:
he gives the quarrel. And this is the nature of wicked and fierce men, that
they are so restless, that they will provoke; not stay till they be provoked.
Psalm. 35.20.
Such David speaks of, Psalm. 35. They speak not peace, but devise deceitful
words against them that are quiet in the land. Observe. 3. Impious spirits are
always apt unto Contention; as truly religious hearts to Peace.
Such were those enemies of Jeremiah, that did devise devices against him, and
smote him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. when he gave them no cause: and those
again, Jer. 20.10. that did watch for his halting: yea, sought to entice him,
that so they might take revenge upon him. And so it is said of some that
provoked our Savior to speak of many things, willing to pick a quarrel. Such
an one was Alexander; of whom it was said, that he would fight with stones and
mountains, if he had not men to fight withal. And so of one Coelius, who was of
so turbulent a spirit, that he would not be quiet, except he were in quarrels;
and was angry, if he were not provoked: his Motto was, Dic aliquid, ut duo
simus; Say or do something, that we may be two. And we want not those
swaggering ruffians, and roaring monsters, that walk the streets merely to
quarrel. These are compared to the Sea, that cannot but cast up mire and dirt;
and rages, not because it is provoked, but because it is unquiet. They are
compared unto asps and vipers; and those, (...), that not being wronged, yet do
hurt. It is as natural for the wicked to do evil, as for the fountain to run,
or the fire to burn. And the cause of this motion of the wicked, is, not from
without, but from a principle within. A Watch will not go, but by means of the
spring; but the wicked heart works from it self, (...), of its own accord;
and stays not, no more then the pulse in the body. The wicked needs not the
devil to tempt him; for he can tempt himself: (...), says Nazianzen; Sin is
ever ready at hand. Nazianzen.


Now for the Use of this:

First, it may let those that be of such tumultuous spirits see, Application
what a fearful case they are in. God would have men live in peace, and behold,
they are enemies to peace; yea, they wilfully break it. Are the peacemakers
blessed? then certainly, the peace-breakers are cursed. Shall the peacemakers
be called the sons of God? then certainly, the peace-breakers shall be called
the children of the devil. Is there not a woe to him by whom the offense comes?
and do they dare to give offense, to provoke others, and to begin a quarrel?
Men should consider one another, to provoke to love; as the Apostle says; and
these consider their brother, to provoke him to hostility; and they will wrong
him, to provoke him to strike again. It is required of men, that; being
provoked, they should forgive it; for, it is the glory of a man to cease from
strife: but these provoke others, and are willingly, and wittingly, and de
industria, contentious Contentiosi. Words in osus, intimate vicious habits.
Aulus Gellius.
Now, are not such an abomination to the Lord? Is it not just with God, that he
that loves contention, should be clothed with rags? that he should want inward
peace, and at the end of his days should go to his own place, where there is
nothing but tumult and confusion?

In the second place, I wish we might be provoked by a people that are not Gods
people, as it is in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 33.21.
that we could be as forward to good, as they are to evil: They are ready to
quarrel, and to offer injury; and their sword, like Joab's, is ready to fall
out of the scabberd, upon every occasion; yea upon no occasion. Oh that we were
as ready ( Titus 3.1.) to every good work, as soldiers that stand in their
files, ready to fall on, upon the word given. Saint Augustine is for Emamus
occasiones, S. Augustine.
let us buy opportunities of doing good. I wish we could apprehend those
opportunities that offer themselves, and do, as it were, (with a smiling face)
invite us to the embracing of them. But alas! many and many of those, either we
at all take no notice of, or at least do not regard; but let them slip by,
without making any use of them. So prone is out nature to evil, and so averse
to good, that in the former (like gunpowder) the least spark takes in us; but
in the later (like green wood) much blowing will not make us burn. We flee unto
evil, but we are scarce haled to that which is good. Alacrius illi ad mortem,
quam nos ad vitam; evil ones run more cheerfully to death, then we to life and
goodness. What is there in the ways of evil that chears us, like that in the
ways of piety? or is there the like reward of well and evil doing? Oh what
tears are sufficient for this inequality of our carriage! Let us with trembling
think of it: Consider this, all ye that forget God. We will not, when he would;
and he will not, when we would.

It follows, And every man's hand against him; that is, to oppose him. We may
see, then,

Observe. 4. Contentious persons, as they are troublesome, so hateful unto all
men.
That the troublesome man is hateful to all men.

Had not Cain reason to think that all men would hate him, and that every man
that met him, would kill him, when he had so sinned against Nature and
Religion? And well might Lamech think that people would distaste him, when he
was so full of rage, that he cared not for killing a man in his fury. And how
hateful, think you, that Nimrod, that mighty hunter, was unto men! Joshua
censured Achan, and it enraged the people against him, in that he had troubled
them. And if Elijah had been a troubler of Israel, no doubt all the people
would have been against him. And when the Priests would inflame the minds of
the people against Jeremiah, they make them believe, that he troubles the
nation, and weakneth the hands of the people; that he seeks nothing but to put
causless fears and jealousies into their heads: and himself complains, that
he was a man of contention. And so Amos suffers as a man that troubles the
public peace; and that the land was not able to endure his words. And we see
how they incense the people against Saint Paul, Acts 16.20. This man does
exceedingly trouble our City. So at Thessalonica, Acts. 17.6. These men have
turned the world upside down, and are come hither also: As who should say, Take
heed of these men, bend your selves against them, and cast them out speedily;
for they be Incendiaries, and they raise tumults wheresoever they come; and
therefore they are not to be endured, unless we mean to be enwrapped in the
same miseries that others have been.

For the Use of this:

Application
First, this may answer that complaint that some men and women make in the
world: I am not beloved (say they) I cannot have the good will of my
neighbors; they are strange unto me, they will hold no conversation with me.
Why, you are not peaceful; you are disturbant to your neighbors; you are
inimicitious to those that offer you none injury; you are meddling with things
that belong not unto you; you are carrying tales between others; and you are
siding with those that be naught. If so, wonder not that you are hated: it is
the just judgment of God upon you, that men should be afraid of you, and shun
your society.

Secondly, it may teach men how to gain love, and to be well respected in the
world: let them be affable and courteous; let them do good offices, as they
have occasion; let them study to be quiet, as the Apostle says:) let them not
willingly offer injury, nor let them take exceptions at any thing they suffer:
let them be innocent as doves. This peaceableness conduces much to make that
which Saint Peter calls (...), a fair conversation. The Sichemites can give
this motive for the dwelling of the sons of Jacob amongst them, Genesis 34. Genesis
34.21.
because they were peaceable men. Innocence, and harmlesness, and quietness,
(though they be contemned by proud and stirring humors, as a (...), a flatness
of spirit; yet) certainly they are no ciphers in Christian Arithmetic. Solomon
makes it the property of a fool, to be meddling; but a meek and quiet spirit is
of God. So then, now, who would not rather choose to be a fool to the world, and
wise to God; then wise to the world, and a fool to God? A peaceable man will
get love; a contentious man will get hatred, and be a burden to the place where
he lives. Now he is a fool indeed, that had not rather be beloved then hated,
and that both by God and man.

Preached, Ian. 12. 1641.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.12, 13. And he shall dwell in the presence of all his Brethren. Verse.
13. And she called the Name of the Lord, etc.
THis clause is diversely interpreted; Some understand it thus; for all he shall
be so savage, and fierce a man; and his hand against every man; yet, even
amongst his enemies, he shall have some friends, and other some that will
affect him, and commend him: Observe. 1. None so desperately wicked, but ever
found Abettours.
And it is true, there were never any so desperately wicked, but they found
some to favor them, and applaud them. David speaks of those that bless the
covetous, whom God abhors; there were those men among the Jews, that spoke
well of Tobiah their common enemy, and reported his good deeds, Nehe. 6.10.
Suetonius, Epiphanius, and S. Augustine.
Nehemiah 6. The Persians honored Nero, that was the hatred of God and man:
and as Suetonius reports; though all men thought him unworthy of common burial,
yet they sent some yearly with flowers and odours, to adorn his Sepulcher: And
both Epiphanius and Saint Austin tells us, of a certain brood of Heretics,
called Caiani; that honored Cain, affirming that he was a worthy man,
conceived by some powerful nature; That therefore showed it self mightyin him.
The same Heretics also, honored Corah, Dathan and Abiram, as men of courage
and resolution: yea they adored Judas the traitor, being persuaded that some
divine operation, and propheticallinstinct did direct, that, by his delivering
his master to the Jews, all men might be delivered from the devil. And did
not Sixtus Quintus in the conclave of Cardinals, make a Panegyric in the
commendation of that Iacobin, Application
that killed Henry the third of France? Adams eating of the forbidden fruit,
has put the judgment of his posterity, out of taste; insomuch that they often
think well, and speak well, and are affected to such as hate God, and are
hateful to men; and are not only (...), but (...); not only disorderly, but
absurd; men that do things, S. Ierom. lib. Epist.
repugnant to right reason: as Saint Ierom says of writers, non est tam
ineptus scriptor, qui non sui similem inveniet lectorem: there can be no such
impertinent a writer, but he shall find a reader fit for him; so it may be
said of ill men, be they never so bad, there will be some that favor them. But
Isaiah has a woe in his 5. Chapter, at the 20. Verse To those that call evil
good; and Solomon says, such are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. And
we know how Iehosophat smarted, for loving him that hated the Lord; wrath was
upon him from the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
But this sense does does not so well agree with the words that went before;
that his hand should be against every man, and every man's hand against him:
there be others therefore, that expound it of his cruelty, and that he should
not spare, to afflict even his brethren; and certain it is, that (such as was
Ishmael) cruel, fierce, and bloody minds put little difference; regard neither
humane society, nor civility, nor yet affinity, no nor consanguinity; Observe.
2. No respect or relation, can restrain cruel dispositions that are backed with
power.
and that the nearest relation will not restrain them from violence; for the
Son rises up against the father, (as we see in Absolon; and the father against
the son; Saul throws a spear at Jonathan; the brother against the brother,
Esau resolves to kill Jacob: and Cain does not only resolve it, but act it: he
slew his brother Abel. They tell of Herod, that in that Massacre which he
appointed to pass upon the Infants, two of his own sons were slain; insomuch
that it was a byword, better be Herod's hogg then his child: and what
unnatural monsters have these last and worst times brought forth, that have
embrued their hands in the blood of their own children! These be those (...)
that Saint Paul foretold, 2 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 3.3.
Those difficult and perilous times, wherein people should be (...), without
natural affection; and therefore (as I said the last day,) let us take heed of
bloody-mindedness, and cruelty of disposition; for we shall be apt to break all
bonds, for the satisfaction of our revenge. This interpretation may pass, if we
add another thing, which Expositors do think is here intended: and that is, he
shall dwell in the presence of his brethren, he shall be of that power and
strength, that though he be opposed by all men, yet he shall be able to make his
party good, and to dwell by them, and in spite of them; and through his power,
shall be injurious unto them; and enlarge his coasts by taking from them,
maugre all their opposition: and certainly, there is nothing does so animate,
and more encourage men to violence and oppression, of those that be near unto
them, then a presumption of their power and strength. Nimrod was a mighty
hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10.9. That is, being of power, he practiced all
manner of tyranny and cruelty, insomuch that it grew into a proverb, to call a
cruel tyrant and oppressor, a Nimrod: Iezabel serves to make this an argument
to Ahab, to take Nabaoths vineyard from him; Tune regnum Israelis? Do thou
now govern the kingdom of Israel? 1 Kings 21. Thy power is great enough, 1
Kings 21.7.
to make thee Lord over his, or any other man's vineyard; if he will not sell or
exchange; extort it by power: the conceit that Senacherib had of his great
strength, as appears in that speech of railing Rabsekah; made him forward to
oppress the people of God. Micah chapter 2.1. Speaks of those that devise
iniquity, and work evil upon their beds; when the morning is light, they
practice it, because it is in the power of their hand: What has been the
ground of those unjust, of those bloody wars, that have been in the world,
among Princes; among the race of Ishmael, the Turks great oppressions but
confidence of power? and of latter times, even in the Breast of Christendom,
but only ambition backed with power? People have thought they have wanted
elbowroom, and presuming on the strength they were able to make, (and making
power and not justice, the rule of their actions,) they have invaded the
Territories, and rights of each other; and have showed themselves none other,
then King James of blessed memory calls them, Splendid Robbers; what has
been the ground of that oppression, that has been used by those, in favor to
Princes, against others? but only that they have built upon their place and
strength; and conceived, that others durst not stir against them; or if they
did, it should be to no purpose: the rich man, that took the poor man's sheep,
to make a feast for his friends, thought the poor man durst not resist him,
being rich and potent: (...), (says the Poet) oppression dwells next door to
Poverty: the oppressions of former times were but a counterpain of ours. And as
Ambrose says, S. Ambrose.
in his book of Nabaoth the Jezreelite; historia vetus, usus quotidianus,
ancient History is of present use, and daily application.

But now for Application of this

Application
First, Let those that be of great power, and strength, and wealth, use it well;
let it be for protection of others, not for their destruction: Let it be to
defend, not to offend; Let them be sanctuaries to others, but not shambles: Let
them stand up in the cause of those that suffer, and not themselves lay hands
upon them; Let them not be blown up with a conceit of their own might, and take
advantage of others weakness, to oppress them; for God will meet with them:
oftentimes he does it here; as we see in Ahab and Iezabel, they paid dear for
Nabaoths vineyard; but if not here, because they can carry it out, with their
might and power: yet elsewhere there is tribunal, before which they must
appear; Qui praedo praeda, (says Saint Augustine: S. Augustine. Isai. 33.1.
) He that preyed upon others, shall himself be a prey to death and hell: Woe
unto thee, (says Isaiah) that spoilest and wast not spoiled; when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: God may defer his wrath for a time, but
it will come; and quanto tardius venit, S. Gregory.
severius percutit (says Saint Gregory,) and the slower it comes, the
heavilyer it falls: the sin of oppression, sure enough, will be paid home,
either here, or in hell, or in both.

Secondly, Let it be an item to those, that are oppressed by their waspis^
neighbors, and can enjoy nothing quietly, that they have a mind to; Let them
possess their souls in patience: there is a God that will right those that
suffer wrong, Psalm. 146.7. If thou see in a country, (says Solomon, Eccles.
5.) the poor oppressed, wonder not at it; that is, be not too much discouraged
in that regard. There is one, higher then the highest of them, that regards
it; and he will judge both the just and the wicked. A man that in some Court is
overswayed, (against right) yet is not out of heart, while he has an higher
Court to appeal unto, of the equity whereof he is persuaded: and so has the
oppressed; they have a Court of heaven to appeal to, and there we shall be sure
to have justice for us, according to the equity of our cause. I know this is
difficult, and puts a man to it: but we must bear: says the Apostle, Be ye
patient, till the coming of our Lord.

But now, before we leave this verse, curiosi quaerunt, A Question touching
Gods Permission.
(says Jerome) the curious start a Question here, Why God, foreseeing and
foreknowing what kind of persons Ishmael and his posterity would be, would
suffer such to be brought forth into the world; or did not, as soon as they
were born, dash these children of Babylon against the stones, Observe. 3. Gods
permission of evil, both persons and actions, vindicated (by manifold good ends
and reasons) from being any ways occasion of them.
or prevent these Cockatrice eggs, from growing to be fiery flying serpents. He
is the God of peace, and love, and mercy; and he loves a sweet correspondence
of men, in their several societies. Nay, to suffer such as should be
cobling-stones in a wall, that would neither head nor bed well? nay, such
firebrarnds of the world, as Hecuba dreamed she went withal? men whose hands
should be against every man, and every man's hand against them! such as should
be the pest of the place, and the calamity of the times wherein they lived!
such disorderly ones as would spoil that comely method and order into which God
had digested things! nay, may not a man think that God is the author and cause
of the sins of such men, when, foreseeing them, he does not prevent them?

Oh, in the fear of God, first, let us take heed of this conceit: Better (says
Saint Chrysostom) an hundred to be slain, Chrysostom. 23 Hom. super Acta Apost.
then that our God should hear such a word from us: That he is the cause of sin
to us! Saint Augustine calls it, detestandam and abominandam opinionem; a
detestable and abominable opinion: for, (says he) Fieri non potest, S.
Augustine.
ut per quem a talibus surgitur, per eum in talia decidatur; it is impossible,
that he by whom men rise from sins, should be the occasion of their falling
into them. And Fulgentius says, Far be it from us to think, Fulgentius.
that God is author quorum est ultor, author of those sins whereof he is
revenger: His Prescience and foresight of sin, does not make him the cause of
it. Non ideo peccat homo, quia Deus eum peccaturum praescivit, (says Saint
Jerome;) a man does not therefore sin, S. Jerome.
because God foreknoweth his intention to sin; no more then the Astronomer is
the cause of the Eclipse which he foretells, or a Physician of the disease
which he foreseeth a man will fall into; or the Prophets, of the calamities
which they foretold; or a wise man, of the ruin of another, which he foresees
in his wicked courses. No, our destruction is from our selves, (as God told
Israel, Hos. 13. Hos. 13.9.
) and the least aspersion may not be cast upon God, whose pure eyes can behold
none iniquity.

But then for the Quare, Why God does permit such wicked men to be born,
Eccles. 7.10.
and to live in the world: I might say, (as Solomon, Eccl. 7. in another case)
Thou do not enquire wisely concerning this: or I might answer, as my Author
does, in the words of the Apostle. Romans 9. Romans 9.20.
O man, who art thou, that reply against God! has not the potter power over
the clay? may not God do as he pleases? And dare any man say unto him, Why
do thou so? His will may be secret, but it cannot be unjust. But yet, to give
some satisfaction in this Point, it is a true speech of Saint Augustine;
August. in 11 of his Enchirid.
Deus non sineret aliquid mali, nisi usque adeo esset omnipotens and bonus, ut
been faceret etiam de malo: God would not suffer any evil to be done in the
world, but that he is so good and omnipotent, as that he can bring good also
out of that evil, and make all things work for the best, etc. Now God suffers
wicked men to be born into the world, and to live in the world,

First, to let the world see, how much man's nature is depraved and corrupted by
his fall. God made him upright; but he transgressing, fell in the dirt, S.
Bernard.
(says Saint Bernard;) and not only defiled himself, but wounded himself; so
that he became, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, nothing
but swellings, and putrified sores. This first sin was the Trojan-horse, the
fruitful womb of all those mischiefs that have infected the world; of all those
murders, and cruelties, and oppressions, that have stained the souls of men;
of all those judgments with which God has justly plagued the sons of men: This
corrupt nature of man is fierce, and drives furiously, like Jehu the son of
Nimshi: it breaks out desperately it is like the raging sea, that casts out
nothing but mire and dirt: it rusheth into sin, as the horse into the battle,
and commits sin with greediness. Now all this shows, (in the practice of
wicked men) as in a glass, the woeful condition of our Nature. It Is intended,
for men's humiliation, and that they should bethink themselves from whence they
are fallen; and seek the repairing of Gods image in them.

Secondly, God suffers such fierce and cruel ones to be in the world, for the
exercise of the graces of his children as first, their thankfulness to God,
that he is pleased to restrain that corruption in them, which so breaks out in
others. When thou see a man wallow like a beast in his own vomit, dart out
blasphemies against heaven, revile the Gospel of salvation, tear the blessed
Name of God in pieces, with horrid and hideous oaths: when thou hear of
Cain murdering his brother, Judas betraying of his master, Ananias lying to the
holy Ghost, Lucian mocking the Lord Jesus as a crucified impostor, Julian
darting of his blood against heaven in hatred of Christ, the Scribes and
Pharisees blaspheming the Spirit of God: when thou observest men of an unquiet
and turbulent spirit, that, like Salamanders, cannot live out of the fire; that
are of a provoking carriage, and apt, at every turn, to be injurious unto their
brethren, yea, even thirsting after their blood, and shedding it: Then thank
God, that his grace keeps thee from these precipices: for thou have the same
root of bitterness in thee, that those monsters have; Prove. 27.19.
as face answers to face in the water, says Solomon, Prove. 27. so the heart
of man to man: Every man may see in another, the complete image, deformity, and
unrighteousness of his own heart; and may truly say, such an one should I be,
if Gods grace did not prevent it: 2. Hereby God will exercise the grace of
wisdom, and circumspection; for when such wicked ones be in the world, the
children of God (according to the counsel of their Lord,) must be wise as
serpents, and innocent as doves; i. e. they must carry themselves so, 1 Cor.
10.32.
that they do not provoke those malicious ones against them; give none offense
(says the Apostle) neither to Jews, nor Gentiles, 1 Cor. 10. they must do
nothing to irritate them: it may be, they may be offended at their profession,
and practice of religion; but that is Scandalum acceptum, non datum; and
offense taken, but not given: and in that case, melius est ut scandalum
oriatur, quam ut veritas relinquatur; better it is, that such an offense should
arise, then that the truth should fall, and be forsaken: but else they must be
so wise, as to carry themselves harmlesly, and give them none offense, Tertul.
in Apol.
whereby their still glowing wrath, (that fire on Satan's Altar) may be stirred
against them: and thus wise were those Christians, Tertullian speaks of in his
Apology; They lived peaceably and quietly, in the midst of their enemies; and
they were ready to do all offices of humanity for them; but it could not be
justly laid to their charge, that they were injurious unto them, insomuch that
they could say, bonus vir sanus, sed malus quia Christianus. Such an one is a
good man, but evil only, in that he is a Christian.

Thirdly, God by suffering such men, will exercise the patience of his
children; for being apt to be wronged by those violent men, (though they offer
no wrong,) there is an employment of their patience; as likewise of their
cofidence in God, who is an harbor to put into, in all storms.

Fourthly, Of their love to God; for by a kind of (...), and contrariant
operation, the coldness of the charity of men, makes their love more intense
toward God; it does also stir up in them, the Spirit of prayer and
supplication, and make them more earnest with God, for the protecting of them:
for the girding up and restraining of the fury of wicked men; yea further, it
is the stirring up of their compassion toward those wicked men; for we are
even bound to pity them, who are so miserably enthralled, under the power of
sin and Satan; and to pray for them, that their eyes may be opened, that they
sleep not in death: and the rather, because we see, this is the effect of
corrupt nature, which would break out in us, as well as in them, if God did not
restrain it: Titus 3.3.
The Apostle makes this an argument, to provoke meekness. Tit. 3. We our
selves were in times past unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts
and pleasures, hateful, and hating one another.

Lastly, God suffers such wild and fierce men, and such cruel people in the
world, for the punishment of men: while they take liberty to sin against him;
He makes a rod of the malice and cruelty of the wicked, to scourge them
withal: God gave his people into the hands of such as oppressed them, because
they had provoked him, by their foul sins: and though it is true, that
afterward he threw those rods into the fire; (as we see in the King of
Assyria, and others;) yet for the present, he does use them to chastise his own
people withal; and they are very fierce against them.

Give me leave to add one word more, concerning this instance in our Text. The
ferity, and fierceness, and savage diposition of Ishmael and his posterity, was
a part of the punishment which God laid upon Sarah for advising, and Abraham
for yielding to take Hagar to wife. Gal, 4.
They lived in part to see it: for Ishmael mocked, yea persecuted Isaac, (says
Saint Paul, Gal. 4.) and therefore was east out, with his mother; Psalm. 83.6.
but after their death it fell out, that the Hagarens were reckoned among the
enemies of Sarahs seed. Psalm. 83. They were amongst those, that sought to cut
them off, from being a nation; and that the name of Israel might be no more in
remembrance: unwarrantable courses treasure up punishment for after time.
Observe. 5. The messages of Gods faithful ministers are his own word, and
Embassages.
I have made it good heretofore, in manifold examples, and given sufficient
Reason for it; for how should a blessing be expected upon any project, wherein
God is not advised withal? Nay, how just is it with him, to render such
actions, vexatious unto the parties that have undertaken them? And therefore,
let us ever ask counsel of God, and look that the grounds of our actions, be
justifiable. And amongst other ways, let people take heed of unlawful
mixture, such as was Abraham's with Hagar; a punishment of that fault, may lie
in the issue, and they may grow up, to be an hearts grief to those from whom
they are sprung; besides, their being standing monuments, 3. Part of his Histo.
c. 18. Tit. 6.
as it were, of their sin and shame: if they shall prove good, (as Iephtah, and
diverse others have done, and not fly out, as Ishmael;) yet that ought to be
matter of humiliation, as long as they live: Antonine tells of the mother of
those three famous men, Petrus Comestor the Author of the Scholastical History,
Peter Lombard the Master of the Sentences: and Gratian the Compiler of the
decrees, (having had them all, in an unlawful way:) that she told her
Confessor, that she could not be so sorry for her sin, as she should, because
they proved such eminent men: but he bad her to bewail also her want of
sorrow: Though such children prove never so excellent, yet the fault is to be
mourned for; and the judgment: if it lie not in the child, to be a grief to
the parents, while they are living; or a shame, when they are dead; (as is said
of Dionisius, poenas quas vivus effugit, mortuus in filio exolvit, the
punishments which he escaped living, he suffered in his Son, after his
decease:) it may lie in some other thing; for certainly God will punish it, one
time or other; as he did in Augustine himself, for his Adeodatus. Let us take
heed of this, or any other unlawful course, which, though it seem never so
pleasurable or profitable, in the contriving or acting, yet will have a sting
in it, and vex as much as ever it contented: for God must be just, and men must
reap the fruits of their own way. And so I have done with this verse.

I come now to the next, Verse 13.
where begins the third part of this Chapter, and it contains the
thankfulness, and obedience of Hagar; her thankfulness in the 13. and 14.
verses; acknowledging the Lords mercy to her, and giving the fountain a new
name: and her obedience, in that which is supplied, in that in her mistress
house she brought forth her son; she returned therefore thither again,
according to the direction of the Angel: and in the last verse, is set down
the age of Abraham, when Ishmael was born.

For the first of these, her thankfulness, in this 13 verse; she gives God a
title: and secondly, she gives a reason of it.

For the former: she calls the name of him that spoke unto her, the Lord.
Why, may some man say, It was the Angel of the Lord that spoke unto her; and so
he is styled four several times; verse. 7, 9, 10, 11. And mark, (says my
Author) though it were an Angel that spoke unto her, ipsa autem non ut ab
Angelo, sed ut a Deo dicta accipit; yet she entertains it not as from the
Angel, but as spoken to her from the Lord himself: Et sic audiendum est verbum
Dei; Observe. 5. The messages of Gods faithful Ministers are his own words and
embassages.
and so (says he) is the Word still to be received: that which Gods Ministers
faithfully deliver, (by virtue of their Office) is to be taken as the Word of
God himself. Zacharias, in his song, speaking of Gods Word, Luke ^.70. says,
As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets: God speaks by their mouth:
that which they delivered, was no less to be reputed Gods Word, then if the
Lord himself had uttered it, in some such sort as he spoke to some of old.
Hence is that ordinary phrase in the Prophets, The word of the Lord which came
to such a Prophet; and, according to the word of the Lord which such or such an
one spoke. God told Jeremiah, (Chap. 1. Jer. 1.9.
) I have put my words into thy mouth. Daniel says, (Chap. 9. Dan. 9.10.
) We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, by the ministry of his
servants the prophets: He calls it the Lords voice, which came unto the
people by the Prophets ministry. He that hears you, hears me, says Christ
to his disciples, when he sent them forth to preach, Luke 10.16. God does
beseech you through us, (says Saint Paul) and we pray you in Christ's stead, 2
Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5.20.
and he tells the Thessalinians, (1 Thessalonians. 2.13.) that his word was indeed
the word of God. And that this opinion is to be held, of those that faithfully
believe, even to this hour, may be gathered from that promise of Christ, Lo, I
am with you to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. Matthew. 18.20.
It cannot be restrained to the Apostles, who, having served their time are now
at r^st; but belongs to those Preachers to whom the Lord gives gifts, for
the gathering together of his Saints, until the end of the world. How is Christ
with them, but by teaching, and enabling them what to say, and by revealing, by
them, his mind unto his Church? Hence it is, that as Christ is termed the sun
of righteousness, Mal. 4.3. Rev. 1.20.
Mal. 4. so his Ministers are called stars, Rev. 1. and therefore, as the light
of the stars is (by way of reflection) the very light of the sun, which they
receive from thence; so the doctrine of Christ's Ministers is the doctrine of
Christ: The words of an Ambassador, are reputed his from whom he comes: And
Ministers are Gods Ambassadors; therefore, what they faithfully deliver, is
not man's, but Gods.

For the Use of this:

Application
It teaches people with what respect to entertain that which Gods Ministers
faithfully teach, even as it were immediately delivered by God himself: Neither
is it possible men should profit by hearing, till this persuasion be graffed in
them. This was that which made Saint Paul's ministry among the Thessalonians,
to be, not only in word, but in power: they did receive it, not as the word of
man, but as it was indeed, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. When the doctrine is believed to be the Lords,
then it confirms faith, and builds up in saving knowledge. When threatenings
are received as his, they strike an awe into the conscience, and awaken unto
repentance. When the comforts are taken as his, then they are balm to the
navil, and marrow to the bones. David made account Nathans words were Gods, and
therefore they humbled his soul; and again, his afterward did comfort him.

Numb. 16.
When this is urged, it may be some will say, (as Corah and his companions,
Numb. 16. to Moses and Aaron) You take too much upon you: What do you make your
selves? Must your words be taken as Gods own words; and your sayings; as the
Oracles of the most High? Who can endure that you should be so presumptuous?

But it is answered, It is no arrogance, or presumption, to speak as the Spirit
of God does in the Scripture. David, and Hezekiah, and Eli, and others, have
taken the words of the Prophets as Gods own words.

Why, but then they will say, Must every word that is delivered in a Pulpit, be
taken as Gods words?

No: but that which is faithfully delivered, by virtue of their Office, is to
be received as Gods own Word. And this is our comfort, in the midst of the
worlds contempt, that he that despises us, despises him that sent us; that
is, God himself. And this shall be the condemnation of the scorners of the
Word, that their disdain has made war against Heaven: Your murmurings are not
against us, but against the Lord, Exodus 16.7.
Exodus 16. Contemnis praeconem, sed hunc judicem; thou contemnest not only the
Preacher, but thy Judge.

She called the name of the Lord that spoke to her, (...), Thou God see me.
Her Naming is, that God did see her affliction, and would look upon her in
mercy: for God is said to see the affliction of men: Exodus 3. I have seen, I
have seen the affliction of my people. Exodus 3.7. Psalm. 25.18.
And David prays to God to look upon his affliction, Psalm. 25. that is, not
barely to eye it, but to case it. In oculis Dei est pietas and indulgentia, S.
Ambrose.
(says Saint Ambrose;) in the eyes of the Lord are mercy and compassion. This
seeing here, is no more then the Angel had said before to her, verse. 11.
Observe. 6. It Is both a Consolation and a caution, that God beholds all, both
our doings and sufferings.
The Lord has heard thine affliction. What a ground of consolation it is unto
a man or woman, when they are afflicted either inwardly or outwardly; to find
God look upon them, and to speak comfort unto them, no tongue is able to
express.

The substance of what should now be observed, was spoken upon the eleventh
verse; and therefore I dismiss it, and conclude with this:

This name of God, God sees, as it is a ground of consolation in affliction,
Application
so it ought to be the ground of our cautelous and circumspect walking in our
whole conversation. It was that which kept Joseph in awe, when he was
solicited by his lascivious mistress: How can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God! Genesis 39.
It kept David in awe: I have set the Lord always before mine eyes, Psalm. 16.8.
and Psalm. 119.168. I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my
ways are in thy sight. And by this would Elihu deter men from wicked practices,
Job 34. Gods eyes are upon the ways of man, Job 34.21.
and he eyeth every step he takes. And I wish this might be ever in our mind,
in all places, and at all times, (...), God sees me. He is in all places, and
(like a well-drawn picture) eyeth me in every part of the room. Nazianzen.
It Is Nazianzen's comparison. Seneca gave advice, Sic facias quaecunque
feceris, tanquam spectet Cato, aut Scipio, aut Lucius aliquis: So do whatsoever
thou do, as if Cato, or Scipio, or some grave Lucius looked upon thee. And
much more force should there be in Gods presence; who looks upon us, not only
when we are fasting, but feasting; not only when we are praying, but playing;
not only in the fields, but in the house; and not only in the parlour, but in
the bedchamber; yea, in the closet. Are not they Atheistical, that are
conceited that God sees them not? And little better are they, that, being
persuaded God sees them, yet dare, by their ill courses, provoke the eyes of
his glory. They that would be afraid of a grave person, yea of an ordinary man,
yea of a child; yet are not afraid of the presence of God. I say again, Were
this consideration still in us, (...), God sees me; what temptation could
prevail against us! It is said of a Reverend and religious man, that he had
this written before his eyes in his study, and I make it my close; Sin not
thou: though never so secret, God sees thee, and the Angels stand by thee; the
devil is ready to accuse thee, thine own conscience to give evidence against
thee, and hell fire to torment thee.

Preached, Ian. 19. 1641.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.13. Thou Lord see me. For she said, Have I also here looked after
him that sees me?
THe last part of the Chapter sets out unto us the gratitude and obedience
of Hagar: her gratitude, in the 13 and 14 verses, in giving a name to God, and
a name to the Well.

For the former, I opened the name given to God.

I will not stand upon the Common place of Thankfulness: Chrysostom. in loc.
But, because S. Chrysostom and others do observe, (...): that is, the modest
gratitude of this same handmaid, for Gods great favor showed unto her; I will
note two particulars here, upon which her gratitude is grounded.

(...)
First, (...), Thou Lord see me: As if she should have said, I was destitute,
and forsaken; there was no creature to yield me relief: but thou did look
upon me, and had mercy on me.

Observe. 1. All earthly defects are made up to Gods children, with supplies
from heaven
When Flesh falls off, God falls in; when the World leaves, God helps;
when people are destitute of Earthly means, then often come heavenly supplies.
Joh was in an heavy case, (as himself lays down) in the midst of his
broyling and throbbing sores, Job 19. his brethren were far from him, his
acquaintance were estranged from him, his kinsfolks failed him, Job 19.13.
and his familiar friends forgot him: they that dwelt in his house, even his
maids, did count him a stranger: he called his servant, and he gave him no
answer: his breath was strange to his wife, though he entreated her for the
children of his own body: the young children despised him, all his wicked
friends abhorred him, and they whom he loved were turned against him. Good man,
what a low ebb was he at! nor wife, nor friend, nor servant, to stick to him!
and his children gone, that might have comforted him! And yet, had not God been
now his comfort, had not he looked upon him, what had become of him? But he
says, verse 25. I know that my Redeemer lives: Though outward comforts
stinted, there was a spring of inward comfort. David says, Psalm. 27.10. When
my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. And when he was
in that great perplexity; Ziglag was burnt, his wives were carried away, and
his goods, and the people spoke of stoning him; well may it be said, that he
was distressed: Yet when the world so frowned, God favored him; for it is
said, He encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30. 1 Samuel 30.6.
We shall find, that the widow and the fatherless are more especially
entitled to Gods protection, in several places of the Scripture. The cause of
a widow is doleful: the Hebrew calls her (...), from (...), mutus, dumb: sic
appellata, quod viro mortuo, non valeat loqui and litigare: so denominated,
because she has no heart to speak, having lost him that was her loving
yoke fellow. The Greek calls her (...), from (...), to rejoice: but sure it is
(...), by a figure of contrariety, because she has but small cause of
rejoicing. 1 Timothy 5.5.
The Apostle calls her (...), that is, solitary; or, as our translation
renders it, desolate. Our Laws call her relictam, one left; vidua, a viduo the
old word; a viro divisa, as parted and divided from man, and exposed to injury.
(...), says the Greek Proverb; When the oak falls, every one will fetch
wood. Now because she has lost the vail of her eyes, God will be her
protector; and because she is destitute of the comfort of her mate, he will be
an husband to her. And so orphans and fatherless are in a sad condition: (...),
(says Hesychius) is from (...), that is, dark, or clouded: as much as (...),
and signifies (...), one that is in darkness. And Photinus says, that (...)
is (...): an orphane is such an one as has no man to help him, no helper. I
will not leave you comfortless, Joh. 14. In the Greek it is, (...), John 14.18.
I will not leave you orphans: intimating the case of orphans to be
uncomfortable; and therefore it is, that God is more especially sollicitous for
them, and rebukes those, in an heavy manner, that wrong them: they are left
of the world, and therefore are found of God. The world was a back-friend to
the poor man that lay at the pool of Bethesda eight and thirty years together,
and, all that time, could not find a man to help him into the pool: hominem
non habeo, says he, Joh. 5. John 5.
I have not found a man; and therefore Deum habes, (says one) thou have a God
to help thee: Christ instantly says unto him; Arise, take up thy bed, and
walk. Our Lord tells his disciples; ( Joh. 16. And 16.32. Matthew. 26.56.
) You shall leave me alone. Indeed it proved so, Matthew. 26. All the disciples
forsook him, and fled: Yet I am not alone, (says he;) for the Father is with
me. Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 4.16. at his first answering, no man stood with
him, but all men forsook him: notwithstanding (says he) the Lord stood with
me, and strengthened me. When men forsake, God will help. Indeed, he suffers,
sometimes, men to come to that pass, that they are utterly destitute, before he
comes to help; both for the manifestation of his own goodness, and the
increase of our thankfulness.

And therefore for the Use of it:

Application
First, Let our care be, to keep in with God, and to endear our selves to his
protection, by a godly conversation; for if we be in with him, in all our
troubles and perplexities, when men shall fall off, as leaves in Autumn; or be
like the brakes in the Summer, that Job speaks of; we may roll our selves
upon God, who will make amends for the worlds defect: But if we be not e
servis, of his family, at least, of good correspondence with him, we shall be
utterly lost; for our friends will turn adversaries, and they will be
encouraged to do us mischief; as David's enemies said, his God has forsaken
him, let us persecute him, and take him, for there is none to deliver him: And
they could reproach him and say, where is now thy God? I say again, let us keep
in with God; and then if there be any water, it is in the Ocean; if there be
any light, it is in the Sun; if there be any comfort, it is in God.

Secondly, when we find, upon the worlds deserting us, that God has taken
care of us; let us be truly thankful; and the more thankful, because he came
in at a dead lift, as we say: when David was sensible of Gods drawing him out
of a pit, wherein he must necessarily, in the judgment of flesh and blood, have
perished; there is a new song in his mouth, Psalm. 40.3.
even of praise unto his God, Psalm. 40.3. And when the man at the pool was
sensible, that in the want of man's help, God helped him; the next news we here
of him is, that he is in the temple. John 5.14.
John 5. And what ingenuous person is there in the world, that has not found
his heart inflamed; and an edg set upon his thankfulness; when he can say, as
Hagar here; thou God see me the world afforded no help, but, thou my God
do help me.

Another ground of her thankfulness here insinuated, is this; that having heard
all those comforts that the Angel had given her, in this her affliction;
Observe. 2. True Christian gratitude looks through the means and instruments
up to the main Agent, through all second causes to the first. Augustine. Genesis
32.10.
yet she looks up higher then the Angel, even to God himself, and
acknowledges him to be the fountain of all that consolation: It is a special
part of thankfulness, in benefits received, to look through the means and
instruments, and second causes, unto God, and ultimately to resolve all into
him, that is Bonum omnis boni, the good of every good besides: Fons boni
lucidus (says Saint Austin,) the clear fountain of all good: Jacobs estate was
much improved; he looks further then his own industry. Genesis 32.10. Lord
(says he) I am less then the least of thy mercies; for with my staff came I
over this Jordan, and now I have gotten two bands: And Genesis 33. For his
children, he looks further then the strength of his own body, Genesis 33.5.
verse. 5. These be the children which God has graciously given thy servant.
And so Joseph, for his honor and great estate that he got in Egypt, he looks
further then his own wit and understanding, and the favor of his Prince; as
appears by the name he gives his younger Son Ephraim; God (says he) has
caused me to be fruitful in the land of mine affliction. Genesis 41. Deborah,
though she saw what Iael had done against Sisera, ch 41.52.
yet she looks higher, and praises the Lord for the avenging of Israel,
Judges 5. Judge. 5.2. 1 Samuel 17.37.
When David tells Saul, how he slew the Lion and the Bear; he does not look
upon his own courage, but he ascribes it unto God. 1 Samuel 17. God delivered me
out of the mouth of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear: and in other victories
which he got, he does not boast of his own prowess, though he had the heart of
a Lion, and was a man both of valor and skill; but he thanked God for them,
Psalm. 144. Psalm. 144.1.
Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight: Hezekiah being freed from his dangerous sickness; which was
mali moris, as they say, and most probably thought to be the plague; though he
had applied the lump of figgs, which the Prophet had prescribed, yet he
pitcheth not upon this, as the main cause; but celebrateth the power and
goodness of God, as knowing him to be the Author of his recovery, Isaiah 38.
Isai. 38.
The man that was cured in the beautiful gate of the Temple, by Peter and John,
looks further then them; and therefore it is said, that he went into the
temple walking, and leaping, and praising God. Acts 3. Acts 3.8.
He looked further then the instrument, even to the prime efficient: we shall
see Paul directing the Corinthians, for what benefit soever they had received
by the ministry of him, or of Apollos, to look further then them, even unto
God. 1 Cor. 2.5. Who is Paul, or who is Apollos; 1 Cor. 2.5, 6.
but Ministers, by whom you have believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase: and for those
comforts which himself received, by what mediate hand soever he had them,
whether Ananias, or any other; He looks up as high as God, 2 Cor. 1. Blessed
be God, 2 Cor. 1.3.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercy, and the God of
all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation: even the wiser heathens,
in their deliverances by Sea and Land, would look up as high as God,
(whatsoever the instruments were;) Hence the temples of their Deities were so
full of those (...), their offerings; and we read of some of their Altars
inscribed, Iovi liberatori, unto Jupiter their deliverer.

The Application of this point is, to stir us up, Application
to put this that I have said, in practice; in those evils of punishment that
befall us, we are not to rest in the secondary causes, but to mount higher,
even to God; for there is none evil in the city, which the Lord does not, Amos
3. Understand it de malis poenae, non Culpae; of the evils of punishment, not
of those of sin: David knew that God had a hand in Shimei's cursing him, the
Lord has bidden him curse, says he; 2 Samuel 6.11.
2 Samuel 16. So Job, in his losses, had an eye not so much to the Caldeans, and
Sabeans, or to Satan himself, as unto God; non ad manum percutientem, sed ad
manum permittentem (says Saint Augustine; Augustine.
) he looked not at the hand that smote him, but higher; to the divine hand
permitting it: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, Job. 1. Job.
1.21.
Saint Paul does instruct the Corinthians, that when they were judged, they
were chastned of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32. Isai. 9.13.
1 Cor. 11.32. and it is taxed as a great fault, when men turn not unto him
that smites them, Isai. 9.13. So in blessings received, we should not stick in
the means, but acknowledge God to be the Author, and prime efficient; and that
inferior causes are but his instruments; for as in evils of punishment, if we
do not rise in our thoughts as high as God, and make account they are from him,
we shall never be patient under the rod, nor profit by it: so in good things
received, if we look no further then second causes, we shall never be truly
thankful; nay, we shall be unjust, by shifting the debt from the true creditor.
And yet, how frequent a fault is this in the world! In Victories, how apt are
men to thank the strength and the power they brought into the field, and to
forget him that is the Lord of hosts, and God of victory! Nay, Adrian, and
Verus, of old; and Selimus, and Ferdinand, of later times, did erect monuments
of Victory to their Horses. So for honor and dignity, men thank their friends,
or their money, or their own acts; not remembering that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
75.6.
that promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south; but it is God that pulls down one, and sets up another. So for
wealth; men look no further then their own labor or industry, or else what
has been cast upon them by the donation of friends; not remembering that of
Solomon, The blessing of God is that which makes rich. The returns at Sea are
attributed to a strong ship, and the Skill of the Pilot. The Fisher (as the
Prophet speaks) sacrifices to his net and drag. The Husbandman thanketh his
dunghill for his Crop, and neglects God that gives the increase. Yea, some
are so presumptuous, and so irreligious, as to thank themselves, and their own
works, for their salvation: they will have, not only a congruity, but a
condignity in them; and say, that God is tied, upon terms of strict justice, to
reward them: never thinking of God, who works all their works for them, says
the Prophet; that works both the will and the deed, says the Apostle. Some,
in special comforts received, either by preaching, or otherwise, idolize the
Ministers; and are not thankful, as they ought, to God, Isai. 48.17.
who makes them to profit, Isai. 48. and gives the tongue of the learned to
his servants, to minister a word in due season, to them that be weary, And 50.4.
Isai. 50. Now what wrong is here done to God, that he must be robbed, to pay
the instrument! How must this needs provoke him! He is not against some praise
and thanks to be given to the instrument: The sword of the Lord, and the sword
of Gedeon: But when he observes us to give more unto the means, then to the
author; then he is jealous, and is more justly offended, then Saul was with the
women's song; Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. Let
the keeper of the vineyard have his two hundred; but let Solomon have his
thousand: Thank we our friends, and think well of the means; but let God have
the fat of the sacrifice, as without whose blessing no means could have been
available for our comfort. If we do otherwise, as we are unjust and unthankful
for the present; so we lay up a judgment for after time. It is reported of
Timantes of Athens, who, reckoning up his Victories, coming to one, said, Hoe
Fortunae meae debeo; This I owe unto my Fortune. You must know, he meant, by
Fortune, the Deity: but he never prospered after. When, in mercies received, we
forget to acknowledge God the prime agent, and to be thankful; it is the next
way to make all means, for after-time, unsuccessful. Let us learn of Hagar
here: Thou Lord see me: I have had great comfort from the Angel; but I know
he was only but thy mouth: Thou art the fountain of all my consolation: It is
thou, thou Lord alone, that see and regardest me.

We come to the next clause; Have I here also looked after him that sees me?
Of which there be almost as many interpretations, as there be words in it. That
a man is (as Nazianzen says, Nazianzen.
in another case) in a garden where there is variety of curious flowers, he
knows not which to pluck first. Some make the meaning to be this: Have I here
also looked after him? That is, I have only seen the back-parts of the Angel,
and not his face. Musculus thinks, that she was so fearful and modest, that,
all the while the Angel spoke to her, she looked not upon him; only, in his
going away, Observe. 3. The imperfection of our knowledge here, and dullness of
our apprehensions. Exodus 33.10.
she had a sight of his back-part. And from hence some would gather, that our
knowledge, even of Angels, in this life, is imperfect: and if of them, much
more of God, who said to Moses, Exodus 33. Thou shall see my back-parts; but my
face can thou not see, and live. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 13. We know
but in part: and, Chap. 12. 1 Cor. 13.9.
We now see through a glass, darkly: hereafter, we shall fee more clearly; we
shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. and yet, even then, Qualis est, non quantus
est, 1 John 3.2.
(says the Father;) his indulgence to us, rather then the essence of himself;
for that is too strong liquor for any created nature to contain: he is
incomprehensible: our eyes are too weak, to gaze against such a Sun.

Others expound it thus: Various Expositions.
Have I also here looked after him that sees me? that is, I have seen that
Angel here, after I have seen him in my masters house. And some would make this
the Tutelar or Guardian Angel of Abraham's family; and that he was here employed
to Hagar in the wilderness. Concerning Guardian Angels, whether they are so
assigned, and deputed by God, to the protection of several Countries, Princes,
Families, and Persons; we have formerly spoken. And though it be the opinion
generally of the Greek Fathers, and of many of the Latin, and some of our
later Protestant Divines, that there is a particular Angel to every one; (those
places are urged, Matthew. 18. Their Angels always stand before God: Matthew. 18.10.
and Acts 12. it is his Angel:) I have said, We need not be anxious about it:
Acts 12.15.
for, not only one Angel, but many, watch about those that fear God: Psalm.
91.11.
Psalm. 91. He gives his Angels charge over them

Thirdly, others say, that she challenges her self, that she had no sooner
taken knowledge of the Angel, till he was gone. Indeed, such is the dullness and
inadvertency contracted upon men, that they take not knowledge of Gods dealing
with them. Jacob, awaking out of sleep, Genesis 28.16.
says, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis 28. It is a
good while, ere Samuel understands that it is God that speaks to him; and
therefore twice he runs to Eli, to know his pleasure, thinking he had called
him, 1 Samuel 31.. It is long ere Gedeon is brought to a right understanding,
both of the party speaking, and the things spoken unto him, Judges 6.
Judge. 6. Elihu (in Job) says, God speaks once, and twice, and man
perceives it not, Job 33.14. And Saint Augustine says of himself, August. 1
Conf.
Deus in me loquebatur, and ego nesciebam: the Lord spoke in me, and I knew it
not.

Fourthly, some make this the sense: Have not I here also looked after him that
sees me? That is, Did he not see me first, before I saw him* It was so indeed;
and so it is with us all, that God sees us, and seeks us, and looks after
us, before we look after him, yea look up to him, or think of him; we are so
happy, oftentimes, invenire, to find him: But this we could not do, if he did
not praevenire, prevent us with his grace and favor: He is fain to offer
himself to be found, and put desires into us of seeking him, or else we should
never find nor seek him. We cannot suspirare, unless he first inspirare: we
cannot pant after him, nor aspire toward him, unless he first inspire us.
Bernard.
In that advancement of Gods love to man, that Bernard makes, Quod tantus,
tantum, tantillos, tales, gratis; that the Omnipotent should take care of a
creature so mean and impotent, and of him only, and of him in such a state of
sin, and opposition to him; and all this freely: yet the highest is, prior
dilexit; that God loved him first; as Saint John says, not that we loved him,
but that he loved us first. And I would to God it were our only fault, that
when we do not begin: but such is our weakness, yea our wickedness, that God
offers himself to be found, and puts good motions into us, we do not look
after him; those motions do but make a thorow-fare of our souls; nay, they are
like sparks, they fly and die; we do not cherish and foment them, and pursue
them; and therefore still continue strangers unto God, and have none
acquaintance with him, as we ought.

Fifthly, some think the emphasis of this speech to lie in the word here;
(...), Did I ever look to find God so near me, now in this desolate place,
where all comfort failed me? Had it been in my Mistress house, upon which Gods
Sun does ever shine, it had not been so much: Observe. 4. The substance of Gods
mercies much advanced by circumstances, and especially in that be loved first.
but here, in the wilderness, that God should look upon me, and speak unto me;
and, passing by my former errors, should comfort me; this is extraordinary!
Certainly,

Gods mercies are much advanced, according as they are circumstantiated; as
when there is but a weak beginning of them; as the captive maid is the first
wheel in Naamans cure: when a great comfort is effected by weak means; as
Hezekiahs recovery is wrought by a bunch of figs: or when the means are made
glorious; as when a great person helps a poor man in his misery: or when the
mercy comes in a time unexpected; as the message of the Angel to Saint Paul,
when all hopes of escaping were past: or when a man is not so well disposed, to
receive the mercy: Saint Paul was then converted, when he was in his full sins,
against the Church: And Hagar, when she was out in rebellion: Some have met
with a mercy, when they have come from lewd company: Again, the place adds
much unto it; as when Jacob has the promise renewed unto him, and the vision
of the ladder in his Journey, and when he lay in the open field: And Saint
John, that had his Revelation, in the place of his banishment; and certainly,
that man that will work his heart, Application
to be so truly thankful as it ought; he must admit the consideration of
circumstances, and recollect himself, when, and where, and how, and by what
means God afforded him, this and that favor; for, to take favors in the
lump, and gross: and to consider them only in the bulk; will not so warm the
heart, and melt it into gratitude, as the laying of them open, in all their
adjuncts.

Lastly, diverse do interpret it thus; I yet see, that is; I live though I have
seen God: because it was thought, no man could see God and live; I have seen
God face to face, and my life is preserved, says Jacob, in way of rejoicing,
Genesis 32. Nay they were conceited, Genesis 32.30.
that if they had but seen an Angel, they should dye. As we see in Gideon,
Judge. 6.22. perceiving it to be the Angel of the Lord; he said, alas O Lord
God; for I have seen an Angel of the Lord, face to face: But the Lord said
unto him, peace be unto thee, fear not, thou shall not dye: Manoah said to his
wife, we shall surely dye, because we have seen God, Judge. 13. Judge. 13.22.
And the soldiers, upon the apparition of the Angel, did shake for fear, and
became as dead men, Mat. 28.4.

And this may let us see, how graciously God deals with us, Mat. 28.4.
that he teaches us by men, like unto our selves; for the sight of God,
speaking in mount Sinai was so terrible, that they say to Moses, Exodus 20 19.
Exodus 20. Speak thou unto us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us,
lest we die: Nay, God does not think fit, to deal with us by Angels, in the
Ministry of his word; (...), says Saint Chrysostom: the dispensation of his
word and Gospel, S. Chrysostom
is not inintrusted unto Angels; and why? First, they could not, being of so
sublime a nature, have that compassion of us, that men may have, that are (...)
subject unto the like to the same passions, with us: Secondly, they are too
glorious, and we should not endure them so well, being our selves clothed with
flesh: Elihu says to Job. 33. Job. 33.6.7.
Behold I am according to thy wish in Gods stead, I also am formed out of the
clay, my terrors shall not make thee afraid: God could either by himself, or
by an Angel, have instructed the Eunuch, but he sends Philip unto him: and
so Ananias to Paul, and Peter to Cornelius; and Paul to Lydia: It is his will
we should submit unto the ministry of men. And certainly, though our curious
minds may stand to Gods immediate speaking, or the ministry of Angels; yet,
as we should not be able to endure it, so not to profit by it: for, that speech
of Abraham to the rich man, who would have one sent from the dead to his
brethren, will serve us in this case: If they will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, they will not hear an Angel.

I come to the next verse, wherein her thankfulness does appear, in giving a
name to the Well, where the Angel had met with her: for it is probable, that
she gave the name, and that afterward others took it up, and commonly called
it by that name. Now in that she gave a name to the place, we may see Observe.
5. Grateful minds use all good means to keep up the memorial of Gods favors.
The care of grateful minds, to use all lawful means to keep Gods mercies in
remembrance.

I told you before, how this woman was advised to lay up the memory of the
blessing in the name of her son, Ishmael: and so Isaac's name was to that
purpose, that they might never forget what a cause of joy he was to Abraham. So
Joseph calls his eldest son Manasseh, because God had made him forget his
affliction; and his younger, Ephraim, because God had made him fruitful in the
land of his affliction. And so Moses calls his son Gershom; that is, a
stranger there: and his other son Eleazer, in that God had helped him. They
have also, for this reason, given names to places: as Abraham calls the place
where Isaac was spared, and another sacrifice provided, (...), Genesis 22.14.
(...) And 28.19.
God will provide, Genesis 22. Jacob changes the name of (...) into (...); of Luz
into Bethel; that is, the house of God, Genesis 28. that he might ever remember
how graciously and comfortably God had revealed himself unto him in that place.
Jehoshaphat, and the people, called the place where they met to praise God, 2 Chronicles. 20.2.
after their great deliverance, the valley of Berachah, 2 Chronicles. 20. that is,
the valley of blessing. Thus they have given names to times; as Mordecai, and
Gods people, to keep in remembrance that deliverance of theirs from Hamans
plot, called them the days of Purius, of (...), Esth. 9.26.
or, of lots, Esth. 9. So they have kept Anniversaries; as we see in the feasts
of the Passover, and Pentecost, and the Tabernacles, and the feast of
Dedication, spoken of, Joh. 10. which our Lord himself did keep. Oblivion is
the worst sort of Ingratitude: and to cast such benefits behind our backs, or
set them in some blind corner, argues a slighting of them, and no purpose to
be thankful for them. Our Memory, though it be a natural mother to courtesies
done by us; yet it is a stepmother to benefits received; and therefore good men
(here) used the more care to refresh it.

For the Use of it:

Application
Let it be our care also, to keep in mind Gods favors, that we may not only
serve God with a flash of joy, and blaze of thanks; but may keep a continual
fire within us; yea, set apart some times purposely, for the recalling of Gods
mercies, that we may stir up our selves to the greater measure of thankfulness.
Let us often meditate how free and full Gods favors are: he gives, because he
loves; and he gives fully, because he loves. Let us think also, what need we
have of his mercies; and what a maim it would be, to want even the least of
those we seem to undervalue. And let us think also, how importunate we are for
his benefits; and therefore a shame to forget them. Lastly, how we dispose our
selves to receive future mercy, by being thankful for former: and, on the other
side, how we stop the current to our selves, by our ingratitude.

Again, she gave this name to the Well, not only for her self, to quicken her
own memory; but in regard of posterity, (says Ferus; Ferus in locum.
) ut inde admonerentur divinae misericordiae; that they might be thereby minded
of the divine mercy: that they might know, that God did there behold his
servant in affliction; and that they might expect the like mercy that she had
found, that gave the name to the Well, out of her experience of Gods mercy to
her.

The favors of God to some, ought to be encouragement to others. Observe. 6.
The favors of God to some, ought to be encouragements to others, both for
expectation, and adaptation. Psalm. 32. Romans 4.22, 23.


David, speaking of that which he had found, upon his resolution to confess his
sin, even the remission of it, he adds, Psalm. 32. and for this shall every
one that is godly pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be found. Saint
Paul (Romans 4.) speaking of the faith of Abraham, that it was accounted to him
for righteousness; withal adds, It was not written for him alone, but for us
also, to whom our faith also shall be imputed for righteousness. Saint James
gives hopes of a good issue to our afflictions, by the example of Job, James
5. James 5.1.
You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord: As
who should say, Expect the like. And, Verse 17.
verse 17. when he will encourage to the expectation of a good return of
fervent prayer, he voucheth the example of Elias, how God, upon his prayer,
shut and opened heaven. It is said of the woman that was a sinner in the city,
when she knew that Christ sat at meat in the Pharisees house, she came, Luke
7. yea, Luke 7.37.
thought thus: If he offered so much grace to those that be his enemies, he
will not reject me, that come in the humility of my soul. And it is Saint
Bernards Meditation: Non renuisti confitentem latronem, S. Bernard.
non lachrymantem meretricem, non supplicantem Cananaeam, non deprehensam in
adulterio, non negantem discipulum, non persecutorem discipulorum: in odore
horum unguentorum currimus post te: Thou, O Lord, rejectedst not the thief
confessing, the penitent harlot, the importunate Canaanite, the reformed
adultress, the denying disciple, the very persecutors of thy disciples: and in
the perfume of these odours, Lord, we follow thee; hereby drawn, we run after
thee.

For the Use of this:

We are to be warned of the judgments that God has inflicted upon others. For
this end, our Lord bids us Remember Lots wife: Application
and Paul tells, Jude verse. 7.
how God punished the old Israelites: and Jude tells of the sin and
punishment of the Angels, of the old world, of Sodom; and faith, (...), they
lie out as a sea-mark: yea, God says, Zeph. 3.6, 7.
Zeph. 3. that he cut off the nations, and made their towers waste, and their
streets desolate; intending, that his people should fear, and receive
instruction; that they should hear, and learn, as it is said in Deuteronomy. In
sanguine tuo caeteri descent disciplinam, (said a Proconsul unto one he
punished;) In the characters of thy blood; others shall read instruction.

An so, on the other side, we should be encouraged and comforted by the
instances of Gods mercies: for, Whatsoever was written aforetime, was written
for our learning, (says the Scripture) that we might have hope. And whatsoever
God has mercifully done for others, he has done it to encourage others to the
expectation of the like: for his arm is not shortened, but that he can do as
much as ever: and he is as good as ever: and if we find not what others have
found, we may thank our selves for it; and so we may indeed. We would find the
same favor that David did: Why do we not? Because, though we have sinned with
David, we have not repented with David. We would find the same favor that
Peter did: Why do we not? Because we do not weep, as Peter did. We would find
a return of our prayers, as Elias did: Why do we not? Because we do not pray
fervently, as he did. We would have an happy issue out of our afflictions: Why
have we not? Because we are not humbled under the hand of God, as his children
have been. If we had been so, we should have found such honey in that lion,
that we should have had occasion to say, It was good for us to have been in
trouble. Let us carry our selves as Gods people have done; and let us
confidently expect, that the mercy he has showed to others, he will show to
us: and so we shall be able to tell others what God has done for our souls;
that so they may cast themselves also upon the goodness of the same God, and
find help in time of need.

Preached, Ian. 26. 1641.
THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 16.14, 15, 16. Beer-lahai-roi. It is between Cadesh and Bered. Verse. 15.
And Hagar bare Abraham a son, etc.
FOr the name given to the Well, it is called, The well of him that lives, and
sees me.

First, of him that lives.

Often, in both Testaments, Observe. 1. God is the sole fountain of life, the
living God; and all other refuges dead without him. Deuteronomy. 5.26. Josh. 3.10. 1 Samuel 17.36. Psalm. 42.2.
is God called The living God.

Here, and again, Deuteronomy. 5. Who is there, of all flesh, that has heard the
voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, and lived? Josh.
3. Hereby shall you know that the living God is among you. So, 2. Sam. 17.
David says, that Goliath defied the armies of the living God. So, 2 Kings
19.4. the King of Assyria sent Rabshakeh to reproach the living God. So, Psalm.
42. My flesh cries out for the living God. Dan. 6.20.
Darius calls Daniel the servant of the living God, Dan. 6.20. and, verse 26.
he calls God the living God. So, Matthew. 16.16. Peter says, Thou art the Son
of the living God. I adjure thee by the living God, says the High Priest to
Christ, Matthew. 26.63. So, 2 Cor. 3.3. Saint Paul mentions the Spirit of the
living God: and, 1 Timothy 3. he calls it the Church of the living God. Heb.
9.14. 1 Timothy 3.15. Revel. 7.2.
To serve the living God. And, Revel. 7. the Angel had the seal of the living
God. We shall find in the Scripture, that Gods oath is, by his life. As I
live, says the Lord, Numb. 14.28. Isai. 49.18. As I live, says the Lord. And,
Jerem. 22.24, As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah were as the signet of my
right hand. Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked. And as we find not that he has sworn by any thing but
his life and holiness; so others have made it their oath. As the Lord God of
Israel lives, says David to Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.34. So Ittai to David, 2 Samuel
15.21. As the Lord lives. So Elijah to Ahab, 1 Kings 17. 1 Kings 17.1.
As the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand. And so Elisha to
Elijah, 2 Kings 2.2. Many other places might be brought; but we shall make
mention of them in the Application.

The Heathens had this understanding; and therefore they called their Jupiter
(...), from living. And most truly and properly is God said to be the living
God; for he has life in himself, and of himself. Jo^. 5.26.
Joh. 5. The Father has life in himself: no creature has it in or of it self.
He says to Moses, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am; that is, of himself: (...), Rev.
1. I that am: nay, (...) ero, is the Hebrew word; Deuteronomy. 5.26.
I will be: which no creature can challenge. Deuteronomy. 5. (the place before cited)
he is called (...); that is, the God of life, yea of lives: not only the
living God, but the God of life. It is a rule that Suarez gives; Suarez.
Genitivi pro adjectivis in Scriptura positi, exaggerationem significant; that
genitives in holy Writ put for adjectives, do augment the signification: as, a
man of blood, and a man of violence, and the man of sin, and a man of strength,
and a man of wisdom. So that, then, by this phrase, the God of life, we may
gather, That life is eminent in God; and not only so, but essentially and
originally in God: and therefore he is called, not only the living God, but
life it self: Joh. 14.6.
Joh. 14. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: 1 John 5.20. This is the true
God, and eternal life: not only life, but life eternal; as the Angel swear by
him that lives for ever, Revel. 10.6.
Revel. 10. In all other things, their Life, and They, are two: but God is his
own life; and because he is his own life, he is eternal: for, as Aquinas well
reasons against the Gentiles, Aquinas.
A separation is a division of one thing from another: Nothing can be separated
from it self: Therefore, God must needs live eternally, because he cannot be
separated from himself. 2. He justly deserves the name of the living God,
because he gives life to every living thing: whatsoever lives, lives by
participation from him: therefore he is called Fons vitae, The fountain of
life, Psalm. 36.9. and 42.8. Act. 17.25, 28.
Psalm. 36. and, Psalm 42. David calls him the God of his life. He gives to
all life and breath, Acts 17. and, verse 28. In him we live, and move, and have
our being.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
First, in that he is the living God, it serves to difference him from all the
idols of the world. The Scripture shows it, by opposing this style of God to
idols: Jer. 10.8, 10.
Jerem. 10. having spoken of the stock, that doctrine of lies, he says, But
the Lord is the true God; he is the living and the everlasting King. And so,
Acts 14.14. We preach, that you should turn from those vanities to the living
God. Idols, and the living God, are opposed: 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
so, 1 Thessalonians. 1. You turned from idols, to serve the living God. He is the true
God, idols are lies; (...), as they are called; as (...); (...)
that is, non dii, no gods; nay, from (...) nothing; according to that of the
Apostle, An idol is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. or if any thing, yet, at best, only a
dead thing; and therefore cannot be the true God, which is living. Dumb idols
the Apostle calls them, Psalm. 115.45. etc.
1 Cor. 12.2. Nay, David describes them more fully, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6. They
are the works of men's hands: they have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not,
ears and hear not, noses and smell not, hands but handle not, feet but walk
not. They that make them are like unto them, and so is every one that puts
his trust in them.

Much good (therefore) do it the Pagans with their idols; and the Papists, who
are worse then Pagans, with their images, because they have more light: They
would have people believe (belike,) that they are living ones; for sometimes,
(they say) they look with a cheerful countenance, and sometimes they turn away
in dislike; they turn their eyes, they weep, they move their hands, they nod
their heads; but these are gulleries, to fool children withal; wise men know
these impostures: God give them better minds, then to make the Scripture a mute
judge, and images laymens books: God turn their hearts from these vanities; let
us serve him that is the living God, in Spirit and truth; and ever acknowledge
him, to be the only true God; God blessed for ever.

A second Use is, that we prize life, as the Rachel, the most beautiful

Secondly, life makes the first division of things; there is nothing before
life, but being; and being makes no distinction of things; for that can be
nothing, that has no being; and therefore those creatures that have life, we
esteem before those that have it not; how noble soever otherwise: a living dog,
is better then a dead lion: (says Solomon, Eccles 9.4.) And the poorest worm
that crawleth, Eccles. 9.4.
is more glorious in this respect, then the frame of Heaven and Earth; in that
it lives, and the other does not.

And again, Thirdly, the greatest happiness that men shall ever attain unto,
the happiness of Heaven, is set out by life. O let us then prize this blessing,
and let us not be foolishly prodigal of it; like some, who by their contention
and quarrelsomness, and being forward to every duel, hazard it; nor like
others, that dig their own graves, by intemperance, and so dye in tempere non
suo, before their time, scarce live out half their days: Such as refuse meat or
drink, or physic, for the preservation of life; show a flat undervaluing, if
not a contempt of that great Jewel; and as we are to prize it for the worth of
it; so we are to be truly thankful to the Doner, for it, and that is the
living God. Some men think they are beholding to their food, and to their good
stomach, and able concoction: Alas; who gives food? Of whom do thou beg thy
daily bread. 2. When thou have meat, who gives thee an Appetite? how many
have meat before them, and yet they loath the sight of it: 3. When a man has
eaten with an Appetite, who give thit power to nourish? there be those that
have a (...), Caninus Appetitus, a stomach like a dog; and yet there is an
(...), i.e. a defect of nourishment; it is most true that our Savior says,
man lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth
of God: that is, the word of Gods blessing: we owe our life then, and the
support of it, unto God; who if he did not supply oil, our Lamps would quickly
go out. And if we must be thankful for life barely, then much more for health,
which is the perfection of life: for non est vivere, sed valere vita; not to
be, but to be well, is to live, to live in health: It is true, we must be
thankful, Exodus 22.29.
even for Penury and want. Thou shall not delay to offer thy first fruits, and
thy liquors, Exodus 22. The word is (...) thy tears: and Cajetan observes,
that it signifies sterillity; God will be thanked in a barren year, as well as
in a plentiful: So God must be thanked for sickness also: Job blessed God for
an Abstulit, as well as a Dedit; for his taking away, as well as for his
giving, Job. 1.21. But when God is pleased, to give us not only life, but a
latitude of health, how much are we bound unto him! What light is to an house,
that health is to a man; what comfort has a man in an house (though never so
well furnished) if he have not light? And what comfort in a man's greatest
possession, if he have not health? Let us then (I say) be thankful, to the
living God for it; and let us be afraid to turn the edge of so great a
blessing, against God himself, and wrong him with his own gift; as they do,
that spend their health in lust, in excess, in gaming, and other vain and
sinful courses: do we live through the bounty of this living God; and shall we
live to his dishonor? can we not subsist one moment, without his supporting
hand? and dare we mispend this talent? non hos quaesitum munus in usus, this
was not bestowed to such ends: God gives Israel corn, and wine, and oil, and
they offer them to Baal: and so he gives us life, and health, and do we
sacrifice it to sin? but as he threatens to take those things from them; so it
is just to take away our life, that we thus mis-employ, and grieve him withal.

1 Timothy 6.17.
A Third Use is, that we should trust in God: The Apostle makes this one
argument, for our confidence in him; because he is the living God, 1 Timothy 6. He
is the fountain of living waters; other things on which we are not to rely, are
but broken Cysterns, Ierem. 2.13. either dead things, or insufficient; wealth
is many a man's tower; and he says to the wedg of gold, thou art my confidence;
and what is wealth but a dead thing? neither can it make a man live: for man's
life consists not, Luke. 22.13.
in the abundance of things which he possesses, Luke 22. Honor is but a dead
thing, but in potestate honorantis, only in the power of him that yields the
honor; it is oftentimes the cause of mischief, to him that has it; and
therefore justly called gloriosum periculum, a gilded danger: and pleasures are
but dead things, and they kill too: 1 Timothy 5.6.
they that glut themselves with them, are dead while they are alive, 1 Timothy 5.
Besides there is no hold of them; like the freshest flowers, they fade the
soonest: these things then are not to be trusted in, nor yet other things;
which though they have life, are insufficient. Psalm. 20.7.
Some men put trust in horses, (says the Psalmist, 20.7.) but we will remember
the Name of the Lord; for an horse is but a vainthing, to save a man, Psalm.
33.17.
Psalm. 33. and there at the 16. Verse. He supposes a confidence that some men
put in an army of men. So did Sisera, so did Benhadad, so did Senacherib; so
did Sigismund of latter time: but he says there, a King is not saved by the
multitude of an Host: Some men trust in the favor of Princes; and think
themselves made, if they be but respected by them; but what says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 146. Psalm. 146.4, 5, 6, verses
Trust not in Princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no help in them;
their breath goes forth, they return to their earth, and then all their
thoughts perish: all dependances from them, and hopes in them, are quashed, and
buried in the same dust with them, Isai. 2.10. Cease from man whose breath is
in his nostrils: 2 Chronicles. 16.12. Asa sought to the Physicians: and Ierem. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm, whose heart
departs from the Lord; happy therefore (says he) is he that has the God of
Jacob for his helper, and whose hope is in the Lord his God: This God lives
for ever and ever, and cannot only bless in this life, but give eternal life:
he loves not only to bring his children to happiness, but because he lives
for ever, to make them everlastingly happy.

Lastly, Let the knowledge of this, that God is the living God, keep us from
sin: for because he lives, he is sensible of those affronts be offered him;
and because he lives eternally, he will punish eternally; it is called the
wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever, Rev. 15. Rev. 15.7.
Whatsoever Origin thought, or the Misericordes Doctores, (as Saint Austin
calls them) the charitable doctors, of the determination of the damneds
punishment; as long as God shall live, they shall be tormented: his breath
shall still blow that fire and brimstone: and therefore know, as the Apostle
says, Heb. 10. Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: the idols of
the heathen, they could be bold withal; chain them, and scourge then, but they
were dead things: the true God is the living God; he lives to plague obstinate
sinners here: and he lives to plague them for ever and ever.

The second thing is; Of him that sees me, God living and seeing: Observe. 2.
Gods providence is as watchful, as his essence powerful.
You know we spoke of this upon the former verse. yet give me leave to give one
blow more, for the driving home of this nayl, and not without just cause: for
though people will not stick in words to acknowledge a general providence of
God, and that his eye is upon all, and every man; yet by their practice it does
plainly appear, that they have so much of this bitter root of Atheism in them,
that they do not think that he does eye them so particularly, or does set
himself to observe their proceedings: for certainly if they did, they would not
be so desperate in their courses: that which they dare not do in the eye of the
judge, nay of a common man, nay of a child; durst they do, if they were
persuaded that Gods eye did behold them? O let this then be written in our
hearts, and ever fresh in the remembrance of every one of us; God sees all,
and universos ut singulos; and so all, that not any particular one escapes his
knowledge: (...), He sees me wheresoever I am, whatsoever I am doing; he sees
mine Actions, he observes every word of my tongue, yea every thought of mine
heart; yea, (...) that is, long before; or as one translation, a far off:
(...); Heb. 4. all things are naked, and dissected, Anatomized to his presence:
Cave, dominus Te videt, was an inscription in a certain place. Take heed what
thou do, the Lord sees thee; and if it were written in every of our rooms,
it were not amiss: Timor Dei est Ianitor Animi (says the Father;) the fear of
the Lord (which is a severe and awful consideration of Gods presence) is the
porter of the soul; and certainly where this porter is watchful, it keeps out a
world of wickedness, such as is found in the sons of Beliall, because there is
no fear of God before their eyes; who say presumptuously as those in Job; Tush,
God sees not, neither does he regard; where the fear of God is not, not any
sin is blushed at: as we may gather from that speech of Abraham, unto
Abimelech; who when he asked him, why he had not plainly professed Sarah to be
his wife, tells him his reason; that he thought the fear of God was not in
that place, Genesis 20. Romans 3.10.
and therefore they would kill him, Genesis 20. And so Romans 3.10, and 11. verses,
The Apostle reckons up foul iniquities, reigning in the lives and hearts of
men; and he assigns the reason of all those prodigious impieties Verse. 18.
There is no fear of God before their eyes: And if the want of the fear of God
be the cause of evil, I am sure, he that stands not in awe of Gods presence,
has not the fear of God in him.

Oh then witness we the fear of God, by acknowledging him present, Application
and standing in awe of his eyes: Let us know that he sees, and that is not
all; but as he sees the good we do, and lays it up, that he may reward it;
so he sees our evil also, and keeps a register of it, that when the time of
recompense comes, he may punish it.

In the latter end of this verse, is added a Topography, or description of the
place of this Well; It was between Cadesh and Bered: This Cadesh, is that
Cadesh-Barnea that we often read of; and was one of the stations of the
children of Israel, when they were Ambulans Respublica, Salvianus.
(as Salvian calls them) a traveling Commonwealth; and Bered we find no
where but in this place; the Chaldee calls it Chagra: Now this description of
the place, some think to be a needless circumstance; but let them take heed,
for (...), Basil.
To say there is any idle word in holy writ (says Basil,) is no less then
blasphemy: Certainly Moses the penman of this story, did purposely and
advisedly mention it; (as he does often in the like kind; such a place is thus
and thus situated, and as thou go to such a place;) Here was a famous
occurrent, and a new Name was given to the Well; and therefore it was fit, it
should be described, where it was, that when people should pass by that way,
they might take knowledge of it: Isaac meditated or prayed about this place,
Genesis 24. Genesis 24.62. c. 25.11.
yea he dwelt by this Well, after the death of his Father, Genesis 25. No doubt
but many in after times, made use of this place: and it was the fault of the
children of Israel, that, near to this place, they murmured for water, Numb.
20. not remembering (hoc loco) that in this place, God had succored Hagar, in
her affliction.

So then, Moses does, in this description, posteriorum negotium agere, act the
business of posterity: as it was said of one of old, He does that which may be
for the benefit of posterity.

Remarkable mercies should be recorded, and treasured up unto posterity;
Observe. 3. Remarkable mercies are to be treasured up to al posterity.
and that with circumstances of place, and time, and person; that posterity may
be stirred up to thankfulness, and expectation of the like mercy from God.
Jacob takes one of the stones that he had laid his head upon, and pitched it
up for a pillar, and called the name of the place Bethel, and it retained that
name, Genesis 28. the pot of Manna must be kept, Genesis 28.
Exodus 16. to instruct posterity: and Joshua set up 12 stones, in the midst of
Jordan, and they are to this day (says the text,) Josh. 4.9. Josh. 4.9.
and at the 20. verse. other 12 stones that they brought out of Jordan, were
erected in Gilgall, that all ages after, might take knowledge of the great work
of God, in dividing Jordan for his people: Verse 20.
the deliverance from Amaleck, God would have Moses write, Exodus 17.14. This
shall be written for the generations to come, and the people that shall be
born, shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 102. The parents were commanded of God,
Psalm. 102.18.
to teach their children what the passover did signify, and other things:
that they might teach their children, and so from age to age, the memory of
Gods mercy might be continued; that the father to the children might make known
Gods truth: as Hezekiah speaks, Isai. 38.

And for the Use of it: Isai. 38.19.


I wish this may be taken up into our practice: Application
God has magnified his mercy to this land of ours in great deliverances, and
we have seen them with our eyes; we should tell our children of these things,
and charge them to teach their children; that in all succession of time, God
may be glorified; and his people encouraged, to serve that God, that has
wrought such wonders for us: that great deliverance in 88. (but 54. years ago)
it is almost buried; one great occasion is, the want of an anniversary: That
other as great deliverance, from the gunpowder treason, has an anniversary,
yet it is but little thought of; in this short time, some of the popish side,
have had the bold front to say, there was no such thing; what will they be
ready to say one hundred years hence? nay some of our own (I speak it with
grief) stick not to mince the matter, and partly to excuse the actors, and wish
it were forgotten, and so wonderfully extenuate the great mercy of God: does it
not behove us then to take care, as Moses did, that posterity may know it? let
our children be informed of it, in their confabulations, that they may tell
their children, and they theirs; that so in all succeeding ages, they may be
thankful for the mercy, may abhor such rebellion, that brings forth such
sower grapes; and may love that truth, which God did so miraculously defend and
protect: but you will say, this is enough out of a circumstance.

Now we come to the next Verse, which tells us,

First, how Hagar brought forth her son Ishmael.

Secondly, how the name was given by Abraham.

For the former, I have told you, that this her bringing forth in Abraham's
family, necessarily supposes, 1. that she returns thither. 2. that she was
received there.

She returned thither: for that was it that the Angel gave her in charge;
Return to thy mistress, and humble thy self under her hand. No doubt, she did
both: she came a penitent and reformed woman, no more insolent against Sarah,
nor giving occasion of offense. Where we may note,

Observe. 4. Happy that Affliction which ends in Reformations. Prove. 20.30.
What a happy thing it is, when after Affliction, follows Reformation.

Surely it is that which God intends: God intends to open their ears (whom
he afflicts) unto discipline, and that they should depart from inquity, Job
36.10. And, so, Prove. 20. The blueness of the wound serves to purge out evil.
And, Isai. 27.9. By this (that is, by afflictions formerly spoken of) shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, the taking away sin.
Jer. 9.7. I will melt them, and try them: how shall I do for the daughter of my
people? I have tried other means; I will now afflict her, if by this means I
may reclaim her: I will go to my place, till they acknowledge their offense,
Hos. 5.10.
Hos. 5. in their affliction they will seek me early. We see what Gods
intention is in afflicting: and this end he has attained in diverse that have
been afflicted; Psalm. 119.67.
as we see in David, Psa. 119. he says, Before I was afflicted, I went astray:
but now I have kept thy word. And, verse. 79. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. The like we see in Manasseh, who
was recalled by his affliction, 2 Chronicles. 33. So it was with Paul, who being
unhorsed, and smitten with blindness three days, and in that time exercised
with spiritual terrors; Acts 16.
he returned no more unto folly. And so the Jailer, Acts 16. And the Prodigals
penury brought him home to his fathers house, and made him ever after an
obedient son.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
It meets with those against whom the hand of the Lord is gone out, and has
been heavy upon them; and yet, when the affliction has been removed, they
have not been amended; nay, many times, much worse then before; as if (like
Antonine in the fable) they had gotten strength by their fall. Such an one was
Pharaoh, who, when the judgment was taken away, was more obdurate then before.
Such was Ahaz: for you may well think, that if he did inter flagella peccare,
Gregory. 2 Chro. 28 22. Isai. 5.1.
(as Gregory speaks) sin between the stripes; (and so he did, 2 Chronicles. 28.)
he would be worse, after he was released. Why should you be smitten any more?
(says the Lord, Isai. 5.) ye will revolt more and more. Yea, even those that
have made large promises, and protestations, in the time of affliction, what
kind of men they would be, if God would reprieve them. Optimi dum infirmi, (as
Ferus says;) soundest in mind, when unsound in body: penitent, while pinched:
But when the storm has been over, they have cast all their vows behind their
back, and renewed their unsanctified ol^^^, with more eagerness and greediness
then formerly: the Dose has irritated* not purged out the humor. Just like
those Israelites, Psalm. 70.34.
Psalm. 70. when God slew them, seemed to return; but they did but flatter with
their lips; for they did flee out again fearfully.

And is not this a fearful thing, that Affliction, which God intends for cure,
should do no good? Jerem. 4.11.
like that wind (Jer. 4.) from the wilderness, which shall neither fan nor
cleanse. Nay, that a plaster should be laid on, and the son should be so
rebellious, S. Augustine.
that (as Augustine says) not only non profit, sed ob sit; it should not
only not heal, but hurt! Oh let all such take heed of that heavy doom, Ezekiel.
24. Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, (that is, have offered to do it, and used means to
do it;) and thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee: None affliction
hereafter shall do thee any good; thou shall go on to make up the measure of
thine iniquity, till thou come unto the place of torment, to be paid for all
together.

In the second place, Let it be an Admonition to us all, ( Micah 6.9.) hear the
rod, and who has appointed it. Every affliction has a voice; yea, it says to
us, as Ebud to Eglon, I have a message to thee from God, Judge. 3. God calls
upon us to repent, and amend; Judges 3.20.
and therefore let us now seriously endeavor reformation, and make it good
which God intends in our affliction, that it may bring forth the quiet fruit of
righteousness, Heb. 12. Blessed be those fetters, Heb. 12.11.
that make Manasseh a better man: blessed be that whale of affliction, which
conveyeth Jonah on dry land, reformed: blessed be that poverty, that drives
home the Prodigal: blessed be that Bethesda, out of which a man comes healed:
blessed be that file, that cleanses us from our rust; that fire, that purges
us from dross; that clay and spittle, that opens our eyes to see our errors,
and reform them. (...); (says Saint Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in loc.
) What a fruitful gain is to be made of our well-improved-afflictions! And
therefore remember we our pangs, and remember we our prayers, and our vows, and
pay them unto God. The fruit of affliction is seen in the after-course; and he
has profited by it, that is such as he has promised to be: and certainly, God
and man will love that man, whom affliction has made a better man.

Secondly, we may conclude also, that she was received again by Sarah, upon her
humiliation and submission; and all former errors forgotten.

This pious and charitable disposition has been found in Gods people: Observe.
5. Forgiving dispositions, are badges of Gods people.
As we see in Joseph toward his brethren: they sought unto him for mercy, and
that he would forgive their unnaturalness; and he did it. And so in Moses: how
easily did he pardon his brother and sister, and intercede to God for her, and
the people, that often murmured at him? So David forgave his son Absalon, and
Saul, that persecuted him; and Shimei, that cursed him, when he sought unto
him. So Samuel, though the people reviled him, yet he pardons them, and
prays for them; yea, thinks he should sin, if he did it not. So Daniel
passed by the wrong the Wisemen did him, and is a means to save their lives.
Thus Saint Stephen freely forgave his persecutors, without any submission of
them; and, in the midst of that shower of stones, prays for them. And so did
Saint Paul by the Jews, and our blessed Lord by his persecutors. And I doubt
not but Philemon did what Paul required him, in regard of Onesimus. And thus
diverse of the Worthies did, of former times: The blessed Martyrs have freely
forgiven those that have wronged them. That which has wrought them to this,
has been.

First, the consideration of the common frailty of nature; how apt people are
to offend, and do wrong.

Secondly, the meditation of their own frailty; that they may be so tempted,
that they may be injurious to others: and what they would have done to
themselves, in the like case, they are willing to do to others.

Thirdly, the observation of Gods dealing with others; who does forgive
iniquity, Exodus 34.
transgression, and sin, as he is described, Exodus 34. even foul sins, crimson,
scarlet-iniquities, upon humiliation; David's adultery and Murder, Manassehs
Necromancie, Peter's denial of his Master, Paul's persecution of the Church.

Lastly, the consideration of Gods dealing with themselves; how mercifully he
has received them, upon their repentance and humiliation: and they must be
followers of God, as dear children.

Now for the Use of this:

Application
First, it meets with those to whom this is durus sermo, an hard saying. What,
forgive an injury? No; retain wrath, and revenge the injury to the full. What,
upon submission, and craving pardon, to put up this? That were to be
poor-spirited. How many are there, even fathers to their children, masters to
their servants, one man to another, whom nothing will satisfy; no mediation of
friends, no prayers or tears, or acknowledgements, appease! Nay, they suffer
not only the sun of the day to go down upon their wrath, and many suns; but
even the sun of their life sets in this black cloud. Yea, so malicious they be,
that they think their children unworthy to inherit their possessions, unless
they will be heirs of their malice, and to prosecute a revengeful course set on
foot by them; as the father of Hannibal took an oath of him, bound at the
Altar, that he should never have peace with Rome.

Do these people at any time remember, that it was one of those fearful sins
that God gave up the Heathen unto, in his just judgment, to be (...), Romans
1.30.
that is, implacable. Do they (2.) think of the condition of their begging
forgiveness of God, and how they seal up their own judgment. 3. If, from any
one vicious affection, we may conclude a nullity of grace, surely from this:
God is love; and the devil is malice: and it is (...), Chrysostom.
(as the Greek Father says.) It is the most proper affection of the devil, to
be an irreconcilable enemy.

In the second place, let us labor for this godly and charitable disposition,
to forgive others their offenses; yea, as our Savior faith, to seventy times
seven times. And let us but set before us the example of God, who, upon
repentance, receives us; and it will answer all objections. When the Flesh
says, He is base that has wronged me; shall I forgive him? Think, there is
not that distance between thee and thy brother, that is between God and (...).
I, but secondly, it is not the first time: And did never God but once forgive
thee? But thirdly, he will do it again: And will thou never more offend God? I,
but fourthly, it beseems not my place. Why, is thy place greater then Gods?
Fifthly, I shall be counted a coward. Is God so, for forgiving? Think often,
how thou carriest thy self toward God, and thou will be more inclinable to
forgive thy brother his offenses toward thee.

It is said, And Hagar bare Abraham a son.

Here might be observed, how faithfully God performs what he promised: for
the Angel had said this from God, and now it is effected. But of this
plentifully heretofore; as likewise of that which might be noted out of the
disposition of the name by Abraham; it is in the power of the father: He was
advertised by Hagar, what the Angel had said concerning the childs name; and
now, according to his right and place, he does impose it. The wife may suggest,
and advise, and counsel; but she may not usurp that power and right of the
husband.

The last verse is only a Chronology of Abraham's age when Ishmael was born
unto him; which affords little matter of observation. I will therefore
conclude with this:

This good man, Abraham, in his old age, has a son: Though it be not the issue
which God intended him, yet it is a comfort unto him.

God crowns the old age of his servants with many comforts. Observe. 6. Aqua
vitae for old age; and what crowns that with comfort.
They have wisdom, increased by long experience; they are reverend, and
respected; they see their childrens children; they are freed from troublesome
services; and, above all, God gives them the comforts of his Spirit; and he
makes them not only teachers of others, but examples unto others: he is ready
to comfort them, because the time of age is that time, those days whereof
Solomon says, There is no pleasure in them.

For the Use:

Let those that are aged bless God for those comforts he affords them; and
above all, let them bless God for a good old age, Application
when God is pleased to continue, yea to improve their graces; that, though the
outward man decay, the inward man is sound; and the decays of Nature are made
up with soundness of grace: such an old age is not only a comfort to ones
self, Prove. 16.31.
but a crown, (says Solomon, Prove. 16.) The hoary head is a crown of glory,
when it is found in the way of righteousness. When the white almond-tree does
so flourish, he that will not rise up to it, it is pity that he should ever be
old.

I pray therefore, Let us that are old, above all comforts, labor for this: It
is woeful to see one that is declining in body, yet worse in soul; to be near
the grave, and far from heaven: to hear old people blaspheme and swear, to be
excessive, to be lustful, and, even when strength is gone, to talk (...); as if
they wanted not a will, but a power on^^y to sin: to see them as foolishly
fashionable as young girls: to hear them lie and slander: I say, This is woeful.
Oh labor we for grace; That must be our chief comfort in age, better then all
the Sack and Sugar in the world: We need not be bidden to get Spectacles when
our eyes fail us, or a staff when our limbs fail us; and shall we not seek for
grace that may support us? And let us live in the fear of God, and be examples
of piety to others; and then we may sing, with old Simeon, Lord let thy servant
depart in peace.

Preached, Febr. 2. 1641.
(...), 1 Cor. 15.3. Quod accepi, tradidi, etc. I have delivered unto you, that
which I also received. E. S.

FINIS.

