Seasonable Advice to Youth.

A Funeral Sermon On Psalm. 119.9.

Preached upon the DEATH OF Mr. Richard Walter, Jun.

In the Eighteenth Year of his Age.

January 13th, 1691/2.

By JOHN SHOWER.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's- Head-Alley, over
against the Royal Exchange, 1692.

TO Mr. JOHN WALTER.
Sir,
IF the following Sermon upon the Death of your Brother, may be of any Use and
Advantage unto others, the Obligation will be very much owing to you, with
whose Desire I complied in the Preaching of it, and now in the making of it
Public: The chief of my Design therein being the Instruction of the Younger
sort, I could not so fitly prefix any other Name as yours. I hope your tender
Affection to your Brother will make you read this Memorial of of him with great
Seriousness; and assist your good Improvement of those Counsels, which are so
needful for Persons of your Age to consider, and obey.

I shall only add my Hearty Prayer to God for the Early Impressions of his
Grace, to Sanctify you betimes, and make you to know and love the Holy
Scriptures, and so preserve you from the Snares of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, and particularly from Youthful Lusts.

If this Sermon may any way contribute to such a desirable effect on you, and
others of your Age, I shall bless God.

London, Feb. 25. 1691/2. I am Yours, in the best Services, John Shower.

A Funeral SERMON On the DEATH of Mr. Richard Walter.
Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his way? By taking Heed
thereto according to thy Word.


A Practical Discourse to Young Persons would not be unfit at any Time, in this
Age, and in this City, if there were no special Occasion leading to it: But it
is most fit, when there is one, such as the Providence of God has now given
me, by the Death and Funeral of a Young Gentleman. What I shall say on that
Subject, I reserve for the Close, to enforce the Improvement of the other
contained in this Text: Which will admit to be considered two ways. Either

First, As the rectifying and cleansing the way of Youth, is a necessary Means
in order to the obeying God's Word, and the keeping his Commandments. Dr.
Hammond.
The Original will bear this Interpretation: And some Ancient Versions do
countenance it. The Sense then is this, How shall Young Men be purged and
purified by Divine Grace, so as thereby to be qualified for Obedience to God?
It is a kind of Prayer (in a Poetic strain) for that Grace which is necessary
to Holy Walking. But,

Secondly, I choose rather to consider those Words, as an Answer to the Enquiry,
by what means we may be sanctified betimes, and enabled to please and obey God
in our whole Course. And that we are told, is by carefully observing, and
taking heed to the Word of God: The Blessed Influence whereof to that purpose
is here Asserted and Amplified. Partly from the Subject, with respect to whom
it has this Effect, A Young Man. Partly from the special Object, about which
this purifying Influence of the Divine Word is employed, in such an one, i. e.
The Cleansing of his way. This extends to all that needs to be rectified either
in Heart or Life, in Spirit or Practice: Not only as to his external Behavior,
but his inward Principles and Temper. For we read of the Young Man's walking in
the way of his own Heart, and in the sight of his own Eyes, Eccl. xi. 9.

Neither are we to overlook the Form and Manner of Expression, by way of
Question, Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his way? The Psalmist had
before declared the Desire of his Soul, that his Life might be ordered
according to God's Word. Ver. 5.
Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! He had professed the
Purpose and Resolution of his Heart to endeavor it. Ver. 8.
I will keep thy Statutes, O forsake me not utterly! Upon which follows the
Interrogation in the Text, Wherewithal, etc. i. e. But how shall one so Young
as I am, under the Guidance of a Deceived Mind, and the Biass of Corrupt and
Vicious Inclinations, assisted with very little Experience, surrounded with
many dangerous Examples, and suitable Temptations, etc. How, or wherewithal
shall such a One be Cleansed, and Reformed, and Enabled to please and obey God?
The Answer is, by attending to the Instructions of his Word, by observing the
Orders and Directions he has there given us, by applying that Word for our
Sanctification, and by following the Holy Counsels and Conduct of it.

The Question it self how this may be done, does suppose the Necessity, and
imply the Difficulty of it. There is great need it should be done; but how
shall it be effected? Were it not a matter of some Difficulty, there would be
no ground for such a Question, by what means it may be brought about. But
because it is not a slight and easy, though most needful matter, the proper
means must be diligently sought for, and minded, viz. by taking heed unto the
Word of God.

For the opening of this Passage, there are Four things to be considered.

First, The sinful ways of Youth, that need to be Rectified and Cleansed.

Secondly, The Difficulty that is supposed by the Interrogation, to Purify and
Reform them.

Thirdly, The sufficient and only means how this may be done, i. e. by the Word
of God.

Fourthly, The Necessity of careful Attendance unto this Word, and particular
Application of it, to an effectual Cure.

First, Concerning the sinful impure ways of Youth, which need to be Rectified
and Cleansed. The Corruption of Human Nature upon the the First Apostasy, is
not more plainly expressed in the Divine Revelation, than manifest in the
effects of it, unto the experience of all, who are any ways acquainted with
themselves. We need but compare what we find in our selves with the Holy Image,
Nature, and Law of God unto which at first there was a just Conformity and
Agreement in the Nature of Man. But now we are alienated from God, and
disaffected to him: The inward and deep depravation of the Understanding and
Will, the Two Superior Powers of the Soul, that command the rest, may easily be
discerned, if we will but examine and reflect upon our selves. Tit. 3.3.
That our Judgments are deceived, and our Minds blinded, and our Wills fettered
by Sensual Lusts, and that we are pleased with our Slavery, and unwilling to be
delivered. The Rectitude of our Nature being lost by the First Transgression,
an Hereditary Corruption, is transmitted from our First Parents to all their
Posterity. We are shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin: And that which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? This
discovers it self very early in Children, and with more violence in the various
Lusts of Youth, according to the several circumstances of their Conditions in
the World, and the different Channel that is formed for it by their particular
Constitutions and Tempers. The most principal Duties and Institutions of
Christianity, do suppose this Degeneracy and Corruption of Human Nature; and in
this and many other Scriptures, it is manifestly employed. The Subject of this
Text is not Pure and Unbiassed, equally indifferent unto Good or Evil, but it is
supposed that he needs to be purified, as well as guided. Wherewithal shall a
Young Man cleanse his way? His way cleansed: There is hardly any Metaphor
whereby the Affections and Conversations of Men are more usually expressed,
than by this of their Way and Walk: But there are some particular ways of
Wickedness more appropriate unto Youth, than to Elder Persons. The
Instructions, Counsels and Exhortations of the Holy Scriptures, (besides those
of common and universal Concern,) are therefore all suited to the various
Classes under which Men may be severally considered. There are some corrupt
Inclinations and Practices, some ways of Sin to which Young Men are more
inclined and tempted than before or after that Age: which in Childhood they are
not arrived unto, and in Riper Years are commonly exchanged for others: I say
commonly, because sometimes Gray Hairs are deformed by the Vices and Follies of
Youth; and sometimes the Wisdom and Virtue of Old Age may be Eminently the
Ornament of Young Men. Old Age may sometimes flourish in Youth, and be as often
perished in those that are well stricken in Years. Covetousness for instance,
is not so much the Peculiar Vice of the Age, but may be the Fault of Young
Persons. The Rich Young Man in the Gospel is an Instance, who told our Lord,
that he had kept the Commandments. But he had Houses, and Lands, and Bags of
Money, which stood in his way to Heaven, those he observed, and kept as well as
the Commandments. Particular Countries and Places, particular Callings and
Relations, particular Seasons and Times may have their special Sins; and so
have the different Ages of Men. The Ignorance of Youth is commonly attended
with Pride and Conceitedness. For they who know but a few things, are always
most presumptuous of their own Understanding, and so are commonly more Rash and
Hasty, Giddy and Inconstant, fond of Liberty, and Impatient of Restraint,
Affecters of Novelty, and Lovers of Pleasure, of Company, Pastime, and sensual
Mirth, etc. There are some youthful Lusts, which young Timothy is warned
against, 2 Timothy 2.22.
such as Ambition and Vainglory, Curiosity, and Envy to appear Great and
considerable before others, as the Scope of the Place, and three or four
following Verses seem to manifest. Not Drunkenness and Uncleanness, or such
carnal Lusts. For though all Men have the Seeds of these, yet the Modesty and
Frugality, the Weakness of Constitution, and often Infirmities of Timothy make
it very improbable they should here be principally meant. The Corruption of
Human Nature, it is true, does usually and with great Violence discover it self
in unsanctified Youth, by these Lusts of the Flesh, These are some of the ways
of their Heart, according to which they form their Lives: Where the Restraint
of Bodily Temper, special Providence, Religious Education, and Divine Grace do
not make the difference. I need not go about to prove that Childhood and Youth
are Vanity, or Sinful Folly, considering the many Examples in Scripture, and
the multitude of such in every Age, and in none more than our own; considering
the frequent Warnings given us by God against such Lusts; considering the
bitter Remorses, and penitent Confessions of many who are truly Converted, or
but Awakned by the prospect of Death and Judgment; considering the earnest
Supplications even of Good Men, that God would not Remember the Sins of their
Youth. Even David thought he had cause for such a Request, Psalm. 25.7. whose
Poverty and Piety, whose Industry and Afflictive Trials in his Younger Years,
were a very great Restraint from those Lusts which are more Unbridled in others
of another Education and Condition. Not to mention how many in Riper Years are
made to passess the Sins of their Youth, Job 13.26. and their very Bones are
full of them, Job 20.11. For a Young Sinner has himself for his Heir and
Successor, when he is Old; and that which he receives for his Inheritance, is
only the sorrowful remembrance and bitter Fruits of his Youthful Follies.

It is sad to consider how many Young Men of hopeful Parts, and promising
Capacities, are taken in the Devils Snares, in the pursuit of Sensual
Pleasures; and lay up Matter for future Diseases, and bodily Pains; how they
poison their Blood, and weaken their Constitutions; how they hasten or antedate
the Infirmities of Old Age, and do what they can to dig their own Graves. But
it is a more Melancholy Reflection, to consider how they provoke God, and
incense his Almighty Vengeance; how they wound and wrong their own Souls, and
treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath; how they provide Fuel for
everlasting Fire, and consign their Bodies and Souls to Hell for ever. To see
them run headlong to their own destruction, by walking in the way of their
Hearts, and in the sight of their own Eyes: To consider how easily, they are
led into destructive Paths, and made a cheap and hasty Prey by the Tempter,
till they are hardened past Recovery, or cut off in the midst of their days, by
a sudden Arrest of Judgment. And so for the short and vain Pleasures of Youth,
they perish to Eternity; unless some few of them by an extraordinary Grace are
recovered at the last Hour, and renewed unto Saving Repentance: But it is much
to be feared, that very few Deathbed Penitents are so.

Secondly, It is supposed to be a matter of no small Difficulty, for a Young
Man to Reform and Cleanse his Ways. This in part appears from what has been
said already of the Corruption of Human Nature, and the Vicious Inclinations of
Youth. Their Ignorance and Rashness, and want of Experience, their Aversion to
serious Thoughts, for fear of Melancholy; with the apprehended unsuitableness
of Restraint and Retirement unto Persons of their Age, do all increase the
Difficulty. They usually reckon that they have the World before them, they have
Time enough hereafter, and are now in the Age of Liberty and Pleasure, and that
both God and Man will indulge a great deal to them, because of their Youth;
Presuming at the same time, that a great while hence, they shall have
Opportunity and Heart, and Help, to work out their Salvation when ever they
please. For when they Calculate their own Nativities, they reckon to the
longest Term of Human Life, that any are wont to reach to. Their Sun is
climbing higher, they have a great while to Night, and so are far removed from
the Thoughts of Death. Accordingly, when ever they are advised by those who are
Elder, to look forward to the Grave, and beyond it, to bethink themselves of
their Everlasting State, and provide for an Endless Life; their inward Thought
is agreeable to the Highpriests Answer unto Judas, What is that to us, look
thou to that. Such is the Strength and Power of Sense, and Fancy in the Days of
our Youth; such is the Weakness of our Reason, (as not having attained to any
great Consistency of Judgment, which must be ripened by Consideration and
Experience:) such is the violence of our Passions, and the Inconstancy of our
Resolutions; so variable and uncertain the Objects of our Affections and
Choice; such the venomous Influence of Self-Flattery, and that of others about
us; such the force of Examples, and so great the number of ill ones; so deep
the Impressions we receive by the Company we converse with; (especially if
Atheistical or Licentious Youths are the Instruments of the Devil to entice
us;) so little command have we of our selves, to bridle those Impetuous Lusts
that are easily Fired by every Spark of Temptation; and so intolerable is the
Reproach imagined of being singular, of not complying with the Customs of those
of the same Age with our selves, that on these and the like Accounts, the Devil
has a mighty Advantage against us, in that Portion of our Time.

For the most part, Young Men are Changeable and Unsteady, Heedless and Unwary,
are but little Fortified against the Wiles of the Devil; are little used to
consider things with any Strength, and Intensness of Thought, and prone to
flatter themselves with foolish hopes and projects of the wonderful things
which they shall be able to compass, to do, and be, and enjoy, and reach,
before they leave the World, etc. That it is no wonder that the Principal
(because most hopeful) Attempts of the Devil are directed against such, to
deceive and destroy them by Youthful Lusts. Children are not capable of doing
him such Service, or themselves such Prejudice, or of being employed to so many
ill-purposes: And commonly Old Men are already fixed in their way. The Minds of
Youth are more flexible, and withal sharper for any Undertaking; their Bodies
stronger and more active for most kinds of Wickedness, their Blood more warm,
their Spirits more Vigorous, as their Sinful Desires are more Raging, and all
their Passions more vehement. On which account the Wisdom of the Ancients would
not admit Persons very Young to the Lectures of Moral, Arist. Ethic. Lib. 1.
Chap. 1.
or Civil Philosophy: as supposing them to be so very much under the Government
of their Passions, that good Counsel would be lost upon them, and all such
Discourses prove in vain.

But though the Philosophers despaired of being able to reclaim and reduce
Young Men by their weak and naked Rules of Morality, we need not do so, who are
under the dispensation of a Gospel of Grace, and are acquainted with the power
of the Divine Word. The Precepts of Philosophy may assist our Recovery from the
grosser Immoralities in practice; such as violate the plain Sentiments of
natural Conscience, or are Scandalous in the view of Men. But the Divine Word,
(accompanied with the power of the Spirit,) can work an effectual Cure in Heart
and Life, by healing our Corrupt Nature, and making us partakers of the Divine.
This is one special Privilege of the Gospel State; and is much for the honor
of Divine Grace; recommending at the same time the Excellency of the Word of
God, as the holy means of it. Which leads us to consider.

Thirdly, That the Word of God is the sufficient, and only means of Cleansing
and Reforming the sinful ways of Youth: This Enlightens the Eyes, Psalm. 19.6,
7, 8. Psalm. 17.4. Psalm. 37.31. Prove. 6.23.
Converts the Soul, makes Wise the Simple, shows us the way of Life, and keeps
us from the Paths of the Destroyer. It was for this end, that our Blessed Lord
gave himself, that we might be Sanctified and Cleansed with the Washing of
Water, by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26. He declared that his Disciples were Clean by the
Word he had spoken to them, John 15.3. He prays that they might be Sanctified
by the Truth, which Truth is his Word; and makes the same Request for all those
who should afterward believe, John 17.20.

And here we might distinctly consider, that hereby we are made acquainted with
the Nature and Necessity of this Sanctification, and Cleansing: And that by
Divine Appointment, this is the ordinary Means of effecting it. And farther,
that herein the Wisdom of God is honored, by its exceeding Fitness to that end.

1. Without the knowledge of this Word, we could not fully have understood the
loathsome Depravity and Corruption of our Hearts, or the manifold Transgressions
of our Lives. How wretchedly we are Polluted, and how often we Offend; how
Defective are our best Duties; how short we come of our Rule and Pattern; and
what need there is of seeking to recover the Divine Image and Life.

This Blessed Word instructs us, how the Ground of our Sanctification is laid
in the Satisfaction of Christ: how it is procured, Acts 3.26.
and how we may partake of it: What we owe to the Blood of the Cross, and what
to the influence of the Divine Spirit. The Treasury of Heaven was opened by the
Sacrifice of Christ, that the Holy Spirit might be given to Convince and
Convert the World. His Departure or going away, John 15.
which comprehend his Death and Ascension, was necessary and expedient unto
this.

We are also here instructed, how this Sanctification is carried on, by our
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. For this Water of the Spirit has a
continual Cleansing Virtue upon all true Christians, until their Purified Souls
ascend to Heaven. He that pitied them when they were in their Pollution, will
not leave them after they are Cleansed, till he has finished his Work.

It is from this Word that we are acquainted with the Necessity and Extent of
this Sanctification, as reaching to Soul, Body and Spirit. It tells us the very
Mind and Conscience are defiled; and that there needs not only the Cleansing of
our Hands, but the Purifying of our Hearts. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
For the Doctrine of the Grace of God, teaches us to deny all Ungodliness and
Wordly Lusts; James 4.8.
to kill the Lusts of the Eyes, to mortify the Pride of Life, to crucify the
Desires of the Flesh, and bring the Understanding and Conscience, and every
Thought into Subjection to the Laws of Christ. 2 Cor. 7.1.
This tells us what the Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit is, from which we must
be Cleansed: and how indispensably necessary this is to our Acceptance with
God, and our Communion with him. This represents the Divine Purity, (which we
are to imitate and resemble,) as every way Amiable and Excellent. As, that the
Blessed God essentially hates every Sin, earnestly forbids it, and terribly
threatens it, and patiently dissuades us from it, and severely punishes it, and
has mercifully sent his Son to destroy this Work of the Devil: Therefore that
he cannot tempt any man to evil, or necessitate and cause the Sins of Men,
which he warns them against on pain of Damnation.

Never was inward Purity so pressed by any Law before; or the universal
Sanctification of our Nature advanced to such a pitch. No other Law pretends to
reach to the inward Thoughts of the Heart, as those in the Word; which forbids
us to Covet, to Lust, or hate our Brother in our Heart. This ransacks every
filthy Corner, and pierces into the Secrets and Recesses of every Man's
Breast; speaking with absolute Authority to the very Grounds, Principles, and
Ends of every Action: dissecting the whole Body of Sin, uncovering the inward
Ulcers of the Soul, manifesting that a Lustful Desire, impure Mouth, or an
unclean Hand, will make a Man polluted before God, and stand guilty of the
Breach of his Commandment. This Law is exceeding Broad, it forbids not only the
sinful Acts, but the Instruments of 'em, what would begin or promote 'em, or is
chosen for the Sin's sake, with relation, or in order to it. This shows us
whence our Infection did first arise, tracing it unto its Springhead, the first
Apostasy from God; manifesting the spotless Holiness of the Divine Majesty, and
his perfect abhorrence of every Sin, so as to judge and condemn the invisible
risings of Disobedience, and Contrariety to it, in our very Thoughts. Yea, by
the measures of the Gospel, we are unclean, unless we have active Purities. If
we are not crucified to the World, we are covetous: we are malicious, and hate
our Brother, if we do him not all the Good we can; tho he have treated us
injuriously; we dishonor the Name of Christ, if we do not to our utmost
advance his Glory.

Ephesians. 5.13.
This is that Light which makes manifest; discovering that Deformity in Sin,
which we never saw before; and so much of it in the Heart, as we never before
believed; with the aggravating Spots of many plausible Duties, and the
provoking circumstances of our particular Faults. For when we thought our
selves very Absolons for Beauty, by looking into this Glass, we appear as vile
and loathsome as Lepers: and all our Secret Sins, which are always in the Light
of God's Countenance, are by the Word set in order before us. What is said of
the Sun in the Heavens, is true of this Word, its Circuit is to the Ends of the
Earth, and there is nothing hid from the Light and Heat thereof. Psalm. 19.6.


2. This may be also considered as the ordinary Means, which God has appointed
for the cleansing of our Hearts and Ways. And therefore the Sanctification of
the Spirit, 1 Pet 1.22. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Acts 15.9.
and believing of the Truth, are joined together. The Sense of some particular,
more notorious Sin, is commonly the first means to humble the Soul: When the
Charge is brought home by the Word to this or that Person, Thou art the Man, or
Thou art the Woman, who have scorned and slighted the Authority of thy Maker,
in this or the other Instance. Thou art the Foolhardy Rebellious Creature, who
have affronted thy Sovereign, who have despised that Goodness, which should
have led thee to Repentance; abused that Patience, which has a tendency to thy
Salvation; rejected that Grace, that would have helped thee; and contemned that
Redeemer, who shed his Blood for thee. This Voice of the Lord is powerful, to
shake the stoutest Cedars; and make a Felix on the Bench to tremble, when
preached but by a Prisoner at the Bar. They that Crucified the Redeemer, and
scorned his Doctrine, were pierced to the Heart, and cry out, Men and Brethren,
1 Cor. 14.26. 2 Acts.
what shall we do be saved! By this the Chains of the Devil are knocked off,
and his Captives recovered into the Liberty of God's Service. You shall know
the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, John 8.32. In this Jordan the
most polluted Creatures have been washed; and Hearts full of loathsome Filth
have been changed into Vessels of Purity Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.9.

3. This therefore is the most likely, fit and proper Means. For besides, the
Encouragement of these Examples to seek for cleansing, we have others
propounded as our Patterns to imitate. Sometimes the Blessed God himself, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, that we may not rest in low Seize; and sometimes
the Examples of the Saints, that we might not despair of being healed. For the
same powerful Grace that has sanctified others, is able to do the like for us.
Therefore while our Impotency and Impurity is declared in this Word, we are
directed by it to a Fountain open for sin, and for uncleanness. We have
Promises and Precepts most graciously connected. What God commands us in one
Place as our Duty, he promises to do for us by his Spirit, or enable us to do
in another; or at least gives us ground to hope he will.

Let us then consider the exceeding great and precious Promises, which are the
Motives, and Means of our being cleansed from all Filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1. For by them we are made Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1.4.

It Is by this means Divine Impressions are made upon the Soul, Mr. How 's
Blessedness of the Righteous. p. 268.
the obdurate Heart of a Sinner melted and overcome, and transformed into the
Image of God. Compare this Means God works by, with the Subject to be wrought
upon, and the Effect to be wrought, and none can be conceived fitter. It is the
Office of the Word, by Precepts, Promises and Rewards, to inform the Judgment,
and awaken Conscience, and persuade the Will. It is some Encouragement to
expect the Influence of the Spirit, in the use of this means, because it is so
excellently fitted to this End, to heal our Impotency; which is not Natural but
Moral. And God would not appoint us Means, which should be altogether in vain.

Dr. O. of the Dominion of Sin and Grace. p. 14.
Grace is tendered unto Men in the preaching of the Gospel, to enable them to
perform, and comply with that which God requires. For although we know not the Way
and Means, of the effectual Communications of Grace unto the Souls of Men: This
is certain, That Grace is so tendered in the Preaching of the Gospel, that none
go without it, none are destitute of its Aids and Assistance, but those alone
who by a Free Act of their own Wills, See to the like purpose, Mr. Howe's
Blessedness of the Righteous, chapter 17. and
do refuse and reject it. Ye will not come unto me, that you may have Life. And
all Unbelievers have, or may have Experience of this in themselves, that they
do voluntarily refuse the Assistance of Grace, which is offered for their
Deliverance. Therefore is their Destruction of themselves. -- The common Grace
Redeemers Tears, p. 53. Append. p. 192.
which is generally afforded to them, who live under the Gospel, extends so far
as that they have thereby a Day allowed them to provide for their Peace. Now
though this Grace is not yet certainly Saving, yet it tends to that which is
so; and none have cause to despair, but that being duly improved and complied
with, it may end in it. It is expressly said to such, (as live under the
Gospel,) they are to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, for this
reason, that God works, or is working in them, i.e. statedly and continually is
at work, or is always ready to work in them, to will and to do, (...).
of his own good Pleasure, 2 Phil. 12.13. The matter fails not on his part. He
will work on in order to Salvation, if they work in that way of Subordinate
Cooperation, which his Command, and the necessity of their own case oblige
them unto. -- The Impotence therefore of the Will, lies in its D. Bates's
Harmony of the D. Attributes, in Octavo. p. 63.
Obstinacy. This is the meaning of St. Peter, speaking of Unclean Persons, That
their Eyes are full of Adultery, and they cannot cease from Sin. It Is from
their own Fault alone, that they are without Power. Therefore the Scripture
represents Man to be (...) and (...), weak but wicked. His disability to
Supernatural Good, arises from an inordinate Affection to that which is
sensual.

Let me add, if this Holy Word (animated by the Divine Spirit,) be not
effectual to our Sanctification, those means which are more Extraordinary, are
not like to be so, Psalm. 78.22, 23, 24. They Rebelled against God, and would
not believe his Word, or Trust in his Salvation; though he commanded the Clouds
from above, and opened the Doors of Heaven, and rained Manna for them to Eat,
and gave them the Corn of Heaven. Their Victuals came out of the Clouds, and
their Water cut of a Rock, and yet these Miracles did not Convert them. Neither
the Miracles of Moses, or those of our Blessed Lord, were sufficient in their
time. In some Places our Lord wrought Miracles, and yet they desired him to be
gone out of their Coasts: And when he was on the Cross, they jeared him with
his Miracles, though they could not but acknowledge them; he saved others,
himself he cannot; let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe.
After the Miraculous Feeding of Two Thousand with Five Loves and Two Little
Fishes, John 6.14, 22, 26, 30.
the People were astonished, and said one to another, This is he that should
come; this doubtless is the expected and long looked for Messiah; and would
have taken him by force, and made him King: And yet I think the very next Day,
at least within a Day or Two, when he told them they followed him only for the
Loaves, they say unto him, What Sign show thou that we should believe? What
work do thou? As if he had never wrought a Miracle before. Luke 16.31.
Yea, our Lord has told us, If we will not hear Moses and the Prophets,
neither would we believe, though one should rise from the Dead. Though one of
your Acquaintance who Perished in his Sins, should appear at Midnight in a
Frightful Shape, and warn thee in particular by his Example, to take heed of
Youthful Lusts, and not continue one Hour longer so near to endless and
intolerable Misery, as is every Impenitent Sinner? Should he tell thee, that he
once made a Mock of Sin, and a Jest of Hell, and a Scorn of Godliness, as thou
do? That he did not believe there was such a Holy, Terrible God, as now he
finds; or that it would be so fearful a thing to fall into his Hands? but now
he feels the Word of God to be true; and that for a Foolish Lust, he has the
Recompense of a Miserable Eternity. If such Warnings were given, they would not
awaken Men to Repentance, unto whom the Preaching of the Word is not effectual.
We read, that after the Resurrection of Lazarus from the Dead, they that knew
him before, and knew he was raised again, John 11.53.
and Conversed with him afterward, were not Converted to believe on Christ;
for from that very Day of his Raising Lazarus, the Highpriests, and Scribes,
and Rulers, and People, took Council how they might put him to Death. The like
may be said concerning the Resurrection of Jesus Christ himself.

And how many do we see brought to the very brink of the Grave, within a step
of Death and Hell, both in their own apprehension, and in the judgment of
others, who upon an unexpected Recovery, (not unlike a Resurrection,) have been
far from being reclaimed and bettered afterward? Their forced Repentance
vanishes, when the fear of dying cease. It is the Ministry of the Word,
which is the ordinary Method that God has appointed for our Sanctification;
and if that be not effectual, these extraordinary Methods would not.

Fourthly, It remains to be considered, That if this Word become the effectual
means of our Sanctification, we must carefully attend, and take heed unto it.
The Original imports to observe narrowly, Psalm. 130.3.
with great exactness; we must still have it in our Eye, that we may form our
Designs, regulate our Affections, and order our Ways accordingly. Josh. 1.8.
We must carefully preserve it as a Treasure, and watchfully observe it as a
Rule; we must hide it in our Hearts, verse 11. A competent knowledge of this
Word, and diligent endeavor to increase it, is manifestly supposed; Heb. 2.1.
and that we give earnest heed to the things we Read or Hear, lest at any time
we let them slip. We must study the Mind of God in the Holy Scriptures; wait on
the Public Preaching of it; consider its Tendency and Use, as able to make us
Wise unto Salvation. Col. 3.16.
We should ponder it in our Hearts, and endeavor to preserve it there, that it
may cohabit and dwell with us, Jer. 15.16.
and in us, and be unto us the Joy and Rejoicing of our Hearts: Yielding up our
selves unto the Power of Truth, that we may experience its Holy Efficacy to all
the Ends for which God has appointed it.

1. What is first, and most obviously to be Collected from what has been said,
is the Usefulness and Necessity of the Holy Scriptures. What excellent
Knowledge may be found there, for the cure of our Ignorance? What Sanctifying
Influence, for the purifying of our Hearts and Ways? What Establishment and
Strength to fix our Wavering Minds, and heal our Unsetledness? How certain and
Divine are its Instructions? How Pure and Spiritual, and yet Plain and Express,
are its Precepts? What pungent and smart Reproofs? what inviting Promises? what
terrifying Threatenings, are employed in this Word? to lead us into the way of
Life, and save us from the Paths of the Destroyer? How fitly do the effects of
it answer its Name? 1 Cor. 1.18. Romans 1.16. Psalm. 110.2. Heb. 4.12.
of the Power of God, and the Rod of his Strength, the Power of God to the
Salvation of the Soul? It is quick and powerful, sharper than a Two-Edged
Sword, to pierce and wound by Conviction. It is the Word of God's Grace, to
heal those Wounds; Act. 20.32 1 Timothy 2.3.
able to build us up, and give us an Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified. What Sins are to be avoided, how Temptations are to be resisted,
how Bosom Lusts are to be Mortified, and a Pure, Acceptable Worship to be
performed, and what otherwise is necessary to the pleasing of God, and
Communion with him, is taught us in this Word.

Hereby we are acquainted with our Sin and Misery, and told the only way of our
Recovery and Happiness. The Malicious Arts and Stratagems of the Devil are here
unfolded; hence we are instructed how to conceive of God, how to approach to
him, converse with him, and resemble him. Our Steps are hereby directed by
unerring Light; our Purposes settled, and our Course stated; and Directions
given us how to use our Selves, and all we have for the Service of our Maker,
Redeemer and Sanctifier. By taking heed to this Light, we are safely led out of
those Labyrinths, where others have lost their way, and may prevent stumbling
into the Pit of Destruction, into which others fall. All the Doctrins and
Precepts of this Word, tend to our Healing and Recovery; to promote the
perfection and felicity of our Nature; to bring us to the best kind of Life for
the present, in respect of duty to God, comfort to our Selves, and usefulness
unto others: And this in the expectation of the Heavenly Reward: enabling us in
some measure to partake of the Earnest, and enjoy the Fore-tastes of it. In
short, It is by this Word that we believe in Christ, and have hope toward God,
and are enabled to love him, and so to dwell in Love. Our Faith, our Hope, our
Love to God and Christ, are all begun, cherished and maintained by the
influence of this Word. To this we owe that Faith whereby we are vitally united
to the Son of God; that Hope whereby all our Grace flourishes; and that Love
whereby we are Fruitful. For as by Faith we have a Spiritual Life, by Hope we
gather Strength, and by Love we become active in all the Fruits of Holy
Obedience.

2. This will justify the extraordinary Esteem and Affection that Good Men
have for the Word of God. Who, after such experience of its cleansing Virtue,
but must profess, that the Sayings of this Book are Faithful, and True, and
Worthy of all Acceptance? more to be desired than Gold, than much Fine Gold,
sweeter than the Honey and the Honeycomb? Psalm. 119.93, 97.
O how love I thy Law! says David, It is my Meditation all the Day. I will
never forget thy Precepts, for by them thou have quickened me. O that this Law
might be continually within my Heart, to enlighten, counsel and refresh me!
that it may dwell richly in me; be always an Ornament of Grace to my Head, and
a Chain of Gold about my Neck; Health to my Navel, and Marrow to my Bones! I
heard its Voice, I felt its Power, and beheld its glorious Beauty, and so have
been changed into the same Image; and shall I not love it? If any should seem
to wonder, and think such Estimations and Affections strange, you may answer
with the Man born Blind, John 9.30. This is a mavelous thing, that you know
not what it is, or why I so much prize and love it, when it has opened my
Eyes. I was Spiritually Dead and Defiled, and by this Word I received quickening
and cleansing. No wonder therefore, if I account all things but Dross and Dung
in comparison of this Knowledge. Phil. 3.7, 8.


3. What Thankfulness should they express, whose Hearts have been seasoned with
Holy Principles and Affections betimes; and their Way cleansed by the Word of
God? If through the Knowledge of Christ, you have escaped the Pollutions that
are in the World, through Youthful Lusts, (when so many others are thereby
Drowned in the Gulf of Perdition,) should you not be very Thankful? When you
behold Multitudes who wallow in the Mire, and take Pleasure in the ways of Sin,
are regardless of God and Christ, and the Eternal World, you may say, I was as
Mad as they, or should certainly have been so, if Free Grace had not prevented.
What Gratitude do I owe to my Redeemer, and his Mighty Spirit, who makes me
thus to differ! Many of you can look back with Joy and Praise upon the Early
Experience you have had of this kind. You can reflect how early God began with
your Souls, so early, that your Baptism seemed to have had its effects and
influence presently; so early with some, that you cannot tell the very time
when God first began. Others can remember the special Instruments whom God
employed from time to time to do them good; by what careful and prudent
Education, Prove. 4.4.
by what useful Examples of Holy and Affectionate Relations, by what convincing
Sermons, Chapter 5.3, 4.
by what awak'ning Providence, by what repeated Motions and Strivings of the
Spirit of the Grace, you were brought to the knowledge of your Sin and Duty, and
enabled to own and avow your Baptismal Covenant, and seriously out of choice
come under the Bond of it. To which Purpose David acknowledges God, Psalm.
16.2, 7. O my Soul, thou have said to the Lord, thou art my Lord, therefore I
will bless thee, who have given me Counsel, and enabled me to receive it; who
have enlightened my Darkness, removed my Prejudices, cleansed me from my
Pollutions, softened my hard Heart, subdued my Enmity and Disaffection to thee,
and made me willing in the Day of thy Power, to come to Christ that I might
have Life and Healing by him. Lord how is it that thou do manifest thy Self
to me, and not unto the World! That I should be quickened and cleansed, while
others are left under Spiritual Defilement and Death.

4. What need have Superiors to be careful and diligent to bring Young Persons
under their Charge, acquainted with the Word of God? It is mentioned not only
to the Praise of Young Timothy, but of those who were concerned in his
Education, that he knew the Holy Scriptures from his Childhood, 2 Timothy 3.15
i.e. those of the Old Testament, for scarce any other were then written when
he was a Child. He was also acquainted with what was necessary to be known
concerning Christ, as is mentioned in the same Verse, under the Expression of
the Faith which is in Christ Jesus. Women and Children had then the Scriptures
in a Language they understood; for his Grandmother Lois and his Mother Eunice
instructed him very early in the knowledge of God and Christ.

The Debauchery of Youth is very much owing to the want of good Principles
instilled into their Minds in their Tender Years: By that means they are a more
easy Prey to the Devil; having little or nothing to oppose, to the Snares he
lays for them, or to their own corrupt Inclinations. You therefore that give up
your Children to God by Baptism in Infancy, you seem to profess a Desire they
should be his as soon as yours; you solemnly engage and promise to bring them
up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; but how false to God and them
must you appear, if you do not season them with Holy Principles betimes! if
when you know they have Immortal Souls to Save, and an Eternal Blessedness to
obtain, and endless Misery to escape, yet bring them up in Ignorance, without
that necessary Knowledge that must make them wise to Salvation. If you do not
instruct them in the Rules and Obligations of their Duty, that they may know
the God of their Fathers, 2 Chr. 28.9
and serve him with a perfect Heart. If you do not mind them of the Evil of
Sin, the Uncertainty of this Life, and the Assurance of an Everlasting State,
of the Truth, and Consequences of the Fall of Man, of the way of our
Reconciliation to God, and the Participation of his Image, etc. If you do not
inculcate these plain and necessary Truths upon them; if you do not bring them
to the public Worship; teach them how to spend the Lords Day; observe their
particular Tempers, Corruptions, and Temptations, and apply your selves
accordingly with Wisdom and Seriousness for their good.

Of all others you have the most Power over them, and Interest in them; none
have such Advantages and Opportunities to instruct and persuade them as you.
None are under so many Obligations of Duty, and Interest of every sort as you.
It is therefore Unnatural and Unexcusable to neglect it.

You are not easily Apprehensive how much your present Comfort is concerned in
it; for if while they are Young, you are negligent in your Duty to them, they
are likely enough when grown up, to fail of theirs to you. And it is but just
they should not know their Duty to You, if you do not instruct them in theirs
to God. These Arrows (to which they are compared in Scripture, Prove. 22.6.
Deuteronomy. 4.9. -- 11.19.
and happy is he that has his Quiver full of them,) should be directed right
at first, for accordingly they are like to Fly afterward. It may fall out
otherwise, but usually the gracious or vicious Habits of the First Age are
transmitted to the next; and the after Conversation is suitable to the
Education of Childhood and Youth. Besides the Sin and Mischief which you may
prevent. For we know not at what Period of Time a Child comes to the use of
Reason; and so cannot tell when God will impute their Follies, nor whether they
will tend; or what Impressions they may leave. But when he does not impute them
to Damnation, it may be he will so far, as to cause Sickness, or an hasty
Death. And therefore they should be instructed in their Duty, so soon as
capable, and be restrained from the material Parts of any Evil, even evil
Words, which they understand not.

Before I dismiss this Head, let me mind you that are Masters of Families, that
you ought thus carefully to instruct your Younger Servants, the care of whose
Souls is committed to you by the Providence of God: Your own safety and
comfort, and the good success of your Civil affairs, is concerned in it, as
well as your Duty. Mr. H. Palmer. Dr. H. Wilkinson, on Job 13.26. p. 17.
An Eminent Preacher in his time, upon a like occasion, in a Sermon at
Aldermanbury, made mention of a memorable Passage to this purpose. That in the
beginning of the Irish Rebellion, there were some Popish Servants cut the
Throats of those who had formerly been their Masters, telling them that they
should have taught them better.

Somewhat of Direction and Counsel I would now add unto the Younger sort. Let
me therefore beseech you,

First, To make a Pause, to stop a while, and bethink your selves: Employ some
time in a serious Consideration of your Hearts and Ways, according to this Word
of God. Think, what sort of Creatures you are, and how you came into this
World? Who was the Author of your Beings, and the Original of all things? What
did he make you for? but to Glorify and Enjoy him? How wretchedly incapable
you have rendered your selves of both? And in order to your Relief, what is to
be done on your part, and what may be hoped for on God's; and how remediless
your Case is, if this Affair be not begun to be transacted before the only time
is past, wherein it may be done. O try your Reason, and use it in such
Reflections. Think in what a Condition you were born; how you have lived; what
you have done, and what you now are; whether you are going, and where you must
shortly be: Think what your sinful Folly has already cost you; what you have
lost, and the manifold Hurts and Mischiefs you have received by it. What
unthrifty Bargains you have made, and what is the bitter Fruit of those things
whereof you are now ashamed. The Devil himself cannot persuade you, but you
must Die; and you dare not say or think that there is not an everlasting Heaven
or Hell: You therefore sometimes wish to die the Death of the Righteous. And
will you not consider a little, how impossible that is, without being like them
while you live?

Secondly, Endeavor clearer Apprehensions, and a better Understanding of the
Religion you profess, as to the Evidence of its Principles, the Nature, Grounds
and Reasons of it. That you may know your own Case, and what it is to be a
Christian, and what the necessary change does imply, and how it is to be
wrought. That you may know the God from whom you have revolted; whom you are to
obey as your Sovereign Ruler, and to enjoy as your chief good. That you may
know the Savior, that must befriend you for the Pardon of Sin, and for Eternal
Life. That you may know the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier, by whom you must be
Enlightened, Quickened and Renewed. How can you love and obey your Maker, if
you know him not? what he is, and how he will be served? How can you believe on
Christ, if you know not who he is, or what he has Done and Suffered,
Purchased, Promised, Offered, Prepared, and is ready to be, and do, and give?
How can you bewail your Sin and Misery? Loath your selves, and seek for Grace,
if you continue Ignorant of such things as these? It is by the Light of Holy
Knowledge you must be recovered; you are lost and perishing, 2 Cor. 3.4.
while this Gospel is hid from you. If you are not sensible of your own
Ignorance and Disease, and where is the Remedy; how will you come to Christ as
your Teacher and Physician?

Thirdly, To this end, diligently study the Holy Scriptures, and attend the
Public Preaching of the Word, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
with suitable Desires and Designs. Apprehend the weight of the matters treated
of, and know that it is for your Life: You know not the advantage of an
affectionate Study of the Holy Scriptures. While the Ethiopian Eunuch was
reading in the Prophet Isaiah, Acts 8.26.
though he understood it not, God did so far reward and bless him, that he sent
Philip to instruct him farther, and his Conversion to the Faith was the Issue
of it. When ever you hear the Word Preached, remember in whose Name, and upon
what Arrand the Message comes.

Therefore lay aside every Prejudice, Jam. 1.21. Luke 8.18. Act. 10.33.
and place your selves as under the Eye of your All-seeing Judge. We that speak
to you in the name of the Lord, have very much to blame our selves for, God
knows, that we are not Serious enough, and Compassionate enough to the Souls of
Men: (not adapting our selves to the Capacities and Necessities of the Younger
and more Ignorant sort.) Alas! we see and know but little, and feel less of the
great important things we speak of. And though we hope we find Mercy to be
Faithful, yet how short do we come of that Affection and Vigor, and serious
Importunity, which the case of Sinful Perishing Souls does need? How unlike
those that know the Terrors of the Lord, the value of an Immortal Soul, and the
nearness of Eternity? How unbecoming those who speak every Lord's Day unto Men
and Women, unto whom we may never speak more? And it may be such and such of
you shall never hear a Sermon more; take heed therefore how you hear.

Fourthly, Be most Importunate with God for the Spirit of Holiness and
Sanctification. He alone can restore Life to thy Dead Soul, and conquer the
Enmity of thy Heart against Holiness. For we are Saved by the Washing of
Regeneration, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, 3 Tit. 5. Beg the Holy
Spirit, with an Earnestness answerable to your Necessity of what you ask; that
he may be a Living Principle, to cause you to walk in his Statutes, and keep
his Commandments. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
Forgiveness of Sin is not all that you need; you are Diseased and Defiled, and
need to be Cured and Cleansed. If you ask the Holy Spirit with an apprehension
and feeling of your need of his powerful Influence, you may supplicate and
plead the Promise in Hope, that God will more readily grant you, than any
Father upon Earth gives Bread to his Children. Mat. 5.6. Chap. 7.11.
They that seek him early and earnestly, shall find him. Our Lord is exalted to
give Repentance, and Saving Faith; his Powerful Grace can subdue the most
Impetuous Lusts of Youth. You may be earnest and importunate with God for these
things; he does not require or expect you should be contented to perish in your
Filthiness and Unbelief, despairing of Helo, as if the case of Man were like
that of Devils: He requires you to Hope, and is pleased with it. See Mr. How Is
Redeemer's Tears, p. 118.
And if you find any Motions and Strivings of this Blessed Spirit, in answer to
Prayer, cherish every Beginning of it, as an Earnest of more. Be thankful for
every Beam of Heavenly Light, from the God of all Grace; it may prove the
dawning of a more perfect Day. Beg that this mighty Spirit would open your Eyes
and Hearts, that being convinced of the certainty and reality of the Gospel
Revelation, by the view of its suitableness to your case, and the many glorious
advantages that are offered by it, you may be brought to love it as Amiable;
and yield up your selves entirely in compliance with it.

Fifthly, Take heed of Declining after good and hopeful Beginnings. How many
Young Persons have begun in the Spirit, and ended in the Flesh? Light has
shone in upon their Minds; they have been under awakning Convictions by the
Word; strong Affections have been excited by it; they delighted to hear and
read it; they kept up a course of secret Prayer for some time, etc. and yet
have afterward fallen away to a Vicious Life. It may be they had not
considered and counted the cost of being Resolved Christians; what they must
abandon and forsake; what pleasing Temptations they must avoid and resist; what
instances of Self-denial they must consent to, etc. And therefore by the
Solicitation, or Sophistry, or Jears of their Old Companions, through the
Subtilty of Satan, and the Power of Youthful Lusts, they have been entangled
again with the Pollutions of the World, and the Strong Man has re-enter'd the
House, with Seven Evil-Spirits worse than himself.

How Miserable is the case of such, after they have been enlightened, and in
part delivered, 2 Timothy 2.26.
who return to their former Bondage, and are led Captive by the Devil at his
Will! They were not far from the Kingdom of God; they seemed to consent to be
the Lord's; they were almost persuaded to take the Yoke of Christ upon them, as
his resolved Followers: but now have taken leave of him, and are at the Command
of Satan; his Will is theirs: If he bid them think as little of God as they can
despise the Holy Scripture, make light of Sabbaths and Sermons, and all good
Counsel, they do it. If he bid them gratify their Carnal Appetites, indulge
their Sensual Inclinations, and frequent such and such ensnaring Company, they
do it. They are led Captive by him at his Will. With what Hearty Compassion
should we think and speak of the case of such! and many such there be. But if
you are not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, past all feeling, I
would feign ask you, whether you are not yet willing to return? If Mercy may be
had, and you may yet be recovered out of the Snare of the Devil; Dare you
solemnly and expressly in so many Words, take leave of Christ, and bid him
farewell for ever? Are you content to forfeit his Favor, and throw up all hopes
of it, and venture his Eternal Displeasure? Would you not yet return, if God
would receive you? If there be Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, that you
may be healed? May I not tell you, in the Name of Christ, that there is; and
that if you return with your whole Heart, (you especially, who are the Children
of Holy Parents,) he will yet receive you: He will meet you halfway, and bid
you welcome. Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. Isa. 55.6, 7, 8.
He will heal your Backslidings, and blot out your Transgressions, and remember
your Iniquities no more. He pawns the Authority of his own great Name for this,
Three several times in one Verse, to assure you of it, Zach. 1.3. Prove. 1.23.
Turn ye at my Reproof, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, is the Voice of
Wisdom.

I might likewise direct you in your Addresses to God for his Purifying Grace,
to Eye the Blood of * Christ, as the procuring cause of your Sanctification;
and the Holy Spirit, the Purchase of that Blood, as the great Sanctifier of
Souls. I might urge you farther, * that with an hearty abhorrence of every Sin,
you would penitently and thankfully renew the Covenant you made with God in
your Baptism, yielding your Selves to the Lord, as the most solemn and
Important Transaction of your whole Lives. And be sure * keep out of the way of
Temptation as much as you can, endeavoring to avoid those particular Snares by
which you are most easily overcome. Pretend not a Resolution against the Sin,
if you are willing to look upon the Temptation; to walk upon the brink of the
River, and to come near the door of that House, into which you know you must
not enter. It is impossible a Man should love to abide by a Temptation for a
good end, or without unspeakable Hazard. It is vain Confidence on your own
Strength, to come as near Sin as you durst, and the Event does commonly prove
it so. Especially * see that you well employ your Time upon the Lords Day; and
take heed to your * Company all the Week. Few of the Younger sort Miscarry, but
date their Sin and Ruin from the neglect of this Counsel. * Begin with God
every Morning, by serious Prayer, and Reading some part of the Holy Scriptures,
with some Practical Affectionate Book, if but for a quarter of an Hour; it
would leave a serious Tincture on the Mind, and a good Savor on the Heart, and
be of use to antidote you against Temptation, and to preserve a Holy frame all
the Day. But * never desist your diligent Endeavors, till you come to walk
with God in his Love and Fear, and as under his Eye, all the Day long: That the
pleasing of God may become the Business, and Pleasure of your Lives.

Lastly, Do not delay Compliance with these Counsels, but presently set about
it; can you begin too soon to cleanse your Hearts and Ways? Is it too soon to
be reconciled to God, and delivered from the danger of Damnation? Can you
attain Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and a well grounded Hope
of Eternal Life too soon? If you languish'd under a noisome Distemper that
threatened your Life, would you imagine you could be healed too soon? And how
much Sin and Mischief, Shame and Sorrow, and bitter Repentance may you prevent,
by taking heed unto the Word of God betimes? How much larger Opportunities for
the glorifying of God, have Young Converts, than late Penitents, though they be
Sincere? What Advantages never to be retrieved have they lost, who have
outsinned their Youth? because their Time is gone, and can never be recalled.
What Honor may you bring to God, who remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth? What Ornaments to your Profession may you prove? Of what usefulness unto
others in this World? being filled with the Spirit of God. What seize in
Grace, and the knowledge of Christ, See Mr. Charnock, Vol. 2. p. 57, 58.
and what additional degrees of Glory may you reach? You may grow to a greater
Stature, being new born in Youth, and bring forth more and better Fruit in Old
Age: You will have a longer time of Peace of Conscience, and of the Comforts of
the Spirit; much sweeter fore-tastes of Heaven, and improved meetness for it.
You may lay up Treasures of Experience to confute the Devil, if he assault you
on a Deathbed, etc.

And is it nothing to despise all these advantages of an Early Piety? to secure
the comfort and usefulness for the future part of your Lives? Is it nothing to
be prepared for a sudden Death? and to provide against the Pangs and Sorrowful
Reflections of a Deathbed? Is it nothing, when you come to Die, to review your
former Life with Joy? saying, Lord! remember how I have served thee, the God of
my Fathers, from my Childhood, and Youth! Is it nothing to bring God greater
Glory in this World? and receive a more weighty and sparkling Crown of Glory in
the next? Have you not been often told, how much more difficult your Repentance
and Conversion to God will hereafter be, than now, if you should be spared some
Years longer? Are your Hearts like to be better by longer continuance in Sin?
Will the Justice of God be less provoked? will it not be more? Will the Devil
have less advantage against you, when he has had so much longer Possession? To
Day, while it is called to Day, if you will hear his Voice, harden not your
Hearts. It is some hardening of your Hearts, not to hearken to his Voice this
day: It is one step more toward final Impenitence and Unbelief, against which
there is no Remedy provided in the Gospel. How hardly was that Man Cured, Mark
9.29.
who was possessed with a Devil from his Childhood? The more you are alienated
from the Life of God, the harder will be your Recovery.

And how much greater is the provocation against God, by every such Delay? How
aggravated and displeasing is your base ingratitude against the Blessed God,
and a Merciful Redeemer? You reject his present Call, slight his Kindness, and
refuse his Love, and in effect tell him, that though you have no mind to
perish, but that one time or other before you die, you will accept it; that yet
you have other Business for the present to mind; it will be time enough for
that when you are more at leisure. Your Youthful Lusts now call you, your
Secular Affairs and Settlement in the World now call you to other Thoughts; and
these shall l be first minded and served. Your Compassionate Physician offers
his Help, and promises a Cure, if you will but hearken and submit to him: You
tell him in effect, that you like your Leprosy, and are in love with your
Disease: You care not to be recovered to Health: you will not as yet be Purged
and Healed; though one time or other you intend to call for his Assistance. May
he not most justly say unto you, Let him that is filthy, be filthy still. You
would not be purged from your filthiness, therefore you shall not, till you die.

How bitter will be the Thoughts of these repeated Calls neglected? What cold
Horror, and Shivering Dread shall seize thee on a Bed of Languishing? which
some may take for true Repentance. But, Oh how little of that, which by a large
Charity we hope is so, may the Righteous God accept? and who can tell whether
he does or no? For such Men see themselves upon the brink of the Grave, and
stepping into Hell, and know it is as much as their Souls are worth, presently
to make Peace with God by unfeigned Repentance.

No wonder then if they let fall some little Drops of a beginning Sorrow; if
they have some extorted Resolutions of Living better; some sudden Remorse and
Regret for those Sins, that they are now like to be Damned for; some quick and
rash Vows of an Awakened Conscience; with some Confusion of Face under the
Fears of Death and Judgment. But at such a time, it is hard to distinguish
between Religious Sighs and Natural Groans; or separate their Repenting Cries
for Mercy, from their Howlings on their Beds through Bodily Pain. It Is true,
God may work Miracles of Mercy on such Convinced Sinners, who did not seek to
him till the Eleventh Hour; but whether he will no, there is no Certainty or
Probability, but that he can if he please; which to Persons in that condition,
who fear an Everlasting Hell the next Hour, is a sad uncomfortable Thought. No
Man in his Wits that reads the Bible, would run the Hazard.

If they have the use of Reason, and are not hardened in Atheism and
Infidelity, they cannot but fear and tremble: Peace and Prosperity may
transport Men; the Mouth of Conscience may be stopped in Health by false
Principles, and the Voice of Flattering Company; its secret Whispers may be
drowned by the noise and hurry of Business, or diverted, bribed, and abused by
the entertainments of Sense, and the deceitfulness of Riches. But in Sickness
and Affliction, when dis-intangled from its Fetters, Conscience will speak its
own Sense; and it ever speaks loudest in a time of Calamity: Then it will
witness and accuse, condemn and terrify. All their Arts of Oblivion cannot
make it silent; it will disquiet them with Fears and Torments, which increase
at the approach of Death, and after Death are the beginning of Hell. For
though, as one says, That may not be fully opened till the last Judgment, yet
the Anguish of Conscience is a part of Hellfire, preparatory to the Horrible
Sentence of Doomsday.

Now, Is he his own Murderer, who would not endeavor to make Peace with God,
when in danger of approaching Death? The like is he, who will defer this for
one Day, because every Day of such delay is a Day of Danger; and so is he
obliged by the same care for himself, and concern for his Soul, if he Sinned
Yesterday, to Repent to Day, lest he be Dead to Morrow. For how many Persons
die Suddenly? (many have done so of late, and more may;) and who knows that he
shall not? Thy Sick Neighbor may recover and live many Years, and he that is
now in Health, may expire the next Hour. You are also uncertain of a tedious
Sickness, to afford you the lingering forerunners of Death; or of such a one,
as shall not disturb the Brain, and unfit for serious Thoughts. The first
Symptom of your last Sickness, may conclude your Life; you may not have time to
complain or cry. Job 36.13, 14. They cry not when he binds them, they die in
their Youth, and their Life is among the Unclean. How groundless are the
Expectations of arriving to Old Age? The Almond Tree does not every where
flourish. Hardly one or Two of a great Multitude, lay down a Hoary Head in the
Bed of the Grave. Very little Ripe Fruit is gathered into the Basket, in
comparison of the many Blossoms that fall to the Ground. Is not your
Constitution in Youth more tender? and consequently more subject to external
Impressions, that may cause Sickness: While grown Branches can stand the shock
of a Cold Winter, every Blast or Storm will spoil the Beauty of new blown
Flowers. And yet though you know this, and therefore must grant your length of
Days no surer than that of others, and your presuming on the future equally
hazardous, and without ground; you will not now Repent, and turn to God. It may
be you Resolve you will, if you live till hereafter; that is, you are content
to to be Damned if you die before that time: And who knows what a Day may bring
forth? Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4.14.


Though you are now Strong and Healthful, in the heat and Wantonness of
Youthful Blood, or in the strength and vigor of your Age, and begin to have a
throng of Worldly Business, may not the same be said of some of those who died
the last Week? who it may be delayed their Repentance on the like grounds, and
thought their own Death as improbable as you do yours; which is now so much the
nearer, by how many Days you have survived them. Is there any of you but would
willingly Repent, and turn to God, one Day before you die? And who can be sure
to do that, who delays till to Morrow? I persuade my self, you cannot think
that you shall be exempted from appearing before the Bar of Christ, if you die
in Youth: Or that those Lusts and Sins that are Damning to Men of Forty, will
not be reckoned for by God, or hereafter punished, because committed by one of
Sixteen. Will you yet boldly put it to the venture? Eccl. 9.11.
and Rejoice O Young Man in thy Youth, and walk in the way of thy own Heart,
and neither know nor consider, that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment. And how soon may you receive that Summons? every whit as soon as if
you had lived many Years longer. To several Diseases You are more obnoxious
than Elder Persons, to some that are now Reigning, and often prove Mortal, as
you are more full of warm Blood, to catch the Infection; particularly the
Smallpox.

By which Distemper it pleased God to visit this young Gentleman, Mr. Richard
Walter, in the Eighteenth Year of his Age; concerning whom, (as it will not be
needful, so) it cannot be expected I should speak much, being almost a Stranger
to him, till the last Scene of his Life. When I was requested to join with some
Friends in Prayer for him, and afterward at his own Desire visited him, and
prayed with him. I found him in a very Penitent and Serious frame, which I hope
was not the bare effect of his having received the Sentence of Death in
himself; not only because during his whole Sickness, he discovered the like
Temper of Mind, whenever he had the free Exercise of Reason, (which after some
Days Delirium, God was pleased very observably to restore in answer to Prayer,)
but because he had formerly been under very serious Impressions of what
concerned his Soul, and the Everlasting World. Unto which purpose, the
practical Books of that Great and Holy Man Mr. Baxter, were useful to him; as
they have been unto Thousands more. These Impressions I hope did remain, and
were now and then awakened and revived upon him, notwithstanding the dangerous
Snares and Temptations of Youth. His fervent and penitent Supplications to
Heaven, as the fruit of these, I hop^ found Acceptance with the Father of
Mercies, through the Mediation of Christ: For at the very last he was (...) afraid
or unwilling to Dye. Notwithstanding that (...) expressed a very great Sense of
his Sin, he could yet say I hope my Dear Redeemer has enabled me to Repent and
has forgiven me. There is Pity in his Bosom, and Mercy in his Breast. And so
he went on, mentioning some Scriptures to that purpose.

There is one thing I would add, (which may be I^^table and Exemplary, if God
allow you the use of Reason on a Sick Bed,) that before he died, he was willing
to do something to promote the Salvation of his Acquaintance and Companions, as
the best Expression o^ his Friendship to 'em, by exciting them to consider
their Latter End, and prepare for the other World, where we must have our
unchangable, Eternal Abode. Thi^ appeared, when I spoke to him on that Head, by
the instructive Messages he desired me to convey to some o^ 'em, and by his
most affectionate Wish, and Praye^ for his In the Island of Barbados.
Parents, when I parted from him, viz. Tha^ he might meet them in Heaven;
where, he said, will b^ more and better Pleasure in one Moment, than is to b^
found in all the Enjoynments of this World for a Thousand Years.

God grant that they, and all his Relations and Acquaintance, such especially
who have desired this Sermon, may wisely improve his Decease which administered
the occasion. And may it be of some use to all the Younger sort who heard it,
or may now read it to help 'em to consider, and remember the Divine Counsel o^
this Text, how Young Men may cleanse their Ways, by taking heed unto the Word
of God.

THE END.

