A CONSOLATORY LETTER To an afflicted Conscience: Full of pious admonitions and
Divine Instructions.

Written by that famous Divine, Doctor SIBBS: and now published for the common
good and edification of the Church.

Ecclesiastes 6.18. Be not thou just overmuch, neither make thy self overwise:
wherefore should thou be desolate?

AEtat: Suae 58



LONDON, Printed for Francis Coules. 1641.

A Consolatory Letter to an afflicted Conscience, Grace and Peace.
Dear Sir,
I Understand by your Letter, that you have many and great trials; some
external and bodily, some internal and spiritual: as the deprivall of inward
comfort, the buffetings (and that in more then ordinary manner) of your soul,
with Satan's temptations: and (which makes all those inward and outward, the
more heavy and insupportable) that you have wanted Christian society with the
Saints of God, to whom you might make known your griefs, and by whom you
might receive comfort from the Lord, and encouragement in your Christian course.

Now that which I earnestly desire in your behalf, and hope likewise you do
in your own, is that you may draw nearer to God, and be more conformable to
his command by these afflictions; for if our afflictions be not sanctified,
that is, if we make not an holy use of them by purging out the old leaven of
our ingenerate corruptions, they are but judgments to us, and makes way for
greater plagues: Ioh. 5.14. And therefore the chief end and aim of God in all
the afflictions which he sends to his children in love, is, that they may be
partakers of his holiness, and so their afflictions may conduce to their
spiritual advantage and profit, Heb. 12.10. The Lord aims not at himself in
any calamities he lays on us, (for God is so infinitely all-sufficient* that
we can add nothing to him by all our doings or sufferings) but his maine aim
is at our Melioration and Sanctification in and by them. And therefore our duty
in every affliction and pressure, is thus to think with our selves: How shall
we carry and behave our selves under this cross, that our souls may reap
profit by it? James 4.8.
This (in one word) is done by our returning and drawing nearer to the Lord, as
his holy Apostle exhorts us. This in all calamities the Lord has a special
eye unto, and is exceeding wroth if he find it not.

Isay 1.4, 5.
The Prophet declares That his anger was not turned from Israel, because they
turned not to him that (...) them. Now it is impossible that a man should draw
nigh to God, and turn to him, if he turn not from his evil ways: for in
every conversion there is Terminus a quo, something to be turned from, as well
as Terminus ad quod, something to be turned to.

Now, that we must turn to, is God; and that we must turn from, is sin; as
being diametrally opposite to God, and that which separates between God and us.

To this purpose we must search and try our hearts and ways, and see what
sins there be that keep us from God, and separate us from his gracious
favor: and chiefly we must weed out our special bosom-sins. This the ancient
Church of God counsels each other to do in the time of their anguish and
affliction, Lament. 3.39, 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Lord: for though sin make not a final divorce betwixt God and his
chosen people, yet it may make a dangerous rupture by taking away sense of
comfort, and suspending the sweet influence of his favor, and the effectual
operation of his grace.

And therefore (dear Sir) my earnest suit and desire is, that you would
di^igently peruse the book of your conscience, enter into a through search and
examination of your heart and life; and every day before you go to bed, take a
time of recollection and meditation, (as holy See Genesis 24.63.
Isaac did in his private walks) holding a privy Session in your soul, and
indicting your self for all the sins, in thought, word, or act committed, and
all the good duties you have omitted. This self-examination, if it be so strict
and rigid as it ought to be, will soon show you the sins whereto you are most
inclinable, (the chief cause of all your sorrows) and consequently, it will
(by Gods assistance) effectually instruct you to fly from those venomous and
fiery serpents, which have so stung you.

And though you have (as you say) committed many grievous sins, as abusing
Gods gracious ordinances, and neglecting the golden opportunities of grace: the
original, as you conceive of all your troubles; yet I must tell you, there is
another Coloquintida in the pot, another grand enormity (though you perceive it
not) and that is your separation from Gods Saints and Servants in the Acts of
his public Service and worship. This you may clearly discern by the affliction
it self, for God is methodicall in his corrections, and does (many times) so
suite the cross to the sin, that you may read the sin in the cross. You
confess that your maine affliction, and that which made the other more bitter,
is, that God took away those to whom you might make your complaint; and from
whom you might receive comfort in your distress. And is not this just with
God, that when you wilfully separate your self from others, he should separate
others from you? Certainly, when we undervalue mercy, especially so great a one
as the communion of Saints is, commonly the Lord takes it away from us, till we
learn to prize it to the full value. Consider well therefore the haynousnesse
of this sin, which that you may the better conceive, First, consider it is
against Gods express Precept, charging us not to forsake the assemblies of the
Saints, Heb. 10.20.25. Again, it is against our own greatest good and
spiritual folace, for by discommunicating and excommunicating our selves from
that blessed society, we deprive our selves of the benefit of their holy
conference, their godly instructions, their divine consolations, brotherly
admonitions, and charitable reprehensions; and what an inestimable loss is
this? Neither can we partake such profit by their prayers as otherwise we
might: for as the soul in the natural body conveyes life and strength to
every member, as they are compacted and joined together, and not as
dis-severed; so Christ conveyes spiritual life and vigor to Christians, not
as they are disjoined from, but as they are united to the mystical body, the
Church.

But you will say England is not a true Church, and therefore you separate;
adhere to the true Church.

I answer, our Church is easily proved to be a true Church of Christ: First,
because it has all the essentialls, necessary to the constitution of a true
Church; as sound preaching of the Gospel, right dispensation of the
Sacraments, Prayer religiously performed, and evil persons justly punished
(though not in that measure as some criminals and malefactors deserve:) and
therefore a true Church.

2. Because it has begot many spiritual children to the Lord, which for
soundness of judgment, and holiness of life, are not inferior to any in
other Reformed Churches. Yea, many of the Separation, if ever they were
converted, it was here with us: (which a false and adulterous Church
communicated.)

But I hear you reply, our Church is corrupted with Ceremonies, and pestered
with profane Persons. What then? must we therefore separate for Ceremonies,
which many think may be lawfully used: But admit they be evils, must we make a
tent in the Church for Ceremonious Rites, for circumstantiall evils? That were
a remedy worse then the disease. Besides, had not all the true Churches of
Christ their blemishes and deformities, as you may see in seven Asian
Churches? Revel. 2. and 3. And though you may find some Churches beyond Sea
free from Ceremonies, yet notwithstanding they are more corrupt in Preachers,
(which is the maine) as in profanation of the Lords day, etc.

As for wicked and profane Persons amongst us, though we are to labor by all
good means to purge them out, yet are we not to separate because of this
residence with us: for, there will be a miscellany and mixture in the visible
Church, as long as the world endures, as our Savior shows by many parables:
Matthew. 13. If therefore we should be so over-just as to abandon all Churches
for the intermixture of wicked Persons, we must sail to the Antipodes, or
rather go out of the world, as the Apostle speaks: it is agreed by all that
Noah's Arc was a type and emblem of the Church. Now as it had been no less
then selfe-murder for Noah, Sem, or Iaphet, to have leapt out of the Arc*
because of that ungracious Gains company; so it is no better then soule-murder
for a man to cast himself out of the Church, either for real or imaginall
corruptions. To conclude, as the Angel enjoined Hagar to return, and submit
to her Mistress Sarah, so let me admonish you to return your self from these
extravagant courses, and submissively to render your self to the sacred
communion of this truly Evangelicall Church of England.

I beseech you therefore, as you respect Gods glory and your own eternal
salvation, as There is but one body and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.
one Lord, one Baptisms, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in (...) all; so endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace, as the Apostle sweetly invites you. So shall the peace of
God ever establish you, and the God of peace ever preserve you; which is the
prayer of

Your remembrance at the Throne of Grace R. SIBS.

FINIS.

