Sir Arthur Haselrig's LAST Will and Testament. With a brief SURVEY OF HIS
LIFE and DEATH.

LONDON,

Printed for Henry Brom, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Gun
in Ivy-lane, 1661.

Sir ARTHVR HASELRIG'S LAST WILL and TESTAMENT, WITH A brief Survey of his
LIFE and DEATA.
O Death, how unwelcome art thou to a troubled Spirit? Is my long hanting after
worldly Honor, and fishing after Church Lands to enlarge mine Inheritance by
an injurious surprizall of others Rights, brought to this Precipice? Yes most
justly; that Sacred-secret Synod, from which all my sinister Actions have ever
peremptorily appealed, has justly and irrevocably decreed, that ARTHVR, who was
once such an eminent Champion at the ROUND TABLE, should be now deserted, nay
shamefully stripped of those weak stays, whereon He, miserable He, in the
height of his swelling Fortunes so strongly relied, and imprudently doated. Ah
me! what an eyesore is this to see Lawn-sleeves rise to their wonted height:
and my blasted Honor sinking down with contempt into a disconsolate Depth! O
Bishopric, where in my Regality I so much Soveraigniz'd, or, as some will have
it, Tyrannized; must I now leave thee, and leaving thee recommend thee to a
Prelacy, which was most hated by me? Though for pity sake that Prelatical State
might retain this opinion of me, for otherwise they traduce me highly, that I
never bore such hate to their Persons, as I bore love to their Personages; nor
such dis-esteem to their Professions, as I had, and hold ever in my estimate of
their Possessions. But now my hydroptick Thirst is quenched, my earthly desires
(though much against my will) unfortunately sated; whence I collect with an
heavy eye to what I have left behind me, what a vading breath, or light blast
is this flash of Honor; whose overswollen Bladder as it puffs us up living, so
it stifles us dying.

But it is high time for me now to recollect my self; and look a little back,
having so small a space left me to look forward: I may expect a Funeral, but
OLIVERS vast excess ushered in with such scorn, and registered with such shame,
deters me from injoyning too much cost, lest my Executor might be enforced to
pay more than either the price of my Carcass, or the remnant of my forfeited
Estate would discharge. My Rebellion, as this late Synod by cutting, and
cutting of our late Rump styles it, has sufficiently all the world over
proclaimed me Bankrupt; it would grieve me to leave my Heir protested against,
for a Vessel of crumbled Dust: which I am confident, will be accompanied by
more Fiends than Friends, more Followers than Mourners: so as in this case a
Rope of strong-sented Onions would do excellent service for enforcing wet-eyes
from dry hearts: to pump tears with a few feigned fghs to delude the Spectators
at my death; as my actions under a vizard of zeal bravely, though now
unfortunately, performed all my life. On which State-Stage there is none that
ever knew Sir ARTHUR, but will ingeniously confess to his honor, that there
was no Shimei of all that Leven, who acted his part more politickly, nor
daringly: nor promoted the Interest of the Good Old Cause with more acrimonious
fidelity. Upon which account (though Self-interest turned the wheel that
steered all my Actions) I behaved my self in that posture, and manner, as I was
ever held (I appeal to my mortallest enemies, if this be not true) a most
useful and serviceable Instrument to the Antimonarchical Tribe: and withal
such an endeered Favorite to redoubted OLIVER, as his ear was as attentive to
me, as it was ever to his close faithful Cu^ St. John's; till he found my
averseness from King-ship, whereto his vast ambition subtilely aspired. Mean
time, though I stood ever a professed enemy unto Monarchy, I appeared a constant
Zealot for a Pentarchy. A Fift-Monarchy-Man I was cordially, whose Spirits now
when I am dying sound in mine ears mortally stirring, though my short Lease of
Life will prevent me from partaking the issue of that fair Quarrel. Sure I am,
Phanatick heat will not be quenched without much blood. This our dislaughtered
Accomplices, who lately sacrificed their active lives with undaunted valor to
the hands of the common Executioner expected: which my brother HARRISON gave a
touch of at his death, saying, I see the Lord will not appear to us this day.
But discontents must not be so cured. Our trusty Phanaticks hope a day will
come, which seeing my weak divining Spirit cannon prefine it, I unwillingly
leave to those that shall live to see it.

And no doubt but the discontented Party, seconded by our baffled Reformades,
and desperate Decoys of our late disbanded Army, may find our impregnant City a
ready Foster-Mother to nurse these distempers in her ranting Racketers (besides
the winning demureness of our conscientious Anabaptist, which will strengthen
the Quarrel mainly, and make our Phanatick ruffle bravely) upon these grounds,
if not timely diverted, which we hope the Liberty of the time will slowly look
into, there is small doubt to be made, but this teeming age may breed as many
John Leydons apt to design a fresh massacre in every circumstance, equal to
that memorable one of Munster. But to my grief, rhough it be not my fortune to
be a Spectator of it, nor Actor in it, my desires are as strong as my faculties
weak. I shall swell in my wishes dying, what I could not atchieve living. But
leaving these till time shall repent them, and posterity become more sensible
of them, let me petition Death (to whose arrest I hold my Fame much indebted,
for snatching me from the claws of ravenous Dun,) to respit me a little, a very
little; my words shall be but few; because my hours cannot be many: and these
shall be bestowed on the discovery of my life; wherein to unrip my Infirmities
I hold it needless, seeing the whole Island has been long time Pronotory of
them: No Court of Record in all Westminster, but may bear Record of my restless
Passion; which these Reverend Judges would usually give way to out of their
indulgent favor, being highly taken with the erring tumor of my active
State-valour: though Runaway Downs, as the Usurper sometimes twitted me, may
witness the contrary. The sallies and various occurrences of which Field were
every way as terrible to me, as the encounters of Death now approaching me: or
Duns dreadful attendance upon my feverish trial. Truth is, that in the height
of my being, as I was generally held a confiding man; and one that intended to
have his voice, and voto bear sway; were it right, or wrong, against all
Opposers, there was no Plea, were it legal, or illegal, which I pursued, and
expected not a successful issue: Neither in the prosecution thereof did I
encounter with any affront to my then imperious power more disgustful, than
from those virulent aspertions thrown upon me by a tart, but acute Counselor;
whose Coife might authorize him to make bold with me. But, I am persuaded his
spleen to my Person (having before made it my endeavor to bring him within the
compass of Delinquency) gave more fuel to the fire of his passion, than his
pretended Zeal to his Client, an useful Instrument to his Profession. I must
confess (and the remembrance of it is some Corosive to me) that my acrimony of
spirit was so quickened toward that Gentleman his Client, as I mortally hated
him: and by a tedious suit (so much did my strength overtop his weakness) so
exhausted him, for challenging his own; as I am confident the cure will prove
worse than the disease; and that the recovery of his Estate will scarcely
countervaile the expensive charge of his Suit. For after sundry Verdicts
returned for him, I was no ways deterred, but doubling my Fyles, and reviving
my Claim, wherein I found Saint John's ever my indulgent Hearer, whose joint
assistant I had been in all his designs My resolution was not only to crush
him with my purse, whom I could not conquer by the equitable Rule of the Law:
But out of my vindicative spirit, as none more violent nor virulent, I
publicly vowed to intail that Suit upon my Heir for ever.

Neither was my quenchless fury only discovered in this, but in aggravating
the rackt Compositions of Delinquents; amongst which my inveterate spleen was
such to a Favorite of the Muses, who opposed my demands, as I made my self a
Party; and so by degrees brought him to taste sharply for his folly.

To enlarge the number, and measure of my practiced insolences; Profanation
of Temples, oppression of Tenants, extortion in pursuit of Offices shall render
me unexemplary to all succeeding ages. With which Pressures I grew so daily
mired, as my Conscience became wholly seered. The corroding memory whereof
makes me appear ignominious in my self, odious to all.

Upon review of these, my Funeral Hearse (if any such Decency be admitted me)
is to expect only dry eyes to accompany it. No Mourner unless Squire Dun bemoan
his own Interest, for not having a hand in putting off my Clothes. But it was
my Physicians pious policy by the help of a Clyster to palliate my endangered
Fame, and for want of a Perpendicular Line, to strip him of his Booty.

I should now dispose of my Estate, but our late Reformed State has done me the
favor to save me a labor: So as I must leave mine Heir with the Chamelion to
feed on Air. -- But my britle Glass is run out; not one grain of Sand left to
supply the Cruet -- Woe is me, shall I never see Westminster more? Must my hopes
of a Change, be changed into heaps of dust? Oh I sink, I sink! And I feel my
earthen thoughts so heavy, as they cannot fix on ought that is heavenly. -- A
due to all the world: O how happy I, if I had never known it: or had less loved
it; so might I more cheerfully have left it.

So good night to Sir Arthur
With all his debaucht Honor.
Hic jacet Arthurus, terris nunquam rediturus,
Obrutus ut Curis, cognitus art Furis.
His Supplement portrai'd to life.
WOuld you know more of him? Take a survey of his Carriage during that too long
reign of the Rump: where you may hear from all hands in what braving manner
this cowardly Cliuias bore himself. He would not stick with an insolent shrug
to maintain not only Anarchy, but flat Apostasy with his Sword. Though he was
never holden for a Blade-man, but such a baffled Spirit as He represented the
face of a Christian in nothing more, then in an inbred fear to be cudgeled out
of his incivility.

To sundry desperate extremes did his furious Passion engage Him; being in no
place secure, because in no place constant to himself. So factiously active was
his Quick-Silver-Brain, as his projecting Pate would not suffer him to sleep:
His nightly devotions were bestowed in devising new Utopian States Principl'd
to his own Phanatick Fancy: and in settling these so irresolute, as the
following day never approved what the former day did, which rendered him as weak
in resolving, as he was light in devising. He had got the knack of Preaching,
or Prating rather in Divinity: but edified himself least in Rules of Humanity.
In his beginning, being then in his rising, he grew so familiar with Oliver, as
he would not stick by way of Argument to collar with him: but the enraged Tygre
no sooner furrowed his Front, then this feverish Rateun let fall his Crest. So
soon was his spriteless valor resolved into fear. His sleeps were short, and
those troubled, arising from the vapors of an addle Brain wholly disordered.
But no Dreams struck in his thoughts more terror, than the affrightful visions
of a Tippet, and a Mitre. These called him to an Account before his time: but
having got the Act of Oblivion by heart; he took it for a Dream, and so the
vision vanished.

He sacrilegiously removed the Altar from B. A. Church to his own House; under
which, to save the charge of a Monument, his Lady was after buried. And to
enlarge his Profanation, he razed down to the ground a beautiful Chapel;
whose splendour and antiquity might plead a privilege against the hand of
hostility. From the ruins whereof he reared to himself a Dining Parler:
preferring his own licentious humor and secular pleasure before Gods honor.
And to sum up all in one (for should we insist upon all, they would require
an ample Volume) to authorize his Insolences; It is the opinion of many, that
he died of a Cold Palsy, and very likely: The proper symptoms, or consequent
products of a Paraletick distemper. Sylv.
since the whole course of his life was over-swayed by unsettled Passions,
Weakness and Levity.

Near his Death he found more quiet within him, because a Lethargy had seaz'd
on him. So far did his Disease afford him Ease; wherein he might justly cry out
with that phrentick forlorn Ethnic: O that this Distemper would never leave
me! But like a Lightning before death, or a Beamling striking forth before a
storm: heaving himself up a little; and drawing his breath slowly, as one
approaching near shore, after a deep groan fetched from a burdened soul, He
shut up all with this sad but suitable farewell; I am passing; I am passing; but
I know not whither: Oh that I might sojourn here for ever!

SUPER OSSA Olivari Cromwelli, Bradshai, Iretoni, etc.
Nuperrime exhumata, and condignis Exequiis tradita.
UT venti sonuere graves a morte Tyranni,
Murmr conspirant Ossa levata pari.
Talia si terris formidine plena ministres,
Qualia tartariis fers, Olivare, locis?
Ionis, Sulphur erunt, and spiritus ipse Procellae
Portio; number sapiunt naribus ista tuis?
Quas Bradshawus opes? quas Ireton sustulit iras?
Qui sceleris socii, suppliciique tui.
Quid tibi Nauta Blagus? quid Pridux, Consul equestris?
Pridus? Baxterus? Husoniusque? Whalus?
Quam tibi Coetus opem tribuit? quam de Styge portam
Aperiet reducem? Desine; claude viam.
Nulla salus miseris; spes nulla relicta salutis,
Nec tibi, nec sociis restituenda quies.
Seimus ab Inferno concessa Redemptio nulla est.
Novimus ense tua far; perinde pati.
Upon OLIVERS Bones; and his two Accomplices Tyburn'd, January 30, 1660.
FRom the Red-Lyon was this Leopard brought,
Where He was wont to mount before He fought.
A fitter June could not devised be
For NOL to mount the Sledge to the Triple Tree.
Epitaph.
Here hangs his Trunk, whose restless Bones could have
No ground, but under Tyburn for a Grave.
First time inshrin'd like to some British King,
Next with dishonor pendent in a string.
Two Consorts there appear who hang beside him,
Being so dear 'twere pity to divide them.
Thus Fate has shred that thread which Fury spun,
Hanged without suffering by the hand of Dun.
To them ask why these Rebels hang so high?
Treason mounts higher still then Felony.
Mourn Mercer, Draper with distilling Eyes,
Or with sad looks instead of Elegies.
Habits must pay themselves, penurious Dick
Defrayes all scores; how? in Arithmetic.
But hark my Boys, if you have wit to call
In time, old BESS has stuff to pay you all.
Protector, Praeses, Consul, Lictorque Tyburnus
Funeris officiis succubuere suis.
Iste parat laqueos, laqueis Hi corpora tendunt;
Lictor ut infligit, perfida Turba ruit.
Ecce consortes scelerumque morum
Naribus tetrum pariunt vaporem,
Traxit ut Dunnus retulit saporem
Lerna malorum.
Lo! lo! to what corruption Traiters sink!
Divert your Sense; Dun stirs them till they stink.
No Infection like Rebellion.
Jack Cutts bemoans this hanging, for his Wench
Was struck to the heart by that Rebellious stench.
So as those Trayters may be counted the Head,
Who slaughtered living, and who poys'ned dead.
For Treason is of that contagious nature,
No Carrion smells like the Carcass of a Traiter.
Read Sinonem similem per Orbem,
Subditis trietem, Superis prophanum,
Vel magis cursu temere ferocem
Principis hostem!
FINIS.

