Satan's Invisible WORLD DISCOVERED; OR, A choice Collection of Modern
Relations, proving evidently against the Saducees and Atheists of this present
Age, that there are Devils, Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions, from Authentic
Records, Attestations of Famous Witnesses, and undoubted Verity.

To all which is added, That Mavelous History of Major Wei^, and his Sister:
With two Relations of Apparitions at Edinburgh.

By Mr. George Sinclar, late Professor of Philosophy, in the College of
Glasgow.

No Man should be vain that he can injure the merit of a Book, for, the meanest
Rogue may burn a City, or kill an Hero, whereas, he could never build the one,
or equal the other.

Sr. G. McK. Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid. 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE EARL of WINTON, Lord SETON and TRANENT, etc.
And One of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I PRESENT Your Lo: with an Oblation, both Lame and Imperfect. It Is all which
my Ability can afford. I must Sacrifice with Barley-Meal, because I want
Frankincense. Far litabit qui non habet thus.

But what Imperfection is in it, I supply it with the Sincerity of my Respects,
who presents it. It Is a Subject, that the Learndest Prince, and greatest
Monarch in His time was not ashamed to treat of. I seriously implore your
Lordships Protection, for, I have to do with many Adversaries of this Visible
World, who will not fail to ride tilts at me, with Bul-rushes and
Windle-strawes. As for those of Satan's Invisible UUorld, in the Name of the
LORD, I defy them. I know the acutness of your Lordships Ingine and
Profoundness of your Knowledge, in all such and other Matters, that there is no
Theme which I am able to treat of, or Thesis which I am able to publish, but
your Lordship is able by your Power and Authority to protect it, and by your
Reason to defend it.

I am the more encouraged to offer this to your Lordship, A Noble Patrician,
because I have seen Tracts of this Subject consecrated to Kings, Dukes, and
Princes. I have sure Experience of your Lordships Bounty and Favorable Aspect,
which gave Wings to my New Philosophical Experiments, to fly through Holland,
France, and Germany, which have made them so acceptable to Strangers.

Neque Phoebo gratior ulla est,
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit pagina nomen.
If my Writings had such good Fortune and Success abroad, by the auspicious
Conduct of your Lordships name upon the Frontispice, what must they have at
home, where your Power, Interest, and Relations are so considerable? Where your
Ancestors are so famous, having been useful to their Country, in Peace and
War; others of them employed in Public Affairs at home and abroad, and all of
them most eminent for their unstained Loyalty to their Prince, and Zeal for his
Interest; and that since Malcome the third, six hundred years ago, to your
Lordship, who is the twentieth and fifth, Lineally descended from Dougald the
first of the Family.

What a Faithful Achates, and Companion was Christopher Seton the third, to
King Robert the Bruce, in all his troubles? whose love to his King, was like
the love of Jonathan to David, for which, and his valiant Atcheivements, be
bestowed his Sister Christin upon him in Marriage, and the Flower-de-Luce to
his Coat of Arms, one of the chief Ornaments of the Royal Badge.

-- Patruo te Principe celsum,
Bellipotens illustrat Avus. --
Was not Alexander Seton, the second Son of Lord William, and Lady Katharin
Sinclar, or rather, Saint Katharin, who builded the famous Chapel of Seton,
for his excellent Endowments of Body and Mind, made Head of the noble Family of
Gordons, by marrying the Heretrix of Huntly; and that three hundred years ago?
And was not his Sister Isabel, by the same Mother, bestowed in Marriage upon
that most Princely Youth John Stuart of Darnly, from which two, the Royal Race
is descended: So that I may say without Flattery, your Family is come off
Princes, and reciprocally, Princes are come off your Family.

Quis venerabilior sanguis, quae major origo
Quam regalis erit? --
What was that illustrious Knight Alexander the third, who during the time of
John the Balliols Usurpation, three hundred and fifty years ago, was made
Governor of Berwick, whom the King of England, while he was beseiging the
Town, could neither by Threatenings, nor fair Promises, inveigle or persuade to
betray his Trust. The Garrison laboring under great penury of Provision, a
Truce was made upon this Condition, That if Relief came not before such a
limited day, the Town should be delivered up. The Scottish Army approaching,
under the Conduct of the Valiant Douglas, and King Edward fearing that the Town
might be releived, sent to the Governor, certifying him (though the days of
Truce were not yet expired) that if he did not render it forthwith, both his
Sons, the one an Hostage, the other a Prisoner of War, should be crucified
immediately before his eyes.

But the magnanimous Father, and incomparable Mother, being driven to this
insuperable Dilemma; Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum implacata Charybdis
Obsidet --
Love to their Dearest Children persuading, and Love and Respect to their
Country, and Family dissuading, carry like two invincible Hero's, and by
admirable Resolution, and Constancy, beyond what Roman Histories can parallel,
they prefer their Country to their dearest Pledges, Fidelity to Treachery,
and Glory to Shame. On which barbaritie, the Famous Poet Johannes Johnstonus
Aberdonensis, writteth thus in his Book entitled, The SCOTS Hero's, Huc averte
oculos, neu tristia fata tuorum,
Respice --
Vincit amor Patriae constansque in pectore virtus,
Omnia pro Patria sustinuisse valens.


This strange Tyrannical, Barbarous, and Monstrous Fact, is suppressed in the
Histories of England, and buried in silence, not unwiselie, it being capable
neither of Defense, nor Excuse.

My Lord,
Neither can I pass over in silence Lord George, the fifth of that Name, Claros
inter habent nomina clara viros.

Your Great Grandfathers Father, who being Master of the Royal Economy to the
Queen, was sent by Order of Parliament to France, to make up a Match between
Francis the Dolphin, and Mary Queen of Scots. And after, was sent by King James
her Son, to Henry the third, for confirming the ancient Alliance, whose third
Son Alexander, for his Knowledge and Skill in Juris-Prudence, was many years a
Senator of the College of Justice, and thereafter President to the Senate, and
one of the Kings honorable Privy Counselors, and at last made by King James,
Earl of Dumfermling, and Lord High Chancellor of SCOTLAND; from whom, by his
two Daughters he had two Grand Children, two matchless Hero's, John Duke of
Lauderdale, and John Earl of Tweeddale, both of them, as was said of Julius
Caesar and Cato, Ingenti Uirtute, Men of most eminent Parts and Endowments.

Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis
Est in Juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
I come at last to your Lordships Father and Grandfather, who imitating their
Noble Ancestors, were notable examples of Love and Piety toward their
Sovereign: both of great Humility and Goodness. Your Grandfather was
admirable, even to excess for Liberality to his other Children, and
Hospitality to Friends and Strangers, more becoming a Prince, than a Subject.
Your Mother of the Renowned Gordons, a Paragon of Nature for her matchless
Beauty and Goodness, Rara quidem facie; forma pulcherrima Dido.


My Lord,
I have touched a little the History of your Family, but cannot relate all it
deserves. It is well done by others, and augmented by the Learned Notes of Sir
Alexander Seton of Pitmeden, Knight Baronet, that honorable Gentleman, one of
the honorable Senators of the College of Justice.

But for what end (my Lord) have I celebrated the praises of your Predecessors?
Is it because I have nothing to say of Your self? Far be it. Your large
Possessions purchased by the Prudence and Heroic Valor of Your Forefathers,
are managed with Frugalitie and Moderation. Non minor est virtus quam quaerere,
parta tueri:
Casus inest illic, hic erit artis opus.
The ancient Honor and Dignity of Your Family is preserved without the least
stain or spot of Disloyalty; so that I may truly say, as is engraven upon the
Frontispice of Your stately Palace, Decus decori addis avito.


This Treatise is called Satan's Invisible UUorld Discovered, but I am
ascertained, that by Your transcendent Skill, you have discovered an Invisible
World, far beyond what any of your Ancestors could do; I mean your
subterraneous World, a work for a Prince, and a Subject to Write of, by that
great Philosopher Kircher. What Meanders and Boutgates are in it, are rather to
be admired then believed. There Daedalus for all his skill would mistake his
way? What running of Mines, and Levels? What piercing of Gaes? What cutting of
impregnable Rocks, with more difficulty, than Hannibal cutted the Alps.

-- Qui montes rupit aceto. What Deep-Pits, and Air-holes are dug! What
diligence to prevent Damps, which kill Men and beasts in a moment! What
contriving of Pillars, for supporting houses and Churches, which are
undermined! What floods of Water run through the Labyrinths, for several miles,
by a free Level, as if they were conducted by a Guide! How does Art and Nature
strive together, which of the twain shall advance Your Lordships Interest most!
What curious Mechanical Engines has Your Lordship, like another Archimedes,
contrived for your Coal-works, and for draining of Coal-sinks! What a
moliminous Rampire, has Your Lordship begun, and near perfected, for a Harbor
of deep Water, even at Neip-Tides!

Portus ab accessu ventorum immotus and ingens. How bountiful has Nature been
in forming a choice Coal under ground, within a stone-cast of your New Haven?

Your Experimental Skill in improving your Coal, for making of Salt, is praise
worthy. Your defending of the Salt-pans against the imperious Waves of the
raging Sea, from the N.E, is singular. Your renting of Rocks, for clearing of
Passages into Your Harbors, which none of your Predecessors were able to do,
is stupendous.

As the Result of the wise Government of your Affairs, redounds to your self,
so does it to the public. Advantage of the Country, and others, so that men
may say, -- Te toti genitum se credere genti.

How many hundreds of Young and Old have their Being and Livelie-hood, by
their dependence on your Lordships virtuous Actions about the Coal and Salt,
and things belonging thereunto, who art your self the greatest Coal and
Salt-Master in Scotland, who is a Nobleman, and the greatest Nobleman in
Scotland, who is a Coal and Salt-Master; Nay, absolutely the best for skill in
both, of all Men in the Nation. What fruitful Cornfieldsd, where Ceres has her
chief habitation lie within the Prospect of your dwelling house at Seton* Which
persuades me to maintain this Paradox, There is no Subject in Britan has so
much Casual and Land-Revenue within a mile of his house, as your Lordship has.

In a word, your Affability in Converse, your Sobriety in Diet and Apparel,
your Friendship and Kindness to Your Friends, your Candor and Ingenuity, with
the prudent management of your Affairs, have indeared all Men to You; So that I
may say, If your Predecessors were famous of Old for their Feats of War, in
the time of War, so is your Lordship famous for your Arts of Peace, in the time
of Peace. But, my Lord, I fear I am wearisome, and therefore I shall close as I
began, imploring your Patrocination to this small Enchiridion. And as I have
been long since Devoted to You in all Duty and Love, so shall I ferventlie
pray for Your Preservation and Happiness here and hereafter, while I live, and
shall think my self happy to be under the Character of Your Lordships,

Most Dutiful and Obedient Servant, GEORGE SINCLAR.

In Auctorem and Opus, Encomiasticon.
MIramur tam multa tui monumenta Georgi*
Ingenii and claram famam, quam scripta per orbem
Conciliant docta dum lucubrata quotannis
Conspicimus tot missa manu: dum falsa refutas
Dogmata divini pandens mysteria verbi;
Et monstras rectum per tanta pericula callem,
Quo sacrae veritatis amans, incedere possit
Tutusiter, sacro firmatus lumine mentem:
Et vero faciles non flectat tramite gressus.
Nunc aliud conaris opus, regnique recludis
Atria Tartarei, qualisque potentia diti
Sit permissa Dei rerum cui summa potestas
Consilio sapiente doces, and quanta sit ejus
Impietas, quae dira paret, semperque minetur
Exitia humano generi, quae funera saevus
Ediderit, miserasque animas demiserit orco.
Mira etiam sed vera refers simulachra per urbes
Visa per obscurum noctis errantia passim,
Horrendum dictuque nefas animasque Sepulchris
Excitas, notos, questu implevisse penates
Confessasque suae non ullis cognita vitae
Crimina, Medeas arts, aut foedera diri
Servitii stygio se cum pepigisse tyranno
Aut caedem graviusve nefas. Nec long petitis
Uteris exemplis, sed quae vicinior aetas
Protulit, and nostris etiam conspeximus oris.
Esse igitur manes, and subterranea regna.
Et flamma and stygio; stagnantem sulphur lacum
Atque animas, queis posse mori natura negavit
Qui dubitent cum haecmira legant, atque affore tempus
Quo tandem notis redeant corporibus omnes
Spiritus, exactae capiant and praemia vitae.
Ergo homines horum memores, dum certa facultas
Dum ratio tempufque finunt, and carpitis auras
Aethereas, properate gradum, pacemque verendi
Numinis, and veniam vestris exposcite factis.
Tu quoque de vera sic relligione mereri
Perge modo quo coepisti Sinclare, tuisque
Non deerit laus digna piis conatibus unquam:
Postera sed vestros celebrabit fama labores.
Patricius Sinclarus.

REader, if thou call in question, what I have said in the Preface, anent the
Number of these absurd Tenets, maintained by the Cartesian Philosophers abroad.
I refer thee, for full satisfaction, to Petrus van Mastrick, that famous
Professor of Theology at Utricht, who in his late Book entitled Gangraena
Carte sianismi, has set them all down, and far more than I have mentioned,
citing Author, Book, and Page, and has notably confuted them. For proof of what
I have written anent these other Tenets, mentioned in the last Page of the
Book, see Malebranche his Books, La Recherche de la Verite. De la Nature, and
de la Grace, and his Meditations Chrestiens, together with Mr. Arnaulds Book de
Vraes, and de Fausses Idees, where all these opinions are ridiculed, and most
rationally confuted.

THE PREFACE To The READER
MY Purpose is only by some few Collections to prove the existence of Devils,
Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions. The Philosophical Arguments, which are
brought for this end, though very cogent, yet many of them are so profound and
speculative, that they require a greater attention and sagacity, than many
learned men, that are not used to consider, will allow. Neither can the common
and vulgar sort of Readers, reach the understanding of such Reasonings.
Therefore I judge they are best convinced by proofs which come nearest to
Sense, such as the following Relations are, which leave a deeper impression
upon minds and more lasting, than thousands of subtle Metaphysical Arguments.

The Essay considered in it self, is but mean and of small moment, but taking
it as it relates to one of the Outworks of Religion, which the bold, and too
much daring Infidelity of some have assaultd, it will be thought seasonable,
especially now, while Atheism, and Quakerism that Sink of, Folly and Madness
(as one calls it) out of which there is no great leap into the other, does now
so much obtain. And while Parties venting there animosities one against another
and men scrambling for Conceits, and their own private advantadges, do not see
how this damnable evil, a lesson never believed in Hell, Nullus in Inferno
Atheus est, ante fuit, comes on by large Strides, and enters the Breach, which
they have made. If this prevail, farewell all Religion, all Faith, all hope of
a life to come. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we must die. Sober and wise
men have often said, if they did not believe to live again, they would not
desire to live a Moment.

The Relations are plain and easy, and all of them may be attested by
Authentic Records, or by famous witnesses, There are here, no old Wives
trattles about the fire, but such as may bide the Test, and strick trial of any
man's examination. What belief can be given to any human histories, and matters
of Fact, related by famous Writters, as much may be given to these following
Relations. I have collected some of them from Saducismus Triumphatus, that
excellent Book composed by Doctor Glanvil, and Doctor More, and the rest are
purchased from Persons of eminent honesty and Faith. This Book is not the
worse, but the better, that I have transcribed some of the choicest Relations
there, and insert them here. It is not possible to write a Book of this Nature,
but the Author must collect, since it depends, not upon a Man's own Invention,
but essentially upon Information from others. The advantage lays here, that a
man may have this Book for a small Price, though no other Relations had been in
it, but what are there. Whereas that other Book cannot be sold in the Shops
under six or seven shillings. There is one Relation here, viz, the Devil of
Glenluce, which I have been at great pains to be informed of, which Doctor More
has so much valued that he has taken it word by word from my Hydrostaticks,
and has thought it worth his while to insert it among his Relations. It is now
enlarged by many excellent Additions, and publishd here again. None yet, that
ever I heard of had the confidence to say, that it was but a Trick, and an
imposture to amuze and wonderstricke simple and credulous persons. I believe,
if the Obduredest Atheist among men, would seriously and in good earnest
consider that Relation, and ponder all the Circumstances thereof, would
presently cry out, as a Dr: of Physic did, hearing a Story less considerable.
If this be true, I have been in the wrong Closs all this time, I must begin my
Account a new. This one Relation is worth all the price that can be given for
the Book. Some indeed have also said, that the Demon of Tedworth, was but an
imposture, and that Doctor Glanvil confessed so much himself, but he has
sufficiently vindicate that, Men only speak as they would have it. Glad would
many be, if all such Relations were acknowleged to be but Tricks and Waggeries,
that they might live as they list; Because men are horribly afraid to believe
there should be any Spirit; lest there should be a Devil, and an account after
this life: They are impatient of any thing that implies it, that they may with
a more full swing, and with all security from an after reckoning indulge their
lusts, living like Brutes, and dying so. I have insert likewise a notable Story
of the Devil that troubled a Protestant Ministers house, at Mascon in France,
to let see, that none can plead a protection from his malice. The Devil
endeavors more to smite the Shepherd, than any of the Flock, though he be an
utter enemy to both. Many worthy Ministers of the Gospel have been the Butt of
the Devils malice, an instance whereof is clear from the twentieth and first
Relation.

But what are the Reasons, why there is so much disbelief of Devils, Witches,
and Apparitions? There is first an affected humor in many to Droll, Scoff' and
Mock at all such Relations, and are rather willing to believe a World in the
Moon, than the truth of such a Narrative. And Witchcraft being a large Subject
to expatiat upon, men find ample occasion to speak of Cheats* and Impostors, of
Juggling Tricks, of Melancholious fits of distempered Persons, of old Wives
Fables, which they talk of at an high rate, and so conclude by their Frolic
and wanton Fancy* that whatever is spoken by sober men, anent the reality of
witches, and Spirits, are but ridiculous, and inconsistent with reason. And to
this purpose the Drolling Wagge actuating and elevating his Scoffing Vein,
especially with a Glass of good Claret, quibles luckily, and by making others
laugh, they think him, and he thinks himself, a third Cato fallen from Heaven.
Whereas he is but a man like his Neighbors. And though at first, he only
intended to play the Wanton, yet by such frequent Merriments (as a man by lying
in sport, comes at last, by an habit, to lie in earnest) his reason becomes an
obedient slave to his Fancy, and concludes in seriousness, there are neither
Devils nor Witches. The half-witted hearers admire him, and take every Jest for
an Argument, and his loud laughs upon an idle tale of a Devil or a Witch for
Demonstrations, that no such Creatures are. The other reason, why Folk
disbelieve Witches and Spirits, is Atheism. For if a man take good notice, he
will find there is of it lurking at the root of the Saducean Principle. It Is
probable that the Saducees in Christ's time, were as great Patrons and Advocates
of Witches, as either Scot the Inglishman; the Father of the Witch Patrons,
whom King James mentions in his Demonology, or Webster, Wagstaff. or the Author
of the Namle Pamphlet. Printed Anno 1659.

A third Reason is, Because it is commonly believed that many innocent Persons
have suffered as Witches, especially such as have been Tortured to a
Confession. Let it be so, but will it follow, that all suffer after that
manner, And though many of their Confessions seem ridiculous, as their
Transformation into Catts and Hares, and their Transportation into far
Countries which is evident enough; Yet such things as their renouncing their
Baptism, and giving up themselves from Top to Toe, to the Devils service and
receiving his Mark (they willing to take it) and injunctions to do all manner
of evil, cannot be thought ridiculous. If we can believe, that the Devil can
speak with an audible voice, and come under a visible shape, as is very
probable, he appeared to our Savior, why should it be thought incredible, that
he may not do the like to Men and Women. Satan offered to make a fair bargan
with Christ; if thou will fall down (says he) and worship me, I will give thee
all these Kingdoms. Why (much more) may he not make compacts with men and
Women? If Witchcraft, were but a new Trade, which had never been heard of
before, and but a few in a countrey-side, that professed their skill in it, and
told such foolish stories of themselves, that man might be esteemed singular,
that would believe them. But since this employment has been verified by
Millions in all ages, in all places, and has obtained the general approbation
of all sober judicious men, but especially so well verified from holy
Scripture, why should any man as Webster and Wagstaff, judge all Witchcraft but
delusions. Samuel said to Saul, that Rebellion was like the sin of Witchcraft;
that is, the one is as great a sin as the other. Would ever the Spirit of God
compare Rebellion, especially against himself, to a non-ens, to a thing that is
not, or to Juggling Tricks, or Legerdemain, such as the Hocus Pocusses play.
Were Jannes and Jambres the Egyptain Magicians, who withstood Moses, only two
Juglers, or couzening Rogues, that cast down before Pharaoh carved and painted
Serpents instead of real ones. They have been very artificially done, that the
true Serpents mistook them for real ones. It was a Victory to brag of indeed,
that Moses obtained over Pharoahs Magicians, if they were but arrant Cheats,
who had no more to do with evil Spirits, or evil Spirits with them, then evil
Spirits have to do with other Sinners. There is that well known place, Exodus
22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live, which would be a Law of extreme
severity, or rather cruelty against a poor Jugler for his tricks of
Legerdemain. Why is Witchcraft called a Work of the Flesh, and reckoned up
among the rest of these damnable sins, Gal. 5. The Greek word is Pharmakeia,
veneficium, Sorcery, or the Art of poisoning, whereof they have great skill
from the old Drugist their Master. Not that they mischieve people ordinarily by
natural poison, as Arsenick, or the like, but rather by some hellish malignancy
infused into things, by the art and malice of the Devil. It is such a poison,
that no Alexipharmacon or Orvieton can be an Antidote against. Men and Women
have been wronged by the touch of a Witches hand, by the breath, and kiss of
their mouth, as is well known of late. By their looks, which is called
Fascinatio physica, a Forelook or Ill-eyes. The Greek word is Bascania, from
Bascaino to bewitch or envy, quasi phasei kaino, oculis interficio, as when a
Witch sends forth from her heart through her eyes venomous and poysonful
Spirits, as Rays, which lighting upon a man, will kill him. The Basilisk
kills this way, But the Devil and the Basilisk are both Serpents. What was
Simon Magus? But especially that notable Magician Apollonius Thianeus, one
beyond most that ever the World knew. And that Damsel possessed with a Spirit
of Divination: in the Greek a Spirit of Python, by which name Apollo (the
Devil) was called by the Heathens.

The Witch of Endor is so notable and evident an instance of Confederacy with
the Devil, that the Witch Patrons to find an evasion, have set theit wits upon
the Rack. But it is such a Choak-pear to them as that they shall never be able
to Chew or Swallow. Doctor Glanvile maintains, it was the true Samuel that
appeared to Saul. But it is far more probable that it was the Devil in Samuels
lickness. For it is most incredible, that GOD who had just now refused to
answer Saul, by the means which himself had appointed, would answer him, or
suffer Samuel to answer him, by the use of those means, which GOD detested.
Secondly, if it had been the true Samuel, or some Good Spirit, he would not
have received that worship from Saul, which Good Spirits would not suffer; Rev.
19.10. and 22.8, 9. Thirdly, Among the other sins, for which he condemns
Saul, he omitteth this of asking counsel of one that had a Familiar Spirit to
enquire of it, for which transgression with others he is expressly said to have
died; 1 Chronicles. 10.13. Which the true Samuel who was so zealous for GODS honor
and so faithful a reprover of sin, would never have neglected, especially now*
when he took Saul, in the very fact, Lastly, he pretends himself to be
disquieted and brought up by Saul's instigation, and the Witches Art, which is
most false, impious, and absurd to imagine concerning those blessed souls who
are returned to their God; Eccl. 12.7. Isa. 57.2. Luke 16.22. Rev. 13.14.

Many in all Ages have written of Devilry and Witchcraft, Men of eminent
Knowledge and Parts, as we may see by one instance of King James his
Demonology, a piece as far beyond all other men's writtings on that subject; as
himself was beyond all Princes in his time. I cannot omit to mention the
opinion of His Majesty's present Advocat, (Sir George Mackenzie,) a Gentleman
of great knowledge and experience in all such Matters, in his 16. Pleading for
Mevia accused of Witchcraft; I am not of their Opinion (says he) who deny that
there are Witches, though I think them not numerous, and though I believe that
some are suffered by Providence, to the end that the being of Spirits may not
be denied, etc. And in his Criminals, he acts the part both of a Divine, a
Lawyer, and a good Philosopher, in order to Witchcraft.

But what can be the reason of so much Atheism in the World? There are many,
but I shall only touch at two: First, there are a monstrous rabble of men, who
following the Hobbesian and Spinosian Principles, slight Religion, and
undervalue the Scripture, because there is such an express mention of Spirits
and Angels in it, which their thick and plumbeous capacities cannot conceive.
Whereupon they think, that all contained in the Universe comes under the notion
of things matterial, and bodies only; and consequently, no GOD, no Devil, no
Spirit, no Witch. Hobbs the Inglishman is too well known by his Atheistical
writtings. Benedictus Spinosa, or rather Maledictus; a stranger abroad, a
profain abuser of the Scripture; will have all those Devils, which CHRIST and
his Disciples cast out, to be but Diseases in men's Bodies.

There is a second Reason, namely the absurd Principles of the Cartesian
Philosophy, eagerly maintained by Carts his Followers, in their public
Writtings and Disputations abroad. They do not indeed assert, there is no GOD,
but rather seem to prove so much, especially by his Idea, which is Connatural
to all men. This may seem a plausible reason, but when its put to the Test, or
Touchston, it, with others of that kind, are not found sufficient, nor able to
convince Atheists. That their Principles are absurd, and dangerous, I shall
mention a few of them, which are owned and maintained publicly abroad,
especially in Holland.

As (1) that we must doubt of all things, before we can come to any clear
distinct knowledge of them. We must suppose (they say) there is no God, no
Heavens, no Earth; nay which a man ought to tremble at to speak of, that GOD is
a deceiver. (2) They incroach upon the sound Orthodox Religion, and the
Articles of our Faith, and go quite contrary to all Christian, and Protestant
Divines, and would have the Orthodox Theology reformed by their fanatical
Philosophy. (3) That Philosophy is not subservient, or an Handmaid to
Divinity. (4) That Philosophy is as sure, as Divine, and also revealed as the
Scripture is. (5) That the Scripture in things Natural, speaks according to the
erroneous opinion of the Vulgar. That Philosophy and Philosophers are the
Interpreters of the Scripture in things Natural. (6) That the Scripture in
things Moral and Practical, speaks according to the erroneous Judgment and
Opinion of the Vugar. (7) That the Scripture in matters of Faith speaks also
according to the erroneous opinion of the vulgar. (8) That Philosophy is the
infallible Interpreter of the Scripture. (9) That the Cortesians their Clear
and Distinct Perception is the only Rule of all Truth. (10) That there is in
every man an Idea of GOD, without the Consideration of which, no man can attain
to the knowledge of Gods Existence, and Nature, though he were never so well
furnished with the light of Nature, and the knowledge of the works of Creation
and Providence. (11) That GOD may be properly defined. (12) That the Divine
Essence consists only in Cogitation. (13) That GOD cannot properly be called a
Spirit; because (say they) a Spirit, to speak properly, denotes some corporeal
thing. (14) That the life which the Scripture attributes to GOD, and whereby he
is called the Living GOD, is nothing else but his Understanding and his Will.
(15) That GOD by his power can make one thing contradictory to another, (16)
That GOD can deceive, if he please. (17) That GOD can make an Infinitum, both
as to bulk and number. (18) That God is From himself, not only Negative, but
also Positive. That is, he is not only Independent from all things whatsoever,
but is from himself, as if he were the cause of himself both prior and
posterior to himself. (19) That his Omnipresence, is nothing else, but his most
Efficacious Will, by which he sustains and governs all things. (20) That the
Mystery of the Trinity, may be demonstrat by Natural Reason. (21) That the
Communicability of the Divine Essence, does not arise from its infinitness.
(22) That the three Persons of the Godhead are neither distinguished among
themselves, Really, nor Modaliter. (23) That the three Persons, are neither
distinguished from the Divine Essence, Really, nor Modaliter, nor ratione
ratiocinat^. (24) That in Explaining the Work of Creation, we may lawfully make
use of false Suppositions. (25) That the first Chaos, was able of it felf, to
produce all things material. (26) That God did not creat all things for Man.
(27) That the World has a Soul. (28) That the world as to its bulk is
indefinite, but may be infinite. (29) That there is a world in the Moon. (30)
That the Angels might have existed and been; before the world was made. (31)
That the Essence of Angels consists only in Cogitation. (32) That what
mavelous works have been performed by Angels (as killing an hundred fourscore
and five thousand of the Assyrians) were done by their bare thought and
Cogitation. (33) That the Essence of the Soul of man consists only in
Cogitation. (34) That every man has two Souls, one Rational the other Animal.
(35) That the Rational Soul may be absent, and yet the Body living, by virtue
of the Animal Soul. This (by the way) is a brave invention to let see how
Witches may be transported to Balls of Dancing, and far countries, and their
Bodies tarry at home. For the Devil may put their Rational Soul into some Aerial
Vehicle, or a Body made of condensed Air, and carry it whithersoever he
pleases, while the Animal Soul may keep life in the Body at home. (36) That it
is proper only to the Will to affirm, and deny. (37) That the will is infinite
after its own manner, and that it can will all things which God can will. (40)
That the Idea of God in man, belongs to the Image of God in man. (41) That
Brutes want life, sense and Perception. (42) They confound Gods Omnipresence
with his Providence. (43) That the explication of Original sin, is to be sought
for, from the inmost Cabins of the Cartesian Philosophy. (44) That the
Intellect does not err, nor can err. (45) That it is in the Will of Man, not to
assent, but to things clearly and distinctly perceived. (46) That the Decree of
God leaves the free actions of men, indetermined. (47) That the Personal
Subsistence, namely, that Subsistence, by which the Humane Nature subsists is
but a mere figment of Divines. (48) That the Divine Nature cannot be present,
or united to the humane Nature, but by an external operation. (49) That Grace
in the Conversion of a man is not irresistible. (50) That Faith is not
Knowledge. (51) That Faith does not belong to the Understanding. (52) That
Faith consists only in hungering and thristing after Righteousness. (53) That
Death is not the separation of the Soul and Body. (54) That the Resurrection is
not the reunion of the Soul and the Body. (55) That the Souls of the Righteous
do not properly pass immediately into heaven. (56) That the Souls of the wicked
do not presently pass into hell. These are a part of the Cartesian Tenets. What
dangerous Principles they are, and what dreadful consequences may be drawn from
them, is evident to all sober men. James Arminius, and his followers called
Remonstrantes bred much trouble to the Belgic Churches:, but not comparable,
to what this man Carts, especially his Followers, have done. The Arminian
Tenets were but five in number, as to heads and had some shadow of Reason. But
the Cartesian Novelties far exceed the number of heads, which the Hydra or
Lernean Serpent had. They are big with, and ready to be delivered of
Vaninianism, Arianism, Socinianism, Vorstianism, Nestorianism. Novitates
Cartesianae (says a learned man) multis parasangis supera^t Arminianas, the
Cartesian Novelties go far beyond, for number and weight the Arminian Tenets.
They not only gnaw about ( arrodunt) as a Gangren, but ( exedunt) they eat up
the most part of the whole body of Theology, to the utter ruin of the Christian
Faith. Let no man mistake me, for its not my design to discourage any man that
teaches or learns new Philosophy. Ego ipse amo novam Philosophiam; verum non
quia est nova, sed quia est bona. It is very fit, that Students in Philosophy,
should have ex omni aliquid, should know all the different sects and opinions
of learned men, for their accomplishment, providing first, as the Great
Philosopher says, this Axiom be observed, Quicquid movetur aliquo quiescente
movetur. There ought to be laid down some sure principles, as a foundation
upon which Students may walk surely, which for their evidence and certainty,
may never be called in question. Archimedes said well when one asked him, If he
was able to move the Earth with his Mechanical Engines? da ubi stabo, and
terram movebo. Give me a place to stand upon (says he) and I shall move the
Earth; intimating, that no desing how small, or how great soever can be
accomplished without sure grounds laid down first as a foundation: otherwise
men might resolve to build Castles in the Air.

To put an end to this matter, I shall inquire at the Witch Patrons, why
Pharo's Magicians, were not able by their Enchantments to turn the dust of
Egypt into lice, as Aaron did with his Rod. They cast down their counterfeit
Serpents, turn water into blood, brought up Frogs upon the Land of Egypt; and
yet were not able to produce Lice, the meanest of all Vermin. It is said, the
Magicians did so with their Enchantments, that is, they endeavored by their
Magical Art to do it, but could not, for say they to Pharo, the Finger of God
is in this; for neither we nor the Devil our Master can counterfeit this
Miracle. It must be said, that either the Lord laid an inhibition upon these
Evil assisting Spirits, that they had no power to withstand Moses any longer,
or (if these Sorcerers were only men, that used Legerdemain and slight of
hand) that he restrained them from playing their tricks any more. If the first
be granted then there must be wretched Wights, that do strange Miraculous
things by the assistence or consociation of evil Spirits, and consequently
Wizzards or He-Witches. If the second be said, Viz, that the Lord only
restrained these Juglers from using bare slight of hand, then what will not
follow. First, that poor Juggling Fellows, were able to contend and debate with
Moses, who was immediately assisted by the power of GOD. Secondly, that this
victory, which Moses obtained over these men, was but mean and small, not to be
boasted of, which is the basest Derogation to the glory of that victory, and
the vilest reproach against the God of Israel, and his Servant Moses, that ever
was heard of. It is evident that this conflict was between the Kingdom of
light, and the Kingdom of darkness, and the evil Spirits thereof. And is it
likely that the Spirit of GOD, would compare seducers, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the Faith, nay the worst of men (2 Timothy 3. from the first
to the 9. verses.) to Jannes and Jambres, if they had been but Cheats, and
Juglers. They have been famous at that time for their Sorceries, that they were
remembered many years after, as witness Numenius the Pythagorean Philosopher,
that mentions Jannes, and Pliny that mentions that same Wizzard. The Lord put
such an affront upon the Devil, and his instruments, while they were not able
to produce a Louse, that they never compeired again with their enchantments.
This was a part of that Glorious Victory.

Speaking of the Cartesian Philosophy, I forgot to Relate that Mr. Forbes one
of the Regents of the Kings College of Aberdeen, has this year in his public
Theses, confuted the chiefest points of the Cartesian Philosophy, both
Iudiciously, and Modestly.

My little Book, I send thee forth into the World where some will welcome thee,
some mock thee, some contradict thee, be not discouraged, though thou be the
youngest of five. Degeneres animos timor arguit. Thy Brethren before thee, have
met with foul and maleapart Censures. Tune cede malis; sed contra audentior ito,
Quam tua te fortuna sinet.
Say with valiant Aeneas, when the Prophetess Sibylla was showing him what bad
fortune he was to meet with -- Non ulla laborum O Virgo, nova mi facies
inopinave surgit
Omnia praecepi, atque animo mecum ante peregi.
Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium.


Carmen Steliteutieon.
EUGE SY GERYONOS RHOPALO TRIA SOMATA RIPSAS,
AMPHITRIONIADES HOS MEGAS ALLOS ESE,
HEIMATI T'ALLOTRIO SEO CERBERE KEUTHE KARENON.
OU DYNATON PHOREEIN EELIOIO PHAOS.
SATAN'S INVISIBLE World DISCOVERED: Or, A choice Collection of Relations anent
Devils, Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions.
RELATION I. Touching the Troubles which Sir George Maxwel of Pollok met with
from the Devil and his Haggs.
Pollok 24 of June, 1684. Sir,
I Send you herewith the true Account, my Father caused me write from his own
mouth, which is the surest Relation I can give, either of his own trouble, or
what concerns Jennet Douglas, the first discoverer of these Pictures. There
fell out some less matterial circumstances in the Family during her abode
there, whereby it fully appeared, that she knew what was done in distant
places, and understood Languages. For instance, when a Chapter in the Greek
New Testament was read, she made us understand by signs what the purposes were,
(for at that time she was dumb, whether really or counterfeitly, its hard to
determine) and did exactly give an account to my self, what we did at two miles
distance from the place where she was, without any information given to her,
which I know of.

I rest your affectionat Friend, John Maxwel.


Upon the 14. of October, 1676. my Father was surprised at Glasgow, in the
night time, with a hot and fiery distemper; and coming home the next day, he was
fixed to his bed. The Physician fearing a Pleurisy, and a Fever, opened a vein,
and the application of Medicaments being made, the fiery heat was abated; he
remaining for seven weeks together under a great pain chiefly in his right
side, though not fixed to his bed. There had come to Pollok-town a young dumb
Girl, but from whence was not known, who had remained there for four weeks
before, but seldom frequenting Sir George Maxwels house, till at length she
came to some more familiarity, and converse with his two Daughters. And having
observed Sir George sick, and weak in his body, she signified unto them, That
there was a woman, whose son had broke his fruit-yeard, that did prick him in
the sides.

And seeing this woman one day in the Hall of Pollok amongst a great many other
company, she assured his Daughters that this was the woman. And the day
following, she told the Gentlewomen, That this woman (whose name was Jennet
Mathie, relict of John Stewart, under-Miller in Schaw-Mill) had formed an
Wax-Picture, with pins in the side, which was to be found in her house, in a
holl behind the fire, offering to bring it unto them, providing she were
accompanied with men to protect her from violence. At first, they hardly
understood her, till she went to one of the Gentlewomens closets, and bringing
thence a little Bee-wax, she plied it before the fire, showing the dimensions
and quantities of the Picture. The Gentlewomen not regarded the information,
because they thought it fabulous; yet his two servants Laurence Pollok, and
Andrew Martine, knowing how much the Girl loved their Master, and knowing that
his life was in hazard, if this picture were not found; resolved at all
adventure, to try whether the information were true or false; and therefore
going alongs with her to the said Jennet Mathies house, one of them planted
himself on the one side of the fire, and the other on the other side, while in
the mean time, the little Girl coming quickly by Laurence Pollok, puts her
hand in the holl behind the fire, and then slips into Andrew Martine, beneath
his cloak the Waxen-effigie, which had two pins in it, one in each side, but
that in the right side, so long as to pierce through to the other; that in the
left was not so long, nor so deeply thrust in. This picture being brought to
Pollok, Sir George his Son, without acquainting his Father, apprehended Jennet
Mathie, procuring the next day, the Lord Ross his order for conveying her to
prison. She being interrogat touching the Picture, after several subterfuges,
alleges, It was the deed of the dumb Girl.

It was also enquired, whether Sir George or his Lady had given her at any time
provocation to this malice? But it was well known, they had been courteous to
her, and upon her complaints, had rebuked some for spreading bad reports upon
her name, as not appearing sufficiently well founded to a conviction. Only upon
the 14 of October, above specified, before Sir George went to Glasgow, he had
called before him a servant in Pollock-toun, that had broken his Orchard in
harvest last, who confessed the fact, and that Hugh-Stewart a son of Jennet
Mathies, was his complice. But a bystander declared, that he was not now in
Pollok-land, but in the Darnlie. To whom Sir George replied, I hope my fingers
may reach him in Darnlie. This was all, which could be thought a provocation to
Mathie. No harm being done in the mean time to her son, whom Sir George to
this hour does not so much as know by the face, but has suffered him all the
time of his sickness to live in his mothers house, evensince her imprisonment.
In the mean time* Mathie remaining obstinat, was searched for insensible marks,
before the Sheriff Depute of Renfrew, and many famous witnesses at Paisley, and
very many found upon her.

After the finding of the Picture of wax foresaid, there was some abatement of
Sir George his sickness, but not to any observable degree, so low was he
brought. But upon the fourth of January following, his sickness recurred with
that violence, that for four or five days, his friends and relations had no
great confidence of his life. But they were more amazed on the 7th. of January,
being the Sabbath day when they had an express from the dumb Girl, who was at
Pollok-town, but could not get over the water to the house, the River being so
swelled at that time) signifying, that John Stewart, Mathies eldest son, had
four days since formed an Effigy of clay, for taking away Sir George his life.
And when she was called for, she declared, it was in his house, beneath the
bolster among the Bed-straw.

The next day following, James Dunlope of Houshill, and Ludowick Stewart of
Achinhood, with some of Sir George his servants, and tennents, went to Stewarts
house, taking the little Girl with them, resolving to make a very exact trial,
that it might not be said, that the dumb Girl had brought any thing hither.
Wherefore, they caused John Stewart himself to light a candle and hold it,
while Ludowick Stewart, and another did in his sight, lift the Clay Effigy
from among the bed-straw, beneath the bolster (the little Girl, all the while
standing at a distance from the place) but the picture having been made, only
three or four days before, and not sufficiently hard, did break into two
pieces. In it were three pins, one in each side, and one in the breast. Stewart
had nothing to say for himself, but that he knew not, who had put that thing
there. He was instantly apprehended, and so was a little sister of his lately
entered into the fourteenth year of her age, named Annabil Stewart, who was
said to have whispered before, somewhat of the waxen Effigy. This poor
creature proved thereafter through Gods favor a key to the detection of making
both the Pictures.

At first, she was very obstinate, but the next day she confessed, that being
present in her brothers house, the fourth of January while the clay picture was
formed, the black Gentleman being present, (which was the name she gave the
Devil) together with Bessie Weir, Marjorie Craig, Margaret Jacksone, and her
brother John: but when confronted with her brother, she did not with confidence
adher to her confession. Upon the finding of this picture, Sir George did very
observably recover in his health, and all the pain, which was in his side did
by degrees wear away.

John Stewart remained, notwithstanding his sisters confession above measure
obstinct, until he was searched the next day for insensible marks, whereof he
had great plenty. At the finding whereof, he was so confounded, that immediately
he confessed his paction with the Devil, and almost all the other heads expressed
in his judicial confession afterwritten; And declared, that his accomplices who
formed the Effigy with him were the same, his sister had named. She also came
to a free and full confession of her paction with the Devil, and her accession
to the forming both of the waxen picture in her mothers house, and of the clay
one in her brothers house.

Upon information of the premises, the Earl of Dundonald and the Lord Ross,
granted a warrant for apprehending Bessie Weir, Margaret Jackson, and Marjorie
Craig, who had been fellow sisters in the foresaid sorcerie.

Margaret Jackson, a woman aged about fourscore of years, after a day or two,
confessed paction with the Devil, and her accession to the making of both the
Pictures, and condescended upon the accomplices above named. Many insensible
marks were found in her body.

Upon the 17 of January last a third portrait of clay was found under Jennet
Mathies bolster in the prisonhouse of Paisly, which the dumb Girl had given
information of. But it seemed to be the picture of some Woman, and probably of
some of the Family of Pollok. For Annabil Stewart did freely declare, that
their malice was against the whole Family of Pollok. For turning to young
Pollok, and his Lady, she said, and against you also. This portrait was found
before four famous witnesses.

The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, being informed of these Pictures and
Effigies, the depositions of three confessing Witches being sent, did grant a
Commission for their trial, and also for the trial of the other three, that
were obstinat. And in regard of the singularity of the case, they ordered the
Process to be very solemn, Commissionating for the trial some judicious
Gentlemen in the country. viz. Sir Patrick Gauston of Gauston, James Brisband
of Bishoptoun, Sir John Shaw younger of Greenock, and John Anderson younger of
Dovehill. To whom they added Mr. John Preston Advocat (a Gentleman well seen in
Criminals, and who exercised the office of a Justice-Depute for several years)
a Sine quo non, in the Commission. And that the whole Process might be the more
exact, they appointed George Lord Ross Assessor, with power to Vote, and
Decide. And further ordered Mr. Robert Martine Clerk to the Justice Court, to
be Clerk to the Process, which was to be recorded in the public books of
Adjournal.

The Commissioners of Justiciarie held their first Court at Paisly, the 27 of
January; before whom Annabil Stewart deponed that in Harvest last, the Devil in
the shape of a black man, had come to her Mothers house, and required the
Deponent to give her self up to him, and that the Devil promised, she should
not want any thing that was good. That being, enticed by her Mother Jennet
Mathie, and Bessie Weir, who was Officer to their several meetings, she did put
her one hand to the crown of her head and the other to the sole of her foot,
and did give up her self soul and body (whole seal here is bad seal) to the
devil. That her mother promised her a new Coat, for the doing of it. That the
new name the Devil gave her, was Annippy. That he took her by the hand, and
nipped her arm, which continued to be sore for the space of half an hour. That
the Devil in the shape of a black man lay with her in the bed, under the
Clothes. That she found him cold. That thereafter he placed her nearest to
himself. That she was present in her mothers house, where the Picture of wax
was made, and that it was made to represent Sir George Maxwel of Pollok. That
the black man, Jennet Mathie her Mother, whose name was from the devil
Lands-lady; Bessie Weir, whose name was Sopha, Marjorie Craig, whose new name
was Rigeru, Margaret Jackson whose new name was Locas, were all present at the
forming, and making of the said effigy. That they bound it on a spit, and
turned it about before the fire. And that it was turned by Bessie Weir, saying
as she turned it, Sir George Maxwel, Sir George Maxwel, which was expressed by
all of them. That this Picture was made in October last.

That upon the third day of January following, Bessie Weir came to her Mothers
house, and advertised her to come to her brother John Stewarts house, the
following night by twelve a clock in the night. And that accordingly she came
to the place, where she found Bessie Weir, Marjorie Craig, Margaret Jackson,
and her brother John Stewart, a Man with black clothes and a blew band, and
white handcuffs, with hoggers on his feet, and that his feet were cloven. That
she sat down at the fire side with them, where they made a Picture of Clay, and
placed pins in the breast, and in the sides. That they did place pins in the
Picture of Wax, one in every side. That the black man did put the pins into the
picture of Wax, but is not sure, who did thrust them into the Picture of Clay.
That the Pictures produced, are the Pictures she saw made. That the black man's
name is Ejoall.

This declaration was made before famous witnesses, subscrived by the two
Notars public for her, Robert Park younger, Patrick Carswel in Paisley, and
subscrived by the Commissioners.

John Stewart did judicially depone before the Justices, that upon the third
day of January instant, Bessie Weir in Pollok-toun came to him late at night.
he being without doors at his own house. That she did intimate unto him, that
there was a meeting to be at his house, the next night; and that the Devil in
the shape of a black man, Margaret Jackson, Marjorie Craig, and the said Bessie
Weir, were to be present, and that Bessie Weir required him to be present which
he promised to do. That the next night, after he had gone to bed, the black man
came in, and called him quietly by his name, upon which he arose from his bed,
and put on his clothes.

That Margaret Jackson, Bessie Weir, and Marjorie Craig, did enter in at the
window, in the Gavil of his house. And that the first thing, which the black
man required was, that he should renounce his Baptism, and deliver up himself
wholly unto him, putting one of his hands, on the crown of his head, and the
other to the sole of his foot. And that he was tempted hereunto by the Devil,
promising he should not want any pleasure, and that he should get his heart
sithe on all that should do him wrong. That the new name given to him by the
Devil was Jonas. That thereafter the Devil required every one of their
consents, for the making an effigy of clay for taking away the life of Sir
George Maxwel of Pollok, to revenge the taking of his mother Jennet Mathie.
That every one of the Persons above named, did give their consent to the making
of the said Effigy. And that they wrought the clay, and that the black man did
make the figure of the head and face, and the two arms to the said Effigy.
That the Devil set three pins in the samine, one in each side, and one in the
breast. And that the said John did hold the candle all the while the Picture
was a making. That he observed one of the black man's feet to be cloven, and
that the black-mans apparel was black, and that he had a blew band about his
neck, and white handcuffs, and that he had hoggers upon his legs without
shoes, and that the black man's voice was hollow and ghousty. That after they
had begun to the forming of the Picture, his sister Annabil (a child of 13 or
14 years of age) came knocking to the door, and she being let in by him, stayed
with them a considerable time, but that she went away before the rest, he
having opened the door unto her. That the rest went out at the window, through
which they entered. That the Picture was placed by Bessie VVeir, in his
Bed-straw. Further confessed, that he had envy and malice against the said Sir
George. Her quarrel being, as he conceived, that Sir George, had not entered
her husband to his harvest service. That the Effigy was made upon the fourth
of January last. And the Devils name amongst them was Ejoal. That the new name
given to himself was Jonas, and Bessie VVeir her name, who was Officer, was
Sopha. That Margaret Jacksons name from the Devil was Locas, and that his
sisters name was Annipy, but does not remember what Marjorie Craigs name was.
This confession had the same solemnities, which the former had.

Mar^aret Jackson, did the same day judicially confess, That she was present at
the making of the first Effigy, which was made in Jennet Mathies house in
October last, and that the Devil in the shape of a black man, Jennet Mathie,
Bessie VVeir, Marjorie Craig, and Annabil Stewart were present at the making of
the said Effigy which was made to represent Sir George Maxwel of Pollok, for
taking away his life. That 40 years since, or thereby, she was in Pollok-Shaws
croft, with some few sticks on her back; that the black man came to her, and
that she did give up her self to him from the top of her head, to the sole of
her foot, having first renounced her Baptism.

And that the new name she had from the Devil was Locas. That about the third
or fourth of January last, or thereby, in the night time when she had wakened,
she found a man in the bed, whom she supposed, had been her husband, who had
died twenty years before, or thereby, and that the man did immediately
disappear. And that this man was the Devil, and that this was the first time
she knew him. That upon Thursday the fourth of January last, she was present in
the house of John Stewart at night, when and where the Effigy of clay was made,
and that she saw the black man's clothes were black, and that he had white
handcuffs, and that Bessie VVeir in Pollok town, and Annabil Stewart in Shaws,
and Marjorie Craig were present the foresaid time and place at the making of
the foresaid Effigy of clay. That she gave her consent to the making of the
samine. That the Devil, who had appeared in the shape of a black man, his name
was Ejoal. This confession had the same solemnities, which the two former had.

Upon the fifteenth of February 1677, the Justices being conveened again in
Court at Paisley, John Stewart, and Annabil Stewart, with Margaret Jackson, did
adhere to their former judicial confession. But Jennet Mathie, Bessie Weir, and
Marjorie Craig did obstinately deny. One remarkable passage there was
concerning Jennet Mathie. The Justice upon the 27 of January commanded the
Iaylour to fix her feet in the Stocks, that she might not do violence to her
own life. The Man declared, That the next morning he found her bolster, which
the night before was laid at least six yards distant from the Stocks, now
placed beneath her; the Stocks being so heavy, that two of the strongest men in
the Country could hardly have carried them six yards. He wondering, did ask
her, how she had win to the bolster? She answered, That she had creept alongs
the floor of the room, drawing the Stocks to the same place. And before the
Court, she said, she had gotten one foot free out of the holl, and with the
other had drawn the Stocks, a thing altogether impossible, the Stocks being so
weighty, nor she able to take out her foot out of the hole.

The Justices having examined all witnesses in matters of fact, touching the
Effigies, Sir George his sickness, and the recovery of his health, upon the
finding of the same: considering also the bad fame of those who were obstinate
and having confronted them with the confessing Witches, who in their faces
avowed their accession, in manner expressed, in the confession above written.
Considering lastly, all other circumstances of their case, committed them to
the trial of a Judicious Inquest, who being found guilty were condemned to the
fire to be burnt, and their Effigies with him. Only Annabil, in regard of her
Nonage, and the evidences she seemed to give of her penitencie was reprived by
order of Council, but to remain in Prison. In the mean time both she, and her
brother John, did seriously exhort their Mother to confession, and with tears
did Annabil put her in mind of the many Meetings she had with the Devil in her
own house, and that a summers day would not be sufficient to relate what
passages she had seen between the Devil and her. But nothing could prevail with
her obdured and hardened heart.

It is to be noted, the dumb Girl, whose name was J^nnet Douglas does now
speak, nor very distinctly, yet so as she may be understood, and is a Person
that most wonderfully discovers thines past, and does also understand the
Latin Tongue which she never learned.

RELATION. II. Being a Wonderful Discovery of Murder by an Apparition.
ABout the year of our Lord 1632. near unto Chester in the Street, there lived
one Walker, a yeoman of good estate, and a Widower, who had a young woman
called Anna Walker to his kinswoman, that kept his house, who was by the
Neighbors suspected ^o be with child, and to as toward the dark of the
evening one night sent away with one Mark Sharp, who was a Collier, or one that
diged Coals under ground, and one who had been born in Blak-burne-Hundred in
Lancashire, and so she was not heard of, for a long time, and no noise, or
little was made about her. In the Winter time, one James Graham, being a
Miller, and living about two miles from the place, where Walker lived, was one
night alone very late in the Mill grinding Corn. And as about twelve, or one a
clock at night he came down the stairs, from having been putting Corn in the
Hopper, the Mill-doors being shut, there stood a Woman upon the midst of the
Floor with her hair about her head hanging down, and all bloody, with 5. large
wounds on her head. He being much affrighted and amazed, began to bless
himself, and at last asked her, who she was, and what she wanted? To whom she
answered, I am the Spirit of such a Woman, who lived with Walker, and being got
with child by him, he promised to send me to a private place, where I should be
well looked to, until I was brought to bed, and well recovered, and then I
should come home again, and keep his house. And accordingly said the
Apparition, I was one night late sent away with one Mark Sharp, who upon a Moor
(naming a place which the Miller knew) slew me with a Pick (such as men dig
Coals withal) and gave me these five wounds, and after threw my body into a
Coal pit hard by, and hid the Pick under a bank: and his shoes, and stockings
being bloody he endeavored to wash: but seeing the blood would not wash forth,
he hid them there. And the Apparation further told the Miller, that he must be
the man to reveal it, or else that she must still appear and haunt him. The
Miller returned home, very sad and heavy, and spoke not one word of what he had
seen, but eshewed as much as he could to stay in the Mill after night without
company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing again of that frightful
Apparition.

But notwithstanding, one night when it began to be dark, the Apparition met
him again, and seemed very Fierce and Cruel, and threatened him, ( that if he
did not reveal the Murder she would continually pursue and haunt him. Yet for
all this, he still concealed it, until some few nights before Christmas, when
being soon after Sunset walking in his Garden, she appeared again, and then so
threatened him, and affrighted him, that he faithfully promised to reveal it the
next morning.

In the morning he went to a Magistrate, and made the whole matter known, with
all the circumstances. And diligent search being made the body was found in a
Coal pit, with five wounds in the head, and the pick and shoes and stockings
yet bloody, in every circumstance, as the Apparition had related to the Miller.
Whereupon Walker and Sharp were both apprehended, but would confess nothing. At
the Assize following, ( viz. at Durham) they were arraigned found guilty,
condemned, and executed, but would never confess the fact. There are many
persons yet alive that can remember this strange murder, and the discovery of
it: for it was, and sometimes yet is, as much discoursed of in the North of
England as any thing, that almost has ever been heard of, and the Relation was
printed, though now not to be gotten.

RELATION. III. Touching the Witchcraft of Agnes Sympson.
THough this be of two old a date, to comply with the title of our Stories, yet
being a true copy of Record so Authentic, though not so fresh, it may happily
not be amiss briefly to name some effects, kinds, and circumstances of her
Sorcery; as her skill in Diseases, that the sickness of William Black was an
Elf-shot. Her taking the sick Parties pains and sicknesses upon her self for a
time, and then translating them to a third Person. Her use of long Scriptural
Prayers and Rhyms, containing the main points of Christianity, so that she may
seem to have been not so much a white Witch, as an holy Woman: Her useing of
such Nonsensical Rhyms, for the instructing of ignorant people and teaching
them to pray, as these two prayers, the Black and White Pater Noster in Meeter,
in set Forms to be used Morning and Evening, and at other times, when occasion
offered.

White Pater Noster,
God was my Foster.
He fostered me
Under the Book of Palm Tree.
Saint Michael was my Dame,
He was born at Bethelem.
He was made of flesh and blood,
God send me my right food:
My right food, and dyne two,
That I may to you Kirk go.
To read upon you sweet Book,
Which the Mighty God of Heaven shoop,
Open, open, Heavens Yaits,
Steik, steik, Hells Yaits.
All Saints be the better,
That hear the White Prayer, Pater Noster.
The Black Pater Noster runs thus.

Four newks in this house, for haly Angels,
A post in the midst, that is Christ Jesus,
Lucas, Marcus, Matthew, Joannes,
God be into this house, and all that bel^ngs us
But when she sought for an answer from the Devil upon any occasion, he
appeared to her in the shape of a Dog, but the way of dismissing, and Conjuring
him to go was thus, I charge thee to depart on the law thou lives on, as she
did, when she dismissed him, after her consulting him about the old Lady
Edmistons sickness. But the manner how she raised the Devil, was with these
words, Elva come and speak to me; who came in the lickness of a Dog. Her
sailing with her Cummers, and fellow withes in a Boat to a ship, is very
remarkable, where the Devil caused her and them to drink good Wine and bear
without money, she neither seeing the Mariners, nor the Mariners her. And after
all, the Devil raised a wind, whereby the ship perished. Her Baptizing, and
using other Ceremonies upon a Cat, with other Witches, to hinder Queen Ann,
from coming into Scotland. Her raising of a Spirit to conjure a Picture of wax
for destroying of Mr. John Moscrope.

But to be more particular, I shall give you her own confession to King James.
Item fyled and convict of sameckle, that the Devil in man's lickness met her
going out to the fields from her own house at Keith, betwixt five and six at
even, being alone, and commanded her to be at North-berwick Kirk the next
night. To which place she came on horseback, conveyed by her Good-son, called
John Couper, and lighted at the Kirk-yeard, or a little before she came to it,
about eleven hours at even. They danced along the Kirk-yeard, Geilie Duncan
playing on a Trump, and John Feign mussiled led the Ring. The said Agnes and her
daughter followed next. Besides, there were Kate Gray George Moilis his wife,
Robert Grierson Katharin Duncan, Bessie Wright, Isabel Gilmore, John Graymail,
Duncan Buchanan, Thomas Barnhil and his wife, Gilbert Mackgill, John Mackgill,
Katharine Mackgill with the rest of their Cummers above an hundred Persons,
whereof there were six men, and all the rest women. The women made first their
courtesy to their Master, and then the men. The men turned nine times
Widder-shines about, and the Women six times. John Feign blew up the Kirk doors,
and blew in the lights, which were like Mickl black candles sticking round about
the Pulpit.

The Devil started up himself in the Pulpit like a mickle black man, and
calling the Row, every one answered Here, Mr. Robert Grierson being named, they
all ran hirdie girdie, and were angry: for it was promised he should be called
Robert the Comptroller, alias Rob the Rower, for expriming of his name.

The first thing he demanded was, if they kept all promise, and had been good
servants, and what they had done since the last time, they had conveened. At
his command they opened up three Graves, two within, and one without the Kirk,
and cutted off from the dead Corpse, the Ioints of their Fingers, Toes, and
Niese, and parted them amongst them, and the said Agnes Sympson got for her
Part, a Winding Sheet, and two Ioints. The Devil commanded them to keep the
Joints upon them while they were dry, and then to make a powder of them, to do
evil withal. Then he commanded them to keep his commandments, which were to
do all the evil and mischief they could. Before they departed, and were
dismissed, they behoved to kiss his Arse, with reverence to the Reader. He had on
him, an Gown, and an Coat, which were both black* And they that were assembled,
part stood, and part sat. John Feign was ever nearest the Devil at his left
Elbock, Graymail kept the Door.

That which is observable in John Fien is, that the Devil* appeared to him not
in black, but in white raiment, but proposed as Hellish a Covenant to him as
those Fiends that appear in black. His Skimming on the sea in a boat, is
remarkable, with those of his accomplices, and his foretelling the leak in the
Queens Ship by the help of the Devil. His raising Winds with the rest, when the
King sailed into Denmark, by casting a Cat into the sea, which the Devil
delivered to them, and taught them to cry Hola, when they first cast it in. His
raising a Mist, at the Kings return from Denmark, by getting Satan to cast a
thing like a Footbal, (it appearing to John like a Wisp) into the sea, which
made a Reek to arise, whereby the Kings Majesty might be cast upon the coast
of England. His opening of locks by Sorcery as one by mere blowing into a
Woman's hand, while he sat by the fire. His embarquing in a boat with other
Witches, and all of them sailing over sea, and entering within a Ship, and
drinking Good Wine and Ale there, and sinking the Ship, when they had done,
with the Persons in it. His kissing Satan's Arse, (with reverence) again at
another Conventicle. His being swiftly carried above in the Air in chasing of a
Cat to catch her, to cast into the sea, thereby to raise winds, according to
the prescription of Satan. His pretending to tell any man how long he should
live, if he told him but the day of his birth.

RELATION IV. A Proclamation over the Market Cross of Edinburgh, at twelve a
clock at night.
AFter that King James the fourth, had mustered his Army in the Borrow-Moor,
being at that time a large spacious Field, and most Pleasant and Delightful, by
reason of many staitly Oaks, which overshadowed the place; about midnight, in
the Month of July, there is a Proclamation heard at the Market Cross of the
Town, Summoning a great many Burgesses, Gentlemen, Barons, Noblemen, to appear
before the Tribunal of one Plot-Cock. The Provost of the Town standing in his
own Fore-stair, or Gallery, having heard his own name cited, cried out, That he
declined that Judicatory, and appealed to the Mercy of GOD Almighty. This was
the Army which the King led into England, and were defeat at Floudon, on that
Fatal day, Tuesday the 9th. of September, 1513. where the King, with near about
five thousand of the Noblest and Worthiest Families of the Kingdom did fall.

RELATION V. A Miraculous Cure of a Dutch-W^man, accompanied with an Apparition.
THE Narrative taken by a Dutch-Merchant from her own mouth, Begins thus, A
Miraculous Cure upon Jesch Claes, a Woman about fifty years of Age, for these
many years, well known to my self and the Neighbors. This Woman for fourteen
years had been lame of both her legs, one of them being dead and without
feeling, so that she could not go, but creep upon the ground, or was carried in
peoples arms as a child, but now through the power of GOD Almighty, she has
walked again, which came to pass after this manner, as I have written it from
her own mouth.

In the year 1676 about the 13. or 14. of this Month October, in the night
between one and two of the clock, Je^^h Claes being in bed with her husband,
who was a Boatman, she was three times pulled by the arm, with which she
awaked, and cried out, O Lord! What may this be? Hereupon she heard an answer
in plain words: Be not afraid, I am come in the name of GOD, to tell you, that
your Malady which has been for many years upon you shall depart, and it shall
be given you from GOD Almighty, to walk again. But keep this to your self till
further answer. Whereupon she cried aloud, O Lord! That I had a light, that I
might know what this is. Then had she this answer, there needs no light, light
shall be given you from God* Then came a light over all the Room, and she saw a
beautiful youth about ten years of age with curled yellow Hair in White Raiment
to the feet, who went from the beds head to the Chimney with a light, which a
little after evanished. Hereupon did something gush from her hip, or diffuse it
self through her leg as a water to her great Toe, where she found life rising
up, and feeling it with her hand, she cries out, Lord give me now again my
feeling, which I have not had for so many years. And further she continued
Crying and Praying to the Lord according to her weak measure.

Yet she continued that day, being Wednesday, and the next day Thursday, as
before till evening at six a clock. At which time she sat at the fire, dressing
the food. Then there came as like a rushing noise in both her ears, with which
it was said to her, Stand, your walking is given you again. Then did she
immediately stand up, that had for so many years crept, and went to the door.
Her Husband meeting her, was exceedingly afraid, drew back. In the mean while,
she cried out, My dear husband, I can walk again. The man thinking it was a
Spirit, drew back saying, you are not my Wife: But his Wife taking hold of him,
said, my dear Husband, I am the self same that has been married these 30 years
to you. The Almighty God has made me to walk again. But her husband being
amazed, drew back to the side of the Room, till at last she clapped her arms
about his neck, and yet he doubted, and said to his Daughter, is this your
Mother? She answered, yes Father, this is my Mother indeed, I have seen her
walk also, before you came in. This Person dwells upon Princes Island in
Amsterdam. This Relation, is Attested by many famous witnesses.

RELATION VI. Strange Pranks played by the Devil at Wood-Stock in England, Anno
1649.
THe Commissioners, October 13. 1649. with their Servants being come to the
Mannor-house, they took up their lodging in the Kings own Rooms; the
Bedchamber, and withdrawing-Room: the former whereof, they also make their
Kitching, the Council-Hall their Brewhouse: the Chamber of Presence, their
place of sitting to dispatch business, and a Wood-house of the Dining Room,
where they laid the wood of that ancient Standard in the High-Park, known of
all, by the name of the Kings Oak, which (that nothing might remain that had
the name of King affixed to it) they dug up by the Roots. October 14 and 15
they had little disturbance: but on the 16 there came as they thought somewhat
into the BedChamber, where two of the Commissioners, and their Servants lay, in
the shape of a Dog which going under their beds, did as it were, gnaw their
Bed-cords: But on the morrow finding them whole, and a quarter of Beef, which
lay on the ground untouched, they began to entertain other thoughts. October
17- Something to their thinking removed all the Wood of the Kings Oak out of
the Dining Room into the Presence Chamber, and hurled the Chairs and Stools up
and down that Room. From whence it came into the two Chambers, where the
Commissioners, and their Servants lay, and hoyested up their Beds-feet so much
higher than their heads, that they thought they should have been turned over
and over: and then let them fall down with such a force, that their bodies
rebounded from the Bed a good distance, and then shook the Bedsteads so
violently, that themselves confessed their Bodies were sore with it.

October 18. Something came into the Bedchamber, and walked up and down, and
fetching the Warming-pan out of the Withdrawing-Room, made so much noise that
they thought five Bells could not have made more.

And October 19. Trenchers were thrown up and down the Dining Room and at them
who lodged there* whereof one of them being wakned, put forth his head to see
what was the matter, but had Trenchers thrown at it.

October 20. The Curtains of the Bed in the Withdrawing-Room, were drawn to and
fro, and the Bedstead much shaken, and eight great Pewther-Dishes, and three
dozen of Trenchers thrown about the Bedchamber again. This night they also
thought whole armsful of the Wood of the Kings Oak, were thrown down in their
Chambers, but of that in the morning they found nothing had been moved.

October 21. The Keeper of their Ordinary, and his Bitch, lay in one of the
Rooms with them, which night they were not disturbed at all. But October 22.
though the Bitch kenneld there again, to whom they ascribed their former nights
rest, both they and the Bitch were in a pitiful taking, the Bitch opening but
once, and that with a whining fearful yelp. October 23. They had all their
clothes plucked off them in the Withdrawing-Room, and the Bricks fell out of the
Chimney into the Room. And on the 24. They thought in the Dining Room that all
the Wood of the Kings Oak had been brought thither, and thrown down closs by
their Bedside; which being heard by those of the Withdrawing-Room, one of them
rose to see what was done, fearing indeed that his Fellow Commissioners had
been killed, but found no such matter: whereupon returning to his Bed again, he
found two or three dozen of Trenchers thrown into it, and handsomely covered
with the Bed-cloaths.

October 25. The Curtains of the Bed, in the withdrawing-Room, were drawn to
and fro, and the Bed-stead shaken as before, and in the Bedchamber, Glass flew
about so thick (and yet not one lozen of the Chamber windows broken) that they
thought it had rained money. Whereupon they lighted Candles, but to their grief
they found nothing but glass.

October 29. Something going to the window opened and shut it: then going into
the Bedchamber, it threw great stones, for half an hours time, some whereof
lighted on the High-bed, others on the Truckle-bed, to the number in all of
above fourscore. This night there was also a very great noise, as if forty
Piece of Ordinance had been shot off together. At two several knocks it
astonished all the Neighboring Dwellers which is thought might have been heard
a great way off. During these Noises which were heard in both Rooms together,
both Commissioners and their Servants were struck with so great horror, that
they cried out to one another for help: whereof one of them recovering himself
out of a strange Agony he had been in, snatched a Sword, and had like to have
killed one of his Brethren coming out of his Bed in his Shirt, whom he took for
the Spirit that did the mischief. However at length they got all together, yet
the Noise continued so great and terrible, and shook the Walls so much, that
they thought the whole Manor would have fallen on their Heads. At its
departure, it took all the Glass of the Windows away with it.

November first, Something as they thought walked up and down the
Withdrawing-room, and then made a noise in the Dining Room. The stones, which
were left before, and laid up in the Withdrawing-Room, were all fetched away
this night, and a great deal of Glass (not like the former) thrown about again.
November the second. There came something into the withdrawing-Room treading as
they conceived much like a Bear, which first only walked about a quarter of an
hour: at length it made a noise about the Table, and threw the Warming-pan so
violently, that it quite spoiled it. It threw also a Glass and great Stones at
them again; and the bones of Horses, and all so violently, that the Bed-stead
and the Walls were bruised by them. This night they planted Candles all about
the Rooms, and made fires up to the Rantle-trees of the Chimneys, but all were
put out, no Body knew how, the Fire and Burn-wood, which made it, being thrown
up and down the Rooms, the Curtains torn with the Rods from their Beds, and the
Bed-posts pulled away, that the Tester fell down upon them, and the feet of the
Bed-stead cloven into two. And upon the Servants in the Truckle-Bed, who lay
all the time sweating for fear; there was first a little, which made them begin
to stir, but before they could get out, there came a whole Tub full, as it were
of stinking Ditch-water down upon them, so green, that it made their Shirts and
Sheets of that color too.

The same night the Windows were all broke by throwing of Stones, and there was
most terrible noises in three several places together, to the extraordinary
wonder of all that lodged near them. Nay the very Rabbet Stealers, who were
abroad that night, were so afrighted with the dismal Thundering, that for haste
they left their Ferrets in the holes, behind them, beyond Rosamonds Well.
Notwithstanding all this, one of them had the boldness to ask, in the Name of
GOD, what it was, what it would have, and what they had done, that they should
be disturbed after this manner? To which no answer was given, but it ceased for
a while. At length it came again, and as all of them said, brought seven Devils
worse than it self. Whereupon one of them lighted a Candle again, and set it
between the two Chambers in the Doorway, on which another fixing his eyes, saw
the similitude of a Hoof, stricking the Candle, and Candlestick into the middle
of the Bedchamber, and afterward making three scraps on the snuff to put it
out. Upon this, the same person was so bold, as to draw his Sword, but he had
scarce got it out, but there was another Invisible-hand, had hold of it too,
and tugged with him for it, and prevailing, struck him so violently, that he
was stunned with the blow.

Then began violent Noises again, insomuch that they calling to one another,
got together, and went into the Presence Chamber, where they said Prayers, and
sang Psalms, notwithstanding all which, the Thundering noise still continued in
other Rooms. After this, November 3d. they removed their Lodgings over the
gate; and next day being Sunday, went to Ewelm, where, how they escaped, the
Authors of the Relation knew not. But returning on Monday, the Devil (for that
was the name they gave their nightly Guest) left them not unvisited, nor on the
Tuesday* following, which was the last day they stayed.

RELATION VII. An Apparition to King James the fourth, and his Courtiers, in
the Kirk of Lithgow.
WHile the King stayed at Lithgow, attending the gathering of his Army, which
was defeat at Flowdon, being full of Cares and Perplexity, he went into the
Church of Saint Michael, to hear Evening-Song, as then it was called. While he
was at his Devotion, an Ancient Man came in, his Amber colored Hair hanging
down upon his Shoulders, his forehead high, and inclining to Baldness, his
Garments of Azure color, somewhat long, girded about with a Towel, or
Table-Napkin, of a Comely and very Reverend Aspect. Having enquired for the
King, he intruded himself into the Prease, passing through, till he came to
him, with a clounish simplicity, leaning over the Canons-seat, where the King
sat. Sir, said he, I am sent hither to entreat you, to delay your Expedition
for this time, and to proceed no further in your intended Journey: for if you
do, you shall not prosper in your Enterprise, nor any of your Followers. I am
further charged to warn you, not to use the Acquaintance, Company, or Counsel
of Women, as you tender your Honor, Life, and Estate. After this Warning, he
withdrew himself back again into the Prease. When Service was ended, the King
enquired earnestly for him, but he could be no where found, neither could any
of the Bystanders (of whom diverse did narrowly observe him, resolving
afterward to have discoursed with him) feel or perceive how, when, or where he
passed from them, having in a manner vanished in their hands.

RELATION. VIII. Anent the Major who returned from Death, to tell the Captain,
whether there was a GOD or not.
COncerning the Apparition of the Ghost of Major George Sydenham (late of
Dulverton in the County of Somerset) to Captain William Dyke (late of Skilgate
in this County also, and now likewise deceased:) Be pleased to take the
Relation of it, from a Worthy and Learned Gentleman, Doctor Thomas Dyke, a near
Kinsmans of the Captains thus. Shortly after the Majors death, the Doctor was
desired to come to the house to take care of a Child, that was sick there, and
in his way thither he called on the Captain, who was very willing to wait on
him to the Place; because he must, as he said, have gone thither that night,
though he had not met with so encouraging an Opportunity. After their arrival
there at the house, and the Civility of the People shown them in that
Entertainment; they were seasonably conducted to their Lodging, which they
desired might be together in the same bed; where after they had lain a while,
the Captain knocked, and bids the Servant bring him two of the largest and
bigest Candles lighted, which he could get: Whereupon the Doctor enquires what
he meant by this? The Captain answers, You know Cusin, what Disputs my Major
and I have had touching the Being of GOD, and the Immortality of the Soul. In
which points, we could never yet be resolved, though we so much sought for and
desired it. And therefore it was at length fully agreed between us, that he of
us who dyed first, should the third night after his Funeral, between the hours
of twelve and one, come to the little House which is here in the Garden, and
there give a full account to the Surviver, touching these matters, who should
be sure to be present there at the set time, and so receive a full
satisfaction. And this says the Captain, is the very night, and I am come on
purpose to fulfill my promise. The Doctor dissuaded him, minding him of the
danger of following strange Counsels, for which he could have no warrant, and
that the Devil might by some cunning device make such an advantage of this rash
attempt, as might work his utter ruin. The Captain replies, that he had
solemnly engaged, and that nothing should discourage him. And adds, that if the
Doctor would wake a while with him, he would thank him, if not, he might
compose himself to rest: but for his own part he was resolved to watch, that he
might be sure to be present at the hour appointed. To that purpose, he sets his
Watch by him, and as soon as he perceived by it, that it was half an hour past
11, he rises, and taking a Candle in each hand goes out by a back door, of
which he had before gotten the key, and walks into the Garden-House, where he
continued two hours and an half, and at his return declared, that he neither
saw nor heard any thing more than what was usual. But I know said he, that my
Major would surely have come, had he been able.

About six weeks after, the Captain rides to Eaton to place his Son a Scholar
there, when the Doctor went thither with him. They lodged there at an Inn, the
Sign whereof was the Christopher, and tarried two or three nights, not lying
together now as before at Dulverton, but in two several Chambers. The morning
before they went thence, the Captain stayed in his Chamber longer than he was
wont to do, before he called upon the Doctor. At length he comes into the
Doctors Chamber, but in a Visage and Form much differing from himself, with his
Hair and Eyes staring* and his whole Body shaking and trembling. Whereat the
Doctor wondering, presently demanded, what is the matter, Cousin Captain? The
Captain replies, I have seen my Major. At which the Doctor seeming to smile,
the Captain confirms it, saying, if ever I saw him in my life; I saw him but
now. And then he related to the Doctor what had passed thus. This morning after
it was light, some one comes to my Bedside, and suddenly drawing back the
Curtains, calls Captain, Captain, (which was the term of Familiarity that the
Major used to call the Captain by) to whom I replied, what my Major? To which
he returns, I could not come at the time appointed, but I am now come to tell
you That there is a GOD and a very just and terrible one, and if you do not
turn over a new leaf (the very expression, as by the Doctor punctually
remembered) you shall find it so. The Captain proceeded. On the Table by, there
lay a Sword, which the Major had for^erly given me. Now after the Apparition
had walked a turn or two about the Chamber, he took up the Sword, drew it, and
finding it not so clean and bright as it ought, Captain, Captain, says he, this
Sword did not use to be kept after this manner, when it was mine. After which
words he presently disappeared.

The Captain was not only thoroughly persuaded of what he had thus seen and
heard, but was from that time observed to be very much* affected with it. And
the Humor, which before in him was brisk and jovial, was then strangely
altered. Insomuch as very little meat would pass down with him at Dinner,
though at the taking leave of their Friends, there was a very handsome Treat
provided. Yea, it was observed, that what the Captain had thus seen and heard,
had a more lasting influence on him, and it was judged by those who were well
acquainted with his Conversation, that the Remembrance of the passage stuck
closs to him, and that those words of his dead Friend were frequently sounding
fresh in his ears, during the remainder of his life, which was about two years.

RELATION. IX. A Remarkable Story of discovered Witchcraft at Lauder, anno
1649. and of the Wyls which the Devil used in deceiving poor Creatures.
IN the beginning of the year 1649, a common report passing up and down in all
Men's and Women's mouths, of an eminent Warlock whose name was Robert Grieve,
alias Hob Grieve, traffecking in these parts of the Country, and deceiving many
simple People, he was at last discovered, apprehended, and imprisoned, at the
Town of Lauder, and after long shiftings, and denial, wherein he had learned of
his Hellish-master, to be most subtle; by the great Goodness of GOD, he was at
length brought to a serious acknowledgement of his Guilt, and Confession of his
being the Devils Officer in that Country for warning all Satan's Vassals to come
to the Meetings, where, and whenever the Devil required, for the space of
eighteen years and more. He acknowledged also, That his Wife (who twenty years,
or thereabout before, was burnt at Lauder) was the occasion of his coming into
that snare: for they being poor, and having little or nothing to live upon, he
began to grudge under that Condition, and to complain of his Lot; which his
Wife perceiving, desired him not to be troubled, but showed him, that if he
would follow her counsel, she should acquaint him with a Gentleman, who would
teach him a way how to become rich. To which motion he hearkened, and at her
desire went down with her to a haugh on Gallow-water, near to the Stow, where
she trysted the Gentleman: and when they had come to that place, and tarried a
considerable space, seeing no body, he began to weary, and tell her, that he
would be gone; but she pressing him to stay, and assuring him, that the
Gentleman would not fail her: At length there came a great Mastiff bigger than
any Butchers Dog, and very black running upon him, which put him into such a
Confusion, and Astonishment of Spirit, as that he knew not where he was: But
his wife labored to comfort him, under that consternation, assuring him, that
the Gentleman would come presently and perform what he had promised to him.

And accordingly in a short space the Devil apeared in the shape of a
Black-man, and fitting his discourse to the man's tentation, made many promises
to him, that if he would become his servant, he would teach him ways, how to
be rich, and how to be much made of in all the Country. Unto which demand of
the Devil, he acknowledged, that he consented to, not so much for any hopes of
future riches, as for fear least he should instantly be devoured by him, (for
he suspected in the very mean time, that it was the Devil,) and then he gave
him that charge, to be his Officer to warn all to the meetings; (as was said
before,) in which charge he continued for the space of eighteen years and more,
until he was apprehended. He was most ingenuous in his Confession, an great
Evidence whereof was this, That there was neither Man nor Woman delated by him,
But were all Confessors, when apprehended; and confronted with him, and dyed
confessing. One instance is remarkable, and worthy of observation, which is
this. After he had delated many, and as many of those were apprehended, as the
Prison could conveniently contain and the Keepers attend, he gave up another
Woman in the town of Lauder, whose name the Magistrates resolved to conceal for
a time, till the Prison should be emptied of some of those, who were already
apprehended, and had confessed; and accordingly Secrecy was engaged unto. But
the Devil, came that same night unto her, and told her, that Hob Grieve had
fyled her for a Witch, but assured her, that if she would rise up and go and
challenge him for it, and never come away, till he and she were confronted,
that then he would deny it. Whereupon she arose and came to the Prison Window,
and railled upon Hob Grieve, calling him Warlock and slave to the Devil, and
all evils which her mouth could utter: and when desired to go home by the
Centries, and also by the Magistrate, she sat down upon the Tolbuith-Stair, and
said she should never go to her house, till she and that slave to the Devil
were confronted, Whereupon the Baillie came to the Preacher desiring him to
come and speak to her, to desire her to go home to her house, for there were
none accusing her, who accordingly came, and entreated her to go home: but she
obstinately refusing to go, till she should be confronted with that Rascal, who
had delated her an honest Woman, for a Witch. The Baillie was constrained to
her desire. Whereupon many being present as witnesses, she was conveyed up to
the Prison to the Room, where Hob Grieve was. And so soon, as she came in his
sight, she fell down upon her bare knees, and began to scold the man, and to
accuse him of a lie, in speaking of her name. Says she, thou common Thief, how
dar thou for thy soul say, that ever before this time, thou saw me or I saw
thee, or ever was in thy company, either alone, or with others. All which
language he heard very patiently till he was desired by the Baillie to speak.
Whereupon he asked her, how she came to know, that he had delated her for a
Witch. For says he, surely none but the Devil, thy old Master, and mine has
told thee so much. She replied, The Devil and thou perish together, for he is
not my Master, though he be thine. I defy the Devil, and all his works.
Whereupon he says to her, What needs all this din, Does thou not know, that
these many years, I have come to thy house, and warned thee to Meetings, and
thou and I have gone alongs together. And thereafter he condescended to her
upon several places, and Actions done in these places by her, and others, to
all which I am (said he) a witness. By this she was so confounded, that
immediately in presence of the Bailly, the Preacher, the Schoolmaster, and
many witnesses, she cried out, Oh now, says she, I perceive that the Devil is
a liar, and a murderer from the beginning: for this night he came to me, and
bade me come and abuse thee, and never come away, till I was confronted with
thee, and he assured me that thou would deny all, and say, thou false tongue
thou lied. And having said this, she with many tears confessed, that it was all
truth which he had said, and prayed the Minister, that he would entreat GOD for
her poor Soul, that she might be delivered out of the hands of the Devil. Under
this confession she continued even unto the day of her death.

Another evidence of ingenuity in him was this, that after five or six men and
women, whom he had delated, were also convinced, and had confessed their
Witchcraft, he earnestly desired, that he and they might be taken to the
Church, on the Lord's Day, to hear the Word of GOD; which being granted, and
they conveyed with a Guard to the Church, all of them sat down together before
the Pulpit. The Preacher lectured on these words, Mark 9.22. And often times it
has cast him into the fire, and into the water to destroy him, etc. The Father
of the Lunatick-child complained to Christ of the Devils cruelty toward his
son. And the Preacher briefly noted, that Observation from the words, That what
ever the Devil did to such as he had gotten any power over, his aim and end was
always to destroy the poor Creature both Soul and Body. This truth being
seriously applied, and spoken home by the Preacher to the said Hob Grieve, and
the rest of the confessing Witches, and Warlocks, they were all immediately so
confounded, that all of them cried out with a dreadful and lamentable noise, A
lace! that is a most sure truth; Oh, what will become of us poor Wretches? Oh,
pray for us. But Hob Grieve especially bare witness to that sad truth, by a
general Declaration, in the face of the Congregation, that he had Experience of
the truth thereof. For, said he, there is no trusting to his promises; for in
Musselburgh water, when I had a heavy Criel upon my back, he thought to have
drowned me there; and since I came into prison, he did cast me into the fire,
to destroy me, as is well known to the present Preacher, and Magistrates of the
place, and many others; And concluded with an Exhortation to all, to beware of
the Devil; For whatever he says or does, his purpose is to destroy you, and
that you will find to be the end of his work, as we know to our doleful
experience this day. Another evidence of the Devils art in studying the
destruction of the poor Creature, was manifest in that same place, and year
1649. A certain Woman in the town of Lauder was fyled (not by Hob Grieve, but
by some other) and for a long time denied. The Magistrates of the place for
this cause, were loath to meddle with her, but adjudged to death all the rest,
who had confessed; and ordained them to be burnt upon the Monday after: She
hearing of this, and that she alone was to remain in prison, without hopes of
escape, was prompted by the Devil to make up a confession in her own bosom, as
she supposed might take away her life, and thereupon sent for the Minister, and
made that confession of Witchcraft which she her self had patcht up before
Witnesses; and in the close she earnestly entreated the Magistrates, and the
Ministers, that she might be burnt with the rest upon Monday next. Her
confession was, That she had covenanted with the Devil, and had become his
servant, about twenty years before, when she was but a young Lass, and that he
kissed her, and gave her a name, but since, he had never owned her, and that
she knew no more of the works of the Devil, as she should answer to GOD, but
what she said was true. But intelligent Persons began to be jealous of the
truth of that confession, and began to suspect, that out of the pride of her
heart, in a desperate way, she had made up that confession to destroy her life,
because she still pressed to be cut off with the rest upon Monday. Therefore
much pains was taken on her by Ministers, and others, on Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday morning, that she might resile from that confession, which was suspected
to be but a Tentation of the Devil, to destroy both her soul and body, yea it
was charged home upon her by the Ministers, that there was just ground of
Jealousy, that her confession was not sincere, and she charged before the Lord
to declare the truth, and not to take her blood upon her own head. Yet stiffly
she adhered to what she had said and cried always to be put away with the rest.
Whereupon on Monday morning being called before the Judges, and confessing
before them, what she formerly said, she was found guilty, and condemned to die
with the rest that same day. But being carried forth to the place of Execution,
she remained silent, during the first, second and third Prayer, and then
perceiving that there remained no more, but to rise, and go to the Stake, she
lift up her body, and with a loud voice cried out. Now all you that see me this
day, know that I am now to die as a Witch by my own confession, and I free all
men, especially the Ministers and Magistrates of the guilt of my blood. I take
it wholly upon my self: my blood be upon my own head. And as I must make answer
to the GOD of Heaven presently, I declare I am as free of Witchcraft, as any
child: but being delated by a malicious Woman, and put in Prison, under that
name of a Witch, disowned by my husband and friends, and seeing no ground of
hope of my coming out of Prison, nor ever coming in credit again, through the
temptation of the Devil I made up that confession, on purpose to destroy my own
life, being weary of it, and chosing rather to die than live, and so died.
Which lamentable story, as it did then astonish all the Spectators, none of
which could restrain themselves from tears, so it may be to all a demonstration
of Satan's subtility, whose design is still to destroy all, partly by tempting
many to presumption, and some others to despair. These things to be of truth,
are Attested by an Eye and Ear witness who is yet alive, a faithful Minister of
the Gospel.

RELATION. X. A True Narrative of the Drummer of Ted-Worth.
In the year 1661, about the middle of March a Gentleman named Mr. Mompesson,
in the County of Wilts, being at a Neighboring town called Ludgarshal and
hearing a Drum beat there, he enquired of the Bailly of the town, at whose
house he then was, what it meant. The Bailly told him, that they had been for
some days troubled with an idle Drummer, who demanded money of the Constable,
by virtue of a pretended Pass which he thought was counterfeit; Upon this Mr.
Mompesson sent for the Fellow, and asked him by what authority he went up and
down the Country in that manner with his Drum. The Drummer answered, he had
good Authority, and produced his Pass with a Warrant under the hands of Sir
William Cawly and Colonel Ayliff of Gretenham. Mr. Mompesson knowing these
Gentlemen's hands, discovered that the Pass and Warrant were counterfeit, and
thereupon commanded the Vagrant to put off his Drum, and charged the Constable
to carry him before the next Justice of the Peace, to be further examined, and
punished. The Fellow confessed the Cheat, and begged earnestly to have his Drum.
Mr. Mompesson told him, that if he understood from Colonel Ayliff, whose
Drummer he said he was, that he had been an honest man: he should have it
again, but in the mean time he would secure it. So he left the Drum with the
Baillie, and the Drummer in the Constables hands who it seems was prevailed on
by the Fellows entreaties to let him go.

About the midst of April following when Mr. Mompesson was preparing for a
Journey to London, the Bailly sent the Drum to his House. When he was returned
from that Journey, his Wife told him that they had been much afrighted in the
Night by Thieves and that the House had been like to have been broken up. And
he had not been at home above three nights, when the same noise was heard, that
had disturbed his Family in his absence. It was a very great Din and knocking
at his Doors, and the outsides of his House. Hereupon he got up and went about
the House with a Brace of Pistols in his hands. He opened the Door where the
great knocking was, and then he heard the noise at another Door. He opened that
also, and went out round his house, but could discover nothing, only he still
heard a strange noise, as a thumping and Drumming on the Top of his House,
which continued a great space, and then by degrees went off into the Air.

After this the noise of Thumping and Drumming was very frequent, usually five
nights together, and then it would intermit three. It was on the outsides of
the house, which is most of it, of Board. It came constantly as they were going
to sleep, whither early or late. After a months disturbance without, it came
into the Room where the Drum lay, four or five nights in seven, within half an
hour after they were in bed, continuing almost two hours. The sign of it just
before it came was, they still heard an hurling in the Air over the house, and
at its going off, the beating of a Drum, like that at the breaking up of a
Guard. It contitinued in this room for the space of two months, which time Mr.
Mompesson lay there to observe it. In the fore part of the night, it used to be
very troublesome, but after two hours all would be quiet.

Mistress Mompesson being brought to bed, there was but little noise that night
she was in Travail, nor any for three weeks after, till she had recovered
strength. But after this civil Cessation, it returned in a rudder manner than
before, and followed and vexed the Youngest Children, beating their bedsteads
with that violence, that all present expected when they would fall in pieces.
In laying hands on them, one should feel no blows, but might perceive them to
shake exceedingly. For an hour together it would heat on the Drum, Roundheads,
and Cuckolds, and Tat-too, and several other points of War, as well as any
Drummer could. After this they would hear a scraping under the Childrens bed,
as by something that had Iron tallons. It would lift the Children up in their
beds, follow them from one room to another, and for a while haunt none
particularly but them.

There was a Cock-loft in the house, which had not been observed to have been
troubled, thither they removed the Children, putting them to bed, while it was
fair day, where they were no sooner laid, but their Troubler was with them as
before.

On the first of November 1662* it kept a mighty noise, and a Servant observing
two boards in the Childrens room seeming to move, he bid it give him one of
them; upon which the board came (nothing moving it, that he saw) within a yeard
of him. The man added, nay let me have it in my hand; upon which, it was shoved
quite home to him; he thrust it back, and it was driven to him again, and so up
and down, to and fro, at least twenty times together, till Mr. Mompesson forbad
his Servant such Familiarities. This was in the day time, and seen by a whole
room full of people: That morning it left a Sulphurious smell behind it, which
was very offensive. At night the Minister one Mr. Craig, and diverse of the
Neighbors came to the house on a Visit. The Minister went to Prayer with them,
kneeling at the Childrens Bedside: during Prayer-time, it withdrew into the
Cock-loft, but returned as soon as Prayer was ended, and then in sight of the
Company; the Chairs walked about the Room of themselves; the Childrens shoes
were burled over their head, and every loose thing moved about the Chamber. At
the same time a Bed-staff was thrown at the Minister, which hit him on the
Leg, but so favorably, that a lock of Wool could not have fallen more softly;
and it was observed that it stopped just where it lighted, without rolling or
stirring from the place. Mr. Mompesson perceiving that it so much persecuted
the young Children, he lodged them out at a Neighbors house* taking his eldest
Daughter, who was about ten years of Age, into his own Chamber, where it had
not been a Month before. As soon as she was in bed, the disturbance began
there again, continuing three weeks drumming, and making noises; and it was
observed that it would exactly answer in drumming any thing that was beaten or
called for. After this, the house where the Children were lodged out, happening
to be full of Strangers, they were taken home, and no disturbance having been
known in the Parlour, they were lodged there, where also their Persecutor found
them, but then only plucked them by the Hair, and Night-cloaths, without any
other disturbance.

It was noted, that when the Noise was loudest, and came with the most sudden
and surprising violence, no Dog about the house would move, though the knocking
was often so boisterous and rude, that it had been heard at a considerable
distance in the Fields, and awakened the Neighbors in the Village, none of
which live very near the house. The Servants sometimes were lift up with their
beds, and then let gently down again without hurt, at other times, it would ly
like a great weight upon their feet.

About the latter end of December 1662. the Drummings were less frequent, and
then they heard a noise like the gingling of Money, occasioned as it was
thought, by somewhat Mr. Mompessons mother had spoken the day before to a
neighbor, who talked of Fairies leaving money, viz. that she would like it
well, if it would leave some to make amends for their trouble. The night after
the speaking of which, there was a great gingling of money over all the house.
After this, it desisted from ruder noises, and employed it self in little
Apish, and less troublesome tricks. On Christmass-even a little before day, one
of the Boys arising out of his bed, was hit on a sore place on his heel, with
the latch of the door, the pin that it was fastened with, was so small that it
was a difficult matter to pick it out. The night after Christmsas-day, it threw
the old Gentlewomans clothes about the room, and hid her Bible among the Ashes.
In such silly Tricks it was frequent. After this it was very troublesome to a
servant of Mr. Mompessons, who was a stout Fellow, and of a sober conversation.
This man lay within during the greatest disturbance, and for several nights
something would endeavor to pluck his clothes off the bed, so that he was fain
to tug hard to keep them on, and sometimes were plucked from him by force, and
his shoes thrown at his head. And now and then he should find himself forcibly
held, as if he were bound hand and foot: but when ever he could make use of his
Sword, and struck with it, the Spirit quitted its hold. A little after these
contests, a son of Sir Thomas Bennet whose workman the Drummer had sometimes
been, came to the house, and told Mr. Mompesson some words that he had spoken,
which it seems were not well taken. For as soon as they were in bed, the drum
was beat up very violently and loudly; the Gentleman arose, and called his man
to him, who lay with Mr. Mompessons servant, just now spoken of, whose name was
John. As soon as Mr. Bennets man was gone, John heard a rusling noise in his
chamber, and something came to his bedside, as if it had been one in Silk. The
man presently reaches after his sword, which he found held from him, and it
was with difficulty, and much tugging that he got it into his power: which as
soon as he had done, the Spirit left him; and it was always observed, that it
still avoided a Sword, About the beginning of January 1662. they were wont to
hear a Singing in the Chimney, before it came down. And one night about this
time, Lights were seen in the house. One of them came into Mr. Mompessons
chamber which seemed blue and glimmering, and caused stiffness in the eyes of
those who saw it. After the Light, something was heard coming up the stairs, as
if it had been one without shoes. The light was seen also 4 or 5 times in the
Childrens chamber; and the Maids confidently affirm, the doors were at least
ten times opned and shut in their sight, and when they were opened they heard a
noise, as if half a dozen had entered together. After which, some were heard to
walk about the Room, and one Rusled as if it had been in Silk. The like Mr.
Mompesson himself once heard.

During the time of the knocking when many were present a Gentleman of the
company, said, Satan, if the Drummer set thee to work, give three knocks and no
more, which it did very distinctly and stopped. Then the Gentleman knocked, to see
if it would answer him, as it was wont, but it did not. For further trial, he
bid it for confirmation, if it were the Drummer to give five knocks and no more
that night, which it did, and left the House quiet all the night This was done
in the presence of Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Oxfordshire, and diverse others.

On Saturday morning, an hour before day, January 10. a Drum was heard beat
upon the outsides of Mr Mompessons Chamber, from whence it went to the other
end of the house, where some Gentlemen strangers lay, playing at their door,
and without, four or five several Tunes and so went off into the Air.

The next night, a Smith in the Village, lying with John the Man, they heard a
Noise in the Room, as if one had been shoeing of an Horse, and some what came,
as it were with a pair of Pincers snipping at the Smiths Nose most part of the
Night.

One morning Mr. Mompesson rising early to go a journey heard a great Noise
below where the Children Lay, and running down with a Pistol in his hand, he
heard a voice crying a Witch, a Witch, as they had also heard it once before.
Upon his entrance all was quiet.

Having one Night played some little Trick at Mr. Mompessons Beds feet, it went
into another Bed, where one of his Daughters lay. There it passed from side to
side, lifting her up as it passed under. At that time, there were three kinds
of Noises in the Bed. They endeavored to thrust at it with a sword, but it
still shifted, and carefully avoided the thrust, still getting under the Child
when they offered at it. The Night after it came panting like a Dog out of
breath. Upon which one took a Bed-staff to knock, which was caught out of her
hand, and thrown away, and Company coming up, the Room was presently filled,
with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very hot though without fire, in a very
sharp and severe winter. It continued in the Bed panting and scratching an hour
and a half, and then went into the next Chamber, where it knocked a little, and
seemed to ratle a Chain: this it did for two or three nights together.

After all this the old Gentlewomans Bible was found in the Ashes the Paper
side being downwards. Mr. Mompesson took it up, and observed that it lay open
at the third Chapter of Mark, where there is mention of unclean Spirits falling
down before our Savior, and of his giving power to the twelve to cast out
Devils, and of the Scribes Opinion, that he cast them out through Beelzebub.
The next night they strewed Ashes over the Chamber, to see what impressions it
would leave. In the morning they found in one place, the resemblance of a great
Claw, in another of a lesser, some Letters in another, which they could make
nothing of, besides many Circles, in the Ashes.

About this time ( says my Author) I went to the house on purpose to inquire
the truth of those passages of which there was so loud a report. It had ceased
from its Drumming, and ruder Noises before I came hither, but most of the more
remarkable circumstances before related, were confirmed to me there, by several
of the neighbors together, who had been present at them. At this time it used
to haunt the Children, as soon as they were laid. They went to Bed that night I
was there about eight of the clock, when a Maidservant coming down told us it
was come. The Neighbors that were there and two Ministers who had seen and
heard diverse times, went away: but Mr. Mompesson, and I, and a Gentleman that
came with me went up. I heard a scratching, which was very strange, as I went
up the Stairs, and when we came into the Room, I perceived, it was just behind
the Bolster of the Childrens Bed, and seemed to be against the Tyking. It was
as loud a scratching, as one with long nails could make upon a Bolster. There
were two little modest Girls in the Bed between seven and eleven years of age,
as I guest. I saw there hands without the Clothes, so that they could not
contribute to the Noise, that was behind their heads. They had been used to it,
and had still some body or other in the Chamber with them, and therefore seemed
not to be much afrighted. I standing at the Beds-head, thrust my hand behind
the Bolster, directing it to the place, whence the noise seemed to come.
Whereupon the noise ceased there, and was heard in another part of the Bed. But
when I had taken out my Hand, it returned, and was heard in the same place as
before. I had been told, that it would imitate noises and made trial by
scratching several times upon the Sheets as 5 and 7 and 10 which it followed,
and still stepped at my number. I searched under, and behind the Bed, turned up
the clothes to the Bed-cords, graspt the Bolster, sounded the Wall behind, and
made all search that possibly I could to find if there were any Trick,
Contrivance, or common Cause of it: the like did my Friend, but we could
discover nothing. So that I was then verily persuaded, and am so still, that
the Noise was made by some Demon or Spirit. After it had scartcht about half
an hour or more, it went into the midest of the Bed under the Children, and
there seemed to pant like a Dog out of Breath very loudly. I put my hand upon
the place, and felt the Bed bearing up against it, as if something within had
thrust it up. I graspt the Feathers to feel, if any living thing were in them.
I looked under, and every where about, to see if there were any Dog or Cat, or
any other Creature in the Room, and so we all did, but found nothing. The
motion it caused by this panting, was so strong, that it shook the Room and
Windows very sensibly. It continued thus more then half an hour, while my
Friend and I stayed in the Room, and as long after, as we were told. During the
Panting, I chanced to see as it had been something, (which I thought was a Rat
or Mouse) moving in a Linning Bag, that hung up against another Bed, that was
in the Room. I stepped and caught it by the upper end with one hand, with which I
held it, and drew it quite through the other, but found nothing at all in it.
There was no Body near to shake the Bag, or if there had, no one could have
made such a Motion, which seemed to be from within, as if some living Creature
had moved in it. My Friend and I lay in the Chamber, where the first and chief
disturbance had been. We slept well all night, but early before Day in the
Morning I was awakned (and I awakned my Bedfellow) by a great knocking just
without our Chamber door. I asked who was there several times, but the knocking
still continued without answer. At last, I said, In the name of God* who is it,
and what would you have* To which a voice answered Nothing with you We thinking
it had been some servant of the house, went to sleep again. But speaking of it
to Mr. Mompesson, when we came down, He assured us, that not one of the house
lay that way, or had business, thereabout, and that his Servants were not up
till he called them, which was after it was day. Which they confirmed, and
protested, that the Noise was not made by them. Mr. Mompesson had told us
before that it would be gone in the middle of the Night, and come again diverse
times early in the Morning about four a Clock, and this I suppose was about
that same time. There came one Morning a light into the Childrens Chamber, and
a voice crying a Witch a Witch, for at least an hundred times together. Mr.
Mompesson at another time (being in the day) seeing some Wood move that was
there, as of it self, discharged a Pistol into it, after which they found
several drops of Blood on the Hearth, and in diverse places of the Stair. For
two or three nights after the discharge of the Pistol, there was a calm in the
house, but then it came again, applying it self to a little Child newly taken
from the Nurse, which it so persecuted, that it would not let the poor Infant
rest for two nights together, nor suffer a Candle in the room, but carry them
away lighted up through the Chimney, or cast them under the Bed. It so scared
this Child, by leaping upon it, that for some hours, it could not be recovered
out of the fright. So that they were forced again to put the Children out of
the house. The next night after, something about Midnight came up the Stairs,
and knocked at Mr. Mompessons door, but he lying still, it went up another pair
of Stairs to his Man's Chamber, to whom it appeared standing at his Beds-foot.
The exact shape and Proportion he could not discover, but he says he saw a
great Body with two red glowring, or glaring eyes, which for some time were
fixed steadily upon him, and at length disappeared. Another night strangers
being present, it purr'd in the Childrens Bed like a Cat, at which time, the
Clothes and Children were lift up from the Bed, and six men could not keep them
down: hereupon they removed the Children, intending to have ripped the Bed. But
they were no sooner laid in another, but the second Bed was more troubled than
the first It continued thus Four hours, and beat the Childrens legs against
the Bed-posts, that they were forced to arise, and sit up all Night. After this
it would empty Chamber Pots into their Beds, and strew them with Ashes from the
Hearth, though they were never so carfullie watched. It put a long picked Iron
in Mr. Mompessons Bed, and into his mother a naked knife upright. It would fill
Porrengers with Ashes, throw every thing about the Room, and keep a noise all
day.

About the beginning of April, 1663. ae Gentleman that lay in the house, had
all his Money turned black in his pocket. And Mr. Mompesson coming one morning
into his Stable, found his Horse, he was wont to ride on, laying on the ground,
having one of his hinder Legs in his mouth, and so fastened there, that it was
difficult for several men to get it out with a Leaver. After this, there were
some other remarkable things; but my Account goes no further. Only Mr.
Mompesson write me word, That afterward the house was several nights beset,
with seven or eight in the shape of Men, who as soon as a Gun was discharged,
would shuffle away together into an Arbor.

The Drummer was tried at the Assizes at Salisburg upon this occasion. He was
committed first to Gloucester-Gaol for stealing, and a Wilt-shire man coming to
see him, he asked, What news in Wilt-shire? The Man answered, He knew of none.
No, says the Drummer! Do you not hear of the Drumming at a Gentleman's house at
Tedworth. That I do enough, said the other. I quoth the Drummer, I have plauged
him, and he shall never be quiet, till he has made me satisfaction for taking
away my Drum. Upon information of this, the Fellow was tried for a Witch at
Sarum, and all the main circumstances, which I have related were sworn at the
Assizes by the Minister of the Parish, and diverse others of the most
intelligent and substantial Inhabitants, who had been eye and ear Witnesses of
them, time after time for diverse years together.

The Fellow was condemned to Transportation, and accordingly sent away: but I
know not how (it is said by raising storms, and afrighting the Seamen) he made
a shift to come back again. And it is observable, that during all the time of
his restraint, and absence the house was quiet, but as soon as ever he came
back at liberty, the Disturbance returned.

He had been a Soldier under Cromwell, and used to talk much of Gallant Books;
which he had of an odd Fellow who was counted a Vizzard. Upon this occasion, I
shall here add a Passage, which I had ( says my Author) from Mr. Mompesson,
but yet relates to the Main purpose.

The Gentleman, who was with me at the house Mr. Hill, being in Company with
one Comton of Summer-set-shire, practiced Physic and pretends to strange
matters, related to him this Story of Mr. Mompessons disturbance. The Physician
told him, he was sure it was nothing but a Rendezvous of Witches and that for
an hundred pounds, he would undertake to rid the house of all disturbance. In
persuit of this discourse, he talked of many high things, and having drawn my
Friend into another Room a part from the rest of the company, said, he could
make him sensible, he could do something more then ordinary, and asked him whom
he desired to see. Mr. Hill had no great confidence in his talk, who was then
many miles distant from them at her home. Upon this Compton took up a
Looking-glass that was in the Room, and setting it down again, bid my friend
look in it which he did, and there, as he most solemnly and seriously
protested, he saw the exact image of his wife in that habit, which she then
wore, and working at her Needle in such a part of the Room, (there represented
also) in which, or about which time she reallie was, as he found upon inquiry,
when he came to his own house.

The Gentleman averred this to me, and he is a very sober Intelligent, and
credible Person. Compton had no knowledge of him before, and was an utter
stranger to the Person of his Wife. Thus I have written the sum of Mr.
Mompessons disturbances, which (says my Author) I had partly from his own
mouth related before diverse, who had been witnesses of all, and confirmed his
Relation, and partly from his own Letters, from which the order and series of
things is taken. The same Particulars he writ also to Doctor Creed; then Doctor
of the Chair in Oxford.

RELATION. XI. The Devil of Geuluce enlarged with several Remarkable Additions
from an Eye and Ear witness, a Person of undoubted Honesty.
THis is that famous and notable Story of the Devil of Glenluce, which I
published in my Hydrostaticks, anno 1672, and which since has been transcribed
word by word by a Learned Pen, and Published in the late Book Entitled
Saducismus Triumphatus, whom nothing but the truth thereof, and usefulness for
refuting Atheism could have persuaded to transcribe. The Subject matter then of
this Story, is a true and short account, of the Troubles, wherewith the Family
of one Gilbert Campbel, by profession a Weaver in the old Parish of Glenluce in
Galloway, was exercised. I have adventured to publish it De Novo in this Book,
first because it was but hudled up among Purposes of another nature. But now I
have reduced it, to it is own proper Place. Next, because this Story is more
full, being enlarged with new Additions, which were not in the former, and ends
not so abruptly, as the other did.

It happened (says my Informer, Gilbert Campbels Son who was then a student of
Philosophy in the College of Glasgow,) that after one Alexander Agnew, a bold
and sturdy Beggar, who afterward was hanged at Drumfries for Blasphemy had
threatened hurt to the Family, because he had not gotten such an Alms, as he
required, the said Gilbert Campbel was often times hindered in the exercise of
his calling and yet could not know by what means this was done. This Agnew,
among many blasphemous expressions had this one, when he was interrogate by the
Judges, whether or not, he thought there was a God, he answered, he knew no God
but Salt, Meal, and Water. When the Stirs began first, there was a Whistling
heard both within and without the House. And Jennet Campbel going one day to
the Well, to bring home some Water, was conveyed, with a shril whistling about
her ears, which made her say, I would fain hear thee speak, as well as
Whistle. Hereupon it said, after a threatening manner, I Will cast thee Iennet
into the Well. The voice was most exactlie like the Damsels voice, and did
resemble it to the life. The Gentlewoman that heard this and was a witness,
thought the voice was very near to her own ears, and said the Whistling was
such, as Children use to make, with their small slender Glass Whistles.

About the middle of November, the Foul Fiend came on with new and
extraordinary Assaults, by throwing of Stones in at the Doors, and Windows, and
down the Chimney-head, which were of great quantity, and thrown with force, yet
by Gods Providence, there was not one Person in the Family that was hurt. This
did necessitate Gilbert Campbel, to reveal that to the Minister of the Parish,
and to some other Neighbors and Friends, which hitherto he had suffered
secretly. Notwithstanding of this, his trouble was enlarged; for not long
after, he found oftentimes his Warp and Threeds cut, as with a pair of
Sizzers, and not only so, but their Apparel were cut after the same manner,
even while they were wearing them, their Coats, Bonnets, Hose, Shoes, but could
not discern how, or by what mean. Only it pleased GOD to preserve their
persons, that the least harm was not done. Yet, in the night time, they had not
liberty to sleep, something coming and pulling their bed-cloaths, and Linnings
off them, and leaving their Bodies naked. Next, their Chests and Trunks were
opened, and all things in them strawed here and there. Likewise the parts of
their Working-Instruments, which had escaped were carried away, and hid in
holes and bores of the house, where hardly they could be found again. Nay, what
ever piece of Cloth, or Household Stuff was in any part of the house, it was
carried away, and so cut and abused, that the Good Man was necessitate in all
haste and speed, to remove and transport the rest to a Neighbors house, and he
himself compelled to quite the Exercise of his Calling, whereby he only
maintained his Family. Yet he resolved to remain in his house for a season;
during which time, some persons about, not very Judicious, counseled him to
send his Children out of the Family, here and there, to try whom the trouble
did most follow, assuring him, that this trouble was not against the whole
Family, but against some one person or other in it, whom he too willingly
obeyed. Yet, for the space of four or five days, there were no remarkable
assaults, as before. The Minister hearing thereof, showed him the evil of such
a course, and assured him, that if he repented not, and called back his
Children he might not expect, that his trouble would end in a right way. The
Children that were nigh by being brought home, no trouble followed, till one of
his Sons called Thomas that was farest off came home. Then did the Devil begin
a fresh for upon the Lords day following in the afternoon, the House was set on
Fire, but by the help of some Neighbors going home from Sermon; the Fire was
put out, and the house saved, not much loss being done. And Monday after being
spent in Private prayer, and fasting, the house was again set on Fire upon the
Tuesday about nine a clock in the morning, yet by the speedy help of Neighbors
it was saved, little skaith being done

The Weaver being thus vexed, and wearied both day and night, went to the
Minister of the Parish, an Honest and Godly in andesiring him, to let his Son
Thomas abide with him for a time, who condescended, but withal assured him that
he would find himself deceived, and so it came to pass, for notwithstanding
that the Lad was without the Family, yet were they that remained in it, sore
troubled both in the day time, and night season, so that they were forced to
wake till Midnight, and sometimes all the night over, during which time, the
persons within the Family suffered many losses, as the cutting of their
Clothes, the throwing of Piets, the pulling down of Turff and Feal from the
Roof, and Walls of the house, and the stealling of their Clothes, and the
Pricking of their Flesh, and Skin with Pins.

Some Ministers about having conveened at the place, for a solemn Humiliation,
persuaded Gilbert Campbel to call back his Son Thomas, Notwithstanding of
whatsoever hazard might follow. The Boy returning home, affirmed that he heard
a voice speak to him, forbidding him to enter within the House, or in any other
place where his Fathers Calling was exercised. Yet he entered, but was sore
abused, till he was forced to return to the Ministers house again.

Upon Monday the 12 of February, the rest of the Family began to hear a voice
speak to them, but could not well know from whence it came. Yet from Evening
till Midnight too much vain discourse was kept up with Satan, and many idle
and impertinent questions proposed, without that due fear of God, that should
have been upon their Spirits under so rare and extraordinary a Trial. They came
that length in familiar discourse, with the Foul-Thief, that they were no more
afraid to keep up the Clash with him, than to speak to one another. In this
they pleased him well, for he desired no better, than to have Sacrifices
offered to him. The Minister hearing of this, went to the house upon the
Tuesday, being accompanied with some Gentlemen, one James Bailie of Carphin,
Alexander Bailie of Dunraged, Mr. Robert Hay, and a Gentlewoman called Mistress
Douglas, whom the Ministers Wife did accompany. At their first in-coming the
Devil says, Quum Literarum, is good Latin. These are the first words, of the
Latin Rudiments, which Scholars are taught, when they go to the Grammar
School. He cries again a Dog. The Minister thinking that he had spoken it to
him, said, he took it not ill to be reviled by Satan, since his Master had
trodden that path before him. Answered Satan, it was not you, Sir, I spoke it
to, I meant by the Dog there, for there was a Dog standing behind backs. This
passing, they all went to Prayer, which being ended, they heard a voice
speaking out. of the ground, from under a Bed, in the proper Country Dialect,
which he did counterfeit exactly, saying, Would you know the Witches of
Glenluce? I will tell you them; and so related four or five Persons nam^s that
went under a bad report. The Weaver informed the Company, that one of them was
dead long ago. The Devil answered, and said, It is true, she is dead long ago,
but her Spirit is living with us in the World. The Minister replied saying
(though it was not convenient to speak to such an excommunicat and
intercommuned person) the Lord rebuke thee, Satan, and put thee to silence; we
are not to receive Information from thee, whatsoever fame any person goes
under; Thou art seeking but to seduce this Family, for Satan's kingdom is not
divided against it self. After which all went to Prayer again, which being
ended (for during the time of Prayer no noise or trouble was made, except once,
that a loud fearful youel was heard at a distance) The Devil with many
threatenings boasted and terrified the Lad Tom, who had come back that day with
the Minister, that if he did not depart out of the house, he would set all on
fire. The Minister answered, and said, the Lord will preserve the house, and
the Lad too, seeing he is one of the Family, and has GODS Warrant to tarry in
it. The Fiend answered, he shall not get liberty to tarry; he was once put out
already, and shall not abide here, though I should pursue him to the end of the
world. The Minister replied, the Lord will stop thy malice against him. And
then they all went to prayer again, which being ended, the Devil said, give me
a Spade and a Shovel, and depart from the house for seven days, and I will make
a Grave, and ly down in it, and shall trouble you no more. The good man
answered, not so much as a Straw shall be given thee, through Gods assistance,
even though that would do it The Minister also added God shall remove thee in
due time. The Spirit answered, I will not remove for you, I have my Commission
from Christ to tarry and vex this Family. The Minister answered, a Permission
thou have indeed, but God will stop it in due time. The Devil replied, I have
Sir, a Commission, which perhaps will last longer than your own. The Minister
dyed in the year 1655 in December. The Devil had told them, that he had given
his commission to Tom to keep. The Company enquired at the Lad, who said, there
was something put into his pocket, but it did not tarry.

After this, the Minister and the Gentlemen arose, and went to the place,
whence the voice seemed to come, to try if they could see, or find any thing.
After diligent search, nothing being found, the Gentlemen began to say, We
think this voice speaks out of the Children, for some of them were in their
beds. The Foul Spirit answered, you lie, GOD shall judge you for your lying,
and I and my father will come and fetch you to Hell, with Warlock Thieves: and
so the Devil discharged the Gentlemen to speak any thing, saying, Let him speak
that has a Commission, (meaning the Minister) for he is the servant of GOD.
The Gentlemen returning back with the Minister, sat down near the place, whence
the voice seemed to come, and he opening his mouth, spoke to them, after this
manner, The Lord will rebuke this Spirit in his own time, and cast it out. The
Devil answering, said, It is written in the 9th. of Mark, the Disciples could
not cast him out. The Minister replied, What the Disciples could not do, yet
the Lord having hightned the Parents Faith, for his own glory did cast him out,
and so shall he thee. The Devil replied, It is written in the 4th. of Luke, and
he departed and left him for a season. The Minister said, The Lord in the days
of his Humiliation, not only got the victory over Satan, in that assault in the
wilderness, but when he came again, his success was no better, for it is
written, John 14. Behold, the Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in
me, and being now in glory, he will fulfill his promise, and GOD shall bruise
Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. The Devil answered, It is written,
Matthew* 25. There were ten Virgins, five wise, and five foolish; and the
Bridegroom came, the foolish Virgins had no oil in their lamps, and went unto
the wise to seek Oil, and the wise said, go and buy for your selves; and while
they went, the Bridegroom came, and entered in, and the door was shut, and the
foolish Virgins were sent to Hells fire. The Minister answered, The Lord knows
the sincerity of his servants, and though there be sin and folly in us here,
yet there is a fountain opened to the house of David for sin and for
uncleanness, when he has washen us, and pardoned our sins, for his Names sake,
he will cast the unclean Spirit out of the land. The Devil answered, and said,
Sir you should have cited for that place of Scripture, the 13 chap. of Zech.
and so he began at the first verse and repeated several verses, and concluded
with those words, In that day I will cause the Prophet, and the unclean Spirit,
pass out of the land, but afterward it is written, I will smite the Shepherd,
and the Sheep shall be scattered. The Minister answered, and said, well are we
that our blessed Shepherd was smitten, and thereby has bruised thy head, and
albeit in the hour of his sufferings, his Disciples forsook him Matthew. 26. Yet
now having ascended on high, he sits in glory, and is preserving, gathering in,
and turning his hand upon his little ones, and will save his poor ones in this
Family from thy malice. The Minister returning back a little, and standing upon
the Floor, the Devil said, I knew not these Scriptures, till my Father taught
me them. Then the Minister conjured him to tell whence he was. The Foul-Fiend
replied, that he was an evil Spirit, come from the bottomless Pit of Hell, to
vex this house, and that Satan was his Father, and presently there appeared a
naked hand, and an arm from the Elbow down, beating upon the Floor till the
house did shake again, and also he uttered a most fearful and loud cry saying,
come up Father come up, I will send my Father among you, See there he is behind
your backs. The Minister said I saw indeed an hand, and an arm, when the stroke
was given, and heard. The Devil said to him, Saw you that? It was not my hand,
it was my Fathers: my hand is more black in the loof. O said Gilbert Campbel,
that I might see thee, as well as I hear thee! Would you see me, says the
Foul-Thief; Put out the Candle, and I shall come butt the house among you like
fire balls. I shall let you see me indeed. Alexander Bailie of Dunraget says to
the Minister, let us go ben, and see if there be any hand to be seen. The Devil
answered, No, let him come ben alone; he is a good honest man, his single word
may be believed. About this time the Devil abused Mr. Robert Hay a very honest
Gentleman very ill with his Tongue, calling him Witch and Warlock. A little
after the Devil cries (It seems out of purpose and in a purpose) a Witch, a
VVitch, There Is a Witch sitting upon the Ruist, take her away: he meant a Hen
sitting upon the halk of the House.

These things being Past, all went to Prayer during which time he was silent.
Prayer being ended, the Devil answered and said, If the Goodmans Sons prayers
at the College of Glasgow, did not prevail with GOD: my father and I had
wrought a mischief here ere now. To which Alexander Bailie of Dunraged replied,
well, well, I see you confess there is a God, and that prayer prevails with
him, and therefore we must pray to God and commit the event to him. To whom the
Devil replied, yea Sir, you speak of prayer with your broad lipped Hat, (for
the Gentleman, had lately gotten a Hat in the fashion with broad lips) I Will
bring a pair of Shears from my Father, which shall clip the lips of it a
little. Whereupon he presently imagined, that he heard and felt a pair of
Shears, going round about his Hat, which caused him lift it, to see if the
Foul-Theif had meddled with it,

During this time, several things but of less moment passed, as that he would
have Tom a Merchant, Rob a Smith, John a Minister, and Hue a Lawier, all which
in some measure came to pass. As to Jennet the Goodmans Daughter he cries to
her, Jennet Campbel, Jennet Campbel, will thou cast me thy Belt. Quoth she,
what a widdy would thou do with my Belt? I would fain (says he) fasten my loose
bones closs together with it. A younger Daughter sitting busking her Puppies,
as young Girls use to do, being threatened by the Fiend, that he would ding out
her harns, that is brain her, answered without being concerned, no if God be to
the fore, and so fell to her work again. The Good Wife of the house having
brought out some bread was breaking it, to give every one of the Company a
Piece. Cries he, Grissel Wyllie, Grissel Wyllie; give me a piece of that hard
bread (for so they call their Oat Cakes) I have gotten nothing this day, but a
bit from Marrit, that is as they speak in that Country Margaret. The Minister
said, beware of that, for it is a sacrificing to the Devil. The Girl was
called for, and asked if she gave him any hard bread, no says she, but when I
was eating my due piece this morning, something came and clieked it out of my
hand.

The Evening being now far spent, it was thought fit, that every one should
withdraw to his own home. Then did the Devil cry out fearfully, let not the
Minister go home, I shall burn the house if he go, and many other ways did he
threaten. After the Minister had gone forth: Gilbert Campbel was very instant
with him to tarry, whereupon he returned, all the rest going home. When he came
into the house, the Devil gave a great gaff of laughter: you have now Sir done
my bidding. Not thine, answered the other, but in obedience to God, have I
returned to bear this man company whom thou do afflict. Then did the
Minister call upon God, and when prayer was ended, he discharged the Weaver,
and all the Persons of the Family, to speak a word to the Devil, and when it
spak, that they should only kneel down, and speak to God. The Devil then roared
mightily, and cried out, What? Will ye not speak to me, I shall strike the
bairns and do all manner of mischief. But after that time no answer was made to
it, and so for a long time no speech was heard. Several times has he beat the
Children in their Beds, and the claps of his loof upon their Buttocks would
have been heard but without any trouble to them. While the Minister and
Gentlemen were standing at the Door ready to go home, the Ministers Wife,
and the Good-Wife were within. Then cried Satan, Grissel put out the Candle.
Says she to the Ministers Wife, shall I do it? No says the other, for then you
shall obey the Devil. Upon this he cries again with a louder shout, Put out the
Candle. The Candle still burns. The third time he cries, Put out the Candle,
and no obedience being given to him, he did so often reiterat these words, and
magnify his voice, that it was astonishment to hear him, which made them stop
their ears they thinking the sound was just at their ears. At last the Candle
was put out. Now says he I Will trouble you no more this Night. I must insert
here, what I heard from one of the Ministers of that Presbytrie, who with the
rest were appointed to meet at the Weavers house, for prayer, and other
exercises of that kind. When the day came, five only met. But before they went
in, they stood a while in the Croft, which lays round about the house,
consulting what to do. They resolved upon two things, first there should be no
words of Conjuration used, as commanding him in the Name of GOD to tell whence
he was, or to depart from the Family, for which they thought they had no call
from GOD. Secondly that when the Devil spoke, none should answer him, but hold
on in their worshipping of GOD, and the duties they were called to. When all of
them had prayed by turns, and three of them had spoken a word or two from the
Scripture, they prayed again, and then ended, without any disturbance. When
that Brother who informed me, had gone out, one Hue Nisbit, one of the company,
came running after him, desiring him to come back, for he had begun to whistle.
No, says the other, I tarried as long as GOD called me, but go in again I will
not.

After this, the said Gilbert suffered much loss, and had many sad nights, not
two nights in one week free, and thus it continued till April; from April to
July, he had some Respite and ease, but after, he was molested with new
assaults; and even their Victuals were so abused, that the Family was in hazard
of starving, and that which they eat gave them not their ordinary satisfaction,
they were wont to find.

In this sore and sad affliction Gilbert Campbel resolved to make his Address
to the Synod of Presbyters, for Advice and Counsel what to do; which was
appointed to conveen in October 1655. namely, whether to forsake the house or
not? The Synod by their Committy appointed to meet at Glenluce in February
1656. thought fit that a solemn Humiliation should be kept through all the
Bounds of the Synod; and among other causes, to request GOD in behalf of that
afflicted Family; which being done carefully, the event was, that his troubles
grew less till April, and from April to August, he was altogether free. About
which time the Devil began with new assaults, and taking the ready Meat that
was in the house, did sometimes hide it in holes by the door-posts; and at
other times did hide it under the Beds, and some times among the Bed-cloaths,
and under the Linnings, and at last, did carry it quite away, till nothing was
left there, save Bread and Water. This minds me of a small passage, as a proof
of what is said. The Good-wife one Morning making Pottage for the Childrens
Breakfast, had the Tree-plate wherein the meal (...) snatched from her quickly.
Well says (...), let me have the plate again. Whereupon it came flying at her,
without any skaith done. It Is like, if she had sought the meal too, she might
have got it; such is his civility when he is entreated. A small homage will
please him ere he want all. After this he exercised his malice and cruelty
against all persons in the Family, in wearying them in the Night time, by
stirring and moving through the house, so that they had no rest for Noise, which
continued all the Month of August after this manner. After which time the
Devil grew yet worse, by roaring, and terrifying them by casting of Stones, by
striking them with staves on their Beds in the Nightime. And upon the 18. of
September about Midnight he cried out with a loud voice, I shall burn the
house. And about 3. or 4. Nights after, he set one of the Beds on fire, which
was soon put out, without any prejudice, except the Bed it self.

Thus I have written a short and true account of all the Material Passages
which occurred. To write every particular, especially of lesser Moment, would
fill a large Volum. The Goodman lived several years after this, in the same
house: and it seems, that by some conjuration or other, the Devil suffered
himself to be put away, and gave the Weaver a peaceable habitation. This Weaver
has been a very Odd man, that endured so long these mavelous disturbances.

RELATION. XII. Anent Mother Iackson her VVitch-Craft.
THis Story has as much certainty with it, as any Human Story can have. The
Author that writs it is a Famous Minister of the Gospel, and attested by famous
Witnesses. This Woman was arraigned and condemned at Newgate for bewitching one
Mary Glover a M(...)rchants Daughter in Themes-Street. One Doctor Boncraft did
inform Judge Anderson then Lord Chief Justice, that the said Mother Jackson was
wronged and that the Maid did counterfeit. Whereupon the Lord Chief Justice
gave order to Sir John Crook then Recorder of London to make trial of them in
his Chamber at the Temple. The Maid being sent for came with her Mother and
diverse of her Neighbors: and about an hour after, the Witch was sent for, and
was brought in disguised like a countrey-market-Woman, with a mufflet hiding
her face, and an old Hat, and a short Cloack spattered with mire. When she
entered the Chamber the Maid suddenly fell down backward upon the floor, with
her eyes drawn into her head, her tongue toward her Throat, her Mouth drawn up
to her Ear: her Body became stiff, and senseless. Her Lips being shut closs, a
plain and audible voice came out of her Nostrills, saying Hang her, Hang her.
Then did the Recorder call for a Candle, and a sheet of Paper, and held the
paper flaming to her hand, till her hand did blister. The blister did break and
water came out, which dropped down upon the Floor, the maid lying still and
senseless as a dead body, with the voice coming out of her Nostrills saying
hang her, hang her. Then the Recorder called for a long Pin, which he held in
the Flame of the Candle, till it was very hot, and thrust the head of it into
her Nostrills to see if that would make her Neese, Wink, or bend her brows, or
stir her head, which she did not, but lay still as one dead, and senseless,
Then I told the Recorder (says my Author) that I had often prayed with the
Maid, and that when I did conclude with the LORDS Prayer, the Maid, as soon as
I said ( but deliver us from all evil) was tossed up, and shaken as if a Mastive
Dog should take a little Curr into his mouth, and shake him. Then the Recorder
bad the Witch say the Lords Prayer, which she did till she came to these words,
But deliver us from evil, which she skipt over and would by no means be brought
to say them. Then they bad her rehearse the Articles of the Christian Faith,
which she did, till she came to these words ( our Lord) but would by no means
be drawn to confess that Jesus Christ was Our Lord. I told the Recorder also
that when the Maid was in her senseless and dead fits, if the Witch did but lay
her hand upon her, she was tossed and thrown toward her. Thereupon the Recorder
caused the Maid to be taken up, and laid upon a Bed, and clothes to be laid
upon her, especially her head, because she should not see, nor hear. Then he
made signs to the women to stand round about the Bed, and that the Witch
should stand among them and that every one should lay hands one her softly,
which they did, and the Maid did not stir, till the Witch laid her hand upon
her. Then all the Clothes were thrown off, and the Maid tossed toward her.
Whereupon the Recorder looking upon the Witch said, Lord have mercy upon thee,
Woman, and sent her to Newgate. Then as soon as she was gone, the voice that
came out of the Maids Nostrils ceased, and she came to her self, and went home
with her Mother.

About 3 Weeks or a Month after the Witch was condemned, the Maid continued
every second day in most strange and fearful Fits, and Torments. The Recorder
hearing of it, did blame me, and all the Ministers of London. And told me, that
we might all of us be ashamed to see a Child of God in the Claws of the Devil,
without any hopes of deliverance, but by such means as GOD had appointed,
Fasting and Prayer.

Within few days after, it pleased GOD to make me an instrument to draw five
Ministers, and other good Christians together to set a day a part, and to join
with me, in that holy exercise, wherein we continued from morning till after
Candle lighting. Then on a sudden, after a fearful conflict which did much
amaze some, and caused them to cry with a confused Noise, Jesus help, Jesus
save, the Maid did start up out of a Wand-Chair, where she sat, and with her
strength did lift me up with her, I kneeling behind her, and holding her in my
Arms, she did throw white Froth out of her throat and mouth round about the
Chamber, and on a sudden fell down into the Chair, as one truly dead, with her
head hanging down into the Chair, her neck, arms limber and souple, which
before were stiff as a frozen thing: Then suddenly life came into her whole
Body, and her eyes which were drawn into her head, and her Tongue, which was
pulled into her throat came into their right place. Then she looked up with a
cheerful countenance round about the Chamber, and with a loud voice spak,
saying, O he is come, he is come, the Comforter is come, the Comforter is come,
I am delivered, I am delivered. Her Father hearing these words, wept for joy,
and with a faultring voice, said, O these were her grand Fathers words, when he
was at the Stake, the fire crakling about him. It seems he died a Martyr in
Queen Mary's time. Then she kneeled down, and offered a sweet evening sacrifice
of Thanks and Praise to GOD for her deliverance, till her voice grew weak. Then
did the Minister speak to her to forbear, and let one of them end the day with
thanksgiving. And in regard that I (says the Minister) had begun the day with
prayer, the Company desired me to make an end with Thanksgiving. This being
done, care was had of her, to put her to some Minister for a year, least Satan
should assault her again. And by common consent she was put to me, and I took
her home to my own House, for being my servant for that time, and her Mother
and Sister, and Lodged them at my House in great Saint Helens. Which then was
my living This Relation was published in the year 1642. by the Minister, whose
name is Jews Hughes and is yet to be seen in Print.

RELATION XIII. King Duff the 78 King of Scotland Bewitched.
THough this be well known to all who read our Scots Histories, yet it will not
be amiss to insert it here, as in its own place, for their sake especially who
have not heard of it. While the King was about the settling of the Country, and
punishing the Troublers of the Peace, he began to be sore afflicted in his Body
with a new and unheard of Disease, no Causes of his Sickness appearing in the
least. At length, after that several Remedies and Cures were made use of to no
purpose, a Report is spread, the Authors thereof being uncertain, that the King
was brought to that sickness and Trouble by Witches. This suspicion arose, from
an unusual Sweating he was under, his Body pining and withering away by little
and little and his strength failling day by day. And since all his Physicians;
had done their utmost, and yet no appearance of recovery, it was supposed his
case was extraordinary, therefore all men being vehemently intent upon the
Event, news came to Court that Night-meetings were kept at Forres a Town in
Murray, for taking away the life of the King, This was presently received and
believed for Truth, because no other thing did occurr for the present more
probable. Whereupon Trusty and Faithful men are presently sent away to one
Donald Governor of the Castle there, in whom the King had the greatest Trust
and Confidence. This man having gotten some knowledge of the business from a
certain young Wench, whose Mother was under a bad report of being skilful in
this Black-Art, found out and discovered the whole matter. The young Harlot is
taken, because she had spoken some words rashly anent the Kings sickness, and
that within a few days his life would be at an end. Some of the Guard being
sent, found the Lasses Mother, with some Haggs, such as her self, roasting
before a small moderate fire, the Kings Picture made of Wax. The design of this
horrid Act, was that as the Wax by little and little did melt away, so the
Kings Body by a continual sweating, might at last totally decay. The
Waxen-Image being found and broken, and those old Haggs being punished by
death, the King did in that same moment recover. Compare this with the first
Relation, and you will find them jump and agree exactly.

RELATION XIV. The Apparition of Edward Avon, to his Son in Law Thomas Goddard.
THomas Goddard of Marleburgh in the County of Wilts, Weaver; on the ninth of
November 1674 going to Ogburn, at a Style on the Highway about nine in the
morning, met the Apparition of his Father in Law, one Edward Avon of this Town
Glover, who dyed in May last, having on to appearance, the same Clothes, Hat,
Stockings, and Shoes he did usually wear when he was living, standing by, and
leaning over that Style. Which when he came near, the Apparition spoke to him
with an audible voice, these words, Are you afraid? To which he answered, I am,
thinking on one who is dead and burried whom you are like. To which the
Apparition replied with the like voice. I am he you were thinking on, I am
Edward Avon your Father in Law, come near to me, I will do you no harm. To
which Goddard answered, I trust in him that bought my Soul with his precious
blood, you shall do me no harm. Then the Apparation said, How stand Cases at
home? Goddard asked what Cases? Then it asked him, how do William and Mary,
meaning as he conceived his Son William Avon, a Shoemaker here, and Mary his
Daughter, the said Goddards wife. Then it said, What? Tailor is dead, meaning
as he thought one Tailor of London, who married his Daughter Sarah, which
Tailor dyed about Michaelmas last. Then the Apparition held out his hand, and
in it as Goddard conceived, 20. or 30 shillings in Silver, and then spoke with
a loud voice. Take this money, and send it to Sarah for I shut up my Bowels of
Compassion toward her in my life time, and now here is somewhat for her. And
then said, Mary (meaning the said Goddard's Wife, as he conceived) is troubled
for me, but tell her God has showed me Mercy contrary to my deserts. But the
said Goddard answered, In the name of Jesus I refuse all such money. Then the
Apparition said I perceive you are afraid, I will meet with you some other
time. And immediately it went up the Lane to his appearance. So he went over
the same Style, but saw it no more that day.

He says, the next night about 7. of the Clock, it came and opened his Shop
windows and stood in the like Clothes, looking him in the face but said nothing
to him. And the next Night after, as Goddard went forth into his Backside with
a Candle light in his hand, it appeared to him again in the same shape, but he
being in fear, ran into his house, and saw it no more then.

But he says, that on Thursday the 12. instant, as he came from Chilton,
riding down the Hill between the Mannor-house and Axfoord-Farm-Field, he saw
some what like a hare crosing his way, at which his Horse frighted, threw him
into the Dirt, and as soon as he could recover on his Feet, the same Apparition
there met him again in the same habit, and there standing about eight foot
directly before him in the way, spoke again to him with a loud voice: Source (a
word he commonly used when living) you have stayed long, and then said to him,
Thomas, bid William Avon take the Sword that he had of me, which is now in his
House, and carry it to the Wood, as we go to Alton, to the upper end of the
Wood, by the way side, for with that Sword I did wrong thirty years ago, and he
never prosper'd since he had that sword. And bid William Avon give his sister
Sarah twenty shillings of the money which he had of me. And do you talk with
Edward Laurence, for I borrowed twenty shillings of him several years ago, and
did say I had paid him, but I did not pay it him; and I would desire you to
pay him twenty shillings out of the Money which you had from James Elliot, at
two payments. Which money the said Goddard now says was five pounds, which
James Elliot a Baker here owed the said Avon on Bond, and which he the said
Goddard had received from the said Elliot since Michaelmas at two payments,
viz. 35. shillings at one, and 3 pound 5 shillings at another payment. And it
further said to him, tell Margaret (meaning his own Wife as he conceived) that
I would desire her to deliver up the little money which I gave to little Sarah
Tailor the Child, or any one she will trust for it. But if she will not, speak
to Edward Laurence to persuade her. But if she will not then, tell that I will
see her very suddenly. And see that this be done within a twelve month, and a
day after my decease, and peace be with you. And so it went away over the Rails
into the Wood there in the like manner, as any man would go over a Style to his
apprehension, and so he saw it no more at that time. And he says, that he paid
the twenty shillings to Edward Laurence of this town, who being present, now
does remember, he lent the said Avon twenty shillings about twenty years ago,
which none knew but himself and his Wife and Avon and his wife, and was never
paid it, again before now by this Goddard.

And this Goddard further says, that this very day by Mr. Majors order, he
with his Brother in Law William Avon went with the Sword, and about Nine a
Clock this Morning, they laid down the Sword in the Copse near the place the
Apparition had appointed Goddard to carry it: and then coming away thence,
Goddard looking back, saw the same Apparition again in the like habit as
before. Whereupon he called to his Brother in Law* and said, Here is the
Apparition of our Father, who said, I see nothing. Then Goddard fell on his
knees, and said, LORD open his eyes that he may see it, if it be thy blessed
Will. And the Apparition to Goddards appearance, beckned with his hand to come
to it. And then Goddard said, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
what would you have me to do? Then the Apparition said to him, Thomas take up
the Sword and follow me. To which he said, should both of us come, or but one
of us? To which, it answered, Thomas, do you take up the Sword. And so he took
up the Sword and followed the Apparition about ten Poles in length further into
the Copse, and then turning back, he stood still about a Pole and a half from
it, his Brother in Law staying behind at the Place where they first laid down
the Sword. Then Goddard laying down the Sword upon the Ground saw something
stand by the Apparition like a Mastiff-Dog of a Brown Color. Then the
Apparition coming toward Goddard, he stepped back about two steps. And the
Apparition said to him, I have a permission to you, and a Commission not to
touch you: And then it took up the Sword, and went back to the Place, at which
before it stood, with a Mastiff-Dog by it as before, and pointed the top of the
Sword into the Ground, and said, In this place lies buried the Body of him,
whom I murdered in the year 1635. Which is now rotten and turned to Dust.
Whereupon Goddard said, I do adjure you in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, when did you commit this Murder. And it said, I took Money from the
Man, and he contended with me, and so I murdered him. Then Goddard asked him,
who was Confederate with him in the said Murder? And he said, None but my self
was accessory thereto. Then Goddard said, What would you have me to do in this
thing? And the Apparition said, This is, that the World may know that I
murdered a Man, and buried him in this place in the year 1635.

Then the Apparition laid down the Sword, on the bare ground there, whereon
grew nothing, but seemed to Goddard to be as a Grave sunk in. And then the
Apparition rushing further into the Copse, vanished, and saw it no more.
Whereupon Goddard his Brother in Law Avon, leaving the Sword there, and coming
away together, Avon told Goddard he heard his voice, and understood what he
said, and heard other words distinct from his, but could not understand a word
of it, nor saw any Apparition at all. Which he now also present affirms, and
all which the said Goddard then attested under his hand, and affirmed, he will
depone the same, when he shall be thereto required.

RELATION XV. Some observable Passages of GODS Providence to a Godly Minister,
in giving him full clearness concernin Bessie Graham, suspect of Witchcraft.
SHE was apprehended about the end of August 1649. upon some threatening words,
she had spoken in her drunkenness to John Rankins Wife in Kilwinning. Whereupon
the poor Woman ten days after took Sickness, and shortly died. She was
imprisoned in the Steeple, for the space of thirteen weeks, all which time I
(the Minister) repared to her, but found her still more and more obdured. In
all her discourses she was so subtle, that not only I could get no advantage
by her words, but sometimes she made me think, that she was an innocent Woman;
so that I was much grieved for her hard usage, if it could have been helped,
and had my own secret Wishes, she had never been meddled with. Yea, if she could
have made an escape, I being innocent of it, I could have been glade: for I
feared much, that all we could get proven on her, would not have been a
sufficient ground, for the Civil Magistrate, to give a warrant, for putting her
to an Assize. Or if they had given a warrant I feared the Assize would not
condemn her unless I had advised them thereto, wherein I was not clear, so that
she should have been set at Liberty, and I blamed for it, by reason of my not
advising the Assize to condemn her. At this nick of time one Alexander Bogs
skilled in searching the Mark, came, being often sent for, and finds the Mark
upon her ridge-Back, wherein he thrust a great Brass Pin, of which she was not
sensible: neither did any blood follow, when the Pin was drawn out. I looked
upon this but as a small evidence, in respect of what I found afterward* yet
this somewhat inclined the Judges to send the Process to Edinburgh, though
there were small hopes of obtaining a Commission for putting her to an Assize.
My fears deceived me, for I was informed that a Commission was granted, though
with difficulty. But here my strait was augmented, for the chiefest man in the
parish refuses to meet professing he thought all that was proven on her, were
but Clatters. And I was informed, that others of the Judges did say little
less. However, I, my self could not but think her guilty: Yet if the Assize had
put her to it, I was not so clear to advise them, by Reason, that the things
were proven but by one Witness. This put me to many thoughts and Prayers,
wherein I did engadge my self to GOD, that if he should find out a way for
giving me, and the Assize full clearness, either by her own Confession or
otherwise, I should remarke it as a singular Favor, and special Mercy. This
Resolution I did often reiterate, Lord make me mindful of it. After a short
time, Providence brought to light an unexpected Presumption of her guiltiness,
which did convince me more, than any of the rest. Upon Wednesday the 28 of
November in the evening I went to exhort her to a confession, with Alexander
Sympson the Kirk-Officer, and my own servant with me: After laboring with her
in vain, we leave her. But when I came to the stair-head, I resolved to halt a
little to hear what she would say. Within a very short space, she begins to
discourse, as if it had been to some body with her. Her voice was so low, that
I could not understand what she said, except one sentence, whereby I perceived,
she was speaking of somewhat I had been challenging her of, and she had denied.
After she had spoken this, after a little while I hear another voice, speaking
and whispering; as it were conferring with her, which presently I apprehended
to be the Foul-Fiends voice: but being uncertain, if those who were with me had
heard it, so as they could give testimony concerning it, and not daring to ask
them, least she hearing our whispering should have spoken no more, I resolved
to stand a little longer, she having kept silence a time, upon occasion, as I
thought of some little din amongst us, at our hearing of an uncouth voice. She
began to speak again, and before she had well ended, the other voice speaks
as it were a long sentence, which though I understood not what it was, yet was
so low and ghoustie, that I was certainly persuaded that it was another voice
than hers. Besides, her Accent and manner of speaking was, as if she had been
speaking to some other:, and that other voice, to my best remembrance, did
begin before she had closed, so that two voices were to be heard at once.

By this time fear took hold on Alexander Sympson, being hindmost in the Stair,
and thereby he cries out. I did exhort him with a loud voice not to fear; and
so we came all of us down the stair, blessing GOD that had given me such a
clearness in the business. They both who were with me declared, They had heard
the uncouth how voice, both the times. Within a quarter of an hour I go up
again, with two or three able men with me, and brought her down to the School,
having placed six men to watch, where she remains at the time of my Writing
hereof, November 30. obstinate and obdured, and I fear she shall be so to her
death.

Some special Providencies I observed in all these.
First, That however we knew nothing at our first apprehending of her, but only
that she was of a bad report, and had some boasting words to John Rankings
wife, after which she dyed shortly, yet partly more and more light brake up
until so many Presumptions were proven on her, as the Civil Magistrate did
judge it equitable to put her to an Assize. ( 2) That Alexander Bogs came and
found the Mark upon her, at that very nick of time, when there was an
inclination to let her go free: which though it did not say much, yet it was a
mean to keep her still in Prison. ( 3) That a Commission was granted upon more
slender grounds, than any which had been granted before: and that the Lord
kept up the greatest evidence of her guilt, until the Commission was
obtained, and the day for the Assize appointed. ( 4) That the Commission being
granted, I was in a great Strait, what to do, no less being presented to me
than her Blood-guiltiness, if I should advise to condemn her, and the sparing
of an enemy to GOD, if I should not advise. This made the mercy, in giving me
so full clearing the more acceptable. ( 5) That GOD did make all other means
misgive which I did use, until he should clear me by these, wherein more of
himself was soon. ( 6) That before he gave me clearing, I was made to engadge
my self, to a special Observation of his most remarkable Providence toward
me. ( 7) That I had often thoughts to use these means of trying her, by going
to watch in the night, if I could hear the Devil and her conferring together,
but was always hindered until this time, having no such resolution, when I was
coming out from her, but only a present purpose to stand but a little, not
thinking to hear any thing of this kind, and if she had not presently begun to
speak, I would have gone away. ( 8) That I my self was present at the hearing
of their conference. If it had been any other, I would neither have been so
fully satisfied my self, nor yet others who should hear of it. ( 9) That not
only I, but two with me did hear also, which will make a legal proof. ( 10)
That I was born up with courage all the time acting Faith in GOD, that the Foul
Spirit should not have power to do us harm, though he was so near unto us. (
11) That I heard as much as did give full clearing, that it was another voice,
though I could not get any of the words understood. The Lord thinking it
sufficient to loose me out of my strait, though he would not satisfy my
Curiosity. ( 12) Though I could not get the words understood, yet there was as
much evidence as made it clearly appear, it was another voice than hers.

As first, that we heard twice. And (2) that three of us did so think. ( 3)
That I was in courage, and so my judgment not jumbled by any fearful
apprehensions. ( 4) That the Accent and way of her discourse, and in what we
did understand of it, was not after the manner, how one regrates a thing to
himself, but of one conferring with another. ( 5) That the other Voice was to
my certain hearing of a different Accent from hers, so hollow and ghoustie,
that it was as easy to me to put a difference between them in the mean time,
as between the Voice of a Man and the Voice of a Child. ( 6) That to my best
Remembrance the Uncouth Voice began before she ended, so that two Voices were
to be heard at once. Lastly, Alexander Sympson under stood their language, and
afterward did depone the words judicially.

It is good ( 1) For folk to hold on in doing of duty, though they foresee
insuperable difficulties before they come to the end of it. Let a man go on
till he come to the difficulty, and ere he come that far on, GOD will remove
it. ( 2) Its good in asking Mercies to engadge the heart to some duties of
thankfulness, upon the granting of them. ( 3) How zealous is the Devil to get
Souls damned. That though he be of an excellent substance, of great natural
Parts, long Experience, and deep understanding, yet he will so far inslave
himself to poor Miscreant Bodies, as to be ready at their call, to discourse
and keep Company with them, that at the last he may get them. ( 4) How
serviceable and trusty so ever the Devil seems to be unto Witches, yet he
cares not to ensnare them at the last: for he could not but know, that we were
waiting on to hear him and her: so that on purpose he has entered in discourse
with her, that she might be taken in the Grin.

I come to some other remarkable passages concerning Elizabeth Graham before
her death, giving evidence that she was most guilty of Witchcraft, though she
died obstinate, and would not confess. Upon Saturday night, November 13 she
seemed to incline to a Confession, and promised to William Wat to tell me to
morrow after Sermon all that was in her heart. At which time, I had none with
me, but William Wat. When I spoke with her, She regrated her misspent time, but
especially her malice toward my self; which she affirmed the Devil tempted her
to. All which time she spoke with a very low voice, that although I desired her
to speak out, we could scarcely hear her. Whereupon, I enquired the Reason, why
she was not able to speak louder? She replied, that when she set her self to
speak any thing that was for her Souls good, she dought not get spoken. These
were her words But if she would scold and flyte, as she used to do, the Devil
would give her strength enough to speak as loud as ever she did. Within a
little I posed her, if she was guilty of Witchcraft? She stareth with her eyes
by me, first to the one side, and then to the other: at which time, I think
certainly she saw the Devil. For immediately after, she began to rail upon me,
although she had confessed her malice at me, was partly the cause of her
greatest grief, and still as she went on in railling, her voice became stronger
and stronger, till at last, she spoke as loud as ever she did.

Upon Monday before noon, she was most bitter in her Language. I posed her,
what grounds of confidence she had, if it would be well with her Soul? She
answered, she had no grounds yet; for she had lived a wicked woman, and had not
yet repented; but she hoped, she would get Heaven, and get repentance, and a
change wrought in her: and though she was to live but a short while, she was
sure of it, and that I would soon see it. I thought in the mean time she had
spoken that in her rage. But after, I perceived the Devil and she had an
further design in it, as appears by what follows. That same day afternoon they
came, and told me, that she had fallen to pray, and had many gracious words,
expressing her own vileness, and the sense she had of GODS Mercy, and with
tears, in which strain she continued till after supper. I came then to see her,
at which time she was continuing still as before in aggreging her sin, and
guilt, and showing her hopes of Salvation, and her desire to die, and all
alongs she had such pithy expressions, and Scripture so often, and plentifully
cited, that I was put to wonder; considering that I had ever found her
altogether ignorant of the grounds of Religion, both before and after she was
put into Prison.

After I had wondered at it a while, without speaking to her, considering what
she had foretold so confidently before noon, I concluded in my own mind, that
it was a draught between the Devil and her, to fenzie Repentance in such an odd
way, that we might be deceived; being made to think, that she was not a Witch,
else she would confess it, seeing GOD had given her Repentance.

Whereupon I seriously considering the matter, I posed her of guiltiness, she
confessed all the particulars of the Process, which did not certainly conclude
her to be a Witch, but for the rest of the particulars, she denied, as also the
Crime of Witchcraft it self. However, she said, she knew she would die, and
desired not to live; and she thought we would be free before GOD of her blood,
because, that however she was free, yet there were so many things deponed
against her, that though it was hard for us to think otherwise of her than we
did, yet she knew well enough her own innocence.

Thus I have written all these particulars, as I found them in the Authentic
Record written by the Ministers own hand. She was soon after executed, and died
without any acknowledgement of Witchcraft.

RELATION XVI. Anent the Apparition of Sir George Williers.
SOme few days before the Duke of Buckingham went to Portsmouth where he was
Stabbet by Felton, the Ghost of his Father Sir George Williers appeared to one
Parker, a religious and sober man, who had been a servant to the said sir
George, but now servant to the Duke his Son, he appeared to him (I say) in his
Morning-Chamber-Gown, and charged him to tell his Son that he should decline
that Employment and Design, he was going upon, or else he would certainly be
murdered. Parker promised to the Apparition to do it. The Duke making
preparations for his Expeditions, the Apparition came again to Parker, taxing
him very severely for his breach of Promise, and required him not to delay the
acquainting his Son of the danger he was in. Then Parker the next day tells the
Duke, that his Fathers Ghost had twice appeared to him, and had commanded him,
without any further delay, to give him that warning. The Duke slighted it, and
told him, he was an old Doting Fool. That night the Apparition came to Parker a
third time, saying, Parker thou have done well in warning my Son of his danger,
but though he will not yet believe thee, Go to him once more however, and tell
from me by such a Token (naming a private token) which no body knows but only
He and I, that if he will not decline this Voyage; such a Knife as this is
(pulling a long Knife out from under his Gown) will be his Death. This Message
Parker also delivered the next day to the Duke, who when he heard the private
Token, believed he had it from his Fathers Ghost. Yet said he, that his honor
was now at the Stake, and he could not go back from what he had undertaken,
come Life come Death. This passage, Parker after the Dukes Murder communicated
to his fellow Servant Henry Celey, who told it to a Reverend Divine a Neighbor
of mine (says my Author) from whose Mouth I have it. This Henry Celey has not
been dead above twenty years, and his habitation for several years before his
death was at North-Currie, but three miles from this place. My friend the
Divine aforesaid was an intimate Acquaintance of this Henry Celey's, and
assures me he was a Person of known Truth and Integrity.

RELATION XVII. Anent Hattaraik an old Warlock.
THis man's name was Sandy Hunter, who called himself Sandy Hamilton, and it
seems was called Hattaraik by the Devil, and so by others, as a Nickname. He
was first a Neat-herd in East-Lothian to a Gentleman there. He was much given
to Charming. and cureing of Men and Beasts by Words and Spells. His Charms
sometimes succeeded, sometimes not. On a day herding his kine upon a Hill side
in the Summer time, the Devil came to him in form of a Mediciner and said
Sandy, you have too long followed my trade, and never acknowledged me for your
Master. You must now take on with me, and be my servant, and I will make you
more perfect in your Calling. Whereupon the man gave up himself to the Devil,
and received his Mark, with this new name. After this, he grew very famous
throw the Country, for his Charming and cureing of diseases in Men and Beasts,
and turned a vagrant fellow, like a Iockie, gaining, Meal, Flesh, and Money by
his Charms, such was the ignorance of many at that time. Whatever House he came
to, none durst refuse Hattaraik an alms, rather for his ill, than his good. One
day he came to the Yait of Samuelstoun, when some Friends after Dinner were
going to Horse. A young Gentleman brother to the Lady seeing him, switcht him
about the ears, saying, You Warlok Cairle, what have you to do here? Whereupon
the Fellow goes away grumbling, and was overheard say, you shall dear buy this
ere it be long. This was Damnum Minatum. The young Gentleman conveyed his
Friends a far way off and come home that way again, where he supt. After supper
taking his horse, and crosing Tine-Water to go home; he rides throw a shadowy
piece of a Haugh, commonly called the Allers, and the evening being somewhat
dark, he met with some Persons there that begat a dreadful consternation in
him, which for the most part, he would never reveal. This was malum secutum.
When he came home, the Servants observed terror and fear in his Countenance.
The next day he became distracted and was bound for several days. His Sister
the Lady Samuelstown hearing of it, was heard say, suerly that knave Hattaraik,
is the cause of his Trouble. Call for him in all haste. When he had come to
her, Sandy, says she,, what is this you have done to my Brother William? I
told him, says he, I should make him repent his stricking of me at the yait
lately. She giving the Rogue fair words, and promising him his Pock full of
Meal, with Beaf, and Cheese, persuaded the Fellow to cure him again. He
undertook the business, but I must first (says he,) have one of his Sarks,
which was soon gotten. What Pranks he played with it cannot be known. But within
a short while the Gentleman recovered his Health. When Hattaraik came to
receive his wadges, he told the Lady, your Brother William shall quickly go off
the Country but shall never return. She knowing the Fellows Prophesies to hold
true, caused her Brother make a Disposition to her of all his Patrimony, to the
defrauding of his younger brother George* After that this Warlock had abused
the Country for a long time, he was at last apprehended at Dumbar, and brought
into Edinburgh, and burnt upon the Castle-hill.

I have insert this story, which I had from the Gentleman's own Brother, a thing
well known at that time through the Country, not so much for any great matters
in it, as that it may be an occasion to me to speak a little of Charms. The
word Charm, or Incantation comes from the Latin word Carmen, signifying a
verse, because the RomanSouthsayers gave their Charms in Verse. It is only a
strange composure of words to blind the Understanding of People, pretending
that by virtue of Words great matters may be brought to pass. But words of
themselves, either spoken or written, (as these charms) have no force to bring
any thing to pass. It is only the power of Almighty God. Charming is much
practiced by the Pope, and the Romish-Church. Their whole form of Religion both
in private and in public consisting of Charms of all sorts. Pope Leo had a
Charm, which he said he had from an Angel, who taught him, that whosoever
earried that Charm in writ about him, and said every day three Pater Nosters,
three Aves, and one Creed, shall not that day be conquered of his enemies, nor
be in other danger ghostly or bodily, but shall be protected by these holy
names of Jesus Christ written, with the four Evangelists, and Crosses between
them, as Jesus Christus Messiah Soter Emanuel, etc. It is still a common
practice among the Papists to carry Charms about them, to make them Shot-Free
when they go to War, as also has been found by experience in the late Irish
Wars, many of the Idolatrous Irish being found with Charms in their Pockets,
composed by the Popish Clergy. They make their Holy Water by a Charm or
Conjuration thus. I conjure thee, thou Creature of Water: in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that thou drive the Devil out of every Corner of
this Church and Altar; so that he remain not within our Precinks, which are
Just and Holy. This is used in the Dedication of their Churches. Thus by Holy
Water, they not only conjure the Devil from their Churches, but from dwelling
Houses, from Meat and Drink, from Salt upon the Table. They dedicate their
Bells in Steeples, which have power to clear the Air from Devils. It is
likewise a sort of Charm, which many Witches have prescrived namely to cut the
Rouan-Tree between the two Beltan days. If any Man or Woman, Horse, or Cow
shall have a piece thereof upon them, no Devils or Fairy* shall have power, to
meddle with them. An old Woman whom I read of, used this Charm, when she went to
Bed.

Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
The Bed be blessed that I ly on.
Another Old Woman taught her Neighbor this Charm, when the Butter would not
Churn.

Come Butter come,
Come Butter come,
Peter stands at the Gate,
Waiting for a Buttered Cake,
Come Butter come.
RELATION XVIII. The Appearing of the Ghost of Mistress Bretton.
DOctor Bretton late Rector of Ludgate, at Deptford, lived formerly in
Herefordshire, and married the Daughter of Doctor Santer. This Gentlewoman was
a Person of extraordinary Piety, which she expressed as in her life so at her
death. She had a Maid, that she had a great kindness for; who was married to a
near Neighbor, whose name as I remember was Alice. Not long after her death,
as Alice was rocking her Child in the evening, she was called from the Cradle
by one knocking at the Door, which being opened, she was surprised at the sight
of a Gentlewoman, not to be distinguished from her late Mistress, neither in
Person, nor Habit. She was in a morning Gown, the same in appearance with that
she had often seen her Mistress wore. At first sight she expressed very great
amazement, and said, were not my Mistress dead, I should not question but you
are she. She replied, I am the same that was your Mistress, and took her by the
hand which Alice affirmed was cold as a Ston.

She added, that she had business of great importance to employ her in, and
that she must go immediately a little way with her. Alice trembled and
beseeched her to excuse her, and entreated her very importunatly to go to her
Master, who must needs be more fit to be employed. She answered, that he who
was her Husband, was not at all concerned, but yet she had a desire rather to
make use of him, and in order thereunto had several times been in his Chamber,
but he was still asleep, nor had she power to do more than once uncover his
feet toward the awakening of him. And the Doctor said, that he did hear a
walking in his Chamber in the Night, which till now he could give no account
of. Alice next objected, that her husband was gone a Journey, and she had no
one to look to her Child, that it was very apt to cry vehemently, and she
feared if it awakened before her return, it would cry it self to death, or do
it self mischief The Apparition replied, the Child shall sleep till your return.

Alice seeing there was no avoiding it, sorely against her will followed her
over a Style into a large Field, who then said to her, observe how much of this
Field I measure with my Feet. And when she had taken a good large and leisurely
compass, she said, all this belongs to the Poor, it being gotten from them by
wrongful means, and charged her to go, and tell her Brother, whose it was at
that time, that he should give it up to the Poor again forthwith, as he loved
her, and his deceased Mother. This Brother was not the Person, who did this
unjust act, but his Father. She added, that She was the more concerned, because
her name was made use of at some Writing, that related to this Land.

Alice asked her how she should satisfy her Brother, that this was no Cheat or
Delusion of her Fancy. She replied, tell him this secret which he knows, that
only himself and I are privy to, and he will believe you. Alice having promised
to her to go on in this Errand, she proceeded to give her good advice, and
entertained her all the rest of the Night, with most heavenly and divine
discourse. When the Twilight appeared they heard the Noise of Horse-Bells.
Whereupon the Apparition said, Alice, I must be seen by none but your self, and
so she disappeared.

Immediately Alice in all haste runs home, being thoughtfull for her Child, but
found it as the Apparition had said, asleep as she left it. When she had
dressed it and committed it to the care of a Neighbor, away she went to her
Master the Doctor, who amazed at the account she gave him, sent her to his
Brother in Law. He at first hearing Alice's Story and Message, laughed at it
heartily. But she had no sooner told him the secret, but he changed his
Countenance, and told her, he would give the Poor their own, and accordingly he
did it, and they now enjoy it.

This with more circumstances many times has been related by Doctor Bretton
himself, who was well known to be a Person of great goodness and sincerity. He
gave a large Narrative of this Apparition of his Wife to two of my Friends,
says my Author. First to one Mistress Needham, and afterward a little before
his death to Doctor Whichcot.

RELATION XIX. Touching an Apothecaries Servant that returned to the Shop,
after he had been dead.
THis is a known passage, which happened in the year 1659, at Crossen in
Silesia. This is a part of Germany, which long since was under the Polonians,
but is now subject to the Crown of Bohemia. The chief Magistrate of that town
at that time was the Princes Elizabeth Charlotta, a person famous in her
generation. In the Spring of the aforesaid year, one Christopher Monig, a
Native of Serbest, a town belonging to the Princes of Anhalt, servant to an
Apothecary, died and was buried with the usual Ceremonies of the Lutheran
Church. A few days after his decease, a shape exactly like him in face,
clothes, stature, mien, etc. appeared in the Apothecaries shop, where he would
set himself down, and walk sometimes, and take Boxes, Pots, Glasses from the
Shelves, and set them again in their places, and sometimes try and examine the
goodness of the Medicines, weigh them in a pair of Scales, pound the Drugs with
a mighty noise in the Mortar. Nay serve the People, that came with their Bills
to the Shop, take their Money, and lay it up safe in the Counter. In a word, do
all things that a Iourney-man in such cases uses to do. He looked very ghastly
upon these that had been his Fellow Servants, who were afraid to say any thing
to him. And his Master being sick at the time of the Gout, he was often very
troublesome to him, would take the Bills that were brought him, out of his
hand, snatch away the Candle sometimes, and put it behind the Stove. At last,
he took a cloak that hung in the Shop, put it on, and walked abroad, but
minding no body in the Streets, entered into some of the Citizens houses, and
thrust himself into their company, especially of such as he had formerly known,
yet saluted no Body, nor spoke to any one, but to a Maid servant, whom he met
with hard by the Church-yeard, and desired her to go home to his Masters house,
and dig in a ground chamber, where she would find an inestimable treasure. But
the Maid amazed at the sight of him, sounded, whereupon he lift her up, but
left such a mark upon her flesh, with lifting her, that it was to be seen for
some time after. The Maid having recovered her self, went home, but fell
desperately sick upon it, and in her sickness discovered what Monig had said to
her: and accordingly they dug in the place, she had named, but found nothing
but on old decayed Pot with an Hematites, or Bloodstone in it. The Princes
hereupon caused the young man's Body to be dug up, which they found putrified
with purulent Matter flowing from it: and the Master being advised to remove
the young Man's Goods, Linnens, Clothes, and things, he left behind him, when
he died out of the house, the Spirit thereupon left the House, and was seen no
more. And this some People now living will give their Oath upon, who very well
remember they saw him after his decease, and the thing being so notorious,
there was instituted a Public Disputation about it in the Academy of Leipsig,
by one Henry Conradus, who disputed for his Doctors degree in the University.
And this puts me in mind of an Apothecary at Reichenbach in Silesia, about
fifteen years ago, who after his death appeared to diverse of his acquaintance
and cr^ed out* that in his life time he had poisoned several men with his
Drugs. Whereupon the Magistrates of the town took up his Body and burnt it;
which being done, the Spirit disappeared, and was seen no more.

RELATION. XX. A Wonderful Story of one Robert Churchman, inveigled in
Quakerism, and possessed by a Spirit, and how he was recovered: written by way
of Letter by Doctor John Templar.
SIR, Your desiring to be acquainted with some Passages concerning the Quakers
in this Town of Balsham, obliges me to give you the following account. At my
first settlement her^ in the Ministry, I found them very busy in enticeing my
People to a compliance with their persuasions in Religion. This desinge they
did attempt to accomplish by dispersing their Papers among them. Two of my
Parishioners I had a particular eye upon, namely, Robert Churchman, and his
Wife, they being persons of a very good life, and a pleasant estate. I was
under a fear, that their departure from the Church, might be a means to induce
others to the same practice. The first, in my discourses I had with him, did
manifest a very strong inclination to the Principles of the Quakers. The second
was so far engaged, (meaning the said Roberts wife) that the Quakers did
commonly report, that a Principle was begun in her.

As I was one day in conference with the said Robert Churchman, I desired him,
that when any of their Books came to his hand, he would do me the kindness to
bring them to me, that we might read them over together, assuring him of no
unwillingness in me to hearken to what soever should appear reasonable. What I
desired he performed not long after. When I had received the paper into my
hand, before I began to read, I suggested to him, that it would be convenient,
that the Person who had been the cause of his seduction should be sent for, and
hear what was replied to the Contents, which he willingly consented to. When
the Quaker was come, one branch of our discourse was, Whether the Scripture is
to be owned as a Rule, which the Quaker denied, asserting that the Rule was
within them. After the expense of two or three hours discourse about this and
other matters, I desired Robert Churchman to take notice, that the Quakers did
not own the Scriptures for their Rule. Which before this conference I had
intimated to him, but found him unwilling to believe it.

It pleased GOD so far to bless what was spoken that the next time he met his
Brother Thomas Churchman, he told him of what had passed at my house, and that
now he was assured that the Quakers did not acknowledge the Scripture for their
Rule; and for his Part he would not be of that Religion, which does disown the
Scripture in that Particular.

Not long after, the Wife of the forementioned Quaker coming to his house to
visit his Wife, he met her at the Door and told her she should not come in,
intimating that her visit would make division betwixt them. After some Parley
the Quakers Wife spoke unto him in these Words, Thou will not believe except
thou see a sign, and thou mavest see some such. Within a few nights after,
Robert Churchman had a violent storm upon the Room where he lay, when it was
very calm in all other parts of the town, and a voice within him, as he was in
Bed, spoke to him, and bid him Sing Praises, sing Praises telling him, that he
should see the New Jerusalem, about which time a Glimmering light appeared all
about the Room. Toward the morning, the Voice commanded him to go out of his
Bed naked, with his Wife, and Children. They all standing upon the Floor, the
Spirit making use of his tongue bid them to lie down, and put their mouths in
the dust which they did accordingly. It like-wise commanded them to go, and
call his Brother, and Sister, that they might see the New Jerusalem, to whom he
went naked about half a Mile. When he had delivered his Message, that which
spoke within him, charged him to denounce wrath against them, and declare that
Fire and Brimstone would fall upon them as it did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, if
they did not obey, and so he returned to his own house. Where, upon the Floor
of a low Room, he stood naked about three or four hours. All that while, he was
acted in a very unusual manner. Sometimes the Spirit within forced him to Sing,
sometimes to Bark like a Dog. When his Brother and Sister who followed him,
were very importunate with him to resist it, it bid him to kill them, making
use of these words, These my enemies which would not, that I should reign over
them, bring and slay them before my face. It made him to utter with great
readiness many places of Scripture, which he had no knowledge of before. The
drift of what was spoken was to persuade him to comply with the Quakers, and it
named some, who live in the Neighboring towns. About three or four hours being
thus spent, he came to himself, and was able to give a perfect account of what
had befallen him.

Several Nights after, the same trouble returned upon him. His Wife was
tortured with extraordinary pains. The Children which lay in the Room
complained that their Mouths were stopped with Wool, as they were in Bed. The
disturbance was so great, that he had thoughts of leaving his house for a time,
and made it his desire, to be with me at mine. I prevailed with him, not to be
so sudden in his removal, but to make some further trial. It pleased GOD upon a
continuance with him in Prayer every day in the house, that he was at last
perfectly free from all molestation. The Quakers hearing of his condition, gave
it out, that the power of God would come upon him again, and that the wound was
but skinned over by the Priest, which made me the more importunate with him to
keep close to the public service of GOD, and have nothing to do with them, or
their writings. Which direction be observed till Novem. 1661 and perusing one
of their books, a little after, on the 10 of that Month his troubles returned.
A voice within him, began to speak after the former manner. The first sentence
it uttered was, Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is
he to be accounted? The design which he discerned, that it did aim at was this,
to take him off from coming to the Church, (where he had been that day) and
from hearing the Word of GOD. It suggested several other Scriptures, in order
to the persuading him to a compliance with the Quakers, and told him, That it
would strive with him, as the Angel did with Jacob. Upon Wednesday at night, he
was peremptory in his resisting of it. When it began to solicit him, he
replied, That he saw it was a Spirit of delusion, which he would not obey. Upon
which the Spirit denounced a curse against him, in these words, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, and so left him with a very great heat in his body.

After this, he was in his own apprehension in a very comfortable condition,
and while he was considering what had happened, a Voice within him spoke to him
saying, That the Spirit which was before upon him, was a Spirit of Delusion,
but now the true Spirit of GOD was come unto him. Now Satan is turned into an
Angel of Light. It acquainted him that the Doctrine of the Trinity was true,
and that GOD had an Elect People, and that those whom the Father had Elected,
the Son had Redeemed, and whom Christ Redeemeth, the Holy Ghost Sanctifies.
And told him, That the Minister of the Town would further instruct him about
the truth of these things. Upon Thursday morning about break of day, it set him
upon his knees, as he was in bed, and bid him Farewell. The same day it came
upon him in the Fields, as he was going to, and coming from the Market, and
pressed upon him to believe, that it was the Good Spirit which he was Acted
with, which be still doubted of. One night that week amongst many Arguments,
which it used to that purpose, it told him, if he would not believe without a
sign, he might have what sign he would. Upon that Robert Churchman desired, if
it was a Good Spirit, that a Wier-Candlestick which stood upon the Cupboard
might be turned into Brass, which the Spirit said, he would do. Presently there
was a very unsavory smell in the Room, like that of the snuff of a Candle
newly put out; but nothing else was done toward the fulfiling of the promise.

Upon the Lord's Day following, he being at Church it came upon him. When the
Chapters were named, he turned to them in his Bible, but was not able to read.
When the Psalm was sung, he could not pronounce a syllable. Upon Monday morning
his speech was wholly taken from him. When I came to him, and asked him, how it
was with him? He moved his head toward me, but was not able to speak. I waited
an hour or two in the Room, hoping that his speech might have returned unto
him, and that I might have gained from him some account of his condition. But
finding no alteration, I desired those who were present to join with me in
Prayer. As we were praying, his Body with much Violence was thrown out of the
bed, and then with great vehemence he called to me, to hold my tongue. When
Prayer was done, his tongue was bound as bebefore, till at last he brake forth
into these words, Thine is the kingdom, thine is the kingdom, which he repeated
above an hundred times. Sometimes he was forced into extreme Laughter,
sometimes into Singing. His hands were usually employed in beating of his
breast. All of us, (there present) who stood by could discern unusual heavings
in his Body. This distemper did continue toward the morning of the next day,
and then the Voice within him, signifying to him, that it would leave him,
bidding him to get upon his knees in order to that end which he did, and then
presently he had a perfect command of himself.

When I came to him, he gave me a sober account of all the passages of the Day
before, having a distinct remembrance of what the Spirit forced him to do, and
what was spoken to him by those who stood by. In particular he told me, he was
compelled to give me that disturbance in prayer which before I mentioned, the
Spirit using his Limbs and Tongue as it pleased, contrary to the Inclination of
his own thought and mind.

Upon the Thursday following the Spirit began to rage after its former manner,
as I was praying with him, it was very discernable how it wrought upon his
Body, forced him to grate his Teeth, and draw his Mouth awry. He told me,
after I had done that it bid him to denounce woe against me. It pleased GOD pon
continuance in Prayer with him, to release him of all his trouble, and so far
make it advantageous to him and his Wife, and some others, which were too much
biased with the Principles of the Quakers, that now they have a perfect
dislike of that way, and do diligently attend upon the public service of GOD
in the Parochial Church.

Sir, you may be confident of the Truth of what is here related by your assured
Friend John Templar, Basham. Jan. 1. 1682.

RELATION XXI. Touching Isabel Heriot.
THis Woman was born at Peaston in the Parish of Ormiston, and was for several
years a very useful Servant to the Minister there, for all manner of
Out-House-Work. She was of a low stature, small and slender of Body, of a Black
Complexion. Her head stood somewhat awry upon her Neck. She was of a drolling
and jearing humor, and would have spoken to Persons of Honor with great
confidence.

After several years service, the Min^ster began to dislike her, especially
upon the account of her not profiting in the knowledge of GOD, she having so
much opportunity and occasion to know and learn. Therefore she was put away,
and went to other service, for a long time. After which, she returned to
Ormistoun town, and was sometimes haunting the Ministers house, but without his
knowledge. She took sickness about the beginning of Winter 1680. and about the
time of her death, her face became extremely black. Within three or four nights
after she was buried, one Isabel Murray Relick of William Craig the
Kirk-Officer, saw her Apparition about twelve a clock at night, in her White
Robes upon her, such as she was put into her Coffin with, walking from the
Chapel toward the Ministers Louping-on-stone, where (according to her custom
when she was alive) she halted a little while with her Elbow leaning upon it.
After this, she observed her to walk in at the Ministers back-yait, toward the
Stable. We have only the bare testimony of this one Woman for it. Within some
few nights after, there was a throwing of stones over the Ministers house, and
some thrown at the Hall-door and Windows. The stones were found in the Clos^
the next morning. When they lighted, they fell softly for the most part. The
Minister coming in one night, (against whom the Devils malice chiefly was) at
the backdoor, and shutting it after him, had a great stone cast after him,
which hit the door very smartly, and left a mark and impression behind it. This
she did, (or rather the Devil) in imitation of a prank she had played, while she
was alive* For the Minister having caused the other Servants thrust her out at
the same door, she threw a great stone at it with Violence, out of wrath and
anger. The foresaid Isabel Murray coming out of the Ministers house one night,
or going into it, was hit very sharply with a stone upon her back. The Servant
man that kept the Horses, after he had been at his Devotion, and was going
into his bed in the Stable, was by somewhat gripped by the heel, to his great
amazement. He giving a great and loud cry, the Mistress of the Family and others
came into the Stable, and found the Lad under a great afrightment. This night
several clods and stones were thrown, but no person touched. One thing
remarkable was, that an old Horse-comb which had been a wanting for several
years, was thrown at the Lads Bed^stead with great violence; yet wronged no
Body. The Horses would have been found the next Morning standing and lying
disorderly, and sometimes all in a great sweat.

While this Servant-man had been dressing the Garden he has found several
Stones thrown at him, but was never touched, save by one, which hit him very
favorably. The house was sometimes troubled within with some small Noise and
Din.

One time there was a burning Coal thrown under one of the Beds. One of the
Family upon a night, had his Nightcap taken off his Head in the Bed, and found
the next morning full of Sinders and Ashes, lying under the Chimney. If the
Devil could have done more, surely he would have done it. This is the most part
of the trouble, which the Family met with, which continued for eight or nine
Weeks, not every night, but now and then. During which time frequent and
fervent Prayers were sent up to God, by those of the Family, and others out of
it, which wanted not success. There was much talking of this Ghost, and things
spoken rashly, and some out of malice did invent lies and untruths. One
jearingly said, now let the Minister, and his brethren with all their Prayers,
drive away the Devil. It Is very remarkable, that after that time there was no
more trouble found about the Family.

For what follows, we have only the simple word of the foresaid Isabel Murray,
who coming home from the Church between Sermons to the Town of Ormistoun, to
visit her house, and Kail-yeard, for fear vagrant Cows had come over the Dyke;
and going down her yeard, she saw in the Ministers yeard, being next adjacent,
the Apparition of Isabel Heriot, in that same very habit she was laid into her
Coffin with. Never was one Egg liker to another than this Apparition was like
to her, as to her Face, her Stature, her Motion, her Tongue, and Behavior. As
like was the Devil to her, as Apollo was to old Butes, whom Virgil excellently
descrives in the 9. Book of his Aeneiods, bringing him down from Heaven, to
wait upon Ascanius.

Ascaniumoue petit, forma tum vertitur oris
Antiquum in Buten. -- Ibat Apollo
Omnia longaevo similis, vocemque coloremque
Et crines albos, and saeva sonantibus arma.
Apollo went, and from the Heaven descends,
And in old Butes form, to Ascanius bends.
In all points like the old man still he went,
Whom then to wait on's Son Aeneas sent.
Such his White-hair, Complexion, and his Voice,
And dreadful Arms, rattling with mighty noise.
Her face (said the Woman) was black like the mouten soot, (one of her own
expressions) the very color which her face had when she died. She saw her
walking under the Fruit Trees, and over the Beds, where the Seeds had been
sown, bowing her body downward, as if she had been seeking somewhat off the
ground, and saying to her self, A stane, a stane, for so she pronounced the
words. For she had gathered a considerable number of small stones in her lap,
which the woman saw her throw down at a Bush-root, near to the foot of the
yeard. Some may apprehend that these were the stones, which she frequently cast
in the night time. This woman seeing her, says with very great confidence, Wow!
What Is thou doing here, Isabel Heriot? I charge thee by the Law thou lives on,
to tell me? See the like expression, page 24. She replies, or rather the
Foul-Fiend in her likeness, I am even come again, because I wronged my Master,
while I was his servant. For it was I that stealled his Shekel, (This was a
Jewish Shekel of Gold, which with some other things, had been stolen from him
several years before) which I hid under the Hearth-stone in the Kitching and
then when I flited took it into the Canongate, and did offer to sell it to a
French Woman who lodged where I served, who asked where I got it. I told her, I
found it between Leith and Edinburgh. One night (says she) I was riding home
late from the Town, and near the Head of Fauside Brae, the Horse stumbled, and
I said, the Devil raise thee, whereupon the Foul* Thief appeared presently to
me and threatened me, If I would not grant to destroy my Master the Minister, he
would throw me into a deep hole there, which (I suppose) is yet remaining, or
if I could not get power over my Master, I should strive to destroy the
Shool-Master. It was very remarkable, that one of the Ministers servant-women,
had given to the Schoolmasters servant-woman some Linnings to make clean among
which there was a Cross-Cloath of strong Linning, which could never be found,
though diligent search was made for it, till one morning the Master awakening,
found it bound round about his Night Cap, which bred admiration both to himself
and his Wife. No more skaith was the Devil or the Witches able to do him. What
way this was done, or for what end, it cannot be well known, but it is somewhat
probable, that they designed to strangle and destroy him in the night time,
which is their usual time in working and doing of mischief. This happened about
the time (I suppose) that the Devil had charged Isabel Heriot to destroy this
honest man. Yet within two days a young Child of his, of a year old fell sick,
which was quickly pulled away by Death, none knowing the cause or Nature of the
Disease.

But I proceed. She confessed likewise, how the Devil met with her, a second time
at Elfiston mill, within a quarter of a mile of Ormiston, and told what the
Devil did to her.

And (says she) I was coming home one night from Hadington Market with
Horse-Corn, and met with the Devil at Knokhills, who bad me destroy Thomas
Anderson, who was riding with me. And because I refused, he threw the
horse-corn off the horse. This Thomas Anderson was a Christian man. It is well
remembered yet, that she went the next morning timously, and brought home her
Oats, which had layen there all the night. And moreover says she, I cheated my
Master when I went to the Market to buy Oats, for I made him believe, I gave
more money for the Boll, than I did. And do not you remember, Isabel Murray,
that one night, you coming out of the Ministers house, got a sore knock upon
the back with a stone? It was I, but it was not for your own sake, but for your
Good-mans sake Willy Craig, who threw me one day into the Jaw-hole, and abused
me. She told this Woman likewise, that she would fain have spoken a word with
her Master. After this conference, the Woman began to be feared; and came
running home in haste.

During all this time, there was no person in the Family, that m^t with any
hurt, or skaith, or saw any thing, such was the Lords kindness to them all. One
Isabel Elliot a Witch, confessed to the Minister, that many nights his house and
yeard would have been beset with Witches. The same woman asked the Devil one
time, why they could not get a mends of him? He told her, he was locked up.

This Woman Isabel Heriot, was never reputed a Witch, nor delated by any, for
Witchcraft. Some jearingly would have called her so. She was indeed ignorant
of Religion, notwithstanding of the excellent opportunities she had for gaining
of knowledge. Next her riding and traveling from far places in the country,
in the night, as well as in the day time and coming home late without fear, and
her stunkard and ill Nature bred suspicion. If she had confessed a Compact with
the Devil, before her death, it might have been a good ground. But this trouble
happening to the Family immediately after her death, and her Apparition being
seen, gave all occasion to say she was a Witch. But these things, do not
infallibly conclude. But what could her Apparition be? It behoved, either to be
her real Body informed and acted by the Devil (for her soul could not be
brought back) or only the Devil taking upon him her shape and form, acting and
imitating her to the life, which is more probable.

I have adventured to publish this without his knowledge, presuming so much
upon his Goodness, and love of Truth, and useful instruction of the World,
though I should displease his own humor, whilst happily I may, upon his better
consideration, gratify some more noble principle in him. For I know nothing in
the thing, that can turn to his dishonor, For the best of Men, and Families
have suffered from the Devil in extraordinary ways, and it has been their
Glory, that by their Faith and Courage, and confidence in the Arm of GOD they
have overcome him. If I have erred in some circumstances, or in any other
thing, I am to be excused, since I was not an eye witness. And what I have
written, anent the Apparition, was most part from the woman's own mouth.

RELATION. XXII. Anent a Magician at Antwerpe.
Mr. Tindal, the first Translater of the Scripture into Inglish, after the
Reformation, being at Antwerpe whilst the Persecution was hot in England
against the Truth, he was showed by some English Merchants there, of a notable
Magician in the place, whose use was at Feasts, or when they used to meet at
Supper, to bring to the Table, whatever Wines, or delicious Fruit, the Company
would desire, and set presently before them, with other amazing proofs of the
power of the Devil. Mr. Tindal perceiving what a snare this might be to some,
desired that when they met together with him, he might be present, without
being known what he was. And after they were met, and at Table, this wretched
Magician after his manner, began to try his Black Art, but it would not do with
him. For whilst he had wearied himself, in observing his Spells, Charms, and
Incantations, and what the furthest that Hellish skill and power could do, to
satisfy the Company, he was at last enforced to that Confession before them
all, which he spoke with great wrath and anger, That there was one in the
Company that hindered his work, by Reason of whom he could get nothing done at
that time.

I may add to this a strange Providence of GOD. Master John Craig, that was a
Minister to King James here in Scotland, being, when he was a Young Man,
apprehended at Room, for venting Heresy as they called it, was shut up in
Prison. In the mean time, Paul the fourth dies. The Banditi that night broke up
all the Prison doors, and set at Liberty all the Prisoners. Mr. John Craig
escapes, with an intention to go to Bononia. But fearing hurt there, he set his
mind toward Millain. When he had traveled some days, declining the Highways
out of Fear, he came into a Forest, a wild and desert place, and being sore
wearied, lay down among some Bushes, at the side of a little river, to refresh
himself. He lay there pensive, and full of thought. For neither knew he in what
place he was, nor had he any means to carry him out the way. In the mean time,
there came a Dog fawning upon him, with a purse in his teeth, with Money, and
lays it down before him. He stricken with fear, rises up, but construing the
same to proceed from GODS favorable Providence, he accepted of it, and held on
his way, till he came to Vienna in Austria.

RELATION XXIII. Anent a great Doctor of Divinity, that raise out of the Bier,
and spoke to all that were present.
IT is written in the life of one Bruno, that a Doctor of great note for
Learning and Godliness being dead, and being brought to the Church to be
buried, while they were in their Popish Devotions, and came to these words,
Responde mihi, the Corpse arose in the Bier, and with a terrible voice cried
out, Justo DEI judicio accusatus sum, I am accused at the just Judgment of
GOD. At which voice, the people ran all out afrighted. On the morrow when they
came again to perform the Obsequies, to the like words as before, the Corpse
rose again, and cried with a hideous voice, Justo DEI judicio condemnatus sum;
I am Judged at the Righteous Judgment of GOD. Whereupon the People run away
amazed. The third day almost all the City came together, and when they came to
the same words as before, the Corpse rose again, and cried with a more doleful
noise than before, Justo DEI judicio condemnatus sum, I am condemned at the
just Judgment of GOD. The consideration whereof, that a man reputed so
upright, should yet by his own confession be damned, caused Bruno, and the rest
of his Companions, to enter into that strick Order of Carthusians. The Author
and Relator makes this use of it. If the voice of the dead man could afright
them into Superstition, should not the warning of GOD afright us into True
Doctrine?

RELATION XXIV. Touching some Drunkards destroyed by the Devil.
THIS has been published in a Sermon by a Godly Minister. But I must insert it
here in its own proper place. On the 8 of February (says my Author) in the
year 1578, a company of Drunkards, whose names are recorded as follows, Adam
Gibbons, George Keepel, John Keysel, Peter Horsdroff, John Warner, Simon
Heamkers, Jacob Hermons, and Hermon Frow. These eight Drunkards in contempt of
the blessed Sabbath, agreed to go to the Tavern on the Lords day to be merry:
and coming to the house of one Antony Hodge, an honest Godly Man, they called
for Burnt-Wine, Sack, Clarat, and what not. The Good Man refusing to give them
any, advised them to go to Church to hear the Word of GOD; but they all save
Adam Gibbons, refused, saying, they loathed that Exercise. Whereupon the Host
departed, who being gone to Church, they began to curse and ban, wishing, he
might brake his neck, ere he returned; and wishing the Devil might brake their
own necks, if they went from hence, till they had some Wine.

Whereupon the Devil in the likeness of a Young Man appeared unto them,
bringing in his hand a Flagon of Wine, and so drank unto them, saying, Good
Fellows be merry, you shall have Wine enough, you seem to be lusty Lads, and I
hope you will pay me well: who answering said, They would either pay him or
engage their Neck for it. Yea, rather than fail, their Bodies and Souls. Thus
these men continued drinking, and swilling so long till they could hardly see
one another. At last the Devil their Host told them that now they must pay for
all, at which their hearts waxed cold. But the Devil bid them be of good cheer,
for now they must drink Fire and Brimstone with him in the Pit of Hell for
ever. At which the Devil break their Necks assunder and destroyed them. And
thus ended these drunkards, their miserable days. This by the way, may serve
for a Document for all Drunkards for ever, and to persuade folk, that the Lord
has the Devil for his Executioner, when he pleases to execute his vengeance
upon Notorious Sinners.

RELATION XXV. Touching one William Barton a Warlock.
ABout thirty years ago, more or less, there was one William Barton apprehended
for Witchcraft. His confession was first, that if he had twenty Sons, he would
advise them to shun the lust of uncleanness. For said he, I never saw a
beautiful Woman, Maid, nor Wife, but I did covet them, which was the only cause
that brought me to be the Devils Vassal. One day says he, going from my own
house in Kirkliston, to the Queens Ferry, I overtook in Dalmeny Muire, a young
Gentlewoman, as to appearance beautiful and comely. I drew near to her, but
she shunned my company, and when I insisted, she became angry and very nyce.
Said I, since we are both going one way, be pleased to accept of a convey. At
last, after much entreaty she grew better natured, and at length we came to
that Familiarity, that she suffered me to embrace her, and to do that which
Christian ears ought not to hear of. At this time I parted with her very
joyful. The next night, she appeared to him in that same very place, and after
that which should not be named, he became sensible, that it was the Devil. Here
he renounced his Baptism, and gave up himself to her service, and she called
him her beloved, and gave him this new name of John Baptist, and received the
Mark. She likewise bestowed fifteen pound scots upon him in name of
Tocher-good, and so parted.

After he had gone a little way off, she calls him back and gave him a
Merk-piece in good and sufficient money which She bad him spend at the Ferry,
and desired him to keep entire and whole the 15. pound, which he declared was
real and true Money. He confessed that they never met together, but they played
their Pranks. After this Confession he begged Liberty to sleep a little, which
the Judges granted to him. After he had sleept a short time, he awakened with a
great Laughter. The Judges inquired the reason. He replied, being seriously
urged, that the Devil had come to him, and rebuked him with anger, and
threatened him most furiously, that be had confessed, and bad him deny all, for
he should be his Warrant.

After this, he turned obdured, and would never to his dying hour acknowledge
any thing, for the Devil had persuaded him, even from his first engaging, that
no man should take his life, Which promise he firmly believed, to the very
last. When they told him in the prisonhouse, that the Fire was built, and the
Stake set up, and the executioner coming to bring him forth: he answered he
cared not for all that, for said he I shall not die this day. But the
Executioner got presently orders to lead him forth, and he steping in at the
Prison door in an instant shot to dead, as they say, and never stired again, In
this strait, they appointed the Executioners Wife to strangle him, which she
did willingly, a reward being promised to her. When the Warlock heard this,
that a Woman was to put him to death; O, cries he, how has the Devil deceived
me? Let none ever trust to his Promises. All this was done at Kirkliston before
famous witnesses. The Eexecutioners name was Andrew Martain and his wifes name
Margaret Hamilton, who when her Husband died clapped her hands, and cried often,
Dool for this parting, my dear burd Andrew Martin. This Bartons Wife had been
likewise taken with him, Who Declared, that She never knew him to have been a
Warlock before; And he likewise declared, That he never knew her to have been a
Witch before. She confessed that malice against one of her Neighbors, moved her
to engage in the Devils service. She renounced her Baptism and did prostrat her
Body to the Foul-Spirit, and received his Mark, and got a new name from him,
and was called Margaratus. She was asked, if ever she had any pleasure in his
company, never much says she. But one Night going to a dancing upon
Pentlandhills, he went before us in the likeness of a rough tanny-Dog, playing
on a pair of Pipes. The Spring he played (says she) was, The silly bit Chiken,
gar cast it a pickle and it will grow meikle. And coming down the hill when we
had done which was the best sport, he carried the candle in his bottom under
his tail, which played ey wig wag, wig wag. She was burnt with her husband.

There is one thing remarkable in this Story that he bestowed so much money
upon the Warlock, which proved good and sufficient Coin? It Is seldom he is so
liberal. But surely he would be more liberal, if the Lord would suffer him to
steal, or make use of Treasures lying hid in the Ground, or in the Bottom of
the Sea. If this liberty were granted, he ^ight deceive the most part of men
and women in the world, with his gifts. The next Relation, shall be in
confirmation of this.

RELATION XXVI. A Wonderful and Strange Accident which fell out at Lions in
France.
A Lieutenent of a Guard called Jaquette having supped one Night in a rich
Merchants house, was passing home and by the way, said, I wonder what I have
eaten and drunken at the Merchants house, for I find my self so hot, that if I
met with the Devils Dame this night, I could not forbear using of her.
Hereupon, a little after, he overtook a young Gentlewoman masked, whom he would
needs usher home to her Lodging, but discharged all his Company except two. She
brought him as to his apprehension, to a little low house hard by the City wall
where there were only two Rooms. After he had enjoyed her he desired that
according to the custom of French Gentlemen, his two Comerads might partake
also of the same Pleasure. So she admitted them, one after the other. And when
all was done, as they sat together, she told them, if they knew well, who she
was none of them would have adventured upon her. Thereupon she whistled three
times, and all evanished. The next morning, the two Comerads, that had gone
with the Lieutenent Jaquette were found dead under the City-wall, among the
Odure and Excrements, and Jaquette himself a little way off half dead, who was
taken up and coming to himself again confessed all this, and presently dyed.
This may verify the preceding Relation.

RELATION XXVII. A Mavelous Prank played by the Devil at Hamelen, a town in
Germany.
THis City was annoyed with Rats and Mice. It happened that a
Pied-Coated-Pyper, came thither, who covenanted with the Chief Burgers for such
a Reward, if he could free them from the said Vermin, nor would he demand it,
till a twelve Month and a day after. The Agreement being made, he began to
play on his Pipes, and all the Rats and Mice followed him to a great Lough hard
by, where they all perished; so the Town was infected no more. At the end of
the year the Piper, returned for his reward. The Burgers put him off, with
slightings and neglect, offering him some small-matter, which he refused. And
staying some days in Town, on a Sunday morning at high Mass, when most People
were at Church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and the Children up, and down,
followed him out of the Town, to a great hill not far off, which rent in two,
and opened, and let him and the Children in, and so closed up again. This
happened about 250. years since. And in that Town they date their Bills and
Bonds, and other Instruments in Law, to this day from the year of their going
out of their Children. Besides, there is a great pillar of stone erected, at
the foot of the said hill, where this Story is engraven.

RELATION. XXVIII. A Relation of the Strange Witchcraft discovered in the
Village Mohra in Swedeland.
THe News of this witchcraft coming to the Kings Ear, his Majesty was pleased
to appoint Commissioners some of the Clergy, and some of the Laity, to make a
Journey to the Town aforesaid, and to examine the whole business; and
accordingly the Examination was ordered to be on the 13. of August; and the
Commissioners met on the 12. instant, in the said Village, at the Parsons
House, to whom both the Minister, and several people of fashion complained,
with tears in their Eyes, of the miserable condition they were in, and
therefore begged of them to think of some way, whereby they might be delivered
from that Calamity. They gave the Commissioners very strange instances of the
Devils Tyranny among them; how by the help of Witches, he had drawn some
hundreds of Children to him, and made them subject to his power, how he has
been seen to go in a visible shape through the Country, and appeared daily to
the People, how he had wrought upon the Poorer sort, by presenting them with
Meat and Drink, and this way allured them to himself, with other circumstances
(...) be mentioned hereafter. The Inhabitants of the Village added, with very
great Lamentations, That though their Children had told all, and themselves
sought GOD very earnestly by Prayer, yet they were carried away by him; and
therefore begged of the Lords Commissioners, to root out this Hellish crew,
that they might regain their former Rest and Quietness; and the rather,
because the Children, which used to be carried away in the County or District
of Elfdale, since some Witches had been burnt there, remained unmolested.

That day, i. e. the 13th. of August, being the last Humiliation-day instituted
by Authority for the removing of this Judgment, the Commissioners went to
Church, where there appeared a considerable Assembly both of Young and Old: the
Children could read most of them, and sing Psalms, and so could the Women,
though not with any great Zeal or Fervor. There were preached two Sermons that
day, in which the miserable case of those people, that suffered themselves to
be deluded by the Devil, was laid open; and these Sermons were at last
concluded with very fervent Prayer.

The Public Worship being over, all the people of the Town were called
together in the Parsons House, near three thousand of them. Silence being
commanded, the Kings Commission was read publicly in the hearing of them all,
and they were charged under very great Penalties to conceal nothing of what
they knew, and to say nothing but the truth; those especially, who were guilty,
that the Children might be delivered from the Clutches of the Devil. They all
promised obedience, the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weeping and crying
bitterly.

On the 14th. of August the Commissioners met again, consulting how they might
withstand this dangerous flood, after long deliberation, an Order also coming
from his Majesty, they did resolve to execute such, as the matter of Fact could
be proven upon. Examination being made, there were discovered no less than
threescore and ten in the Village aforesaid, three and twenty of which
confessing their Crimes, were condemned to dye, the rest, one pretending she
was with Child, and the other denying and pleading not guilty, were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were afterward Executed.

Fifteen Children which likewise confessed that they were engaged in this
Withery, died as the rest. Six and thirty of them between nine and sixteen
years of age, who had been less guilty, were forced to run the Gantlet. Twenty
more, who had no great inclination, yet had been seduced to those Hellish
Enterprises, because they were very young, were condemned to be lashed with
Rods upon their hands, for three Sundays together, at the Church Door, and the
aforesaid six and thirty were also doomed to be lashed this way once a Week for
a whole Year together. The number of the seduced Children was about three
hundred.

On the twenty fifth of August, execution was done upon the notoriously guilty,
the day being bright, and Glorious, and the Sun shinning, and some thousands of
People being present at the Spectacle. The order and Method observed in the
examination was this.

First, the Commissioners and the Neighboring Justices went to Prayer: this
done, the Witches, who had most of them Children with them, which they had
either seduced, or attempted to seduce, some seven years of age, (nay from
four) to sixteen were set before them. Some of the Children complained
lamentably of the Misery and Mischief they were forced sometime to suffer of
the Devil and the Witches.

The Children being asked whether they were sure, that they were at any time
carried away by the Devil? They all declared they were; begging of the
Commissioners, that they might be freed from that intolerable slavery.

H^reupon the Witches themselves were asked, whether the Confessions of these
Children were true, and admonished to confess the Truth, that they might turn
away from the Devil unto the living GOD. At first, most of them did very
stiffly, and without the least sheding the least tear, deny it, though much
against their will and inclination. After this, the Children were examined,
every one by themselves, to s^e whether their Confessions did agree or no, and
the Commissioners found that all of them, except some very little ones, who
could not tell all the Circumstance, did punctually agree in the Confession of
Particulars.

In the mean while the Commissioners, that were of the Clergy examined the
Witches, but could not bring them to any Confession all continuing steadfast in
their denials, till at last some of them burst out into Tears, and their
Confession agreed with what the Children had said. And these expressed their
abhorrency of the Fact, and begged Pardon. Adding that the Devil, whom they
called Loeyta, had stopped the Mouths of some of them, so loath was he to part
with his prey. And had stopped the ears of others: and being now gone from them
they could no longer conceal it, for they had now perceived his Treachery.

The Confession which the Witches made in Elfdale, to the Judges there, agreed
with the Confession they made at Mohra: and the Chief things they Confessed,
consisted in these three Points. First, whether they used to go? Secondly, what
kind of place it was they went to; called by them Blockula, where the Witches,
and the Devil used to meet? Thirdly what evil and Mischief they had either
done, or Designed there?

First, of their Journey to Blo^kula. The Contents of their Confession.
We of the Province of Elfdale, do confess, that we used to go to a Gravel-Pit,
which lays hard by a Cross-way, and there we put on a Vest over our heads, and
then danced round, and after this ran to the Cross-way, and called the Devil
thrice, first with a still Voice: the second time somewhat louder: and the
third time very loud, with these words, Antecessor come and carry us to
Blockula. Whereupon immediately he used to appear, but in different Habits: but
for the most part, we saw him in a Gray-Coat, and red and blew Stockings. He
had a red beard, a high crowned Hat, with Linen of diverse colors, wrapped
about it, and long Garters upon his Stockings. It is very remarkable, that the
Devil never appears to the Witches, with a Sword at his side.

Then he asked us, whether we would serve him with Soul and Body? If we were
content to do so, he set us on a Beast, which he had there ready, and carried
us over Churches, and High Walls: and after all, we came to a Green Meadow,
where Blockula lies. We must procure some scrapings of Altars and fy^lings of
Church-Clocks: and then he gives us a horn with a Salve in it wherewith we do
anoint our selves, and a Saddle, with a Hammer, and a Wooden Nail, thereby to
fix the Saddle. Whereupon we call upon the Devil, and away we go.

Those that were of the Town of Mohra, made in a manner the same Declaration.
Being asked, whether they were sure of a real Personal Transportation, and
whether they were awake, when it was done, they all answered in the
Affirmative, and that the Devil sometimes laid something down in the place,
that was very like them* But one of them confessed, that he did only take away
her Strength, and her Body lay still upon the Ground: Yet sometimes he took
away her Body with him-

Being asked how they could go with their Bodies through Chimneys, and broken
pans of Glass, they said, that the Devil did first remove all that might hinder
them in their flight, and so they had Room enough to go.

Others were asked, how they were able to carry so many Children with them,
They answered, that when the Children were asleep they came into the Chamber,
and laid hold of the Children, which straightway did awake, and asked them,
whether they would go to a Feast with them? To which some answered, yes. Others
no, Yet they were all forced to go. They only gave the Children a Shirt, a
Coat, and a Doublet, which was either Red or Blew, and so they did set them
upon a Beast of the Devils providing, and then they rid away.

The Children confessed the same thing: and some added, that because, they had
very fine Clothes put upon them, they were very willing to go.

Some of the Children concealed it from their Parents, but others discovered it
to them presently.

The Witches declared moreover, that till of late, they had never power to
carry away Children, but only this year and the last, and that the Devil did at
this time force them to it: that heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one
of their Children, or a Strangers Child with them, which happened seldom, but
now he did plague them, and whip them, if they did not procure him many
Children, insomuch that they had no Peace, nor Quiet for him: And whereas that
formerly one journey a week would serve turn, from their own Town to the place
aforesaid, now they were forced to run to other towns and places for Children,
and that they brought with them, some fifteen some sixteen Children every night.

For their journey, they said they made use of all sorts of Instruments, of
Beasts, of Men of Spits and Posts, according as they had opportunity: if they
do ride upon Goats, and have many Children with them, that all may have room,
they stick a Spit into the Backside of the Goat, and then are anointed with
the aforesaid Ointment. What the manner of their journey is, GOD alone knows.
This much was made out, that if the Children did at any time name the names of
those, either Men or Women that had been with them, that had carried them away,
they were again carried by force either to Blockula, or to the Cross-way, and
thereby beaten, in so much that some of them died of it. And this some of the
Witches confessed, and added, That now they were exceedingly troubled and
tortured in their minds for it.

The Children thus used looked mighty Bleak Wan and Beaten. The Marks of the
Whips the Judges could not perceive in them, except in one Boy, who had some
wounds and holes in his Back, that were given him with Thorns. But the Witches
said, they would quickly vanish.

After this usage, the Children are exceeding weak. And if any be carried
Overnight, they cannot recover themselves the next Day: and they often fall
into Fits, the coming of which they knew by an extraordinary paleness, that
seizes on the Children. And when a Fit comes upon them, they lean on their
Mothers Arms, who sits up with them, sometimes all night. And when they observe
the paleness coming, shake the Children, but to no purpose.

They observe further, that their Childrens Breasts grow cold at such times;
and they take sometimes a burning candle, and stick it in their hair, which yet
is not burned by it. They Swooun upon this paleness, which Swooun lasts
sometimes half an hour, sometimes an hour, sometimes two hours, and when the
Children come to themselves again, they mourn and lament and groan most
miserably, and beg exceedingly to be eased. This the old men declared upon
Oath before the Judges, and called all the inhabitants in the Town to witness,
as Persons that had most of them experience of the strange Symptom of their
Children.

A little Girl of Elfdale confessed, that naming the name of Jesus, as she was
carried away, she fell suddenly upon the Ground, and got a great hole in her
side, which the Devil presently healed up again, and away he carried her, and
to this day the Girl confessed, she had exceeding great Pain in her side.
Another Boy confessed too, That one day he was carried away with his Mistress;
and to perform the Journey, he took his own Fathers horse out of the Meadow,
where it was feeding, and upon his return, she let the horse go in her own
Ground. The next morning the Boys Father sought for the horse, and not finding
it gave it over for lost: but the Boy told him the whole Story, and so the
Father fetched the horse back again: and this one of the Witches confessed.

We come next to the Place, where they us^d to assemble called Blockula, and
what they did there. They unanimously confessed* that Blockula is Situated in a
large Meadow, like a Plain Sea, wherein you can see no end. The Place or House
they met at, had before it a great Gate painted with many diverse colors on
it; through this Gate they went into a little Meadow distant from the other,
where the Beasts went, which they used to ride on. But the men whom they made
use of in their Journey, stood in the House by the Gate in a Slumbering
posture, Sleeping over against the Wall.

In a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very large long
Table at which the Witches did sit down. And that hard by this Room, was
another Chamber, where there were some lovely and delicate Beds.

The first thing they said, they must do at Blockula was, That they must deny
all, and devote themselves Body and Soul to the Devil, and promise to serve him
Faithfully, and confirm it with an Oath. Hereupon they cut their Fingers, and
writ their Name in his Book. They added, that he caused them to be Baptized
too, by such Priests as he had there, and made them to Confirm their Baptism
with dreadful Oaths and Imprecations. Hereupon the Devil gave them a Purse,
wherein there were fyllings of Clocks with a big Stone tied to it, which they
threw into the Water, and then were forced to speak these words. As these
fyllings of the Clock do never return to the Clock, from which they are taken,
so may my Soul never return to Heaven. To which they add Blasphemy, and other
Oaths and Curses.

The mark of their cut Fingers is not found in all of them. But a Girl who had
been slashed over her Finger, declared, that because she would not stretch out
her Finger, the Devil in anger had so cruely wounded it.

After this they sat down to Table, and those that the Devil esteemed most,
were placed nearest to him; but the Children must stand at the Door, where he
himself gives them meat and drink.

The Diet they did use to have there, was, they said, Broth with Colworts, and
Bacon in it, Oat-meal Bread spread with Butter, Milk and Cheese. And they added
that sometimes it tasted very well, and sometimes very ill. After Meals, they
went to dancing, and in the mean while swore and cursed most dreadfullie, and
afterward went to fighting one with another. Those of Elfdale confessed, That
the Devil used to play upon a Harp before them, and afterward to go with them
that he loved best into a Chamber, where he committed venereous acts with them.
And this indeed all confessed, that he had carnal knowledge of them, and that
the Devil had Sons and Daughters by them, which he did marry together, and they
did couple, and brought forth Toads and Serpents.

One day the Devil seemed to be Dead, whereupon there were great Lamentations
at Blockula: but he soon awaked again. If he has a mind to be merry with them,
he lets them all ride upon Spits before him; and he takes afterward the Spits,
and beats them black and blue, and then laughs at them. And he bids them
believe that the day of Judgment will come speedily, and therefore sets them
a work to build a great house of Stone, promising that in the house he will
preserve them from GODS fury; and cause them to enjoy the greatest delights and
pleasures: but while they work exceeding hard at it, there falls a great part
of the Wall down again, whereby some of the Witches are commonly hurt which
makes him laugh, but presently he cures them again.

They said, they had seen sometimes a very great Devil like a Dragon, with Fire
round about him, and bound with an Iron-Chain: and the Devil that converses
with them tells, that if they confess any thing, he will set that great Devil
loose upon them, whereby all Swedeland shall come unto great danger. They
added, That the Devil had a Church there, such another as in the town of Mohra.
When the Commissioners were coming, he told the Witches, they should not fear
them, for he would certainly kill them all. And they confessed, that some of
them had attempted to Murder the Commissioners, but had not been able to effect
it.

Some of the Children talked much of a white Angel which used to forbid them
what the Devil had bid them do: and told them that those things should not last
long; what had been done, had been but permitted because of the Sin and
wickedness of the People and their Parents, and that the carrying away of the
Children should be made manifest. And they added, that this white Angel would
place himself sometimes at the Door betwixt the witches and the Children: and
that when they came to Blockula, he pulled the Children back, but the witches
went in.

We come in the last place to show the Mischief and evil, which the witches
promised to do to Men and Beasts. They confessed, that they were to promise the
Devil, that they would do all that's ill: and that the Devil taught them to
Milk, which was after this manner. They used to stick a knife in the wall, and
hang a kind of a Label on it, which they drew and stroaked, and as long as this
lasted, the Persons they had power over were miserably plauged, and the Beasts
were milked that way, till sometimes they died of it.

A Woman confessed, that the Devil gave her a wooden knife, wherewith, going
into houses, she had power to kill anything, she touched with it. Yet there
were few, that would confess, that they had hurt any Man or Woman. Being asked
whether they had murdered any Children. They confessed that they had indeed
tormented many, but did not know, whether any of them died of those plagues.

And added that the Devil had showed them several places, where he had power
to do mischief.

The Minister of Elfdale declared, that one night these witches, were to his
thinking, upon the Crown of his head, and that from thence, he had a long
continued pain of the head.

One of the Witches confessed too, that the Devil had sent her to torment that
Minister; and that she was ordered to use a Nail and strike it into his head,
but it would not enter very deep; and hence came that Head ach. The Minister
said also, that one night he felt a pain, as if he were torn with an
instrument, that they cleanse Flax with, or a Flax-comb, and when he awaked, he
heard some body scratching and scraping at the Window, but could see no Body.
And one of the Witches confessed, that she was the Person that did it, being
sent by the Devil.

The Minister of Mohra declared also, that one Night one of these Witches came
into his house, and did so violently take him by the Throat, that he thought,
he should have been choked, and awakeing, he saw the Person that did it, but
could not know her, and that for some weeks, he was not able to speak, or
perform Divine service.

An old Woman of Elfdale confessed, that the Devil had helped her to make a
Nail, which she struck into a Boys knee, of which stroke the Boy remained lame
a long time. And she added, that before she was Burnt, or executed by the hand
of justice, the Boy would recover.

They confessed also, that the Devil gives them a Beast about the bigness and
shape of a young Cat, which they call a Carrier, and he gives them a Bird too,
as big as a Raven, but white. And these two Creatures, they can send any where,
and wherever they come they take away all sorts of Victuals they can get, as
Butter, Cheese, Milk, Bacon, and all sorts of seeds, whatever they can find,
and carry it to the Witch. What the Bird brings, they may keep for themselves;
but what the Carrier brings, they must reserve for the Devil, and that is
brought to Blockula, where he does give them of it so much, as he thinks fit.

They added likewise, that these Carriers fill themselves so full sometimes,
that they are forced to spew by the way, which spewing is found in several
Gardens, where Colworts grow, and not far from the houses of those Witches. It
is of a yellow Color like Gold, and is called the Butter of the Witches.

The Lords Commissioners were indeed very earnest, and took great Pains to
persuade them to show some of their Tricks, but to no purpose; for they did all
unanimously confess, that since they had confessed all, they found that all
their Witchcraft was gone, and the Devil at this time appeared to them very
terrible, with claws on his hands and feet, and with horns on his head and a
long tail behind, and showed to them a Pit burning with a hand out: But the
Devil did thrust the Person down again with an Iron-fork, and suggested to the
witches, that if they continued in their confession, he would deal with them
in the same Manner.

The above Relation is taken out of the public Register, where all this is
related with more circumstances. And at this time through all the Country
there are prayers weekly in all Churches; to the end that Almighty GOD would
pull down the Devils power, and deliver those poor Creatures, which have
hitherto groaned under it.

The Lord Lion bergh Envoy extraordinary for the King of Sweden confirmed this,
at London March 8. 1682. And gave it under his hand, that the matter of Fact
mentioned here, is true.

RELATION XXIX. Anent an Apparition seen in Gladsmuire.
I Find among some of my Notes, written in the year 1666, that Richard
Chaplain, and his Brother George both of them Merchants in Hadington, coming
home late from Edinburgh upon a Saturday Night, being the fourth of November
1666, and riding off the Muire at a place called the Two-Mile Cross, within two
mile of their own home, saw four men in Gray Clothes, and Blew Bonnets standing
round about a dead Corpse laying swadled in a winding sheet. Their Dog was so
feared that he durst not go forward but came running back among their horse
Feet. The one Brother is yet living, a sober and Christian man, who can attest
this. If I have varied, it is only in some small Circumstance, which does not
alter the thing it self. It is the more remarkable, because it was about 20
days before Rullian Green.

There was one Alice Duke an English Woman, that was taken Anno 1664, and
confessed before the Judges, that after their meetings, all the Witches make very
low obeysances to the Devil, who appears in Black Clothes, and a little Band.
He bids them Welcome at their Coming, and brings them Wine, Beer, Cakes, and
Meal, or the like. He sits at the higher end, and usually Anne Bishop sits next
him. They eat, drink, dance, and have Music. At their parting they use to say,
Merry meet, Merry part, and that before they are carried to their meetings,
there foreheads are anointed with Greenish Oil, that they have from the Devil,
which smells raw. They for the most part are carried in the Air. As they pass
they say, Thout, Tout, a Tout, Tout, throughout and about. Pass^^ng back they
say, Rentum Tormentum, and another word which she does not remember.

I read of an old Gentleman an excellent Justice of Peace in England, who did
always dispute against the immortality of the Soul, and its distinction from
the Body, and of the existence of Spirits. No reason could convince him, but
palpable experience. He being a bold man, and fearing nothing, used all the
Magical Ceremonies, he could to raise the Devil, or a Spirit, and had a most
earnest desire to meet with one, but never could do it. But while his servant
is one Night drawing off his Boots in the Hall, some invisible hand gave him
such a Clap upon the Back, that it made the Hall ring again. He went
immediately to his Field to try if any Spirit had called him to converse with
him; but found none. When neither rhyme, nor reason could persuade him that
there were Spirits, says the Gentleman, that debated with him, Well well, do
you remember, the clap you received upon your back one Night? Yes, said he.
Assure your self, said the other, that Goblin will be the first that will
welcome you into the other world. Upon this his countenance changed most
sensibly, and was more confounded with this, than with all the Philosophical,
or Rational Arguments, that could have been brought against him.

There was one Julian Cox an Inglish woman apprehended for witchcraft. The
first that deponed against her was an Hunts-man, who swore that he going out
with a pack of Hounds, to hunt a Hare, did Start one not far from Julian Cox
her house The Dogs hunted her very close, and the third Ring hunted her in
view, till at last, the Hunts-man perceiving the Hare almost spent, and making
toward a great Bush, he ran on the other side of the Bush to take her up, and
preserve her from the Dogs. But as soon, as he laid hands on her, it proved to
be Julian Cox, who had her hands grovelling on the ground, and her Globs (as he
expressed it) upward. He knowing her, was so afrighted that his hair on his head
stood on end. She was out of breath, so that she could not speak. The Dogs came
up, and smelt her, but did no more. This Narrative says my Author, has the
most authentic confirmation that human affairs are capable of Sense, and the
sacredness of an Oath.

RELATION XXX. Anent one Spalding in Dalkeith.
ABout the time, that the Earl of Traquair, was his late Majesty's
Commissioner in Scotland, it happened at Dalkeith where he resided, that one
Spalding a towns-man killed his neighbor one Sadler. The Murderer fled, and
absented himself, for a year and more. Yet sometimes, came home in the Night
time, finding that no man pursued him. After he had been wearied of this way of
living, he resolved to cast himself upon the Commissioners Mercy. He coming one
day near to the town of Dalkeith in Coatch, Spalding came in a most humble
manner, and prostrat himself before him, and begged mercy. The Commissioner
enquired what the business was? The Servants told him, he was such a man, that
had killed his Neighbor a townsman. Thereupon, he appointed him to be conveyed
to Prison, where he lay for a year and more. At last ane Assize found him
guilty, and appointed him to be hanged. When he heard this sentence, he cried
out, Oh must I die like a Dog! Why was not I sentenced to lose my head. After
he came to the Scaffold, and Prayer was ended, he goes up the Ladder, and the
rope being put about his Neck, he cries with a loud voice in the Audience of
all, Lord (says he) let never this Soul of mine depart from this Body till it
be reconciled with thee. And having said this, the Executioner threw him off
the Ladder. When he had hung the ordinary time sufficient to take away any man's
life he was cut down, and his Body put into a Bier, and carried to the Tolbuith
to be Won. When they had opened the lid of the Bier; the man bangs up upon his
Bottom, and his eyes staring in his head, and fomeing at the mouth, he made a
noise and roared like a Bull, stricking about him with his Fists, to the great
consternation of all. The Magistrates hearing of it, gave orders, that he
should be strangled better. The Executioner fell to work, and putting the Rope
about his neck, stood upon his Breast, and strained his neck so hard, that it
was no bigger about than his VVrist. And he continuing after this manner for a
sufficient time, was carried to the Grave: and covered with earth.
Notwithstanding of all this, he made such a rumbling and tumbling in it, that
the very Earth was raised, and the Muiles were so heaved up that they could
hardly keep them down. After this his house at the East end of the town (as I
am informed) was frequented with a Ghost, which made it stand empty for a long
time. Whether any have dwelt in it since I know not. This I have from a very
creditable Person, who being a Scholar there, at that time, was an eye and ear
witness, who is yet alive.

RELATION XXXI. Of the Devil of Mascon in France.
ANNO 1612 one Monsieur Perreaud a Protestant Minister there, being from his
own house one night, and his Wife being in bed, she was much troubled with
noise, and din in the house: the next night, she felt somewhat that pulled the
blankets from the bed; and the same night, all the Pewter Vessel, and Brass
Candlesticks were thrown about the Room. The Minister coming home, was told
this, who carefully searched every corner of the house before he went to bed,
and secured all the Doors and Windows, to prevent suspicion of Imposture: He
was scarce well in bed, when he heard a strange noise in the Kitchen, like the
rolling of a great Iron Bullet, beating against a partition of Wanscot: upon
this the Minister went to the Room, but found nothing; The next morning he made
it known to the Elders of the Church, and a public Notary, one Francis
Tornous, who sat up with him every night till Midnight, but they heard nothing
till September 20. At which time about nine a clock at night in the presence of
all, who were there, the Devil began to whistle three or four tunes, with a
loud and shril voice (though somewhat hoarse) which seemed to be about three or
four steps from them, singing a little tune of five notes, which Birds are
taught to whistle, and after, he often repeated this word Minister, Minister,
to which Master Perreaud said, Yes indeed, I am a Minister, and servant of the
living GOD, before whose Majesty thou tremblest. Said the other, I know
nothing to the contrary. I have no need of thy testimony, says he. This being
done, he says over with a loud voice, the Lords prayer, the Creed, the ten
Commandments, and the morning and even Prayers, and sings the eighty and first
Psalm. He told the Minister, that his Father had been poisoned, and named the
man that did it. He told him, that as he came by his elder brothers house that
night, he saluted him, and asked if he had any service to command him with to
Mascon, to his brother: and told that they were very kind to him, and remembered
their Love to the Minister. It was told him afterward by those who were
present, that a fellow of strange shape came riding on a very lean horse,
hanging down his head and spoke to that purpose. At another time the Devil
began to mock GOD, and all Religion, and said over the Doxology, but skipped
over the Second Person, and made a foul horrible, and detestable Equivocation
upon the third Person. He also earnestly desired them to send for Mr. Du
Chaffin the Popish Priest of St. Stevens Parish, to whom he would confess
himself, and withal he desired him to bring some Holy Water along with him, for
that (said he) will presently send me a packing. That great Mastiff (said he)
dare not bark against me (this was the great House Dog) because I have made the
sign of the Cross upon his head.

Then he fell a scoffing and jearing, and told how he did fall off the Ladder
into the Ditch among the Frogs while the Savoyes, were scalding the walls of
Geneva: and did most exactly imitate their croaking: At another time, he told
them with a lamentable voice, that he had a mind to make his Latter-Will and
Testament, and bid the Maid call for Mr. Tornous the public Notary, and
declared to him what Legacies he would leave, and to one present he said, he
would bequeath five hundred pound; but he answered, I will have none of thy
money, thy money perishes with thee.

At another time, while he was speaking, a man who was present rushed into the
place, whence the voice seemed to come, and searched it strictly, but found
nothing except a small bottle, which he brought forth, at which the Devil fell
a laughing, and said to him, I was told long since, that thou wast a fool, and
I see now thou art one indeed, to believe that I am in the Bottle. I should be
a greater Fool my self to go into it; for so I might be catched by stopping the
mouth of the Bottle with ones Finger.

At another time, the Minister said to him, Go thou cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, To whom he replied in great wrath,
Thou lie I am not cursed, I hope yet for Salvation by the Death and passion
of Jesus Christ.

The Devil threatened the Minister, that he would pull him out of his Bed by the
feet, and pull the Blankets off him. He answered, I will lay me down and sleep,
for the Lord makes me to dwell in safety, thou can have no power over me,
but what is given thee from above. Whereupon he said, it is well for thee, it
is good for thee. And at last he confessed, that he could not prevail against
the Family because they did too much call on the name of God. And indeed it was
observed, that as often as they kneeled down in prayer, the Devil left talking,
and often said, while you are at your prayers, I Will go take a turn in the
Street. But no sooner was prayer ended, but he began as before, which course he
continued till the 25. of November, at which time he spoke these last words,
Alas, alas, I shall speak no more

The Minister told Mr. Du-Moulin, that a grave Divine once coming to his house,
and hearing the Devil speak profanly, rebuked him sharply for it. Whereupon the
Devil answered, Minister, you are very Holy and Zealous in this Company, but
you are not so when you were singing such a baudy song in such a Tavern. And
having said this, he sang the same baudy song over before them all. The Divine
said, it is true, Satan, I have been licentious in my younger years, GOD of his
mercy has given me repentance, and pardon for it, but for thy part, thou art
hardened in sin, and shall never get Repentance nor Pardon. After this, the
Devil said, O poor Hugonits (those of the reformed Religion) you shall suffer
much within a few years; O what mischief is intended against you!

A Popish Officer, that belonged to a Court of Justice being a Lawyer, came out
of curiosity to the Ministers house, to ask some Questions concerning many
matters. The Minister forbad him; but he would not forbear. And after the Devil
had resolved him many things, anent absent Friends, private Business, News and
State affairs, and Questions in Law, he says to him, now Sir I have told you
all, you have demanded, I must tell you next, what you demanded not, that at
this same very time such a man (whom he named) is taking a word of your wife at
home. And then he discovered many secrets and foul practices of the Lawyer. And
at last says, Now Sir let me correct you for being so bold, as to question
with the Devil, you should have taken the Ministers Counsel. Then upon a
sudden, the whole Company saw the Lawyer drawn by the Arm into the midst of the
room, where the Devil whirled him about, and gave him many turns with great
swiftness, touching the ground only with his toe, and then threw him down upon
the floor with great violence; and being taken up, and carried to his house, he
lay sick and distracted a long time.

The last ten or twelve days, the Devil threw stones about the Ministers house
continually, from morning to evening, and of great quantity, some of them being
of two or three pound Weight. One of those days, the public Notary Mr Tornous
had a great stone thrown at him, which falling at his feet, he took up, and
marked it with a coal, and threw it into the backside of the house: but
presently the Devil threw it at him again. When he took it up, he found it to
be very hot, thinking it had been in Hell, since he handled it last. The next
day upon the 22 of December the Devil went quite away, and to morrow after,
there was seen a great Viper going out of the Ministers house, which the
Neighbors about seized upon with a pair of pincers, and carried it all over
the town crying, here is the Devil that is come out of the Ministers house. It
was found by an Apothecary to be a true and natural Viper, a Serpent rarely
seen in those countries. Compare this with the twentieth and first Relation,
and you will find a notable proof of the Wonderful kindness and mercy of GOD to
these two Religious Ministers, and their Families.

RELATION XXXII. Anent Margaret Wilson.
THis is a true Narrative of what happened to her one Night, while some persons
were attending her. For what Past other nights I cannot relate, since I want
Information. They say, that the Gentleman her Uncle, in the Parish of
Gallashiells, came one Sunday after Sermon to the Minister there, Master
Wilkie, and told him, that the Devil was at his House, for, said he, there is
an odd knocking about the bed where my Niece lies. Whereupon the Minister went
along with him and found it so. She rising from her bed sat down to Supper, and
from below, there was such a knocking up, as bred fear to all that were
present. This knocking was just under her Chair, where it was not possible for
any Mortal to knock up. Supper being ended, they went all to Prayer, and she
rising from her place, went and kneeled down in another place, and there also a
knocking was heard below her, even during the time of Prayer. When she was put
to bed, many Persons attending, she fell into a deep sleep. Then her body was
so lifted up, that many strong men were not able to keep it down. Sometimes her
body would have made such a motion in the Bed, as if something had been
gripping her by the feet, and pulling her up and down. In the mean while, they
heard a loud noise scratching upon the Feather-Bed, as with long Nails. And
likewise the Minister affirms, that he heard a loud risping at her heart, such
as risping Irons make upon Wood or Timber. When she awaked, she told him of
many things the Devil had been speaking to her, offering her Gifts and
Presents. She was hardly persuaded to pray; nay could not, when even the words
were put into her mouth. The Minister desired her to enter into a Personal
Covenant with GOD, which he drew up, but finding one composed already to his
hand, in that little Treatise, called the Christians Great Interest, he made
her subscrive it. When she had done this the Devil persuaded her with many
Arguments to break it. This was the Method, the Devil observed ordinarily every
Night, during (...) trouble.

That same Night about twelve a Clock, the Minister took her Uncle out to his
own Garden, to take a turn or two, and began to bear in upon him, the s^nse of
this sore affliction which was upon the Family, and exhorted him to reflect
upon his ways, and consider, if he had done any thing that had provoked the
Lord against him, and particularly he charged him with one thing, whereof there
was a loud report. He solemnly protested, and that with dreadful imprecations,
he was innocent of that particular, which was said of him, and absolutely
denied it. She confessed, that she had seen the Devil a in man's likeness, but
especially once going to Church, when he forbad her to go and hear Sermon.
After much trouble of this kind, and much noise and talking, the young Woman,
being but twelve or thirteen years of age, came to Edinburgh, and tarried with
a friend there, and from thence she went to Leith, where she served a Mistress.
At last she went to Easter-Didiston (it seems) and married there a Husband with
whom she lived some years at the Magdalen-Pans, where she died. I do not hear
that ever she was molested after. If all the particulars of this business were
truly collected, they would amount, to a far longer Relation, than I have set
down.

RELATION XXXIII. A Short Information anent Iennet Douglas.
Edinburgh, October. 8th. 1684. For Mr. Sinclar. Sir,
WHen I was at Glasgow in the Summer, 1677. I was desirous to see the Dumb
Girl, whom you mention in your first Relation. At my first incoming she
declined to entertain discourse, but by friendly expressions, and giving her
some money, I gained her. I first inquired anent her Parentage? I do not
remember (says she) of my Parents, but only that I was called by the name of
Jennet Douglas by all People who knew me. I was kept, when I was very young
by a poor woman that proved cruel to me, by beating, and abusing me, whereupon
I deserted the Woman's house, and went a begging. I enquired next, how she
became Dumb? She told me, by reason of a sore swelling she took in her Throat
and tongue; but afterward, by the Application of Album Graecum, which I
thought said she was revealed to me, I recovered my Speech. I asked her, how
she came to the knowledge of Witches and their practices? She answered, that
she had it only by vision, and knew all things as well this way, as if she had
been personally present with them, but had no revelation, or information from
the voice of any Spirit. Nor had she any communication with the Devil, or any
Spirit of that kind: only (says she) the Devil was represented to me, when he
was in company with any of the Witches, in that same shape and habit he was
seen by them.

She told me, she was altogether ignorant of the Principles of the Christian
Religion, but had some smattering knowledge of the Lords Prayer, which she had
heard the Witches repeat (it seems by her vision) in presence of the Devil; and
at his desire (which they observed) they added to the word Art, the letter W,
which made it run, our father which wart in heaven, and made the third Petition
thus, as on earth, so it may in heaven; by which means the Devil made the
application of the Prayer to himself.

I remember, that one day, there was a woman in the town who had the curiosity,
to give her a visit, who asked her how she came to the knowledge of so many
things? But the young Wench shifted her, by asking the Woman's name. She told
her name. Says the other, are there any other in Glasgow of that name? No says
the Woman. Then said the Girl, you are a Witch; Says the other, then are you a
Devil. The Girl answers, the Devil does not reveal Witches. But I know you to
be one, and I know your practices too* Hereupon the Woman run away in great
confusion, being indeed a Person suspected of Witchcraft, and had been some
time imprisoned upon that account.

Another Woman, whose name was Campbel had the curiosity likewise to come and
see her, and began to ask some questions at her. The Wench shifting to give her
an answer, says I pray you tell me, where were you yesternight, and what were
you doing? And withal (says she) let me see your arm. She refusing, the
Landlord, laid hold upon the Woman, with some others of the house, and forced
her to make bare her arm, where Jennet Douglas showed them an invisible mark,
which she had gotten from the Devel. The poor Woman much ashamed run home, and
a little time after, she came out and told her Neighbors, that what Jennet
Douglas had said of her was true, and earnestly entreated them that they would
show so much to the Magistrates, that she might be apprehended, otherwise the
Devil (says she) will make me kill my self. But the Neighbors judging her to
be under a fit of distraction, carried her home to her house. But early the
next morning, the Woman was found drowned in Clyde.

The Girl likewise told me at Glasgow, being then under no restraint, that it
was revealed to her, she would be carried before the Great Council at
Edinburgh, imprisoned there, and scourged through the town. All which came to
pass: for about a year after she was apprehended, and imprisoned in the
Tolbuith of the Canongate, and was brought before the Council. But nothing
being found against her, she was dismissed. But thereafter for several crimes
committed within the town of Edinburgh, she was taken again, and imprisoned,
scourged, and sent away to some forrainge Plantation, since which time, I have
not heard of her.

There are several other remarkable passages of her which I cannot inform you
of, which others perhaps may do, therefore I shall abruptly break off, and say
no more, but that I am your affectionat Friend. This information I have from a
discreet understanding Gentleman who was one of my Scholars at Glasgow several
years ago.

RELATION XXXIV. Anent Helen Elliot burnt at Culross.
For Mr. Sinclar, Edinb. October. 18. 1684. Sir,
I Cannot but much approve your design in publishing Satan's Invisible World
Discovered, especially at this time, when there are so many, that deny the
existence of Devils, Spirits and Witches, and will credit nothing, but what
they see with their eyes. I shall inform you, with three remarkable Stories,
which may be attested by famous Witnesses, many of which are yet living.

I had the curiosity, when I was a Scholar, to pass over from Borrowstonness to
Culros, to see a notable Witch burnt. She was carried to the place of Execution
in a Chair by four men, by reason her Legs, and her Belly were broken, by one
of the Devils cunning tricks which he played her. This Woman was watched one
night in the Steeple of Culros, by two men, John Shank a Flesher, and one John
Drummond, who being weary went to another Room, where there was a Fire, to take
a Pipe. But to secure her, they put her Legs in the Stocks, and locked them,
as well as might be. But no sooner were they gone out of the Room, but the
Devil came into the Prison, and told her he was obliged, to deliver her from
the shame she was like to suffer for his sake; and accordingly took her out of
the Stocks, and embracing her, carried her out of the Prison. At which she
being terrified made this exclamation by the way, O GOD wither are you taking
me! At which words, he let her fall, at the distance from the Steeple, about
the breadth of the street of Edinburgh, where she brake her Legs and her
Belly. I saw the impression and dimple of her heels, as many thousands did,
which continued for six or seven years upon which place no Grass would ever
grow. At last there was a stone dyke built upon the place.

My second Relation shall be of some Witches of Borrowstonness: which were the
occasion of much inquiry after them there. Anno 1644. A certain Woman in the
town, came about eight a clock in the morning into her Neighbors house, after
a most furious manner, and assaulted her, by scratching her face, and pulling
the hair out of her head, saying, thou traitor Thief, thou thought to have
destroyed my Son this morning, but it was not in thy power. The Ship wherein the
young man was a Sailler, had been under a dreadful tempest aff and on, with
Saint Abbs head, that morning. With the violence of a Sea, which came in upon
the Deck, he was cast over-boord on this side of the Ship, and to the
admiration of all, he was cast in upon the Deck again, upon the other side,
without harm. This mavelous business being reported about eight a clock at
night by the Mariners, when they came a shore, and being compared with what the
one Woman said to the other that morning, both of them were apprehended, and
after their confession were both burnt, many hundreds being Spectators whereof
I was one.

The last, Which is more remarkable, shall he anent the Wife of one Goodaile a
Couper in the Parish of Carrin. This Woman was about thirty and two, or three
and thirty years of age, a most beautiful and comely Person as was in the
Country about. She was often fyll'd and delated by many, who had been burnt.
They told, that amongst them all, she was the Person, whom the Devil at their
Meetings, did most court and embrace, calling her constantly my dear Mistress,
setting her always at his right hand, to the great discontent of his old Haggs,
whom, as they conceived, he now slighted. She was apprehended, and committed to
Prison. At this time there was one James Fleming a Master of a Ship there, a
Person of great courage, strength and resolution, who had it insinuat to him by
her, when he was exhorting her to confess, that in respect she understood, he
was to be upon her Watch the next night, if she got no deliverance, as she
expected before one a clock in the morning, she should lay her heart open to
him before others. At which he being apprehensive of what might fall out, as
indeed he had reason, went to his Uncle, a grave and experienced Person, who
advised him to take all his Ships Company, to the number of fourteen able men
and keep watch, not forgetting the Reading of Scripture, and earnest Prayer to
GOD. The Night was still and calm, as an Summers evening, without the least
appearance of Change, when upon a sudden at midnight, as James Fleming himself
was coursing her too and again, as the custom was, holding her by the hand, I
say upon a sudden, a terrible tempest, like an Hirricano came on, which took
the Roof from the house, to their great consternation. And a voice was heard
three times, calling her by a strange name to come away. At which she made
three several loups upward increasing gardually, till her feet were as high as
his breast. But he held her by both her arms, and as he used to say, when he
spoke of it) he betooched himself strongly and earnestly to God, though with
great amazement, his hair standing Widdershins in his head. And after the third
call, he prevailed against the greatest Effort, which ever he felt, and threw
her on the ground, she grovelling and fomeing like one having the
falling sickness, where she fell into a profound sleep, for the space of two or
three hours. When she awaked, she declaimed most bitterly against the Devils
treachry, and perfidiousness, who had promised to carry her to Irland before
four a clock in the morning, and to touch at Paisley where she might see her
sister in passing. She made a free and full confession, and deleated many
Women, some of them of good repute, who afterward confessed, and died so. The
Author of this letter is a Person of great honesty and sincerity From the First
Relation of his, we have an evident instance that the Devil can transport the
Bodies of men and Women through the Air; `Tis true, he did not carry her far
off, but not for want of skill and power. Neither was he afraied to hear the
name of God spoken; but purposing to destroy both the Soul and the body of the
poor creature, he has pretended so much, to excuse himself, at her hand.

The first Story puts me in mind of one Craich a Witch put in prison, in the
Steeple of Culross, to whom several years ago, Mr. Alexander Colvil, Justice
Depute came, a gentleman of great sagacity and knowledge as to Witches. He
asked if she was a Witch. She denied. Dar you hold up your hand and swear that
you are not a Witch? Yes sir said she. But behold, what a remarkable Judgment
of God come upon her. While she is swearing with her arm lifted up, it became
as stiff as a tree, that she could not pull it in again, to the amazement of
all that were present. One Person yet living there, was a witness and can
attest this. The Gentleman seeing the vengeance of God upon her for her
wickedness falls down presently upon his knees, and entreated the Lord in her
behalf, who was graciously pleased to hear him.

Some are of Opinion, that the Devil cannot raise winds and storms upon the Sea
and Land. This is evident from the last relation in the Letter. Which puts me
in mind of a terrible tempest of wind in the Firth, that day when Bessie Fouler
was burnt at Mu^^elburgh in May anno 1661. The Devil (it seems) had promised to
her, that she should not die at that time whereupon she looking out at the
Prison Window spoke very confidently to the folk below, You think to see me
burnt the day, but you will all be deceived. The Hirricano did so prevail, that
in effect, every body suspected that she should not have died that day. The
morning and the forenoon were very calm.

RELATION XXXV. Anent some Prayers, Charms and Avies, used in the Highlands.
IN the time of ignorance and superstition, when the darkness of Paganism was
not dispelled by Gospel light; Spirits keept a more familiar converse with
families, and even in the time of Popery, what was more frequent in houses than
Brownies whom they employed in many services. It were unseasonable and tedious,
to rehearse all the Stories, which have been told of Brownies, and Pharies,
commonly called our Good-Neighbours, how there was a King and a Queen of
Pharie, of such a Court, and train, as they had, and how they had the teind and
duty, as it were of all corns, flesh, and meal, how they rode and went alongs
the sides of hills, all in Green apparel. I verily believe many have seen such
specter, but what were they? Nothing but the delusion of the Senses of sundry
simple people, whom the Devil made believe they did see and hear such things.
Browny was a Spirit, that haunted diverse houses, (familiarly) without doing any
evil, but doing necessary turns up and down the house, and frequently was found
working in the Barn, threashing the corn in the night time, who appeared like a
rough hairy man. Such then was the ignorance of many, that they believed their
house was all the sonsier that Browny was about it. As K. J. says in his
Demonology.

I will not speak of ridiculous Friets, such as our meeting with a Lucky or
unlucky foot, when we are going about important business; these unquestionably
are the Devils lessons for the most part, and a denying of Gods Providenee. The
practice of the Heathen was to attribute good or evil luke to the slying of
Birds as Virgil says, Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice Cornix.

Whether there be any Magie in the practice of some young Women too curious,
who upon Allhallow even go to bed without speaking to any, having first eaten
a cake made of soot, and dreaming, see in their sleep, the man that shall be
their husband, I shall not determine. But it looks like a very bad practice. I
heard of a Woman, who dipped her smock in South-running-water, on that night, and
hanged it up before the fire to dry. One comes in, in the likness of the man,
who was to be her husband, and turns it, and went immediately to the Bed, where
she was attending the event, and kissed her. It seems she did not believe it was
the Devil. To speak of the second sight I cannot, till fuller information be
given. I am undoubtedly informed that men and Women in the Highlands can
discern fatality approaching others by seeing them in Waters or with
winding-sheets about them. And that others can lecture in a sheeps shoulder
bone a death within the Parish, seven or eight days before it come. It is not
improbable but that such preternatural knowledge comes first by a compact with
the Devil and is derived downward by succession to their posterity, many of
such I suppose, are innocent, and have this Sight against their will and
inclination.

Charms and Spells have been first taught to men and Women in confederacy with
the Devil, many of which are received by Tradition, and used by Witches and
ignorant Persons too. The virtue of curing, must be from the Devils active
invisible application of them, to such or such a disease, as the curing of an
Universal Gout by this unintelligible Charm.

Etter sheen etter sock, Et ta leur etta pachk Wipper si caan easemitter in
shi, fo leish in shi corn, orn sheip two till ane curht match a mainshore.

There is in some Part of Galloway a Charm for curing a disease called the
Ling, in these words, Cathari Duni Chini Brini. Another there is, which some
use for effectuating that, which others do by casting three knots, far si far,
fa far fay u, far four na forty Kay u Mack straik it a pain four hun creig weil
Mack smeoran bun bagie. This language cannot be interpreted.

Besides this, there are Prayers and Avies among the Highlanders, wherein they
think, there lays great virtue, as in repeating the Lords Prayer in Latin thus.

Paidder nohter kish in sheali sanctishetar noman du, ta renada, ta langa tu,
quidi honum aicht in dearrich, an dingas, an dangis, a nipis a nopis, nduramis
indaramis, indittimis, indattamis, shecli sheclorum, Amen.

Their Avi Mary runs thus.

Avi Mari crashi plena du na tekamis penedicata tus anti willi yeramis,
Penidicata rucata shendri Esum Chrisum Amen.

At night in the time of Popery when Folks wen to Bed, they believed the
repetition of this following Prayer was effectual to preserve them from danger,
and the house too.
Who sains the house the night,
They that sains it ilk a night:
Saint Bryde and her Brat,
Saint Colme and his Hat.
Saint Michael and his Spear,
Keep this house from the Wear.
From running Thief,
And burning Thief;
And from a ill Rea,
That be the Gate can gae,
And from an ill wight,
That be the gate can light.
Nine reeds about the house;
Keep it all the Night,
What is that what I see,
So red so bright beyond the sea?
It Is he was pierced through the hands,
Throw the feet, throw the throat,
Throw the tongue;
Throw the liver and the lung.
Well is them that well may,
Fast on Good-Fryday.
Another Prayer used by the Thieves and Robers on the Borders after Meat, in
order to stealling from their Neighbors.
He that ordained us to be born,
Send us maire meat or the morn,
Part often right and part often wrang,
God let us never fast over lang,
God be thanked and our Lady,
All is done that we had ready.
A Country man in East Lothian used this Grace always before and after Meat.
Lord be blessed for all his Gifts
I defy the Devil and all his shifts
God send me mair Silver, Amen.
As the Devil is originally the Author of Charms, and Spells, so is he the
Author of several baudy Songs, which are sung. A reverend Minister told me,
that one who was the Devils Piper, a wizzard confessed to him, that at a Ball of
dancing, the Foul Spirit taught him a Baudy song to sing and play, as it were
this night, and ere two days past all the Lads and Lasses of the town were
lilting it throw the street. It were abomination to rehearse it.

RELATION XXXVI. Anent one Elizabeth Muidy at Hadington.
THis Woman was a Servant to Margaret Kirkwood there, a Woman of good repute
once, who before her death took some trouble of mind, but upon what account, I
cannot determine. She made some insinuation (it seems) to some of her Friends,
that she inclined to put hand in her self; whereupon she was attended and
waited upon; but had her own Liberty to retire her self to private Prayer, in
which exercise she was frequent. Upon a Sabbath forenoon, when all were at
Church and she at home, none with her save only a Servant-Maid, she went into
some high Room or other, as she was wont to do to her Devotion; and there
before the Maid could know, she hanged her self. In this very moment of time,
this Lissie Muidy, her old servant being in Church was observed to number upon
her fingers 50. or 51. which number being ended she cries out with a loud voice
in presence of all, now the turn is done. She was presently taken away as a
distracted Person, and news coming to the Church, that such a Woman had hanged
her self, her old Mistress, she was taken away to Prison, but what her
confession was, it is not well known. There are many other things reported,
whereof I cannot give an account. This Tragedy was acted within these few years
at Hadington.

FINIS.
THE INDEX
Page THe troubles of Sir George Maxwel. 1 A wonderful discovery of Murder by
an Apparition. 19 The Witchcraft of Agnes Sympson. 22 A Proclamation over the
Market cross of Edinburgh, 28 A Miraculous cure of a Dutch Woman. 29 The Devil
at Wood-stock in England, 32 An Apparition to King James the fourth 39 The
Major appears to his Captain. 40 A remarkable story of Witchcraft at Lauder. 45
The Drummer of Tedworth. 55 The Devil of Glenluce. 75 King Duff bewitched. 100
Edward Avon appears to his Son in Law. 102 Anent Bessie Graham a Witch in
Kilwining. 109 The Apparition of Sir George Willers. 120 Anent Hattaraik an
Wizzard in East-Lothian. 122 The Ghost of Mistress Bretton. 128 Of Robert
Churchman inveigled in Quakerism. 135 Touching Isabel Heriot. 144 Touching a
Magician at Antwerpe. 154 A Doctor of Divinity rises out of the Bier. 156 Some
Drunkards destroyed by the Devil. 158 Touching William Barton a Warlock at
Kirklistoun. 160 Touching a wonderful Accident at Lions in France. 164 Touching
the Piper at Hamelen in Germany. 165 Touching the Witchcraft in Mohra in
Swedeland. 167 An Apparition in Gladsmuire. 187 Anent one Spalding in Dalkeith.
191 The Devil of Mascon in France 193 Anent Margaret Wilson. 200 Anent Iennet
Douglas. 203 Anent Helen Elliot burnt at Culross. 207 Anent Charms and Avies.
212 Anent Elizabeth Muidy. 219
ADVERTISEMENT
THere is a young man that goes under the Authors name, that pretends to be a
Poet, that for money, has presented his Verses to several Persons of Quality.
Let no Person think that Mr. Sinclar has any interest in that man, or his
Verses; as indeed he makes many believe. This is subjoyned to the end of his
Book, by Mr. Sinclars affectionate Friend who knows this to be true.

I. S.

ADVERTISEMENT.
If any Gentlemen, and others, will be pleased to send me any Relations about
Spirits, Witches, and Apparitions, in any part of the Kingdom; or any
Information about the Second Sight, Charms, Spells, Magie, and the like; they
shall oblige the Author, and have them published to their satisfaction.

Direct your Relations to Alexander Ogstouns Shop Stationer, at the foot of the
Plain-stones, at Edinburgh, on the Northside of the Street.

POSTSCRIPT. Being a Relation anent Major Weir.
I Have subjoined this Relation, by way of Postscript, because it came to my
hand after the book was finished by the Printer, from a Gentleman that knew
exactly all the matters of Fact, and all the Circumstances of the business;
which is as follows, Nov. 11th. 1684. For Mr. Sinclar at Edinburgh. Sir,
I Have so far condescended to give you satisfaction in the desired
particulars, that I have looked over these Memoires, which I had by me,
touching the Life and Death of Thomas Weir, that from Eyewitnesses, and his
Sisters Declaration, I can assert the Truth, As follows,

This man Thomas Weir was born in Clydsdaile, near to Lanerk, who had been a
Lieutenent in Ireland long since. What way he came to get some public command
in the City of Edinburgh, in the year 49. and 50. I know not; but it seems he
has been always called Major Weir, since that time. Many things might be
narrated of him, which for brevities sake I cannot meddle with; since I intend
to speak only of his Sorceries, and other things relating thereunto. It seems,
he had, before he was burnt, some charge over the Waiters at the Ports of the
City, being as it were a Check to them. Coming one day as his custom was, he
found some of them in a Cellar, taking a cup of Aile, neglecting their Charge.
After a gentle reproof, one of them replied, that some of their number being
upon duty, the rest had retired to drink with their old Friend and Acquaintance
Mr. Burn. At which word, he started back, and casting an eye upon him, repeated
the word Burn four or five times. And going home, he never any more came
abroad, till a few weeks after, he had discovered his impieties. It was
observed by some, that going to Liberton sometimes, he shunned to step over
that Water-brook, which is ordinarily called Liberton-burn, but went about to
shun it. Some have conjectured, that he had advise to beware of a Burn, or some
other thing, which this equivocal word might signify, as burn in a fire. If so,
he has foreseen his day approaching. A year before he discovered himself, he
took a sore sickness, during which time he spoke to all, who visited him like
an Angel, and came frequently abroad again.

This man taking some dreadful tortures of Conscience, and the Terrors of the
Almighty being upon his Spirit, confessed to several Neighbors in his own
house, and that most willingly, his particular sins which he was guilty of,
which bred amazement to all persons, they coming from a man of so high a repute
of Religion and Piety. He ended with this remarkable expression, Before GOD
(says he) I have not told you the hundred part of that I can say more, and am
guilty of. These same very abominations he confessed before the Judges
likewise. But after this, he would never till his dying hour confess any more,
which might have been for the glorifying of GOD, and the Edification of others,
but remained stupid, having no confidence to look any Man in the face, or to
open his eyes.

When two of the Magistrates came to his house in the night time, to carry him
to prison, they asked, If he had any money to secure? He answered, None. His
Sister said, there was. Whereupon to the value of five Dollars, in parcels here
and there, were found in several clouts. His Sister advised the two Magistrates
to secure his Staff especially; for she also went to Prison. After he was
secured in the Tolbooth, the Bailies returned, and went into a Tavern, near to
Weirs house, in the Westbow, a street so called there. The money was put into a
Bag, and the clouts thrown into the fire by the Master of the house and his
Wife, which after an unusual manner made a circleing and dancing in the fire.
There was another clout found with some hard thing in it, which they threw into
the fire likewise; it being a certain root, which circled and sparkled like
Gunpowder, and passing from the Tunnel of the Chimney, it gave a crack like a
little Cannon, to the amazement of all that were present.

The money aforesaid, was taken by one of the two Bailies to his own house, and
laid by in his Closet. After Family Prayer was ended, he retired into the same
Closet, (where I have been) during which time, his Wife (who is yet living) and
the rest of the Family were afrighted, with a terrible noise within the Study,
like the falling of an house, about three times together. His Wife knocking
gave a fearful cry, My Dear are you alive. The Bailie came out unafrayed,
having (as he said) heard nothing: whether he concealed this upon the account
his Wife was with Child, or otherwise, it cannot be well known. The money was
presently sent away to the other Bailies house, a great distance from Weirs,
where, as was reported, there was some disturbance, but in broken expressions.

During the time of his imprisonment, he was never willing to be spoken to, and
when the Ministers of the City offered to pray for him, he would cry out in
fury, Torment me no more, for I am tormented already. One Minister (now asleep)
asking him, if he should pray for him? was answered, not at all. The other
replied in a kind of holy anger. Sir I will pray for you in spite of your
teeth, and the Devil your master too: Who did pray, making him at least to hear
him: but the other stairing wildly, was senseless as a Brute. Another, who is
likewise at rest, demanded, if he thought there was a God. Said the Man, I know
not. That other smartly replied. O man the Argument that moves me to think,
there is a God, is thy self, for what else moved thee to inform the world of thy
wicked life. But Weir answered let me alone. When he peremptorly forebad one of
his own Parish Ministers (yet alive) to pray. One demanded, if he would have
any of the Presbyterian persuasion to pray. He answered, Sir, you are now all
alike to me. Then said the Minister to him, I will pray with you. Do it not
said the other upon your Peril, looking up to the beams of the house. But
Prayer was offered up, so much the more heartily, because the company about
expected some vision. It is observable, that in things common, he was pertinent
enough; but when any thing about Almighty God, and his souls condition came
about, he would Shrugg, and Rub his Coat and Breast, saying to them, torment me
not before the time. When he was at the stake to be burnt, the City Ministers
called to a Churchman there, looking on, being one of that persuasion, whereof
Weir was formerlie deemed to be, to speak to him; but no sooner he opened his
mouth, than he made a sign with his hand and his head to be silent. When the
Roap was about his neck to prepare him for the fire, he was bid say, Lord be
merciful to me, But he answered let me alone, I will not, I have lived as a
beast, and I must die as a Beast. The fire being kindled, both He and his
Staff, a little after fell into the flames. Whatever Incantation was in his
Staff, is not for me to discuss. He could not officiat in any holy duty without
this Rod in his hand, and leaning upon it, which made those who heard him pray,
admire his fluency in Prayer. Its falling into the fire with him (let others
search out the disparity) minds me of this Passage. In Shetland a few years
ago. A Judge having condemned an old Woman and her daughter called Helen
Stewart for Witchcraft, sent them to be burned. The Maid was so stupid, that
she was thought to be possessed. When she had hung some little time on the
Gibbet, a black Pitchy-like ball foamed out of her mouth: and after the fire
was kindled, it grew to the bigness of a Walnut, and then flew up like Squibs
into the air, which the Judge yet living attests. It was taken to be a visible
sign that the Devil was gone out of her. I shall make no application of this,
as to Major Weirs Staff.

I know from good hands, that if this man repented of any thing in Prison, it
was for causing a poor maid to be scourged, who affirmed, She had seen him
commit beastiality going to New miles to a solemn meeting. This poor Woman
lived about two years after his death, and heard of his fatal end. His incest
with his own sister, was first, when she was a young Maid. The place, where
this abomination was committed, was cursed, for contrary to nature, it remained
always bare without Grass. A reverend Minister told me (I mention this as from
my self, not from the author of the Letter) that Major Weir confessed so much
to him, and told him, that the place lays off the road-way between Kirkaldy
and Kinghorn, upon a little hill side, which he had the curiosity to go and
see, and found it so. This was done the matter of fifty years ago. Many other
things he confessed, which Christian ears should not be defiled with.

Before I come to his Sister, take this notable remark from two Persons yet
alive, dwelling at the foot of the Westbow, at the head whereof dwelt Major
Weir. This Gentlewoman, a substantial Merchants wife was very desirous to hear
Him pray, much being spoken of his utterance, and for that end spoke to some of
her Neighbors that when he came to their house, she might be sent for. This
was done, but could he never be persuaded to open his mouth before her, no not
to bliss a cup of aile, he either remaining mute, or up with his staff and
away. It troubled her then, but I suppose both her husband and she smiles at it
now.

Some few days before he discovered himself, this Gentlewoman coming from the
Castle-hill where her husbands Neice, was laying in of a Child, about midnight,
perceived about the Bow-head three Women in windows, shouting, laughing, and
claping their hands. The Gentlewoman went forward, till just at Major Weirs
door, there arose as from the street a Woman above the length of two ordinary
femells, and stepped forward. The Gentlewoman not as yet excessively feared,
bid her maid step on, if by the Lanthorn, they could see what she was; but have
what they could, this long legged Spectre was still before them, moving her
Body with a vehement Cachinnation, a great unmeasurable Laughter. At this rate
the two strove for place, till the Giantiss, came to a narrow Lane in the Bow,
commonly called the Stinking-closs, into which she turning: and the
Gentlewoman looking after her, perceived the closs full of flaming torches
(She could give them no other name) and as it had been a great multitude of
People, Stentoriously laughing and Gapping with Tahies of laughter. This sight
at so dead a time of the night, no people being in the Windows, respecting the
Closs, made her and her servant haste home, declaring all, which they saw to
the rest of the Family, but more passionatly to her husband. And though sick
with fear, yet she went the next morning with her Maid, to veiw the noted
places of her former nights walk, and at the Closs, inquired who lived there?
It was answered Major Weir. The honest couple now rejoicing, that to Weirs
devotion they never said Amen. I know there are some, who precariously assert
the unreasonableness of believing such Visions and Apparitions, but you have
made them sufficiently evident from your Relations foregoing. These in all
probability, have been a presage of his approaching death, and of the manner of
it, Links and Torches signifying an honorable interrment, which perhaps has
been promised to him. There was one Minister in the city, that could never be
persuaded to speak with him in Prison, but no soonner was he dead, but he went
to the Tolbooth, and called for his Sister, who had some remorse, of whom I
shall now speak. He told her, that her Brother was burnt, and how he died
(though he saw him not execute, as I heard from himself) She believed nothing
of it, but after many attestations, she asked Where his staff Was? for it
seems, she knew that his strength and life lay therein. He told her, it was
burnt with him. Whereupon, notwithstanding of her age, she nimbly, and in a
furious rage fell on her knees, uttering words horrible to be remembered. And in
rising up, as she was desired, her rageing agony closed with these words. O
Sir, I know he is with the Devils, for with them he lived. She entreated that
Minister to assist her, and attend her to her death, which at her violent
importunity be yielded unto, though it was not his course to wait upon
condemned Persons. What she said in private to himself, he says must die with
him. She avouched, that from her being sixteen years of age, to her fiftieth,
her Brother had the incestuous use of her body, and then loathed her for her
age. She was pretty old at this time, and he when he died was about seventy. He
asked her, if ever she was with Child to him? She declared with great
confidence, he hindered that by means abominable, which she beginning to relate,
the Preacher stopped her. Some bystanders were desirous to hear the rest, but
says he (Gentlemen) the speculation of this iniquity is in it self to be
punished.

In often and returned visits, she was interrogat if she had any hand in her
Brothers Devilty? She declared, but in a passive way, and gave this for an
instance. A fiery Chariot, or Coatch, as she called it, coming to his door, at
broad day, a stranger invited him and her to go visit a friend at Dalkeith, a
small town some four miles from Edinburgh. They both entered, and went foreward
in their visit, at which time (says she) one came and whispered something in
his ear, which affected him. They both returned after the same manner, that
they had gone out. And Weir going after, to make some visits, told them he had
strong apprehensions, that, that day, the Kings Forces were routed at
Worcester, which within two or three days was confirmed by the Post. She
affirmed that none saw the Coatch, but themselves. The Devil has wrought far
greater Farelies in his time than this.

She knew much of the enchanted Staff, for by it he was enabled to pray, to
commit filthiness, not to be named, yea even to reconcile Neighbors, Man and
Wife, when, at varienoe. She often hid it from him, and because without it, he
could do nothing, he would threaten and vow to discover her incest, fearing
which, she would deliver it again.

Being asked the cause of her much spinning, which she was famous for? She
denied any assistance from the Devil, but found she had an extraordinary
faculty therein, far above ordinary Spinsters: Yet owned, that when she came
home, after her being abroad, she found, there was more yarn on her wheel than
she left. And that her Weaver could not make cloth thereof, the yearn breaking
or falling from the Loom.

Once there came a stranger to her, while she was at her Wheel, and proposed a
way to her to make her rich, for they both lived almost upon Alms. The way was
this, Stand up and say, all Crosses and Cares go out of this house. She
answered, GOD forbid I say that, but let them be welcome when GOD sends them.
After two or three visits more, she asked this stranger, where she dwelt? She
replied, in the Potter-raw, a street in the Suburbs of that City, but finding
neither such a house, nor such a woman, I judged, said she, it was the Devil,
one of my brothers acquaintance; for I know, he had familiarity with the Devil.

His poverty minds me of a Wizzard accused and execute in Shetland, before
named, for Witchcraft several years ago, called Luggie, to a nickname, who
being a Fisher, had a trick at any time, when hungry at Sea, to cast out his
line, and would out of Neptuns lowest Kitching, bring cliverly up fish well
boiled and roasted. And his Comerades by a Natural Courage, would make a merry
meal thereof, not questioning who was Cook. He had another piece of Art, at any
time in the year, or in great storms, to go up to an high hill near his own
house, whereupon there was a deep pit, out of which, with his lines he drew up
Codlings, or Keeling for his provision, which never man could do but himself.
This story is true, being yet to be seen in the Criminal books of that Country.

She was asked anent her Parents? She was persuaded her mother was a Witch; for
the secretest thing that either I my self, or any of the family could do, when
once a mark appeared on her brow, she could tell it them, though done at a
distance. Being demanded what sort of mark it was? She answered, I have some
such like mark my self, when I please, on my forehead. Whereupon she offered to
uncover her head for visible satisfaction. The Minister refusing to behold it,
and forbidding any discovery, was earnestly requiested by some Spectators to
allow the freedom. He yielding, she put back her head-dress, and seeming to
frown, there was seen an exact Horse-shoe shaped for nails in her wrinckles.
Terrible enough I assure you to the stoutest beholder.

In the morning before her execution, she told the Minister, she resolved to
die with all the shame she could, to expiate (under Mercy) her shameful-life.
This he understood to be an ingenuous confession of her sins, in opposition to
her brothers despair, and desperate silence, to which he did encourage her. At
her parting with him, she gave him hearty thanks for his pains; and shaking his
hands, (offering to kiss them) she repeated the same words, which he bade her
perform. Ascending up the ladder, she spoke somewhat confusedly of her sins, of
her brother, and his inchanting-staff; and with a ghaistly countenance,
beholding a multitude of Spectators, all wondering, and some weeping, She spoke
aloud. There are many here this day, wondering and greeting for me, but alace,
few mourns for a broken -- At which words, many seemed angry. Some called to
her to mind higher Concerns. And I have heard it said, that the Preacher
declared, he had much ado to keep a composed countenance. The Executioner
falling about his duty, she prepares to die stark naked: then and not before,
were her words relating to shame understood. The Hangman strugled with her, to
keep on her clothes, and she strugled with him to have them off. At last he was
forced to throw her over open-fac'd, which afterward he covered with a cloth.

So much from the Gentleman, that gave me this Information, to which I shall
add, that this is not published with a design to reflect upon men of this, or
that Persuasion. Far be it. The Devil can counterfeit what Religion he pleases,
and ordinarily a good one. True Religion can never suffer any prejudice from a
Hypocrite his wearing a cloak of it, more than the good Angels can suffer a
stain from Satan's transforming himself into an Angel of Light. The Devil has
his Laikies, and Pages with CHRIST'S Livery upon them. Was not Judas, who was
but one of the twelve, a vile Hypocrite? It is a wonder where there are a
thousand professing CHRIST in a Congregation, that a hundred of them are not as
bad. His glistering cloak of Religion dazzled all Men's eyes. This was needful,
foul faults must have a fair Cloak to cover them. The Apostle Jude speaks of
some, that go after Sarkos heteras, which may be understood, not only of that
sin mentioned, Romans 1.27. but of another sort of flesh, not to be named.

He was a demonstration proving evidently that there is a GOD; viz. by the
terrors terrors of his Conscience. It is evident also, there is a Devil, that
hurries men on into sin. He had this expression to two Ministers that came to
see him in prison; There was no temptation which the Devil could propose to
him, but he was capable to accept of it. It is evident also, there is either an
Explicit or Implicit Compact between some men and the Devil. Horrible sins
covered with Religion, bring utter despair at the last. Desperation is Hell in
fieri. Some men as well as Devils are tormented before the time. Let us not
count the less of Religion, that its made a cloak for covering sin. Let us
beware that such a man's fall prove not a neck break to us; Let us idolize no
man for his Profession, or that he is of this or that Persuasion, or of such a
Party: Let no man rest in a bare Profession of Religion. Men in compact with
the Devil, may be assisted both to Preach and Pray. The Devils servants are
well rewarded at the last. Profession and Practice must go together. A Clinking
Profession with an unbridled tongue, is a vain Religion. Pure Religion and
undefiled before GOD, and the Father, is to visit the Fatherles and the Widows
in their affliction; and for a man to keep himself unspotted from the World.
Major Weir was burnt between Edinburgh and Leith, at a place called the
Gallow-lie, on Thursday 14. of April, 1670.




An Apparition seen in a Dwelling house in Mary Kings Closs, in Edinburgh.
Sir, Within these few years, there was one T. C, by profession an Agent about
the Session-house, who about flitting-time was removing his furniture from a
lower part of the City to an higher. One in the aforesaid Closs seeing his Maid
on the Saturday carrying some light furniture to such a house, asked her, if
she was to dwell in that house. Yes said she, for I am hired for this half
year. Her friend told her, if you live there, I assure you, you will have more
Company than your selves. And after twice or thrice, more going up and down,
and several informations anent the business, she was persuaded to tell her
Mistress, she would not tarry a servant in that house, it being haunted with a
Spirit or Ghaist, and gave her the ground of her intelligence.

The Mistress informed her husband, desiring him to forbear that house, least
she might be afrighted, even with apprehensions. But he out of a natural
courage and fortitude of mind smiled at the Relation, and resolved to tarry,
lodging there that same very night. To morrow being the Sabbath Day, they went
both to Church in the forenoon. But in the afternoon, he being indisposed,
fitted himself for a sleep. His Wife took the Bible, and a the head of the
Table near the Bed, resolved to spend the time in reading of the Holy
Scripture, appointing the Maidservant to go to Church, which she did, but came
no more to the Family.

As the Mistress was reading to her self, she chanced to cast her eye to a
little Chamber Door just over against her, where she spyed the head and face of
an old man gray headed with a gray Beard, looking straight upon her, the
distance being very short. At which sight, she endeavoring to awaken her
husband, fell a sown and fainted, and lay in that posture, till she heard some
of her Neighbors open their doors, after sermon was ended. Then she told her
husband what was done, and what she had seen, the Apparition being evanished.
He pleaded it was some fancy or delusion of her Senses, and bad her be of good
courage.

After Supper, both being alone, the goodwifes fear still continuing, she built
on a large Fire, and went to bed. After a little time, the Good Man casts his
eve toward the Chimney, and spyed that same old-mans-head in the former place.
He told his Wife, who was like to fall into her former passion. He rises,
lights a candle, sets it on the Table, and went to his Bed again,
encouraging themselves in the Lord, and recommended themselves to GODS care and
protection. After an hour and more was spent thus, they clearly perceived
a-young child, with a coat upon it, hanging near to the old man's head. At which
sight, the Good Man Tom flew out of his Bed, and his wife after him. He taking
her in his arms kneeled down before the Bed, and with fervent devotion they
entreated the Lord to be freed from that temptation. He lighted a second
candle, the first being spent, and knocked upon his Neighbors, but getting no
answer, they both returned to their Bed, where they both kneeled, and prayed,
an excessive fear and sweat being upon them.

By and by a naked Arm appears in the air, from the elbow downward, and the
hand streatched out, as when one man is about to salute another. He then skipt
out of his Bed, and kneeling down begged help from heaven. The Arm had now come
within its own length to him as it were to shake hands with him. Whereupon he
immediately goes to his Bed again, and at the opening of the Curtain, it offered
another salutation to him. The man and his wife embracing one another through
fear, and still eying the naked Arm, they prayed the more earnestly. But the
Cubit offering to touch him, he was in such a consternation and amazement, that
he was as one distracted, but taking some courage from GOD, he boldly spoke to
it after this manner. In the name of the living GOD, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, tell me why thou troubles my Family? To my knowledge, I never wronged
any man, by killing or cheating, but has lived honestly in the World. If thou
have received any wrong, if I can right thee, I shall do my utmost for thee,
but trouble me no more. Notwithstanding of this, the Arm and hand came nearer
than before, still after a courteous manner, with an offer of acquaintance.
They fell to prayer again, both of them being drowned with sweat, and in the
mean time they saw a little Dog come out of that little Room aforenamed, which
after a little time looking about, and toward the Bed, and the Naked Arm,
composed it self upon a Chair, as it were with its nose in its tail to sleep.
This somewhat increased their fever. But quickly after, a Cat comes leaping out
from the same Room, and in the midst of the hall began to play some little
Tricks. Then was the hall full of small little creatures, dancing prettily,
unto which none of them could give a name, as having never in nature seen the
like.

It is not possible to narrate the hight of Passion, and Fear these two were
under, having all these Apparitions at once in their eye, which continued a
long time. The honest couple went to their knees again within the Bed, there
being no standing in the Floor of the Room. In the time of prayer, their ears
were startled, with a deep, dreadful, and loud groan, as of a strong man dying,
at which all the Apparitions and visions at once evanished, and as the honest
couple thought, they retired to the little Room, whence they came, and the
house was quiet.

After this, they both went hand in hand to the little Room where the Drink
stood and refreshed themselves therewith. After they had taken a second
draught, the husband said, my Dear, God has made me this night to bear, that
which would have afrighted to death the stoutest of them all. The day
approaching, they dressed themselves, and made no secret of it. But looking
back upon what happened, they wondered, that none of them had the wit to open
the Door, and to fly from the house, which had been easier to have done, than
to light the first Candle. But they behoved to undergo this Trial, having no
power to escape it. And by this means, the Good Man had the courage to dwell in
the house after till he died: yet would never want some Good-fellows or others
with him, concluding the worst was over as indeed it was.

A few weeks after, he on a Sabbath day went with his wife to Carstorfin, a
Village two miles from Edinburgh, to hear Sermon. In the evening he took some
refreshment there, at a public Inns: and steping to the Door, to ease nature,
he was instantly surprised with a vehement Shivering and trembling in all his
joints. Coming from the end of the aforesaid Village, with a purpose to come
home, he was accompanied with some crows flying above him, and almost keeping
pace with him, til he came to Portsburgh, a part of the suburbs of the City,
Where they left him, and returned to their own lodging. These Crows (my dear
says he) do prognostic that I must die shortly. He fell sick of a pain in his
head, with an excessive aiking. But before I go further on in this narration, I
must make a visit to the Country.

A Gentle man near Tranent or in it, a town about seven miles from Edinburgh,
whose Agent this man was, in managing his Law affairs, and kept his Papers
for that effect, had a singular kindness for Thomas, as he had for him. This
Gentleman being in Bed one morning with his Wife, his Nurse and a Child laying
in a truckle Bed near them, the Nurse was afrighted with something like a cloud
moving up and down the Room, but not shaped as such. She called to her Master,
and his Wife, and awakned them. He seeing the Cloud figured like a man, nimbly
skipt over the Bed, and drew his sword. And going to Bed again, laid it by his
side, and recommended the Family to God. For a time it continued in the
forementioned dark form, but anon they all saw perfectly the body of a man,
walking up and down. The Gentleman behaved himself more like a Christian, than
a combatant. At last this Apparition looked him fully and perfectly in the
face, and stood by him with a ghaistly and Pale countenance At which the
Gentleman with great courrage said to the Spectre, what art thou? Art thou my
dear Friend Thomas Coltheart? for so was the Agent called. Art thou dead my
friend? Tell me, if thou have any commission to me from Almighty God, tell it
me and it shall be welcome? The Ghost held up its hand three times, waving and
shaking it toward him, and immediately disappeared. This was done about the
very hour (as was guessed) of the Agents death.

The Sunday after his death, among many accompanying his Corpse to the common
burial place, some of the Town Ministers were there, and by chance a friend of
his, thanked one of them for his attendence: and said (sir) it was a pity, that
some of you saw him not before he died. The Minister asked him, if any
remarkable thing was the cause of his sickness? So much was told, as gave the
Minister ground to make a visit to the Widow, who made him very welcome with
many tears in her eyes. After she had composed her self, he prayed. Prayer
being ended, she began the fore-related story, and told it from the beginning.
But when she came to the Dogs part, she telling him, that he was just now
sitting upon the Chair, where the Dog lay asleeping, the Minister rises up, and
taking the Mistress by the hand, come (said he) if I have seen his Chair: in the
name of almighty God, I will see his Chamber too; and so went in to see the
little Room from which the Apparitions came, and to which they returned, in
which Room she gave the Minister an account of what followed the Dog. In the
mean time a Gentleman came in, whom she knew by his voice, and running to him
with great fervor, they embraced one another affectionatly with tears. To make
an end, this stranger was the Gentleman, to whom the Ghost of the deceased
husband appeared, about Tranent, the very hour, when he was expiring at
Edinburgh. He told likewise, that, that morning the Ghost appeared to him, he
was resolved to attend the Duke of Lauderdaile from Lithingtoun to Edinburgh,
but this Apparition discomposing his Wife, he could not. But with his first
convenience, (he told her) he had come in, to see her, and get an account of
his papers, being touched with what he saw at his house. These things coming to
the Duke of Lauderdails ears, as remarkable Stories, he called for that
Minister, and had the same account of the Particulars, before many of the
Nobility narrated to him,

An Apparition of a deceased Wife to her husband, at Edinburgh.
SIr, That which I narrated to you the other day, I have now sent it under my
hand, as a thing very certain and sure. I knew a servant Maid that served a
Gentlewoman in the Old Provosts Closs, as they call it, who was married to a
Butcher called John Richy about twelve years ago. She lived about five years
with him, and bore him four Children, and then died. Within a few days after
her burial, he went in suit of a young Woman, courting her for Marriage. He had
a Comerade of the same trade, to whom he revealed his Intention, and desired
him to meet at such a house, near to the Court of Guard, down some Closs or
other, that he might see his new Mistress. The appointment is kept. The two
Lovers sat down together on a Bedside, and the Comerade sat opposite to them,
there being a table between them, and a Window or shot at the head of the Room,
that gave them light. The Closs or Wynd was narrow to which they had a sight.
And while the two, are dallying together in the Bed, the other smiling at them,
behold while this man is casting his eye about the room, he perceived
distinctly the body and face of the dead wife, in her dead clothes, looking
toward them from an opposite window. At which, this man, his Comerade, rose up
afrighted, saying to the other, John what is that? Whereupon all stood up
looking, and saw perfectly the buried woman, lifting up her hands (as appeared)
to take the dead dress from her head, but could not reach it. The man threw her
out of his Arms, with a purpose to be gone quickly. But his Comerade vowed he
would not stir, till he get some thing to comfort his heart. They got a little
Brandy, and then went away, not without wondering and fear. Upon this the man
took sickness for three or four days, and his Comerade coming to give him a
visit, counseled him to delay, or wholly to desist from that purpose of
marriage. But affection would not suffer him to forbear, and though not fully
recovered of his Frenzy, he made a new address to his Mistress. But while he is
putting on his shoes, his dead wife appears again in her ordinary habit, and
crossing the Room in his sight, says, John will you not come to me? and with
that evanished. Upon this, he took sickness again, and called for his Comerade,
and told him of this second Apparition, who most freely entreated him to
desist, or at least to delay. His sickness increasing, he died. About which
time he spoke of a third visit his wife gave him, blaming him, as if he had too
soon forgotten her. But did not tell it distinctly, and therefore his Comerade
could not be positive in it. He was buried within a month of his wifes decease.

One of the Ministers of Edinburgh, who had been acquaint in the house, where
she served, hearing some Whisper of the Apparition, sent a servant secretly to
call for the man's Comerade, who gave him a just and true narration of all which
I have written. Adding, that he having seen the Vision first; some told him, he
would quickly die, but he is yet living in the town a Flesher, the Minister
having married him to two Wives since. The deceast wifes name was Helen Brown.
I intended to have published another Relation anent the devils coming in the
nightime, and knocked three several times at such a man's door; but I was
desired to forbear.

Having no kindness for the Cartesian Philosophy, I must fall upon it in the
close, as I did in the beginning. I will not name nor cite the Author, that
maintains the following Blasphemous Opinions, tho I may. 1. That there is an
infinite intelligible extension, which is GOD, in which we see all Bodies. 2.
This Author makes CHRIST, the Eternal Word, speak in the quality of a Cartesian
Philosopher. 3. He destroys altogether the Providence of GOD. 4. He says that
GOD has not made all things for his own Glory. 5. That it was necessar that
all men should be Sinners, that there might be a diversity of Glory. 6. Works
done without Grace are good-works. 7. GOD is not the Author of every good
thing, that is in us. 8. He destroys the Authority of the Scripture, and
exposes it to be despised by the profane. 9. The thoughts of Jesus Christ are
the occasional Causes of the distribution of Grace. 10. GOD could have created
Spirits from all Eternity. 11. All Creatures are full of Jesus Christ. 12. He
ruins the nature of sin, by the Idea, which he gives of Liberty. 13. That
Liberty is not essential to Spirits. 14. A man transported by his passion, does
not sin. 15. Every Habit or Passion, or Temperament, which we cannot over come
does make the most ugly and Enormous Actions, to be no sins. And thence,
Sodomy, Incest, Murder, Adultery, Rebellion, Witchcraft, are no sins, if they
be habitual. These are but a few of his Blasphemous and Atheistical Opinions.
This Philosophy would please some now adays very well, that habituate
themselves in murder, in murdering some in their Lodgings, and others on the
Kings highway, as is most unchristianly done by some! O dementia! Huccine
rerum venimus?

FINIS.

