Sin Dismantled, SHOWING THE LOATHSOMENESS THEREOF, In laying it open by
CONFESSION; With the Remedy for it by Repentance and Conversion.

Wherein is set forth the Manner how we ought to confess our Sins to God and
Man, with the Consiliary decrees from the Authority thereof, and for the
showing the necessity of Priestly Absolution, the removing the disesteem the
vulgar have of Absolution, setting forth the power of Ministers.

With an Historical Relation of the Canons concerning Confession, and the
secret manner of it; also showing the Confessors affections and inclinations.

By a late Reverend, Learned and Judicious Divine.

LONDON, Printed by J. Best, for WILLIAM CROOK, at the three Bibles on
Fleet-Bridge, MDCLXIV.

The Principal CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe names of things exemplify their nature. The Authors purpose.
Heb. (...) signifies Repentance and Consolation, which is variously rendered by
the Septuagint. Heb. (...) Confession or a casting off, by the same
Interpreters is translated to give thanks, and to praise. Exagreusis a
forinsecal word, an Indictment. Exhomologesis, Metanoea and Metameleia usual
in the New Testament. Resipiscence and Penitude their difference, and several
uses. page 1.

CHAP. II. Repentance a Conversion, and wherein it consists. The Fathers
define it from the sensible effects and figns thereof. The Scho^lmens error in
placing it in bodily corrections rather than in mental change. The Reformed
Divines seat it in the humiliation of the heart, requiring also outward
expressions of sorrow. Conversion is the essential form of Repentance. Self
abnegation, godly sorrow, a Penitents practice and endeavor. p. 10.

CHAP. III. Discipline of penance, wherefore enjoined by the Church.
Exhomologesis; diverse kindi of Confession; public penance of Apostolical
practice. The austerity thereof in the Primitive times. Order thereof
prescribed in the days of Cyprian and Ambrose. Diverse examples of public
Penitents. The solemn practick thereof in Records of the Church. Sinners
admitted but once to solemn Penance, Actual reconciliation denied by the Church
to lapsed sinners. No renewing unto Repentance, how understood in the Epistle
to the Hebrew. Four stations observed by the ancient Penitents. The restoring
of this Discipline much desired. p. 16.

CHAP. IV. Confession of sin addressed unto God chiefly, and to Man also with
considerable relations, grounded upon the Law of Nature; with God himself a
necessary antecedent to pardon. Adam and Cain interrogated to extract
Confession. Sundry precedents of Penitents recoursing to God in Confession.
There is shame in confessing to God, as well as unto Man. Penitential Psalms
composed by David for memorials and helps to Confession. The Rabbis doctrine
of Confession of sin before God, practiced in the time of the Gospel, preached
and urged by the Ancient Fathers; and so far by Chrysostom, as a tribute due
to God only, for which the Pontificians are jealous of him. Confession before
God is not destructive of Confession before man in a qualified sense, though
preferred before it, and especially called for by the old Doctors, although
that be of singular use also. p. 43.

CHAP. V. Of Confession to Man. The Confession of sin under the Law before the
Priest at the Altar, and the Sacrifice. Special enumeration of all sins not
required of the Jews. The Law commands the acknowledgment of sin, and
restitution. Jobs friends confessed their errors unto him, who sacrificed for
them. David's confession unto Nathan Rabbis affirming sins to be confessed unto
the Fathers and Levites. The place in St James chap. 5. Of mutual Confession
explained and vindicated. Testimonies of the Fathers for Confession unto man.
The opinion of the Schoolmen, that sin in case of necessity, and in way of
Consultation for a remedy, not in way of Absolution for reconcilement, may be
detected to a Layman: and of the Reformed Divines. That sins may be confessed
to a Believing Brother for advice, and to a Minister of the Gospel. p. 65.

CHAP. VI. Diverse Offices and administrations in the Church. The peoples
Confession unto John at Jordan, wherein they were particular. The Confession of
the Believers at Ephesus to St Paul. Proofs from the Fathers for Confession to
the Priests of the Gospel. Such Confession withdraws not from God, but
leads to him. Testimenies of the worthiest Divines of the Church of England
for Confession, seconded with Divines of the Reformation from the Churches
beyond the seas. p. 90.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Institution, necessity, and extent of Confession,
and is divided into three Sections. p. 111.

SECT. I. The Decrees of the Tridentine Council for Divine right, and authority
of Confession. The Anathema's held too severe by some moderate Romanists.
Public Exhomologesis vilipended by those Fathers. The Schoolmens faintness in
reasoning for the divine institution of Auricular Confession. The Canonists
plant the same upon the universal Tradition of the Church. Divines siding with
the Canonists. Oppugners of Auricular Confession in former ages. Pretenses of
Divine authority from places of Scripture examined. Different proceedings in
the Court of Conscience from earthly Tribunals. Special cognizance of all sins
not a necessary antecedent at all times to Priestly Absolution. God pardons
many sins immediately never spoken of to a Priest. Differences of Popish
Divines concerning the matter and form in Penance, prove to be no such thing as
Sacramental Confession, which reaches not higher than the Lateran Council.
Confession of sin of the same institution as Repentance is. Divine institution
manifold. In what sense Confession may be said to be of Divine institution. p.
113.

SECT. II. The abusive necessity of Confession. Tyrannical inquisition into
men's consciences distasteful. Confession left at liberty in Gratians time.
Schoolmen leaning to the necessity thereof. Confession not the only Necessary
means for absolution and remission. The Ends aimed at in Popish confession,
unnecessary. No express precept in Scripture for the absolute necessity
thereof. Confession an heavy burden upon fleshly shoulders. Private Confession
not practiced from the beginning. Established in the place of the public by an
Edict from Leo I. The fact of N^^tarius abrogating confession, with the several
answers and expositions of Roman writers expended. Confession deserted in the
Greek Church. Diverse kinds and forms of Necessity. Confession in what cases
necessary; and the necessity thereof determined. p. 144.

SECT. III. Scrupulous enumeration of all sins decreed in late Councils.
Circumstances aggravating and altering the property of sin, Millstones to
plain people. Anxious inquisition into each sin with every circumstance a
perplexed piece. Particular reckonings for every sin an heavy load to the
Conscience, and without express warranty from God, implying difficulty, and
impossibility, and tending to desperation. No urgent necessity to be so
superstitious in casting up of all sins, and the circumstantial tails thereof.
Romish closets of confession Seminaries of sin and uncleanness. Venial and
reserved sins exempted by Rome from the ^ars of ordinary Priests, upon what
grounds. Strict and specific enumeration of sins but of late standing in the
Church. General Interrogatories proposed at the hour of death from Anselme.
Some sins are specially, and by name to be rehearsed in confession. The nature
and quality of those sins described and determined. p. 179.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Confessary or Priest that receives confessions, and his
authority for the same: Divided into two Sections: p. 208.

SECT. I. The vulgarly disesteem of the power of Absolution in the hand of
Priests. Keys diverse; Of 1. Authority. 2. Excellency. 3. Ministry. The office
of the Ministerial key in discerning, and defining Ecclesiastical and
conscientious Consistories. The gift of Science in the Priest, not properly the
Key, but the Guide. Absolution a judicial act. Magistrates spiritual and
temporal distinguished in their jurisdiction and ends. Bonds of sin culpable,
and for sin penal. Satisfaction expiatory, vindictive. God for gives sins
properly, and effectively. The Priest by way of application and notice; as also
dispositively, qualifying by his function sinners for the same; in which he
proceeds as a subordinate cause both declaratively and operatively. The
priority of binding and loosing on Earth to Heaven in respect of the sensible
apprehension in the Penitent, not of the purpose and operation in God. Power of
Absolution primitive in God, in his Ministers derivative and delegate. A
Penitent absolving himself by the finger of Gods Spirit in what sense. The
power of binding in the Church rather privative than positive, and declarative
only. p. 211.

SECT. II. Peter seized of the keys to the use of the Church. ^ower of
Absolution conferred and confined unto Priests. ^aicks usting the same not in
case of office, but necessity, and where they are the parties grieved. Bonds of
the soul, and sin only, loosed by this key. The accomplishment and actual
donation of this power. God remitteth by the Churches act. The form of Priestly
Ordination. Heresy of the Novations denying in the Church power to reconcile
Penitents. Seed and bellows thereof austerity of those times. Absolution in the
Priest not absolutely efficacious, but as relating to conditions in the
Penitent. The Priest not secured from failing in the act of absolution. The
erring key. Priestly absolution declarative and demonstrative, and in a moral
sense energetical. Judgments forinsecal are applied declarations of the Law to
the fact. Absolution a Ministerial act, but powerful and judicial, but not
Sovereign nor despotical. The spirit of judgment to discern and determine, how
necessary for Priests in the act of absolution. Fathers making Priests Judges
of the Conscience. The exercise of the keys, 1. In the word of reconciliation:
2. In Prayer; ancient forms of absolution expressed in a deprecative manner,
not indicative: 3. In the Sacraments: 4. In interdictions and relaxations of
public censures.
Keys abused at Rome, dangerous to Sovereign Majesty's and Republics. The
superciliousness of Roman Priests in usurping upon Divine right, subjecting the
power of forgiveness in God to their arbitrements. Their preposterous way in
absolving first, and afterward in enjoining Penan^^. The feigned virtue of
absolution Ex opere operato, destructive of Piety and penitency. Conditions
requisite in the Penitent to be relieved by the keys, and lawful use of
Absolution. p. 239.

CHAP. IX. Paternal affection in the Confessary. Good for sheep if the shepherd
know their diseases. Medicinal Confession. The grief better healed when clearer
opened. Ghostly counsel of great importance to a Penitent. Great care in the
choice of a discreet Confessor. Rome's rigid Tenet. Absolution denounced by any
Priest besides the Ordinary to be invalid. The inconveniences thereof. The
Parochial Priest not to be deserted without just cause, and the same to be
approved by the Diocesan. p. 282.

CHAP. X. Many positive precepts without fixed times. The practick for times
and seasons left to the Churches arbitration. Times necessary for Confession,
when particular persons and consciences are perplexed. Times convenient for all
Christians; 1. When visited with desperate diseases. 2. Upon the undertaking of
solemn actions and exploits accompanied with danger, and meeding special help
from God. 3. Upon the receiving of the blessed Eucharist, before which
Confession to the Priest is always Convenient, and sometimes necessary; and
the neglect thereof in some cases damnable. p. 295.


CHAP. XI. All convenient secrecy apprimely requisite in the Confessary.
Suspicion of discovery a great enemy to confession. Sins already committed with
expressions of grief to be concealed. The Schoolmen bringing sins de futuro to
be committed, within the compass of the seal. The damnable doctrine of the
Jesuits, that Treasons and Conspiracies yet plotting against Church or State,
and confessed to the Priest, ought to be shut up in privacy. The odious
consectaries and inconveniences thereof. Examples of sundry Confessors
revealing treasons detected in Confession. The preservation of Prince, Church
or State to be preferred before the secrecy of the Seal. Sins opened in
confession, the concealment whereof complieth not with the Priests fidelity to
his Prince and Country, to be discovered. Marriage in the Clergy no prejudice
to the lawful secrecy of the seal, especially if the penalty of the old Canons
against the violaters thereof should be revived. p. 300.

CHAP. XII. An Historical relation of the Canons and Constitutions of the
Church of England concerning Confession, and the practice thereof by some of
the chief Members in the same. p. 312.

OF CONFESSION OF SIN.
PPOTHEPIA.
BE persuaded (industrious Reader) to stand a little at the Gate, and receive
this light in the Porch; lest a scandal may be taken where none is given. The
subject the Author of this ensuing discourse treats upon, is a duty of late
times laid aside, and which through the (...), and sluggishness of our devotion
has waxed old (as it were) and wasted it self, but now begins to peep out
from under a cloud of many abuses, Inertia Caesarum quasi consenuit, atque
decoxit, nisi sub Trajano Principe movet lacertos, etc. Florus Prolog. histor.
and the sinews thereof requickned with spirits and motion, as the Historian,
said of the decayed Empire of Rome. And because the practice thereof is no whit
plausible to flesh and blood, it is likely to be opposed by all such that are
not guided by the Spirit: He foreseeth also that some (though otherwise well
minded) may herein be contrary-minded, which may well come to pass by not
looking narrowly into the duty it self, covered under a mass of inordinances,
and thereupon crying down the duty because of the abuse. But his hope is, they
will be better persuaded, when they shall perceive the same to be defecated,
and disabused.

The matter it self is of no small importance, and conducing to Repentance for
sin, and Remission: And herein a great and learned Antiquary said truly, that
the chiefest point of the Ecclesiastical state and function is taken up in
Repentance it self, Ecclesiasticae rei functionisque praecipua pars
poenitenlia, ejusque usu and administratione continetur. Dionys. Petav.
animadvers. in Epiphan. haeres. 59. (...). Gal. 1.10.
the use and administration thereof. His care has been most in separating
betwixt the light and darkness, the thing it self, and the abuse thereof; and
his aim the reviving of this discipline as it was practiced from the beginning.
For the undertaking whereof, how mean a place Humane Respects have had with
him, his heart best knows, in whose Conscience that of the Apostle makes no
small impression, If I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ;
and his prayer is, never to be so far destitute of Grace, as to comply with
man, and to come off from God. Smoothers of great Personages, and Detractors of
men in place, he distastes alike; and stands in an equal distance to the
ambitious, that desire many preferments, but discharge none; and to the
Malcontent, disqueting himself because his worth or hopes are small.

The integrity he has observed in the carriage of this subject, he makes over
to be discerned by the judicious and candid Reader; and the freedom to his own
conscience; Prorsus ea liberate scripsit Caesarum vitas, qua vixerunt ipsi.
Erasm. in Sueton. Epistolar. lib. 28. (...). 1 Cor. 4.2.
for of all things Faith and Religion endure restraint and the fetters worst:
Sueton took to himself as much freedom in writing the lives of the Casars, as
they did to themselves in living. And Divines are Dispensers, and in Dispensers
fidelity is most set by. His desire also is to be censured with the like
sincerity and freedom as he has written. Very justly was Apelles reprehended
by Lycippus another Picturer, for painting Alexander with a thunderbolt in his
hand, Plutarch. lib. de I side, and Osiride.
when as he himself had set him forth with a Spear; for humors truly
represented are lasting, but false and counterfeit colors vanish into smiles
and oblivions; and far better it is to write what is true and just, than what
is great and plausible. In the various censures of the Times he neither
expects nor flattereth himself with the hope of a general applause. (...).
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. page 203.
For I suppose (says an ancient Father) no man has ever been so fortunate in
his writings, as to encounter with no contradiction, but let him hold himself
well appay'd, if none can justly control him.

That he has promiscuously used the name of Priest as of Minister, he is well
assured will give no distaste, especially to those Brethren who are contented
to head their party with the name of Presbyter, (...) Presbytero, Hispan.
Prebstre, Gallice. Priester, Germ. (...). Saxon. Romans 15.16. Sacra functione
circa Dei Evangelium fungens. Castalio. (...). Etymolog. M. In Sacerdotis locum
non commodum satis vocabulu^ subslitutum Ministrorum; quo licet omnes qui sacro
funguntur munere rite and ex Scripturae usu app^llentur, non tamen co
Presbyteri a Diaconis distinguuntur. Jos. Mede Commentar. in Apocalypse. part.
2. p. 237.
seeing also that sacred Officers of the Church of England, whereof himself
has had the honor to be one, are admitted into the order of Priesthood; and
Clergy men so initiated, are in most of the Western languages known by that
denomination: nor can any be justly offended, to be called by that name as
(...) under the Gospel, since the Doctor of the Gentiles styles himself the
Minister of Jesus Christ, and (...), performing the duty of a Priest about the
Gospel, as Henry Stephan renders it: The name importing no more than one
sacrum Dei administrans Evangelium, set apart to administer the Gospel, or set
over the public worship and service of God And a very Learned man of our own
side is of opinion, that as the name of Minister may not amiss and according to
the Scripture phrase signify all that are initiated and admitted into holy
Orders; so it is not fit and proper to distinguish betwixt a Deacon and
Presbyter.

Furthermore this Treatiser would be esteemed as one whose studies are
nourished in the shade, and whose helps extend not beyond his own Study, and
the Authors by him used and cited, to be of his own acquaintance. If he might
presume, Studia (ut sic dixerim) in umbra educata. Seneca ad Neron. Tacit.
Annal. lib. 14. cap. 14.
the Church of England should be his Patron, to the pillars thereof, and their
feet he humbly submits his discourse, and to the benignity of his candid
Readers; whose gentle and upright dealing with him will richly supply the
defect of a more specifique Patronage. However he is resolved to rely upon the
shield of Gods favor, and the testimony of his own Conscience. And thus much
by way of Preface, where his mind was to have said more, or else not so much.

OF PENITENTIAL CONFESSION.
CHAP. I.
The Contents.
The names of things exemplify their nature. The Authors purpose. Heb. (...)
signifies Repentance and consolation, which is variously rendered by the
Septuagint. Heb. (...) confession or a casting off, by the same Interpreters is
translated to give thanks, and to praise, Exagoreusis a forinsecal word, an
indictment, Exhomologesis, Metanoea and Metameleia usual in the New Testament.
Resipiscence and Penitude their difference and several uses.

NAMES fitly imposed are the express images of things, and speak their nature:
no better key to open the secret of any subject matter, (...). Clem. Alex.
Strom. lib. 6.
than by being acquainted with what title it is called. Truth is a picture
drawn at life, the names and titles are the several colors, representing the
same unto a rational understanding. By names the Creatures are not only made
known what nature they are of, but are distinguished also, their several kinds,
and specific forms are diversely discerned. (...)
The Hebrews style the nomination of their creatures a separation of their
several species, their Analysis, and distinction; there is then a twofold use
of names; 1. To tell us what a thing is in it self; 2. and how differenced from
another.
This task was God pleased at the first to impose on Adam, Non nudae suerunt
appellariones, fed ex earum naturis sumptae. Mercer.
and he had then the strength to undergo it, wherein he was not simply graced,
the creature to take its being from God, and its appellation from man, by that
employment would God try his skill as well pleased to behold his own wisdom
reflecting from that glass. My purpose is (the Lord being my help) to treat of
peni^ential confession, the original, institution, progress, and practice
thereof, also its efficacy, virtue and scope, together with the uses and abuses
by such Congregations and Churches as pretend to Christianity, to endeavor to
disabuse the same, and restore it to its former integrity. To inquire what
authority is delegated unto man in giving audience unto Penitents; likewise
what necessity lies upon sinners, and in what cases, to unfold the burden of
their Consciences unto the Lords Stewards. And lastly, what power over sin is
committed to that earthen vessel, together with the instructions, latitude, and
extent thereof, for procuring the safety of Christian souls. Wherein (as we
have said) our first step into this passage and nature of Confession must be to
learn the names, and appellations thereof. Exodus 3.13.
And as Moses would not stir afoot till God had told him his name, so we must
arrest our thought in the first place, upon this inquiry.

And to begin with the first and most sacred Tongue, (...) signifying
Repentance, which is the root and parent of confession, Generaliter significat
mutation^m animi seu affectus, qualis est quando aliquem dicti vel facti sui
poeniteat, illudque ipsum mutat, vel quae fit condolentia vel commiseratione,
vel quae fit consolatione in eo qui prius perturbatus erat. Kercher. Lexicon.
Hebr-Graec. verbo (...).
which word imports usually a change in the mind, or affections, when a man
repents of what he has spoken or done, as wishing the same unsaid, or to do
again; and this alteration is accommodated with grief and pity, if what has
slipped from his tongue, or hand, be prejudicial to himself, or such as are
dear unto him, or else with consolation, in case his former purpose proved
molestious unto him, (...) consolari, poenitere. S. Pagnin.
and that he has found case in the revoking thereof. And hence it is that the
word carries with it a double signification to repent, and to comfort; for
godly sorrow usually sits down in consolation, true Repentance like Janus with
a double face, looking upon the old year or conversation lamentably; upon the
new, or renewed life cheerfully. Genesis 6.6. (...) Job 42.6.
God spoke as man, when he repented that he made man, there is the word; and Job
in the same terms expressed that serious abnegation of himself, wherefore I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. A Penitent for a time dislikes
none more than himself, and would have others take notice of his vileness also
by covering himself with dust, and crowning his head with ashes. The Septuagint
have rendered the same variously, but every way significantly; as 1. (...) to
cease, (...), says God by the Prophet, upon the peoples turning from the evil
of sin, Jer. 26.3. Mala non peccatoria sed ultoria. Tertull. lib. 2. contr.
Marcion.
I will cease from the evils of punishment, which I purposed to do unto them
because of the evil of their doings; so it has, and ever will be, betwixt us
and God; hand off from sin, hand off from punishment. 2. It is interpreted
(...), to ponder and consider, (and that but once) upon that former place in
Genesis, Aug. [pro poenitut] legit recogitavit, juxta fidem ve^ustissimi
codicis. lib. 15. de Civit. Dei. cap. 24.
(...); and God pondered in his mind that he had made man, considering and
bethinking with himself what he had done; so considerate were those
Interpreters in translating thus, lest Repentance with God might have begot
some misprision of him with Ptolomy; though otherwise they make bold to render
it with words and phrases of Repentance, and that in the person of God too,
when it is not of man but of the evils that might befall him.
As 3. (...), to repent again, in Jeremy, If a nation turn from the evil,
(...), I will repent of the evil I thought to do unto them. If it do evil in my
sight, that it obey not my voice, Poenitentia Dei neque ex improvidentia, neque
ex levitate, neque ex ulla boni aut mali operis damnatione reputetur, sicut
humana -- nihil aliud intelligitur quam simplex conversi^ scientiae prioris.
Tertull. lib. 2. contr. Marcion. c. 24. Jerem. 18. verse. 8. and 10.
then (...), I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them:
Here I cannot refrain from telling my Reader, how we occasion Gods favors, and
frowns; when man turns from evil, God turns to be good in collation of
benefits, and when man turns from being good, God turns to be evil in the
affliction of his judgments; (...) and (...).
yea so propitious is God upon Repentance, that to repent with him is with
these Translators to be patified. In Moses earnest intercession for the people,
(for whose sins God was justly displeased) we read according to the Original,
(...) Exodus 32.12.
Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people; they
render it (...), be favorable to the sins of thy people. And whereas God was
entreated and Moses prevailed in his suit, (as what cannot fervent
supplications do with God) the Hebrew verity says, (...) Verse 14.
and the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto the people, and
they say, (...), God was entreated for the evil and pacified. This evidence is
from the Old Testament, and oldest language for Repentance.

And what find you for the tongue and dialect thereof, Confession? I say as
Philip to Nathaneel; Come and see: the Hebrew (...) in hiphil to Confess, John
1.46.
is a branch of the root (...) projicere, to cast away; because Confession is a
kind of casting up of crude sins, indigested in the conscience of a diseased
stomach, and disquiet breast. A Father of great antiquity has instructed me to
this observation, Even as those that have meat lying indigested upon the
stomach, Sicut ii qui habent intus inclusam escam indigestam, aut humoris, vel
phlegmatis stomacho graviter, and moleste imminentia, si vomuerint relevantur;
ita etiam hi qui peccaverunt, siquidem* occultant, and retinent inter se
peccatum, intrinsecus urgentur, and propemodum suffocantur a phlegmate, and
humore peccati, si autem ipse sui accusator fiat, dum accusat semetipsum, and
confitetur, simul evomit and delictum atque omnem morbi digerit causam. Origin.
homil. 2. in Psalm. 37.
or are otherwise troubled with the phlegm, are greatly releeved by a vomit;
so those that hide their sins committed inwardly, are strangled well-nigh, and
choked with their humor and fl^gme, but if that vexed person would accuse
himself, and confess, by so doing at once he vomiteth up his sin, and
discovers his disease. And it shall be, when he shall be guilty of one of
these things, (...) and shall confess that he has sinned in that thing, Levit:
5. Psalm. 5.6.
So Origin. Thence comes also (...) which is confession, or the sacrifice
destined to expiate the sin revealed to the Priest, of which there is frequent
mention in the old Law; where the guilty person was to confess the sin that he
had sinned, and to present his offering. And the Priest was to make his (...)
atonement, expiation or redemption; the quality of which confession, and the
reserved cases therein will come under our hands hereafter; So in the inquiry
after the iniquity of Achan, which put Israel to flight more than all their
enemies could do: the offender attached by a divine lot; Joshuah advises him
at no hand to conceal the sin, Josh. 7.19. (...). Lui fai confession. Gallice.
but to make confession thereof to God, or as the Septuagint according to the
letter of the Hebrew, give confession unto him. And the same Interpreters,
where sin is the subject thereof, render it confession; but where God and his
mercies are the contents, Psalm. 27.7. Pour esclater en voice d'action de
graces. Fr. B.
praise and thanksgiving; as for example, That I may publish with the voice of
thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works; or as the French Bibles, for
to illustrate with the voice of thanksgiving; after the Hebrew, That I may
cause to be heard, or sound forth in the voice of confession, which the
Septuagint read thus, (...) Ut audire faciam sonum, in Hiphil. Psalm. 26.7. Sec.
LXXII. From (...) forum. Ezra 10.1.
(...), that I may hear the voice of thy praise. But when sin bears the burden
of confession, then the words used are (...), and (...), which run along all
their translation, and are of much use with the Greek Fathers also; sometimes
they express it by (...), a forinsecal word, as in that former place of
Leviticus, (...), and shall confess his sin. After that solemn and heavy
denuntiation of the peoples sins unto God by the lips of Ezra, chap. 9. in the
beginning of the next, the Septuagint read, (...), after he had confessed
weeping and praying. That Priests and peoples confession could not but fly up
to heaven, winged with prayers and tears: And David's purpose to accuse and
indict himself for his offenses, was according to that tenor, (...), Ps. 31.
vel 32. sec. Hebraeos.
I said I will confess my sin against my self; where he never took his own part
more, than by setting himself in such a confession against himself: wherein
those Translators would show that in confession, there must be a concurrency
both in soul and body, and both must arraign us at the Bar, giving in of
evidence, or rather finding of the bill of indictment by our selves put in, and
signed to be true, if it were only (...) the evidence of the tongue were
enough, but (...) imports that there is an inward sense of the outward
evidence; and as evil springs from the heart, 1. Exhomologesis conscientiae.
Cyprian.
so from that root must orall confession issue forth: and hence is it that one
of the Fathers calls it, 1. The confession of the conscience: 2. Another, the
exposing of the burden of the soul, 3. 2. pondus animi proferre. Aug.
and a third, a sighing forth of sin, rather than speaking, and with grief of
heart, more than words of the lips.
Thus far the Old Testament has led me by the hand along the several
denominations of Repentance and Confession. 3. Ingemit culpae dolor. Ambr.


And now for to come unto that other part of Gods treasure, (for so Clemens
Alexand. honors the Scriptures) let us see what a good Scribe may bring forth
of the New also: We shall there find for Repentance two words, (...) and (...),
the former has respect unto the mind, and the change thereof, rather than any
corporal afflictions; when after a lapse the party peccant shall find his
error, (...) mutatam mentem sonat, non afflictionem corporis. Erasm. annot. in
Mat. cap. 3.
and so seriously to lament that former error as to correct and amend the
same; De errore admisso ita dolere, ut corrigas, Latin resipiscere. Beza
Annot. ad Matthew. 3. verse. 2.
considering what he was with grief, and endeavoring to be what he was not,
(but ought to have been) with grace; Semper (...) convenit (...).
that his Repentance is a departure from evil unto goodness, therefore herein
is wisdom in the end; and in Latin is termed resipiscentia, for to commit sin
is folly, but to repent thereof, and amend is wisdom; therefore it has
reference to the inward man, Nam and in Graeco s^no poenitentiae nomen non ex
delicti confessione, sed ex animi demutatione composita est. Terrul. lib. 2.
contr. Marcion. cap. 4.
and imports not so much the confession of sin, as the commutation of the
mind, whereby the sinner is altered, rather than the sin uttered, as Tertullian
elegantly expressed the force of the Greek word; (...), Matthew. 3.8. (...),
Matthew. 9.13. (...), Luc. 24. (...), Matthew. 11.21. (...), Act. 3.19.
and in that name is comprised Repentance, with its properties and virtues; so
you have the fruits of repentance, Mat. 3.8. and the calling of sinners to
repentance, Mat. 9.13. and forgiveness of sins annexed to repentance, Luke
24.27. so you have the habit and dress thereof, they had repented in sackcloth
and in ashes. The virtue and effect, together with the manner and efficacy
thereof; Repent and be converted that your sins may be blotted out; (...).
Hesiod.
thus (...) is all in all with repentance.

The other word (...), is not of such virtue, and is used of such as have been
remiss, and supine in managing of their affairs, who smarting for their
sollies, and negligence, Dicta est cum socordes in peragendo sero incipimus
esse attenti. Erasm.
at the last show more diligence; such after-wits are usually anxious, Declarat
post rem aliquam factam sollicitum esse and anxium, Latin poenitere, atque
usurpari potest in vitio. Beza.
and disquieted with their doings. This kind of pensiveness does not always
imply a change either in life or purpose for the better, but sometimes for the
worse also, betokening rather a (...), and displeasure, whereby we could wish
with all our hearts things done undone, hap what will, be they good or evil.
The gifts and callings of God are (...) without repentance, that is of that
sort as the donation thereof i^ at no time displeasing to God, who therewith
was once pleased. Heb. 7.21.
The Lord swear (...) and will not repent, that is, will never desire to
change, or dislike his deposition. The son that refused to labor in his
fathers vineyard, was better than his word, he said he would not, (...). Matthew.
21.29.
afterward he repented and went, and upon better thoughts altered his
resolution, and obeyed: he repented upon what he said, and went upon what he
resolved. Judas after his treason (...) repented likewise, as sore troubled at
what he had done, Tristitiam significans a qua est absorptus. (...).
and could have wished the same to have been to do again, as one swallowed up
of sorrow and despair. The Apostle of his sharp letter sent to the Corinthians,
I do not repent, though I did repent, as loath to grieve them; so he repented
that they should look sad at any lines of his; yet he repented not, because
they sorrowed after a godly manner. I have been the more particular in these
instances, that the difference betwixt these two, (...), which a learned
Interpreter always translates Resipiscence, Beza.
and (...) in like manner always by him rendered Poenitude, might shine the
clearer, and it stands in two points, 1. in their properties and conditions,
the one being a sober discerning of what was formerly amiss, wisely correcting
and amending the same, or an alteration wrought in the heart upon sounder
advise, and a reformation of precedent faults; whereas the other [Metameleia]
ofttimes intimates no more, than a mere vexation, causing trouble, and anxiety
of mind at things past help, or a displeasure, and distrust only, joined with
little or no amendment. 2. The other difference lies in the object; Metanoea is
only for reformation, altering what was fit to be altered, and grieving for
what was worthy to be lamented; whereas Metameleia is sometimes a fretting that
evil designs succeed not, as Pharaoh repined that he let Israel go, and
resolved to cross their passage to his own ruin; Therefore when this
Repentance is attributed to God and men, and they both good and bad, Deus vult
mutationem, non mutat voluntatem. Aquin.
this distinction must be observed; 1. when God is said to repent (as in making
of S^ul King) the change is in the outward act, not in Gods internal will, viz.
in the dethroning of that worthless Prince: 2. when good men repent, the change
is in the affections, and in the actions also: 3. but the wicked are no
changlings, grieving sometimes that their mischievous plots take no place, and
at other times swallowed up in grief, that they have been so mischievous.



Other words there are in the New Testament for Confession, coincident with
those used by LXXII. Interpreters in the Old, whose Translation is by the
Evangelists and Apostles generally embraced; as (...), 1 John 1.9. and (...),
Mat. 3.6. Mark 1.6. Acts 19.18. I choose to direct to the places only, having
formerly spoken all I know by the words already; and my care is to ease my self
and my Reader all I can, from the tediousness of Tautologies and needless
repetitions.

And as little remains to be spoken of the Latin names, Poenitentia takes
its beginning with Erasmus, a pone tenendo, because it lays hold on good
resolutions in the last; although a great master in Criticisme derives the same
from poena, Turnebus.
and that from poeniendo, ( poenire with the ancient standing for p^^ire)
because punishment usually answers sin* To repent in the vulgar Translation is
poenitentiam agere for poenitere, and is as ridiculously translated by our
Rhemists to do penance; as if I should interpret vitam agere to do life, which
I oppose not with any purpose to cut off godly sorrow from Repentance, or those
severe and wholesome exercises thereof, of much use in the Primitive times, as
not ignorant that though Repentance be a conversion and turning, yet the way is
with weeping, Joel 2.
etc. and profess my self no great enemy to them that with a discreet hand
shall chastise the body, not to keep even with God, but to keep it under, to
sequester the same from sinning, rather than to satisfy for sin; according to
that vulgar Epigram of Ausonius,

Sum Dea quae facti, non factique exigo poenas,
Nempe ut poeniteat, sic Metanoea vocor.
And thus much for the words, and their significations, wherein I have not
only rested upon the naked Etymologies, but have respected the use, and
practice thereof in holy Scripture, and live in hope to be discharged of that
censure, Bellarmine (I know not how justly) passes upon the Divines of the
Reformation, Errant isti Grammatici potius quam Theologi, qui vocum
significationes ex Etymologiis potius ducunt, quam ex communi Scripturae and
bonorum Authorum usu. Bellar. l. 1. de Poen. c. 7.
as Grammarians rather then Divines, deriving the significations of words from
Etymologies, rather than the common use of the holy Scriptures and good Authors,

CHAP. II.
The Contents.
Repentance is a conversion, and wherein it consists; The Fathers define it
from the sensible effects and signs thereof. The Schoolmens error in placing
it in bodily corrections rather then in mental change. The Reformed Divines
seat it in the humiliation of the heart, requiring also outward expressions of
sorrow. Conversion is the essential form of Repentance. Self-abnegation, Godly
sorrow, a Penitents practice and endeavor.

HItherto of the several names and appellations, (...). Clem. Alex. (...). l.
1. p. 215. Mat. 9.21.
now of the substance and thing it self; for words are as clothes, and raiment
to the body, whereas the material substance is the nerves, and fleshy part
thereof; yet as the Haemorrcousaan in the Gospel drew virtue from our Savior
by touching the hem of his garment, so no small light has been afforded (as in
part has already appeared, and will be shown more fully hereafter) to discover
the nature of penitential confession from the habit and outside thereof; the
clothes thus spread we may see more clearly into the thing it self. And so much
has been unfolded by the names wherewith Repentance is called in several
languages, that the less is left behind to discover the substantial part
thereof; and therein I shall make as little stay as I may, for that this
consideration was not the principal matter intended, but as an apparatus, and
necessary introduction thereunto. Our inquisition into the nature of Repentance
shall begin with the holy Scriptures, pass along by the Fathers, divert unto
the Schoolmen, and conclude with the modern Divines of both Churches.

In Gods book Repentance is described to be a conversion and a change. In
Solomon's prayer upon the dedication of the Temple, when the people shall be
switten down before the enemy, 1 King. 8.33. (...). Aristot. verse 35.
because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again unto thee, and
confess thy name, etc. there is a turning to; which implies also a turning from,
and that follows in the verse following, if they confess thy name, and turn
from their sin. The terms then in this conversion (...) is from sin, and
thence there is a departure; (...) is to God, and thither there must be an
adventure. Upon good advice then the Hebrew (...) to turn, is by Interpreters
turned to repent, especially where the same is doubled in the Original, as in
Ezekiel, (...) Restournez vouz and vou^z destournez. Fr. Bible. Jerem. 13.23.
Repent and turn from all your transgressions, Chap. 18.30. and Chap. 14.6.
return, and turn ye from, as the French read it. I could be infinite (if
occasion were) in such particulars. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil;
inimating that Repentance is no natural work, that sins set on by custom
adhere as close unto the soul, as blackness to the skin of the Ethiopian, or
spots unto the Leopard; that the blackness, and those spots are changed by
doing good instead of evil, and that change to be wrought upon Repentance. Acts
17.30.
The same Scripture seats this Conversion in the heart, showing that it arises
from a sense of Gods judgments, and a detestation of sin, 2 Cor. 7.10.
accompanied with a godly sorrow for the same; grounded upon a just displeasure
a sinner takes unto himself for displeasing God, joined ever with holy vows,
studies, and endeavors of amendment of life; Matthew. 3.
Thus much from the Scriptures.

For the Fathers their descriptions are usually taken from the effect, and
operation of Repentance; as that of Ambrose, Repentance is to bewail sins
already committed, Praeterita mala plangere, and plangenda iterum non
committere. Ambr.
and not to commit again sins already bewailed, consisting in a contrition for
sin, Anteacta peccata flere; and flenda non committere. Greg.
and a dereliction thereof, where indeed what a penitent turns from, and
leaves, is expressed, but not to what he is to lean, and turn unto; Est virtus
qu^^ commissa mala cum emendati^nis proposito plangimus and odimus, and
plangenda ulterius committere nolumus. Lomb.
the Master of the sentences somewhat supplies this defect, that it is a virtue
whereby we lament, Est dolor de peccato commisso cum emendationis proposito.
Aquin.
and hate the sins that we have done, with a purpose of amendment, as not with
our wills to commit what we have lamented; which Aquinas has contracted thus,
it is a grief for sins past, with a purpose of amendment. Est quaedam doleatis
vindicta, semper puniens in se, quod dolet commisisse. Aug. lib. de vinc. poen.
Etiam in bonis factis adhibent. Tert. lib. de poen. c. 1.
But that ascribed to Saint Austin, viz. that it is a kind of revenge always
punishing in himself, what a sinner grieves to have committed, has respect
unto the exercise, and consequent of Repentance, rather than to the virtue it
self. They all concur that Repentance is a grieving for sin, insomuch that the
Ethnic is taxed by Tertullian, for calling that Repentance, wherein the doing
of a good turn is grieved at; as spilt upon a thankless breast, or otherwise
cast away; where he desires to be understood of Medicinal and saving
Repentance, otherwise he will fall under the lash of his own pen, himself
censuring in Marcion, what he approved against the Ethnic, and approving
against Marcion what he censured in the Ethnic; for he allows not that the
subject of repentance should be only evil, nor that every sorrow should be
grounded upon a real error, or always argue something amiss; for many times
courtesies, and benefits are repented of by the Donours, Poenitentiam prave
interpretatur (Marcion) confessionem scilicet sapere mali operis alicujus, vel
erroris; porro non semper, evenit enim in bonis factis poenitentiae confessio
ad invidiam, and exprobrationem ejus qui beneficii ingratus extiterit. Tert.
lib. 2. cont. Marcion. c. 24. Poenitentia invidiosa. criminosa.

as extended to such as deserve not the same, importing rather ingratitude in
the Dones, than any offense in the Benefactor; therefore to reconcile him to
himself, interpret him to speak of criminal Repentance only, which ever
respects sin the chief motive of godly sorrow.

All which descriptions of the Ancients, Definitio poenitentiae data est per
causam, non per essentiam. Compend. Theol. verit, l. 6. c. 20.
comprehending rather the consequents and effects of Repentance, than the
precise form thereof, occasion the Schoolmen to let go the substance for the
shadow; who in their disputes are so fettered to the external practice, and
fruit of repentance, that no other collection can be made from their Treatises,
and determinations, than that In iis, quae corporis magis exercitationem, quam
animi emendationem in se continent, collocata. H. Grotius de Relig. Christ. l.
6. sub initio.
Repentance is a harsh kind of discipline, and austerity, carrying a rigid hand
upon the fleshly part of man his body, thereby to tame the same to subjection,
or to chastise it for former insurrections; a discipline not amiss, if the
mind, and inward man might be renewed also, which ever implies a due
correction, and amendment of life; but of this inward reformation ne (...)
quidem, there is a strange silence, In externis exercitiis mordicus infixi --
de interiori mentis reformatione mirum silentium. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 4.
Sect. 1.
you shall not lightly meet with a syllable thereof in all their voluminous
Tractates. It is not a shirt of hair, a Lenten suit, a dejected countenance,
that can please God, without a true humiliation of the heart; nor the outward
habit of John the Baptist, without his inward virtues. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked with all sackcloth without, and all purple within. The Divines of
the Reformation espying this defect of the inward sap, and marrow of
Repentance, consisting in the rending, and renewing of the heart, have stood
much upon, Repentance what, and wherein the truth thereof consists.
and urged repentance of this kind; as a work of grace arising of a godly
sorrow, whereby a man turns from all his sins to God, and brings forth fruit
worthy of amendment of life: Or a true conversion of our life to God,
proceeding from a true fear of him, Est vera ad Deum vitae nostrae conversio a
sincero serioque Dei amore profecta, quae carnis nostra, veterisque homiuis
mortisicatione, and Spiritus vivificatione constat. Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 3.
quem sequitur Zanch. loc. com. de Poenit.
and contained in the mortifying of the old man the flesh, and in the quickening
of the spirit. Nor have they stayed here, but have called on for the fruits,
and exercises thereof, professing the end, and scope of repentance to be the
restitution of Gods image decayed in us; Officia pietatis erga Deunt,
charitatis erga homines -- externa testimonia quae sinceram resipiscentiam
commendant. Calv.
have enjoined the offices of piety to God, and of charity toward man; That
penitent sinners are trees of Righteousness, of Gods own planting, Es. 6.3.
Ezekiel. 47.12.
growing by the waters that flow out of the Sanctuary, and therefore must bear
fruit, that may serve for meat, and leaf for med cine. Behold then the subtilty
of Satan, and iniquity of these times, persuading many to have inward
Repentance, and grief in the heart, without any external exercise or fruit,
whereas the tree is known to be good by the fruit it bears. It Is true, bodily
exercise upon the flesh, where the spirit, and inward grace of Contrition is
wanting, profits nothing; yet if true sorrow be planted in the heart, it will
break forth in the eye with tears, and tongue with confession. Consider how
unsuitable it is to cut off all bodily Repentance for sins done in the body, as
thou have given thy members to the one, so give them to the other also. Thus
have I opened (so far as is necessary) the doctrine of Repentance, and shall
dismiss the same with certain conclusions.

The very nature and essence of Repentance consists in turning. Conclus. 1.
The first text that Saint Paul preached on to the Gentiles after his own
conversion, Acts 26.20.
was, that they should repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for
Repentance; the sum and drift of Repentance being to pass from our selves to
God: which conversion is not a substantial change, altering the subject, but an
alteration in the qualities of the Converts soul, changing them from evil to
good; as for example, the same body now in health, (...). Arist. de gener. and
corrup. l. 1. text. 23.
now diseased, where the substance is the same, but not the state; or as the
same metal wrought in an angular or circular figure, materially the same,
though not formally. (...). Id. ib.
In repentance then the substance is not changed, as in generation and
corruption, nor the quantity, as in growth and diminution, but in qualities and
conditions only; a transformation of the inward man, therefore called a new
heart; and described by returning unto the Lord, putting away abominations out
of his sight; Ezekiel. 18.31. Jer. 4.1, 3, 4.
by breaking up of fallow ground; and circumcising the fore-skins of the heart,
wherein lies the amendment, and alteration.

A Penitent upon the sense of his sins and Gods judgments, Conclus. 2. Peccati
odium poenitentiae exordium -- illum arbitror plurimum profecisse, qui sibi
plurimum displicere didicit. Calvin.
becomes a person much dejected, as David and Peter, and thereupon grows into a
great dislike with himself, wishing he were another man; and as the beginning
of Repentance proceeds from the hatred of sin, so does the hatred of sin
spring from the fear of God, and that penitent has made a fair progress in
Repentance, which has truly learned with himself to be highly displeased.

Contrition in a true Penitent is a godly sorrow for sin, and for incurring
Gods displeasure: Conclus. 3.
Grief for sin is, where the sin is more abhorred than the punishment; that if
there were no Conscience to accuse, no Devil to terrify, no Judge to arraign
and condemn, no hell to torment, yet to be humbled for all that for sin, and
brought upon our knees for offending such a God; and that sin should be the
more displeasing to us for that it is unto Him displeasing. There was in the
heart of Anselmus such a detestation of sin, as to profess, that if the horror
of sin on the one side, and terror of hell on the other, were so proposed, as
one of them (choose which he would) must needs be undergone by him, Si hinc
peccati horrorem, hinc inferni dolorem corporaliter cerneret, and necessario
uni eorum immergi deberet, prius infernum quam peccatum appeteret. Malle se
purum a peccato, and innocentem Gehennam habere, quam peccati sorde pollutum
coelorum regna tenere. Eadmer. vita Anselm. lib. 2.
that he would prefer the torments to suffer there, before the filthiness of
sin to be unclean here; and that in his option and choice, he had rather
descend into hell an innocent, and undefiled, than to ascend into heaven with
guilt and uncleanness; such hearts, and holy resolves, God send us.

A Penitent indeavoureth by all ways and means possible to appease the wrath
of God, Conclus. 4.
to make his atonement for the obtaining of mercy, by faith in Christ, and the
efficacy of his merits; by humility of heart, by confession and acknowledgment
of the offense; by promises of amendment, and by frequenting the best remedies
against sin; supporting himself in all his anguishes, and afflictions, and
though he have fallen among thieves, be stripped of his raiment and wounded,
yet he is not quite dead, gasping for relief, Luke 10.30. Clem. Alex. paed.
lib. 1. page 89.
and anchoring himself upon the coming of the good Samaritan; his soul is a
wounded spirit indeed, but wounded (...), as a father speaks, not to death,
but so as may be healed. Arbitror quod etiam Judas potuisset and tanta Dci
miseratione non excludi a venia, si poenitentiam non apud Judaeos, sed apud
Christum egisset. l. 2. de poen. c. 5. Hoc auferre vultis [Novatiani] propter
quod agitur poenit^ntia; toll Gubernatoris perveniendi spem, and in mediis
fluctibus incertus errabit; toll luctatori coronam, lentus jacebit in stadio
--. Bonum Dominum habemus qui velit donare omnibus. Ambr. lib. 2. de poenit.
cap. 3.
This expectation of pardon and reconcilement differenceth the godly sorrow of
true Converts, from the gulf of grief, and desperation of forlorn Miscreants,
such as were Cain and Judas, men swallowed up of sorrow, without the least beam
of comfort. Judas went the wrong way in confessing his sins unto the Jewish
Priests and not unto God. I suppose (says Ambrose) that if that Confession had
been directed unto Christ, he might have found mercy; hope of mercy is the
only encouragement to Repentance; without this Anchor the Pilot and his ship
are t^ssed incertainly with winds, and waves; take away this laurel, the
Champion will languish upon the theater. But a good Lord we have that will
forgive all, and to all that seek him, says the glory of Millaine. And in this
last Conclusion we have news of Confession, which is a good means to obtain
mercy and forgiveness, to which we hasten.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.
Discipline of Penance wherefore enjoined by the Church. Exhomologesis, diverse
kinds of Confession, Public penance of Apostolical practice. The austerity
thereof in the Primitive times. Order thereof prescribed in the days of
Cyprian and Ambrose. Diverse examples of public Penitents. The solemn Practique
thereof in Records of the Church. Sinners admitted but once to solemn Penance.
Actual reconciliation denied by the Church to lapsed sinners. No renewing unto
repentance, how understood in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Four stations
observed by the ancient Penitents. The restoring of this discipline much
desired.

I Have touched in the former passages how Repentance began to be placed in the
exercises, and practick part thereof, as the subduing of the body with
austerity of food, and raiment; by which external means Man rather came to the
notice of our sorrow, than God; for the Almighty as he is the searcher of the
reins, and heart, has an eye principally upon those inward parts to see how
they stand affected: I say, because God can make a scrutiny into the spirit of
man only, it was thought fit by the Church, (which is a select company of men,
and understand as man) to prescribe unto sinners such rules to be observed in
Repentance, whereby the same might appear to be real and sincere unto them
also: for if the Church have any power (as sure she has) in the reconcilement
of Penitents, there must needs be some such means supposed as are
proportionable to the Churches apprehension, whereby inward contrition for sin
may be unto them demonstrated, and forthwith the party to be reconciled. But
grief of heart cannot be made known unto man without some sensible sign;
therefore as Saint James called upon the professors, James 2.18.
show me thy faith by thy works; so did the ancient Disciplinarians, show us
your Repentance by the fruit thereof. Now this evidence, and demonstration
consisted in the undergoing of an outward humiliation, according to the
Penitential Canons then in force; of which discipline there were several
degrees, Nomine Poenitentium apud veteres, soli publici poenitentes intelligi
solebant. Bell. l. 2. de poenit. c. 14. p. 1403. Ministerium ejus. Tertul.
according to the nature of the offense, and this the Ancients called
Exhomologesis: for as in the Primitive times they only were named Penitents
that underwent the public prescript thereof; so public penance was
comprehended under that title as the ministerial part thereof; for what was it
else but a public manifesto, and declaration of sin, joined with a submission
to open Penance and shame? Insomuch that the Jesuits themselves confess that
Exhomologesis is a word of such latitude, Apud veteres nomine Exhomologesis
interdum non intelligitur sola Confessio, sed etiam contritio and satisfactio.
Bell. de poen. l. 2. c. 5.
and use with the old Doctors, as to comprehend contrition, and satisfaction,
as well as vocal Confession only; and expressly that Cyprian thereby meant not
that, Exhomologesis apud Cyprian. sacram^ntalem (ut vocant) confessionem non
significat; D. Petavius animadvers. ad Epiphanium. her. 49. p. 233.
which they term Sacramental. Upon good ground then Erasmus first, and after
him Chemnitius have observed, how diverse Divines not advisedly considering what
the old Doctors say, are deceived, or else have a purpose to deceive in their
allegations; for what the Fathers speak of a general, Pontificii quae propria
sunt hujus confessionis ea transferunt, and tribuunt auriculari suae
enumerationi. Chemnis. exam. part. 2. p. 187.
and open Exhomologesis, that they wrest by and by, to a secret, and privy kind
of confession, as it is now used in the Church of Rome; To cut off all
ambiguities, we shall therefore in a table both for brevity and perspicuity
represent the several kinds and uses of Confession, Confessio laudis. Confessio
fraudis.
Aug. hom. 8. sup. verb. hujus. Psalm. 30.4. (...). Basil. in Psalm. 29. p. 80.
by which draught the Reader may be instructed to what head and place such
testimonies produced by such Divines, may be justly referred.

Exhomologesis then is a confession of laud, and thanksgiving, as well as of
fraud, and iniquity; and so Basil upon Psalm. 29. as the LXXII number it, Give
thanks unto the memorial of his holiness. Confess, that is to say, give thanks,
for confession there, is taken for giving of thanks. This kind of confession is
much to the purpose, but not to the present; that of fraud and sin being most
proper to a penitent, as a recognition of his own unworthiness; the draught,
and Synopsis thereof behold in this digramma:

Confession of sin is public, in the face, and open assembly of the Church,
and is 1. Of the whole Church. Ordinary, in every sacred meeting.
Extraordinary, for some national sin, or judgment.
2. Of one particular member fallen into notorious and scandalous sins, and
smitten with the censure of the Church, who is publicly to confess the same
with much sorrow, and affliction; humbly deprecating for the same, and desiring
his state, and reconciliation, as the Corinthian.
Confession of sin is Private To God only. To man 1. For the good of our souls
and healing of our infirmities 1. Unto the Pastor ex effec^ most fit, and
proper. 2. To a faithful and discreet friend in extraordinary cases and times.
2. To our Neighbor for to pacify and satisfy him for some offenses, and to
be reconciled unto him.


This is the (...), and order to be observed in the ensuing discourse.

Public Penance has bordered upon the Apostles times, yea, imposed by them.
When a Christian Gentile at Corinth had fallen into that foul sin, which a
Heathen Gentile would have stuck, and blushed at, viz. Incest with his
Stepmother; the Apostle held it fit to proceed against such an offender, Tradi
Satana; i. e. jus civitatis amittere. Beza.
to deliver him to Satan, i. e. to exclude him from the communion of the
faithful, and put him out of that corporation. The fact was evident, the sin
was scandalous, (for he kept her as his wife) therefore must the punishment be
public also; Ommes crimen sciebant, public enim noverca^ suam loco uxoris
habebat; in qua re neque testibus opus erat, neque tergiversatione aliquae tegi
poterat crimen. Ambr. on 1 Cor. 5. (...). Chrysostom. Ut pudore and tristitia
sapere discat.
and that penance was for the destruction of the flesh, that Satan should
afflict his body, as he did Job. Paul's will was, that the flesh being the sink
of lust, should thereby be tamed, and humbled; that sorrow and shame might
teach him better manners. This censure was put in execution according to his
directions in the first Epistle. Now after some time and good experience of his
contrition, and tears, 2 Cor. 2.6.
the Apostle writes again in his second Epistle, therein approving of his
punishment so solemnly imposed, and undertaken for sufficient, and acquaints
the Church there, that he was not yielded over for good and all to Satan, but
delivered for a season; that he had lain long enough under that hard
Schoolmasters hands, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 5.
and given good proof of his Repentance; that as in the censure he set open the
door to repentance, so upon his repentance the door for mercy also: then he
releaseth him of the interdict, and restores him to the society of the
Believers. Christi nomine ac vice. Ambr. (...). Theophyl.
To whom you forgive, I also, and that in the person of Christ, q. d. I with
you, and Christ with me; you forgive, and I as the Lientenant of Christ, and
his Deputy, approve the same: Where Paul the principal Judge representing our
Saviors person in the sentence, and absolution, yet called the Church at
Corinth as his assistants in both.

Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the same Corinthians lately published out of
an ancient copy sent from the Levant, admonishes the authors of sedition
(which that Apostolical man justly esteemed for a very heinous offense) to come
in and subject themselves to their Priests, (...), (...). -- (...). Clem. Ep.
ad Corinth. 1. page 71, 72. Oxoniae edit. an. 1632. a V. C. Patritio Junio,
Regiae Majestati a Biblioth.
which the learned publisher interprets to be instructed in repentance,
somewhat too coldly, for to be disciplined unto repentance, understanding
thereby public penance. Also therein seems to be mention of the place, and
station wherein such Penitents were ranked: for it is much better (says he) to
be found little in the fold of Christ, and of good estimation, than seeming
great in their own-eyes to be cast off from the hope of him; where instead of
the latter words, (...), is placed by that famous man (...), or (...), extra
cancelles, without the bars and bounds of Christ's congregation, where the
penitents abode. That discipline, and bending of the knees thereunto, that mean
place in Christ's fold, and those cancels are apparent footsteps of solemn
penance practiced in the Church, upon the reconcilement of public and
notorious offenders. And I believe it the rather, because Tertullian says
expressly it was a Deo instituta, Peccator restituendo sibi a Deo institutam
exomologesin sc^ens. Tert. de poen. c. 12. and Rhenanus note. Tradit a Domino
institutum istum poeni^entiae actum, and poenitentiae ministerium a.
had no meaner an Author than God himself; whereof his learned Refiner has
taken special notice. He then must be heard next of this matter; A man of great
spirits, and parts, Tertul.
sharpened by nature, or the age he lived in, unto much severity; with whom the
administration of this public penance was expressed by the greek Exomologesis,
which he calls the very act, or deed doing thereof, as a probation, and
approbation of cordial sorrow: there^n open confession was made of the sin to
God, Probatio est ut nou solum conscientia praeferatur, sed aliquo etiam actu
adimpletur. cap. 9. -- Quatenus satisfactio confessione disponitur, confessione
poenitentia nascitur, poenitentia Deus mitigatur. ib.
not as to one ignorant thereof, but to prepare the penitent so, as to satisfi^
the Church, whose profession he had wronged, and by that confession might be
brought forth such repentance as God might be appeased. The drift and end of
that abject humiliation in the penitent, being to incline God to mercy; the
manner of that dejected carriage is punctually described, the habit sackcloth
and ashes, Sacco and cineri incubare, Corpus sordibus obscurare, animum
maeroribus dejicere.
joined with a neglect, or rather a careless debasing, and slubbering of the
body, carrying a stricter hand thereupon as the Organ and vessel of sin,
although there is required a heavy soul also. The food and diet thin, bread and
water, without any other mixture, Pastum and potum pura nosse, non ventris
scilicet, sed anime causa, -- ^ejuniis preces alere, ingemiscere, lacrimari,
mugire, Presbyteris advolvi, and charis Dei adgeniculari; omnibus fratribus
legationes deprecationis suae injungere.
or compositions, to preserve the soul alive in the body only; adding unto
fasting; prayer; to prayer, tears; to tears, sighs and groaning; to fall down
at the Priests seet; to kneel before Gods Dearest, (so the best Critics read,
and maintain the reading) that all the Brethren might join with them in prayer
to mediate on their behalf: all this is done to set forth repentance; to judge
our selves that we may not be judged, to be thus severe, that God might be
remiss; Cum provolvit hominem, magis relevat; cum Jqualidum facit, magis
mundatum reddit; cum accusat, excusat; cum condemnat, absolvit.
and the property of this discipline is, by casting down to extol, by sullying
to purge, by accusing to excuse, by condemning to absolve, and by not sparing,
to procure God to spare us. This publication of our selves contrary to the
ingenit pride of nature, kept back many (even in his days when worldly
respects were less set by) and the ensuing shame, from the performance of this
duty; of whom he complains, that they preserved worldly credit before
heavenly safety; Pudoris magis memores quam salutis, velut illi qui in partibus
verecundioribus corporis contracta vexatione, conscientiam Medentium vitant,
and ita cum erubescentia sua pereunt.
not unlike to such that being diseased in those members (the very naming
whereof modesty has locked up in silence) choose rather bashfully to perish,
than to present them to be cured to the Chirurgions hands. Non potest corpus de
unius membri vexatione laetum agere, condoleat universum, and ad remedium
conlaboret, necesse est.
The Father removes this unseasonable shame, which were better placed before
sin, than after; adding that the spectators in this act are his fellow members
of the same body; and what member will triumph to see another grieved and in
misery? especially in such a body where Christ is the head, who feels in
heaven, and cries out when his members are kicked at by persecutors below.
Therefore when hold is laid by doleful sinners of the Brothrens knees Haec
supplices attingunt, ad haec manus tendunt, haec ut aras adorant. Plin. hist.
l. 11. c. 45. (...). Homer. iliad. l. 5.
(and knees are the Altars where suppliants offer up their requests for grace,
and pity) Christ is taken hold of, Cum te ad fratrum genua protendas, Christum
contrectas, christum exoras, Christus patitur.
Christ is entreated, Christ is a patient on the Penitents behalf, bemoaning
his sorrows, putting his tears into his bottle, recording all his sighs in his
book, binding up his wounds, and pouring the oil and wine of consolation into
them; tread in this case all shame under foot, An melius est damnatum latere,
quam palam absolvi? In asperitudine sacci and horrore cineris, and oris de
jejunio.
and prefer open absolution before secret guilt: And though our bodies are for
the time besmeared with dust, and wrapped with hair-cloth; though our visages
be pale, and lurid with fasting; our hair dischiveld, not platted, nor crisped;
and no fucus, no frication applied to revive a decayed complexion; the soul
Christ's spouse never appears in a better dress, nor more lovely chaste to her
husband, than when the body is less adorned. Surely the tinkling ornaments, Es.
3.18, 19, 20 Number ergo in coccino and Tyrio pro delictis supplicare nos
convenit? Poeniten iam, and ministe ium ejus exomolog^sin. Cyprian.
and caules, the round tires like the moon, the changeable suits of apparel,
the wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses, and hoods, and veiles, are
very unmeet furniture for repentance; even Tire it self (had the means been
offered) had laid aside the Tyrian robe, for sackcloth, and ashes. This was
the discipline up in Tertullians days, which is the ministry, and act, or
exercise of Repentance, rather than the virtue it self.

After the Master let his Scholar take place, Saint Cyprian, with whom the
conversation of a Penitent is thus expressed; He must (says he) be very intent
upon prayers, and supplications, Orare oportet impensius and rogare, diem
luct^^transigere, vigiliis noctes and fletibus ducere, -- stratos solo
adhaerere cineri, in cilicio volutari and sordibus; post indumentum Christi
perditum, nullum jam velle vesttum; post Diaboli cibum malle jejunium; justis
operibus incumbere, quibus peccata purgantur; Eleemosynis frequenter insistere,
quibus a morte an^mae liberantur. Cyprian.
passing away the day in heaviness, the night in watching and weeping; lie
prostrate he must upon the ground, bespread with ashes, rolling in sackcloth
and mire; he must away with no garment having lost that of Christ's; preforring
fasting, having fed upon the Devils dish; and be employed upon good works, by
which sins are cleansed; and given to alms-deeds whereby souls are delivered
from death See (Christian Reader) the strictness of those times; how hardly
sinners were taxed. True Converts stuck not at such penances to purchase Gods
favor, the loss whereof they he would dearer than their lives, and for whose sake
they shed blood as we^l as tears: marvel not at the rigid Penitents of that age
which was so pregnant of faithful Martyrs, and let not those passages trouble
thee, viz. Good works cleanse from sin, that is they sanctify (not justify)
the doers; and purge out sin (...). Cl^m. Al. Peccata bonis operibus purgantur,
quia contrario habitu expelluntur. El emosynae nou liberant a morte, sed in
ipsis Eleemosynis D^us. Hostieus.
as one contrary does another; and alms deliver from death, that is, God
delivers from death such as are rich in alms, and good works: far be it from
this B. Martyr to entitle good works of what kind soever, to the virtue of that
blood which only ran in our Saviors veins. Now the order observed in this
discipline may be collected from a passage in the same Father, blaming the
preposterous reconcilement of some where the same was omitted, thus; The
penance as yet not performed, Non dum poenitenti a facta, nondum exomologesi
fiaita, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo and clero imposita, Eucharistia illis
datur. Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 14.
the public confession not perfected, the hands of the Bishop and Clergy not
being imposed upon them, and for all this they are admitted to the Eucha^ist.
The order then as B. Rhenanus collects was in this manner; First, the penitents
resorted to the Priests, and made their sins known unto them. Discimus hunc
olim in Ecclesia servatum ordinem, ut 1. sieret confessio criminum apud
sacerdotes Dei. 2. hanc sequebatur Poenitentia (quae and praecesserat.) 3.
Poenitentiam excipiebat exomologesis. 4. quam subsiqu batur impositio manus
Episcopi ac Cleri: hac facta, dabatur Eucharistia, and sic reconciliatio.
B. Rhen. annotat. ad Tertul. de Poenit.
2. Then was their penance prescribed. 3. Next the public denunciation of
their offenses in the face of the assembly. 4. Afterward their reconcilem^nt
by imposition of hands from the Bishop, and the Clergy, and their admittance
to participate of the blessed Sacrament.


Saint Basil writing upon those words of the Psalm, Basil. M.
He loves mercy and justice, demonstrateth how God is inclined to both of
these virtues, that all his acts are mixed and composed of them both, and how he
practices the one upon Penitent, the other upon obdurate sinners; (...).
Basil. in Ps. 32. sub fins. gr. page 84. Basilcae. An. Dom. 1551.
and withal describes the behavior and carriage of a Penitent to obtain
mercy. If God shall find thee humble and bruised for thy sin; there is the
inward contrition of a wounded heart, the first and principal ingredient in
this Medicinal Penance; lamenting very much, and bewailing thy evil works,
there is (...) howling and weep^ng, the expressions of inward sorrow; Publishing
without shame the things that were done in secret; there is Exhomologesis,
solemn and open Confession; petitioning the Brethren to further, and labor thy
safety and recovery; there is supplication to make the Church thy advocate; and
when he shall behold thee thus wholly miserable, and pensive, he will confer
upon thee his abundant mercy; there is the Penitents reconciliation, and
absolution: there go then inward grief, outward sorrow, open confession, humble
supplication, all these forerunners unto mercy, and reconciliation.

In Ambrose you shall meet with frequent mention of Ambrose. this Disciplius,
especially where repentance is his theme. If a man have sinned secretly, Si
quis occulta crimina habens, propter Christum tamen studiose poenitentiam
egerit, quomodo istic repetit, si ei communio non refunditur; volo veniam reus
speret, petat eam lacrimis, petat gemitibus, petat populi totius fletibus, ut
ignoscatur obsecret; and cum secundo, and tertio fuit dilata ejus communio,
credat remussiu^ se supplicasse; fletus augeat, etc. -- Cognovi quosdam in
poenitentia sulcasse vultum lacrimis, exarasse continuis fl^tibus genas,
stravisse corpus suum calcandum omnibus, jejuno ore semper and pallido mortis
speciem spiranti in corpore praetulisse. Ambr. lib. 1. de poen. c. 10.
and shall for Christ's sake have ^ndergone penance, what ben fit reapeth he if
not restored to the communion of Sa^nts? my desire is the guilty person hope
well, entreat for his state with weeping, with\ sighing, with the tears of the
people; that he become a suitor for pardon, and although his request be once
and again deferred, let him imagine he has been to^ remiss and cold in his
prayers, and forthwith enlarge his tears, etc. Then he tells us what penitents
his eyes had seen: I have known some in their penance to have furrowed their
countenance with tears; to have plowed up their eyelids with continual
weeping; to have prostrated their bodies to be trampled on by all; of so pale
and fasting a visage, that they seemed to set forth the picture of death in a
breathing and panting body. The same Father further adds concerning the
restrained life of such a Penitent in another place thus; He must renounce the
world, cut his sleep shorter than nature would, Reaunciandum seculo est, somno
ipsi minus indulgendum quam natura postulat, interpellandus est gemitibus,
interrumpendus est suspiriis, sequestrandus orationibus, vivendum ita ut vitali
huic moriamur usui: seipsum sibi homo abneget, ut totus mutetur. Id. ib. lib.
2. cap. 10.
break is ^ff with sighs, interrupt it with groanings, sequestring the time
thereof unto prayer, so to live as if he were dead to all worldly affairs, to
deny himself, and to be wholly changed. So great was the austerity and shame
usually attending upon this discipline in his days, that he tells us of some
frighted with the conscience of their sins, would demand penance, and upon the
apprehension of the strict way thereof, would start back, and rec^il from the
performance; and such seem to ask p^nance as offenders, but would undertake no
otherwise than as if they were just. Plerique peccatorum snorum conscii
poenitentiam petunt, and cum acceperint, publicae supplication is revocantur
pudore; hi vid^n^^r malorum petisse poenitentiam, agere bon^^^^^
2. Some crave penance but it must be short, and they of ^soones taken into the
Communion, Nonnulli poseunt poenitentiam, ut statim sibi reddi communionem
velint, hi non tam se solvere cupiunt, quam Sacerdotem ligare. -- Alii
proposita spe agendae poeniten^iae, licentiam sibi delinquendi propagatam
putant, cum poenitentia remedium peccati sit, non incitivum; vulneri enim
medicamentum necessarium est, non vulnus medicamento; quia propter vulnus
medicamentum quaeritur, non propter medicamentum vulnus desideratur. Amor. l.
2. de. poen. c. 9.
these seek not so much to loose themselves, as to bind the Priest 3. A third
upon hope of doing penance, and gaining pardon one day, license themselves in
mischief, and to proceed in sinning; but in vain, se^ing Repentance is a remedy
against sin, not an encouragement thereunto: salve is propared for the wound,
not the wound for salve; and the Medicine is required for the hurt, not the
hurt for the Medicine. This good man endeavored to arm his people against that
which retarded, and took off so many from making use of this balm of Gilead,
this healing penance, namely, Public shame. Art thou loath to do this in the
Church, to supplicate unto God, Hoc in Ecclesia facere fastidis, ut Deo
supplices, ut patrocinium tihi ad Deum obsecrandum sanctae Plebis requiras; ubi
nihil est quod pudori esse debeat, nisi non fateri, cum Omnes simus peccatores:
^hi ille laudabilior qui humilior, ille justior qui sibi abjectior. Id. ib. c.
10.
to request the holy assembly to plead on thy behalf unto him, where there can
be no place for shame, except not to confess, seeing we are all sinners; and
where he deserves more praise that is more humble, and is the more righteous in
Gods sight, the more vile he seems to himself?

The order then observed in the undergoing of this duty may be seen in Saint
Ambrose also, who exhorting us to the same, while we are in bodily health, and
perfect memory, alleging likewise how uncertain in the event late Repentance
is, has these words; Man knows not if he shall take his penance, Nescit si
possit ipsam poenitentiam accipere, and confiteri Deo and Sacerdoti peccata
sua, -- ergo qui egerit veraciter poenitentiam, and solutus fuerit a ligamento
quo er at constrictus, and a Christi corpore separatus; and been post
poenitentiam vixerit, and post re^onciliationent cum defunctus fuerit, ad
Dominum vadit, ad requiom vadit, a popule Diabotis separabitur. ^^bort. ad
poenir.
and to the Priest his sins (...) and a little before; He that shall have done
his penance, and be absolved from the bond wherewithal he was holden, and
sopurated from the body of Christ, and shall have led a good life after
Repentanes and dyin^ after reconciliation, that man gooth to the Lord, to rest,
shall not be deprived of the kingdom of God, and shall be separated from the
people of Satan. Wherein I note these things; 1. The abstontion of a sinner,
and separation from the Church, in those words, ligamento quo erat constrictus,
and a corpore Christi separatus, expressly mentioning the spiritual bond, and
censure. 2. His admission to his penance, nescit si possit ipsam poenitentiam
accipere; for with Ambrose poenitentiam agere points at intercal contrition,
and poenitentiam accipere at the external Ministry, and declaration thereof by
public Penance. 3. This Discipline consisted in open confession of sin before
God, his Priests, and people; the sinner desiring their prayers on his behalf,
to which these words relate, confiteri Deo, and sacerdoti peccata sua, joined
with some passages in the former testimony. 4. His Reconciliation and
absolution, whereby the censure is removed, the bond loosed, and the separated
person again restored, in those words, and solutus fuerit a ligamento and post
reconciliatione^, etc. 5. His carriage after his reconciliation, viz. the
fruits of repentance, a good life, which the Father thus describes; Tell us
how to demean our selves after repentance; Quid est been vivere post
poenitentiam dote nos: dico vobis abstinere ab ebrin sitate, a concupiscentia,
a furto, a malo eloquio, ab immoderato risu, a verbo otioso unde reddituri
homines sunt rationem in die judicii. Ecce quam levia dixi, ut tacerem gravia
and pestifera. Ambr. ib.
I say unto you, abstain^ from drunkenness, from concupiscence, from theft,
from evil speaking, from immoderate laughter, from idle words, whereof account
must be made; I mention these light faults, to say nothing of greater crimes.
And thus much from Saint Ambrose.


St. Augustine mentions the in junction of this public Con. Augustine
fession for notorious offenses, thus: If the Penitents sin do not ^ne^ ly
redound to his own mischief, but also unto much scandal of others; Si peccatum
oj us non solum in gravi ejus malo, sed etiam in tanto scandalo est aliorum,
atque hoc expedire utilitati ecclesiae videtur Antistiti, in notitia multorum
vel etiam totius plebis agere poenitentiam non recuset, non resistat, non
lethali and mortiferae plagae per pudorem addat tumorem. Aug. homil. 50. ult.
tom. 10.
and the Bishop shall think it expodient for the profit of the Church, let him
not refuse to recognize his penance in the presence of many, yea of all the
people; let him not resist, let him not by his shamefastness add swelling to
his deadly and mortal wound: And the same Doctor in another place touching the
usual impediments that cross this practice of piety, Nam and ipsa poenitentia,
quando digna est causa secundum morem ecclesiae ut agatur, plerumque
infirmitate non agitur, quia and oudor, and timor est displicendi, dum plus of
lectat hominum astimatio, qu^m justitia qua quisque se humiliat poeaitendo;
unde non solum cum agitur Poenitentia, sed ut agatur, Dei misericordia
necessaria est. Aug. Enehirid. Qu. 81.
says, when there is just cause for the under going of penance according to
the custom of the Church, of t^imes the same is put off through weakness;
because the fear and shame therein are displeasing; credit and estimation
amongst men delighting more than justice, whereby a man humbles himself in
repenting; whence it is that the mercy of God is requisite, not only for the
undergoing of penance, but for the undertaking thereof also.

Ecclesiastical story.
In the story of the Church the solemn practice hereof is thus recorded: The
guilty persons stand afar off much lamenting their offenses, and while the
sacred service of the Church is celebrating, Stant Rei, and velut in
lamentationibus constituti, dum enim sacra Celebratio fuerit adimpleta, illi
communionem non percipientes, cum gemitu, and lamentatione seipsos in terram
prosternunt, ad quos concurrens Episcopus, and ipse cum lacrimis, and gemit^
spirituali prosternitur, and omnis Ecclesiae plebs fletibus mundatur: post hoc
autem prior surgit Episcopus, and elevat jacentes a terra, tum competenti pro
poenitentibus facta oratione, dimittit omnes. At illi afflictionibus sponte
vacantes, aut jejuniis, aut abstinon ia lavacri, aut suspensione Ciborum, aut
rebus ali is quae jubentur, expectant Communionis tempus, quod decrevit
Episcopus; constituto vero tempore, velut quoddam debitum exolventes,
afflictione peccatorum curati cum populo communione participantur. Hist.
Tripart. cap. 35.
they not communicating cast themselves upon the ground with groans, and
mourning; to whom the Bishop approaches, and spreads himself upon the earth
also with like lamentations, and the whole Church is over flown with tears:
after some space the Bishop first rises, and then raises them from the earth
also; then prayer and supplication being made on the penitents behalf, he sonds
them away. But they wholly and willingly give up themselves to affliction and
fasting; abstaining from Baths, and such meats, and all such things as are
enjoined them to forbear; expecting the day of restitution decreed by the
Bishop: and, at the t^me appointed, having d^scharged (as it were) a certain
debt; and being made sound from their sins, are restored to the communion of
the people of God. Here we may perceive that after the Penitents had published
themselves, and their sins in the face of the Church, they were not forthwith
admitted to participate, but a time of forbearance not only from the sacred
Communion, but from such meats, apparel, places of solace, and recreation
(which otherwise might be moderately used,) was enjoined by the Bishop, who
prescribed rules of fasting, affliction, and such like subduing of the flesh
for a season: that such persons as had been more loose in their former
conversation than others, should be restrained above others, according to the
measure of their iniquities, that by the practice of such contrary virtues the
contrary vices might be expelled; the ordering of which limitation, and the
relaxation thereof, was wholly in the Bishops power, and discretion; who having
heard the nature of their disease, prescribed such medicines as might best
comply for the healing thereof. I dare not say the sins of those times were
greater than ours, but I dare say the conscience they made of sin was greater,
and appeal to impartial Readers, that if this discipline were on foot, and
sinners could not come by reconciliation any other way, nor the holy Sacraments
administered to any public offenders without good proof, and demonstration of a
solemn repentance: Let I say spiritual men judge, whether beinous offenses
would not be more rarely committed; if men would not stand more in awe, and sin
not; if the keys of the Church would not be of more sovereign use, and remedy;
if Repentance would not be more seriously performed, wounded Conscience better
pacified, the Church less scandalized, the blessed Sacrament less profaned, God
better pleased with us; and consequently the nerves of all religious devotion
more entirely confirmed.

Come we now to examples of such Penitents as have submitted their necks to the
yoke of this discipline, and have found much ease thereby. In old Irenaus there
is mention of certain women who being seduced and corrupted by Mark the
heretic, upon their conversion did open penance, In manifesto faciebant
exomologesin, plangentes, and lamentantes corruptelam. Quaedam v^ru ad
exomologesin illam non accedebant, in silentio desperantes de vita Dei Iren.
lib. 1. c. 9.
weeping and lamenting their former subversion, and some underment not that
penance as dospairing of the mercy of God. And Eusebius relates, that when
Philip the Emperor, son to Gordianus (who enjoyed the Laurel, An. Dom. 246)
being a Christian resorted to the Church at Easter to communicate; Cum in die
Pasche, i. e. in ipsis vigili is interesse voluisset, and communicare Mysteri
is, ab Episoopo loci non prius esse permissum, nisi confiteretur peccata sua;
and inter poenitentes staret; nec ullo modo copiam sibi Mysteriorum futuram,
nisi prius per poenitentiam culpas, quae de eo ferebantur plurimae, diluisset;
ferunt igitur libenter eum, quod a sacerdote imperatum fuerat suscepisse,
divinum sibi inesse metum, and fidem Religionis plenissimam rebus atque
operibus comprobando. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 25. ex versione Ruffini, nam
Graeca non sunt ad manum.
he was not permitted by the Bishop of that place (...) unless he would confess
his sins, and rank himself among the Penitents; nor could the Bishop be brought
by any means to administer the Eucharist unto him, except he first washed away
those many sins (whereof he was infamous) by Repentance: the report goes, that
he obeyed the Bishops injunction, evidencing by his actions that the fear of
God, and sound faith of Religion was within his breast. There are that doubt
what religion this Emperor was of, some affirming him to be a Christian,
Quidam Christianum fuisse, quidam cultum Christianum simulasse, alii matr^m
ejus ab origin audisse mysteria religionis nostrae tradunt. Aventin. hist.
Bowr. l. 2. p. 177.
some again that he did dissemble that profession; others that his mother only
was instructed in the mysteries of the Christian faith. This is certain, that
Lactantius and Ambrose affirm Constantine to be the first that planted the
Cross of Christ upon the Imperial Crown: and Eusebius himself tells us that he
came by the former story but by report only. The same Author makes relation of
one Natalis, who being seduced by certain Heretics to be of their faction, to
gain a Bishopric, and an annual pension, was oftentimes admonished in his
dreams, Frequenter admonebatur in somni is a Domino. -- ad ultimum a sanctis
Angelis per totam noctem verberatus, and poenis gravibus excruciatus, cilicio
se induit, and cinere conspergit, ac multis lacrimis errorem suum deflens, ante
pedes Zepherini Episcopi prosternit, and vestigiis omnium, non modo Clericorum,
sed and Laicorum multa cum lamentatione provolutus, etc. Eusebius. Eccl hist. lib.
5. c. 28.
how Jesus Christ would not the destruction of him, that had made so many and
so good confessions of him under the Cross; to which he (it seems) giving
little credit, was not long after for a whole night well scourged, and tortured
by Angels; in the morning he gate up, put on sackcloth, and did ashes on his
head, and with many tears bewailed his apostasic; he prostrated himself at the
feet of Zepherine the Bishop, and of all the Clergy, and Laity also, in so
lamentable wise, as he moved the whole Church to tears, and compassion, that by
their prayers he might obtain from Christ forgiveness, showing forth the sears
and wounds he had endured for his name; and at length with much dissienlty he
was restored.

The next news to me occurring of the voice of this turtle, Fabiola.
is the example of a Roman Dame Fabiola, drawn to the life by that excellent
Artist Saint Hicrome; Umbram quandam miserabilis subire conjugii, quam sub
gloria univirae opera exercere meretricum.
her sin was (if I dare call it so) the repudiating of her former husband for
adultery, and (he yet living) the marrying of another, which although Hierome
style the shadow of a miserable marriage, yet confessing the fault, he avoideth
the same by a necessity of better to marry th^^ to burn, and, I will that
y^onger widows marry, etc. and prefers it before the credit of being the wife
of one husband, and to play the Harlot; showing that he disliked such marriages
as unexpedient, not disapproving them as unlawful. He limns her penance with
this pensil, How she came forth wrapped in sackcloth to make public confession
of her error before the people of Rome; Saccum induere ut errare^^ public
fateretur, and tata urbe spectante Romana, ante diem Paschae in Basilica
quondam Laterani staret i^ ordine poenitentium; Episcopo, Presbyteris, and omni
populo collacrimantibus, sparsum crinem, ora lurida, squalidas manus, sordida
colla submitteret. Quae peccata fletus iste non purget? quas inveteratas
m^culas haec lamenta non abluant? -- Aperuit cunctis vul^us suum, and decolorem
in corpore cicatricem flens Rom^ conspexit; dissuta habuit latera, nudum caput,
clausum os; non est ingressa Eccl^siam Domini, sed extra castra cum Maria
sorore Mosi separata, consedit, ut quam sacerdos ejecerat ipse revocaret,
descendit d^solio d^liciarum suarum; accepit molam, fecit farinam, and discal^i
^is pedibus transivit fluenta lacrimarum, sedit super carbones ignis, hi f^ere
in adjutorium: Faciem per quam secundo viro placuerat verberabat, oderat
gemmas, linteamina videre non poterat, ornam^nta fugiebat, sic dolebat qu^
adulterium comm^sisset, and multis impendiis medicaminum unum vulnus sanare
cupiebat. -- Recep a sub occulis omnis Ecclesiae communione. Hierom, ad Ocean.
Epitaph. Fab.
how a little before Easter she resorted to the Lateran Church, ranking her self
among the Penitents; the Bishop, the Priests, and the whole assimbly bemoaning
with her; her hair diffufed, or carelessly spread; her countenance wan and
doleful; her sordid neck and hands besmeared with such tears as could wash away
any sin, with such mourning as could fetch out any spots: and elsewhere; she
laid open h^^ offense to all, Rome beheld, and not with dry eyes, her
disfigured and ill colored wound; her coats ripped and uns^w^d, h^^ head naked,
her face veiled; she entered not into the Church of God, but like Miriam, Moses
sister, separated from the Camp: she abode without, that the Priest, who had
cast her forth, might call her in. She came down from her castle of pleasure,
she took the millstones, and ground the meal, and making bare the leg passed
through the river of tears, sat upon the coals of fire, which were a help unto
her; buffeting that face which was her second husbands felicity: She hated
jewels, no linen napry within her eyes; she eschewed all ornaments, and so took
on as if guilty of adultery; applying diverse plasters for the curation of one
wound; and so in the view of the whole Church was received to the Communion.
Where to say nothing of this Matrons sin, in her penance we may take notice of
these steps; 1. Of the exclusion, and barring of baynous offenders from the
assembly of Christians, in that she was shut out from the Church, as Miriam
from the tent. 2. That there was a set place, and time, where the penitents
ftood, and when they performed their penance, in that she set her self amongst
them, and resorted to the Church a little before Easter. 3. The manner thereof;
her habit mournful, her hair loose, her eyes full of tears, her countenance
cast down, and all things about her instruments and tokens of sorrow. 4. The
Confession of her sin was public before the Bishop, his Clergy, Aparet tempore
Hieronymi clanculariam confessionem institutam non suisse. Erasm. schol. in
Epitaph. Fabiolae.
and his people, (for private confession, if you believe Erasmus, was not yet
set up.) 5. The Clergy, and People were all of them indulgent in
compassionating the state of such Christian abjects. 6. And lastly, the censure
was taken away, and the penitent reconciled.


The succeeding times were not so pregnant in examples of this kind, by reason
that this discipline was for a while discontinued, but set on foot again by the
power of Charles the great, and the Fathers assembled in the fourth Council at
Arles, Council. Are-Int. 4. c. 26. an. 800.
according to the direction of the ancient Canous; and not long after chanced
that remarkable Penance of Fulco Norra Earl of Anjou, Accompagne seulement de
six valets, auquelles il fit ^^rer de fair (...) 2 qu'il leur ^ommanderoit,
commanda a l'un de eux de lui mettre la cord a Col, and le tirer par icella a
S. Sepulcre, and a deux autres de prendre des verges, and de le fouetter l^^n
rudement, encores qu'il eut les espaules de schiquetees de coups de verges, il
print la poigne de l'un de ^ux, and redoubla bien plus rudiment, que n'avoient
se^ serviteurs.
for murdering of his Nephew and Pupil the young Count de Nantes, so racked
and tortured in his conscience, which to appease he went on pilgrimage to the
S. Sepulcher as Jerusalem, attended with six servants whom he obliged by oath
to execute whatsoever he should command; entered into the Sepulcher, forthwith
he strips himself into his skin, and commands one of his servants to fasten a
rope to his neck, and bind him thereunto, and two others to whip him soundly
with cords; exposing himself to the sight and derision of the Infidels, and
purchasing of them free access to the Sepulcher with great sums of money; after
the inflicting of many stripes, his servants pitying the furrows, and wounds
upon his body, and refusing to scourge him any more, he compassed one of their
scourges, and redoubled the blows upon himself in far greater measure than they
had done, crying out, Lord receive to grace, Seigneur recoy a pardon le
miserable parjure, and fugitiff Foulques. A. Thenet vies des hommes illustres.
Livre 4. c. 2.
and pardon the miserable perjured fugitive Fulk: after he had performed this
solemn penance, he returned to his Country so esteemed and honored, his
sanctity purchasing unto him such renown, as he seemed to have received a Crown
at Jerusalem of inestimable value.

So went the world in those days, and such conscience was made of sin and
sorrow; after that came in the Canonists and Schoolmen, the two supporters of
the Roman chair, and this discipline escaped not their hands without some
violence and wresting, to serve their own inventions; for whereas in the
Primitive times it was prescribed as a sign and expression of inward sorrow,
and used as a remedy against sin, and a medicine for sin; they make it a
satisfaction in the scale of justice for public sin, and in that sense, Poen
entia hic non accipitur pro virtuts, quia ista est in sola voluntate, nec pro
Sacramento, quia and hujus forus secretissimus est, sed pro satisfactione
publica pro publicis peccatis imposita. Biel. l. 4. did. 14. Q. 3. dub. 6.
as they do their private satisfactions enjoined upon secret confession, and
close audience, as expiatory, both for the appeasing of Gods anger, and
remitting of the offense; an office peculiar to our Savior. What these men
have made of penance you shall hear, Gabr. ubi supra. Raimund. tr. 4. Poenitens
in die cinerum debet se repraesentare ante fores Ecclesiae in tristi habitu,
nudis pedibus, etc.
which the Canonists say they have from the Council of Agatho; I will not
defraud my Reader thereof, and for his plenary knowledge herein, will compare
the narration of a School-man and a Canonist, that is Gabriel Biel, and
Raymundus, and thus it goes.

About the beginning of Lent, that is upon Ash Wednesday, such sinners that are
designed to undergo this solemn penance, must present themselves at the Church
door before the Bishop of the place, and his Clergy, in sackcloth, naked on
the head and feet, their countenance dejected, and cast down to the earth,
professing by their very habit and look their guilt. The Bishop then attending
with his Clergy, brings them into the Church, Episcopus se prosternens in
terram, dicat cum Clericis, 7. poenitentiales Psalmos, cum lacrimis, pro earum
absolutione, -- tunc manus imponat, aquam benedictam super eos spargat, cinerem
post mittat.
and all prostrated on the ground; he recites over them with tears the seven
penitential Psalms for their absolution; after he has prayed, standing up he
lays his hands upon them, and sprinkleth them with holy water, and puts
ashes upon their heads, and covers them with sackcloth, and denounces unto
them, that look how Adam was cast forth of Paradise, Sicut Adam suit de
paradiso ejectus, ita isti pro peccatis suis ab Ecclesia abjiciuntur; postea
jubet (Episcopus) Ministros, n^ eos extra januas Ecclesiae expellant, Clerus
vero prosequatur eos cum responsorio, In sudore vult^s tui vesceris pane tuo.
so are they for their sins expelled from the Church; which sentence is no
sooner given, than some of his Ministers are commanded by him to drive them
out, the Clergy prosecuting, either singing, or saying the Respond, In the
sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread; that beholding the Church so
troubled for their sins, they may not slight their penance. Upon Maundy
Thursday they return again, and are brought in by the Deane, In coena Domini a
Decano rursus Ecclesiae prasentantur, and licet-stent in Ecclesia, non tamen
communicabant cum aliis in Eucharistia, vel oscula, and sic erunt usque ad
octavam Paschae, and tunc iterum exibunt de Ecclesia, and erunt extra Ecclesiam
usque ad talem diem sequentis anni; and sic fiet annuatim, usque ad finem
Poenitentiae. Ex Gabr. and Raymundo.
or some Priest of good respect, where they neither communicate in the
Eucharist, nor in the Pax, and so they continue till the Vtas of Easter, and
then they depart away from the Church, and are not admitted till the
Ash Wednesday following; and this course to hold every year, till the date of
their penance be expired, and they perfectly restored.

Ritus ista hodie in nullis ( so I read for nonnullis in the copy I use) vel
paucissimis Ecclesiis observaour.
This Rite Gabriel confesses in his days seldom to be practiced in any
Church, and we see how in tract of time it had gathered some rust and dross of
superstition, very incident to exercises of this kind. A Penance (they say) not
to be inflicted on all sorts of people, as the Clergy are exempted for the
honor of their order, and young men for the solemnity of the discipline, and
that but once upon any. Indeed Saint Ambrose inclines to this opinion, who
reprehending the inordinate use of such persons as frequent such heinous
offenses, Merito reprehenduntur qui saepius agendam poenitentiam putant, qui
luxuriantur in Christo; nam si vere agerent poenitentiam, iterandum postea non
putarent, quia sicut unum baptisma, ita una poenitentia; quae tamen public
agitur, nam quotidiani nos debet poenitere peccati; sed haec delictorum
leviorum, illa gravierum. Ambr. l. 2. de Poen. c. 10.
for which public penance is enjoined, affirms that if such sinners had
sincerely repented, and in their hearts detested sin so much as they made show
to do, this Physic once taken would have wrought so perfect a cure upon them,
as there could be no fear of relapse, nor further use of any Medicine of that
nature; and the same Father seems also to have no good liking of that disease,
or Patient, where this Physic will not work: and in those severe times lapsed
sinners already disciplined, were neither restored to public penance, nor to
the public Communion; after which public penance (says Petavius) if again
they entangle themselves with the same sins, Post illam poenitentiam, si iisdem
se criminibus obstrinxissent, ab Ecclesiae aditu and a mysteriorum communione
penitus exclusi, reconciliari amplius non poterant. D. Petav. animadvers. in
Epiphan. haer. 59. p. 239.
they altogether shut out from the Church and participation of the mysteries,
could never after be reconciled; for to Christians there belongs one Baptism
whereby they are bound unto the Church, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. 2. page 282.
so one penance publicly to be performed. Surely in Christian policy there are
great reasons why this Penance should not be reiterated; for the Christian
Church may well grow jealous of that party as defective in the inward
compunction of the heart, that his affections were not fully taken off from
sin, and that he had no perfect hatred thereof, (and by consequent not disposed
to this discipline, where the sign and thing signified, namely internal and
external sorrow are both required) that shall make no bones of falling into the
same, or like grievous offenses, for which he underwent so great a shame, and
made so solemn a detestation thereof; the Ancients therefore suspend their
judgments in that sinners case. God, says Epiphanius, (...). Epiphan. lib. 2.
hares. 59. tem. 1. p. 498.
accepts the penance of a sinner that falls after Baptism, but what shall
become of him if he sin after penance, he only knows whose judgments are
past finding out. And because the ways of Gods mercy are past finding out,
such a lapsed sinner may not be incapable of pardon, although of penance, and
may find reconciliation at Gods hands, although his servants are fearful to
intermeddle therein, not as envying Gods mercy, like Jonas to Nineveh, or
denying lapsed sinners to be capable thereof, as Novatian, but careful only
not to exceed their Lords instructions, and commission: although (says Austin)
a place for humble penance be denied in the Church, Quamvis eis in Ecclesia
locus humillima poenitentiae non concedatar, Deus tamen super cos suae
poenitentiae non obliviscitur.
God will not be unmindful of his patience toward them; where the Father
relating the works of piety, and labor of contrition performed by such
relapsed sinners, demands, shall they avail them nothing afterward? Nihil
ista proderunt in posterum? avertat Deus tam immanem sacrilega^^que dementiam.
Aug. Epist. 54.
God defend us from so savage and sacrilegious madness; for God in whose hands
are all men's hearts, can soften and harden, and make them malleable, which no
man can do; Psalm. 51.
he can create a new heart, and renew a right spirit; a piece of work which
none but he can do; It is he that gives repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25.
and he can best discern of the effect and operation, that grants the
influence. This being certain, where true contrition is, there is remission of
sin, and where Repentance is Gods own work, the Contrition is unfeigned, and
the pardon sealed; insomuch that two passages in the sixth and tenth Chapters
to the Hebrews, that seem less favorable and equal to lapsed sinners, the one
taking away Repentance, and the other the Sacrifice for pardon, (which drew
many into a hard conceit of the Author, and Epistle it self, although the
error lay only in the misapprehension) have been often urged by the old
Precisians, and as often vindicated by the old Pathers: whereof I will give my
Reader a taste, before I come clean off from this subject.

In the Epistle thus, It is impossible that those who were ^nce enlightened,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6,
etc. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they
crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God, and put him to open shame; where
to such persons initiated in the holy mysteries of Christianity, and fallen
away, all possibility of renewing by repentance is taken away, as guilty of
another crucifying of Christ, and opprobry toward him. A repentance is there
denied, it cannot be denied, and denied to them that were formerly baptized
into the Christian faith is apparent also. Such then cannot be renewed, that
is, in such a manner as at their first admission into Christianity, which was
by Baptism, and imposition of hands; it comes home then as if the Apostle had
said, such as were at the first received into Baptism, and thereby obtained
the remission of sins, if such fall, they are not so to be renewed, that is by
a second Baptism of Repentance, the solemnization whereof is but once to one
party; so lapsed sinners may be renewed, but not after that way. As virginity
once lost cannot corporally be restored, yet the lost credit may be repaired by
a chaste conversation afterward; so the lapsed sinner after Baptism (...),
says Epiphanius, has another salve though not another bath. Epiphan. lib. 2.
contr. haetes. tom. 1. p. 494.
And this to be the Aposties meaning. Saint Chrysostom makes good by a twofold
reason; First, because mention is made of a fresh crucifying of the Son of God;
for after he had said, (...).
it is impossible to be renewed to repentance, he keeps not there silence, but
adds crucifying afresh, etc. now Baptism is a figure of the Cross of Christ;
and as it was not for Christ to be crucified again, no more is it for a
Christian to be again baptized; and as he died but once, so are we but once
baptized. (...).
Secondly, the word (...), to be renewed, proves baptism to be meant, for
that is the Sacrament of Renovation, whereby we put on the new man Christ Jesus;
with whom agrees Ambrose; The words themselves show Baptism to be meant, De
baptismate autem dictum verba ipsa declarant, quibus, significavit, impossible
esse lapsos renovari per poenitentiam; per lavacrum enim renovamur, per quod
renascimur. Ambr. lib. 1. de Poenit. cap. 2.
wherein is expressed that it is impossible the lapsed to be renewed by
repentance; for by that Laver we are renewed, by which we were born again. the
flower of Greece therefore concludes, what then? is there no more repentance?
there is repentance, but there is not a second Baptism. The Novatian then is
not here justified, (...). Chrysostom. (...). ad Hebr. tom. 4. p. 482.
but the Anabaptist condemned. So his Disciples and abridgers Theophylact and
Oecumenius tread his paths. What (says the former) is Repentance cast forth?
(...). Theoph. in Heb. 6.5.
God forbid; but a renewing by a second Baptism is rejected; for Baptism
representing Christ's death and passion, there remains then no more a second
Baptism than a second Cross. The same Question and Answer is in Oecumenius,
who backeth this interpretation by the authority of Cyrill, and by the former
reasons used by Saint Chrysostom: 1. Because there is mention of renovation,
which properly belongs unto Baptism; (...). Oecumen.
and of a second crucifying of Christ, and of that properly Baptism is a type;
the man therefore that is once baptized to repentance, and would repent by
being again baptized, crucifieth Christ afresh, who in the second Baptism
suffers the second time; Renovatio per sacri baptismatis lavacrum secunda
vice fieri non potest. Ambr. in Heb. cap. 6. Heb. 10.26.
and to the same purpose is the exposition under the name of Ambrose, or rather
the translation of Saint Chrysostom (as indeed it is) not denying a second
repentance, but a second Baptism to repentance.

But the words that pinch more than the former are, If we sin willingly after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sins; wherein the benefit denied is the sacrifice for sin, Si ultro
peccaverimus. Beza.
and the parties excepted against, some kind of sinners: 1. That sin against
their conscience after the receiving of the knowledge of the truth. Hostiam iis
residuam esse negat, qui a Christi nomine discedunt. Calvin. in loc.
2. That sin wilfully, so that sins of ignorance and infirmity exclude not, but
only wilful apostasy, for how can Christ be a sacrifice for such as disclaim
him? his sacrifice then remains not for them, because they remain not his,
cutting off themselves from the fruit thereof by a voluntary defection.
Saint Chrysostom expounds that Sacrifice as formerly, of a second baptism:
He is not (says he) such an enemy to our salvation as to take away repentance,
(...), etc. Chrysostom. ad Hebr. (...). p. 533.
or the propitiation for sin, or to reject him that has fallen after
illumination; what is it then? he takes away second baptism, for he says
not, there remains no more repentance; or no more forgiveness, but no more a
sacrifice, no more a second Cross, for that he calls a sacrifice. Hebr. 10.14.
By one sacrifice once upon the cross, etc. meaning by that sacrifice Christ's
death upon the cross, or rather Baptism, a representative type thereof. The
Greek Scholia fasten upon the parties, and bid us consider, that it is not
said, if we have, but if we do sin voluntarily, (...). Oecumen.
thereby signifying that to such impenitent sinners as persevere in their
wickedness till death, there is no sacrifice; whereby repentance is not
excluded, but requred rather as a necessary antecedent, q.d. there remains a
sacrifice for penitent sinners, but none for the impenitent; and Theophylact to
the same tune also, If we sin voluntarily, (...). Theophyt.
that is remain in our sins without Repentance. To the same purpose Hugo
Cardinalis writes thus, voluntary sin is not fignified so much, as the custom
of sinning, Significatur non solum peccatum quod v^luntarie fit, sed consuctudo
ipsius peccati, and finalis impoenitentia; non enim ait volentibus peccare, sed
voluntary peccantibus; voluntarius enim est qui in aliquo assiduus est, volens
qui ad tempus. Hugo Card. ad Hebr. 10.
and final impenitency, for he says not those that sin willingly, but
wilfully; for he is said to be wilful in any matter, that is busy and earnest
therein, and willing, that is but for aseason. Now where repentance is not, the
sacrifice of Christ's death is not appliable, and where there is no ceasing.
from sin, there is no true Repentance. Thus we see the fountain is clear,
however false glosses may molest and trouble the stream, for a time, at length
it will settle and return to its native clarity; and thus much by occasion of
solemn Penance once imposed, and if it savor of a digression, let us return
where we left, and perfect the small remainder to be now said of public
Penance.

Late Authors have observed four several degrees which the penitents took in
those austere days; 1. (...).
fletus, auditio, substratio, and consistentia: 1. Weeping before the porch, 2.
hearing in the porch, 2. (...).
3. lying all along on the Church pavement in expectation of the Bishops prayer
and blessing; 3. (...).
so called (as witnesses a great Antiquary a procidendo, 4. (...).
because the penitent admitted within the porch of the Temple, sell down before
the Bishop, (...) est dicta quod (...), h.e. coram Episcopo procid bat
poenitens (...), intra Templi portam admissus, cum catechumenis facessere
jubebatur, ac certis diebus coram Episcopo procidens, impositione manuum, ac
solenni precatione impertitus, dimitti sol^bat. D. Petavius animadvers. in
Epiph. haer. 59.
and was commanded to depart thence with the Catechumeni, and so prostrating
himself before the Bishop at certain times, was dismissed with imposition of
hands, and solemn prayer:
the fourth approach was standing with the assembly within the Church; where
they communicated with the faithful in the station and consistency, (...).
Thaumaturgus.
but not in the Communion, and were not put forth like profane Merchandizers;
partaking of the Orizons of the Church, but not of the Sacrament. Thus they
made their approches to the Lords Table by degrees; and not like the Gallants
of our times that are no sooner up from the Table of Devils, charged with
gluttony and surfeiting, but without any let or check of conscience become very
confident guests at that Spiritual Banquet; yea, scarce cold from their sin,
and their evening surfeit undigested, but they present themselves at the Lords
Board. Good God! what terror must needs possess such profane breasts, when the
Master of that feast shall shake them by the sleeve, with a Friend how came
thou hither not having on thy wedding garment?

As the degrees which they observed, so the places where the penitents stood
were designed also; Lib. 1. de, P^enit. cap. 23.
Bellarmine has set them down out of Pacianus thus: The Penitents in habit
doleful, and to behold lamentable, stood first at the Church door, howling at
the gates, and craving the prayers of the faithful within; this was (...): next
they came within the porch, where they might hear the word preached with the
Catechumeni, and this was (...): and they audientes, auditors only. 3. In
process of time they entered into the Oratory, and abode with the Competentes,
praying and contemplating the Sacrament, but not admitted as the celebration;
this was called (...) from beholding, (wherein the Cardinal not punctually
following his guide, is out both in the derivation and application:) After that
they were admitted amongst the fideles at the celebration of the Sacrament, but
were not yet come so far as to partake thereof; and this was (...), their
station. 5. Their penance fully accomplished and ended, they were reconciled
and received the sacred Eucharist, and this was (...), the complement. Thus far
the Cardinal, (though not so faithfully as he ought) has related from
Pacianus, Greg. Neocaesar, and Photius, men well acquainted with these rites.
Thou see (Christian Reader) at what a distance sinners were held in the days
of old, and not fully restored, till time and grief had worn out their sin, the
scandal satisfied, and their hearts seasoned with devotion. I will wind up this
discourse with Cassander. In the Primitive Church that sluggish professors
might become more zealous, In veteri Ecclesia, ut segniores excitarentur,
poenitentilus ob graviora scelera, certa tempora and officia definita fuerunt,
quibus non solum coram Deo interiorem animi poenitentiam excitarent, and
exercerent, sed etiam Ecclesiae vere se atque ex animo poenitere declararent,
atque it a m^nus impositione Episcopi, and Cleri, reconciliarentur, and jus
Communicationis acciperent: atque haec praescripta officia canonicae
satisfactiones, seu poenae vocarentur, quae jam imperitia Episcoporum and
Pastorum in abusum; and negligentia, and segnitie tam pastorum, quam Populi in
desuetudinem venerant, nisi quod in privatis confessionibus aliqua ejus rei
vestigia remanserint. Cassand. Consult. Confessio.
certain times and offices were appointed unto Penitents guilty of fouler
crimes, wherein they might not only stir up, and exercise the inward
repentance of the mind before God, but declare unto the Church their sincere
and unfeigned sorrow, and so be reconciled by imposition of hands from the
Bishop, and the Clergy, and restored to the Communion; the which prescribed
duties were called canonical satisfactions or punishments, which now adays by
the unskilfulness of Bishops and Pastors have grown to be abused, and through
the wegligence, and lukewarmness both of Pastors and people wholly laid aside,
save that some foot stops thereof have remained in private Confessions. This
modern and moderate Divine has laid down the use and scope of this discipline,
to rouse us up for religious duties, and to set forth before the Church our
sincere repentance, and to be reconciled by Gods Ministers; the decay whereof
he ascribes to the supine negligence of the later Prelates, and that a shadow
thereof remains to this day in private confession; the restitution whereof he
much sighed after, as appears in these his words: Which ancient and
Apost^lick custom of public satisfaction for public and grievous offenses
were very profitable, Quem publicae satisfactionis priscum and Apostolicum
morem ob publica and graviora peccata restitui, utile ac propemodum necessarium
est, in quo potestas Ecclesiastica Clavium in ligando and solendo, i. e.
poenitentiam indicendo, a Communione separando, and rursum indulgendo,
absolvendo seu reconciliando, manifestissime cernitur. Cassand. ib.
yea very necessary to be restored; wherein the Ecclestastical power of the
keys in binding and loosing, that is, in imposing of penance, in separating
from the communion, and again in releasing, absolving and reconciling, is
manifestly discerned. And thus have I prosecuted this discipline (...), as
accurately as I could, that the same being known, Communion-Book at the
Commination.
the vote of our Church for the restitution thereof may be the better
perceived; which thing were much to be wished, and to which all that love the
Lord Jesus must needs say, Amen.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.
Confession of sin addressed unto God chiefly, and to man also with
considerable relations, grounded upon the law of nature; with God himself a
necessary antecedent to pardon. Adam and Cain interrogated to extract
Confession. Sundry Precedents of Penitents recoursing to God in Confession.
There is shame in confessing to God, as well as unto man. Penitential Psalms
composed by David for memorials, and helps to Confession. The Rabbis doctrine
of Confession of sin before God, practiced in the time of the Gospel, preached
and urged by the Ancient Fathers, and so far by Chrysostom, as a tribute due
to God only, for which the Pontificians are jealous of him. Confession before
God is not destructive of Confession before man in a qualified sense, though
preferred before it, and especially called for by the old Doctors, although
that be of singular use also.

HItherto of Repentance both external and internal, the inward sorrow and the
outward demeanor thereof; and that solemn performance was not only a vocal,
and public confession of the guilt, but a real expression; that as Saint
Hiero^^e said of John the Baptist his food of L^^^sts, and his garment of
Came^s hair, Omnia poenitentiae praeparata. Hicron. Matthew. 3.
and the place of his abode the desert, how they expressly set forth what he
preached, the doctrine of Repentance: we are now to arrest our selves upon that
branch and part thereof which consisted in the verbal opening and declaration
of sin, which is a recognition of a sinners unworthiness, opened by himself in
orall confession to the principal party wronged, and sometimes to such persons
also, that by reason of their office, place, or respect, may be a mean to
procure forgiveness, and reconcilement. Now by sin God is ever principally, and
very often only grieved, and sometimes Man also: In the first case to God
only and properly belongs confession, as He who is chiefly, and only
offended; in the second this Confession must be made to God, and the Man also
that is wronged by us, to whom satisfaction for the trespass also belongs,
and the end brotherly Reconciliation: The Dean of Lovaine has taken notice of
all, thus; There is a Confession which is made unto God alone, Est Confessio
quae fit Deo soli, and quae homini, atque haec ru^sus varia, 1. Quaedam fit
homini quem laesinius, pro obtinenda reconciliatione cum ipso, and remissione
offensae in illum; alia fit homini de peccatis in alium admissis, pro consilio
aut reconciliatione habenda; sunt hae confessiones juris naturae, saltem
reformatae per gratiam. Ruard. Tapper. art. 5. page 73.
and another unto man, and this again is diverse, 1. either unto the man whom we
have hurt, for the obtaining of reconcilement with him, and forgiveness of the
wrong from him; or which is made unto a man of such sins as are done against
any other, to ask coursel upon the matter of Reconciliation; and all these
confessions are of the law of nature, at the least as it is refined by grace.
So Confession is made unto God, and in some cases to man also; furthermore the
fact is acknowledged unto man in many points wherein he is not the Party
offended, but considered as a mean and instrument to further, and obtain a
reconcilement unto him who is justly displeased. And as by the light of nature
we advise how to compass the favor of a great Personage justly forfeited, by
making use of such persons that by reason of their place, alliance, or virtues
claim a special interest in his affections; so is it with the sinner and God.
It cannot be denied, but our Mediator, and Intercessor, and Advocate is Christ
Jesus the Lord, and whatsoever Others do or prevail with God, it is for his
sake: He is the Cornerstone reconciling the building, Minister Poenitentiae
duplex, 1. cui confessio fit ex officio, ut Sacer dos: 2. alius qui audiendo
confessionem vicem supplare potest Sacerdotis in necessitates ut est Lai^us,
Compend. Theol. v^^it. lib. 6. cap. 27.

and upon him is built every Intercession from or for any person besides. Yet
other Intercessors there are; Moses stood in the gap, made an atonement for the
people, and God was deprecated and reconciled. There are some persons that by
their office and place as stewards in the Lords house, may give audience to
sin, to whom is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation; and some by their
virtues highly favored by God, though not amongst his Priests, and they may
take Confessions as faithful Brethren, and both of these by their prayers may
induce God to mercy. My discourse must pass along, and in the way call in upon
them all, but must begin with God the principal Party wronged, Confessio quae
fit mente Deo est de jure naturali. Anton. part. 3. tit. 14. c. 19. sect. 2.
and the Principal object of Penitential Confession.

That Confession of sin ought to be made unto God as a condition requisite for
the pardon thereof, and that it is no mean inducement to incline him to mercy,
is an undoubted verity (...), without Controversy embraced by all that make
profession of Christianity; Deus in lege naturae non semel exegit confessionem
peccati. Bellar. l. 3. de Poenit. c. 3.
the foundation thereof is deeply laid in the law of nature it self, as a
practical truth flowing from the Principles and conclusions thereof; and hence
it came to pass, that God exacted it from their hands that had no other light
than the guide of nature. Now Natural laws are the rules and decrees of reason,
and as reason is the common guide to all men, so the dictates and statutes
thereof bind all that are capable of that guidance: But this is a granted
Maxim, Ratio legis est anima legis.
that every guilty person ought to be judged; and this like unto it, Haec est
nota conclusio, quod quilibet Reus debet judicari; and ista, quod nullus debet
esse Judex in propria causa, ergo Reus d^bet judicari per alum; sed non potest
judicari per alium nisi accusetur illi alii, nec potest accusari nisi a scipso,
si poccatum suum sit occul^um; ergo debet seipsum accusare alii a quo
judicetur. Scotus. l. 4. d. Qu. 1. sect. 1. in ista Quaestione.
that none may be a judge in his own cause; and then this, That no offender can
be judged without some accusation; to which add this, non^ can accuse of secret
sins but the delinquent himself; the stone then first moved in this penitential
judicature is the Confession of the party, upon which are grounded the
indictment, and judgment. And says another Schoolman, The law of nature is
for a man to repent of the evil he has done, De jurs naturali est quod aliquis
poeniteat de malis quae secit, quantum ad haec quod doleat se fecisse, and
doloris remedia quaerat per aliquem modum; and quod etiam aliqua siena doloris
ostendat, ut N^nivitae. Aquin. part. ^. quaest. 84. ^. ^. 7.
so far forth as to grieve he has done it, and that he seek all means to
remedy his grief, and that he also utter some sig^es of sorrow. Thou will say
this reason concludes for secret sins, which come to light no way but by
Confession; but public sins are to be confessed to God also. Besides, secret
sins are to him who seath in darkness no secret ^s all, and need not that mean
for discovery, for wherein our Consciences do accuse us, God is greater than
our conscir^ces, that is, a more strict observer. To strengthen then this
reason, I thus assume, The end of penitential confession is the judgment of
absolution, not of condemnation, to free, not to punish for sin; and an
absolution not to q^^t from s^o, for God in justice cannot pronounce us just
(for that were to call darkness light) but such an absolution as discharges us
from the guilt, and obligation unto punishment, and so God in justice may, and
in mercy does justify us (and this i^ to separate betwixt the light and the
darkness.) Now remission of sin ever supposes sin, and the absolution from
sin, the detection of sin, for sin makes man to be miserable, and the
Confession thereof God to be merciful. God requires then no detection of sin
in the judgment of condemnation, which is the punishmens of sin, and wherein he
proceeds according to his own wisdom, but in that of absolution, which
consists in the forgiveness of sin, the confession thereof in the party
pe^^an^ (...) ever been deemed requisite by way of pacification. Insomuch that
all men whatsoever (says Scot^^) that have belloved God to be the just Judge
of all the world, Justi pro omni statu post lapsum, qui habuerunt fidem de Deo,
quod erat Rector universi justus, postquam pe^caverunt contra legem Dei,
confitebantur Deo^p^ccata sua, petentes ab eo remissionem; scientes eum sine
tali remissione tanquam justum judicem vindicaturum de illo peccato. Scotus. ib.
and have acknowledged the law of his providence, seen in the government of the
universe, upon every breach thereof have appli^^ themselves to this supreme
Gover^^^r, to appease him with humble acknowledgment of the off^ner, and to
deprecate his anger. It was but early days in the world when God c^^^ed upon
Adam, where art thou? which was a summons to a reckoning, that as he had
sinned, Entree de propos. gall. (...) Ut ulterius cum eo loquendi and amplius
cum eo expostidandi occasionem hinc captaret, item ut ab eo confessionem
p^ccati extorqueret. Rab. Sell.
so he should take notice thereof, and prevent and pacify his wrath by
confession; it was an entrance into a Parley, or a preface and introduction (as
the Rabbis say) into a further conference, thereby to expostulate with him
about his offense, and to extract from him an ingen^^^ acknowledgment thereof.
And a Father of the Christian says conceits no less; When God said to Adam,
where art thou? our first Parents then guilty persons were inquired after, Cum
Dominus diceret ad Adam, ubi es? peccato transgressionis primi Parents
corrupti a Domine sunt requisiti de culpa, ut peccatum quod transgrediendo
commiserant, confitendo delerent. Greg.
to wash out that sin by confessing, which they had committed by transgressing.
The like interrogatory was made to Cain, where is thy Brother Abel? but his
impudence was to outface the murder, and plead not guilty, till God convicted
him: The sin smothered brake forth into a greater flame, the sore skinned over
with a denial festered; He that said at first, nulla est iniquitas, there is
no iniquity in my hands, and refused to unlade his soul by confession, sinks
under the burden, and cries out, major est iniquit as, my sin is greater than I
am able to bear. Saint Chrysostom collecteth no less. Gods mercy appeared in
the Question, Where is thy Brother? (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis (...). tom. 1. p. 130.
to give him the bint and opportunity to bethink himself, that by confession of
the fault, the guilt might be washed away; for this was Gods ^^n^ even from the
beginning, to exact from us a Confession of our sins, that upon the same he
might show mercy. He coneludes, It is good to confess the fact, to disclose the
wound to the Physician, and to receive medicines from him.

Gods people in process of time, (his good pleasure being known how propense he
is to give a sinner audience) have not failed in this point to confess, nor he
them to pardon; and because Confession of fin from the delinquent, and
Remission of sin from God commonly go together, my discourse shall not separate
them: we are now upon the Sinners Plea, and must instance in those that have
had the will to sin, the grace to see it, the humility to confess it, and the
happiness to be delivered from it. David is famous for his transgressions, his
confessions, and his lamentations; I acknowledged my sins unto thee, Psalm. 32.5.
and my iniquity have I not hid. I said I will confess my transgressions unto
the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sins where we see confession
has not only the promise, but performance of forgiveness annexed thereunto,
and that from Him who is most bountiful in his promises, and most faithful in
his performances, and tu remisisti; whose absolution is ever of force, for he
never turns a wrong key. 2. Note also the manner thereof; David had not yet
made his confession, it was only in vote, in purpose and conception, not in
re* an actual performance, yet his success is crowned with performance, and
that will accepted for the deed, so much is Gods mercy more forward than man's
duty, as to grant the pardon before it be asked, The word was not at my mouth,
and Gods ear was at my heart, Vox m^a in ore nondum erat, sed auris Dei jam in
cord crat. Aug. in Psalm. 31.
says Aug. in the person of David, and much to the same sense a later
Expositor. Vide quam velox sit Dei misericordia erga peccatorem, non dum
confitetur ut audiat homo, sed confiteri promittit, quod audit Deus. Ludolph.
in Psalm. 31.
Behold with what speed the mercy of God makes toward a sinner, he had not
confessed so that man might hear, Dixi deliberavi apud me quod confitebor, and
tu remisisti: magna pietas Dei! quae ad solam promissionem peccata dimisit,
votum enim pro operatione judicatur. Cassiodor. in Psalm. 31.
but promised to confess, which God hears. To the same purpose Cassiodore; I
said, that is, I deliberated with my self how I will confess, and thou
forgavest. O the goodness of God! forgiving sins upon promise only: for with
him the will is of equal acceptance with the deed. And lest we should think
that this was some peculiar privilege vouchsafed unto the Man after Gods own
heart, the same sweet singer of Israel does presently enlarge his note, and
infers this general conclusion thereupon, for this shall every one that is
Godly pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found, verse 6. The godly in
this world are not so godly, but there are times also when they must go to this
Confession, and comfort themselves with this hope, for we are not Angels, but
men, (...). Basil. him. (...) page 245. g^^s. Basilea.
we fall and are raised, and that often, and in a little space. Basil. Thus
David made a good Confession.

Let us pass from the Father to the Son, Solomon.
in whom all ages have and shall admire how so fair a star could fall in so
foul an eclipse, yet he recovered his loft light, and of a great finner proved
a great Convert, and as Chronicles mention the folly of this King, so
Ecclesiastes relates the repentance of this Preacher. He delivers a general
rule; Prove. 28.13.
He that hides his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses, and forsakes
them shall find mercy. Wherein observe a necessary adjunct to Confession, viz.
forsaking of sin. It is not then a naked verbal confession that has this
efficacy, or such a compendious way of healing, and no more; but go show thy
self and thy sins to the Priest, and thy attrition shall become contrition, and
thy sins shall be forgiven, though not clean forsaken. This Roman device
Solomon for all his knowledge (and that extended from the Cedar to the Thistle)
was yet to seek of, for with Tiburine Impostors, though a man bring not so much
as that drop of sorrow for sin by them termed attrition, but only a will to
confess, and utter the story of his lewd life to a Priest, with an intent to be
absolved by him, Non solum attritus recipit gratiam delentem peccatum, tanquam
per virtutem meriti de congruo, se^^on habens talem actum qui sufficiat ad
meritum de congruo, sed tamen habens voluntatem suscipiendi sacramentum
Ecclesiae; and sine obice peccati actualiter in facto, vel in voluntate
inhaerentis, suscipit non ex merito, sed ex pacto divino effectum istius
sacramenti. Scotus lib. 4. did. 14.
there is required no more to be set free from sin; the Sacrament of Penance
will supply all other defects, and confer this benefit mero motu of its own
accord, without any good disposition, or desert of the Receiver, insomuch that
he need to put his ghostly Father to no farther trouble than this, Speak the
word only, and I shall be healed. By this new fetch, the Sacrament of Penance
is available without Repentance, Confession without Contrition, and sin
forgiven which is not forsaken. An opinion (says Gabriel) much to be esteemed,
if it were laid upon the foundation of the Scriptures and holy Fathers: Ista
opinio esset valde acceptanda, si haberce firmamentum Scriptura and sanctorum
Patrum. Biel. lib. 4. did. 14. qu. 2. not. 2.
and no gallant (I think) but would embrace it, to come off from sin at so
easy a hand. But see the ill luck of a thing, it wants both Scriptures and
Fathers to support it; for in the Scripture it is, He that confesses and
forsakes his sin, Observa quod addit, Qui confitetur and deserit; neque enim
satis est confiteri. Menoch. in Prove. 28.
which will not stand with Scotus learning, without the help of an Index
Expurgatorius to expunge the later clause.

The Josuis would fain interpret Solomon of confession made unto Man, and not
unto God; and his reasons for it are, 1. The words, He that hides his sin,
because sins unconfessed are not hidden from God, but Man; for none can be of
so mad a belief, Quia nullus est, qui scelera sua a Deo se abscondere posse cre
lat, nisi forte insaniat; sed ab hominibus, vel ob pudorem, vel alia de causa,
multi peccata sua abscondita esse cupiunt, -- Erubescentia apud homines locum
habet, non Deum. Bell. lib. de poen. c. 11. p. 1387.
as to think God sees them not. 2. Shame, or some other cause may hold them in
from disclosing sin to Man, but none are ashamed to make God privy to their
lewdness.
But how untrue the former reason is, may appear in the case of the two first
sinners, Adam, who hid himself from God, and Cain, who denied his sin to God.
Madmen indeed they were to do so, but so they did. And on ancient Bishop is of
the mind, that many besides them in the world are stricken with that phrenzie,
That God does not regard earthly affairs, and sees not the actions of sinful
men. ^ade puto quod haec in illo (Cain) jam tum opinio fuerit qua nunc in
multis est, Deum terrestria non respicere, and actus sceleratorum hominum non
videre. Salvian. de gubernat. Dei. lib. 1. page 21. Paris. 1617. (...). Hesi^d.
They hide them in their own opinion and sancie, whereas in truth they do not,
no more then when the Fool winks, and thinks no man sees him: for all things
are open to his sight, and with kim there is no darkness at all. And how
frivolous and false the later part of the Cardinals argument is, viz. That in
confession before God there is no place for shame, and sinners shame^esse
therein, another ancient Bishop shall witness: Let us not be ashamed (says
Ambrose) to confess our sins unto God; Non erubescamus fateri Domino peccata
no^tra; Pudor est ut unusquisque crimina sua prodat, sedille pudor agrum suum
arat, spinas tol^^t perpetuas, sentes amputat, etc. Ambrof. dc. poenit, l. 2.
c. 1.
it is a shame indeed for any man to lay open his offenses, but such a shame
that breaks up the fallow ground of his heart, pulls up the tho us and pares
away the briars, etc. A shame then there is in Confession, and that before God;
but such a shame, as considering what good comes thereof, we should not be
ashamed of. Yea the same Father supposes to be in many offenders a greater
shame to confess before God than man, for thus he writes: Can it be well
taken, that thou should blush to entreat God, An quisquam ferat ut erubescas
Deum rogare, qui non erubescis rogare hominem? and pudeat te Deo supplicare
quem non lates, cum te non pudeat peccata tua homini quem lateas confiteri? Id.
ib. c. 10.
that do not blush to entreat man; and that thou should be ashamed to make
thy supplication to God, from whom thou lie not hid, whereas thou art not
ashamed to confess thy sins unto a man, from whom they are concealed? And the
same holy Prelate in another place enervates both the Cardinals pretenses; his
words are remarkable. Why art thou afraid to confess thy iniquities to so good
a Lord? Declare (says he) thy sins that thou may be justified. Quid vereris
apud bonum Dominum tuas iniq^itates fateri? Dic (inquit) iniquitates tuas ut
justificeris; idhuc reo culpae justificationis praemia proponuntur: ille enim
justificatur qui proprium crimen sponte agnoverit; denique justus in exordio
sermonis accusator est sui. Novit omaia Dominus, sed expectat vocem tuam, non
ut puniat, sed ut ignoscat; non vult ut insultet tibi diabolus, and celantem
peccata tua arguat; praevenies accusatorem tuum, si te ipse accusaveris;
accusatorem nullum timebis, si te detuleris ipse. Amb. li. 2. de poeni^c 7.
To the person as yet guilty of sin, Justification is promised for a reward;
for he is justified, that of his own mind acknowledges his offense. And a just
man at the entrance of his speech is his own accuser. The Lord knows all, but
expects thy voice, not with an intent to punish, but to pardon; it is not his
will that the Devil should insult over thee concealing thy sins, be therefore
thy accuser by thine own accusation, and fear not any accuser, if thou shall
arraign thy self. Wherein we may observe, That in Confession unto God there is
dread, which this holy man disswadeth from, and concealment of sin, as some
fondly imagine, and an expectancy of vocal evidence, though God be ignorant of
nothing. To him then does Solomon direct our Confession, for all the Cardinal
has yet said to the contrary.

And he had hereof a living example in his father David, whose Penitential
Psalms, what are they but prescript forms of Confession, where there are as
many sighs as words, mingling his cries with weeping? all the verses standing
chiefly upon two feet, Contrition and Confession; some whereof were composed
for his remembrance, by name Psalm. 37. which is (...), an Instruction for
Confession, as S. Basil (...). Basil. in Psalm. 36. p. 97.
intitles it; that having this Psalm always before his eyes, he might pacify
so good a Lord with the words of a transcendent confession: This is his
direction to others, Reveal thy way, or roll it up unto the Lord, and hope in
him, he will do it. Revela Domino peccatatua, i. confiteado, and spera in e^,
and non in alio; and ipse qui potest, faciet quod petis vel desideras. Sp^m
eni^n prom^t^it peccatoribus, and indulgentiam facit poenitentiam ^gentibus.
Ludolph. in Psalm. 36.5.
Reveal, by Confession; thy way, that is, thy sins, and hope in him, and no
other, and he that can, will do what thou desire; God promises hope to
sinners, and pardon to penitents. Revela Domino viam tuam; i.e. Sacerdoti qui
est loco D^i. Jo. Raulins Sermon. 10. de Poenit.
A better gloss that, than another Friars, Reveal thy way unto God, that is,
unto the Priest, who is in Gods stead; which harps not in David's tune, except
God and the Priest have one and the same consistory, as the Canonists say God
and the Pope have. My God will I trust with my sins, upon whom I trust, and
if sin be my way, to him will I commit it; to the Springhead will I have
recourse for mercy, where the stream flows the fuller and the clearer. He is my
Physician, Ille Medicus est, vulnera igitur illi exponamus; ille laesus est,
and offensus, ab illo pacem petamus; ille est cordium cognitor, coram ipso
corda nostra effundere properemus; ille denique est qui peccatores vocat, ad
ipsum accederene moremur. Calvin. Instit. l. 13. cap. 4. Sect. 9.
and to him will I open my wounds; He is the party wronged, with him will I
make my peace; He knows the very secrets of my heart, before him then I will
pour forth mine; He it is that invites me a sinner unto him, and to him will I
hasten, nor be slack at his call.

And this Confession of sin unto God is insisted upon by the Rabbis, in the
book called (...) of Days; and in the chapter (...) of the day of
propitiations, Dixit R. Isaac Veni and vide, quia mos saucti Dei and benedicti
non est sicut mos carnis and sanguinis; mos namque carnis and sanguinis est,
quod si homo offendit proximum suum, quandoque placet eum verbis, quandoque
nequeat ipsum verbis tantum placare; mos autem Dei sancti and benedicti non est
sic, bomo enim transgreditur transgressione, and tamen placat ipsum verbis,
sicut dictum est, (...) and non solum hoc, sed etiam confert et bonitatem,
sicut consequenter dictum est, (...) forsitan dices vitulo^n culpae? docet,
quid ad hoc dicendum sit id quod sequitur. (...) Petrus. Galat. de arcan. ^ath.
verit. lib. 8. cap. 8.
is extant this passage, R. Isaac said, Come and see, how the manner and
custom of the Lord holy and blessed is not as the manner of flesh and blood;
for the manner of flesh and blood is, that if a man have offended his
neighbor, sometimes he may please him with words, and sometimes he cannot
please him with words alone. But the manner of the holy and blessed God is not
so, for in transgressing man transgresses, and yet pacifieth him with words,
as it is said, Hosea 14, 1. O Israel return unto the Lord, for thou have fallen
by thy iniquity, take with you WORDS and turn unto the Lord; and not only
this, but he conferreth mercy upon him, as it is said in the words following,
Say unto him, take away all our iniquity and receive us graciously. Not only
this but the Scripture has it, as if he should offer calves in sacrifice, as
it is said afterward, So will we render the calves of our lips; peradventure
thou will say the Calves of sin, that which follows teaches what is to be
said to this; I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely. In which
testimony we see that the calves of our lips are the confession of our sins:
that in confession our wounds are healed, and we in God beloved. So in Misdras
Tehillim, that is, exposition of the Psalms, on the title of the hundred
Psalm, (...), a Psalm of Confession; This is that which is written, He that
hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them,
shall find mercy. He that h^deth his sins, (...) hoc est quod scriptum est.
(...) Prove. 28. Qui abscondit peccata sua; talis suit Saul, cui dictum est, 1
Reg. 15. Quae est vox harum ovium? ipse autem respondit, de Amalek adduxerunt
eas. Qui autem confitetur and relinquit ea, misericordiam confequetur; talis
suit David, de quo dictum est, 2 Reg. c. 12. Et dixit David ad Nathan, peccavi
Domino; and dixit Nathan ad David, Dominus quoque transtulit peccatum t^um, non
morieris. Pet. Gal. lib. 10. c. 13.
such an one was Saul, to whom it was said, 1 Kings 15. What means the
bleating of these sheep? but he answered they brought them away from Amalek:
But he that confesses, and forsakes them shall find mercy: such an one was
David, of whom it was said, 2 Kings 12. And David said unto Nathan, I have
sinned unto the Lord; and Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put away
thy sin, thou shall not dye. Instancing in two Kings of a diverse humor, the
one putting off his sins by collusion, has them charged upon him; and the
other charging himself by confession, has them put away. Saul hid his sins, it
was but reason therefore he should find them; David discovered his, and
therefore God so covered them in mercy, as they were past finding out. This
then was the custom of the Law and the Prophets.

Under the Gospel the same custom has continued; the Prodigal son, that
express pledge and hostage for mercy, did but resolve upon Confession to his
dearest Father, whose speed, embracements and kisses prevented the vocal
expression. God who saw him afar off, heard him also what he said Luke 15.18.
within himself, and what he said to 21.
himself also. The prodigal sinned against God, to whom it is said, against
thee only have I sinned; Prodigus peccavit coram Deo, cui soli dicitur, Tibi
soli peccavi, etc. tam cito veniam m^retur, ut venienti adhuc and long posito
occurrit Pater. Ambr. lib. 2. de Poenit. cap. 4.
and ob^ained so speedy a pa^don, that while he was yet afar off, and but on
the way, the Father meets him. The poor Publican upon his confession fared as
well putting up his supplication in the Temple, Luke 18.13, 14.
the contents whereof were, O God be merciful to me a sinner; and went back to
his house just^fied without making Confession to any other Ghostly Father, but
only the Father of Spirits; of whom Saint John gives this assurance, that if
we confess our sins, (...) 1 John 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness; why faithful and just rather then kind and merciful, seeing
forgiveness of sins proceeds from his bounty, not our deserving? indeed it
was his mercy to annex forgiveness to Confession, and his justice to reward
that which his mercy promised. God is so gracious to promise pardon, upon this
condition that a sinner confess; which condition performed, God is faithful and
just to make good his promise with actual forgiveness; fail not thou him of
confession, and he will never fail thee of forgiveness.

Upon these grounds the Fathers direct a Penitent unto God, esteeming the
confession made unto him of so great value, as they seem to make but small
account of that which is made to man, leaving it as a thing indifferent to be
undertaken as the sinner finds occasion. But he that praises Gold, must not be
thought to dispraise silver; and those Ancients that approve of Confession to
God in the first place, (...). Clement. Epist. 1. ad Corinth p. 66, 67.
allow the same in its place to man also. Testimonies of both sorts are extant
in their writings, and to the former for the present thu^. Clemens Romanus. It
is better (says he) for a man to confess his sins then to his heart, like
those which resisted Moses, etc. then tells us how desirous God is hereof. The
Lord (my Brethren) needs nothing else, is desirous of nothing from any man,
save to confess unto him; then follow certain proofs from the Scripture,
showing how acceptable a Sacrifice confession is, as well in praising God* as
in dispraising of our selves; that is the Sacrifice of thank^giving, (...)
(...). (...) (...).

and the other of a wounded spirit. Clemens of Rome is seconded with our
Christian Athenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria, who writes thus: If a Christian
through the suggestions of the Adversary unwillingly fall into sin, (...).
Cl^m. Alex. Strom. l. 4. p. 378.
let him in im^tation of David sing, I will confess unto the Lord, and it shall
please him better then a young calf that brings horns and hoofs; let the poor
beh^ld, and be glad, for he says, offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, and
pay thy vows unto the Lord; and call upon me in the day of thy affl^ction, and
I will deliver there, and thou shals glorify me; for the sacrifice of God is a
wounded spirit. A saying so like unto the former, that I guess this Clemens
took it (as he did some other passages) from the former. These Primitive Men
style confession a Sacrifi^e, and we know of what kind of adoration sacrifices
are, and to whom they appertain: surely a broken heart presented by confession,
and laid upon the Altar of the Cross, is never rejected by God for his sake who
suffered thereupon. Origin a disciple to this last Clemens, and his immediate
successor in the (...) Magister. Hi^ron.
Ecclesiastical School at Alexandria, Ipse nos ut pecc^m^s inst^gat, ipse ^tiam
cum peccaver mus accus^^t; si ipsi nostri accusatores simus, nequitiam
accusatoris effugimus; dicit al cubi Propheta, dic tu iniquitates tuas prior ut
justificoris; nonne evidenter mysterium ostend^t, cum dicit, Dic tu priortu
ergo dic prior, ne te^lle praeveni at --. sed and David in Psalmo dicit,
in^quitatem meam notam feci, etc. vide ergo quia pronunciare peccatum
remissionem peccati mer^tur, -- si ipsi nostri sumus accusatores, proficit
nobis ad salutem; si vero expectemus ut a Diabolo accusemur, accusatio illa
cedit nobis ad poenam. Origin. homil. 3. in Levit.
is frequent in exhorting sinners to all kinds of confession, but earnest for
that which is made unto God. The D^vil (says he) first allureth to sin, next
accuses for sin; we prevent his malice by being our own accusers, and by
taking this office forth of his hands. The Prophet in a place says, Declare
thy iniquities beforehand that thou may be justified: there is a mystery in
these words, Dic tu prior, declare thou first, lest he step in before thee --.
Even so David in the Psalm; Mine iniqui^ies (says he) have I made known unto
thee, and have not hid my sin; I said I will confess, etc. See how the uttering
of sin obtains forgiveness, it will further our salvation to become our own
accusers; but if we delay till the Devil accuses, it will m^ke much for our
condemnation. Now to him must this confession be poured out who forgave David's
sins; although I must not conceal how Origin allows of confession before some
sorts of men also, and that without any gainsaying from me, as in due place
shall appear. And to this confession, (...) Chrysostom. hom. 31. ad Heb. (...).
orall expression is not so requisite; God knows the language of the heart,
and hears the voice of weeping, that heard Annah praying and not speaking,
who reads our minds in our thoughts, with whom tears, and sighs, and groans
are formal evidences. This manner of unfolding our souls to God, St Basil upon
the words of the Psalmist, I have roared for the disquietness of my heart, has
fully described in David's person thus; I do not open my lips in confession,
thereby to make a show to many, but inwardly within my heart closing up mine
eye, (...) Basil. in Ps. (...). p. 100. graec. Basilea 1551.
to thee only beholding things in socret, do I discover the groans that are
within me, roaring within my self; nor is there need of many words to this
confession, for with thee the groans of my heart are sufficient for this
acknowledgment, and those lamentations sent forth from the depth of my soul
unto thee my God.

And look what Saint Basil ascribes to the groaning of the heart, the same
does Saint Ambross to the tears of the Penitent, and notes that no other
Confession of Saint Peter after his denial is upon record, but that which
flowed from his eyes, thus, I find that he wept, I find not what he said, I
read of his tears, I read of no satisfaction; Invenio quod fleverit, non
invenio quid d^xerit; lacrimas ejus lego, satisfactionem non lego. Recte plane
Petrus flevit and tacuit, quia quod defleri solet, non solet excusari, and quod
defendi non potest, ablui potest; lavat enim lacrima delictum quod vote pudor
est confiteri; lacrimae ergo verecundiae pariter consulunt, and saluti; non
erubescunt in petendo, and impetrant in rogando: lacrimae, inquam, tacitae
quodammodo preces sunt, veniam non postulant and merentur; causam non dicunt,
and misericordiam consequuntur; nisi quod utiliores lacrimarum preces sunt,
quam sermonum, quia sermo imprecando forte fallit, lacrima omnino non fallit;
sermo enim non totum profert negotium, lacrima semper totum prodit affectum.
Ambr. de poenit. Petri, ser. 46.
Peter took a good course to weep, and to be silent, for that which is bewailed
is not wont to be excused, and that which cannot be defended, may be cleansed;
tears wash away the sin which the tongue is ashamed to confess, tears therefore
provide for shame, and safety; blush not to entreat, and obtain by entreating.
Tears (I say) are a kind of tacit prayers, asking not forgiveness, yet
obtaining: they set not forth vocally the cause, yet gain the mercy; yea, the
supplication of tears is of greater profit then any words can be; words happily
may fail us in prayers, Subjiciamus nos Deo, ut non subditi simus peccato, and
delictorum nostrorum memoriam recensentes, tanquam opprobrium erubescamus, non
velut quidam, gloriam praedicemus --. Bonum Dominum habemus qui velit donare
omnibus, -- si vis justificari, fatere delictum tuum, solvit enim criminum
nexus verecunda confessio peccatorum. Vides quid a te exigat Deus tuus, vides
qua remissionis pollicitatione te provocat ad confitendum. Ambr. l. 2. de poen.
c. 6.
which tears never do, for the tongue does not always open our case fully, but
tears ever disclose our affections to the full. To God then does the same
Doctor exhort us to disclose our sins. Let us be subject unto God, that we may
not be subject unto sin: Let us call our offenses unto remembrance, and be
ashamed of them, as a disgrace, and not boast thereof as the manner of some is
--. We have a good Lord that would pardon all -- If therefore thou would be
justified, confess thy sin; for a modest, and shameful confession of sin loses
the bands thereof. Thou see what thy God exacteth of thee, and with what a
promise of forgiveness he provokes thee unto Confession.

Led with this promise, and invited with this call, the Golden-mouthed Dr John
Chrysostom exhorts the people to resort to God only in confession, little
regarding that which is made to man, and leaving it as a thing indifferent, as
a thing to be used or not, at the Penitents discretion, which the most rigid of
the Reformed side stick not at, yea he seems at least in words to disavow it,
which is more than the Moderate sort of them expected, or can well away with.
And a great Scholar, but of the other side, freely acknowledges, that
Chrysostom in diverse places, and by name in his 5. Quae a Chrysostomo tum
aliis in locis, tum Hom. 5. De Incomprehens. Dei not. parum commode dicta
vid^antur, ubi peccatores ca se lege negat obstringere, ut hominibus, sed ut
uni Deo peccata fateantur. D. Petavius animadv. in Epiph. haer. 59. p. 224.
Homily of the incomprehensible nature of God, has some unsound passages,
denying sinners to be tied by any law to confess their sins unto Man, but unto
God only. Well, let us see what it might be that is so great an eyesore to
him, and men of his rank: The first mention that occurreth unto me is in Lamech
his case, confessing the murder he committed unto his wives, Hear O ye wives of
Lamech, etc. where expressing elegantly the torture of a rag^ng conscience, the
Father shows, there is no way but one to quiet the same. He that is guilty of
crying sins, and would make good use and be aided by his conscience, (...).
Chrysostom. (...). tom. 1. p. 139.
and be drawa to confess what he has committed, and open his wound to such a
Physic^an, that would heal, and not upbraid him, and receive salving plasters
from him, and would o^ for with him, no one beholding, and declare all things
diligently unto him, shall easily rectify what was amiss; for the confession
of a sinner is the abolishing and doing away of his transgression. Now who is
meant by this Physician, these words following, he that distinctly knows all
things, and again, He requires our Confession not as ignorant, but knowing all
things before a they were, sufficiently show; and from an Homily which bears
his name, and title of Repentance, extant in the Latin* Edition of his works,
it is thus cited by Chemnit. exam. Council. Trid. part. 2. de confess. page 189.
Chemnitius; It is not necessary to confess in the presence of witnesses, let
there be an inquisition made after off^nces in the thought, let this judgment
be without a witness, let God only se^ thee confessing. But let us view the
Father in his own colors, who taking his theme from the Confession of the
Publican, says thus: I beseech you always to make Confession, (...). tom. 5.
page 262, 263.
for I do not bring thee upon the theater of thy fellow servants, nor do I
compel thee to uncover thy sins unto men; unclasp thy conscience before God,
show forth unto him thine actions, and thy wounds, and entreat a medicine from
him, set them forth to him, who will not set at naught but cure thee; for
albeit thou do say nothing, be knows all things. The same words are
repeated again for failing, tom. 6. page 444. which we rather point at, than
produce; for where the Father is copious, repetitions are tedious; who further
says, But thou are ashamed to say thou have sinned; (...). tom. 2. p. 708.
utter thy sins in thy daily devotions: What then? I do not say confess them
to thy fellow servants, for to cast them into thy teeth; confess them to God
that heals them; for God is not ignorant of them, though thou keep them
secret. So upon mention of those words in the Prophecy of Esaias, which in the
LXXII. Esaias 43.26.
Interpreters are thus read, Declare thy sins first that thou may be
justified, he writes thus; Tell me, of what art thou ashamed, (...). Dom. 5.
p. 258.
and blushest at? to confess thy sins? do thou relate them unto man to
reproach thee? or do thou confess them to thy fellow servants to publish them
upon the stage? To thy Lord, to him that cares for thee, to him that is kind
to mankind and to thy Physician thou do unfold thy grief. And not many lines
after, (...). Id. ib. page 258. lin. 15.
I compel thee not (says God) to come forth upon the open stage, and to make
many witnesses, tell me thy sins alone in private, so I will heal thy wound,
and free thee from pain. Also the same Father upon the same subject in another
place advises, not to call our selves sinners only, but to call to mind our
sins, and rehearsing every one in particular: (...). tom. 4. page 589.
I say not proclaim thy self upon the Theater, nor accuse thy self in the
audience of others, but I counsel thee to be persuaded by the Prophet, saying,
Reveal thy way unto the Lord. Confess thy sins unto God, confess them before
the Judge, praying, if not in thy tongue yet in thy memory. And (to say no
more) this was his Pulpit-discourse to the people of Antioch. And this not
only to be marvelled at (says he) that he forgiveth us our sins; (...). tom.
6. page 608. lin. 10.
but that he neither discloseth them, nor lays them open, or makes them
manifest, nor forces us to come forth in open view to speak out our offenses,
but commands us to be answerable for them to him alone, and to him to make
our confession. These (...), several flowers, (and far more than these) are
gathered from this spiritual garden of Saint Chrysostom. The Church of Rome
cannot well endure the breath and smell thereof. The Cardinal would limit his
testimonies to public confession, which is the Theater and stage so often
mentioned, Loquitur de confessione publica, ex qua exprobratio sequi solebat.
Bell. l. 2. de Poen. c. 15.
and so subject to obloquy, but not of clancular confession subject to no such
inconvenience; surely Chrysostom spoke of the confession then in use, which
was performed after one way, and whether private or public, there is the doubt.
Besides, if the Patriarch had excluded the public Theater and not the private
Closet of Confession, why did he repeat to God alone, to him only confess, and
not to thy fellow servant? They aver under those words, To God alone, to be
comprised the Ghostly Father also, who for the time is not so much Man as Gods
Deputy. Upon which ground they resolve, That if a Confessor be interrogated
upon his Oath of a matter revealed in Confession, he may with a safe conscience
deny it, Qui dam dicunt quod potest dicere, se nihil scire ut homo, sed ut
D^us. Sum. Angel. v. Confess. Potest dicere sine laesione conscientiae se
nescire quod scit tantum ut Deus. Aquin. supplem. 3 ae part. Qu. 11. Art. 1.
because he did not hear the same as Man, but as God. A resolution very
prejudicial to the Fundamental Laws of State, as in due place shall be
showed. Others confess more ingeniously, That it was the doctrine of the
Times, Sui temporis sententia fuit, in quo Nectarius confessionem sacram^ntalem
abjecerat. Canus Relect. de poen. p. 964.
and of that Church wherein he lived, and that he was swayed and carried away
with the same. The Friar might have enlarged himself, Gratian. de Poen. did.
1. cap. ult. Quid.
for it was the opinion not of those times, but of all times in the Greek
Church, and so continued till the times of Gratian. The Dean of Lovain makes
him only to connive and wink at the miss and discontinuance of auricular
confession, Forte dici possit Chrysostom. aliquantulum connivere propter
consuetudinem appositam quam per Nectarium praedecessorem suum int^oductam
invenerat. R. Tapper. art. 5. p. 98.
by reason of a contrary custom introduced by his Predecessor within his
Diocese. Whatsoever it was, this great Father and glory of Greece is sca^ce
heard with patience amongst the Pontificians, yet it may be wondered, with what
confidence himself and his fellows are produced by them, alleging them with
like sincerity as they paint them at Rome, viz. with head and beard shaven,
Mitred, Coped, Les ont fait pourtraire, and imprimere a Rome; avaunt la barbe
raze, estant Mitree, and revestu des habits Pontisicaux, a la fashion de noz
Prelatz Latins -- Les Mitres and Crosses n'estoyent lors encores en usage. A.
Theuet. vies des Hommes illustr. livre 1. c. 9.
and armed with Crosier-staffe, after the Roman cut and fashion; whereas the
long beard, and long robe were the usual ornaments of those Eastern Prelates,
the former accoutrements of Mitre and Cross not invented nor frequented in
their times.

But what say the Fathers of the Western Church, since the same Sun that rises
in the East, sets in the West, and casts the same beams upon both the
Climates. The solemn discipline of open Penance continued longer in the Latin
Church than in the other, Ex exhomologesi sive poenitentiae. actu (nisi multum
fallimur) confessio secreta sumpsit originem. B. Rhenan.
and at length sat down also in private confession. I have acquainted you what
Erasmus his opinion was, That the Confession of special sins before God was
private only, and that only made to men was public, a vieu and sceu le tous,
as the Frenchman speaks, exposed to the sight and light of all, and that the
Church was acquainted with no other in Saint Hieroms days; sure no other was
on foot in Tertullians time, as a great Antiquary of his time Beatus Rhenanus
affirms, That Tertullians silence in speaking nothing of clancular confession
is no wonder, Ne quis admiretur Tertullianum de clancularia ista admissorum
confessione nihil loquutum, quae (quantum con^icimus) nata est ex ista
exhomologesi per ultroneam hominum pietatem, ut occultorum peccatorum esset and
exomologesis occulta. Praef. ad lib. de Poen.
which (as he conjectureth) was the daughter of public confession, conceived
by the voluntary piety of some men, that thought to secret sins there belonged
private Confession, and a concealed Penance, as notorious sins were punished
with open repentance, and confession. Yet the duty may be of good use, though
not of so great standing in Gods Church; Quid mihi cum hominibus ut audiant
confessiones meas; quasi ipsi sanaturi sunt omnes languores meos? Aug. Con. l.
10. c. 3.
as Paul was born out of due time, yet called to be an Apostle, whose fervent
labor in the Ministry supplied that defect. As that Critic wondered not at
Tertullians silence, so may none wonder at St Augustines words. What have I to
do with men that they should hear my confessions, as though they could heal all
my diseases? A place that Bellarmine has said something to, though not much to
his purpose. The Confession Saint Augustine speaks of is not Sacramental
confession (he may swear it) but a rehearsal of sins formerly committed,
Confessio de qua loquitur Aug. non est confessio Sacramentalis, sed confessio
peccatorum praeteritorum, and per baptismum dimissorum, ad eum sinem instituta,
ut inde cognoscatur and laudetur Dei miscricordia. Lib. 2. de poen. c. 20.
and washed away by Baptism, ackn^wledged to this end, that the mercy of God
toward him might be manifested. This is the scope of his whole discourse (I
grant,) namely, a detection of his great sins, and of Gods great mercy; yet he
might relate how his sins met with mercy, Confessionis autem causam addidit,
dicens, quia fecisti, Authorem scilicet universitatis Dominum esse confessus,
nulli alii docens confitondum, quam qui fecit Olivam fructiferam spei
misericordi^t in seculum seculi. Hilar. in Psalm. 51.
and so speak of Confession to God, as a mean for the obtaining thereof, and
affirm that man had no more right to know his diseases than he had power to
heal them. Such a conclusion has Hilary upon Psalm L I. That David there
teaches us to confess our sins to no other than to the Author of this
universe, the Lord who made him, and makes the Olive fruitful with the mercy
of hope for ever and ever.

Such testimonies as these seem to import that confessions before God and
before man are incompatible, as if thereby two Masters were served, and the one
forsaken by adhering to the other; that confession peculiarly belongs unto
God, and is not to be given to any other. Truly such a Confession that is made
to man without any subordination unto God, is derogatory both to Gods glory,
and our own safety: So to confess unto any besides, as to rely upon him, is not
expiatory, but piaculous, and not a confession but a malediction. But to use
confession before man, 1. as an help the better to enable us to confess unto
God; 2. or to man as an instrument in the place, and hand of God, is not
repugnant thereunto; 3. to confess to man wholly, and to leave out God; 4. or
to imagine that unfeigned confession made before God is insufficient, without
respect had unto the confession made to man, either in purpose, or performance,
as the accomplishment thereof, is the Hagar that must not abide with the Free
woman, Gal. 4.30.
but be cast out and her son, that is, such consequents as the Roman Polemicks
draw from thence. It was a Calumniation fastened upon our Church, that it should
teach Baptism without Confirmation to be imperfect, Conference at Hampton
Court. page 10. ed. 1625.
or that at least Confirmation added no small matter to the strength and virtue
thereof. Which Scandal the God-like wisdom of his late Majesty was upon Of LI.
Archbishop of Cant. and Bishop of London.
sound information the sponge to wipe away; that it was neither a sacrament,
nor a corroboration to a former Sacrament, but an examination with a
Confirmation. The Confession had to man must not be thought to perfect that
which is had to God; or to be a Sacrament, or a Confirmation of any Sacrament,
by way of corroboration, but by way of examination only, where the sin
confessed unto God is examined, and if upon due examination the confession made
to God shall appear to be good, the same is ratified; if not, the party
dismissed with better instructions to perfect the same. And like as the
Parliament assembled in the first year of King James, made an Act for the
confirmation of his Royal title, whereas in truth his title was as firm as God
and nature could make it, thereby expressing rather their duty to embrace the
same, than adding strength and vigor thereunto; of this kind is confession to
man only. And as children baptized without Confirmation, or an eye thereunto,
have their full Christendom, so has a Penitent upon his Confession to God a
full absolution. Yet as the Church received Confirmation from the Apostolic
hands, and so still continues the same as a duty of singular use and benefit;
the like must be thought of confession to man also, the expediency whereof
shall in fit place be discussed. I shall conclude with that answer of Pinuphius
an Egyptian Abbot in John Cassian; Who is it that cannot humbly say, I made my
sin known unto thee, Qui est qui non poslit suppl citer dicere, peccatum meum
cognitum tibi feci, and injustitiam meam non operui, ut per hanc confessionem
ctiam illud adjungere mereatur, and tu remisisti impietatem cordis mei? Quod si
verecundia retrahente revelare ea coram hominibus erubescis, illi quem latere
non possunt, confiteri ea jugi supplicatione non desinas, ac dicere,
Iniquitatem meam ego agnosco, and peccatum meum contra me est semper; tibi soli
pectav^, and malum contra te feci. Qui and absque ullius verecundiae
publicatione curare, and sine improperio peccata donare consucvit. Jo. Cassian.
Collat. 20. cap. 8.
and mine iniquities have I not hid; that by this confession he may confidently
adjoyn, and thou forgavest me the iniquity of my heart? But if shamefulness do
so draw thee back, that thou blushest to reveal them before men, cease not by
continual supplication to confess them unto him from whom they cannot be hid,
and to say, I know my iniquity, and my sin is against me always; to thee only
have I sinned, and done evil before thee; whose custom is both to cure without
the publishing of any shame, and to forgive sins without upbraiding. In this
Abbots opinion Confession to man was left free and adiaphorous, provided
always, that confession to God be sincerely performed, to which I commend the
case of all Penitents, and pass unto the next kind of confession made before
man as following.

CHAP. V.
The Contents.
Of Confession to Man. The Confession of sin under the Law before the Priest at
the Altar, and the Sacrifice. Special enumeration of all sins not required of
the Jews. The Law commands the acknowledgment of sin and restitution. Jobs
friends confessed their errors unto him who sacrificed for them. David's
confession unto Nathan. Rabbis affirming sins to be confessed unto the Fathers
and Levites. The place in Saint James chap. 5. of mutual Confession explained
and vindicated. Testimonies of the Fathers for Confession unto man. The opinion
of the Schoolmen, that sin in case of necessity, and in way of consultation for
a remedy, not in way of absolution for reconcilement, may be detected to a
Layman: and of the Reformed Divines. That sins may be confessed to a believing
Brother for advice, and to the Minister of the Gospel.

I Have formerly treated of Exhomologesis as a wholesome discipline imposed for
notorious sins, by which the Penitent did not so much make known his offenses,
(for they were too apparent and scandalous) as acknowledge the injury and wrong
he had done to God, and his people, and there by the judgment, and punishment
belonging in justice unto sin; and by such doleful postures to pacify God, and
satisfy the Church scandalized by his fall. We are now to treat of such a
Confession, which brings to light the works of darkness, whereby a sinner
becomes his own accuser, having no other witnesses then God, and his own
Conscience of his folly; opening the same not only unto God but to Man also:
Our first disquisition must be to inquire whether sins were and may be
confessed unto a Man, without entering into the manner of the Confession;
whether it ought to be of all particular sins, together with the circumstances
changing, or aggravating the property of each several offense, or without
considering so much the nature of the man, his profession, calling, or
sanctity, (for these respects will follow in their order.) But whether a sinner
may confess his sins in general or specified unto any man without respect of
persons; provided only that he be within the pale of the Church, and observe
in his carriage the common rules of civility, and we shall find the practice
has been, (and that practice never controlled) in all times for man to have
recourse to man also in confession.

The first and most ancient example in this kind is Lamech; for Adam and Cain
were called to an account, and convinced before they would come to any
acknowledgment: but this man questioned by none, called upon by none, accused
by none, but by the bird in his breast, Genesis 4.23.
his Conscience, cries out, Hear my voice, O ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto
my speech, for I have slain a man in my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. I
must confess I held not this worthy of an instance, though it be the detection
of a secret sin, because it was addressed unto women, unfit creatures to be
acquainted with a man's Cabinet, and to look into the privy Chamber of his
heart; and conceived of this passage to be as much for my purpose, as the
fabulous conjectures of the Rabbis who the man was he slew, and the manner
thereof, to the mind and meaning of Lamech; passed over it had been for me, had
not Chrysostom grounded upon the same so many, and those notable observations
of Confession. 1. As the power and torture of an indicting Conscience, not
suffering the sinner to be at quiet, till his sin be brought to light. 2. The
good that comes to some by the examples of justice in others;
Cains punishment in denying his sin, serving as an inducement to Lamech to
confess his: (...). Chrysos^.
No man therefore constraining him, no man convincing him, he sets up a
judgmentseat, calls upon his wives to be his judges, accuses himself,
confesses the fact, and allots the punishment; wherein no dislike could be
taken to the proceedings, were it not for his mistake in the Judges.

The next act of Confession was more solemn, and religious, made to the Priest
before the Altar; for besides that general confession of the whole people, Nec
publica tantum confessio pro totius populi d^lictis fiebat in die expiationis
-- sed and p^^vata and particularis specialium quorundam peccatorum ab iis
ageb^^^r, qui poenitentiam agentes, sibi Deum propitium reddere volebant.
Beauxan. harm. tom. 1. page 134. col. 2.
poured out annually upon the day of expiation, there was a private and
particular confession of some special sins in use amongst them, for which by
repentance they sued unto God for mercy, says a Sorbonist. The sinner that
would be particular, repaired unto the Altar, and there presented the Priest
with an offering, to make the atonement; for sins hid from the eyes of the
assembly, and afterward come to light, a young bullock, with imposition of
hands from the elders was destined for a Sacrifice; the Ceremonies whereof are
contained, Levit. 4. but for some sort of secret sins, which had not yet seen
the light of fame, the sinoffering was appointed to be a lamb, or a kid, Levit.
5.6.
and the guilty person was to confess the sin, and the Priest to make the
atonement. Josephus mentions the secret sin, and the sacrifice, (...). l. 3.
c. 10.
which he says was a Ram, but not the confession of the sin, as needless
perhaps, because the offense was imprinted upon the Sacrifice as an
Hieroglyphick thereof; of which see Levit. 5. for how could a particular
offering appertaining to particular fins be laid upon the Altar by the guilty
person, Qui potuit quispiam offerre oblationem pro peccato, qui se peccasse
pal^m non fateretur? -- cos qui peculiariter offerebant pro peccato,
peculiariter quo^^* ejus peccati de quo agebatur, sese reos agnoscere necesse
suit. Beza de Excom. contra Erastum.
without disclosing of his offense? did they not by that act pronounce
themselves guilty of that sin, for which they brought the offering, and desired
the atonement? That very act of the party peccant, viz. the presenting of the
sacrifice was a real conviction. Scotus then fell short of the truth in
affirming that under Moses law, In lege Mosaica de peccatis occultis tantum Deo
fiebat confessio, de quibusdam tamen defectibus publicis and de non observantia
legalium fiebat confessio -- generalis confessio Sacerdotis erat quaedam
dispositio ad miseri cordiam petendam pro populo, sicut erat ista, injuste
egimus, peccavimus, etc. Scot. l. 4. d. 17. q. unica.
sins done in secret were confessed to God alone, and that the confession to
man was but of some public defects, and not observing of legal rites. And that
the general Confession of the Priest served to dispose God to be merciful unto
the people, like unto those supplications in the Church-Liturgy, We have
sinned, we have done unjustly, etc. And Bellarmine has overshot the truth in
stretching this confession to a distinct, Illud (...) recte verti possit
distinct, and express confitebuntur, (...), praeceptum hoc intelligendum esse
de confessione distincta, and in specie, ejus peccati, pro quo expiando
sacrificandum erat. Bell. l. 3. de poen. c. 3. Sect. ad haec.
and specifique enumeration of each several sin; and though it be granted the
Hebrew word to signify an express and distinct confession, it concludes not
his purpose; for a distinct confession is one thing, and a confession of all
distinct sins another. The truth is, all the sins they thus Sacrificed for,
were distinctly confessed, but not all the sins they committed were so
sacrificed for, and to such kind of sins as were expiated by sacrifices does
the Cardinal himself limit this distinct confession. Aquinas allows not so
much to Confession under the Law as a clear and evident expression of sin, but
rather a confused intimation thereof,, reserving that distinct demonstration to
the clearer times of the Gospel; for thus he says, In lege naturae sufficiebat
recognitio peccati interior apud Deum, sed in lege Mosaica oportebat aliquo
signo exteriori peccatum protestari; sicut per oblationem hostiae pro peccato,
ex quo and homini innotescere poterat eum peocasse; non autem oportebat ut
speciale peccatum a se commissum manifestaret, aut peccati circumstantias,
sicut in nova lege. Aq. Supplem. Qu. 6. art. 2.
In the law of Nature an inward recognition of sin unto God was enough, but
under Moses law there was required a protestation of the sin in some outward
signs, as by the offering of a Sacrifice for sin, whereby it might appear to
man that he had sinned; but it was not requisite to make a special
manifestation of the sin committed, or the circumstances thereof, as in the new
law: As if to the Patriarchs before the Law, Confession were then but in
spicis, in the ears of Corn; to the Israelites under Moses law in farina, in
the meal; and to Christians under the Gospel in pane, as the bread set upon the
table; this be assured of, Levit. 17.21. Quia Sacordos non omaia peccata populi
scicbat, sed in generali. Lyr. in Levit. 17.
that in Moses time it was not so narrowly sifted into as in ours; for Lyra
giving some reasons, why the Confession of the peoples sins unto God over the
Sacrifice could not be particular, has this amongst others; because the Priest
was not acquainted with all the sins of the people but in a general manner.

The next instance is a law grounded upon the VIII Commandment, against
usurpers of that which is not theirs, injoyning confession of the wrong, and
restitution. Numb. 5.7.
They shall confess their sin which they have done, and he shall recompense his
trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof,
and give it unto him against whom he has trespassed. Materia rest^tutionis
latissima quidem, sed valde necessaria. Biell, l. 4. d. 15. Q. 2.
The point of restitution is indeed of great latitude, and great necessity, a
doctrine too sour for the palate of our times, and we can no more away with it
then with Confession. Oh preposterous shame! we blush not to commit sin, but to
confess; we blush not to do violence, but to restore; that speech of August^ne
is grounded upon infallible truth, The sin is not remi^ted, Non dimittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum.
except what was detained be restored. If thou haft not a mind to augment the
principal fourfold as Zacheus did, yet add th thereunto as the Law enjoined,
or at least the Principal, as reason wills. Lexista loquitur in casu in quo
aliquis poenitentia ducius, vul^ sac^re satisfactionem proximo. Lyra. in loc.
This case of Confession is unto man as damnified together with God, and
therefore he likewise this way is to be satisfied; the offender voluntarily
detesting, and detecting the fact, tendering satisfaction, and desiring
reconciliation. Here the Rhemists exceed the bounds of the Tridentine faith, in
affirming, that a general Confession under the law sufficed not for purging
sins, and that sinners were bound by a divine positive law, Rh^mists A^^o^ upon
Number. 5. Tom. 1. page 333.
to confess expressly, and distinctly their sin which they had committed, whom I
send to Cardinal Tolet, a man of more judgment then all their College, to be
corrected, who ingeniously confesses, that not so much as a purpose to confess
was necessary in the old law: Propasitum consit^ndi non sait necessarium in
v^teri lege. Toler. tract. de confess.
for my part I verily believe, the same divine law for confession that is in
force under the Gospel, to have been a law for Gods people at all times, and of
like necessity to all penitents; and that the Priests after the order of Aaron,
had power to make the atonemant, as well as those after the order of
Melchisedec to grant the absolution; both in their several kinds being
Ministers of Reconciliation, Christ the supreme head of either hierarchy,
giving in proper person a period to the Levitical Priesthood, and investing his
Ministers with their authority, which seems to be the greater, because it
shines the clearer, and the more substantial, because the less ceremonious.

The next, but precedent in time unto the former, is the submission of Jobs
friends (and that by special command of God) unto him, with a direction from
God likewise, that Job by sacrificing for them should pacify his incensed
anger; for God held himself wronged through his servants side, and all this
should they perform upon pain of his high displeasure: the words in the story
are these, Job 42.7, 8, 9, 10.
And it was so, that after the Lord has spoken these words unto Job, The Lord
said unto Eliphaz the Temanite, my wrath is kindled against thee, and against
thy two friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my
servant Job has. Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks, and seven rams,
and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt offering, and my
servant Job shall pray for you, and him will I accept, lest I deal with you
after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as
my servant Job has. So Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and
Zophar the Naamathite went and did according as the Lord commanded them; and
the Lord also accepted Job, and the Lord turned the captivity of Job when he
prayed for his friends. Where note, 1. As God was offended and his servant Job,
so the offense must be acknowledged to both, that both may be pacified. 2. God
retains his anger till the party wronged together with him be satisfied. 3.
Gods wrath incensed against any for wronging his servants, will not be quenched
but by his servants means and procurement; for his fury provoked by offending
Job, must be appeased by Job reconciling. 'Ite ad servum meum Job, and offeret
holocaustum pro vobis; ita legit Greg. and vulg. lat. assavoir par le moin de
Job, -- tellement qu'il vous serve comme de Sacrificateur. Genev, not, in Bibl.
Gallic.
They were to offer their sacrifices to Job, and Job to God for them; so the
ancient Latin copies followed by Gregory read, Go unto my servant Job, and he
shall offer an Holocaust for you, and those words him will I accept, and, the
Lord accepted Job, import no less. Pro semetipso Poenitens tanto cititus ex
audiri meruit, quanto devote pro ali^s int^rcessit. Greg. Mor. l. 35. c. 20.
4. God hears a man sooner in his own cause, that is sollicitous on the
behalf of others; as Job turned away his own captivity in praying for his
friends. Thou will say, but where did Jobs friends confess their sins unto him?
Can not thou spell their Confessions in their Sacrifices? for what meant
those Sacrifices and Jobs intercessions on their behalf, but for their sins?
and how could he offer, and pray for he knew not what? they then confessed the
trespass, presented unto him the trespass offering, and desired his
intercessions that God would be reconciled for their offenses.


The next President is David confessing his sin to Nathan, for albeit the
Prophet gave him a (...), and draught thereof in a Parable, and made David pass
the sentence against himself in thesi, and brought it home to his Conscience by
a special application, uncasing the Parable, and showing that He was the man;
yet David's heart thus roused awoke, and he cried out, I have sinned against the
Lord; 2 Samuel 12.
and Nathan said unto David, the Lord has also put away thy sin, thou shall
not dye. There was no tergiversation, no apology, no accusing of the
instruments, but the King wholly took the sin upon himself. Thus did not Saul
in the case of Agag and Amalek; the charge he had from God was the utter
subversion of that Prince, and State; contrariwise the victory gained, he
spares the King, and makes a prey of the richest and fattest spoils; and
being reprehended by Samuel, spread a religious cloak over his transgression,
as if that prey had been reserved for a sacrifice; and being further charged by
Samuel for disobedience, he conveyes the fact away from himself to the people,
I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and gone the way the Lord sent me, but the
people, etc. If any deviation it was in them, they were out of the way, and
would needs spare the best of the cattle to pleasure God with a Sacrifice.
Proud heart, that all this while would take no notice of his sin, till he heard
his doom, deprivation from his Crown and dignity. Then Saul said unto Samuel, I
have sinned; 1 Samuel 15.
but Samuel said not unto Saul, as Nathan unto David, The Lord has also put
away thy sin. Saul's was a confession upon the rack, but David had no sooner a
sense of sin, but he opens it in humble confession; The wound no sooner
perceived then he hastened for a Medicine, (...). Basil. (...). page 243.
then he fled to the Physician, saying, I have sinned, and forthwith is healed.
The Lord also has put away thy sin. Grave is the wise man's advice, Be not
ashamed to confess thy sins, and force not the course of the river;
Ecclesiasticus 4.26.
That is, turn not the stream or course thereof backward by denial, or on the
one side by excusing; but be thine own accuser to obtain a pardon.

Confession then of sin, and that unto man, amongst the people of the Jews, is
extant upon Sacred records, practiced before the law, commanded by the law,
portraited in their Sacrifices, and performed by the Man after Gods own heart,
and has continued among that dispersed Nation even till our times, if Thomas
Walden and Antoninus may be credited; the one learned so much from the relation
of the Jews themselves at his being in Austria, and the other affirms, that
the learneder sort are wont to confess all their sins to a Levite, Solent
doctiores Judaei ante mortem confiteri omnia peccata Levitae alicui, si quem
forte nacti fuerint. Ant. part. 3. tit. 14. c. 6. Sect. 1. Habent Sacerdotes
(Cuthaei) ex posteritate Aharon Sacerdotis in pace quiescentis, qui cum nullis
alits connubia jungunt, nisi aut familiae suae foeminis aut viris, ut genus
impermixtum conservent. Benjam. Itiner. page 39, 40.
a little before their death, if he may be had; and I think so too when they
chance upon a Levite of the full blood, which to preserve without mixture, the
Jews after the destruction of the Temple were not so careful as the Samaritans,
who boast their Priests to be not only of the tribe of Levi, but family of
Aaron, and therefore call them Aharonitae. Some testimonies of the Rabbis
which I find in Petrus Galatinus may not be neglected. In a Treatise called
B^rashith. (...) that is a lesser exposition upon the book of Genesis, (...)
Genesis 49.8.
and upon those words, Judah thy Brethren shall praise, or confess thee; being
an elegant allusion of old Jacob to his name derived from confession; it is
thus written, This is that Confession which is spoken of by the holy Ghost in
the hands of Job, Illa est confessio de qua dictum est a Spiritu Sancto per
manus Job, (...) Cap. 15. hoc est, quia Sapientes sunt, confitentur, and
indicant, and non abscondunt a Patribus suis, peccata s^. sua. De quibus dictum
est hoc? de justis, qui vincunt, and subjugant fomitem, seu sensualitatem suam,
and confitentur actus suos Patribus suis; omnis enim qui confitetur actus suos,
dignus est seculo futuro, sicut dictum est, Psalm. 50. (...) Et ita invenies in
Juda in hora qua pervenit ad eum factum Tamar, confessus est, quema^medum
dictum est, Genesis 38. (...) Moxigitur vicit sensualitatem vel affectum suum, and
confessus est.
Such as are wise confess or show forth, and hide not from their fathers; that
is, their sins. Of whom is this spoken? of the just, who subdue their lust and
sensuality, and confess their doings to their Fathers, for he that confesses
his acts is worthy of the world to come, at it is said in Psalm. 50.23. He that
offers confession honors me, and he that orders his way, to him will I
show the salvation of God. Accordingly you find in Juda, that at what time his
dealing was perceived by him with Thamar, he confessed it, Genesis 38. Acknowledge
thy Creator, and be not ashamed of flesh and blood; that is, of man; presently
he overcame his sensuality and affections, and confessed. And again in the same
place. God holy and blessed curses every one that does not confess his deeds;
Omais qui non confitetur op^^a sua, Deus sanctus and benedictus maledicit; sic
enim invenimus in Cain, qui negavit and dixit, Genesis c. 4. Nunquid Custos
fratris mei Ego sum? maledictus ergo sit, sicut dictum est ibidem, Et nunc
maledictus es tu.
for so we find in Cain, who denied, and said, Am I my Brothers keeper?
therefore he was accursed, as it is there said; Now then cursed art thou. Such
another testimony is extant in the Hierosolymitan Sanbedrim, in the chapter
that begins (...) that is, The judgment is defined; Omnis confitens habet
partem in seculo futuro; sic enim in Achan reperimus, quod dixit ei Ichoshuah,
Fili mi, Da obsecro, honorem Domino Deo Israel, and da confessionem, and indica
mihi quaeso quid feceris; ne celes a me: and ait, Vere ego peccavi Domino Deo
Israel, and ita hoc sicut hoc feci. Et unde habetur quod remissum fuit ei
peccatum? ex co quod dictum ^st ibidem Jehosuae sc. cap. 7. and ait Jehosuas,
Sicut turbasti nos, turbat te Dominus in die isto: in die isto (inquit) tu
turbatus eris, sed non ^ris turbatus in fu^u^o.
where it is thus written; All such as confess have their share in the world
to come; for so we find in Achan, how Jehosuas said unto him, My son, give
glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make thy Confession, and show unto me
what thou have done. And conceal it not from me; and Achan answered, and said
unto Jehosuas, Of a truth I have sinned before the Lotd God of Israel, and have
done thus and thus. But from whence does it appear that his sin was forgiven?
from that it is said in the same place, viz Josh. 7. And Jehosua said, As thou
have troubled us, the Lord trouble thee in that day: In that day (says he)
thou are troubled, but thou shall not be troubled in the days to come. And
that this confession was made distinctly, is evident by what is recorded in the
book entitled (...), that is, of Days, and in the Chap. (...) sc. the day of
propitiation; Rabbi Hunna said, Dixit Rabbi (...) Hunna, Omnis qui
transgressione transgressius est, necesse est ut singulatim exprimat peccatum.
Pet. Galatin. de arcan. Cath. verit. l. 10. c. 3.
Every one that in offending has offended, necessarily he must express the
offense in a special manner. By these Masters of the Synagogue, it may easily
be guessed how confession was ordered, and practiced by their Disciples and
Proselytes.

In the New Testament the only pertinent place to prove Confession unto man
not circumstantiated with any office, quality, etc. is in the Epistle of Saint
James, Confess your faults one to another, James 5.17.
and pray one for another that ye may be healed: where the disease is sin, the
remedy confession and prayer; the Physicians and Patients subalternal, one
another; the end curation, that ye may be healed; wherein mutual prayer is
enjoined, and mutual confession; and as the precept is one to pray for another,
so is it also one to confess to another; and as not only the order of Priests
may pray for others, but other orders of the faithful for them, and others
also; so sin may be detected to men of another rank than Priests only: to
Priests I grant principally, but not solely: and little advantageth Romes
clancular confession, where the Laity and Clergy hold no correspondency, Il ne
fait rien pour ceste confession a l'oreille d'un Prestre, car icy l' Apostre
recommande une confession mutuelle, qui ne se fait in cette practique. D.
Buchan. l'histoire de la Conscience. p. 173.
they confessing to Priests only, and not Priests to People; whereas the
Apostle by saying, Confess one to another, prescribes confession no more to be
made to the Priest than to another man, Dicendo Confitemini alterutrum non
magis dicit, confessionem faciendam esse Sacerdoti, quam alii; subdit enim,
Orate prose invicem. Scot. l. 4. d. 17. Q.unic.
(says Scotus.) So that without forcing or racking of the words, the sense
will fall out to be this; Confess your sins one to another, that being
conscious of one another diseases, you may the better frame your request on
one another behalf for your recovery. Confession of faults serving here for an
instruction unto prayer, which one Alterutrum, i. aequalibus. Gloss. interlin,
Member of the Church makes for another. Then if none can receive Confession
of sins but a Priest, none but a Priest can pray for another. Mutuam
confessionem and mutuam orationem simul injungit; si solis sacrificulis
confitendum, ergo and pro illis solis orandum. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. c. 4.
Sect. 6.
But if a Lay-Christian may pray for another, yea, for a Priest also; then may
confession be made to a Lay-Christian, Reciproca relatione isti pro scinvicem
tenentur orare. Hug. Card. in loc. ergo, ad se invicem reciproce tenentur
confiteri.
yea from a Priest also. Again, if Priests be the only men to whom confession
in this place is addressed, then Priests only pray one for another; for if
none can confess one another but Priest and Priest, they are the Men then that
can only pray one for another: furthermore, the Confession Saint James speaks
of, passes to and fro, from one to another; now if none may hear confession
but a Priest, Hic exigitur reciproca Confessio-atqui hoc soli sacrifici sibi
vendicant, ergo ad eos solos ableganda est confessio. Calvin. in Jac. cap. 5.
none may make confession but a Priest, for with the Apostle, those only must
make confession that may receive confession, and they only confess that may be
confessed unto. This discourse is grounded upon the mutual and reciprocal
injunction of Confession, and intercession, on the behalf of others, as duties
of equal latitude and extent; The Reason stands thus;

Bar. All such as may make supplications for others, may receive the
confessions of others. Ba. But all Christians may make their supplications for
others. Ra. Therefore all Christians may receive the confessions of others.
Sentit de quotidianis offensis Christianorum inter ipsos, quot continuo vult
reconciliari; alioqui, si de confessione sensisset, quam dicimus partem
Sacramenti poenitentiae, non addi disset (...), i. vobis invicem, sed
saccrdotibus. Erasm. annot. in Jac. 5. page 744.

There are that limit the Apostle to speak only of that Confession which
tends to Brotherly reconciliation, whereby the offender humbly submits,
ingeniously acknowledges, and thereby deprecateth the offense, and pacifieth
the party offended; as if he should have said, the faults you commit one to
another confess one to another, and be reconciled; for had he meant Sacramental
confession, he would rather have said, confess to the Priests than one to
another. This note of Erasmus had been worth the noting, if the words
following, and pray one for another, did not follow, which argue the
fellow servants not to be the party grieved, but the Lord, to whom he is to
intercede on his fellows behalf, q.d. Confess one to another the sins committed
against God, and pray one for another to God for them. Others understand by
sins, the sins against God, by the Confessors, not Priests alone, Haec omnia
intelliguntur de Confessione, secundum quod ipsa est praeceptum, and sicut
praecepta quoad confessionem mortalium, consilium vero quoad confessionem
venialium. Hug. Card. Expos. in. Jac. cap. 5.
but others also in some cases, and the confession as a duty to be performed by
way of 1. Precept, and of 2. Counsel.
If mortal sins be the subject, then the Confessor is to be a Priest, and the
confession necessary, and under command; but if the sins be venial, the
Confessor may be a Layman, and the Confession free, and under counsel only.
This later confession then being an Evangelical counsel, belongs only to
such perfect men as Monks and Friars, and then a Lay brother may serve at a
turn to receive the Confessions of a Cloister, which rather than those
religious Cloysterers will admit, this cardinal exposition shall be turned off
the hinges. But it will be said, a Priest may take notice of such Atoms, and
Peccadillo's too, if his leisure serve him, or if not, may make them over to
one of the Laity, as not worthy of his ears. I see now a mystery and method
observed in reserved cases; moats and lesser sins are reserved for a
Lay-audience, sins of a middle magnitude, for Priests ears, but beams, foul and
heinous offenses, for the Penitentiaries themselves at Rome. And truly I think
Saint James was as, well acquainted with venial sins as with Evangelical
counsels, and with reserved cases as much-as with reserved confessions. So as
touching this interpretation, all that I have to say is, to put my Reader in
mind, that this Scripture is from an Apostle, and this gloss from a Cardinal:
But he and I both must take notice of what Bid says, because he was our
worshipful Countryman, who wills, that daily and trivial fanlts, like
should confess to like, one to another, of the same rank; In hac sententia
debet esse illa discretio, ut quotidiana l^viaque peccata invicem coaequalibus
confiteamur, eorumque quotidiana credamus oratione salvari. Porro, gravioris
leprae immundi^i^m juxta l^gem Sac^rdoti pandamus, atque ad ejus arbitrium,
qualiter, and quanto tempore jusscrit, purificari curemus. Bed. Com. in Jac. 5.
and believe to be helped by their d^ily prayers, whereas the uncleanness of a
fouler leprosy, we should according to the law, unfold unto the Priest; and as
he shall determine, to endeavor our purification after such manner and time as
he shall appoint.

But the Cardinal fixes upon these words (...), and (...), one for another,
and one to another; and contendeth, that they are to be understood as the
consequence of the words of the Scripture (or rather of his impertinent
glosses) shall require; Voces ill^e ALTERUTRUM, and INVICEM accipiendae sunt,
prout exigit consaqu^ntia verborum Scripturae divinae --. Confitemini homines
hominibus, qui absolution^ indigetis, illis qui potestatem habent absolvendi.
Bellar. lib. 3. de Poen. c. 4. Sect. Sed haec.
insomuch that confess one to another is nothing else; but you men that need
absolution, to such men that have the power of absolving. A very discreet
Comment, and which will settle the practice of his Church throughout, in the
point of Penance, thus: Confess you that have committed lesser sins, and have
less money to pay fees, to your Sir John's at home; but you whose sins are
riper, and purses fuller to commute, unto the Bishop, and purchase absolution
from his Consistory. But you whose sins are of a deeper grain, and your selves
of vaster possessions, gang ye on pilgrimage to Rome, as a dainty reserved for
his Holiness; and remember to carry something with you besides your
Pilgrims-staff and habit, (...). 1 Pet. 4.9.
for fear you prove unworthy of Papal absolution. All these glosses are
warranted by that liberty of interpretation the Cardinal has here taken to
himself; which to maintain he would feign paraphrase with a place in P^ter,
viz. Use hospitality one to another without grudging, that is, Eos qui tecto
indigeat, hospitio recipiendos esse ab his qui domum habent, imperitos a Doctis
instruendos, agrotos a Medicis cucandos. -- sia qui peccatorum vinculis
constricti tenentur, ad cos acced^re deb^nt quibus dictum est. Quaecunque solve
it is, etc. id. ib.
not all to use hospitality promiscuously, but those that are able to those
that are in want; so instruct one another, that is, the Doctor the unlearned;
so heal one another, that is, the Physician the sick; so confess you that are
held with the bonds of sin, to such to whom it was said, Whose sins soever you
shall loose; etc. Thus the Jesuit, but sophistically, for the former instances
are distributiones accommodae, wherein every one is to do good according to his
power, and the gift that he has received; viz. those to be given to
hospitality, that are enabled with means; those to instruct, that are (...),
taught of God; and those to heal, that have the skill. Now where God gives the
gift, he requires the duty annexed; and of such as receive the grace, the
good-work: for example, the hope of the Resurrection is common to every
believer, and upon a dead friend, a sure comfort for a sad loss; wherefore
comfort ye one another with these words, (...). 1 These. 4. ult. (...). Joan.
13.34.
a duty belonging to all Christians, because all of them had the like means,
and assurance of Consolation; so, This is my commandment, that ye love one
another; all Christians then are tied to reciprocal love, because the precept
binds all; and so in this present place, To pray one for another is an
universal duty of all Christians; and that one Christian may the better pray
for another, the Apostles advice is to confess the sins which lie heavy upon
the Conscience to another Christian, to enable, and instruct him the better to
procure of God by prayer that which thou seek, ease, and refreshment; as
every Christian therefore has (or should have) the gift to pray for another,
so has he the capacity to receive the confession of another. This I say truly
understood pro distributione accommoda will bring to light the Jesuits
sophistry, and show how vain his instance was to uphold his fancy. Bishop
Fisher, a Cardinal as well as he (although his head went off before his hat
went on) but of greater conscience in handling of Scriptures, contradicts not
the former sense of confession to a Lay-brother, Quod si quispiam contendat
sensisse Jacobum, quod frater fratri cuivis debeat confiteri, nihil moror; si
tamen hoc mihi donaverit, quod alteri cuiquam omnino quam Deo sit confitendum.
Roffens. contr. Luther. art. 8. page 139.
and is contented to approve thereof; so it may be granted him from thence,
(and he has a hard heart that will not) that confession may be made to another
besides God only. And this all the Conclusion according to Lyra, that from
hence may be deducted, how, Ex quo pater, quod confessio deb^t fieri non solum
Deo sed homini. Lyra. in Jac. 5.
it is manifest that confession ought to be make not to God only, but to man
also; and to that end I produced it.

In the next place such testimonies of the Fathers shall be alleged, which
speak confession to be made unto others, over and above that which the Penitent
makes unto God. Origin expounding those words, A sword shall pass through thy
heart, that the thoughts of many may be revealed; writes thus; There were in
men evil thoughts, which to this end are revealed, Cogitationes erant malae in
hominibus, quae propterea revelatae sunt, ut pro^atae in medium perderentur,
and interfectae, atque emortuae, esse desinerent, and occideret eas ille, qui
pro nobis mortuus est; quamdiu enim absconditae erant cogitationes, nec
prolatae in medium, impossible erat eas penitus interfici. Unde and nos, si
peccaverimus, debemus dicere, Peccatum meum notum fecitibi, and iniquitatem
meam non abscondi. Dixi, annuntiabo iniquit^tem contra me Domino; si enim haec
fecerimus, and revelaverimus peccata nostra non solum Deo, sed and his qui
possunt mederi vulneribus nostris atquae peccatis, delebuntur peccata nostra ab
eo qui ait, Ecce delebo ut nubem iniquitates tuas, and sicut caliginem peccata
tua. Origin. tom. 6. hom. 17. in Luc. page 145.
that being published they may be lost, and be as if they had not been; and
being dead cease to have been; and that He might kill them, who for us was
killed; for so long as our thoughts are hid, and not brought forth, it was
impossible they should utterly be cut off; therefore we also that have sinned,
ought to say, My sin have I made known unto thee, and my iniquity have I not
hid. I said I will confess my sins against my self unto the Lord. Now if we
would do so, and reveal our sins not only unto God, but unto those also that
are able to heal our wounds, and our effences, our sins shall be blotted out by
him who says, Behold I blot out as a cloud thy sins, and thy iniquity as
darkness. Where is express-mention of Confession unto others besides God, which
may heal us as his instruments, and servants; and it must not be denied, that
his Priests are professed Physicians of this Cure; yet as we see bodily
diseases oftentimes healed by such as make no profession thereof, so it may
fare with the soul-Physician also, the medicine especially coming from heaven.
Nor can a Lay-Physician be void of power to heal, although he has none to
absolve; for God (...) Many times conferreth safety immediately from himself,
and so much those words, Our sins shall be blotted out by him who says, etc.
seem to intimate, Cyprian in his Epistles writes thus; Cum in minoribus
peccatis agant peccatores paenitentiam justo tempore, and secundum disciplinae
ordinem, ad exomologesin veniant, and permanus impositionem Episcopi, aut
Cleri, jus communicationis accipiant. Cypr. l. 3. Epist. 14.
For lesser offenses let sinners take their penance in a just season, and
according to the order of the Discipline, let them be admitted to public
confession, and by the imp^sition of the Bishops hands, Nam cum in minoribus
delictis quae non in D^um committuntur, poenitentia agatur justo tempore, and
exhomologesis fiat, inspecta cjus vita qui poenitentiam; nec ad communicationem
quis venire possit, nisi prius illi ab Episcopo, and Clero manus fuit imposita.
id.
and of the Clergy, restored to the communion. Again, and much to the same
purpose; for sleighty offenses, and those not [directly] committed against God,
public confession may be performed; his life being looked into which is to
undergo the penance; neither may he be admitted to communicate without
imposition of hands from the Bishop, and the Clergy. From these passages B.
Rhenanus collecteth, that secret confession (besides the discipline thereof in
public) for secret sins, Liquet ex citatis Cypriani locis, occultorum scelerum
exhomologesin fuisse secrelam, and sacerdotem pro modo delicti jejunium, and
elecmosynas confitenti injungere. B. Rhen. annot. ad Terr. lib. de poenit.
together with a prescript injunction from the Priest, of fasting, or giving
alms in the penitent, (as the nature of his sin required) to have been on foot
in Cyprians time. In the zealous age of that blessed Martyr, wherein it was
hard to say, whether desire of doing well, or shame for doing evil was greater,
many sinners and lapsed Christians put to public penance, received such peace
of Conscience upon the performance thereof, Salutarem medelam parvis licet, and
modicis vulneribus requirunt. Cypr.
and their reconciliation from the Bishop, that others also voluntarily came
in, and for offenses of lesser nature submitted themselves to the same
discipline. In process of time the resort became so frequent, and the offense
so small, it was thought fit left by often penance, the discipline of open
penance might melt, and grow into contempt, to appoint a fit person, (a
Clergyman I believe) who was to be (...), one that could keep counsel and
(...), of much experience, to distinguish betwixt lepry and lepry, and to give
counsel also, to receive confessions, and inspecta ejus vita qui agit
poenitentiam, and sift into his life that would do penance; and meeting with
such sins as he thought merited public penance, to present the sinner to the
Bishop and Clergy, to be admitted to Exomologesis; so private Confession was
used in Saint Cyprians days, as a preparative, and manuduction to the public;
and occasioned upon the tender consciences of those, whose faith was stronger,
and fear better, whose hearts stood in much awe of God, Audis non fuisse vel
praeceptum, necessarium, vel consuetudinem universalem; dicit enim (Cyprian.)
fuisse exempla quorundam, qui fide majore, and timore meliore erant; non igitur
omnes hoc secerunt, nec damnati fuerunt illi, qui soli Deo talia confessi sunt.
Chemnit. exam. part. 2. page 191.
and whose Consciences awaked upon the least shock of sin; much different both
in the manner, and end, from that rack of Conscience, rather than relief,
popish shrift, as in due place shall appear.

Saint Basil in answer to that demand, whether it were behoofeful (laying shame
aside) to confess our evil actions to all men, or to some, and what conditions
those some should be of; answers thus; The Confession of sins keeps the same
course as the laying open of bodily diseases. (...), Basil. (...). page 528.
Now men do not lay open corporal diseases to every one they meet with, but to
persons skilful in the art of healing; so confession of sins ought to be made
unto such as are able to cure them; according as it is written, You that are
strong bear the infirmities of the weak; that is, take them away by your
careful endeavor. Where care and diligence is equally required in choosing the
Physician, and in curing of the Patient. I dare not peremptorily say the
Physician is ever to be a Priest, and confine this election to that order; yet
it is a duty more expressly required at the bands of that Hierarchy, whose
profession is the art of binding up of wounded Consciences, and their School a
sanctuary for a troubled soul: but of this I am sure, Saint Basils pleasure
was, that the wounds and diseases of the soul should be showed forth to
sub-celestial Physicians: and as B. Rhenanus further alleges him; Confession
is a noble kind of Medicine, Medicina una nobilis confessio fuerit, ac proximis
eam pal^m facere, ut per communem little orationem vitia facilius curentur.
Basil. apud B. Rhen. prefat. ad Tert. de Poen.
opening to our nearest, and dearest acquaintance, that our sins by their
common prayers may be more easily healed.

Saint Hierom upon Ecclesiastes writes thus; If that serpent the Devil shall
have bit any one secretly, Si quem Serpens Diabolus occulte momorderit, and
nullo conscio peccati veneno insecerit, si tacu^rit qui percussus est, and non
egerit poenitentiam, nec vulnus suum fratri, and Magistro voluit consiteri,
Magister qui habet linguam ad curandum, facile ei prodesse non poterit; si enim
erubescat aegrotus vulnus Medico confiteri, quod ignorant medicina non curat.
Hieron. in cap. 10. Eccles. tom. 7. page 43.
and shall have infected him with the poison of sin, no man besides himself
acquainted therewith: If he that is so stricken shall keep silence, and show no
repentance, nor have a will to confess his sin to his Brother, and Master, the
Master that has a tongue to cure him cannot easily avail him any thing; for if
the sick man be ashamed to lay open his would to the Physician, the Physic
cannot cure what it knows not. Hitherto Hierom. This Physician of all
likelihood should be a Priest, because he is called Magister; for by that
title, and of Father, ancient times reverenced their Pastors; however the
adjunct Frater, shows the Physician was not God but man, to whom the wounded
Spirit must be opened.

Saint Augustine upon the Psalm 66. says thus: Be sad before thou do
confess, after confession rejoice, Tristis esto antequam consitearis, confessus
exulta, jam sanaberis. Non confitentis conscientia saniem collegerat, apostema
tumuerat, cruciabat te, requiescere non sinebat; adhibet Medicus fomenta
verborum, and aliquando secat, adhibet medicinale serrum in correptione
tribulationis; tu agnosce Medici manum, confitere, exeat in confessione, and
defluat omnis sanies; jam exulta, jam laetare, quod reliquum est facile
sanabitur. Aug. sup. Psalm. 66.
for withal thou shall be healed. Such a man's Conscience that does not confess
gathers corruption, the apostem is swollen, it torments thee, it suffers
thee not to be at quiet; the Physician applies fomentations of words, and
sometimes lanceth it with the knife of tribulation; do thou acknowledge the
Physicians hand, confess, let out the corruption in confession that it may
flow from thee; rejoice now and be glad, What remains Will easily be cured.
Whether the Lord or the servant be the Physician I resolve not, let the place
be consulted withal.

Saint Chrysostom writing upon the conference betwixt Christ and the woman of
Samaria, related John 4. has these words: Let us imitate this woman, and in
confessing of our sins let us not be ashamed of man; (...). Chrysostom. in Joan.
hom. (...). page 694. Tom. 2.
let us rather (as becomes us) fear God, who sees whatsoever is done for the
present, and for the time to come; will punish whatsoever is not for the
present repented of. Our actions are to the contrary; we fear not him that
shall come to judge; but such as can hurt us little or nothing, we quake and
tremble at, as ashamed of them, but in the very thing we so much feared,
therewithal shall we be punished; for the man that is moved only to be
ashamed before men, and is no whit ashamed to do evil in the sight of the
all-seeing God, neither will repent here, nor be converted; in that day shall
be openly disgraced, and made known not only before two or three, but before
the whole world. It is evident* that this, Patriarch treats of that
confession made before them, of whom carnal men are ashamed, that is, of men
not of God; for such the Father blames that blush not to do evil before God,
but to confess it before man; and affirms how they shall be punished even in
that they so much dreaded, discredit, and disrepute with men; for the day will
come when they, and their actions shall be spread abroad before the face of the
whole world, and thereupon he groundeth this exhortation: Now I beseech you,
(...). ib. lin. 18.
that although no man sees what we do, every man to enter into his own
conscience, and to make reason the judge thereof, and to open the sins he has
committed, and if he would not they should come to publication at that d^eadful
day, let him procure his wounds forthwith to be heal^d, and the medicine of
repentance to be applied. It is apparent that confession before man (which with
sensual men implies shame and dishonor, as drawing their works out of
darkness into light) is there meant, and not secret confession unto God,
whereof they little pass; it being their disposition to be more in awe of being
ashamed before Israel and this Sun, than before the God of Israel.

Pacianus has left behind him thus; I beseech you, Ergo vos fratres etiam pro
periculo meo per illum Dominum, quem occulta non fallunt, desinite vulneratam
tegere conscientiam: Prudentes aegri medicum non verentur, ne in occultis
quidem partibus, etiam secaturos, etiam perusturos. Pacian. in peraen. ad Poen.
Brethren, upon my peril, by that God whom no secrets deceive, that you desist
from covering a wounded conscience; sick men that have understanding fear not
the Physicians, though they be wounded in their secret parts; Nunc ad eos sermo
sit, qui been, ac sapienter vulnera sua poenitentiae nomine confitentes, nec
quid sit poenitentia, nec quae vulnerum medicina noverunt; similesque sunt
illis, qui plagas quidem aperiunt, ac tumores, medicisque etiam assidentibus
confitentur; sed admoniti, quae imponenda sunt negligunt, and quae biben^^a
fastidiunt. ib.
and they lance and sear there: and rebuking those that confess their sins, and
take no course to forsake them, he says, Let us now speak of such who well and
wisely under the title of being penitent, confess their wounds, but little know
what repentance means, or any medicine for their wounds; and are like to such
which open their grief, and swelling, and confess them before Physicians met
together, but being admonished what things to apply, and what to drink, neglect
the use of such prescribed receipts.

Saint Bernard, a Father also, though born out of due time, says thus; What
shall I speak of Bethphage, a village of Priests, Quid de Bethphage dicam
viculo Sacerdotum, ubi and confessionis Sacramentum, and Sacerdotalis
Ministerii mysterium continetur? -- Scriptum est, Prope est verbum in ore tuo,
and in cord tuo, non in altero tautum, sed simul in utroque verbum habere
memineris; and quidem verbum in cord peccatoris operatur salutiferam
contritionem, verbum vero in ore tuo noxiam tollit confusionem, ne impediat
necessariam confessionem. Bern. Sermon. ad Milites Templi. cap. 12.
where the Sacrament of Confession, and the mystery of Priestly Ministry is
contained, -- as it is written, The word is near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, Deuteronomy. 32. and remember thou to have the word not in one of those places,
but in both; for the word in the heart of a sinner works saving contrition,
and the word in the mouth takes away all prejudicial confusion, that it may be
no hindrance to necessary confession. At which Testimony startle not, that
Confession is called a Sacrament; that is, not in a proper signification, but
as he calls the Ministry a Mystery, and considering the age this good man
lived, marvel not to find in him a little touch of the times; great is his
praise to have been so little defiled.

Concerning the School-Divines, they are absolute for confession to be made
unto man, that make it a matter necessary to salvation to confess our sins
either actually or promissorily unto a Priest; All that may be doubted is,
whether they grant that sins are of a Lay-cognizance or no, that is, whether
they may be confessed to any man except a Priest. Their Master shall be the
Mouth to speak for all, who proposes this Question; Whether it may be
sufficient to confess unto a Layman? and answers, An sufficiat cons^teri
L^ico? -- Sacerdotis examen requirendum est sludiose, -- si tamen defuerit
Sacerdos, proximo vel socio est facienda confessio; si ille cui consit^bitur,
potestatem non halen solvendi, fit tamen dignus veniae Sacerdotis desiderto.
Lomb. lib. 4. d. 17.
that all dil gent enquiry must be made for a Priest, -- but in case a Priest
cannot be had, let confession be made to a neighbor, or companion; and tells
us, that it will not be labor lost, for albeit such a Confessor be not endowed
with power to absolve, yet the penitent becomes worthy of pardon for the desire
he had to confess unto a Priest.

Bonaventure allows of confession to a Lay man, but with this distinction: If
(says he) Confession be considered as a virtuous act, De Confessione possumus
loqui dupliciter; u^o modo prout est opus v^^tutis direcle repugnans hypocrisi,
in quo quis seipsum accusat, ne alius sit quam appareat, v^l mala su^^ aper^^
ad investig and am curationem; and hoc modo confessio potest fieri cuilibet
^^am L^ico, qui potest ad^uvare etitam instruendo, vel orando, and de quo homo
potest erubescere, and humlia^^, and ille exemplo hu^il^tatis m^li^^ tri, non
peccatorum cog^itione deprava^^: alto modo prout con^essio est opus
Sacramentale, and p^out o^d^^^tur ad reconciliationem, etc. Bon. l. 4. l. 17.
opposite to hypocrisy, wherein the party accuses himself, that he may appear
no otherwise than he is indeed; or else laying open his sins to find the means
to heal them; in this sense confession may be made to any Layman, who may give
help by his instructions, and prayers; and of which may arise shame, and
humiliation, and he that takes the confession may himself thereby be amended,
but as it is a Sacramental act, and relates to reconciliation, so to the
Priest only, etc. Wherein we see that confession to a Lay-brother is approved;
and the good that comes thereby expressed: (...).
Naaman received the first direction for the curing of his Leprosy from a
Captive maid; even a little chance may cast in light, and from men that make no
profession thereof may issue words of wisdom.

And of what power and virtue Confession to a Layman is, give ear unto the
ensuing story. A Priest there was somewhat too familiar with a Gentleman's wife
of his parish, Cujus uxorem Sacerdos per adulterium maculavit.
(and as report then went, such kind of dealings were familiar with them)
whereof the husband had some jealousy; it fortuned that at the next village
there was a Demoniack that used to upbraid such as came unto him, by ripping up
all such sins as lay behind unconfessed; marry, over confessed sins he had no
power of discovery. The Gentleman to make a trial, entreated the Priest to
accompany him thither. The Priest could not refuse him, but smelling his
intent, pretended some natural necessity of bending in the stable, where
chancing upon a servant of the Gentleman's, he cast himself down at his feet,
Rogo ut propter Dominum confessionem audias.
and desires him to hear his confession; which made, he desired his penance
forthwith. The servant (this being none of his trade) bad him take such penance
as himself was wont to prescribe unto his fellow Priest in the like case,
Quantum alteri Sacerdoti pro tali crimine injungeretis, hoc sit satisfactio
vestra.
and so dismissed him to his Master; along they went to him that was troubled
with the unclean spirit, where the Gentleman began to enquire, Know you any
thing by me, or by this Sir Domine here? poynting to the Priest; who answered
in the vulgar tongue, I know nothing by him; but in I atin gave the Priest an
Item, which none there but himself understood, in stabulo justificatus est, N^c
tamen tacere licuit, ut virtutem confessionis Sacerdoti ostende^^t. Spec.
exampl. did. 4. sect. 4.
he was assoyled in the stable; as not permitted to reveal unto the Gentleman
the sin committed, nor yet suffered to conceal from the Priest the virtue of
confession. Here is confession to a Layman, and that from a Priest, as much as
was looked for, and absolution from a Lay-hand likewise, more than could be
expected; and how availeable confession to a Layman in a Jakes from a Priest
is in such Priestly cases: But leaving such Spectra, and (...) to be believed
by such as are given over to believe illusions, Let us remove unto the other
side, and see the opinion of men (as we imagine) of a more refined judgment.

Calvin says thus; There follows that secret confession which is made unto
God, Arcanam illam confessionem quae D'o sit sequitur voluntaria apud homine^
confessio, quoties id vel di^^nae gloriae, v^l humiliationis nostrae interest.
Calv. Inst. lib 3. c. 4. Sec. 10.
a voluntary confession also unto men, so often as it shall be held expedient
for Gods glory and our humiliation. And in another place the same man telling
us of two forms of Confession seen in the Scripture, of which one is for
reconcilement to an offended Brother; Sentit Jacob^s ut nostras infir^^tates
alter alteri d^tegentes, coasilio, and consolatione ^^^tud^^^s juvem^s. ib.
sect. 12.
another to a Brother also for reconcilement, but with God; of this writes
thus; St James in those words would have us to understand, that detecting our
infirmities one to another, we should aid our selves with mutual counsel, and
consolation; where Counsel and Consolation is the scope of this confession, and
that end, one who is not of the Clergy may afford.

Calvin is thought of some to be too precise, and rigid in his Tenets; let a
moderate man speak, Cassander who delivers it as a conclusion agreed upon by
the Protestants of Germany; for that many sinners in doubtful cases have need
of counsel, Multi propter ambiguos casus opus habent consilio, ideo hortandi
sunt homines, ut addant enumerationem, ut juvari consilio, atque excitari magis
ad poenitentiam, and de multis rebus admoneri possint. Cassand. consult. art.
11. de Confess.
therefore men are to be exhorted, to number out their sins in confession, that
they may be relieved by counsel, be the more excited to repentance, and
admonished of many matters. Equidem credo hac de re controversiam nullam fuisse
futuram, si non salutaris haec consitendi medicina, ab imperitis, and
importunis Medicis multis inutilibus traditiunculis infecta, and contaminata
fuisset, quibus, conscientiis (quas extricare, and levare debebant) laqueos
injecerunt, and tanquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt, -- huic rei
occurretur, si pii tantum ac prudentes viri huic ^^ilissimo and sanctissimo
audiendae confessionis and absolutionis impartiendae Ministerio praeficiantur.
Id. ib.
The same prudent Divine was of opinion, that there had been no controver sit
about this point, if this healing medicine of Confession had not been by many
unskilful and unseasonable Physicians infected, and defiled with many, and
those unprofitable, traditions, whereby they have cast snares upon the
Consciences, and much tortured the same, which they ought to have eased and
freed from such intanglings; and tells us, that the only help, and redress of
this abuse is, if Godly and wise men were substituted, to this most holy and
profitable ministry of hearing Confessions, and granting absolutions.

I shall make up this point with the testimony of a domestic Divine Dr Willet;
Willet. Synops. controv. 14. Qu. 6. Sect. 2. of auric. Confession. p. 645.
who has these words, Confession of sins such as the Scripture allows, we
acknowledge. There are private Confessions either to God alone, as Daniel
confesses, 9.4. or for the easing of our Consciences, to man also, as to him
whom we have offended, Matthew. 5.24. or to any other faithful man, the Minister,
or some other that we may be helped, and comforted by our mutual prayers; thus
he. And surely this detection of sins is so evident an introduction for a
remedy and ease against them, that even natural men with half an eye have
discerned it, Plutarch by name; Thou say unto a vicious man, Tu dicis
vitioso homini, cum vitiis tuis te abde, morbunque insanabilem and p^stilentem
perfer, celaque invidiam, vel superstitionem veluti palpitationes quasdam, and
tradere te eis qui docere, vel sanare possunt, cave; At vero Prisci aegrotos
suos in publico propon bant, ut praetereuntium quivis, si quid vel ipse in
codem morbo conflictatus, vel similiter laboranti opitulatus, medelae nosceret,
id aegrotanti signi ficaret; aiuntque artem hoc modo experientia adjuvante
crevisse; hoc modo etiam vitae vitia animique prav is affectiones expediebat
detegere, ut cuivis liceret, (iis inspectis, and consideratis) dicere, iratus
et? hoc cave; rivalitate vexaris? istud facito; amas? ipse quoque aliquando
amavi, sed resipui. Nam dum vitia suanegant, occultant, velant, penitus ea in
sese desigunt. Plut. de occulte vivend. Xyland. Interp. p. 116.
hide thy self with thy vices, endure thy pestilent and dangerous disease,
conceal the envy, and superstition, as certain pantings, and beware thou give
not thy self to such as can instruct and heal thee: But the Ancients exposed
their sick men to open view, that such as passed by, and had been sick of the
same disease, or had given ease, and help thereunto, might signify so much
unto the sick man; and they affirm, that the art it self improved by such
experience, to have been much bettered thereby, and increased. In like manner
it may seem expedient to lay open the sins of our life, and the evil affections
of the mind, that it may be lawful for any man, beholding and considering the
same, to say, Art thou angry? take heed of this; Art thou vexed with jealousy?
do this; Art thou in love? I my self was so; but have repented. Now whiles some
men hide their vices, deny, and conceal them, what do they but fasten them more
thoroughly, and surely to themselves?

CHAP. VI.
The Contents.
Diverse offices and administrations in the Church. The peoples confession unto
John at Jordan, wherein they were particular. The Confession of the Believers
at Ephesus to Saint Paul. Proofs from the Fathers for Confession to the Priests
of the Gospel. Such Confession withdraws not from God, but leads to him.
Testimonies of the worthiest Divines of the Church of England for confession,
seconded with Divines of the Reformation from the Churches beyond the Seas.

GODS Church is a body consisting of diverse members, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5.
so necessary as none can be missed; so distinct, as none can be confounded; so
decent, as none can be vilified; so useful, as none can be spared; and so
subordinate, as none can be translated: all of them distinguished in their
places, functions and offices, and enabled with gifts for administrations, and
with administrations for operations. In this holy calling there is, 1. (...),
God inabling, whom he calls; and (...), 2. the administration he calls to
Minister unto, for every vocation is an office, and employment; 3. and (...),
works and uses; for this office is not idle but laborious.
Now all of these are diverse in themselves, but not in their Author. The gifts
are not alike, yet from the same Spirit; the ministrations are different, yet
from the same Lord; the operations are distinct, yet from the same God that
works all in all. In. S. ordine discrimen gradu and potestate.
Amongst which the Lords Officers are diverse; He has set in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, fourthly, helps and
governments, fifthly, diversities of Tongues. The Ministry is a function
distinct from other offices in kind, and in it self in degree also; and the end
whereof the common good of the Church; Quorsum depluere de coelo jussit varia
haec donorum genera benignissimum Numen, nisi humani generis utilitati,
communique faluti consuleret? quorsum caeco pedes, claudo oculi, nisi ut
commodet ille oculos, commodet ille Pedes. Canalicul^m te fecit ille, qui fecit
no^ cisternam. Columb. Noae. page 13. Jos. Hall. Rever. Epis. Exon.
for to what purpose did our bountiful God command these gifts to come down
from heaven in a full shower, but for the common profit, and salvation of
mankind? why has the blind his f^et, and the lame his eyes, but by mutual
help, and lending, to supply their own wants? in good sooth thy Creator has
made thee a con^uit for conveyance, not a cistern for enclosure; as our English
not Seneca now, but Chrysostom preached. Recourse then must be had to each
several Officer pro re nata, as the subject matter shall require. No man asks
of the hand to see, or of the foot to hear, or of the ear to handle; if thou
need Spiritual gifts, repair unto the Lords Stewards; if healing of spiritual
diseases, apply thy self to the Lords Physicians; if to be restored to the lost
savor of God, address thy self to those that have the word of R^co^ciliation:
thou see (good Reader) whither this discourse tends, to send a Penitent
with his sins in his mouth unto a Priest, who by reason of his place is to take
notice thereof, as in its place shall more fully appear. Now only for the
lawfulness, and practice thereof we are to see what countenance the Scripture,
Divines, Ancient and Modern, lend thereunto.

When John appeared in the wilderness preaching, and baptizing, there the
people flocked in such abundance, Mat. 3.
that the Cities and Villages seemed to be desolate, and the wilderness
replenished: from Jerusalem the head City, and Juda the head tribe they resort
unto him, and were baptized, confessing their sins to him no question, that
baptized them. The Prea^hers text was Repentance, and his ministering of Baptism
conduced thereunto; so near is the resemblance and affinity between Baptism and
Repentance, that by the one is sometimes meant the other, and both have the
promise remission of sins. The people submitting thenselves to be baptized,
confessed their uncleanness; when John saw that Christ would be baptized, he
admired, as knowing of no cause he had so to do; there was no spot in him that
needed to ^epurged with this Laver, which occasioned him first to forbid him,
as if he should say, The whole need not this Physic, this Bath is for the
diseased, and this Hospital for the weak and sickly; and then to propose this
Question; I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? q. d. I
have need, thou have none; I have need of thee, thou have none of me; but for
this people, they have need. Therefore as under the Law the offender brought
his trespass offering unto the Priest, thereby implying his sin, Testimonium
peenitent^^e fuit haec confessio. Calvin.
so did the people confess their sins by being baptized into the remission of
them; no less than a man should confess his felony in suing to his Prince for a
pardon. Besides this act of theirs, (...).
they made a vocal expression of their sins, for no less do the words import,
not intimating, but expressing, as the sinner did over the Sacrifice the sin
that he had done; and so did they upon their baptism the sins that they had
committed, and that not in a general way, how they had sinned, Quod cujusque
est, etiam proprium alicui esse dicitur.
and were sinners, for that upon the matter is nothing now; because non posse
non peccare, not to be able to refrain from sin, is a heavy yoke upon the necks
of all the children of Adam; that we may safely give the lie to him that shall
say he is without sin; this infirmity being as proper to our corrupt nature,
Aliud est agnoscere se peccatorem, aliud peccata sua alicui consiteri. Bellar.
l. 3. de Poen. c. 3. p. 1360.
as to laugh, and be reasonable to our pure; then for a man to confess, I am a
sinner, is no more as the world now goes with him, than to say I am a
reasonable, or a smiling creature. But it is one thing for a man to acknowledge
himself to be a sinner, and another, to confess his sins unto another; Sins
were then rehearsed unto John, not after a general fashion, but with specialty,
(...).
and so much the article imports, their sins; that is, such as every man had
committed in particular, and which for the present stuck upon his Conscience;
As we say of Merchants coming to a Fair, (...). Act. 2.45.
they opened their wares; meaning such special traffic as each particular
Merchant traded in. And as the Believers are said to sell their possessions and
goods, that is, such as every one was peculiarly seized of: And those that used
curious arts, to burn their books before all men; that is, such wherein each
singular man was studied: (...), Act. 19.19.
So they confessed their sins, that is, such as they had done; not that they
were sinners only, Non simpliciter fatebantur peccata, sed sua ipsorum
peccata, prout alii ebrietati, alii luxuriae, alii avaritiae, alii irae, alii
hypocrisi dediti magis erant, -- and haec ipsa in quae labebantur, alii aliter,
illa etiam propria confessione exprimebant. Beaux-amis Harmon. Tom. 1. page 394.
but their sins, and that not in general terms but distinctly; this man his
drunkenness, and that his whoredom, and a third his covetousness, and a
fourth his hypocrisy, and so in order such offenses, whereof they were
especially guilty, and in their Consciences stood convicted. Acts 19.18. The
Syriack Paraphrast tendreth the same expressly thus: (...) and multi de illis
qui crediderunt venichant, and annunciabant delicta sua, and id quod fecerant
confitebantur. N. T. Sir. Viennae impress. Widmanstadii opera. A. D. 1555.


The first Christians that came to Confession were the believing Jews, and
Greeks that dwelt at Ephesus; that came and confessed, and showed their deeds.
Paul having been at great pains in his Ministry at Ephesus, in baptizing,
persuading, and disputing both in the Synagogue, and in the School of Tyrannus,
it pleased God to countenance, and confirm his labors with miracles;
performed not only by the immediate hands of Paul, but by such utensils that
were taken from his body, and applied unto them that were vexed with diseases,
and unclean Spirits, and they were cured; insomuch that certain Conjurers
observing in whose name and power the Apostle had wrought all this, presumed to
take that sacred name into their profane mouths, and to call over those that
were possessed, thereby easing them, but pulling the misery upon their own
heads: foolish Charmers, freeing others from the Devil, and themselves becoming
his prey. (...). Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 4. p. 838.
Upon this event the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, such as were guilty
of such spells were terrified, and to prevent the like danger, came and
confessed, etc. They Confessed then, that is evident, and something it was they
confessed, and somebody to whom: The party then to whom; the matter, what; and
the manner how must be explained: 1. He to whom without all doubt was Saint
Paul, for had the party been God, they need not to have come for audience, who
hears when we cry from the utmost parts of the earth; to whom the East and
West Indies are but as the right and left ear; their coming then to confess,
argues that it was to such an one, that could not hear much further than he
saw. They came then to the School of Tyrannus, where Saint Paul exercised, and
there were heard. 2. And the contents of their confession were their deeds;
that is, their evil deeds, for we heard it was a fright that drive them to this
confession; Metu divini judicii territi errata sua professi, ac detestati sunt.
Bez. annot. in Act. 19.
and good actions are matter of hope, and not of dread: a sense of the
punishment of sin in others drive them to a Conscience and confession of their
own; thereupon Chrysostom expounds it in the testimony last alleged, they
accused themselves; now if their deeds had been any other than sinful, the
relating thereof had rather justified than condemned them; Syriaca editio
disertis verhis reddidit offensas. Bell. l. 3. de Poen. c. 4. vide supra.
add hereunto the Syriack Edition, which expressly reads offenses. 3. And for
the manner, it skils not much whether it were privately performed, or in
public, the circumstances are more probable that it was public; and very
clear that it was in specie distinct; of some select, and special sins,
Levantine Countries were too much addicted, viz.
Magical charms, and Conjuration; and in detestation of this sin, they
brought their books which taught them such curious arts, and committed them to
the open flames; and the using of two words, to confess and prodentes. (...).
show forth give no less, and the latter word (...), intimating to set forth as
in a Pageant the story of their lives; the Syriac word (...) Being of the same
signification with the Hebrew (...) to number, q^d. numbering out their offenses
one after another: thus we have a confession of sins, and that distinct, and
that unto a Churchman, (...). Oecumen. in Act. Ap. Tom. 1. page 147. Paris
1631.
Saint Paul, whereupon the Greek Schools ground this exhortation; it behooves
every faithful man to utter his sins, and to submit himself to be censured for
the same, so as he may commit them no more, that he may be justified, according
as it is written. Declare thou thy sins first that thou may be justified.
And Erasmus this collection; That anciently there was some confession made of
an evil life, Vel hinc colligi potest fuisse and antiquitus nonnullam
confessionem male actae vitae, sed apertam (ut opinor) and in genere, quam nec
ipsam legimus exactam abs quoquam; Caeterum quae nunc recepta est clancularia,
and in aurem sit, videtur ex consultationibus privatis esse nata, quae solent
apud Episcopos fieri, si quis scrupulus urgeret anim^m. Erasm. annot. in Act.
Apost. c. 19. p. 315.
but that public (as he imagined) and general, and that not exact^d from any;
howbeit Auricular confession now in use seems to have taken its beginning
from certain consultations made with the Bishops in private, when any scruple
lay upon the soul. The former part of his words making good what we purposed;
that in the Primitive Church there was confession of sins unto the Pastor, we
examine not whether private or public, general or special, of some or of all
offenses. And the passage concerning the original of Clancular Confession will
be considered of, in its proper place.

Thus far from the word of God, now from the words of holy men; and in the
first place we will set Dionysius Areopagita, leaving out that controversy
whether the works under his name be his or no, seeing all Divines confess the
Author to be of great Antiquity: he therefore in an Epistle to Demophylus,
reprehending his insolent carriage toward a Priest, and a Penitent, relates
the abuse thus: Thou (as thy letters mention) whilst a sinner falling down
humbled h^mself unto the Priest, Tu (ut tuae literae indicant) procidentem
Sacerdoli impium, ut ais, atque peccatorem nescio quo pacto contra disciplinae
ordinem astans, calce abjecisti, and repulisti, cum ille quidem verecunde (ut
oportuit) sateretur se ad peccatorum rem^dia quaerenda venisse. Dionys. Epist.
8. Interpret Ambr. Camaldulense.
(I know not by what means standing by, against the discipline of the Church)
did spurn him back with thy foot, whereas he in a lowly manner (as behoved
him) confessed that he came to seek the remedies for his sins. By which it is
apparent, how the sinner humbled himself unto the Priest, sought the best
remedies against sin, such as were repentance, pardon, and Ghostly counsel,
which could not be well prescribed without making his case known unto the
Priest, to whom he resorted for a remedy; where the contemptuous carriage of an
insolent Deacon toward the poor Penitent that confessed, and the Priest that
received him, is rebuked in that Epistle.

Origin succeeds, who describing seven sorts or means to obtain forgiveness
of sins, whereof the last is repentance, writes thus; The seventh, though
painful, and laborious, Est adhuc and septima licet dura, and laboriosa, per
poenitentiam remissio peccatorum cum lavat Peccator in laerimis stratum suum,
and siunt ei lacrimae panes die ac nocte; and non crubescit Sacerdoti Dei
indicare peccatum suum, and quaerere medicinam, secundum eum qui ait, Dixi
pronunciabo adversum me, etc. Origin. homil. 2. in Levit. tom. 1. p. 68.
is remission of sins upon repentance, when a sinner watreth his couch with
tears, and tears become his bread day and night; and when he blusheth not to
show his sins unto the Lords Priest, and to seek for Medicine, according to him
who said, I said, I will confess etc. Against this testimony there stands like
a hand in the Margin, Sacramental confession, set there by Genebrard the
publisher of that Edition, to fetch his Reader over; as if Auricular Confession
(as it now goes for current at Rome) had been alive in the days of Origin;
doing herein, as sorry Painters when the Picture cannot show it self, subscribe
at the foot his name, whom they meant it for. Now how remote Origens meaning is
from the present Roman practice, will better appear hereafter.

Saint Cyprian thus; I beseech every one of you Brethren to confess his sin
while life remains, Consiteamur singuli quaeso vos, (fratres) delictum suum,
dum adhuc qui deliquit in seculo est, dum admitti ejus confessio potest, dum
satisfactio, and remissio facta per Sacerdotes apud Dominum grata est;
convertamu^ ad Dominum mente tota, and poenitentiam criminis veris doloribus
exprimentes, Dei misericordiam deprecemur. Cypr. de laps.
and your confession may be admitted; whilst satisfaction and remission made
by the Priest may be accepted with the Lord. Let us be converted unto the Lord
with all our mind, and expressing the repentance of our sin with unfeigned
sorrow, pray unto God for mercy. It is evident that this exhortation is to make
confession unto the Priest, for he was to make the atonement, and procure a
pardon, and for that a little before the Father commended their zeal, Hoc ipsum
apud Sacerdotes Dei dolenter and simpliciter confitentes, etc. Cypr. ib.
that laid open their Cabinet sins, the very thoughts of their heart full
sadly, and sincerely unto Gods Priests; and my Reader will remember what B.
Rhenanus, a man much versed in antiquity, and of a discerning spirit collected
from these and such like passages from Saint Cyprian.

Gregory Nyssen addresseth himself unto a sinner in these words: Be sensible of
thy present disease, afflict thy self all thou can, (...). Greg. Ness.
append. operum de poenit. Paris. p. 175, 176.
seek also the mourning of such Brethren as are after thine own heart to help
thee to liberty, show forth thy bitter and excessive tears, that I may mingle
mine; Take also the Priest unto thee to associate as a Father, and participate
of thy affl^ctions. For what man can so falsely wear the title of a Father, and
be endowed with so hard and adamantine a breast, as not to condole with his
sorrowing children? Then after some passages, how a good Priest bewaileth their
sin, as Jacob did at the sight of Joseph's coat, and David upon the news of
Absalons death, Eli his graceless sons, and Moses the rebellious people; and
that spiritual children are nearer to them that have begotten them in the Lord,
then the fruit of the body can be to fleshly Parents: The way thus made, he
exhorts, Show unto him [the Priest] boldly without blushing such things as
have been hidden, display the secrets of thy soul, open they concealed grief as
to a Physician, he will have a care and be tender of thy reputation and safety.

Paulinus writing the Life of Saint Ambrose, makes relation of his behavior in
receiving Penitents, after this manner: whenever any came unto him,
confessing their faults, Quotiescunqueilli aliquis ad percipiendam poenitentiam
lapsus suos confessus est, ita flebat, ut and illum slere compelleret;
videbatur ^tiam sibi cum jacente jacere; causas autem crimnum quas illi
confitchantur, nulli nisi Damino soli, apud quem intercedebat, loqu. batur.
Paulin. in vita Ambrosii.
to undergo their penance, be would shed tears in such abundance as to force
the sinner to weeping; seeming as if he had fall^n with him into the same
offense. The causes of their sins which they confessed unto him he never opened
his lips of, save unto the Lord only, unto whom he interceded on their behalf.
Blessed Father, were our Ghostly Fathers thus compassionate, and reserved, they
could not want Penitents. Thy discreet and zealous managing of the keys in the
case of Theodosius, has, and shall make thee famous to all posterity.

Saint Basil setting down the pious intention, and good pleasure of God for a
sinners conversion, and the manner of that conversion to consist in repentance,
and the fruits thereof, concludes thus: It is necessary to confess our sins to
them who are trusted, (...). Basil (...) Page 542.
and credited with the dispensation of the mysteries of God. So the Penitents
of old are found to have done before holy men, for it is written in the Gospel
that they confessed their sins to John the Baptist; and in the Acts, all of
them to the Apostles, of whom they were baptized.

Pacianus in his Paraenesis or Exhortation to Repentance, thus. I appeal unto
you, Brethren, who having committed sins refuse repentance; Vos appello
sratres, qui criminibus admissis poenitentiam recusatis, vos (inquam) post
impudentiam timidos, post peccata verecundos, qui peccare non erubescitis, and
erubescitis confiteri. -- Ecce iterum Apostolus ad Sacerdotem, manus cito nulli
imponas, nec communices peccaris alienis. Quid facies tu qui decipis
Sacerdotem? qui aut ignorantem fallis, aut non ad plenum scientem probandi
difficultate confundis. Parian. in paraen. sive libel. de Poenit.
to you (I say) that after impudence are afraid, and after sinning shamefaced,
which blush not to sin, but blush to confess; and a little after; Behold what
the Apostle says to the Priest, Lay hands suddenly on none, left thou
participate of their sins; what will thou do deceiving the Priest? who either
deceivest him as ignorant, or confoundest him as not fully instructed, with
difficulty of proving.

Legimus in Levitico de leprosis, ubi jubentur ut ostendant se* Sacerdotibus,
and si lepram habuerint tunc a Sacerdote immundi siant -- sic and hic solvit
and ligat Episcopus and Presbyter non eos qui insontes sunt vel nox^i, sed pro
officio suo cum peccatorum audicrit varietates, s^it qui ligandus sit, quive
solvendus. H^eron. Comment. in Matthew. 16
Saint Hierom commenteth thus; We read in Levitious of the Lepers, where they
are commanded to show themselves unto the Priests, and if they be found to be
lepers, the Priest is to denounce them unclean -- So does the Bishop and Priest
bind and loose not such as are infected, and guilty; but when by virtue of
their office having heard the diversity of sins, they may know who is fit to be
bound and who to be loosed. These words will come under our bands again in the
point of Absolution; here they stand to tell us that the Priest was made
acquainted with the variety of sin, the thing intended.

Saint Ambrose, mentioning diverse sins which amongst others are to be repented
of, and abstained from after Repentance, has these words. Non solum post
poenitentiam abistis intus homo se observare debet, sed and ante poenitentiam,
dum sanus est, quia nescit si possit ipsam poenitentiam accipere, and confiteri
Deo and Sacerdoti peccata sua. Ambr. exhort. ad poenit.
A man not only after Repentance ought to preserve himself inwardly from these
sins, but before Repentance, while he is yet whole; for he knows not
certainly if he shall be able to take his penance, and to confess his sins to
God and the Priest.

Saint Augustine incountring that opinion, that because God knows all,
hears all, and pardons all, therefore inward repentance, and confession
unto him is sufficient, without any external declaration thereof before man,
reasons thus; Let no man say to himself, I do it secretly, I do it before
God, Nemo sibi dicat occulte, ago apud Deum, ago, novit Deus qui mihi ignoscit,
quia in cord ago: Ergo sine causa dictum est, quae solveritis in terra erunt
soluta in coelo; ergo sine causa sunt claves datae Ecclesiae Dei? frustramus
Evangelium Dei? frustramus verba Christi? promittimus vobis quod ille negat?
nonne vos decipimus? Aug. hom. 49. ex. 50. cap. 3.
God who pardons me knows that I do it with my heart; was it therefore spoken
without cause, whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven;
are the keys therefore without cause given unto the Church of God? do we
frustrate the Gospel of God? do we frustrate the words of Christ? do we promise
that to you which he denies you? do we deceive you? There is not (I think) any
Christian living that dares to gainsay confession unto God, or the promise of
forgiveness annexed thereunto. Let not then (good people) such Divines be
mistaken, as to withdraw you from confession unto God, when they send you unto
men. They put you not out of the way, but instruct you in the same; think not
then that by so doing you go from God to man, but by man to God; for your way
you may miss of, for all your pretended skill, and need a guide; and being in
your journey may be to seek, and doubtful of your way, may ask of man where it
lies. And if you stand so much of your immediate access unto God, and mercy,
either deny the means which God has appointed, or censure him of weakness, for
instituting such means of so small use, that the end may usually be attained
without them. Indeed the poor esteem of Reconciliation in the hand of
Priesthood is such, that Priests may hang their harps upon the willowes, and
wear their keys under their girdle, and there keep them till they rust, before
any man crave the use. So low and flat seem the power of the keys, and the
promise upon the same, which Christ bestowed upon the Church, in most peoples
eyes; as if by this supine neglect of theirs they would frustrate, as much as
in them lies, the Lords own ordinance; But more hereof hereafter.

In the days of Leo the first, who sat in the Chair at Rome, Anno Dom. 440.
usque ad an. 461. the discipline of public Exomologesis was become too austere
in those dainty times, and began to be confined to private walls, and ears; and
for that change sundry reasons are rendered by Leo, which shall be alleged when
the institution of Auricular confession is debated: therefore after he had
given order for the removal of public confession, which he calls improbabilis
consuetudo, a custom not to be allowed, of, he resolves, That it is
sufficient if the guilt of men's Consciences be declared in secret confession to
the Priests alone; Ne de singulorum peccatorum genere libellis scripta
confessio public recit^tur, cum reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis
Sacerdotibus indicari confessione secreta -- sufficit illa Confessio quae
primum Deo offertur, tum etiam Sacerdoti, qui pro delictis Poenitentium etiam
precator accedit. Leo Epist. 80. ad Episc. Campan.
And concludes, that Confession to be sufficient, which is tendered first unto
God, and then unto the Priest, who comes in as an intercessor for the sins of
the Penitent.

Next to Leo the first of that name, I place Gregory the first of that name,
and Prelate of the same Sea also; who alluding to the raising and rising of
Lazarus from the Grave, says thus; To Lazarus it is sa^d come forth, Lazaro
dicitur, veni for as, acsi aperte cuilibet mortuo in culpa diceretur, Cur reatum
tuum infra conscientiam tuam abscondis? for as jam per confessionem egredere,
qui apud te interius per abn^gationem lates: v^niat itaque for as mortuus, i. e.
culpam confiteatur peccator, venientem vero for as solvant discipuli, ut
Pastores Ecclesiae ei poenam debeant amovere quam meruit, qui non crubuit
confiteri quod fecit. Greg. hom. super Evang. cum esset: Sero.
as if it were distinctly said to every one dead in sin, why hidest thou thy
guilt within thy Conscience? go forth now by Confession, who lie hid inwardly
in thy self by dissembling. Let then the dead come forth; that is, let the
sinner confess his sin, and when he is come forth, let the disciples loose
him, that the Pastors of the Church may remove the punishment he had deserved,
that was not ashamed to confess what he had committed.

Alcuinus born in this Isle of Great Britain, Joan. Major. de Gest. Scotorum,
lib. 2. c. 13.
and deputed Professor at Paris by Clarlemaine, who laid the foundation of that
University; who writing to the Scots his Contrymen, and commending much
their chaste conversation amongst their secular affairs, nevertheless blames
them for not resorting to Confession, in this sort; It is said that no man of
the Laity will make his confession unto the Priests, Dicitur neminem ex Laicis
saam velle confessionem Sacerdotibus dare, quos a D^o Christo cum sanctis
Apostolis ligandi solvendique potestatem accep^sse credimus. Alcuin. Epist. 28.
edit. Henr. Canisii.
whom we bel^eve to have received from Christ, who is God, the power of binding
and loosing, together with the holy Apostles. As in Scotland the inhabitants
are censured for their remisness; So in England, some about the same time are
commended for the practique of Confession; and namely, one Adamantus in Bid,
that being much terrified for grievous sins committed in his youth; He resorted
unto a Priest, by whom he hoped the way of salvation might be showed unto him,
Accedens ad Sacerdotem, a quo sibi sperabac iter salutis posse demonstrari,
conf^ssus est reatum suum, petiitque ut consilium sibi daret, quo p^ssit fugere
a ventura Dei ^ra. Bed. hist. Angl. l. 4. cap. 24.
he confessed his guilt, and entreated that he would give him counsel whereby
he might fly from the wrath of God which was to come. And in Ireland, for the
glory of his Majesty's Dominions, Saint Bernard witnesses; That Malachias did
of new institute the most wholesome use of confession, Usum saluber^imum
confessionis de novo instit it. Bern. in vita Malac.
which before his time the Irish were ignorant of, or did neglect Add hereunto
what Joannes Major says of a Monastery up in Bedes times, where he professed;
That before the death of any Religious person in that Covent the^e was a
strange sound heard, In Monaslerio Mekosensi ant^ mortem sonum mirab^lem in
templo, vel claustro se audire dicunt, qui alicuius Religiosi mortis est
nun^ius; propterea ad confessionem omnes (sono audito) se preparant.
which tolled all the Religious, (each man suspecting himself) to prepare
themselves unto confession. Whether this sound were a false noise or not, is
not the question; (for mine Author avoucheth it rather for a populous rumor,
then a credible report) but that whereof I take notice is, how upon any
summons, or peril of death, Communem plebis opinion^m, and non fidei materiam
recito. Joan. Major. de Gest. Scotor. lib. 2. cap. 12.
confession was accounted a good preparation for a good end, and a quiet
settling of the soul and Conscience.

Inprimis confitendum Deo est, postea etiam Sacerdoti, propterea quod confessio
quae fit Sacerdoti, in hoc nobis adminiculum praebet, ut accepto salutari ab
eis consilio, saluberrimis poenitentiae observationibus, seu mutuis orationibus
peccatorum maculas diluamus. Theodulp. lib. de Ecclesiast. observe. apud. B.
Rhenan. praef. ad Tert. de poenit.
Theodulphus Bishop of Orleance writes thus; In the first place confession
must be made unto God, next unto the Priest, because the confession that is
made unto a Priest, so far aideth us, that receiving wholesome counsel from
them, we may by the wholesome observations of penance, and by mutual prayers
wash away the filth of sin. Thou see here Confession to a Priest, and another
reason thereof besides absolution, that by his sacred advice, (...). Clem.
Alex. strom. 2. page 281.
the Penitent might be directed to bring forth such fruits of Repentance as may
blot out the spots of his former sins. And such rules of direction were called
Canons penitential, whereby a certain time was set down for each particular
sin, for the lustration, and expiation thereof: and Beda mentions, that
Theodorus sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, composed Canons to this purpose,
which he calls Peccantium judicia, viz. how many years of penance belong to
several sins. Theodorus Archiepiscopus, Peccantium judidicia, quantis sc. annis
pro unoquoque peccato quis poenitere debeat, mirabili and discreta ratione
describit. Beda in Chron.
The Penitential it self, being reserved as I am informed, amongst the Archiva
of that great ingrosser of Antiquity, Sir Rebert Cotton; that Archbishop in
the Decrees is cited thus; Confessio quae soli Deo fi^, purgat peccata; ea vero
quae Sacerdoti, docet qualiter purgentur ipsa peccata. De poen. did. 1. sect.
quam inquit.
Confession made to God alone purges sins, but that which is made unto the
Priest teaches the means how they may be purged. Hitherto we have trod the
steps of Antiquity, and shall now second their authority with the judgment of
later Divines of best account and estimation.

Church of England.
And first of all, the established doctrine of that Church whereof I am a
member, and from which with Gods grace shall never deviate, is prescribed in
the Liturgy before the administration of the holy Communion; where the
Mi^^ste^ is to exhort the people, That if there be any of them which cannot
quiet his own Conscience, Communion Book exhortation before the receiving of
the Lords supper.
but requires further comfort, or counsel, he should come to him, or some
other discreet and learned Minister of God; word, and open his grief, that he
may receive such ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, as his Conscience may be
relieved; and that by the ministry of Gods word he may receive comfort, and
the benefit of absolution, to the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of
all scruple and doubtfulnesse. Here is an Exhortation to Confession, and that
to the Minister, and that of sins disquieting the conscience; and that to
receive absolution, counsel, and consolation, to this end, that the Conscience
may be settled, and the Scruple removed.

In the next place is the Defe^der of that Church, who was as the Angel of the
Lord to discern, King James.
and whose memory is a sweet perfume, King James, whose royal words are; Fateor
neminem inveniri amicum aptiorem cu^us au^ibus peccata deponas, quam hominem
Ecclesiasticum, pium, and probum, unde and solatium percipias, and ex pot^state
Clavium peccatorum r^missionem. Medit. in Orat. Dom. p. 62. Edit. Lat.
I acknowledge that there cannot be found a more fitting friend, to whose ears
thou may commit thy sins, then a Godly and an honest Churchman, from whom
thou may receive comfort, and forgiveness of sins by the power of the keys.
In the same place, the same gracious Author has thus written; Ego cum Calvino
confessionem privatam viro Ecclesiastico factam probo, (qu^madmodum antea
professus sum) optaremque ex animo fr^qu^^tio^^is esse eam ^pud nos; rem citra
controversiam praestantissimi usus, praesertim parandis hominum animus ad
sacram Synaxin. ^ib. p. 65.
I allow with Calvin of private Confession m^de unto a Churchman, (as I
professed before) and wish with all my heart it were more frequented by us; a
thing without controversy of most excellent use, but most especially to
prepare men's minds for the holy Communion. Aurei Pectoris verba bracteata words
like apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, and deserve of all the subjects to
him, and his flourishing progeny, ever to be remembered.

Bishop Ridley a great and principal Agent in the reformation of the Liturgy,
B. Ridley. Act. and Mon. edit. 2. p. 17. 8.
and who dipping his Rochet in his own blood, sealed the verity thereof with
Martyrdom, in a Letter unto West sometimes his Chaplain, has written thus;
Confession to the Minister, which is able to instruct, correct, comfort, and
inform the weak, wounded, and ignorant Consciences, indeed I ever thought might
do much good in Christ's congregation, and so I assure you I think even at this
day.

Reverend and ever to be reverenced Bishop Andrews, B. Andrews, Sermon. 4. before
K. James upon Whitsunday.
(...), the Sun, and Apollo of Divines, preached thus; He that shall minister
comfort, and advice soundly unto us, had need to be familiarly acquainted with
the state of our souls: To go to a Lawyers reading, and to hear it, serves us
not for our worldly doubts; nor to hear the Physic Lecture, for the complaints
of our Bodies; No, we call them to us, we question with them in particular; we
have private conference about our estates; only sor our soul affairs it is
enough to take our directions in open Churches, and there delivered in gross;
private conference we endure not, we need not; One we must have to know
thoroughly the state of our lands, and goods; one we must have entirely
acquainted with the state of our body; in our souls it holds not; I say no
more, it were good it did. Good indeed, if it seemed good to Authority.

The Godly-learned Bishop Lakes (...), B. Lakes Sermon. at Greenwich, upon Psalm.
32. verse. 5. p. 139.
who has left a name behind him as a precious ointment, and a light, whose
luster is still with us; taught the same Doctrine before the same Royal
Audience, in these words; Our Church does not condemn Confession as simply
evil, and therefore in its Liturgy has restored it to its native purity;
only it were to be wished that so far as the Church allows it, we would
practice it; for I am persuaded that many live and dye in enormous sins, that
never made any use of it, nor received any comfort from the power of the keys;
the confessing unto the Lord does not exclude confessing unto man, so the due
limitation be observed.

The next is he who is now clothed in white raiment, Bishop White, Praefat. ad
R. Archiep. Cant. prefixed to the book of the Sabbath.
(...), who has challenged from Nazianzen not to be the only Divine, as he
from him not to be the first, who before his last, and useful Treatise of the
Sabbath, in his Preface inscribed to the most eminent Star in our Churches
Horizon, and the highest Watchman in her Tower, amongst others has this
direction; There might also be a profitable use of some private form of
Pastoral collation with their flock, for their direction, and reformation in
particular spiritual duties, such as was private Confession in the ancient
Church.

These Fathers are gathered to their Fathers; Our Church has these lamps yet
burning (and long may they last) that follow: First, our Christian Antiquary,
Bishop Usher, L. Primate of Ireland, Ans. to the Jesuits challenge. page 81,
82.
the L. Primate of Armach, who upon that exhortation made in the Service Book
of the Church, says thus; It appears that the exhorting of the people to
confess their sins unto their ghostly fathers, makes no such wall of
separation between the ancient Doctors and us; but we may well for all this be
of the same Religion they were of. Again, Id. ^bid. page 88.
No kind of Confession either public, or private, is disallowed by us, that is
any way requisite for the due execution of that ancient power of the keys,
which Christ bestowed upon the Church. And again, Neither the Ancient Fathers,
nor we, do debar men from opening their grievances unto the Physicians of their
souls, either for their better information in the true state of their disease,
or for the quieting of their troubled Consciences, and for receiving further
direction from them out of Gods word, both for the recovery of their present
sickness, and for the prevention of the like danger for the time to come:
which doctrine he learnedly asserteth, and vindicateth from the fringes, and
dregs of Popish mixture, and superstition.

The grave and godly Prelate, My Lord Bishop of Duresme, Bish. Morton Appeal.
l. 2. c. 14.
who well knows in Polemical differences between the Reformed and Roman
Churches, to separate the Chaff from the Corn; stateth the question concerning
confession thus; It is not questioned between us whether it be convenient for a
man burdened with sin, to lay open his Conscience in private to the Minister
of God, and to seek at his hands both counsel, and instruction, and the
comforts of Gods pardon. But whether there be as from Christ's institution such
an absolute necessity of this private confession, both for all sorts of men,
and for every particular sin known, and ordinary transgression, so as without
it there can be no remission, or pardon hoped for from God; and so reduces the
difference betwixt Protestants and Papists unto two heads, 1. of necessity, 2.
of possibility, thus; The Papists impose a necessity of confession absolute de
jure Divino, of all sins, with all circumstances, which is a tyranny, and
impossible, and a torture to the Conscience. The Protestants do acknowledge
(says he) the use of private confession, but with a double limitation, and
restraint;
1. the first is the foresaid freedom of Conscience, 2. the second is the
possibility of performance:
by all which passages that great Scient Man, does not remove confession, but
certain errors crept in of late from the same, as namely in that it is averred.
1. to be of divine institution, 2. of absolute necessity, 3. extending to all
men, all known sins, and all circumstances, 4. and that it must be taken as a
necessary mean either in deed, or desire, for the remission of sins; which
tares sown in the field his Lordship would have discerned, if not separated,
from the duty it self; the continuance whereof he allows, and prescribes.


Bishop Mountagu, B. Montagu Appeal. page 299.
(...), has asserted this doctrine usque ad invidiam, of whom we may reckon
not as a witness, but Confessor also, because he has written thus; It is
confessed that private Confession unto a Priest is of very ancient practice in
the Church, of excellent use and benefit, being discreetly handled; we refuse
it to none if men require it; if need be to have it; we urge and persuade it in
extremis; we require it in case of perplexity, for the quieting of men
disturbed in their Consciences. I know not of what latitude in some men's
conceits Popery is, for censuring these words as a smack thereof; for he
approves of it, if discreetly handled; imposes no more need thereof, than to
such as need it; urging it not by constraint, but by inducement, and
persuasion; and that not upon all men, but upon such as are disturbed and
perplexed in Conscience, and not of all sins, but such as lie disquietly in the
bosom. Great parts are as often envied and traduced, as admired; especially
when men of small parts usurp the censure. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. p.
215.
A wise and learned man contents himself with one only meet Auditor, and
approver, and if he meet not with so much, quiets himself in his own worth, and
Conscience; in the testimony whereof there is more solid comfort, than in the
vain applauses, or reproaches of a sandy multitude.

In the book well known by the Practice of Piety, we read such directions in
this present behalf, Practice of Piety.
which sincerely performed were the practice of piety indeed, and they are as
follows; In a doubtful title thou will ask counsel of thy skilful Lawyer; in
peril of sickness thou will know the advice of thy skilful Physician; page 762.
and is there no danger in dread of damnation for a sinner to be his own Judge?
and a little after, Luther says, Page 763.
That he had rather lose a thousand worlds than suffer private confession to be
thrust forth of the Church; Occulta confessio quae modo celebratur, etsi
probari ex Scripturis non potest, miro tamen modo placet, and utilis, immo
necessaria est, nec vellem eam non esse, immo gaudeo eam esse in ecclesia
Christi, cum sit ipsa afflictis conscientiis unicum remedium. Luther. cap.
Babyl. tom. 6. fol. 109.
our Church has ever most soundly maintained the truth of this doctrine. And
again, Verily there is not any means more excellent to humble a proud heart,
nor to raise up an humble spirit, then this spiritual conference betwixt the
Pastor and his people committed to his charge; Page 766.
if any sin trouble thy conscience, confess it unto Gods Minister, ask his
counsel, and if thou do truly repent, receive his absolution, and than doubt
not but in foro Conscientiae, thy sins be as really forgiven on earth, as if
thou did hear Christ himself in foro judicii, pronouncing them to be forgiven
in heaven. Luke 10.16.
Qui vos audit, me audit; try this, and tell me, whether thou shall not find
more ease in thy conscience, than can be expressed in words; Reformed Churches
of Germany.
did profane men consider the dignity of this divine calling, they would the
more honor the calling, and reverence the persons.

Nos confessionem retinemus praecipue propter absolutionem quae est verbum Dei,
quod de singulis authoritate divina pronunciat potestas Clavium; quare impium
esset ex Ecclesia privatam absolutionem tollere; neque quid sit remissio
peccatorum, aut potest is Clavium intelligunt, si qui privatam absolutionem
aspernantur. Augustan. Confess.
Thus is the doctrine of the Mother justified by her children, and lest any
should think our Church and Divines stand here alone, I will adjoyn some
foreign testimonies. The Doctrine of the Protestants in Germany is related in
the Augustan Confession thus; We retain confession chiefly for absolution,
which is Gods word, that the power of the keys denounces by authority divine,
of each person in particular; wherefore it were wickedly done to take private
absolution out of the Church: nor do they understand what remission of sins, or
the power of the keys means, if so be they contemn private absolution. And
the manner observed in the German Churches is set forth by Chemnitius thus; The
use of private Confession is with us preserved, Privatae Confessionis usus apud
nos servatur, ut generali professione peccati, ex significatione poenitentiae
petatur absolutio; cumque non sine judicio usurpanda sit clavis, vel solvens,
vel ligans, in privato illo colloquio Pastores explorant Auditorum judicia, an
recte intelligant de peccatis exterioribus and interioribus, de gradibus
peccatorum, de stipendio peccati, de fide in Christum; deducuntur ad
considerationem peccatorum; explorantur an serio doleant de peccatis, an iram
Dei ti meant, and cupiant illam effugere; an habeant propositum emendationis;
interrogantur etiam si in certis quibusdam peccatis haerere existimantur,
traditur ibi doctrina, and exhortatio de emendatione, quaeritur vel consilium,
vel consolatio in gravaminibus conscientiae, and tali confessioni impartitur
absolutio. Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 2. page 195.
that upon a general confession of sin, and intimation of Repentance,
absolution may be desired; and since that the keys, whether binding, or
loosing, may not be used without judgment, in that private conference the
Pastors sift into the discretion and judgment of their Auditors, whether they
rightly understand betwixt internal sins and external; as also the degrees in
sin, and the wages thereof, and of faith in Christ; they are brought into a
consideration of their offenses, they are tried if they truly repent them of
their sins, and stand in awe of Gods wrath, and desire to fly from the same.
If they have any purpose of amendment, they are further interrogated, if any
particular sins stick upon them; the doctrine and exhortation to amendment is
there delivered, counsel and consolation is there sought for overburt boned
consciences, and upon such a Confession there is granted an absolution.

Beatus Rhenanus, B. Rhenanus.
a great Secretary to ancient learning, treating of private confession, and
from whence it derived its original, Quam saluberrimam esse nemo potest
inficiari, si morositatem, and scrupulositatem nimiam amputes. Quid enim, per
Deum immortalem, utilius habere possit Ecclesia ad continendam disciplinam?
Quid commodius, quam privatam istam confessionem ad populum in necessariis
crudiendum? ubi horulae spatio plus proficit Laicus, quam triduana concione. --
Mihi libet disciplinae encomium apud Cyprian. accommodare confessioni, ut dicam
eam retinaculum fidei, ducem itineris salutaris, fomitem, and nutrimentum bonae
indolis, magistram virtutis. B. Rhen. praefat. ad Tertull. de poenit.
falls into these words; Which no man can deny to be very wholesome, if too
much austorenesse, and scrupulosity therein were cut off; for, in the name of
God, what can be more profitable to uphold Ecclesiastical discipline? what more
fit than private confession to instruct the people in points necessary to be
known? where a Layman shall be more edified in an hours space, than at a
three-dayes Sermon -- May it be lawful for me to bestow the praise Cyprian has
of Discipline, upon confession; and to call it the retentive of faith, the
guide of a saving journey, the seed, and nursery of good behavior, and the
mistress of virtue. I am not ignorant that the Treatise it self containing this
passage is by express order from Index Expurgatorius taken off the file,
Argumentum libri de poenitentia totum expungatur, nam commode repurgari non
potest. Ind. expurg. Madriti, 1584.
as a discourse not capable of a Roman salve, but needing the sponge
throughout, with a deleatur. Their handling of Authors old and new, is much
like the Turkish policy, in depriving Christian Parents of their Children, and
those infants of their virilities, by castrating them, and training them up to
be Janissaries, and persecutors of their own unknown blood, and Religion. Such
are their dealings with the Doctors of the Church, cutting off their masculine
expressions, and setting them against themselves in their own tenets also.

Calvin has left his mind behind him thus; Although Saint James has not named
any man into whose bosom we may empty our selves, Tamet si Jacobus neminem
nominatim assignando in cujus sinum nos exponeremus, liberum permittit
delectum, ut ei confiteamur qui ex Ecclesiae grege maxim idoneus suerit visus;
quia tamen Pastores prae aliis ut plurimum judicandi sunt idonei, potissimum
etiam nobis eligendi erunt; dico autem ideo prae aliis appositos, quia
Ministerii vocatione nobis a Deo designantur, quorum ex ore erudiamur ad
subigenda and corrigenda peccata, tum consolationem ex vemae fiducia
percipiamus. -- Id officii sui unusquisque fidelium meminerit, si ita privatim
angitur and afflictatur peccatorum sensu, ut se explicare nisi alieno adjutorio
nequeat, non n^gligere quod illi a Domino offerturremedium, nempe, ut ad se
sublevandun privata confessione apud suum pastorem utatur, ac ad solatia sibi
adbibenda privatam ejus operam imploret, cujus officium est, and public and
privatim populum Dei Evangelica doctrina consolari. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3.
cap. 4. Sect. 12.
leaving the choice free, of any we shall think meetest within the fold of the
Church; yet because the Pastors usually are deemed more fit than others,
therefore are they to be chosen above others. I say to be preferred before
others, because they are designed by the Lord to the calling of the Ministry,
from whose lips we receive instructions to subdue, and correct our faults; and
consolation upon assurance of pardon. -- Let every believer then remember that
it is his duty, that if he stand so inwardly pricked, and afflicted with the
sense of his sins that he cannot deliver himself without help from without, not
to neglect that remedy which is offered by God unto him, namely for to ease
himself, that he make use of private Confession to his Pastor, and implore his
assistance, that he may take some comfort, whose office it is both privately
and publicly to comfort the people of God with the doctrine of the Gospel.

Zanchy beats the same path with Calvin; for after he had showed what
confession of sins is, and to what end it is made unto the Minister, reflecting
upon those words of Saint James, writes thus; Although in a proper sense it
seems our infirmities may be detected to any person whatsoever (be he Priest
or not) thereby to relieve our selves with mutual help and comfort; Licet
proprie sentire videatur, ul nostras infirmitates alter alteri communicantes,
quicunque ille sit Sacerdos vel non, consilio and consolatione mutua nos
juvemus; tamen quia Pastores Ecclesiae prae aliis idonei sunt ut plurimum, and
praeter hoc habent etiam ministerium absolvendi, ideo hos potissimum nobis
deligendos jubet Apostolus; immo ad hoc nobis a Patre nostro Deo ordinati, and
instituti sunt Ministri verbi and Sacramentorum, ut quotiescunque conscientia
nostra peccatis afflictatur, permitur, consolationeque and peccatorum
remissione indiget, ad ipsos tanquam praesentes Christi legatos mandato
reconciliationis praeditos, recurramus; cis tanquam Christo ipsi corda nostra
aperiamus, peccata confiteamur, infirmitates nostras detegamus, petamusque
tanquam a Christo ipso consolationem, consilium, absolutionem in nomine
Christi, illis enim dixit Christus, potestatem absolvendi tradens, Joan. 20.
Accipite S. Spiritum, etc. and Matthew. 18. Quaecunque ligaveritis, etc. Zanch.
compend. loc. Theolog. Neustadii 1598. page 459, 460.
yet because the Pastors of the Church are for the most part the fittest men,
and moreover have the Ministry of absolution; therefore the Apostle commands
us to make choice of them especially: Yea to this end are they ordained, and
instituted by God our Father, Ministers of the word and Sacraments, that so
often as our Conscience shall be troubled, over-pressed with sin, or need
comfort and forgiveness, we might have recourse unto them as Ambassadors of
Christ, and having the mandat of reconciliation: To them let us open our hearts
as unto Christ himself, let us confess our sins, let us detect our infirmities,
and let us crave from them as from Christ himself consolation, and counsel, and
in the name of Christ absolution; for to them has Christ said John 20. Receive
the holy Ghost, etc. And Matthew. 18. whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, etc. And so thou see (good Reader) this assertion compassed
about with a great cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12.1.


CHAP. VII.
Concerning the institution, necessity, and extent of Confession; and is
divided into three Sections.

HItherto have we cleared certain positive truths concerning confession of
sins, approved by the suffrages and general vote of all, or the most principal
of all Divines, viz. 1. That sins ought to be confessed, and ever acknowledged
unto God, because he ever is offended, and always able and ready to pardon. 2.
Next, unto Man also by way of Reconciliation, when he is wronged; and by way of
recognition, when he is able and willing with discreet words like apples of
gold, to counsel and comfort wounded spirits. 3. And amongst men, to the
Priests and Ministers, who by their place and function, are Instruments of
Reconciliation, God having so appointed, that by them a penitent should receive
news of pardon, and restored favor.
And here my labor might have ceased, there being enough in these positions
for a Christians practice, and a Penitents relief. And here the Period should
have been, had not the Envious, and superstitious Man mingled these truths with
tares. I say not whiles the husbandmen, the Ancient Fathers of the Church
slept, but rather, after such time as they fell asleep in the Lord, abuses
privily crept in, (Confession being carried privately and closely) of such
consequence, as have welnigh brought the duty it self out of Credit, at least
altogether out of practice, and have caused the same to be laid by for many
years; that it is hard to say, whether the neglect thereof, for the adjacent
Superstition, has not been more prejudicial to the growth of grace in the
Church of God, than the usage thereof could have been together with the
superstition. Matthew. 13.30.
And whether the Laborers had not done better, to have suffered both to grow
together, and to have reprieved the Felonious Mother for the Infants sake in
the womb, than by signifying their dislike so highly of the abuses, to permit
the discipline it self to be abolished. But now if that rust may be filed off,
and if the pure juice of the grape may be defecated from the dregs of
corruption, there can be no reason given why the duty should not again take
place, and be restored to its wonted practice. The wisdom of the Correctors
appearing in the discreet parting of the matter it self from the abuse, Il
fault distinguer enter la chose and la corruption qui la suit, laquelle il
saudra retrancher, laissant la chose mesme, and non la prohiber. Da. Buchanan.
L'histoire de la Conscience, p. 123.
and in restoring the same to its former place, and luster; my poor thoughts
have ever esteemed of them for poor Reformers, that shall weed up both tares
and wheat together; like such indiscreet Zelots that pull down Churches,
because formerly abused, against Christ's example, who chased forth the Buyers
and Sellers, without any speech of the destruction of the Temple: an even, and
just hand must be carried by such, as take that office upon them, lest pious
ordinances be swept away in the mass, and rubbage of pretended superstition.
And I think I may say or Confession now in use in the Church of Rome, as
Aristobulus Cassandraeus did of a fountain at Miletum, which the inhabitants
called Achilleium, whereof the water which streamed above was very sweet,
(...). Athenaus Deipn^s. lib. 2. page 43.
but that which remained at the bottom very salt and brinish; some things flow
good therein, but the Roman dregs are bitter. And for the better discovery
thereof we must look over the same again, and handle three things (...),
openly, and distinctly; Punctim agendum non precario.
1. The institution thereof, by whom, and of what authority it is; 2. Next, the
necessity thereof, how far forth it is required, and what danger may arise upon
the abuse, and discontinuance thereof; 3. And lastly the extent;
whether all sins, and the circumstances of each sin fall under the verge and
charge of confession. The consideration of these points will give great light
to descry the misdemeanors in the practick thereof.

SECT. I.
The Contents.
The Decrees of the Tridentine Council for Divine right, and authority of
Confession. The Anathema's, held too severe by some moderate Romanists. Public
Exhomologesis vilepended by those Fathers. The School-mens faintness in
resolving for the divine institution of Auricular Confession. The Canonists
plant the same upon the universal tradition of the Church. Divines siding with
the Canonists. Oppugners of Auricular Confession in former ages. Pretenses of
Divine authority from places of Scripture examined. Different proceedings in
the Court of Conscience from earthly Tribunals. Special cognizance of all sins
not a necessary antecedent at all times to Priestly Absolution. God pardons
many sins immediately never spoken of to a Priest. Difference of Popish Divines
concerning the matter and form in Penance, prove to be no such thing as
Sacramental confession, which reaches not higher than the Lateran Council.
Confession of sin of the same institution as Repentance is. Divine institution
manifold. In what sense Confession may be said to be of Divine institution.

THe Church of Rome (or the most in that Church) father this imp upon Christ
himself, and the institution thereof from no meaner an Author, and thereupon
make it a principal part of a special Sacrament, which they call the Sacrament
of Penance; and they have so strong a fancy that it is a Sacrament, and because
it is so, or rather because they will have it so, it must be a divine
ordinance, and of Christ's institution. Indeed if Confession did justly deserve
that title, and inscription of a Sacrament, we should not stick to give unto
God the things that are Gods; it being a Maxim in Christianity, that the
Sacraments of the Church are of Divine institution; all the doubt is, whether
Confession can assume so much justly unto it self, as to be the essential part
of any Sacrament, or no; and in this Inquisition we are to take these steps,
The first, to enquire whether private Confession of sin appear to have been any
where instituted by Christ. And again, if it may be demonstrated from the word
of God, that there is any such Sacrament ordained by him, whereof private
confession sustaineth such a part, as is reported in the Church of Rome. For
the first it is very true the lawful use thereof depends upon the Institution;
for God forbid but that his Institutes should be followed, and his precepts
duly observed. It is good, yea very good ( says Ter^ullian) that God
commands; Bonum, atque optimum est quod Deus praecipit; audaciam existimo de
bono Divini praecepti disputare, neque eni^^ quia bonum est, idcirco auscultare
debemus, sed quia Deus praecepit; ad exhibitionem obsequii prior est Majestas
divinae potestatis. Tert^l. de Poen. c. r.
I hold it impudence once to dispute, and question the goodness of Divine
Precepts; nor ought we to hearken thereunto because it is good, but because God
commands, the Majesty of his power must conduce to the performance of our
duty. With God is the authority to command, and with us the glory of obedience.
The only doubt i^, if God instituted any such thing* and that man's inventions
are not taught for Divine precepts. The Council of Trent, that popish Cynosura
has decreed Auricular Confession to be of absolute necessity from ordinance
divine, Dominus Jesus Sacerdotes sui ipsius vicarios reliquit, tanquam
praesides, and Judices, ad quos omnia mortalia crimina deferantur, qui pro
potestate Clavium sententiam pronuntient. -- Constat Sacerdotes judicium hoc
incognita causa exercere non posse. Council. Trid. cap. 5. de Confess.
and the Institutor Christ, who by investing his Apostles with the power of the
keys then created this Court of conscience, submitted all sinners to this
jurisdiction, gave the Priests power to hear, and determine of all and all
manner of sins, and the people a command to accuse, and lay open the least
sinful actions, and fractions before these Judges, whom he has made Lord
Keepers of this privy seal; where the proceedings for the trial of sins and
punishments thereof are carried exceeding privately. And that God has not
commanded, nor does the Church now a days require open confession, and open
penance, Non est hoc divino praecepto mandatum, nec satis consulte humana
aliqua lege praeciperetur, ut delicta, praesertim secreta, publica essent
confessione aperienda, Council. Trid. lb.
and it would be an inconsiderate act to enjoin the same by any humane Law. Out
of which Decree have been hatched these Anathema's; Si quis negaverit
Confession^m Sacramentalem vel institutam, vel necessariam esse jure divino.
Can. 1.
The first against all such, as shall deny clancular confession to have been
enacted by Divine authority, or not to be necessary upon the same ground. The
second fulminates against those, that shall gainsay such a Confession, as
necessarily required for the forgiveness of sins, Si quis dixerit ad
remissionem petcatorum necessarium non esse jure divino confiteri omnia and
singula peccata. Can. 2.
however they may approve thereof for the instruction, and comfort therein, and
believe it of old to have been observed, that CANONICAL satisfaction might be
imposed. The third Ban is upon those that affirm the Confession of all sins (as
the Church observes) to be impossible, Si quis dixerit confessionem omnium
peccatorum (qualem Ecclesia servat) esse impossibilem, and traditionem humanam,
and a piis abolendam, etc. Can. 3.
and that it is but a humane tradition, and to be abolished. This is the
doctrine of that Councils Ca^ons, and Decrees. Where had those Fathers been as
ready to prove, as reprove, and to confirm, as Censure, what they
Anathematized, sure their thundrings would have been less, and lightnings more.
Nor would the Divines of Lovian, and Coloign then assembled have desired more
moderation in those Prelates, Cavendum Patribuc ne adversariis materiam
praebeant ea objiciendi, quae Theologis non promptum sit refellere; quin potius
ea moderatione utendum, tam in doctrina, quam in Canone, ut Catholicis ipsis
offensioni non sint. Hist. lat. Council. Trid. p. 283.
both in compiling the decree, as the Canon, for avoiding of Scandal in the
Catholics, and in giving less advantage to the adversary in objecting what
Divines could not easily answer. For is it not strange that out of those words
of Christ in John 20. A Commission should issue to all Priests, with power to
judge; and to all Christians with command to appear at this Court, to indict
themselves of all they are conscious of, and to undergo the Priests Penance,
and sentence; surely the ladder must be well framed, where such rounds are,
Climax prius* conficiendus est been longus, and ducendus Sorites sesquipedalis,
ut detur ista conjungere.
and the links strongly set together, that shall draw on such a chain, and
train of consequences. But the indiscretion of these Fathers in one thing can
never be enough admired, in debasing of public Confession, and reconciliation
as commanded by no law of God, nec imperantium bono futurum, nor should it be
well done for any to command the same, whereas the Fathers truly so called
only countenanced, and esteemed this, when the other was hardly hatched; of
this in their writings there is frequent mention, but of that (now Romes
darling) scarce any footsteps appear; For let any living Proctor on that
Councils behalf resolve me, why public Confession of sin should be but
permitted by Christ, and the Private by him enjoined; Etsi Christus non
vetuerit quam aliqum delicta sua public confiteri possit, non est tamen hoc
divino praecepto mandatum, nec satis consulte humana aliqua lege praeciperetur.
Council. Trid. ib.
why a Magistrate should do ill in making a law for solemn Confession, and
Christ institute and command the Auricular? Can that Confession confined unto
private walls be of greater virtue, than that which breaks forth on the house
tops? or do the keys unlock better in a corner, than in open view? Or shall a
sinful story told in secret, come by a pardon sooner, than that which is
divulged before all? Or shall the Absolution of a Priest, granted in a Chamber,
or a Closet, prevail more than a Reconciliation made by the Bishops and
Priests in the open Church? No less impudence is to be found in the words
following, that by the holiest and ancientest Fathers, secret Sacramental
Confession (as it is now used, and ever has been in the Church) has been
always commended. Let those old records be compared with this new practice,
and then judge of the integrity of these new Fathers.

We will enquire what news there was of this ordinance before the opening of
that Council, and whether the Schoolmen are confident, or a little scrupulous
upon whom to father it. Scotus makes a question from whence the Mandat of
Confession is derived, Q. quo praecepto tenetur quis ad confessio^em?
from the law of God, or from the Churches constitution; and this latter he
would approve of, if two rubs lay not in his way: Quod confessio non cadit nisi
sub praecepto Ecclesiae, non potest faciliter improbari, nisi quia Ecclesia non
attentasset tam arduum praeceptum imponere omnibus Christianis, nisi esset
praeceptum divinum.
1. That the Church would not have made so bold as to have imposed such a
burden upon the Consciences of any, without express warranty from her Spouse?
The true and chaste Church indeed would not have adventured without her
husbands privity; but the Church of Rome has set upon greater matters than
this comes to. The treading upon Emperors necks is as great a daring as the
trampling upon the Conscience. The Popes keys have gone beyond Peter's, not
only to excommunicate, but deprive Princes; locking them forth of the Church,
and their Regal Throne too: Quia non invenitur ubi ab Ecclesia imponatur istud
praeceptum. Council. Late^an.
Such instances as these set forth the impudence of that Strumpet. 2 His other
scruple was for that he knew not when, and where the Church imposed that
precept: for this scruple, let him cast his eyes back upon a Council held not
long before his time, and there he shall read it decreed for both sexes once a
year to come to Confession. And there that the time was instituted, Confession
n'a point este instituee en ce concil^, ains le temps seulment ya este d^clare,
auquel, il la failloit fair. D. Bess Caresme, tom. 2. p. 721.
and not the duty is (with reverence to a doughty Sorbonist) unto a judicious
understanding a thin, and poor evasion. By the way take notice Christian
Reader, of that large assertion of Scotus, that there cannot easily be found
any decree of Council, Nec Canonista facile inveniret aliquod consilium, vel
praeceptum proprie, ubi exprimatur praece ptum de Confessione facienda.
or precept of the Church extant for Confession; thence he proceeds to the
Glossator upon Gratian, and acquaints us with his opinion, viz. It were better
held, that Confession was instituted by a kind of universal tradition of the
Church, Melius dicitur eam institutam a quadam universali Eccl siae traditione,
potius qu^m ex Novi Testam^nti vel Veteris authoritate. De poenit. did. 5. in
principio.
than from any authority of the Old or New Testament.
And that it was taken upon the trust of Tradition rather than ready payment of
the Scripture, the not admitting of any such custom in the Greek Church,
Confessio non est necessaria apud Graecos, esset autem necessaria si praeciptum
de ea esset ex authoritate Scripturae. Gloss. ib,
brought the Glossat^r to that mind; for that Church would not wittingly cast
aside what Gods word imposed. After all this Scotus turns to the other side,
Videtur rationabilius tenere, quod Confessio cadat sub praecepto divino
positivo.
and utters this faint opinion; It seems more reasonable to hold, that
Confession may fall under a Divine positive precept. A lukewarm assertion, not
firmiter tenere, constantly to believe, but rationabilius, more reason for it,
and not tenetur it must be held, but videtur it may seem, it is so, but as it
seems; and cadat, non cadit, it may fall under a divine precept, and it may
not fall out so: what it seemed unto Scotus, I know not, but it seems unto
me, that the faith upon the divine ordinance of Confession was then but of
tender growth, and not fully ripe till the days of the Council of Trent. At
length discarding some of the usual arguments, weakening others, and delivering
some new ones of his own, (whereof the Reader by and by amongst others shall
have a reckning) he resolves all his disputes into this uncertain conclusion;
Veligitur tenendum est, quod sit de jure divino promulgato per Evangelium; vel,
si illud non sufficiat, quod est de jure divino positivo promulgato a Christo
Apostolis, sed Ecclesiae promulgato per Apostolos absque omni Scriptura, sicut
multa alia tenet Ecclesia ore tenus per Apostolos sibi promulgata sine
Scriptura. Scot. lib. 4. d. 17. Qu. Unica. Sect. in ista.
Either it must be held, confession to be of divine right promulgated by the
Gospel, or (if that suffice not) that it is of divine positive law promulgated
by Christ unto the Apostles; and by the Apostles unto the Church, without any
written Scripture; as there are many points which the Church imbraceth, (too
many) delivered by word of mouth from the Apostles, without any Scripture at
all. Thus is the gentle Reader left unto his own choice, which opinion to trust
unto, whether confession belong unto the Scriptures, or Tradition; and were I a
Romanist, (considering what Confession is now come to in that Church) my
thoughts would pitch upon the latter as the best cover; But here is the
inconvenience; if a Sacrament be verbum visibile (and this they will needs have
to be a Sacrament) it were but a sandy foundation to lay the f^brick there of
upon verbum invisibile unwritten tradition. Thus goes the case with Scotus,
not altogether after the Boman cut; and hereof the Cardinal gives a reason;
Because he and other Writers lived before the celebration of those Councils,
Scotus and caeteri Doctores ante concilia illa vixerunt, in quibus accuratius
haec omnia explicata sunt. Bell. l. 1. de Poen. c. 11.
wherein these points were accurately handled, and unfolded.

Gabriel agrees with his Master Scolus, and for a final determination
resolves; That the Apostles received it from Christ, Videtur finaliter
dicendum, quod praeceptum de Confessione Sacramentali promulgatum est a Christo
Apostolis, and per ipsos Apostolos promulgatam est Ecclesi^e verbo and facto
sine omni Scriptura. Biel, l. 4. did. 17. Q. 1.
and the Church from the Apostles in so secret a manner, as the Scripture
makes no words thereof at all. A private conveyance perhaps sorted best with a
private business. This Schoolman makes up an answer to that objection of
Scotus, sc. It cannot be a Church ordinance except the time, and place be
showed where the same was ordained, roundly denying, that express mention of
time and place is requisite to show the Original of every Ecclesiastical
constitution, and assures us, that many traditions, and customs are received
by the Catholics as Church-Ordinances, wherein they are to seek for the ubi,
and quando of their beginning. A Church-law then Confession might be in
Gabriels opinion, though it be not extant where, and when it was introduced.
The Seraphical Doctor says. The Lord has not instituted confession immedately
and expressly; Confessionem Dominus immediate and express non instituit. Bonav.
l. 4. d. 17. n. 72. Christus instituit confessionem tacit, Apostoli autem pro
nulgaverunt express. Antonin. part 3. t^t. 14. c. 19. S^ct. 2.
And the Archbishop of Florince, Christ has instituted confession tacitly,
but the Apostles have published the same expressly. Scarcely can these two
sentences be pieced together; Christ-hath not instituted immediately, says
one; that is, not in his own person (...), but by his substitutes the Apostles;
it was not instituted from them, but promulgated, says the other, from whom
then? He insinuated Confession (says a third) and that secretly too, leaving
the publication thereof for the Apostles; and if he have done so, Ia hoc quod
Ministris Sacramentorum Christus dedit potestatem ligandi and solvendi,
insianavi^, confessionem cis tanquam judicibus fieri debere; sic ergo Christus
confession^m instituit tacit, sed Apostoli promulgaverunt came express. Comp.
Theol. verit. l. 6. c. 25.
The Apostles it seems were unmindful of Christ's charge, no where to publish
a point, and Sacrament of such importance. One Apostle indeed says of one
Sacrament indeed; 1 Cor. 11.23.
That which I received of the Lord have I delivered unto you. But of this
matter no news, no syllable, a deep silence; yet the same Apostle averreth that
he had declared unto them all the counsel of God; Acts 20.27.
surely he was not of our Saviors counsel in this behalf. It is then true
alike, The Apostles published this doctrine, and Christ instituted it.

Thus he Schoolmen stumble at the institution, but the Canenists go down right
to work; for the glory of that order Panormitan repeateth what others, and
relates what himself holds thus; Some say that confession was instituted in
Paradise in a figure, Quidam dicunt quod fuit instituta in Paradiso figurative,
dum Deus indirecte compulit Adam ad confitendum peccatum. Alii quod sub lege,
alii quod in novo Testamento figuratim, dum Christus dixit Leprosis quos
sanaverit, Ita and ostendite vos Sacerdotibus. Alii quod ex authoritate Jacobi
Apostoli dicentis, Confitemini alterutrum peccata vestra: sed Glossa ibi tenet,
quod potius sit instituta ex quadam generali traditione Ecclesiae, unde Graeci
non peccant non utendo confessione, confitentur enim soli Deo in Secreto; quia
apud eos non emanavit haec constitutio, sicut in simili dicimus, in
incontinentia, nam non peccant eorum Sacerdotes utendo Matrimonio, quia
Continentia est de jure positivo, and ipsi non admiserunt illam institutionem.
-- Multum mihi placet illa opinio, quia non est aliqua authoritas aperta, quae
innuat Deum, sive Christum aperte instituisse confessionem fiendam Sacerdoti;
tamen cum sit generalis apud nos illa traditio, peccaret mortaliter Latinus non
utendo hac confessione. Panorm. super. Decretal. 5. cap. Quod autem. c. Omnis
utriusque, Sect. 18. extra. Glo.
when God upon the by urged Adam to confess his sin: Others under the Law; and
others figuratively in the New Testament, when Christ said unto the Lerers whom
he healed, Go and show your selves unto the Priests. Others from the authority
of Saint James the Apostle saying, Confess your sins one to another. But the
gloss upon that place holds, that it was rather instituted from a general
tradition of the Church; hence it comes to pass that the Greeks sin not, in not
using Confession, for they confess to God only in secret; and because this
institution has not yet attained unto them, at we say in the like case of
incontinency, that their Priests offend not in marrying, for single life is but
a positive law, and they never admitted of that institution. -- This Opinion
pleases me much, because there is not any clear authority, which intimates
that either God, or Christ did evidently ordain that Confession should be made
unto a Priest But at this present time since with us it is a tradition
generally received; A member of the Latin Church should offend mortally in
forbearing the use of this Confession. From which testimony we gather these
gleanings: 1. That the ground of Confession is a general tradition of the
Church. 2. That the Greek Church used not auricular Confession, nor had that
institution reached Floruit Panomitan. An. Dom. 1440.
as yet unto them. 3. That single-life in the Clergy, and clancular confession,
are observed in the Latin Church upon like grounds; viz the positive Laws of
the Occidental Church. 4. That the obligation of single-life, and confession,
are of force in the Ponentine Churches only, where they have formerly been
admitted. 5. That as the Greek Priests sinned not in contracting marriage,
because Coelibate in Priests is but de jure positivo only; no more did the
Graecians in not confessing, because the institution thereof is but de jure
positivo only, and both restrained to particular Churches, and they remaining
without the compass of those ordinances. 6. That a member of the Latin Church
sins mortally in abstaining from Confession, because in that Church the
general tradition thereof has been received.
By all of which it appears that Canonical obedience was required only to
Confession, as an useful constitution of the Church, and of such persons and
places only as had consented thereunto. The succeeding Canonists have sailed
by this compass: All of them (if credit may be given to impetuous Maldonate)
following their first interpreter, Omnes Juris Pontificii periti secuti primum
suum interpretem, dicunt, confessionem tantum esse introductam jure
ecclesiastico. Maldon. disp. de Sacram. Tom. 2. c. 2. de Confess. orig.
say that confession was only brought in by the law of the Church. And in
truth the Gloss of Semeca upon Gratians decrees, and the handling of that gloss
by the late Roman Correctors, clearly show the wind to be in another corner
with them than at Rome: Gloss. de Poenit. initio did. 5. in poenitentia.
for John S^meca, a Glossator upon Gratian, approving that opinion which settled
Confession upon Church-tradition, is checked by one Friar Maurick, appointed by
Pius V. to oversee such Glosses, with this Marginal note. Nay Confession was
ordained by our Lord, Imo conf^ssio est instituta a Domino, and est omaibus
post Baptismum lapsis in mortale peccatum, tam Graecis quam Latinis, jure
divino necessaria. Romans Correct. ib. in margin.
and by Gods law is necessary to all that fall into mortal sin after Baptism,
as well Greeks as Latins. The Council of Trent had said Amen to this, and
Anathema to that opinion; therefore all Glosses, decrees, and determinations
Theological, must be calculated according to that Latitude.

Then were the Canonists put to silence, but the Divines keep a muttering
still. Peresius Aiala derives the lively expression thereof from tradition; for
however (says he) this confession might be shadowed forth in the old Law,
Quamvis Auricularis haec confessio in lege veteri fuit adumbrata, per
praecursorem Christi inter parts poenitentiae commendata, and tempore
Apostolorum etiam usitata, and tandem ab Jesu Christo Redemptore videatur esse
instituta; tamen nuda, and clara hujus Sacramentalis instituti ratio, quantum
ad substantiam, and circumstantias ejus, divina traditione solum constat.
Peers. consid. 3. de tradit. Auric. Confess.
might be commended by the forerunner of Christ amongst the parts of
Repentarce, might be used by the Ap^stles, and at last seem to be instituted by
Jesus Christ our Redeemer; yet the naked and evident reason of this Sacramental
institution, in respect of the substance, and circumstances thereof, is only
manifest from divine tradition, His Countryman Canus, a Divine of some
judgment, but more freedom than usually is amongst men detained in servitude,
having sifted those texts vulgarly recited for this purpose; concludes of that
in Saint James, Alia quae solent afferri, ut est illud Jacobi, 5. Confitemini
alterutrum, etc. and illud Luc. 17. non adeo firma videntur adversus Paereticos
testimonia; tametsi dici etiam facile poterat, quod lic^t ex sacra Scriptura
hujusmodi praeceptum non haberetur, habetur tamen ex traditione Christi and
Apostolorum, quemadmodum alia pleraque naturae fidei documenta. Canus, part. 5.
Relect. de Poenit. page 900.
Confess one to another, etc. and that other of Christ, show your selves to the
Priest^, as of testimonies too weak to encounter Heretics; and betakes himself
to this last refuge; Although it may be easily said, that, let it be granted
there is not extant any such command in holy Scripture, notwithstanding it is
received from the tradition of Christ, and the Apostles, as many other
doctrines of the nature of faith are. Add hereunto a Provincial Synod assembled
at Perterovia in Poland, where the Fathers conclude thus; From hence it may be
collected, that Auricular confession was without doubt delivered from Christ by
word of mouth; Ex quo colligere licet, quod viva voce procul dubio fuit a
Christo tradita; cujus midto maxima dictorum and factorum pars mandata
Scripturis non est. Confess. Syn. Prove. Perter. habit. 1551. c. 47. de confel.
p. 253. 2. edit. Dilingae 15.57.
the greatest part by far of whose sayings and doings were never committed unto
any writing. In the opinion then of this Conventicle, Christ instituted the
same; but where and when tradition can best inform.

This want of Proof in Scripture, and Resolution in Divines, occasioned some in
those times to be otherwise minded. The Waldenses of Provence and Daulphine,
Anno 1535. amongst sundry other Articles of their Belief as had been taught
unto them from Father to Son for many hundred years, sent to Oecolampadius, and
Bucer, this seventh; Auricular Confession is not commanded by God, History of
Waldenses collected by I.P.P.L. p. 59, 60. edit. London, 1624.
and it is concluded according to the holy Scriptures that the true Confession
of a Christian consists in the confessing of himself to one only true God,
to whom belongs honor and glory: There is another kind of confession when a
man reconcileth himself unto his neighbor, whereof mention is made in the
fifth of Saint Matthew; the third manner of confession is, when a man has
sinned publicly, and all men take notice of it, so he confess, and acknowledge
his fault publicly. Our Countryman John Wickliffe began openly oppose
Sacramental confession, Cepit confessionem Sacramentalem aperte oppugnare,
asserens eam non in Scripturis fundari, sed ex sola institutione papali
introductam suisse. Tho. Walden. Tom. 1. de Sacr. cap. 135.
affirming the same not to founded upon the Scriptures, but to have been
brought in only by Papal institution: says his Antagonist Tho. Walden, and
not unlikely; for in that ridiculous pack of heresies amassed by the Council of
Constance, and laid unto his charge, this we find for one; If a man be duly
contrite, Si homo fuerit debite contritus, omnis confessio exterior est sibi
superflua and inutilis. Conc. Constable. Sess. 45. Error. Jo. Wickl. a Martino 5.
damanat.
all external confession is superfluous, and unprofitable. And in a declaration
of Walter Bruit, containing divere positions by him asserted, Anno Dom. 1393.
this is one; Arch-B. Abbot of visibility of the Church. p. 72. edit. Land. 1624.
that auricular confession is not prescribed in the Scripture. Add unto these
how in the Province of Toulouse, a certain People called Boni homines, (a
branch of the Waldenses, An. Dom. 1175
if not the tree it self) being questioned by the Bishop of Lions, Interrogavit
Episcopus -- si deberet unusquisque consiteri peccata sua Sacerdotibus and
Ministris ecclesiae, vel cuilibet laico, vel illis de quibus dixit Iac.
Confitemini alterutrum, etc. Qui respondentes dixerunt, infirmis sufficere, si
confitentur cui vellent; de Militibus vero dicere noluerunt, quia non dixt
Jacobus nisi de infirmantibus. Quaesit it ^tiam ab eis si sufficiebat sola
cordis contritio, and ons confessio; vel si erat necesse ut facer nt
satisfactionem post datam poenitentiam, icjuniis, eleemosynis, afflictionibus
peccata sua lugentes, si suppeteret cis facultas. Responderunt dicentes, quia
Iacobus dicehat, Confitemini; alterutrum; peccata vestra, ut salvemini; and per
hoc sciebant quod Apostolus aliud non praecipiebat nisi ut consiterentur, and
sic salvarentur, ^ec volebant meliores esse Apostolo ut aliquid de suo
adjungerent, sicut Episcopi faciunt. Rog. Hovedon. Annal. pars. post. Henrici
secundl R. p. 319. edit. London.
If every man ought to confess his sins unto the Priests, and Ministers of the
Church, or else to a Layman, or to those of whom Saint James says, confess
your sins one to another: They answering said, for them that are sick, they may
confess to whom they please; Of others they had nothing to say, because Saint
James spoke only of infirm persons. The Bishop further demanded of them, if
contrition of the heart, and confession of the mouth were sufficient, or if
satisfaction after penance enjoined was necessary, in bewailing their sins in
fasting, afflictions, and almesdeeds, if they were able. They answered saying,
Saint James says, Confess your sins one to another, that you may be saved; and
by this they perceived that the Apostle commanded nothing else, but that they
should confess, and be saved; neither would they be better than the Apostle, as
to add any thing of their own heads as Bishops do. So has Roger Hovedon
related their tenet in the process of their condemnation. Afterward Anno Dom.
1479. there issued a commission from Rome to Alphonsus Carillus, Archbishop of
Toledo, authorizing him to assemble a Synod at Salamanca, and convent the
Professor there, Petrus Oxoniensis, for teaching these conclusions; 1. That
mortal sins in respect of the offense, Conclus. 1. Peccata mortalia, quantum ad
culpam, and poenam alterius seculi, delentur per solam cordis contritionem,
sine ordine ad claves. Conclus. 2. Quod confessio de peccatis in specie, fuerit
ex statuto aliquo universalis Ecclesiae, non de jure divino. Conclus. 3. Quod
pravae cogitationes confiteri non debent, (Prelates latin) sed sola
displicentia delentur, sine ordine ad claves. Conclus. 4. Quod confessio non
debet esse secreta. Canus, part. 6. Relect. de poenit. p. 899.
and blotted out only by the contrition of heart, without relation to the
keys. 2. That confession of each particular sin was grounded upon some stature
of the universal Church, and not upon divine right. 3. That evil thoughts ought
not to be confessed, and are blotted out by a dislike, and displeasure thereof,
without reference unto the keys. 4. That confession ought not to be held in
secret.
All of which were condemned at the meeting, and that condemnation ratified at
Rome, and that Ratification inserted for the worth thereof, into the
Extravagants, by Sixtus IV.

This opinion then could no sooner peep out, but it was cut off by such as in
those ages struck the stroke. It remains now that we examine the grounds of
such Censures, and condemnations. Some of the Theologues that stand for divine
institution, allege Christ's direction to the Lepers, Luke. 17.14.
Go show your selves unto the Priests: I say some, not all; for the more
judicious have laid aside this leaden weapon. But that some which gape more
after the froth of allegories, that the clearer streams of the literal and
genuinous sense, have somewhat esteemed thereof, as Haymo; for that not only
sins must be confessed to the Priest, Quia non solum Sacerdotibus peccata sua
confiteri debent, sed etiam secundum little consilium, poenitentiam, and
satisfactionem veniae suscipere, recte dicitur, Ire, ostendite, and. vice enim
Dei peccata Sacerdotibus pandenda sunt, and inxta ill^um consilium poententia
ageada. Qui ergo babet lepram p^ccati in anima, debet ^enir^^ad Sacerdotem, and
ci humil^ter peccata consiteri. Haym. Domin. 14. post. pertecost. p. 401.
but moreover that by their advice penance, and satisfaction of pardon must be
obtained; it was well said, Go show your selves unto the Priests, for unto the
Priests instead of God are sins to be opened. and penance at their discretion
to be imposed. And a little after; The man that has the leprosy of sin in his
soul, ought to resort unto the Priest, and humbly make confession of his sins.
Thus Haymo has laid a weak load upon a weak back; yet such is the weakness of
our Rhemist, Rhemists Annot. in Luke 17.14.
judgments, that they think it worthy to furnish an Annotation, and in good
sadness tell us, that by leprosy is meant sin, to be healed by the Ministry
of the Priests, and by showing, Confession, and to that purpose quote a book of
Saint Austins as truly his, as their note is unto the text. Such allusions may
serve to stuff a Postill, but not to back an argument, as a Frenchman cries
out upon his Auditory. Show your consciences (good people) unto your Priests,
Moastrez vos Consciences aux Prestres, and leur declarez vos Pechez, si en
voulez estre guarcatis. Sermon. pour le 14. Dimanche apres la Pentecost. A Roven
chez. D. Landet. 1634.
and declare your sins unto them, if you will be healed. However the Pulpit may
flourish with such Clerk-like collations, the Polemical writers are squemish
therein. The Cardinal likes the allegory, but not the pillar that suftaines it;
for we do not affirm (says he) that the Lepers were dispactched by Christ unto
the Priests, Neque nos dicimus missos leprosos^a Christo. ad Sacer lotes, ut
illis peccata sua confitere^tur; sed ut in lege veteri cogaitio lep^ae
corporalis, ita in nova, cogaitio lep^e sp^ritualis ad Sacerdotes pertinet.
Bellar. lib. 3. de poen. c. 3.
to confess their sins unto them; but as in the old Law the leprosy of the
body was of Priestly cognizance, so in the new, Spiritual-leprosie is to be
taken notice of by our Priests likewise. Mittit Christus, ne calumninrentur
Sacerdotes, Calv. Nec repudiavit penitus christus Judaeorum presbyterium, cum
de leprae dijudicatione ageretur, Ostende te (inquiens) Sacerdoti. Beza de
Presb. and excom. p. 17.
Why then did Christ send them? thou will say, To show the respect he bare unto
Levi's order, and to remove that scandal, as if he went about to break the Law.
And why the Lepers above all others of the diseased were sent to Christ, Lyra
gives two reasons; 1. That the Priests might testify if they were thorough by
healed; 1. Quia Sacerdotes debebant judicare number talip e^^et vere curatus. 2.
Quia pro sua emendatione tenebatur offerre sacrificium determinatum in lege.
Lyr. in Luc. 17.
and so against their wills be witnesses of the Lepers coration, and Christ's
miracle. 2. To offer for their healing the sacrifice appointed under the Law;
upon other errands than they were sent, and not to confess their sins.
Remitted then they were unto the Priests for trial, and examination, not for
any acknowledgment; not to confess they were Lepers, but to make it apparent to
the Priests first, and by the Priests to the people, that they were healed from
their Lepry, and freed from the danger of infecting; It being the Priests
office to try such men, (...). Theophylact in Luc. 17.
and they to undergo the censure. How impertinent then is it to infer a Divine
institution from a politic ordinance? Importuna est illorum allegoria qui
legem mere politicam inter ceremonias reponunt. Calvin.
and to make a Law of State to become a typical ceremony? especially where the
manner and end are so different; Siste te summo Sacerdoti, de publico coetu
intelligendus est; ut praeteream fieri id solitum magis ad publicam gratiarum
actionem, vel ad partae sanitatis, aut alterius cujuspiam beneficii judicium.
Iac. Rex Med. in Orat. Dom. p. 63. lat. edit.
for in Auricular Confession the sin is acknowledged, here the binefit; the act
there is private, here public; there the spiritual lepry is revealed, that it
may be cured, here after the cure, that it may be censured; there that the
Confessed sinner might be restored to the saithful society, here that the
convicted leper might be exiled; there exposed as an example of devotion, here
expelled upon danger of infection; there penitents make their resort to receive
the benefit, and here the lepers to be thankful for the benefit received. This
showing therefore unto the Priests, shows no such matter as Auricular
Confession to be of Divine right and institution.

We must then see better cards. Their best plea is from the words of Christ;
Receive the holy Ghost: Ioh. 20.22, 23
whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins soever
ye retain, they are retained. Words of a pregnant sense in the Church of Rome,
as to bring forth at one venture twins, two Sacraments of Penance and of Oeder.
That Christ therein conferred a power to the Apostles, and their successors
over sins, is a clearer truth than may well be denied; but whether such a power
over consciences as is exercised in that Church, must now be questioned. The
power it self in remitting and retaining fins, we must adjourn to its proper
place, and must for the present examine whether the words of Christ, in
themselves considered, or by necessary consequent prove auricular confession to
be of divine right and institution. The Roman Divines insist upon the latter,
and endeavor by necessary consequent to infer the same thus; Such as have
fallen into sin after Baptism, are bound by Gods law to repent thereof, and
seek to be reconciled unto him, but none can be truly penitnet: or reconciled
unto God without confession of sin unto the Priest; which assumption they
further confirm thus; Christ has instituted the Priests judges upon earth with
such power, Christus instituit Sacerdotes Judices super terram cum ea
potestate, ut sine ipsorum sententia nemo post Baptismum lapsus reconciliari
potest; sed nequent Sacerdotes judicare nisi peccata cognoscant. Bellar. lib.
3. de poenit. c. 2.
as without their sentence, No sinner after his Baptism can be reconciled: but
no Judge can pass a sentence upon unknown sins, and secret sins cannot be known
but by Confession of the party; therefore, they conclude, etc. from which
discourse thus framed, arise in their opinion these two Consectaries; 1. That
Priests are instituted by divine right to hear and determine of sins brought
before them by Confession. 2. Comme l'institution des Prestres est de droit
divine pour confesser les Pecheurs, ausi est bien la confession des Pechez pour
estre sait devant ses Juges; and comme Di^u les a ordonae and command aux
Prestres d'ouir les confessions, and pardonner les pechez; ausi par la mesme,
ordonnance, and commandment, a il oblig^ les fideles, Penitens a lieur
d^co^urir, and declarerleurs sautes. D. B^ss. Carefme, Tom. 2* p. 724.
That sinners are enjoined by the same authority to appear at this Tribunal,
and there to accuse themselves, that they may be absolved.
And as God has ordained and commanded Priests to hear Confessions, and to
pardon sins; so by the same ordinance, and command, hith he obliged the
believing Penitents to discover and declare their offenses. No argument more
cried up than this, and as common with Romes proselytes, as water in Tiber: and
thou have it (good Reader) as it is pressed by a Jesuit and a So^bonist, who
would be thought to be the only Scribes and Pharisees of Papal Divinity; and
may observe how all the force hangs but upon the by, one wheel moving
another, that if the least flaw happen in any one, the motion, that is, the
conclusion cease; Many consequences, but how put together, by what pins, and
contignations, that is a secret. -- depinge ubi sistam
Persius Satyr. ult.
Inventus Crysippe tui finitor acervi.
For according to this induction, without Confession to a Priest no absolution,
and without Priestly absolution no remission; and without remission from the
Priest, no reconciliation with God. Or thus; No reconcilement betwixt God and a
sinner, except his repentance be sincere; no Repentance is sincere till the
Priest approve, and judge it to be so; no Priest can judge of the Sincerity of
Repentance, without notice of the offense; and notice he cannot have without a
sinners confession: Christus certe nihil horum dicit in sententia illa, Joan.
20 -- de tali judiciario processu nulla syllaba ibi extat. Chemnit. ex. part.
2. p. 178.
Thus have you this argument up-staires and down-staires. And if all these
inferences flow so naturally and necessarily from the text, how dull-sighted
were the Ancient Doctors that could espy none of them. Let us tread this Climax
(...); for if it appear that the Priest is not constituted a Judge in this
case, then there will lie against him exceptio fori, and a sinner may demand,
Who has made thee a judge over us? Or if a Judge, yet not infallible, and is
not sure always to remit where God remitteth, and retain where he retains.
Insomuch that then, and there lies an appeal from him to the Judge of all the
world who will do right; also if many sins are brought before God in prima
instantia, and pardoned by himself (...), then all sins are not so necessarily
to be spread before the Priest. Again, if God has invested the Priest with
judicial power to take cognizance of sins in this Court of Conscience; and has
laid no necessity upon sinners to resort thereunto with suit and service, but
left it to the liberty of each man's Conscience in submitting himself to the
jurisdiction thereof. If (I say) these, or any of these be just exceptions, the
nerves of this argument will be soon abated.

I will let the first alone, Whether the Priest be a Judge or no in the matter
of Absolution; but take him for one, There is a difference (says Chemnitius)
betwixt a judicial Tribunal, Discrimen est inter judicium and functionem
Ministerii Evangelii; in Judicio juxt a causae cognitionem pronunciatur, prout
bona vel mala est: Ministerium vero Evangelii mandatum habet annunciandi, and
impartiendi alienum bencficium, Christi scilicet, ad remissionem Peccatorum, --
qui petit absolutionem duo sibi proponit; 1. ipsum Deum, utpote a quo petit and
quaerit remissionem peccatorum, atque adeo coram ipso totum cor suum effundit.
2. deinde proponit sibi Ministerium, cujus voce, seu Ministerio tanquam Legati,
Nuntii, seu interpretis, Deus utitur ad impartiendam, and obsignandam
absolutionem. Quando igitur deictum meum cognitum feci Deo, non neccssaria est
scrupulosa enumeratio coram Ministro, qui tantum dispensator est alieni benefic
i. -- Ut Minister intelligat cum qui absolutionem petit, doctrinam intelligere,
peccata agnoscere, poenitentiam agere, and in Christum credere; quae cognitio
haberi potest absque illa enumeratione, etc. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. de Confess.
and the function of the Ministry of the Gospel; At the Judgment seat
accordingly as the cause is opened, be it good or bad, is judgment given; but
the Ministry of the Gospel has a command of declaring and imparting a benefit
from another, viz. remission of sins from Christ, -- again, He that seeks
absolution, proposes unto himself these two, First, God, from whom he
craveth, and seeks remission of sins, and therefore before him pours out
his whole heast, In the second place he proposes unto himself the Ministry,
by the Voice whereof, as from an Ambassador, Nuntio, or interpreter, God
bestows and seals an absolution. When therefore I have made my case known
unto God, a scrupulous enumeration is not necessary before the Minister, who is
only the dispenser of another favor; and then advises the Minister,
Medicinae locus est hic non judicii Chrysostom.
that if he perceive the Penitent, who seeks for absolution, to have a
competent knowledge what sin is, and what repentance is, and what it is to
believe on Christ, upon which notice he is warranted to give absolution. And
much to the same purpose Canus; We must call to mind that the end of this
sacramental judgment is not punishing, Illud commemorandum est, hujus judicii
sacramentalis finem non tam punitionem, and vindicationem justitiae esse, quam
vindicationem salutarem; ex quo fit, ut licet in judicio pure vindicativo
exacta culparum cognitio requiratur, ut viz. tanta sit poena, quantam quis per
culpas meritus est; at in judicio hoc Sacramentali non exigitur exacta cognitio
peccatorum, sed qualis, and quanta necessaria est ad curationem, and salutem
Poenitentis; haec enim hujus judicii finis est. Canns part. 6. Relect. de
Poenit. page 903.
and the vindicating of justice, but the vindicating of salvation; whence it
is, that although at that Tribunal which serves only for infliction of
punishment, there is required an exact knowledge of the offense, that the
punishment may be squared according to the nature thereof; yet in this
sacramental judgment a strict account of sins is not exacted, but such, and so
much only, which is necessary for the salvation of the penitent; for that is
the scope of that judicatory proceeding. Wherein we note, 1. Confession of sin
is so far forth required as may be for the Penitents salvation; 2. And again,
that an exact confession of all sins is not requisite to the salvation of a
Penitent; 3. And lastly, the ends aimed at in this Spiritual Court, are not the
same with the terrestrial benches;
for here the way is made for mercy, and there the work for justice; judgment
is remembered there without mercy, and here mercy without judgment; thereupon an
exact and curious search into the knowledge of all sins is not so necessary to
this spiritual Judge, and so the first link in the chain is broken.

Rome wills, were thought necessary, what if the Judge proceed not to sentence
according to the right opening of the case? We make no question of the Judges
authority, we suspect his sincerity, and there is great difference between
authority to do a thing, and infallibility in the doing of it. Now his sentence
is right, and ratifyed in heaven, when he proceeds according to evidence, but
it is not infallibly certain, that he shall ever do so; and we cannot imagine
any erroneous sentence to be confirmed above, sine Coeli infamia, without
dishonouring the Supreme Judge. And that sometimes the Priest is out, the School
distinguishing of the erring key, confirms; for what need to distinguish of
the erring key, if the key never erreth? therefore Lyra hedgeth him in, and
tells him that his sentence is allowed of by God, Hoc tamen intelligendumest,
quando judicium ecclesiae divino judicio conformatur. Lyr. in Joan. c. 20.
When the judgment of the Church is conformable to his. Never any simple Priest
has been so arrogant as to assume this privilege to be infallible, the claim
whereof the High Priest at Rome has made his prerogative: but what will you
say if the Pope has erred, and that in this present business of absolution,
and eke in his own case? Read this ensuing story, you that are devoted to his
chair, and tell me how you like it. Popes have power to make choice of their
Confessor, of whom they please; and there was a Pope perceiving his life to
draw to an end, Capellano suo authoritatem Apostolicam contulit se absolvendi
sub plenaria remissione, ut fieri solet in anno Jubilaeo.
that committed to a Chaplain of his own, Apostolical power to absolve with
plenary authority as in the year of Jubilee; By virtue whereof, after confession
made, he received absolution, and so departed this life. Not many days after
he appeared to his Chaplain with a heavy look, and in a mourning weed, and
being demanded, If he was the late Pope, answered yea; also the Chaplain
desiring to know why he was so dejected in countenance, and clothes; for that,
quoth the Pope, I am adjudged to eternal death; Is it possible, replied the
Chaplain, since upon thy confession thou receivedst the benefit of plenary
absolution? it is even so, said the Pope, Supremus judex absolutionem illam
ratam non habuit. Spec. Exempl. did. 9. Sec. 30.
because the highest Judge would not ratify that absolution. The Relator tells
us, how by this apparition God would let us know, that if it be so in the green
wood, and top of the Church, we should consider what may fall out in the dry
and under branches thereof, where there is less authority; that although God
and the Pope have but one Consistory, yet they are not always of one mind; and
if Christ confirm not in heaven the sentence of his Vicar on earth, we may well
doubt if every Sir John's absolution discharge us before God; and if the Popes
keys may err in his own case, we may suspect their integrity in other men's;
and so we see the second link in this Sorites is feeble, and apt to be broken.

For all this, let it be granted that sins must be fully opened, before the
Priest can proceed to Sentence; and that he could not proceed amiss in the
sentence of absolution and pardon; yet except God had made over the hearing of
all sins unto his Priests, Illa potestas remittendi peccata non ita
intelligenda est data Sacerdotibus, quasi Deus se ea abdicarit, and eam prorfus
transtulerit in Sacerdotes, ita ut in absolutione non Deus, sed Sacerdos
remittat peccata. Chemnit. Exam. part 2. p. 176.
and reserved none to himself, as not minding to be troubled about any such
matters, and had resolved neither to forgive the sin, nor give the audience,
but to such only as the Priests have remitted, the argument would be the more
impregnable. But if our God be contrary minded (as sure he is) having shut out
no sins from his gracious audience, and is of so quick an ear, as to hear the
very desires of our hearts; and so swift to mercy, as to prevent oral
Confession with a pardon; how loosly does this reason hang? The present Greek
Church upon confidence hereof addresseth her self unto God for a pardon, even
for those sins which upon some causes were left out in Confession. Thus writes
their late Patriarch; (...). Hierem. Patr. Constant. ad Tubing. Resp. 1. c. 11.
Whatsoever sins the Penitent for forgetfulness, or shamefastness does leave
unconfessed, we pray the merciful, and most pitiful God, that those also may be
pardoned unto him; and we are persuaded that they shall receive a pardon of
them from God; thus he. God then remitteth sins never confessed to a Priest,
and ofttimes retains sins that are confessed; for the Priests sentence is not
always agreeable with his, nor of the same latitude and extent; God remitting
whomsoever the Priest assoileth, (if he proceed aright) and many more besides;
and retaining whose sins soever he retains, and many millions besides.
Thereupon Scotus observes, that the words of this Commission are not precise,
that is, whatsoever you remit, I remit also, and no more; and whatsoever you
retain, I retain, and that only: For that many more sins are retained by God
over and above those which the Priest retains is evident; The Priest only
retaining such which are detected, Illud verbum, Quorum retinueritis, etc. non
est praecisum; non solum enim illa retenta sunt a Deo peccatori ad poenam,
quaeretenta sunt a Sacerdote, quia Sacerdos noa retinet aliqua, nisi aliquo
modo sibi accusata, sed signis indebitis poenitentiae; and tamen illa quae
nullo modo sunt ostensa Sacerdoti, Deus retinet ad vindictam Gehennae; Ergo nec
istud verbum, Quorum remiseritis, etc. erit praecisum.
in such a confession, whereof there are apparent signs, that it proceeds not
from a penitent heart; in such cases where a sinner shall confess his sins and
express no sorrow for the same, like those Qui peccant and publicant, sin and
glory in their sin; wherein the Priest does not absolve, that is, he retains,
and reserves for future sorrow, or punishment. Now God retains those that
draw nigh to himself and the Priest with their lips, but are far from both in
their hearts; God, I say, retains these, and all those likewise that are not
known to the Priest, if they be not repented of, to be punished in hell fire.
So for the other member, viz. remission of sins: If more sins be retained by
God than are by the Priests, it follows that more sins are forgiven by God
than are by Priests also; for be it far from us to think, that God shall be
more strict than the Priest in retaining, and not more copious than the Priest
in pardoning; or that God should exceed the Priest in detention of sins, and
not in remission. No, no, God is rich in mercy, and though in mercy he so far
remember justice as to re^ain more sins than Priests take notice of, yet his
goodness is so great, as to forgive more than Priests are able to take notice
of, or well understand. Therefore the Commission runs in words affirmative,
and not negative; as if the remission and retention of sins made by the
Apostles were precisely equal, and of the same dimensions with the remission
and retention of sins made by God, which the negative terms, if they had
been added, had also comprised; for Christ does not say by way of negation
after this manner, Unde neutri affirmationi adjunxit negativam denotantem
remissionem factam ab Apostolis, vel retentionem esse praecisam respectu
remissionis, and retentionis a Deo faciendae. Scotus lib. 4. did. ^7.
whose sins soever ye remit not, they are not remitted, and whose sins
soever ye retain not, they are not retained; for then the power in the hand of
the Priest had been adequate unto that of God himself, and all sins must
necessarily have come through their hands to Absolution. But their power is as
a lesser sphere wrapped in a greater; a spark only of that celestial flame; or
as the crumbs which fall from their Masters Table. For example, as every thing
that stands under the roof of an house, is under the cope of heaven, but not
wwhatsoever is under the Sun, is included under that roof; so accordingly
whatsoever the Priest remitteth according to Gods Word, God remitteth; but not
convertibly, whatsoever God remitteth the Priest remitteth. There remains
then forgiveness for sin in store, besides that which the Priest ratione
officii bequeatheth. Therefore all sins are not restrained to Priestly
remission, nor by consequence to Auricular Confession, as the only means to
come by absolution and pardon; and so the third link is broken.

Scotus, Ratio ista been concludil quod Sacramentum poenitentiae est institutum
a Christo tanquam utile and efficax; non tamen sequitur ex hoc, quod sit
necessario recipiendum, ut cadens sub praecepto; quia extrema unctio est
instituta a Christo, and confi^mationis Sac^amentum, and tamen neutrum est
simpliciter necessarium, nec est praeceptum de isto vel isto recipiendo -- Sint
quatuor Sacerdotes quorum quilibet habet authoritatem absolvendi istum
peccatorem, non tamen tenetur peccator se cuilibet submittere, sedillorum uni
cui voluerit. Scot. supr.
then, that this was a good and profitable ordinance, instituted by Christ, yet
not necessary to be observed; for instance whereof, Confirmation and extreme
Unction (which go for Sacraments at Rome as well as Penance) both must be
thought to be of divine institution, yet neither adjudged necessary, nor is
there (says this Schoolman) any precept urging the use thereof. So here
Arbitrators are appointed in cases of conscience, but no express command for
any to submit to that arbitration. Pose le cas, There are 4. Priests, with
equal power of absolution, yet a Penitent being in place, is not tied to submit
to any one, but to whom he please. Here is then a judgment seat erected, a
Judge set upon the Pench, with commission to hear and determine of all sins,
and yet no sinners compelled to come in but such as please. It seems Scotus
held the words of Christ to invest the Priest with the power of a Judge, and
Arbiter in the case of sin, to him that voluntarily submitted to that Tr^bunal;
but withal that the words command not sinners to consent, and subject
themselves precisely to that jurisdiction. At Caesar's judgment seat Paul stood,
and ought to be judged, here a sinner may stand if he please, and be judged if
he please, and subject himself to that censure, but he owes no necessary
service thereunto: This seems to be this Doctors opinion, though I suppose
the business depends not upon this uncertainty; but that there are some kind
of sins, though not all, and some sort of sinners too, though not all, that not
only may, but must come in and be judged here, if they love the welfare of
their souls, as we shall see hereafter. Let us now gather up the broken pieces
of this Argument. 1. The Priest is to have notice of the sins of the Penitent
before he can proceed to censure; that is true, but a general knowledge may
sometimes suffice, without exaction at all times of particular Items. 2. The
Priest is constituted a Judge in such cases; that peradventure is true, but
then he is fallible, and often erring in judgment. 3. The Priest remitteth
sins; that is true in a good sense; but God remitteth more properly and more
then he, and many more without him. 4. The Court of Conscience is up, the Judge
enabled with authority, and is present at the Bench to hear; true, but liberty
is left to Christians to resort, or not, to submit, or not, to that
jurisdiction.


Thus this Master-proof hangs together like a rope of sand; for the matter it
self, I suppose, great is the authority which Christ in this place has put his
Priests in, and to great purpose questionless, as in due time may appear; and
great care is to be taken by such that depend upon them, how they frustrate not
the power of God, or rather their own souls of salvation; for the Priests bear
not this power in vain. Nor may the Spiritual men vainly imagine that they are
in place, Qui ex his cristas erigunt and tyrannidem quandam sibi vendicant, cur
non meminerint little quae mox praecesserint? Erasm. Hunc locum quidam non
intelligentes, aliquid sumunt de supercilio Pharisaeorum, etc. Hieron. in
Matthew. 16.
cristas erigere, and aliquid sumere de supercilio Pharisaeorum, as Hierome
said of some, to become Pharisaically insolent, or tyrannical; nor are the
people to dread the same, as an usurpation upon their consciences; but to be
persuaded, that this power is conferred for their peace, this Physic for their
diseases, and this Ministry for their reconciliation. Therefore when other
Physic will not work, prove this; when the peace of Conscience cannot
otherwise be had, seek it here; and when thy Reconciliation can no way else be
made, use these Arbiters and Mediators: And although Christ has not expressly
charged thee to repair unto this Court, to lay open thy case before these
Judges, Duo ista sibi mutuo respondent, ut ubi nulla est confessio, ibi nulla
esse possit absolutio. Confess. Pertcroviae, p. 252.2.
and submit thy self unto their censure; yet consider how God would never
constitute a Judge without a Circuit, nor erect a Court without a jurisdiction;
and bethink with thy self for thy good all this was and is ordained. He has
said, Dixit Medicis ut curarent, sed non dixit infirmis ut ad Medicos curandi
causa venirent, hoc enim quasi certum esse voluit, quod Aegri libenter se
Medicis curandos offerrent. Hugo.
and commanded his Physicians to heal; and has not said unto the sick, Go ye
to those Physicians and be healed; for this he would have supposed for a
certain and indubitate truth, that sick men will gladly offer themselves to
Physicians to be cured. Let an Hospital be once erected, and endowed with
maintenance for poor impotent people, and you need not command, or compel them
to come in; great suit shall be made to the Founder and Overseers for
admittance. The Priest sits, the Courts are open, the Medicines are prepared,
the reconciling keys are in his hands, yet little or no attendance upon this
Judge, no repair to this Physician, no submission to this Reconciler. To one
that demanded why Philosophers repaired to Rich men's houses, and Rich men never
to their Cells; it was answered, That Philosophers knew they had need of such
men, but Rich men were ignorant what use might be made of Philosophers; for
concerning spiritual diseases we esteem our selves so sound, or if we are
diseased, our selves so skilful, as to need none of the Lords Physicians. I say
no more, but that it were better we did not see so much, or saw better then we
do. And thus much to this argument.

Another Reason is yet behind, to prove confession of divine institution,
because it belongs unto the Sacrament of Penance. By which Sacrament the Popish
writers understand not the inward Contrition of the heart, but an external
sign, and expression thereof, and not every contrition so expressed; for
Niniveh published her sorrow in sackcloth, and in ashes; but this Sacrament
was not under the Law, but under the Gospel; nor every external expression
under the Gospel, Poenitentia signis externis declarata, cum verbo absolutionis
est Sacrame itum. Bellar. l. 1. de poen. c. 8.
unless Priestly absolution be set thereunto. If a man would catechize those
Rabbis in their own Rudiments, it would appear how ridiculous it is to teach
man's traditions for Gods precepts; for demand of them what is the outward sign
in this Sacrament, or matter thereof; One will answer, the sin confessed; no
says the Cardinal, Peccatum non est materia ex qua, sed circa quam,
Sacram^ntum operatur. cap. 15.
sin is not the matter whereof, but whereupon the Sacrament works. Scotus and
Ockam make only absolution to be essential therein; And they (says he) must
be born withal living before such Councils were called which handled the matter
accurately. Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction, are not parts of
Repentance, Contritio, confessio and satisfactio, non sunt parts poenitentiae
ut virtus est, sed ut Sacramentum. Lomb.
as it is a virtue, as it is a Sacrament, says the Master of the Schools, and
if Repentance as a virtue be the Saint, and as a Sacrament the shrine only;
let Rome keep the Sacrament without envy, so we retain the virtue. Yet the
Franciscans assembled at Trent, disliked that the actions of the Penitent
should be the material part of Penance, because the matter of the Sacrament is
a sign applied by the Minister unto the Receiver, Materia est quiddam quod a
Ministro applicatur Recipienti, non autem actus ipsius recipientis. Hist.
Council. Trid. p. 284. Signum Sacramenti poenitentiae est verbalis absolutio
quam impendit Sacerdos. Res Sacramenti reconciliatio est vere poemtentis and
confitentis. Grop. de Sacr. Poen. p. 107. Antw. 1556.
and never the actions of the receiver himself. The sign (says Gropperus) is
absolution granted from the Priest; the thing signified is the reconciliation
of a true Penitent that has made his confession. Not so, says the Cardinal;
absolution is not the sign, but the form thereof. I should weary my Reader with
relating popish differences. Here Bellarmine would pare the fray, Neque Scotus
satis apt locutus. c. 16. Sect. deinde Gropperus non satis caute locutus. ib.
Sect. Resp.
telling one Schoolman, he speaks not so fitly; another, not so advisedly; or
else (as before) he lived before those Councels that Went accurately to work.
For our parts, I think we may promise, that when their strife is ended about
the institute, we will become good Friends about the Institution. Of a certain
thus much; Antiquity never knew Repentance by the proper name of Sacrament.
Damascene, a late Father, and well-nigh born out of due time, upon purpose
treating of the holy and undefiled Sacraments of the Lord; (...).
(for that title does that Chapter bear) mentions two Sacraments only,
(...). Damasc. de Orthodox. fide. l. 4. c. 6. page 110, 111. Graec. Varonae
1531.
viz of our spiritual birth, and spiritual food; for our birth is of water, and
of the Spirit. I speak this of holy Baptism; but our meat is the bread of
life, our Lord Jesus Christ; for seeing that this Adam is spiritual, it
behooves this birth, and in like manner this food, to be spiritual; and says
out the whole Chapter upon these two only. The rest of the Sacraments were not
then Orthodoxae fidei, else there would have appeared some footsteps thereof,
in that Father; and that Treatise, which so summeth up the necessary, and most
important principles of Christianity.

It is time to draw to an end of this matter; Then in the name of God what is
to be thought of this ordinance, to what head is confession to be referred?
Council of Lateran.
If the Question be of that confession as is now practiced in the Church of
Rome, the Brat for ought I know, must be fathered upon the Council of Lateran,
under Innocent the III; then Councels lost their freedom, Nec libera Concilia
quae sub Innocentio, Glemente, etc. nec quicquam definitum ab istis Quae sub;
nisi quod ab illis Qui super, praefinitum esset. Tort. Totti. p. 209.
when they were held under: no decree could pass by them which which were
under, without leave from those which were above. A great many met there, M. C.
persons, but Abbots, and Priors to the number of DCCC. Strange matters fell out
there? yes, that so many assembled to so little purpose: Many matters were
proposed and consulted on, but nothing there could be decreed openly, Venere
tum multa quidem in consultationem nec decerni tamen quicquam aperte potuit.
Platin. vit. Innocent. 3. p. 203.
says Platina: Of so many matters consulted on, and not any one could be
decreed upon? Sure so many Fathers consulted to great purpose, Pisani and
Genuenses maritimo, and cisalpini terrestri bello inter se certabant. Platin.
ib.
and perhaps agreed no better then the Republiques of Pisa and Genoa then
together by the ears at Sea, besides other combustions in the continent. But
if nothing there was resolved on, where is the decree of private Confession?
that will issue well enough from thence, for the Historian says, nothing was
decried openly; Clancular Confession then crept in there clanculum and malis
artibus, at some back door, and under hand. Shuffled in there belike it was,
but not openly; Private confession was there privately carried and ordained
thus. Every faithful one of either sex, being come to years of discretion,
Omnis utriusque sexus fidelis, postquam ad annos discretionis pervenerit, omnia
sua solus peccata confiteatur fideliter, saltem s^mel in anno, proprio
Sacerdoti, and injunctam sibi poenitentiam studeat pro viribus adimplere,
suscipiens reverenter ad minus in Pascha eucharistiae Sacramentum, etc.
alioquin and vivens ab ingressu ecclesiae arceatur, and moriens Christiana
careat sepultura. Council. Lateran. cap. 21.
should by himself alone once a year at the least, faithfully confess all his
sins unto his own Priest, and endeavor according to his strength to fulfill
the Penaxce enjoined unto him, receiving reverently, at least at Easter, the
Sacrament of the Eucharist; otherwise in his life time let him be barred from
entering into the Church, and being dead, want Christian burial. In which
decree are these innovations, 1. Solus, that it must be private, 2. omnia
peccata, sins and all sins must be confessed, 3. Proprio Sacerdoti, to
their own Priest, where the liberty of choosing the Ghostly Father is taken
away.
And for the time (which the Jesuit tells us was the only thing there
concluded on) I say there was none decreed, only limited, leaving Christians
to confess at other times convenient within the year, but not to exceed, and
be without the compass of a year: Come as often within, as the Confessor and
his Penitent can agree, and meet upon it, but not to go over the year; and to
this head must popish shrift be referred.

But if Repentance be considered as a work of Grace arising from Godly sorrow,
whereby a man turns from all his sins to God, and obtains pardon; and so
including confession as an evidence of inward sorrow, and a mean of
reconciliation, such a Confession poured out before God, or unto God before his
Priests, is of the same right and institution as Repentance is. The grace of
God has ordained in this world repentance to be the approved Physician for
sinners, (...), Just. Mart. Resp. ad Orthod. Q 97. (...). Id. Dialog. cont.
Tryphon. Judaum.
says Justin Martyr. And again, God according to-the riches of his mercy
accepts of him that is penitent for his sins, as just and without sin. That
thing then is of Divine Institution which Gods grace has ordained; and of
divine power and efficacy, which makes a sinner accepted of God as a Righteous
person. But all this (thou will say) may be done by contrition, and confession
to God only, without respect unto the Priest; I deny not but that it may be,
and often is effected that way, but not always; such may be the Condition of
the sinner, and quality of the sin, that pardon, which is the fruit of
Repentance is not gathered, and new obedience which is the fruit of the
Penitent, is not brought forth, without confession to the Priest, and direction
from him, and so to be comprised in this duty also; for if the door of Heaven
would ever open upon the former knocking, the Priest had keys committed to no
purpose. To make this to appear distinctly, we are to consider, that to
institute may be taken in a twofold sense, Jurisconsultis, instituere est vel
arbores, vel vineas in aliquo loco ponere, ut in conducto fundo, si conductor
sua opera aliquid necessario vel utiliter auxerit vel aedificaverit, vel
instituerit. l. Dominus. Sec. in conduct. ff. loc. and conduct. vide Turneb.
Advers. l. 2. c. 13.
first, to be the cause, producer, and author of an effect; so taken with the
ancient Civilians, with whom to institute trees, or vineyards, is to set, and
plant them, In a ground let out, if the Farmer by his industry shall have
improved it; have builded, or have set or planted, in the Digests. And in this
acceptance Christ is the Author of the Sacrament of the Eucharist; that Vine
is of his planting, and institution: he is the Author? and his Ministers to do
it by his authority. Now Repentance is indeed a work of God, but not in God.
Confession is when God opens a sinners mouth, not his own. in that sense
Confession is not of divine institution. 2. Secondly that is said to be
instituted that is commanded, and enjoined: so of institution divine; that is
of divine law and ordinance, and that of divine law which is prescribed in the
Divine word, the holy Scriptures, as a law to be observed or as an example to
be imitated: And Divine ordinances are there delivered by God immediately, or
by (...), the men of God, inspired by him. In which sense Saint Chrysostom
interprets those passages of Saint Paul, not I but the Lord; and I, not the
the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.10, 12.
not as if Christ spoke of himself, and Paul from himself, for in Paul Christ
spoke: what is it then that he says, I, and not I? Jesus Christ has delivered
some laws, and ordinances in his own person, unto us, (...). Chrysostom. (...).
To. 6.250.
and some by his Apostles. Furthermore, a thing may be of Divine right, as
expressly and formally enjoined in the Scriptures, or else as virtually employed
by a necessary deduction and consequence; Aliquid dicitur esse jure divino
duobus modis; vel quod institutum habet in sacris literis, idque vel express,
vel certa deductione erutum, vel ex^mplum continuata ecclesiae praxi omni
s^culo commendatum. Junius in Bellar. controv. 7. cap. 10.
or else as exemplary and ratified by the constant practice of the Church. So
divine right and institution is accepted in a threefold sense, 1. in express
precept and command. 2. in necessary consequence depending upon some other
thing commanded.
Or. 3ly. by approved examples in Gods word, commended by the practice of the
Church. Confession of divine institution, 1. V^rtute praecepti.
We will lay confession unto all of these, and see what authority it has. And
first for divine command, we read in the law that the sinner by divine edict,
brought his Sacrifice, and confessed his sin unto the Priest. Thou will reply,
Numb. 5.
that law was Ceremonial, Lev^t. 5.
so say I in respect of the Sacrifice, but dare not say so, in respect of the
confession, the one being a typical and the other a moral act, And think it
not strange that one precept may be mixed, and composed of Ceremony and
morality; For is not the law of the Sabbath so, the day Ceremonial, Dies
ceremonialis quies mora^lis.
and the rest moral; Cultus a natura, modus a lege, virtus a gratia.
and it may not unfitly be applied to Confession, what is verifyed of the
Sabbath. 1. Confessio Deo facta est a natura; Nature it self teaches us that a
sinner must confess unto God, whom he has wronged; and this is morale
positivum, the moral positive part of the law. 2. Modus a lege, Confessio
mentalis quae fit Deo, est de dictaminel gis naturae adjutae quodammodo per
fidem. Raymund. sum. tract. 4.
To confess unto the Priest. This manner of confession was enjoined by God,
and this is Positivum divinum, the divine positive part of the law. 3. But
Virtus a gratia; true confession whether to God, Jam donum S^piritus Sancti
habet qui confitetur and poenitet, quia non potest esse confessio peccati, and
compunctio in homine ex seipso. Aug. in Ps. 1.
or to his Priest, is from the working of the holy spirit; it being fulfilled
in this as in other graces, what have thou O man, that thou have not received?
The Ceremonial part which consisted in the Sacrifice, cease; for a Christian
has another Altar, and another Sacrifice, 2. ex necessitate Consequentiae.
Christ Jesus, slain upon the Cross, by virtue whereof his Priests assure the
Penitent of pardon, and absolution. For the second, Confession is of divine
right by way of deduction. For if the use of the keys in the Mini stery of the
Priests be divine, (as it cannot be denied but that they are so) and if that
use consists in absolution, and if that absolution ever presupposes, and
cannot be denounced without precedaneous confession; the consequent will tie
them together, for the world cannot break the relation that is betwixt
Confession and absolution. 3. ratione exempli.
And for the last, a president we have in the Acts of the Apostles, seconded
with the practice of the Church, as has been declared. Thou see (Good
Reader) how confession pretends to divine right in a strickt sense, Jus
divinum laxe vel stricte sumptum hoc in S. literis invenitur, illud ex earum
sive instituto, sive exemplis, and analogia, recta ratione deducitur. Azorius
Instit. Mor. part. 2. l. 1. c. 2.
as enjoined in the Scripture; and in a large, as a necessary consequent
deducted by rational proportion from divine premises; and how the same is
corroborated by examples set forth in the Scripture, and by ecclesiastical
practice, set forth in the discipline of the Church likewise.

This I must be interpreted to speak of Confession unto Gods Ministers in
general, without respect to the manner thereof, privately or publicly
performed. Which I think is left to the power of the Church to determine. There
was a time when the public performance thereof was all in all; that was left
off, and the private doing thereof succeeded in the room, to supply that
defect; and which at the first alteration was esteemed to be no more
Sacramental, or of no more necessity for obtaining remission of sins then
the former. So that the course taken herein may well be thought to have the
nature of a temporal law, which (as Saint Austin says) although it be just,
Appellemus istam legem (si placet) temporalem, quae quamvis justa sit,
commutari tamen per tempora just potest. Aug. de. lib. a^b. lib. 1. cap. 6.
yet in time may be justly changed. Canus acknowledges confession in its own
nature for a divine ordinance, but for the Condition thereof, secret or open,
he refers to be ordered by natural prudence; his words are these: Confession
of sins ought to be made unto the Priest, Confessio peccatorum Sacerdoti
fieri debet, non solum ex traditione majorum, verum etiam ex Evangelico
testimonio, quod quidem est de necessitate Sacramenti: Secretam vero aut
publicam confessionem fi^ri, prudenti^e est naturali relictum, quae dictat ut
occulta occulte, and publica public jud^centur. Canus. Relect. de. poen. p. 6.
not only by tradition from our Ancestors, but also by testimony from the
Gospel; and this is of the necessity of the Sacrament. But whether Confession
should be secret, or public, that's left to natural prudence, which wills
that secret sins should be judged in secret, and those which are public,
publicly. Michael Vehe frames to himself this objection; Let it be granted
that these words, whose sins soever ye remit etc. infer a confession to be
made of all sins whatsoever; which seeing it may be performed two ways,
privately, or publicly, and neither way by Christ commanded, both would seem
of equal necessity. But no man can say that public confession is necessary,
and why may not so much be said of private? answers thus. We say and affirm
neither way of Confession to be necessary by any precept from Christ,
Respond^mus and dicimus neutrum consitendi modum ess^ ex praecepto Christi
necessarium, utrumque autem necessarium sub distinctione; liberum est ergo
ecclesiae eligere illum, vel illum: cum autem etiam secretam volucrit esse
confession^m, ad publicam non tenemur. Vehe. tract. 6. de Sacr. Poen. c. 4.
and yet both necessary with a distinction: The Church then was left to her
choice to take which she pleased; and seeing she has embraced to confess in
secret, we are not tied to the public: Which two assertions how far they cut
the throat of Clancular confession, Rome may do well to consider. Confession
then in it self may be of Divine right, and the manner thereof, whether private
or public, a Churches constitution; and which way the Church should conceive
to be most profitable, and command the use, what am I that should contradict
the same? to whose benign censure I submit what I have here resolved
concerning the institution.

SECT. II.
The Contents.
The abusive necessity of Confession. Tyrannical inquisition into men's
consciences, distasteful. Confession left at liberty in Gratian's times.
Schoolmen leaning to the necessity thereof. Confession not the only necessary
means for absolution, and remission. The ends aimed at in Popish confession,
unnecessary. No express precept in Scripture for the absolute necessity
thereof. Confession an heavy burden upon fleshly shoulders. Private confession
not practiced from the beginning. Established in the place of the Public by an
edict from Leo 1. The fact of Nectarius abrogating confession, with the
several answers and expositions of Roman Writers expended. Confession deserted
in the Greek Church. Diverse kinds and forms of Necessity. Confession in what
cases necessary, and the Necessity thereof determined.

WE are now come to the necessity of confessing; a point necessarily to be
opened, the over-pressing of the same upon men's Consciences has been thought a
kind of Tyranny and has caused the busy obtruders thereof to be suspected, as
if they aimed at their own ends, and sought not those things that are of Christ
Jesus, Lording it over the Consciences of the people, making their keys become
pick-locks, and themselves not Seers, but Spies; not Judges, but Accusers; not
Physicians, but Betrayers; not good Samaritans, to bind up the wounds, but
cruel Tyrants to rent them wider. More than time it is to consider of these
things, and to discharge the duty it self of such abuses. And from our
endeavors herein has sprung the controversy between Rome and us, viz. our
dislike of such a commanding necessity as shall lay violent hands upon a
sinner, and urge him to this Physic against his will; where ofttimes the Purge
becomes more violent than the disease, and the potion more bitter than the
grief it self. The profit, and great good reaped by Confession we willingly
subscribe unto, but confession upon the rack is that we distaste. It is not
called into question (says a Roman Doctor, Non versatur in quaestione, number
utilis and salutaris sit confessio (nam Adversarii hoc ultro donant) sed hoc in
contentionem rapitur, An enumeratio delictorum in confessione sit de jure
divino necessaria? M. Vehe tract. de secreto Confess. c. 1. Lypsiae, 1535.
but no Tridentine) whether confession be beneficial and wholesome (for our
adversaries grant this of their own accord;) but the controverted point is,
whether the numbering up of sins in confession be necessary by Gods law or not.
The Trent Fathers decree the same to be a matter of necessity, laid upon the
necks of all sinners; and plant their sixth Canon, Si quis negaverit
confessionem Sacramentalem vel institutam, vel ad salutem esse necessariam jure
divino, etc. Anathema sit. Con. Trid. cap. 5. can. 6.
to discharge Anathema's against all such as shall deny the institution of
confession, and the necessity thereof from divine right, for the obtaining of
salvation. Many moderate Divines of Germany, as Chemnitius witnesses,
endeavored pacification herein, as desirous to lenifie and mitigate the
severity of this Papal practice with gentle Medicines; Conati fuerunt multi
Pontificii scriptores, in Germania praesertim, acerbitatem legis Pontificiae de
confessione variis pharmacis mitigare; sed concilium sine misericordia
durissimas conditiones Pontificiae confessionis renovat, confirmat, and
stabilit. Chem. Exam. part. 2. p. 195.
but that merciless council ratified and enjoined bitter pills, and sharp
receipts, very corrosive upon the Consciences of men, as apprimely necessary
for the health of their souls. And observes the progress, and proceeding, how
Confession came by those necessary ties. In the Primitive Church it was used as
a profitable, and wholesome discipline, and did much good in restraining from
sin, and in pacifying the conscience after sin; full and frequent are the
passages in the volumes of the Fathers looking this way, and commending the
same to our Christian care; Apud Patres extant exhortationes ad confessionem
disciplinae gratia. -- Gratiani and Lombardi t^mpore coeptum fuit disputari, An
necessaria suit confessio: Gratianus Lectori liberum permi^tit Judicium;
Longobardus inclinat ad necessitat^m. Chemnit. ib. p. 198.
but in their days it was but exhortative, not compulsatory. After their days
in Gratians time the necessity thereof came to be disputed, yet so, as nothing
peremptorily was then resolved. The Master of the sentences seemed to incline
and draw to that opinion which held the same to be necessary; and that which in
his time was but probable, and which might piously be embraced, began at length
to be entertained as certain, and firmly to be believed. And so now a necessity
is laid upon us with a woe* and an Anathema, if we come not to confession. It
is very true what he spoke of those two, (...) Lombard. Gratian.
the Castor and Pollux of Canonical and School Divinity; for Gratian recites
at large the several sentences of the Doctors, and at length leaves the matter
wholly in suspense, after this manner; Upon what authorities, Quibus
authoritatibus, vel quibus rationum firmament^s utraque sententia innitatur, in
medium breviter exposuimus. Cui autem potius adhaerendum sit, Lectoris judicio
reservatur; utraque enim sautores habet sapientes and religiosos viros. De
Poen. did. 1. c. 89. Quamvis.
or upon what strength of reasons both these opinions are grounded, I have
briefly laid open; but to whether of them we should adhere, is reserved to the
judgment of the Reader; for both of them have for their Favorers wise and
religious men. The Scales it seems hung so even that he durst not turn them to
either side, and so the business rested in suspense, and undecided in his time,
which was M C L. years after Christ; and all that while Christianity stood
without this decision. Peter Lombard hangs something upon one scale, who
proposing these questions; 1. Whether sin is remitted upon contrition of the
heart only? 2. Whether confession unto God suffices without any unto the
Priest? 3. And whether confession may be made to a faithful Lay man?
Of which, In his docti diversa sentire inveniuntur, quia super his varia, ac
pene diversa tradidisse videntur Doctores. l. 4. d. 17. Sect. 1.
learned men (says he) are found to hold diversely, and concerning them the
Doctors seem to have delivered diverse, yea and almost adverse resolutions. But
his resolution is thus framed; It may be said that sins are remitted upon
contrition, Dici potest quod sine confessione oris, and solutione poenae
exterioris, peccata delentur per contritionem, and humilitatem cordis. -- Quae
dicta sunt de confessione, and Poenitentia, vel ad confessionem cordis, vel ad
interiorem poenam referenda sunt, and ad contemnentes, vel negligentes
referenda.
and humility of the heart, without oral confession, and performance of
external punishment. And that such testimonies of the Doctors as import
confession, are to be understood of the inward Confession of the heart; or else
touch those as neglect and contemn confession, which is made unto the Priest.
But he adds withal, that a Penitent ought to confess if he have time;
Oportet poenitentem (si tempus habeat) confiteri; and tamen antequam sit
confessio in ore, si votum sit in cord, praestatur ei remissie.
yet before confession be in the mouth, if there be a resolution thereof in the
heart, that a man is forgiven. But afterward he grows more peremptory; From
these and more proofs then these it appears without all doubt, Oportet Deo
primum, and deinde Sacerdoti offerri confessionem, nec aliter posse pervenire
ad ingressum Paradisi. Id. ib.
that confession ought to be tendered unto God first, thence to the Priest, (if
he may be had) otherwise there can be no possibility of coming into Paradise.
This Magisterial determination has these parcels: 1. sin is remitted upon
inward confession; 2. a purpose of Confession is required for the remission of
sin; 3. the neglect or contempt of Confession either to God, or the Priest, is
damnable; 4. Confession of sin (if opportunity serve) is actually to be made
unto God, and the Priest, upon peril of exclusion from Gods kingdom.
Thus the Master; and we cannot expect better from the disciples, for usually
they are more forward, and say more than those that taught them: and especially
seeing the Council of Trent has had so little compassion in this case; we are
out of hope that any Divines of that side should abate any thing of this
decreed rigor.

It remains that we examine the grounds why this extreme necessity is
imposed; for Laws and ordinances are not usually enacted, nor necessarily
exacted, except upon sound purposes and ends. And if those ends may be obtained
without them, or come by upon better terms, or if the goodness thereof be
ended; the Laws are repealed, the ordinances taken away, and the necessity
cease; this being a received Maxim, that the necessity of the means must not
exceed, nor be above the necessity of the end; and if the end be not judged
necessary, the like judgment must be had of the means. Again, such means are
only deemed necessary, which serve for the attaining of the end; and so far
forth as without them such a proposed end cannot be accomplished. For example;
If eating and drinking be only necessary for this life, then if I had no
necessity to live, I might have no necessity to eat. Again, If I am to go a
journey, it is not necessary that I shall go afoot, because I may be carried:
two things then constitute the necessity of the mean, aptitude, and propriety;
that it be sit, and only fit to compass such a design. These notions
presupposed, we shall inquire into the foundations of this necessity in
exacting confession; and if neither the end be necessary to be had, nor the
means so requisite for the due obtaining thereof, we shall then cast away this
necessity as an exaction, it being a burden not to be endured, which is
sustained to no purpose; and a tyranny which lays a necessity upon the
conscience, where Christian liberty is every way as behoofeful.

The first ground of this imposition is upon a supposed peril of salvation;
for these men teach that as there is no reconciliation with God without
remission of sin, so no sin is remitted without confession (or at least a
purpose thereof) unto a Priest; for says Bellarmine, Medium necessarium ad
reconciliationem post baptismum est confessio peccatorum omnium Sacerdoti
facta. Lib. 3. de poenit. cap. 2.
A necessary mean to reconcilement after Baptism, is Confession of all sins
made unto a Priest: And hence it is they urge it so closely; Confession to a
Priest not necessary in all cases, and to all persons, necessitate medii.
and too urgent they cannot be, if so great a matter were at stake. But the
question is, whether the mean proposed be necessary to this end, yea or no; and
whether remission of sins can be obtained of God no other way? for if it may,
then we must conclude this not to be an adequate mean conducing thereunto; for
we must now confider of Confession not as an help, and a kind of mean, and in
some sort of sinners only; but whether or no it be the only mean, for all
sinners to gain a pardon: for there can be no necessity for a Felon to use the
mediation of one man only to his Prince for pardon, except the Prince be
resolute to pardon no other way. Now God has not any where revealed so much,
that no mercy shall be had but upon such a condition; nor dare the Jesuits
confine him unto any such. Christ the Author of the Sacraments, Christus author
Sacramentorum, a Sacramentis suis non dependebat; and ideo non modo sine
confessione, sed etiam sine Baptismo peccata interdum remittebat. Lib. 3. de
poen. c. 17.
depended not upon his Sacraments, and therefore did remit sins, sometimes not
only without Confession, but without Baptism also, says Bellarmine. Yea in
the ordinary course remission of the sin comes in betwixt contrition of the
heart, and confession of the mouth. Saint Augustine upon these words, Non
dicitur, Ore confessus suerit, sed conversus ingemuerit; unde datur intelligi
quod etiam ore tacente veniam interdum consequimur: hinc and Leprosi illi
quibus Dominus praecepit, ut ostenderent se Sacerdotibus, in itinere antequam
ad Sacerdotes venirent, mundati sunt. Aug. apud Magistr. lib. 4. d. 17. Sect. 1.
At what time soever a sinner shall be converted, and ingemuerit, and shall
groan, he shall live, and not die, writes thus; It is not said, and shall
confess with his mouth, but being converted shall groan; from whence is given
to understand, that sometimes we obtain a pardon when our lips are shut; hence
it was that those L^pers whom the Lord commanded to show themselves unto the
Priests, in the way were healed before they came unto them. And as Lazarus was
first raised by the Lord, Lazarus etiam non prius de monumento eductus, and
postea a Domino suscitatus, sed intus susc^^atus prodiit for as vivus, ut
ostenderetur suscitatae anime praecedere confessionem. Lombard.
and loosed from the power of death before he came forth of his grave; so a
sinner is first raised by Grace, and loosed from the bonds of sin and guilt,
before be can come forth to Confession. This order the Master observes, 1. Nemo
suscitatur nisi qui a peccato solvitur; None can be raised but must be loosed
first from Death, because fin is the death of the soul; and this solution is
absolution. 2. Nullus confitetur nisi resuscitatus; (...)
for as speech is the argument of life, so confession of grace: Psalm. 6.5.
and, in morte quis confitebitur tibi?
In death there is no remembrance of thee, Psalm. 6.5.
and in the grave who shall confess unto thee? Now the mean in execution ever
precedes the end: Confession then is not the means to purchase remission, which
goes before it; therefore Gabriel dislikes this course, and tells us, That many,
Confessio quod sit necessaria in actu, varii variis modis ostendere nituntur,
sed plerique insufficienter; and quidem non potest ostendi sufficienter ex
necessitate remissionis p^ccati, quamvis remissio p^cca^i sit necessaria ad
salutem; tum quia ad remission^m peccati est alius modus sufficiens sine
confessione in actu, sc. contritio cordis, per quam peccatum remittitur,
priusquam Peccator Sacerdoti confiteatur, tum quia conf^ssio secundum
probabiliorem opinionem praeexigit remission^m peccati per contritionem
praeviam, and per hoc, nunquam per confession^m remittitur peccatum, sed eam
praesupponit. Biel. l. 4. d. 17. Qu. 1.
and in a diverse manner, have gone about to show the necessity of actual
confession, but for the most part very insufficiently; and truly it cannot
sufficiently be demonstrated from the necessity of remission of sin, although
remission of sin be necessary to Salvation; for that there is another mean
sufficient to come by forgiveness of sin without actual confession, namely,
contrition of heart; whereupon the sin is forgiven before the sinner can
confess unto the Priest. And for that confession prerequireth forgiveness of
sin (according to the more probable opinion) by an antecedent sorrow; and by
reason whereof sin is never forgiven by confession, but is presupposed by it.
Thou will reply, how Biel speaks of actual confession, and not of potential;
or the purpose, and resolution in the heart to confess, which is ever
concomitant with contrition. I answer, Holy vows, and purposes not reduced into
act, are in themselves of no worth, but in case where they shall earnestly be
endeavored to be put in act, and to be effected; but (the ability being
wanting, or disappointed by some greater power) then they are taken for the
deed; and a faithful promise of confession is as good as confession it self.
Here when a Priest is at hand there needs no such vow or purpose, there being
no likelihood the same should be crossed or intercepted; this actual confession
then supposes none that is promissory. I desire therefore this popish block
may no more be cast in the way.

2. Necessitas Finis; Ends prescribed in popish shrift unnecessary.
Other ends then may be excogitated, and for them confession may be thought a
necessary mean; for sure the shoe will not fit this foot; the Question is
indeed, and upon this occasion proposed by the Master of the Sentences. If it
be demanded why Confession should be necessary, Ad quid confessio necessaria,
cum in contrition^ jam deletum sit peccatum? Resp. 1. per conf^ssionem
intelligit Sacerdos qualiter debeat judicare de crimine -- 2. per eam peccator
fit humilior and cautior. Lomb. l. 4. did. 17. Sect. ult.
since the sin already is blotted out by Contrition? In answering to that
demand he flies to other ends: 1. As to inform the Priest of the nature of the
offense, and what he is to judge thereof; but there can be no great end of that
information when the sin is cancelled; for why should another man remember,
when God has forgotten it? 2. And to make the sinner more humble, and more
cautelous. Conduce it may somewhat this way, but there are better texts for
those themes, and auricular Confession left out; some inducements these, but no
ncessary prescriptions.
Furthermore, says Gabriel; If we will narrowly and circumspectly listen unto
the virtue of Confession, Si sunditus attendimus vi^tutem Conf^ssionis, ipsa
non, est instituta (saltem in actu) tanquam necessaria remissioni p^ccatorum,
sed hanc praesupponit; sed propter tri^ instituta est: 1. so, ut P^ccator
innotescat Ecclesiae tanquam absolutus; 2. ut certa satisfactio, per quam poena
peccati tollitur, a Confessore ^mpon^tur; 3. ut poenae pars virtute
Sacramentalis absolutionis remittatur. Gab. Bicl. ib.
it was not instituted (at least in act) as necessary for the forgiveness of
sin, but that ^t supposes; but it was ordained for three other purposes; 1.
that the finner might appear unto the Church to be absolved; 2. That a certain
satisfaction might be imposed by the Confessor, whereby the punishment of sin
may be taken off; 3. and that a part of the punishment might be remitted by
Priestly absolution.
Grave considerations and weighty sure, but the scales must then hang at Rome
to weight them in, else with us on this side of the Alps, they will be found
lighter than vanity it self; and in Biels own judgment, imposition of penance,
the second reason, is not so necessary to a discreet Penitent that c. n. allot
himself a just portion for his sin: yea, absolution (says he) may be enjoined
without any imposition of penance at all, Non videtur necessarium, praesertim
ubi co^sitens non indiget inform^tione -- poena quae hic non solvitur, solvitur
in futuro; fient quoque tales salvi, sed non nisi per ignem. Gab. ib.
(as he says) if the Penitent will run the hazard of Purgatory, and not make
payment here, but defer till then, where the utmost pardon shall be exacted.
And in truth, prescription of penance is the principal mark aimed at in Popish
shrift, and satisfaction the choicest employment; where Penitents are taught
more to rely upon that reed and arm of flesh, than upon him that dyed upon the
Cross. Like the Ambassadors of Ptolomaeus and Cleopatra, who acknowledged in
their Masters name, Plus cos S. P. Q. R. quam parentibus ejus, quam Diis
immortalibus debere, per quos obsidione miserrima liberati essent, regnum prope
amissum recepissent. Tit. Livius lib. 45. Sect. 13.
that their Country was more bound to the Senate and people of Rome, for their
deliverance from a miserable siege, and for the restitution of their kingdom
in danger to be lost, than to their own d^ar Parents, yea, than to the immortal
Gods. Let I say their actions be scanned, and their intentions thereby
discerned, and when these ends are resolved to be necessary, let confession be
decreed to be so also.

But what say you to the third necessity, 3. Necessitas Praecepti.
which is of Precept and Command? Indeed Divine precepts should not be
questioned but observed; Let there be showed any mandamus from heaven with a
peremptory command for Confession upon such conditions, and we, submittimus
fasces, will yield the Bucklers, as extremely loath to espouse any contrary
opinion to the express word of God. Therefore speak Lord, for thy servants
would g^adly hear. The Lord has said indeed, Except a man be born again of
water and of the Spirit; but no where, Except a man repent, and be shriven by a
Priest, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. This is it the Schoolmen and
Jesuits have sought for narrowly, Quod Cajetanus in Commentariis super hunc
locum asserit, institutionem Sacramenti Poenitentiaeinde haberi, non
praecoptum, certissime fallitur. Canus Relect. de Poenit. page 899.
and are yet to seek. And how well they have found it in these words, whose
sins soever ye remit, etc. has in part been discussed; and Cajetan says (but
is checked for so saying) that the institution of repentance may there be
found, but no precept.

A late Sorbonist has found another Precept; Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, Tout homme qui a perdula grace, est tenu and obliege de
droit divine de la recouvrer: attendu que pas commandment express, il est tenu
d'aimer Dieu de tout son cour, Diliges Dominum, etc. Or celui qui n'a point la
grace, n'aime point son Dieu, and l'homme pecheur est prive de cete grace; il
est donc tenu de la recouvrer, and il la recouvre en confessant ses pechez an
Prestre. Pierre Bess. Caresme, Tom. 2. p. 723. A Paris. 1628.
etc. But how is Auricular confession concluded here? marry thus, The man that
has lost the grace of God is by Gods law obliged to recover the same, for so
much as by the commandment he is expressly ti^d to love God with all his heart,
Diliges Dominum, etc. Now that man who is destitute of grace loves not God,
and each sinful man is deprived of that grace; he ought then to endeavor the
recovery thereof; and it is recovered in confessing his sins unto a Priest. If
this discourse of this Doctors were sound, confession being consequently
inferred, and not expressly delivered, would fall out to be an Echo of Gods
word rather than the word it self. The force of this reason (says he) depends
upon this saying of Ambrose, No man can be justified except he shall confess
his sin but the truth is, the consequence is very lame, and shows, Non potest
quispiam a peccato justificari, ni si fuerit antea confessus peccatum. Ambr.
lib. de Paradiso.
how wild humane discourse will grow in Sacred Mysteries, except disciplined by
Religion. The saying of Ambrose is firm, for Justification consists in the
forgiveness of sin, and sin cannot be forgiven except it be acknowledged; but
neither does Ambrose say it ought precisely to be confessed to a Priest, nor
that confession to a Priest is precisely necessary to Justification. The
Doctors fabric then hangs very loosly, and if lost grace may be recovered any
other way, it falls to the ground. Verily Origin (as we have heard) reckoned up
seven ways to remission of sins, whereof Confession is one, then not the only
way. And Scotus (whose argument this is, Sacramentum poenitentiae est via
utilis, est tam^n alia utilis, quare non probat istam esse praecisam ad illam
recuperandam -- nulla alia est via ita sacilis, and certa; hic enim nihil
obstat, nisi ponere ebicem ad gratiam; solum requiritur opus exterius cum
amotione interioris impedimenti, hoc est, habens voluntatem suscipiendi
Sacramentum Ecclesiae, and sine obice peccati mortalis actualiter sibi facto,
recipit non ex merito, sed ex pacto divino effectum istius Sacramenti. Scotus
li. 4. d. 14. Q. 4. Sect. Quantum ad tertium.
and from him the Doctor had it) expected that answer, viz. because another way
may be as good to come by grace as this, sc. by the mean of absolution from a
Priest; therefore it concludes not this to be the only way. For if this kind
of Confession were the only course, and lost grace could not be recovered but
by this means, then it were necessarily to be embraced. But now Scotus dares
not affirm it to be the only precise way; he rather commends it for an easy
way, and so ready to hit, that we cannot lightly miss it; for here is nothing
(if you trust him) to bar thee from grace, if thou bar not thy self; bring but
attrition, which is but the embryo of true sorrow, and a purpose to cast off
thy sins, as a Mariner casts out his goods in a tempest; yea, give but way
only to the virtue of absolution, and it will of it self, without any
disposition in thee, restore grace forfeited, and pardon. A very compendious
and easy way of gaining salvation, wherein the effect of Repentance is gained
without repentance; and remission of sins without contrition; and an impenitent
person resorting to shrift, and bringing no repentance, reaps there the
benefit. O Divine drug! or else O Devilish Mountebanke! by which Spiritual
kind of Cosenage, many are persuaded that the Priests acquittance without more
ado is a Quietus est, and that old scores are struck off; and so they sin and
confess, confess and sin afresh, treading this maze, and dancing that Mattacini
so long, till a fearful catastrophe enclose them: for if this of Scotus were
true (as God forbid it should) that the Sacrament of Penance, without the
virtue of Repentance should confer the virtue; very few would be virtuous, and
real penitents, but Sacramental only. A course embraced (I fear) by too many,
who run on all the year in sinning, and think to strike off all by an annual
shrift; as if that formality were the only appennage of mercy, with the
undergoing of some petty observances, imposed by the Ghostly Father, and those
too an Indulgence procured by a little silver can dispense with; is not this a
goodly argument brought to prove the necessity of Confession, that abolisheth
the virtue of Repentance?

There is another reason behind which goes up and down amongst popish Divines,
for the necessity of Confession, drawn from the nature thereof; a huge burden,
and is couched thus; we make it our pleasure, and willingly undertake things
delightful and grateful to our dispositions, but not willingly would stoop like
Issachar under heavy burdens, except necessity cast them upon us, as desire of
health may sweeten bitter receipts; for if any thing of use in the Catholic
Church may be said to be hard, Si quares est in Ecclesia Catholica quaegravis
ac difficilis videatur, sine dubitatione ulla Confessio est. Quid molestius,
quid onerosius, quam ut cogantur etiam viri Principes peccata sua omnia
detegere, quamvis arcana, quamvis turpia, quamvis pudenda? and Sacerdotum
judicio stare, and mulctam ab eis impositam subire? Bellar. lib. 3. de Poenit.
c. 12.
and heavy, surely it is confession; what more molestious or burdensome to
Princes, Prelates, and all sorts of men, than to be constrained to rip up their
sins, many times full of shame, of leudness, of horror; and to stand, and
submit to the Priests censure, and mercy, in undergoing a fine, or mulct
imposed by him? Some great necessity sure there is, else this duty would be out
of practice. I cannot easily believe the Fathers (says Bishop Fisher) would
have imposed so hard a task upon us, Neque facile crediderim Patres ipsos hanc
usque adeo duram provinciam nobis imposuisse, nisi persuasissimum habuissent
hanc exomologesin ab Apostolis institutam, aut in ipsis Scripturis dilucide
traditam fuisse, ceu rem cunctis peccatoribus apprime necessariam. Roffens.
contr. Luther. page 132. 2.
if they had not been thoroughly persuaded, confession to have been of an
Apostolical institution, or else to have been clearly delivered in the holy
Scriptures, as a thing exceeding necessary for all kind of sinners. Thus they.
It cannot be denied that Romish Confession is an Egyptian bondage; not can it
be proved that any such was imposed by the Ancient Fathers, much less to be of
Apostolical constitution, and least of all to have any light from the holy
Scriptures. Nor is it any wonder that so many stoop their necks and bow their
shoulders thereunto, considering that the most ridiculous religions consist of
the most rigorous Superstitions: what austere Idolatry was that for Baals
Priests, lancing themselves to procure audience? And most unnatural, and cruel
Sacrifices those, Saltabant interim quo pueri in Idolo succenso igne
cremabantur, percutientes tympana ne pueri ejulatus audiretur. Paul. Phagius in
Called. Paraphras. in Levit.
for Parents to commit their dearest children in the flames to Moloch, and to
drown their cries in the aires of Music. (...).
Gods desire is for the people to be his servants, whereas the Devil ever makes
his servants slaves. Who had seen a Prince of this land, uncover his back, and
submit himself to be scourged by Monks, would not have complained of vile
servitude? Henry 2. apud Matthew. Paris.
The Scribes and Pharisees laid heavy burdens, and grieveus to be born upon the
people; yet none of all these were of God. Matthew. 23.3.
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Religion, said I? no, 2 These. 2.11.
God sent them strong delusions to believe lies; they were besotted with a
superstitious fear, and so became slaves to the Roman yoke. Josephus Acosta
relates a strange Confession observed in Japon, Joseph. Acosta, hist.
Indiarum. l. 5. c. 25.
thus; There are in Ocaca very high and steep rocks, which have pikes on them
above 200 fadome high; One of which, surmounting the rest for height, and to
the Xambusis (a kind of Pilgrims) terrible to behold; upon the top whereof
there is a great rod of Iron three fathom long, placed there artificially; at
the end of this rod is a balance tied, whereof the scales are so big as a man
may sit in one of them; and the Goquis (Devils in humane shape) command one of
the Xambusis to enter into one of them and there sit; forthwith by an Engine
the rod is pendent in the air, and the empty scale is raised up to touch the
rod whereunto the balance is fastened, the Pilgrim hanging below in the other.
Then the Goquis tells him, that he must confess all the sins that he can
remember, with an audible voice; whereupon some of the hearers laugh, and some
sigh. At every sin mentioned, the other scale falls a little, till that, having
told all, it remains equal with the other, wherein the sorrowful Penitent
sits: then the Goquis turns the wheel, and draws the rod, and balance to him,
and the empty Pilgrim comes forth. If any sin be concealed, the empty scale
yields not; and if the Pilgrim grow obst^nate, the Goquis casts him down from
the top, where instantly he is broken into a thousand pieces; but the terror
of the place is such, that few will conceal any thing: the place hereof is
called Sangenotocoro, that is, the place of Confession. Lo here an exact
confession upon a terrible engine full of horror and dread to the party that
makes trial thereof; and shall we say that the balance of Ocaca was of divine
institution? the difficulty then of the attempt, and streightnes of the yoke
does not necessarily imply the thing it self to be authorized by God, and
commended to the Church by the Apostles.

If these persuasions induce not to a necessity, what say you if one should
come from the dead, and preach how necessary this duty is? I cannot say such a
Ghost should of necessity be believed. Let us come then to visions, and
revelations; 2 Cor. 12.1.
not such, I fear, as the Apostles were, from the Lord, but (...), strong, and
strange delusions. Hearken then to the stories. Spec. exemplor. did. 2. Sect.
10^.
Bid relates of a Courtier to King Ethelared, whom the King much favored
though his life were dissolute; and often dealt with him to confess his sins,
and amend his life; especially in a time of his sickness, which he then put off
till his recovery, as loath to confess his sins at that time, left his
companions should upbraid him as timorous; Fortiter quidem ut sibi videbatur
locutus, sed miserabiliter. Beda.
words of a resolute, but not religious heart. Not long after the King
continuing his visits, and exhortations to confession; he cries out fearfully,
that it was too late, and tells his Master how two comely young men appeared,
and offered him a little book, and bad him read the few good works that he had
done; and after their departure, a hideous troop of Friends appeared also, and
one of them delivered him a book of an immense volume, containing at large the
wickedness he had done, and bade him peruse the same, so challenging him for
theirs. This Courtier it seems lost himself for not striking out the
Chirographum which was against him, by confession. I wot well this Writer,
says Mr Lambard, upon the like occasion is called venerabilis; but when I read
this, Perambulation of Kent. page 235.
and a number of such which make the one half of his work, I say with my self
as sometimes did the Poet,

Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic incredulus odi.
What ever thing thou show so, I bate it as a lie.
That story shows how a man was damned for want of Confession for his sins
recorded against him. I can tell you of another that cancelled all such records
of sin by confession; and so it is. A thief (not he upon the Cross) desired to
enter into Religion; the Abbot for his trial, Spec. Exempl. d. 2. Sect. 100.
required him to publish solemnly the sins he had privately revealed. To which
purpose all the Religious of that Covent assembled in the Church: A quibusd im
fratribus vinctus, tractus, cilicio sacco vestitus.
The Convert is by some of the brethren led along bound, and beaten, clothed in
Sack and his head powdered with ashes. In this sort ready to enter, he is
prohibited by the Abbot, thundering unto him his unworthiness; which struck him
into tears, and prostrate on the earth; then upon command he openly confessed
sins of that nature, Non hominis vocem, sed ^onitr^i.
and against nature, as not fit to be recorded. And that while, a Religious man
amongst them beheld one with a great scroil, obliterating, and dashing out such
crimes as he confessed. And this, Sine qua nullus indulgentiam sortietur.
says the Relator, was done to incline such as had not then confessed their
sins, to undertake the same, without which no man can come by pardon. By this
vision I perceive the handwriting that is against us may be blotted out some
other way, than at Christ's Cross only; Colos. 2.14.
and however this Abbot might aim hereby to countenance confession, yet the
Trent Fathers will tell him it was not so advisedly done, to draw a man upon
the Theater; and some wrong is offered to private Confession, that the
Penitents sins recorded against him, were not then defaced until he came to the
public. The Relation is fetched from John Climacus with little difference, to
bring Confession into credit, then, as it appears by the neglect thereof, but
meanly esteemed, and by many under his charge is little set by; for having many
(says he) that have not yet confessed, Quia habeo nonnullos qui peccata quidem
n^^dum confessi sunt, quocirca and illos ad confessio^em hoc exemplo provoco.
Climac. Grad. 4. cap. 2.
wherefore by this example I would stir them up to confession. Harpsfield Cope
has set forth this story with great applause; and tells us full sadly that the
Portugals assailing a Castle in the East Indies, Nulla prius peccatorum
confessione praeeunte, gravissimas negligentiae suae poenas experli sunt, --
feles and mures nigerrimi tanto numero tamque horribiles noctu apparuerunt.
Cop. Dialog. 2. page 297, 298.
came off with great loss, for not being armed with confession; and of a
certain Portugal, to whom in the night there appeared a great number of black
Cats and Mice, (impar congressus) very dreadful to see to, and ready to have
devoured him, Histor. and alia impressa ante Alcoran. p. 99.
had they not been prevented by his prayers to a CRUCIFIX hanging in the room,
and his vows to be shriven with all speed. I know not how such creatures as
Cats and Mice may Cope in visions, otherwise they hold little correspondence,
concerning the authority of such fantastic shades, Casaub. praefat. de
libert. Ecclesiae.
wherewith the writings of Friars are replenished, more than with wisdom and
learning: Poenarum celebres sub styge feriae. Prudent. Bellar. de purg. l. 2.
c. 18. Sect. ad quinrum.
it may be said as the Turk did of Papal Indulgences granted by Pius II. to
such as took arms against him, requiring his Holiness to call in his Epigrams
again; and as Casaubon of the late interdict against the Venetian Republic,
that it was Dirum carmen; and as Bellarmine of Prudentius appointing certain
holy days in hell for the damned souls to rest from their pains, that he did
but play more poetico. So these and many other visions of this stamp, seem to
me nothing else, but the Poetry of the Church of Rome, or a moral application
of pious and useful fables.

Thou see, good Reader, no necessary cause why Confession should be so
necessarily urged; and our Church is the more sparing and tender in imposing
any such absolute necessity upon these grounds following: The first is, Reasons
why Confession is not of absolute necessity in all cases, and over all persons.
because Auricular Confession has not been practiced continually in the
Church, but is the daughter and successor of that which was publicly
solemnized. I speak not of Confession in it self absolutely considered, which I
have elsewhere laid down as a Divine Ord^nance; Roman Church. I say, Confession
so understood is not of absolute necessity, but of late introduction. Public
exhomologesis was in ancient times held such a sanctuary for troubled souls,
that not only scandalous sinners which were obliged thereunto, but many
besides came in, and confessed openly their sins carried in secrecy, and
submitted themselves to that discipline; yea, Qui de fide majore, and timore
meliore erant, quamvis nulla Sacrificii, aut libelli sacinore constricti --
apud Sacerdotes Dei dolenter and simpliciter confitentur, exomologesia
conscientiae suae faciunt, animi sui poadus exponunt, s^lutarem medelam parvis
licet, and modicis vulneribus requirunt. Cypr. l. 2. de laps.
some devout Christians not stained with incensing unto Idols, or casting the
holy Scripture into the fire (two scandals in those times purged with this
discipline) guilty only of lesser scars, and griefs, grew ambitious of
undergoing this burden of public Confession and Penance: and hence it was that
many a scoffing Ismael, Multi vero audientes vel exprobrant, vel irrid^nt, vel
male loquuntur. Chemnit.
and railing Doeg began to exprobrate and deride the Penitents. To this end
therefore that the discipline might be carried in a discreet manner, a prudent
Minister was appointed, to be made acquainted before hand, and by whose advise
the Penitent was directed what sins only were fit to be opened in public
Confession. And here is the first mention of Confession to a private Confessor,
with the occasion annexed; that he hearing the story of a sinners life at
large, may select such offenses only as seemed to him fit for publication.
Circumspice diligentius cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum; proba prius
Medicum, -- si i^tell^xerit, and praevidrit tal^m esse languorem tuum, qui in
conventu torius Eccles^ae exponi debeat, and curari; ex quo fortasis caeteri
aedificari poterunt, and tu facile senari, multa hoc deliberatione, and satis
perito Medici illius consilio procurandum est. Origin. hom. 2. in Ps. 37. tom.
1. p. 293.
Be circumspect (says Origin) to whom thou art to Confess; prove thy Physician
first, and if he shall understand, and foreses thy disease to be such, as ought
to be exposed in the assembly of the Church, and there to be cured, whereby
peradventure others may be edified, and thy self easily healed; this must be
done upon great deliberation, and skilful advise of that Physician. Private
sins therefore brought in private Confession, to hear them by the way, and to
advise the Penient whether they, or only some of them are fit to be openly
known, and in such cases to direct him further what course he should take in
public Penance.

But in process of time this rigor, and devotion melted, and many abstained
from this Confession, as abhorring to publish their sins, and to bring
themselves upon the stage: For in Tertullians age when this discipline was in
force, Plerosque hoc opus, ut publicationem sui aut suffugere, aut de die in
diem differ, pudoris magis memores quam salutis. Tert de poenit. c. 10.
and the Church exercised with persecution, it may seem strange that many
should be more in fear of shame than death; abstaining more from being
Confessors of their faults, than Martyrs for the truth: I say the remedy was
not as in his days, to arm the Penitent with resolution, for to trample under
feet censure, and shame; but to remit something of the severity, namely, that
the sin should be confessed in private, and buried there; Ut secreto
confiterontur Sacerdoti, qui licet crimen illud in facie Ecclesiae non
proderet, injungebat tamen delinquenti publicam poenitentiam, ut ipso facto in
genere coram Ecclesia confiteretur, and declaret se grave aliquid commisisse.
Chemnit. ex Sozom n. in histor. Tripartit. l. 9. c. 35.
only the penance imposed was publicly to be performed; by which the Church
gathered, (although she knew it not) that some grievous offense or other was
committed, as Chemnitius explicateth from Sozomen, and the tripartite History.
Those whom you observe to do penance (says Saint Augustine) have committed
great sins, Illi, quos videtis agere poenitentiam, scelera sua comm^scrant, aut
adulteria, aut alia immania facta. Aug. l. 1. de symb. ad Catechum. c. 6.
as adulteries, or some other foul facts; the penance by them performed
convincing them of heinous sin openly, though not evidencing the same unto all.
Thus the Church became contented with public penance, and remitted the
confession of the sin unto private ears; howbeit the public detection of sin
was left off earlier in the Greek Church, than in the Latin; for in the East,
the persecution under Decius was no sooner blown over, but that the Church
appointed a discreet Presbyter to receive Confessions, that Penitents might
resort unto him, and interest his bosom with their offenses; out of which he
was to select such, and prepare as he thought meet for the public, and conceal
the reft; and herein his office consisted. The substituting of this Officer is
witnessed by Socrates, and Sozomen both, whereby the penitent was not as
formerly left to his choice of what Physician he pleased, but confined to that
Penitentiary the Church had ordained; and this is that addition, (...). Socrat.
hist. l. 5. c. 19.
viz. the election of one certain Penitentiary, which those Historians note to
have been made unto the penitential Canon. Episcopi hanc (...) Canoni
adjecerunt, ut Presbyter bonae conversationis, prudens, and (...), ad hoc
ordinaretur, ut lapsi ad illum accederent, ipsi confiterentur peccata. Chemnit.
ex Sozomen. Exam. p. 192.
But whether this Penitentiary was taken to receive Confession of all sins, and
conceal them all, only imposing public Penance, or to discern what sins
should publicly be rehearsed, and what not, can hardly by the light of story
be discerned: for the former opinion, namely, that none of the sins confessed
were to be revealed, serves that requisite quality that he should be (...),
one that could lay his hand upon his mouth, and say nothing. And for the later,
scilicet. that some sins were revealed, appeared by the confession of the
vitiated Matron, so foul, that it caused the Church to stop the mouth of all
public Confession ever after. My thoughts lead me to this issue, that the
Primitive Penitents were too forward to confess publicly more than needed;
therefore it was ordained that they should confess in private first, and then
if any of their sins were deemed fit by the Confessor to come abroad in
public, they were admitted to that public Medicine; whereas the succeeding
Penitents were too remiss in public Confession, and needed the spur; insomuch
that offenses of that nature as needed public expiation, and discovered upon a
private hearing, were reserved for the Theater, and they obliged to public
recital, and penance. And when this also was taken away upon the Matrons
stupration, and the Church would hear no more of such matters; without doubt
the Confession and Penitentiary too were then abrogated.

In the Latin Church the discipline was on foot till Leo I. who was the first
that exiled the same, and set up Auricular Confession in its stead. In whose
days a writing, the contents whereof were particular sins, was exhibited by
the Delinquents to be publicly read in Churches; the same was attempted for
private confession not long since; and as that course was broken off by Leo,
Declarat non licere per literas seu internuncium Confessario absenti peccata
Sacramentaliter confiteri, and ab eodem absolutionem obtinere. Caracalla vit.
Clem. 8. in Platinae supplem.
so this attempt by Clement VIII. who condemned the same as false, temerarious,
and scandalous, to confess by deputation, or writing, and receive absolution
from a Priest not present. The injunction of Leo follows; Let not a
confession of several sins conceived in writing be publicly rehearsed, Ne de
singulorum peccatorum genere libellis scripto professio recitetur, cumque
reatus sufficiat conscientiarum solis sacerdot bus indicari confessione
secreta. Quamvis enim plenitudo fidei videatur esse laudabilis; quae propter
Dei timorem apud homines crubescere non veretur, tamen quia non omnium
hujusmodi sunt peccata, ut ea quae poenitentiam poscunt non timeant publicare;
removeatur tam improbabilis consuetudo, ne multi a poenitentiae arceantur
remediis, dum aut erubescunt, aut metuunt inimicis suis facta sua reserare,
quibus possint legum constitutionibus percelli: sufficit enim illa Confessio,
quae primum Deo offertur, tunc etiam Sacerdoti, qui pro delictis Poenitentium
precator accedit; quod tum demum plures ad poenitentiam poterunt provocari, si
populi auribus non publicetur Conscientia confitentis. Leo Epist. 80. ad
Episcopos Campaniae, etc.
seeing it may suffice that the guilt of men's consciences be declared in secret
Confession to the Priests alone: for although the fullness of faith may seem to
be laudable, which for the fear of God does not fear to blush before men; yet
because all sins are not of that nature, that Penitents may not be afraid to
publish such of them, as require repentance; Let so inconvenient a custom be
removed, lest many be driven back from the remedies of repentance, whilst
either they are ashamed, or afraid to disclose their deeds before their
enemies; whereby they may be drawn within the peril of the laws. For that
confession is sufficient which is offered first unto God, and then unto the
Priest, who comes as an Intercessor for the sins of the Penitent; for then at
length we may be provoked to Repentance, if that the Conscience of him that
confesses be not published to the ears of the people. From this testimony of
Leo we may observe, 1. That to open confession of secret sins, secret
confession succeeded in the room thereof. 2. We may observe also the reasons of
this alteration, viz. fear and danger of the law, which accompanied the former
practice, and retarded many from the same; to remove which impediments it self
also was removed, or rather changed. 3. And lastly, that the manner of
Confession, be it private, or public, is but a Church-constitution, and the
law thereof but temporal, and may be changed at the discretion of the Church;
as that ancient discipline so highly extolled by the Fathers, yet by Leo is
removed as an unprofitable custom, and subject to diverse inconveniences; and
notwithstanding his edict, the times may come when the same may be fancied
again, and private Confession give way thereunto. Private Confession then is
not an ordinance of absolute necessity, the thing to be demonstrated.
And therefore that conjecture of Beatus Rhenanus (for which his mouth is stopped
by the Index expurg.) is more than probable, Ne quis admiretur Tertullianum de
clancularia ista admissorum confessione nihil loquutum, quae quantum
conjicimus, nata est ex ista exomologesi per ultroneam hominum pietatem, ut
occultorum peccatorum esset and exomologesis occulta; nec enim usquam
praeceptam legimus. B. Rhenan. Arg. lib. de Poenit. page 11. edit. Franekerae.
1597.
that clancular confession now in use took its beginning from the public, by
the voluntary devotion of men, that of secret sins there might be held a secret
confession; for we do not read that of old it was any where commanded.

Nectarius sometimes Patriarch of Constantinople, Nectarius and his act for
abolishing of Confession.
and immediate Predecessor to Saint Chrysostom, by which act, upon an occasion
of infamy drawn upon the Clergy by the confession of a Gentlewomen defiled by a
Deacon in the principal Church of the Imperial City, it was thought fit the
same should be abolished, and every one left to the liberty, and examination of
his own conscience, in resorting to the blessed Sacrament: the Narrative is
thus in Socrates; Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 19. vide Sozom. lib. 7. c. 16.
It seemed good unto the Church to take away the office of such Priests as were
appointed throughout every Church to receive Penitents, after the Confession of
their sins, into the company of the faithful. The occasion of the removal by
Nectarius was; A Noble woman came unto the Priest, whose office it was to hear
penitents, and confessed orderly the sins she had committed after Baptism, the
Priest injoyning her to bring forth the fruits of Repentance: As she continued
longer in shriving, she accused herself of another crime, and declares, that a
certain Deacon of that Church had abused her body; at which the people being
much incensed, and the Church defamed, the Bishop upon the advice of Eudaemon,
a Minister of that Church, took away the function of the shriving Priest, and
granted free liberty to every one (as his conscience served him) to become
partaker of the holy mysteries. Thus far Socrates, professing withal that he
could not well tell what to think of Eudaemons advise in this behalf, whether
it would ought avail the Church or no, or be a means that sins escape without
just reprehension: his thoughts he should have kept to himself; for an
historian must ever conceal his affections, and never the truth, adhering to
the verity of the fact, and leaving the censure unto others. It cannot be
imagined into how many shapes the Divines of Rome turn themselves, to turn off,
or to turn away this decree: some condemn this Patriarch for condemning the
same, Quamvis legatur abrogasse hanc consuetudinem, hoc tamen non probat eam
non esse juris divini; non enim omne quod fit, just fit. M. Vehe. tract. 6. de
Confess. c. 7.
although we read (says Vehe) that Nectarius abrogated this custom, yet this
disproveth not, but that it might be of divine right; for not every thing that
is done, is justly done. Our Cope inclines to this opinion, that the words of
the story favor the taking away of confession, but then tells us withal, that
Nectarius did as much hurt to the Church by unbridling this discipline, Si
Nectarius privatam confessionem abrogarit, and illo^^s* (quod dicitur) non tam
manibus, quam animis ad corpus Christi accipiendum ingerendi se quibuslibet
aditum patefecerit, (quod ipsa forte verba si generaliter accipias, prae se
ferunt) is non minus Ecclesiae nimia illa licentia, quam immodica illa sua
severitate incommodasset. Cop. dialog. 2. p. 294.
as Novatus did by locking up the mercy of God with his severer key. If
Nectarius (says he) had abrogated private confession, and opened the gap to
every man with unwashen hands, and souls, to have free access to receive the
body of Christ, (which peradventure the words if you take them generally may
seem to import) he had prejudiced the Church no less by that excessive
licentiousness, than Novatus had done by his immoderate severity. Against these
men we oppose the credit and authority that Nectarius had with the Churches of
God; for they were so far from imagining any detriment to arise unto the Church
by this decree of his, that they became all of his mind. (...). Lib. 7. c. 16.
The Catholic Bishops of those times approving and ratifying the same; so
Sozomen: with the heretical conventicles it (the use of Confession) was
retained, but in the Churches of the Homousians, or Orthodox believers (says
Socrates) it was antiquated. Of whose side then are they which so sharply
rebuke Nectarius? Harpsfield supra.
Another rank of them seem to embrace the act, but with a limitation, that it
was the public confession and penance which he abrogated, and not private
confession, but the addition to the Penitential, which the Patriarch repealed;
and that was the erection of a Penitentiary to receive Confessions, and unfold
some sins unto the Bishop (if needful) that such might be ripped up in public
confession; and this discipline as an appendix to the former, was in opposition
to the rigorous hand of Novatus suppressed. But Bellarmine shall cope with
Harpsfield, Ista revelatio est contra jus naturae, and Apostolicam regulam. l.
3. de poen. c. 14.
and tell him that cannot be, because a Penitentiary having heard confession in
private, his mouth is so locked up, that he cannot under any pretense reveal
any sin so revealed, unto the Bishop, or to his Holiness himself, though he
should command it, it being against the law of nature, and Apostolical rule:
the Ibid.
Cardinal then has restrained the story to these three positions, and bounds:
1. The first, that notorious Penitents, and public offenders were subject to
this penitentiary only; and that sinners for sins committed secretly might
address themselves in confession to other Priests. 2. The second, that if any
private sins, and conscious to the sinner only, were confessed to this
Penitentiary, he was not bound to detect them, but had his lips sealed up to
secrecy. 3. And lastly, That public sins only and such as were known
aforehand, were by his command rehearsed by the Penitents before the
congregation, and public penance undergone for them.
Against these fancies of the Cardinal, I demand, If public sins, and such as
are come abroad into the world are here only meant, what need open sins to be
opened in secret to a Penitentiary? and why could not the Church proceed to
censure notorious sins, without that underhand detection? And what will this
Jesuit say to another, a greater Antiquary than himself, Petavius? who comes
roundly off, and tells us there was never any such thing as public confession;
that neither public nor private sins were openly confessed, either by the
Penitents in their own persons, or recited out of a scroll by the Priests, as
generally has been supposed; from which common tenet he professes his earnest
dissent, A quibus omnibus ego vehementer dissentio; nec adduci possim ut
existimem legem ullam in Ecclesia suisse unquam ejusmodi, quae peccata proferri
public decreverit. D. Petav* animadvers. in Epiphan. haer. 49. page 246.
nor can he be brought to imagine that there was ever any such law in the Church
at any time, which decreed that sins should be publicly pronounced; --
commentum publicae confessionis ingeniose ac solerter excogitarunt, quia alium
exitum difficultatis expedire non possint. Ib.
and further informs us how that jingle of public confession was ingeniously
devised by writers on his side, to avoid the engines, and shocks of heretical
arguments; being driven to that strait as to be able to come off no other way.
We will not lose time to examine the grounds of this assertion; but taking
public Confession for granted, and supposing those sins public in themselves
to be rehearsed in a private way; we say according to their doctrine, they
remain shut up under the seal, because deposited in confession, and though
otherwise known, yet the Penitentiary is put to silence; and the use, viz.
detection of sins capable of public penance, for which the Penitentiary was
ordained, is quite and clean taken away. Quae autem esset functio Presbyteri
non est omnino certum. Bellar. supra.
No wonder then that in Bellarmines opinion, it is not certainly known what his
function was. Furthermore, be his function what it will, it is manifest that
both he and it were done away; but this ordinance, viz. Public sins to be
censured with public penance, was never abolished, either in the East or
Western Churches. Likewise the Matrons sin with the Deacon was committed in
private, and yet openly revealed; public confession in the Church was not then
of public sins only. And lastly, if none were to recourse unto the
Penitentiary except public sinners, and that for their public offenses,
senses; to what end was it so specially required that he should be (...), no
blab of his tongue? Tot a narratio clamat non auricularem, sed publicam
confessionem a Nectario abrogatam. Bellar. ib.
What was it Nectarius did then in this behalf? Marry (says the Cardinal) the
whole story cries it out, how not private but publock confession was abrogated
by him: how deaf then were those Divines (though otherwise of a quick ear) that
heard not this cry? I am not ignorant (says he) that Thomas Walden was of this
mind, Non ignoro Thomam Waldensem Tom. 2. c. 141. in ea sententia fuisse, ut
ex^stimaret a Nectario confessionem simpliciter abrogatam fuisse -- sed non
facile id conc^derem, quod Nectarii sententiam Jo. Chrysostom. apertissime
tueatur. Bellar. sup^a.
that he supposed confession simply and absolutely to be abolished by
Nectarius; but I cannot grant this, because John Chrysostom clearly defended
the sentence of Nectarius. Then whatsoever herein was provided by Nectarius,
the same was protected by Saint Chrysostom; and Thomas Walden, though a
Transalpine man, was as choice in his judgment as the Cardinal; no more could
it lie hid from him, that F. Walden stood not alone in that opinion, for Canus
bears him company thus; Nectarius predecessor to S. Chrysostom, Nectarius
antecessor D. Chrysostomi confessionem secret m^de m^dio sustulerat, ut illo
capite Sozomen. tradit: quamobrem Chrysostomus Nectario saccedens, de
confessione hac auri^ulari populo verba facere noluit; quia caim nondum
scandalum sedatum erat, quod in Ecclesia Constantinopolitana per occasion^m
secretae conf^ssion's fuit exor^um. Can. Relect. de poenit. part 5. page 897.
took secret confession clean away, as Sozomen delivered in that chapter;
wherefore his successor Saint Chrysostom would make no words of this auricular
confession to the people, because the scandal was not yet ^^id, occasioned in
the Church of Constantinople, by the means of private Confession. For which
saying he is perstringed in the Col^n edition, Anno Dom. 1605. with a note
clapped in the Margin, where the Reader is informed, that John Hessel, Oculat^us
locum illum hist. Trip. inspexit Jo. Hessels, and ipse eximi^^s Theologus, qui
in s^^tentia sua de hoc S^zomeni loco Patri^us coacilii Trid. exhibita, erudite
ex ipso cont^xtu Sozomeni ostendit, a Nectario non auricular^m conf^ssionem,
s^d ^^us app^n lic^m quandam, (...). e. publicam illam ^cecato^um recitationem
saisse sublatam; quae fi ^^t^^ communi quodam Poenitentiario cora^^ universo
populo, velut in Theat o quodam. Nota in Ma^g^ne.
a famous Divine, has looked into the story more accurately, who delivering
his opinion to the Fathers in the Trent Council, learnedly demonstrated from
the context of Sozomen it self, that it was not auricular confession, but an
appendix thereof, that is, the public recital of sins upon the Theater, made
by the Penitentiary before the face of all the people, etc. By warrant of which
appendix it appears, that the Penitentiary before the decree of Nectarius
might break the seal, and publish what sins he pleased; a thing that egregious
Divine must take heed of, left by avoiding one rock he dash upon another. I
know not with what eyes, or through what perspective Hessel might view the
relation, to blunt Vehes sight it appeared otherwise; Although (quoth he) the
narration be mixed of solemn and private confession, Licet mixtim ibi sermo fi^t
de solenni and privata confessione, tamen cum dicitur electum esse Sacerdotem
servantem secretum, aperte monstratur, hoc non ad publicam pertinere
confessionem, sed ad clanculariam. Vehe tract. de Conf. 6. c. 4.
notwithstanding se^ing it is said, how a Priest was chosen that could keep
secret, it is very clear that this appertained not unto public but private
Confession. Add hereunto Bishop Fisher, a Prelate to whom Rome can take no just
exception; who upon those words of Sozomen, It seemed good unto the ancient
Bishops that sins Ut peccata public recitarentur, al: ut non recitarentur, ita
vertit Christophors. sequens Cassiodorum and Nicephorum. Videsis D. Petav.
animad. in Epiphan. p. 242.
should be opened upon a Theater, in the presence and audience of all the
people within the Church; and to this purpose a Priest of upright conversation,
that could keep counsel was elected, and appointed to hear such confessions,
writes thus; Some man may object this is meant of public confession; At
objectabit fortasse quispiam, quod hoc de publica confessione scriptum sit; cui
respondemus, id fieri non posse, cum ipse Presbyter teneatur servare decretum
(lege secretum;) nam quomodo secretum servare potuit, quod fuit publica
confessione decretum? sed dicet alius, quid ergo Sozomen. scripsit, visum
antiquis Pontificibus ut in Theatro, etc. ob id nimirum ut confessuri nequaquam
ad Presbyterum in privatis aedibus accederent, unde potuerint offendicula
oriri, and maxim feminis confessuris -- sed publicitus in Ecclesia; non tamen
ita quod illi public delicta sua cunctis manifestarent, sed uni Presbytero
tantum, atque id clanculum.
to whom we answer, that it cannot be so meant, seeing the Priest himself was
commanded to keep it secret; for how could that be kept secret that was
discerned by public confession? But another will say, why then has Sozomen
written, It seemed good unto the ancient Bishops, that sins should be published
upon the Theater, and before the assembly? Truly to this end, that the
Penitents should not resort unto the Priests within private walls, where
scandal might arise, especially upon the approches of women, but publicly in
the Church, not so as if they should there manifest their sins unto all, but to
the Priest alone, and that privately. So the place of confession was to be
public not the confession it self, which was privately received. This Bishop
proceeds, informing us, That public sinners resorted not unto the
Penitentiary, Publici poenitentes non ad hunt Presbyterum, sed ad Episcopum
accesserunt, cujus senteatia jejuni is, etc. -- at illis qui Presbytero
privatim confitebantur, secundum uniuscujusque culpam, Presbyter ipse taxavit
mulctam. Roffens. contr. Luth. art. 8. p. 137.1.
but to the Bishop, and by him were ordered. But such as confessed privately to
the Priest, at his hands received penance only. Thou see plainly that in
this Doctors opinion private confession was hereby meant, and his reasons for
the same; and may further see, Presbyter iste solis publicis poenitentibus
praepositus.
how well these Cardinals agree. It was public confession of public faults
(says Cardinal Bellarmine;) Public confession could not be here meant, says
Cardinal Fisher. This Priest was appointed for public sins only, says
Bellarmine; Public sinners came not to the Priest, but to the Bishop. says
Fisher. Thus God confounds their tongues that build Babel. Well, Fishers
conclusion is, Nequaquam pro publicis criminibus intelligi debeat, quae semper
publi (...) vindicabantur, -- sed pro peccatis admissis duntaxat. Id. ib.
that Nectarius abolished this Penitential Presbyter, and left every man to his
own conscience; which could not be understood of public sins, (for they still
were punished in the Church) but of private faults only. How apparently false
then is the assertion of the Cardinal Jesuit, Publicam poenitentiam sustulit,
non confessionem. Petav. Doct. temp. lib. 13. part. 2. p. 755. Scio quibusdam
visum fuisse totam hanc bistoriam esse confutatam a Socrate. Bellarsupra.
viz. A^l consent that Nectarius abolished public, not private confession; and
of another Jesuit, that the one was not, and the other was not abolished, but
public penance only; may appear by the discourse of this Cardinal Bishop, and
Pope-Martyr. And if none of these evasions will serve, Bellarmine is not
ignorant of another starting hole, sc. to elevate the faith of the Historian
and call his credit into question; a shelter never fled unto but in desperate
storms. The truth is, by the ancient Canons heinous sins were only subject to
the censure of this discipline of vulgar confession, (the confession then only
frequented.) Others moved with devotion, subjected themselves thereunto without
sufficient cause; which to redress, the Fathers exhorted the people not to go
so confusedly to work, but to consult with their spiritual Physicians, what
diseases were fit for that public cure; and at length a certain Priest was
appointed, to whom they were to resort, and he upon private hearing presented
the Church with such sins as were worthy of public notice; and this was the
only practick of Confession in Nectarius time, consisting in the private
audience of sin, with reference to the public censure: which was damned by his
decree, (...). Socrat. Confession put out of the Church by Nectarius. An. Dom.
390. Period. Jul. 5103. utriusque Cycli 7. 11. Indict. 3.
and every man left to the judgment of his own conscience, which could not be,
if private confession had been still kept on foot, and the sinner subjected to
the censure of any Ghostly Father. Which abrogation then of confession simply
considered, however it was carried in the days of that Patriarch, shows the
form and prescript of confession used, and praised by the Ancients, to have
been Canonical rather than Divine; belonging to the external discipline of the
Church, (which upon just occasion might be altered) and not Sacramental, and of
perpetual right, or absolute necessity; which is the Helen the Jesuits pretend
unto, and by us in all cases denied.

Our last conjecture that Auricular Confession in the sense and practice of the
Church of Rome, 3. Confession of no use in the Greek Church.
is not of absolute necessity binding all, and in all cases, is the cessation,
or rather not admission thereof in the Greek Church; for the decree of
Nectarius inhibiting the use of the then received confession, (such as it was)
suspended the practick thereof in general, for there occurs not in Damascenes
tract De orthodoxa fide, the least impression thereof; and therein are
treasured the principal doctrines, or doctrinal principles in Christianity, so
it seems to have gone out of the Church, like a ship upon the waters, leaving
no tract behind. Quidam Deo solummodo peccata confiteri debere dicunt, ut
Graeci. Great. did. 1. de Poenit. c. ult.
Insomuch as Gratian citing the Penitential of Theodorus Archbishop of
Canturbury, (which in truth was none of his, and no whit resembling an ancient
copy thereof to be seen in Sir Robert Cottons treasury; but a Canon of the
Council of Cauvillon, celebrated Anno DCCCXIII) makes it an opinion of that
Church, that sins were to be confessed unto God only. I am not ignorant that
Bellarmine would persuade us that those words (ut Graeci) in Gratian, ^idetur
irrepfisse in textum ex margin, and marginalem annotationem imperiti alicujus
fuisse, qui ex facto Nectarii collegit, sublatam omnino fuisse confessionem
apud Graecos. Bellar. l. 3. de Poenit. c. 5.
were by an unskilful hand first set in the Margent, and thence crept into the
text, upon a surmise, that the fact of Nectarius had altogether abandoned
confession from that Church; his reasons for this conjecture are so plumbeous,
and little worth, as not worthy either of repetition, or refutation; Ivo
decretal. part. 15. c. 155.
for Ivo that imposed decrees before Gratian, has the same: nor was the gloss,
or any Canonist ever so nasute, as to smell out that intrusion in the decrees.
Yet the Gloss draws an argument from hence against the Divine authority of
Confession, because the Graecians denied it for necessary, as their practice
shows, Glossa tale argumentum innuit pro sua opinione, confessio non est
necessaria apud Graecos; esset autem necessaria, si praeceptum de ea esset
authoritate Scripturae. Scotus.
in wholly abstaining from the same; and necessary it had been, had it stood
upon divine precept. For no Church may justly cast that forth of doors, once
brought in upon divine injunction: and Scotus in way of answer thereunto seems
first to grant some such thing, with this protestation; That the Graecians
since their departure from the Church, Respondeo, posito quod non sit apud eos
talis consuetudo, mult as ali as laudabiles consuetudines omiserunt, quo ab
Ecclesia recesserunt; and ita istam non solum laudabilem, sed and necessariam
potuerunt omittere. 2. sed nec notum quod non confiteantur, nec hoc alicubi
aliquis Doctor scribens contra eorum abusiones, exprimit. Scot. lib. 4. did.
17.
(that is since they disclaimed all agreement with Rome) have omitted many
laudable customs, and might leave out confession, though laudable, and
necessary; but tells us withal, that it is not certainly known how they use
not confession, neither any Doctor taxing their abuses, reprehended the want
thereof in particular. All which might well be, as reputing that want in those
days of so small a trespass, as not to be taken notice thereof, or not
deserving any reprehension; to which later conjecture Canus consents.
Theodorus delivers (says he) that the Graecians held sins to be confessed
unto God alone, Theodorus dicit Graecos existimare soli Deo esse confitenda
peccata; quemadmodum itaque Baptismus non statim a passione Christi coepit esse
medium necessarium omnibus ad salutem, sed post sufficientem Evangelii and
Baptismi evulgationem; ita and Confessionis Sacramentum ex co tempore coepit
omnibus hominibus esse necessarium, etiam de peccatis secretis, quo
sufficient^r promulgatum est. Quo sit ut Graeci ante plenam evulgationem, sine
peccatorum confessione occultorum salvari potuerint. Canus, Relect. de Poen.
part. 5. p. 897.
even as Baptism began not immediately upon Christ's death to be a necessary
mean to salvation; but at such time as the Gospel, and Baptism were
sufficiently divulged: So the Sacrament of Confession for secret sins, from
that time forward began to be necessary for all men, when it was sufficiently
promulgated; whence it comes to pass that the Graecians before plenary
publication might be saved without confessing their secret sins. The Greeks
without all peradventure are beholding to Melchior Canus for this excuse, that
they may be dispensed and born withal for not frequenting of Confession,
because the necessity of that practick has not yet been sufficiently cleared
unto them. But is it not ill done of the Jesuits, those Apostolical men, that
take upon them the conversion of Nations, so far to neglect their neighbor
Christians all this while, as not to clear unto them a point of such
importance? for the Nestorians (a wild slip of that tree) know not yet extreme
unction, Purchase Pilgrim. part 3. page 38. Brierwood Enquiry. page 153.
or confession, and the Jacobites in Syria, Palestina, etc. of which sect is
the present Patriarch of Jerusal^m, confess their sins unto God only, and not
unto the Priest; and (as others record) but very seldom, so that ma^y
communicate without auricular confession: and how much it is prized by a
principal member in that Church at this day, may be in part discovered under
the hand of Cardinal Bardini to a Jesuited Greek, bred in the College at Reme,
named Cannachi Rossi, concerning the Patriarch Cyrill, Anno Dom. 1627. whose
deposition the Jesuits labored, for not acknowledging the Rom^n Supremacy;
wherein amongst other accusations charged upon him, the fourth instruction is;
Of him we are advised that he denies the necessity of Auricular confession, Di
lui siamo avisati che nega -- la necessita della confessione auriculare, and lo
Spiegare in essa li peccati della mente, and Che in loco di lei havesse
introdotto una certa confessione furta ae Dio publicamente con parole generali.
Turkish Histor. p. 1500.
and the ein to display the sins of the mind; and that he has brought into the
place thereof a certain kind or form of confession made pu^lickly unto God in
general words. It seems by this passage that the modern Churches of Greece
bear no good will to auricular confession.

The necessity then cannot be so forcing as Rome imagines; what then, The
necessity of Confession stated.
will you leave it to each man's discretion to be used, or forborne, as he shall
think fit? So to leave it, were in effect to leave it off. Our corrupt natures
restrained and kept in, set but at a little liberty become licentious. The
bending twig no sooner up, but declines unto the other side; and there can be
no reason why a natural man is so much in the extremes, but because virtue
stands in the middle. The experience of our times shows how ill a keeper man's
discretion has been of Confession, as quite and clean to loose the trust
reposited; he had good reason therefore that said, Such as go about to make
this law free, endeavor to remove the same altogether out of the Church; Qui
legem hanc liberam facere contendunt eam penitus de Ecclesia tollere moliuntur;
hac enim liberate credita, and recepta, quis sibi obsecro hanc sarcin am
imponant ultro? etsi sarcina non sit, sed saluberrima animae languescentis
med^cina. M. Vehe. Asserr. sacr. Axiom. tr. 6. c. 1.
for if once this freedom be believed, and received, what man will submit his
shoulders willingly to this burden? although burden it is none, but a wholesome
medicine for a languish^ng soul. I cannot think this duty hangs so loose as to
depend upon the mere motion of every Penitent, and yet am far from imagining
the law thereof to be so tyrannical, as to be obtruded upon the consciences of
all men upon little or no occasions. To let blood in some diseases (says an
eloquent Physician) is no new thing; but that there should be scarce any
disease wherein we should not bleed, is (says he) a strange and new fashion.
The soul-Physician may take aim by him for the body, and heal some sins, as he
does not all maladies by letting out of blood, and corruption; and if
repentance be the Antidote against sin, and confession one of the ingredients,
the use must depend as much at least upon the advice of the Spiritual
Physician, as upon the voluntary inclination of the sick patient. God gave a
command to confess unto the Priest, that we have heard; nor that it w^^
ceremonial are we able to prove. The Ministers of the Gospel are enabled with
power to remit and retain sins, and their lips preserve the word of
Reconciliation for distressed consciences, that is clear; and as they are to
prescribe the remedy, so is the penitent to open the disease. The Apostle heard
sins confessed unto him, and rebuked not those that made them. The ancient
Fathers stood much for the same, as a profitable mean at the least, to procure
remission and pardon. And shall a duty so commanded, so advanced, so extolled,
be of so thin and poor esteem, as to be blown away upon each man's fancy? as we
are taught better things, so we hope for better. And although the Reformed
Church well weighing the abuses wherewith the same was incumbered, (which begat
a distaste and dislike of the thing it self with most men) was dully patient,
and moderate at the conniving, and forbearance thereof, as loath to press its
use too much upon squeasie stomachs, but only to make it their Physic, that
refused the some for their ordinary Diet: Yet seeing in these Solar days of
ours, where most men pretend so much to illumination, as able to strip, and
uncase every good thing from beneath the abuse thereof; those that are in place
may be pleased to consider, if it be not time to work upon our consciences, and
take it further to thought, if the abusing of our selves through want of
confession, exceed not those abuses wherewith it was formerly beset. It
belongs only to me freely, and with the conscience of a Divine to examine,
upon what necessity Confession stands, and how far it may concern us. Abyssum
ingredior Quaestionum, nesciens, Deus scit, qua evasurus. Bern.


And the better to come by that, we shall arrest our selves awhile upon such
discourses, as judicious Writers have left concerning necessity, and the
several kinds thereof, that we may see our way before us; and though I plunge
my self into the depth of Questions, yet my scope being to enquire after truth,
my hope is ( God being my Pilot, Necessarium triplex 1 Stabile. 2 Inviolabile.
3 Incommutabile.

and his Word my Compass) to arrive safely in the Haven.

Saint Bernard in that excellent Treatise of his of Precept, and Dispensation,
sets his whole discourse upon a threefold necessity; 1. stable; 2. inviolable;
3. incommutable.
That is said with him to be stable and firm, which may not be abrogated by
any, Stabile ita necessarium est, quod non cuilib^t hominum illud mutare fas
sit, nisi solis Dispensatoribus Mysteriorum Dei, i. e. Praepositis, authentici
Canones, and Ecclesiastica instituta dignae authoritatis.
but by the Dispensers of the Mysteries of God; such are authentic Canons, and
Ecclesiastical institutes; which because decreed from holy men, that had power
and authority from God so to do, cannot be antiquated but by men of like place
and authority. Instituted they were, not as if the Church could not be without
them, Non quia aliter vivere non liceret, sed quod ita magis expediret, nec
plane ad aliud quam ad lucrum and custodiam charitatis.
but because they apprehended she could not do so well without them; Quamdiu
charitati militant, immobiliter fixa sunt.
the end whereof was the preservation of peace and charity; and the rule for
continuance is, whilst they make and fight for charity, they are to abide in
full force: Nor are they to be antiquated, but by men endowed with equal
authority at the least, to the first Enactors; nor except they be found to
make, and march against charity; Nonne justissimum esse liquet, ut quae pro
charitate inventa suerunt, pro charitate quoque, ubi expedire videtur, vel
omittantur, vel in aliud sort commodius demutentur? Bernard. tract. de
Praecept. and Dispens.
and then it is but meet for charity to revoke that constitution, which for
Charities sake was ordained. Otherwise where no necessity is (says Leo) by no
means may the institutions of holy Fathers be violated. Ubi necessitas non est,
nullo modo sanctorum Patrum instituta violantur. Leo apud Bernard.
And this the Father styles vix immutabile, hardly to be changed; Vix mutabile
esse constat, dum solis illud liceat mutare Praelatis; and hoc non nisi fideli
and provida dispensatione.
for they only can do it that are in place, and that by a provident
dispensation. The second kind of Necessity he terms inviolable; Inviolabile,
non ab homine traditum, sed divinitus promulgatum; Nisi a Deo qui tradidit,
mutari omnino non patitur; Dominus tamen horum, quod voluit, and quando voluit,
solvit.
which is not delivered from man, but promulgated from God, and never to be
altered but by God himself. Such are the Precepts of the second Table,
wherewithal no mortal man may dispense, but God may and can when he please; as
with the Hebrews, to spoil the Egyptians in borrowing, and not restoring;
although Clemens Alexandrinus justifies their doings herein, (...). Strom. lib.
1. page 275.
as but exacting from the Egyptians what duly belonged unto them; viz. the
detained wages of a tedious servitude. Thus Sampson pulled down the house upon
his own, and the Philistines head: of such attempts Saint Bernards rule is, If
holy men break forth into acts contrary to Gods law, Aut eos peccasse fatendum
est sicut homines, aut certe sicut Prophetas familiare Dei consilium accepisse.
either we must confess they sinned as men, or believe they received special
direction from God as Prophets. And this necessity is almost unchangeable, Pene
jam incommutabile, soli quippe Deo mutabile.
because this is the change of the Lords right hand only. The third is
immutable, so ratified upon divine and eternal reason, 3. Quod divinaita
constat, and aeterna ratione firmatum, ut nulla ex causa possit vel ab apso Deo
aliquatenus immutari. -- haec quippe talia sunt quae nec liceat, nec expediat
aliquando non haberi. -- omni tempore, omni personae mortem contempta,
custodita salutem operatur.
that God himself cannot alter the same, as implying contradiction. Of this
nature are the contents of the Lords Sermon in the Mount; and whatsoever
precepts of charity, humility, meekness, etc. are extant in holy writ; which
bind all persons, and at all times, and upon the greatest hazard. And this law
truly is, (what was vainly said of the Medes and Persians) that cannot be
altered, and is unchangeable altogether. Omnino incommutabile.
These ground works being laid, let us briefly make the application. I say
then, that no Divine has ever arrogated this last, and incommutable necessity
unto auricular Confession, as a duty of that worth, and so requisice, as God
himself could not dispense with it, or be able to save without it. There is not
so great necessity thereof, Certum est potuisse Deum sine ullis Sacramentis
homines justificare, neque de hoc ulla controversia est. Bellar. de Sacram. in
genere, l. 1. c. 22. Sect. Sit igitur.
as of Baptism; Yet is it certain (says Bellarm^ne) that God is able to
justify men without any Sacraments at all, and hereof there is no
controversy. Away then with that necessity which is ex natura rei, as if
confession were such in it self, that God could not do withal without it. And
for the first necessity, as a matter of Canonical institution imposed by the
Church, no Divine, (except altogether a stranger to antiquity) will deny. Let
it then go for a Church-Constitution, continue it must, and a necessity of
obedience is required, till the same appear unto the Church to be destructive
of charity, or tranquillity; and by the same authority be abolished, by which
it was at first prescribed; and for the second how far necessary as an
Ordinance Divine, and in what sense it may be said to be ordained by God, I
must send back my Reader to the former Section, where the point is stated.

We will tread the footsteps of necessity in the Schoolmens path, and see what
will result from thence; Necessitas Praecepti. Medii.
with them necessity is twofold; 1. As a necessary Precept, 2. or a needful
mean.
Now every just command is grounded upon some reason, and every lawful mean
conduces to some good. Divine Precepts we are not scrupulous to enquire after
the Cause, or Reason thereof, but where Gods pleasure is to set it down; for
with us his will passes for a cause all-sufficient. So then it is necessary to
salvation to obey all Gods commands, or to repent for the disobedience;
although all his divine Precepts conduce not necessarily thereunto. Josh. 6.18.
At the sacking of Jericho the spoils were devoted to the Lord, and the
Israelites might reserve nothing to themselves; a necessity there lay in
obeying the same, though the commandment it self was not so necessary. In the
old Law (as I showed before) there was a precept for Confession; and in the
new, a president for the same; why should it not then be thought necessary? But
take this along with you; Positive Precepts contained in the Scripture are not
to be extended further than the written Word, or intention of the Lawgiver
direct: for example, God intends pardon upon sincere confession of the sin
committed; which Pardon when it may be had upon confession made unto God
himself, we extend it not unto Man. So again, if it may be procured upon a
general confession before man, we urge not the Delinquent to be particular; but
if the Conscience cannot be pacified except the pungitive sin be discovered, in
that case we require a special detection of that sin by name. So then if the
intended pardon may be compassed by any of these ways, that way is to be
reputed necessary for that penitent, which served the turn. If by none, but by
all of these, all of these then are necessary. Moreover, Gods word commands
sins to be discovered to the Priest in terms absolute, without further
circumstance; we dare not therefore extend that precept to the manner thereof;
whether it should be public or private, of all sins, or some, followed with
remorse of Conscience; and whether with the addition of aggravating
circumstances or no. I say we lay no necessity of these cases upon any, because
we have not any express word for our warrant; we counsel only, that no man
permit sin to lie still in his bosom, so long as he feels pain, but complain
still to his Physician, till the cure be perfect. Thus for the necessity of
Precept.

necessit as medii. And we are to judge of that necessity by the end; for no
mean can be of greater necessity than the end for which it serves; and if the
end be found necessary, the mean must be thought to be so, and in means we are
to enquire if the proposed end may be attained by one only mean, or by diverse;
some means may be useful, but not necessary, as a horse for a journey, or
simply necessary as wings to fly. To apply, remission of sins is the end a
Penitent proposes to himself, which to compass, we say that confession to a
Prieft is not of absolute necessity, as the adequate, and only mean; for faith
in Christ (who only has deserved it) is also required; nor a necessary
concurrent mean; for of faith I read, but never of Auricular Confession; that
without faith it is impossible to please God; but only a conditional mean, and
so the necessity thereof hypothetical, in some cases of Conscience to be
instanced hereafter: for sin in no case may be remitted without God, in many
without man. But if we take confession as a medium utile, in that sense we
shall ever approve thereof, although we resolve confession in it self not to be
of absolute necessity for all, but a precept binding some sinners, and for some
special sins only. As the holy Eucharist is a Sacrament of divine institution,
and singular benefit, necessary to some Christians, and at some times, and the
contempt thereof at all times damnable; though in it self not simply necessary,
nor at all times, nor to be imposed upon all persons without discretion, (...),
then, for all that can be said this, Confession challenges not any such
necessity in it self as inherent in the same, or any way belonging of sovereign
virtue and necessary use; but as a condition supposed for the acquiring of some
necessary good, Necessit as ^onditionalis, seu necessitas consequentiae, non
est absoluta, nec competit subjecto ex natura rei: sed solum consequitur ad
talem suppositionem, vel conditionem, ex qua necessario infertur id quod ex
tali condition dicitur necessarium necessitate secundum quid, licet absolute,
and secundum se est liberum contingens. Alvarez de Auxil. l. 3. Disp. 22. n. 40.
viz. forgiveness of sins, and reconciliation; a penitent taking all good
courses to ingratiate himself into the favor of God; and this is only
conditional necessity, and by way of consequence; and so far to be urged as we
shall find it a cause to promote the same; and further we reither require nor
orge it. And amiss it cannot be that shall promove so good an end; nor
superfluous that advances such a purpose, nor a heavy burden that brings so
happy a benefit.

SECT. III.
The Contents.
Scrupulous enumeration of all sins decreed in late Councils. Circumstances
aggravating, and altering the property of sin, Millstones to plain-people.
Anxious inquisition into each sin, with every circumstance a perplexed piece.
Particular reckonings for every sin a heavy load to the Conscience, and without
express warranty from God, implying difficulty, and impossibility, and tending
to desperation. No urgent necessity to be so superstitious in casting up of all
sins, and the circumstantial tails thereof. Romish closets of Confession
seminaries of sin, and uncleanness. Venial and reserved sins exempted by Rome
from the ears of ordinary Priests, upon what grounds. Strict and specific
enumeration of sins but of late standing in the Church. General Interrogatories
proposed at the hour of death from Anselme. Some sins are specially, and by
name to be rehearsed in Confession. The nature, and quality of those sins
described, and determined.

WE are now come unto the Contents of Confession, namely sins; and hence a
difference springs betwixt us and Rome about the extent, and latitude
thereof: Whether forsooth all, and every sin committed after Baptism, together
with every aggravating circumstance following every sin be to be laid at the
Priests feet; and whether such an institution of such a Confession comprising
all sins, together with their remarkable circumstances to be spread before the
Priest upon necessity of salvation, be not certa Crux, a torture and snare unto
the conscience, and the practice hereof render the Conscience more perplexed,
than the sin it self. We shall do well herein to see what the Church of Rome
holds, and what load she lays upon her proselytes, and under what
pretenses. The Lateran Council, where their Confession first came abroad, Omn^a
sua solus peccata confiteatur fideliter, saltem semel in anno, proprio
Sacerdoti. Conc. Lat. sub Innocent. 3. can. 21.
decreed all sins to be confessed faithfully at least once a year unto their
own Priest. The Florentine Council prescribes a sinner to confess wholly all
such sins as he remembers to his Priest, Ad oris confessionem pertinet, ut
peccator omaia peccata quorum memoriam habeat, suo Sacerdoti consit^atur
integraliter, etc. Council. Florent. in doctrine. de Sacram.
as loath to charge him with more than he bears in mind; and if such time be
given as once a year, and of such sins as occur to the memory; it may well be
doubted, that with many sinners but few remain upon the memory at the years
end, to be rehearsed before the Priest. And if all sins are so much to be stood
upon in Confession, it is much to be marvelled that these Councils should trust
so frail a memory as a finners is, especially with such records as he takes no
pleasure to preserve, and that for so long a space; and be so strict for the
account, and so loose for the time, where many a particular may be obliterated
and defaced. The Fathers at Trent decree no less, viz. That all and every sin
must be repeated in Confession; Oportere a Poenitentibus omnia peccata
mortalia, quorum p^st diligentem sui discussionem; conscientiam habent, in
confessione recenseri, etiamsi occultissima illa sint, and tantum adversus duo
ultima Docalogi praeoepta commissa; Quae nonnunquam animum gravius sauciant,
and periculosiora sunt iis quae in manifesto admittuntur -- omnia quae memoriae
occurrunt peccata confiteri student. Qui secus faciunt, and scienter aliqua
retinent, nihil divinae bo^itati per Sacerdotem remittendum proponunt.
that diligent and na^row search must be made into the Conscience, especially
after those secret sins that are against the two last commandments (they mean
the last it self) of the Decalogue, as wounding the soul oft^imes more
dangerously, than such that are openly committed; that all persons be studious
in making confession of those sins which occur unto their memory; assuring
all those that do otherwise, and sciently keep in any sin, to look for no
remission from Gods goodness at the Priests hand. Here the memory must be
helped with diligent disquisition and study to sift after not actual sins
alone, but the most retired offenses of the heart, as many times implying
greatest danger, or else no pardon may be expected either from God, or from the
Priest; what breast will not be disquieted with this scrupulous command, and
not terrified at this fearful penalty? I have searched, but fear me not
narrowly enough; have been studious to remember, but not so careful as I ought;
have looked into my heart, but perceive that is a depth not to be fathomed;
would gladly know what secret sins lurk there, but find it so deceitful above
all things that who can know it? Thus the Conscientious Penitent distrusts his
confession not to be completely made, and can never thereby assure himself of
Priestly absolution. That Council yet proceeds, and commands all circumstances
altering the nature of the sin to be unfolded also. Colligitur praeterea etiam
circumstantias ea^ in confessione explicandas esse, quae speciem peccati
mutant. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5.
Nor does their Catechism set out by Papal authority differ from their
Council, which teaches, Mortifera peccata singula enumeranda sunt; quamvis
etiam occultissime l^teant, ut ejus generis sint, quae duobus tantum extremis
d^calogi capitibus interdicuntur; Saepe enim evenit, ut ea gravius animum
vulnerent, quam illa quae aperte and palam peccare homines solent. Catech. Romans
page 157.
All and singular deadly sins to be numbered up, although they lie hid never so
closely; of which kind are those that are forbidden in the two last
commandments of the law; for it often happens, that such as they wound the
soul more, then those which men are wont to commit in the open view; and not
sins alone, but the circumstances thereof must be brought within Confession.
Not only sins of weight themselves, Neque solum peccata gravia narrando
explicare oportet, verum etiam illa quae unumquodque peccatum circumstan^, prav
tatom valde augent, vel minuunt. Quaedam enim circumstantiae adeo graves sunt,
ut peccati mortiferi ratio ex illis totum const^t. p. 157. ^.
but such things also which severally bes^t them, and greatly increase, or
diminish the iniquity thereof; for some circumstances are so material, that
from them alone is collected the deadliness of the offense. And the sharp and
severe penalty for the omitting thereof is laid down in that Chatechisme thus;
Si quis dedita opera alia quidem es iis qua explicari debeant praetermittat,
alia vero tantummodo confiteatur; non solum ex ea confessione is commodum
nullum consequatur, sed et^am scelere novo se obstringat. Catech. ad Paroch.
Pii V. jussu edit. Paris. 1567.
If any willingly pretermi^, and pass over to confess any of the sins, or
circumstances thereunto belonging as he ought, and so confess but a part, and
parcel thereof; he shall be so far from reaping any benefit under color of
such confession, as to engage himself to a further sin. Here comes in that
intolerable burden, and hard yoke, the remembrance whereof makes tender and
bleeding consciences to tremble; that upon the omission of any sin, or
circumstantial rag thereof (and tender consciences will ever suspect they have
done it wittingly) after all their pains in remembering, grief in reciting, and
shame in discovering their other faults, are so far from landing in the quiet
haven of absolution after many tempests sustained, as they are imbarqu'd to a
further danger, and depart worse sinners than they came; besides the discomfort
in drawing a particular catalogue of all sins, when we have work enough to be
eased of those which lie heavy at the heart.

I said how the Masters at Trent decreed such circumstances of sin to be
unfolded, which changed the kind; and their meaning is further to be unfolded,
that their cutthroat doctrine may be more manifest. There are two sorts of
circumstances, Circumstantiae sunt in duplici differentia; aliae minuentes,
aliae vero aggravantes; rursum vel mutant speciem; ut furtum in loco sacro; vel
non, ut furtum 100. aureorum; idem in specie ac furtum 10. aureorum. Canus.
1. diminishing, and 2. aggravating the offense; and these latter are again
twofold, 1. either which change the species of sin, as to rob the Church is not
theft, but Sacrilege: 2. or else which aggravate only, as to steal a 100. l.
or a 100. s. is theft alike, though not alike was stolen;

and an example of 1. diminishing circumstances, 2. or changing mortal sin into
venial;
as to communicate ignorantly with a person excommunicate; that word ignorantly
shows the offense to be but venial. 1. Circumstantia quae ita minuit peccatum,
ut ex mortali faciat veniale, debeat omnino explicari.
Now their rules herein are these; 1. Circumstances abating the sin from mortal
to venial, are to be expressed. 2. Si circumstantiae minuant peccati malitiam,
intra tamen latitudixem peccati mortalis, non est nesessarium illas confiteri.
2. Circumstances diminishing the sin, yet leaving the same to be mortal, are
not so much to be stood upon in confession. 3. Circumstantiae mutantes speciem,
and ex nova specie, novam peccato mortalem malitiam adjicientes, sunt omnino
explicandae; ut stuprum cum virgin Deo sacra. Can. Rel. de Poen. part. 6. p.
906.
3. Circumstances adding new malice, and changing the species of sin, are
precisely requisite in confession, as the rape of a Nun, or cloistred Virgin; a
Frier-like sin.
Now in good earnest, what are such circumstantial distinctions to the people,
but scruples to perplex their Consciences, or rocks to grind them to powder?
and if their Casuists always versed in these points, are restless in their
resolutions, how shall the vulgar, but little or nothing at all studied in such
cases, discern what circumstances are fit to be put in and out in their
Confessions?

This is the public doctrine of the Church of Rome, and which her adherents
and followers with no less superciliousness aver. If any of the Saints (says
Bishop Fisher) had wittingly concealed the least mortal sin that came into
their mind at the instant of Confession, Si sancti vel minimum mortale quod
menti occurrisset, tempore confessionis sponte subticu^ssent, ausim dicere nec
sanctos eos esse, nec justificatos; immo si quam ante justitiam habuissent, jam
propter h^pocrisin penitus amiserunt. Roffens. Contr. Luther. art. 8.
I dare be bold to say they were neither Saints, nor justified; yea, if they
had attained to any Righteousness before, to have wholly lost it through their
hypocrifie. Great grace is conferred no doubt by this noble Sacrament,
environed with so many scruples and difficulties, that the Penitent is in
greater danger to lose the good he has, than in hope to augment it. It is not
certainly without cause that Luther, who knew the practice thereof, cried out
upon it, as Carnificina cruentissima, Ista est Carnificina cruentissima qua
bactenus tot miseras conscientias torserunt omnium and singulorum peccatorum
discussionibus and confessionibus, cum pro se non iota habeant ullius
Scriptureae, tyrannide propria haec oncra importabilia hominibus imponentes.
Luther. art. 9.
wherewithal popish shavelings have tortured so many consciences by the
discussions and confessions of all and singular offenses; imposing importable
burdens upon men through their tyranny, without any jod, or particle of holy
Scripture. Summa est, confessionem auricularem per multiplices Pontificiorum
abusus saepe factam jam esse ex necessitate, and circumstantiarum perplexitate
conscientiarum Carnificinam: ex formulis interrogationum illecebram and
lenocinium voluptatis: ex istac lege non prodendi futurea peccata proditionum
flagitiosarum latebram atque sigillum Reverend. Episc. Dunelm. in Cause. Regia,
cap. 7. Sect. 2.
And a Reverend Prelate of our own, (these tyrannous abuses considered) to
censure Romish-confession for the necessity, and perplexity of circumstances,
the rack of the Conscience; for and^ he forms of interrogatories therein
admin^stred, the bait bawd of voluptuousn^sse; and for silencing of future
sins, the den and seal of prodigious treasons. Thus he; and how sharp soever
this censure be, sad experience justifies the truth hereof; and a no less
Reverend, and learned personage to style this particular and circumstantial
e^umeration of sins, that Engine whereby the Priests of Rome have lift up
themselves into that height of domineering, Bishop Usher^s Answer to the
Jesuits challenge, p. 124.
and tyrannizing over men's conscience^, wherewith we see they now hold the poor
people in most miserable aw; and lest these Men be thought to be more rigid in
their judgments? than Rome in her confession, let a moderate man, an Angel,
that fled through the midst of heaven, leaving the Reformed Church above him,
Quod subjiciunt Augustanae confessionis Authors, enumerationem omnium
delictorum non esse necessariam, quadam ex part recte habit, viz. si
intelligatur de ignotis, and non occurrentibus peccatis; item si intelligatur
de nimis anx a inquisitione omnium circumstantiarum, quae in multis
conscientiae carnificinam gignit, quam nemo moderatus approbat: Veru si
referatur ad eam enumerationem peccatorum, qua graviora omnia peccata
diligenter expenduntur, and tanquam spiritualia vulnera spirituali Medico
revelantur, de ea quoque retinenda dubitandum non est. Cassand. Consult. art.
11. Lugd. 161 2.
and the Roman below, Cassander speak; Whereas the Authors of the Augustane
Confession add, that an enumeration of all sins is not so necessary, in some
sense it is well; namely, if unknown sins, and such as occur not, be
understood; also if that same anxious inquisition into all circumstances be
meant, which in many begets a torture of conscience, which no moderate man can
approve of. But if it be referred to that enumeration of sins, wherein the more
grievous offenses are dil gently weighed, and are revealed, as spiritual wounds
to a spiritual Physician, there can be no question but that it ought to be
retained. Hereunto may be added, B. Rhenanus, Quam confessionem saluberrimam
esse nemo possit inficiari, si morositatem, and scrupulositatem nimiam amputes.
B. Rhen. prefat. ad. Tert. lib. de Poenit.
who could not away with this morosity, and scrupulosity (as he calls it)
though otherwise, the duty it self (those abuses cut off) is by him highly
exalted.

1. En^meration of all sins before the Priest a burden importable, and besides
Gods word.
Our exceptions against the same follow; and first we challenge them for
shutting the kingdom of heaven before men; and imposing harder conditions than
the most indulgent times under the Gospel, and grace approve of. We live under
a continual Jubilee, and may have access unto the mercy seat with confidence;
but by this doctrine the Gospel is turned into the Law; and the light yoke
become a heavy burden; and the condition of the second covenant of Grace more
precise, then the first of works, it being possible alike to perform all the
precepts of the Law, and circumstances thereof, as distinctly to confess all
our sins, and the circumstances. Moreover, who can well endure such hard load
to be laid upon the Conscience, and so sorely pressed without special warranty
from Gods word? Luther charged the Pope with this tyrannical imposition,
without any shadow of authority from holy writ. Si res haec fuisset ab hoc
Pontifice nuper inventa, potuisses illam and multo quidem inculpatius, ejus
imputasse tyrannidi; verum cum a vetustissimis, and eisdem eruditissimis, atque
sanctissim's authoribus, nec sine Scripturarum testimoniis apertissime traditum
sit, frustra tyrannidem ejus accusas. page 146.
Bishop Fisher confesses the charge in part to be true, if Leo X. then Pope
had been the first bringer in thereof; but he discharges him, and lays it
upon the most ancient, learned and holiest Authors, and that not without
testimonies from the Scripture. That Prelate says it, but he or some for him
must show it, else his assertion will prove a scandal to those ancient and
learned worthies. Tam apertissime tradita, a thing so evident, and we so blind
that cannot see it? sure too much transparency of light has dazzled us. We
would gladly know for our reverence to ancient learning where not only any,
but any one of those Ancients have delivered, that all sins with their
circumstances are upon pain of salvation to be distinctly confessed to a
Priest, and that by express order from the Word of God. This doctrine of the
Church of Rome is sans parallel to any passage of Scripture, or testimony of
any Father. Bellarmine (its a chance else) would have lighted upon those
ancient Records, if any such had been extant; who of the old Councils says
thus; The testimories of the Councils which we all age, Testimonia Conciliorum
quae adferemus, etiamsi non aperte contineant confessionem esse juris divini,
continent tamen antiquam consuetudinem, and saepe etiam indicant necessitatem
confitendi Sacerdoti. Bell. l. 3. de Poen. cap. 5.
although they do not clearly contain confession to be of divine right;
nevertheless they contain an ancient custom, and ofttimes show the necessity
of confessing unto a Priest. The contents of this testimony can afford but
small comfort; and for the Fathers the same man says thus; Although the
Fathers say not in express words, Confession of all sins to be necessary by
divine right, Tametsi Patres (quos citat Chemnitius) non dicant disertis verbis
confessionem omnium peccatorum necessariam esse jure divino; tamen neque
disertis verbis dicunt confessionem omnium peccatorum non esse necessariam jure
divino. Id. ib. cap. 11.
so neither do they say in express words that confession of all sins is not
necessary by divine right. It Is true he says these words of such Fathers as
are produced by Chemnitius, (which are in effect all that are alleged by
himself, as by collation may appear.) And a negative proof from authority will
be thought too slack to prove a positive doctrine; and in Schools too weak an
argument; Confession is necessary by divine Law, because the Fathers say not to
the contrary. Affirmative conclusions urged de fide, and upon the extremest
penalty, must be deduced from positive and clear testimonies, else their credit
may be worthily suspected; and how defective this particular is in proofs, I
appeal to all Pontificious Writers, and indifferent Readers; yea, Canus
confesses that this conclusion, Contlusionem Mathematica demonstratione plane
exploratam haberi non posse, afferuntur argumenta quae probant consentanum
esse, ita fieri oportere. Canus Relect. de poen. part. 6. page 902.
viz. for the confessing of every particular sin, cannot be found out by any
Mathematical demonstration; but faith being supposed, such argument^ must be
trusted unto, which prove it convenient so to be. How comes it then to pass
that this point is concluded to be necessary, where the arguments it stands
upon prove it only convenient? and why should that be exposed to be performed
upon utmost peril, which is at the most but probably confirmed? Precise
Conclusions de fide must rest upon sure foundations, and where salvation, and
damnation is set upon the head of any precept, the same must be evidenced with
a constat quod erat demonstrandum, as certainly as any Mathematical
demonstration.

2. Enumeration of every sin a matter of impossibility. (...). Basil hom. 19.3.
Our second exception is the impossibility in rendering so exact an account of
every sin, with the appendix of several circumstances. That Law is rejected as
Tyrannical, or foolish, that injoyneth impossibilities. It is impiety to
affirm the precepts of the holy Spirit to be impossible, says great Basil. To
confess always before we come to the Communion, Bishop Montagu appeal, page
301.
is ofttimes (says the learned Bishop now of Norwich) a matter of
impossibility to do; even impossible to do with particular enumeration of each
sin, and special circumstance in each sin. Aquinas, and Scotus, (says Beatus
Rhenanus) two, Aquinas and Scotus homines nimium a^guti, confessionem hodie
talem reddiderunt, ut Joan. Geillerius, gravis and Sanctus Theologus, apud su^s
saepe testatus sit, ut secundum illorum d^uteroseis, impossible est confiteri.
Argin Tert. de Poenit.
and too subtle disputants, have brought confession to such a pass at this
day, that John Geiller, a grave and holy Divine, often testified unto his
friends, that according to their rigid observances it is impossible to make
Confession. So by these men's inventions, and curious injunctions (to say no
more) that which was at first an ease to relieve, is now become a snare to
entrap the conscience. Ignorant and importunate Physicians (says Cassander)
casting snares upon the peoples consciences, Ignari and importuni Medici
conscientiis hominum quas extricare and levare debeant, laqueos injiciunt.
Cassand. Con. art. 11.
which they ought to unwrap, and set at liberty. And so it must needs be, for
our sins are as numberless as the sands; and though we should be as exact
computists as Clavius was who has cast up into one sum how many grains of
sands will fill up the vast concave betwixt earth and heaven, we may be out in
our account of sin: We must not (says Canus) put them that sin often to their
Arithmetic, Non oportere eos qui saepe peccant ad Mathematicos numeros
peccatorum multitudinem exact redigere, difficilis sane propositio sed vera;
quia vix possibile est iis qui semel in anno confitentur, certum numerum
peccatorum recensere. Canus supra.
to bring in an exact number of their offenses. It is an harsh, but true
proposition, that it is scarce possible for those which confess but once a
year, to recount the true number of their offenses. To this end David prayed as
well to number his sins, as his days, and was (I suppose) as scrupulous to
confess, and lament them, as any of our Roman Penitents; yet he cries out,
Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 38.5. Nimirum intelligebat quanta esset peceatorii nostrorum
abyssus; qu^m mult^e seelerum sacies, quot capita serret, and quam longam
caadamtrah ret haec Hydra. Calvin. Institut. l. 3. c. 4. Sect. 16.
Who can understand his errors? cleanse me from my secret sins; and again, My
iniquities are gone over my head, as a burden they are too heavy for me. Now
truly he well understood how great a depth of sins there is, how many strange
countenances and shapes they resemble; how many heads they lift up; and how
great a train, and long tail of circumstances this Hydra draws after it.
Therefore he busieth not himself in drawing an Inventory of each several sin;
but cries out of the depth unto the Lord, that the waters have entered into his
soul; that his sins are too heavy; that there is no health in his bones, nor
rest in his conscience: and in such terms spreads his sins before the Lord by
better expressions than in any Method or forms of Confession, (and thereof are
diverse) set forth by our New Masters. I must not forget that Popish writers
streitned with the pressure of this reason, remit something of the rigor, Ea
solum quae post diligentem excussionem memoriae occurrunt. Bellar. de Poen. l.
3. cap. 16.
and exact no further account than of such sins occurring unto the memory, and
seriously called to mind at the time of Confession; and how poor a remnant this
is, to the sands of the Sea, and how small a gleaning after so great a harvest;
that handful reserved for that time makes manifest. Confess all and every sin
is the precept; that is, such only as you can remember, is the exception; a
gentle gloss for a severe law: and as the injunction it self is too rigorous,
so the limitation is too ridiculous. The Grecian Dame defiled by the Deacon in
Sozomen, (...). Strom. 1. p. 217. lin. 11.
confessed her sin (...), which I read rather distinctly than partially; and so
used by Clemens Alexandrinus, viz. the doctrine of Christ deduceth providence
unto things in singular; yet a distinct confession of sin differs from a
distinct confession of all sins, and a sinner may be particular in some, though
not singular in all offenses, a matter (as we said) of impossibility.

3. Obligation of confessing sins all and singular, a point of desperation.
Our third exception, that to oblige the conscience to confess every sin with
the pertinent circumstance is a doctrine of desperation; for confess I must all
my sins, else look for no comfort from Gods hands, and the Priests. Now what
soul can tell he has told all his sins? Thou will say, tell all thou art able,
do they best endeavor to lay open all, and then though some are left out, thou
art discharged. I do my best, and part my sins into branches, Usque ad
circumstanliarum minutias.
fractions, atoms; I weight the nature, and extent thereof; I put thereunto
every material circumstance; I lanch forth into the depth of my lewd life, and
having nothing before but the open air, and vast sea, no haven, no station, and
the further I enter into this Labyrinth, the more I lose my self; and the more
diligent I am to number sins, the more numberless I find them; and after all my
travel in this disquisition, Haerebam inter Saxum and sacrum, nec alius tandem
exitus reperiebatur quam desperatio. Calv. instit. l. 3. c. 4. Sect. 17.
my conscience is not quieted, my Audit is not perfect, therefore much suspect
I shall not have my quietus est at the Priests hands; such thoughts as these
must needs present themselves to that soul whose conscience is kept awake.
Furthermore it is required of all penitents to use such diligence, Diligentem
excussionem vocant, quam in rebus gravioribus ordinary homines adhibere
solent. B lar. l. 3. de Poenit. c. 16.
to keep their sins in memory against the times of Confession, as usually they
do about such important affairs as otherwise much concern them; and here arise
new doubts, and discontents in the mind, whereby a Penitent is jealous he has
not done his devoire, especially when he calls to mind, what diligence he has
showed in accomplishing secular ends, how careful he is in the things of this
life; studious of his preferment, watchful to prevent dangers, painful to
augment his store, provident in laying up for his posterity; all which matched
with the diligence he has used on this behalf, what restless perturbations
ensue? herein I took not time enough, I used not industry enough, I let slip
many sins through negligence, and forgot more through my carelessness; and shall
such negligent forgetfulness be excused? I said above what Beatus Rhenanus
related from a Divine of much experience, concerning the impossibility of
confession; let us hear him further about the perplexity, and corture thereof.
Many religious Carthusians and Franciscans were very conversant with him,
V^rille magno rerum usu praeditus -- a Carthasianis, and Franciscanis
intervisebatur, ab his d^scebat quibus tormentis quoruadam piae ma^tes
affligerentur ob confessionem, cui satissacere (ut ^psisvidebatur) nequirent;
similes querelas adeum deser^baut sanctimoniales; proinde motus suerat ut
libellum ederet in lingua Germanica, cui titulamfecit VON THEM BEICHTUNAH, hoc
est, de morbo Confessionis, quo negabant esse tristiorem qui eo tenebantur:
Erat Carrhusianus quidam, qui propter confessionum, quae ei semper ob
inexplicabilem circumstantiarum vim imperfecta videbatur, sed ^pse
persect^ssimam esse frustra conteadebat, huc miseriarum venerat, ut omaem
salutem desponderet, and (...) Cogitaret; hujusmodi homines illi libuit eo
libello consolari. B. Rhenan. praef. ad Tert. l. de. Poenit.
from them he perceived with what torments well-disposed people were afflicted
about confession, which scrup'es (as it seemed unto them) they could not
satisfy; the like complaixt did the We call them Nuns being for the most part
Nonariae; of whom the Poet -- Multum gaudere paratus, St Cynico barbam petulans
Nonaria vellat. Pers. Sat.
Vestal Virgins and Votaries make unto him, Whereupon he was moved to publish a
Treatise in the German tongue, which he entitled, VON BEICHTUNAH, that is, the
disease of Confession, than which those that were visited with the same,
confessed none to be more grievous. There was a certain Carthusian, all long of
confession, which by reason of the unexplicable violence of circumstances
appeared to him as imperfect, (although he did his best endeavor to perfect
the same all he could) who was driven to that wretched exigence, as to despair
of salvation, and contrive his own death by affamishment; such distressed
persons he was pleased to relieve in that Treatise. A sight whereof I have much
desired, but could not yet compass, and therefore have put down this testimony
more at length than otherwise I would. And not in the judgment of this Divine
alone, but of their greatest Angelical Doctor, this superstitious, and
circumstantial relation of each sin has produced such sad and desperate
events; For as Navarr that great Casuist witnesses; Aquinas himself seemed
sensible of these wringings and tortures of circumstances; Ipse Aquinas
circumstantiarum torturas senfisse videtur, and arbitrabatur candido Christi
lectori conformatiorem esse confessionem, quae tranquillo animo sine
circumstantiis, bona side facta est, quam quae his fit animo scrupuloso, and
inquieto. Navar. Tom. 1. p. 501.
and reputed that Confession more conformable for an innocent breast, where
Christ abides, which is made with a quiet mind, and good intention, than that
which proceeds from a scrupulous and unquiet heart. Insomuch that Divines of
best account in that side have greatly disliked these squeezing, and writhing
interrogatories, serving for no other end but to fish and angle after secrets,
neither necessary nor fit to come abroad; and condemn those late Summists that
prescribe the form thereof; Non displicet confessio, sed morositas ista and
anxietas quorundam, quam docent aliquae recentiorum Summulae, quae justi us
alibi locum habeant quam in Bibliothecis, hoc est, nimirum art em tradere, and
methodum alicujus rei quam ipse non probe calleas. -- bonae m^ntes non sunt
de^ito solatio destituendae, ne tyrannis, and Carnificina conscientiarum
invales^at, haud paulo minus nocitura, quam dissolutio; adeo ^^o dum ubique
servari praestat. B. Rhenan. sup^a.
wishing their Treatises to be bestowed otherwise than in Libraries, as serving
forsooth to deliver the art, and method of a business which skills not much --
and desire that honest hearts may not be defrauded of due comfort; lest the
tyranny and torture of Conscience prevail too much, and as much hurt be done
by such severity, as by licentiousness; and advise, that moderation herein be
shown.

The Cardinal pressed with the weight of this argument, finds no ease but by
retorting the same upon those heads that brought it; thus: If enumeration of
all sins be impossible before men, Quaecunque objiciuntur contra enumerationem
peccaterum quae fit homini, ead^m objici possiat contra enumerationem
peccatorum in confessione quae fit Deo; si illa enumeratio est impossibilis,
and haec est impossibilis; si illa est crudelis Carnificina, and haec crudelis
Carnificina. Bellar. l. 3. de Poen. c. 16.
then it is so also before God; and Protestants require sinners to confess unto
God whatsoever sins they know, or remember, and Papists require no more in
auricular confession both then must lie open to like exceptions: if it be said
that special Confession made before man is impossible, so is that before God
also; if this a torture, then that also; if this lead to desperation, then that
likewise. Thus the Jesuit glories to have wounded us with our own weapon. But
it will not so easily be wrung from us; for we reply; first, Publican remains
justified upon that general confession, and supplication, O God be merciful to
me a sinner. Luke 18.
in making confession to God, the Lord may bring our sins to remembrance, Psalm.
50.21.
I will set them in order before th^e; which the Priest cannot do. desires
thereof, which the Priest cannot; and understands the voice of our weeping,
which the Priest is ignorant of; and tears are a Penitents best Interpreter;
more profitable are the prayers sighed forth in tears, than uttered in words;
Utiliores lacrium^rum pre^es sunt, qui^m s^rmonum, quia serino in precando
forte sallit, lacrima omnino non fallit. S^^mo interdum non totum profert
negotium, la^rim ^semper ^otum p^odit affectum. Ambros. Sermon. 46. de Poenit.
Petri.
our speech may fail in expression, but tears never fail. Our speech ofttimes
does not fully open our case, but tears ever open our affections fully. Ambros.
If then a Penitent have a better dialect spreading his sins better before God,
than if he spoke with the tongue of men and Angels; and such a dialect which
neither Men nor Angels understand but God himself, viz. the voice of weeping;
the argument must return in full force, and there remain, till the Priest has
learned this language, and be able to search the heart likewise. Consider then
if the performance of this task was not well reckoned amongst the knotty pieces
of Christian Religion, by one that was no enemy thereunto, a late Sorbonist.
There are in Christianity three things very difficult to be practiced; En la
Religion Chrestianne il y avoit trois chooses fort difficiles a pratiquer, c'est
a scavoir, passer toute sa vie sans commettre aucun peche veniel; aimer ses
enemis de cour, and d'affection; and confesser tous ses pechez a un homme. P.
Bess. Caresme. Tom. 2. page 713.
that is to say, 1. to pass this life without committing any venial sin; 2. to
love enemies with the heart and affection; 3. and to confess all sins unto a
Priest.
Point me out the man that has performed these more than Herculean labors,
and he shall be the tantum non, and only Paramount above the rank of old Adams
offspring.

4. No urgent necessity to the rehearsal of all sins in confession.
Our fourth exception; That this Charge is imposed upon the Conscience without
any urgent necessity, for what necessary cause or good, can be here imagined;
if remission of sins? It has been proved already that God forgives many sins
Priests never hear of; if because God has appointed so? we must take his word,
and not the Roman Church for divine institutions, and it must be showed where
God wills, that the Priest should stand upon so strict a reckoning; we have
the word of a King to the contrary: In the sacred Scriptures it no where
occurreth (says our late dread Sovereign King James) that any such necessity
is impos^d upon us, In sacris literis nusquam occurrit necessitas haec nobis
imposita sub aeternae mortis poena, ut abditissima quae admisimus peccata
Sacerdoti nota faciamus; nam si vel cogitatiunculam injustam celaveris, ilicet,
oleum cum opera perdidisti. Jacob. Rex Medit. in Orat. Dom. page 61.
that upon pain of eternal death, we must make known unto the Priest the most
secret sins we commit; for if thou conceal the least evil thought, all this
labor beside is but lost, and cast away. To what pupose serves it then?
Remissio peccatorum impendi potest sine praevia illa conf^ssione speciali. --
ac proinde etia^ nudam and apertam peccatorum confessionem ad act onem
poenitentiae, quam satisfactionem vocamus, exigendam, Quae (particularis
confessio) satifactionis magna pars est, and sine qua act^^ poenitentiae recte
praescribi non potest. Jansen. Concord. cap. 147. page 298. Moguntin. 1624.
Jansenius yields a reason, that such a particular draught of confession is
not necessarily previous to remission of sins; and pardon may be afforded
without it; to what end drives it then? marry, there is a business called
satisfaction, which the Priest looks after, and the Penitent must undergo, as
the masterpiece in popish penance; and that cannot rightly be prescribed,
Confessor institutus est loco Dei ad compensandas injurias contra Deum sactas,
and taxandas poenas pro offensis debitas. Can. Relect. de Poen. part. 6.
except the sinner be particular. It is exacted then (according to Canus also)
that the Priest may be made acquainted with each sin, to measure out condign
satisfaction in the Lords stead. Such an end may be made betwixt man and man;
but neither men, nor Angels are able to allot, or being allotted to make
condign satisfaction for the least offense against God; except his dearest Son,
whose merits were of infinite value; which God has accepted, therefore at our
hands looks for no such matter. None so poor but he may pay what he owes unto
God, N^mo pauper est qui Deo debet, nisi qui seipsum pauperem secerit; etsi non
habet quod vendat, habet quod solvat; Oration, lacrimae, jejunia, debitoris boni
census est. -- non enim p^cuniam Deus, sed sidem quaerit. Ambros.
unless he wilfully impoverisheth himself; although he has not what to sell,
he has Wherewith to pay; prayers, tears, fasting, are the riches of Gods
debtor -- for the Lord exacts not wealth, but faith, says Ambrose. Such is the
debt Heaven requires to be paid; and with the Lord thereof repentance it self
is the best restitution. Let us render our selves unto God that heals us,
giving him a reward; (...). Clemens Romans Epist. 2. ad Corinth.
but what? to repent with a sincere heart, says Clemens of Rome. But to
proceed, let it be granted that man could pacify, and right a wronged Deity,
and that the Priest were to deal satisfaction to every sin as he should think
fit. It would trouble all the Priests in the world to make up the measure of
contrition answerable to the sin, to make the sorrow, and the offense to meet,
and weigh equally with satisfaction in the scales of justice; all which doings
could never satisfy a wounded Conscience. Canus therefore bethinking with
himself to how small purpose sinners are required to be so particular, Haec
notitia sufficit Confesso^^, ut sin^m confessionis praestet, sive consilium,
sive remedium, seu vindictam salutarem. Canus, Relect. de Poenit. part. 6. page
905.
lays down this for a Maxim, that such, and so much notice of sin suffices
to a Ghostly Father, as may attain unto the end of confession, be it counsel,
remedy or wholesome revenge: Now in all and every sin he needs not be consulted
withal as an Advocate, or prescribe the remedy as a Physician, or enjoin the
mulct as a Judge, and accordingly frames his conclusions; viz. No man is tied
to use his utmost skill to preserve in memory the sins that he has done, Non
tenetur quis omnem operam quam potest dare, ut omnia peccata quae fecerit in
memoria conservet, ut postea tempore confessionis nullum intermittatur.
as to omit none at the time of shift; which he wills to be embraced, l^st
the yoke of Christ become uneasy, and to men importable; Ne Christi jugum
insuave, immo ad^o importaibile hominibus redderetur; ne Germani merito possiat
obj^cere Doctores Scholasticos confessionem hodie talem reddidisse, ut juxta
illorum haetherosin impossible sit confiteri.
and the Germans have just cause of complaint against the Schoolmen, how by
their subtilty confession is brought to such a pass as impossible to be
performed. Nor can we constrain any to do their best endeavor herein, except
we compel them in flagrante crimine while the sin is hot, to set down the same
in writing. And what shall the unlearned do, how shall poor Country men help
their memory? Quid cum Rusticis agemus? nihil aliud quam eos obligare, ut non
semel modo, verum etiam centies in anno confiteantur.
surely we must enjoin them to confess a hundred times in the year, else not
the hundredth part of their sins will be thought on at the years end; therefore
mediocris diligentia, a moderate diligence, and such as conscientious men, and
fearing God use in other pious exercises, shall here suffice. And Ghostly
Fathers ought to forbear vexing of their penitents by interrogating them
punctually, Non ergo debet Confessor v^xare Poenitentes, punctim interrogando
de numero, per anxiam, and puerilem superstitionem, faciens eos v^l mentiri,
vel certe salsum dicere. Canus supra.
about the number of their offenses, with such anxious, and childish
superstition causing them to lie, or at least to tell an untruth. This Friar
would never have connived so far, if the performance of this Romish practice
had been so precisely necessary; or if he had not espied extreme difficulties,
or rather impossibilities to perform the same, and by consequence the restless
tortures that gnaw upon the Conscience for failing therein. And all this for
good purposes superfluous, and for indirect ends only necessary.

5. The process in examining of particular sins obscene.
Our fifth exception that Confessors under pretense of extracting of sins in
particular, administer such interrogatories to Penitents, that over-whelme the
modester sort with shame, and instruct the worser sort with a more ample
knowledge of doing mischief. Read their forms of Questioning in Summa
Angelica, and other Summists, Sub titulo, Interrogationes in Confessione.
and consider if thereby many an unheard of sin be not taught, many smothered
offenses blown abroad, and if the way to offend, the opportunity, the delight,
the baits, together with the several temptations and inducements to sin be not
therein detected; so that this Method, and Art of confessing is rather a
Method, and Art of sinning; Interroga si stetit naturaliter in vase debito, si
cum tali quaesivit vitare generationem, si habuit pollutionem dormiendo, etc.
de quibus leg^t qui plura cupit Summulas. Nos hac^a scabie tenemus ungues.
Confession it self become a Stews, and the Priest a Pander to fleshly lusts.
Let their Interrogatories be perused, which refer to the VII. Commandment, of
uncleanness, nocturnal pollution, Incest, Sodomy, whereby their Confessors
grope after unnatural lusts, and become not Confessores, but contaminatores,
Sir Rob. Heath at Earl of Castlehavens attainder. April, 25. 1631.
as one of their own Order speaks, proposing such Questions, which to do is
contra naturam, and to relate, contra reverentiam naturae; as a learned Lawyer
spoke in a late unfortunate Earls case. These Ghostly Fathers, of^times
grievously offending in pleasing themselves with such obscene Questions, Qui
saepissime peccant mortaliter delectando se de ^ujusmodi interrogationibus, and
propter delectationem saciendo eas. Sum. Angel. tit. Interrog. in Confess.
contriving them up on set purpose for their delight and pastime. Such forms
of confession you may swear altogether different from the ancient Penitential
Canons, by whose directions the spiritual Fathers of the last society looking
a-squint upon the desires of the flesh; inquire after the difference of sins
obscene, and beastly matters, Formulas confessionum, quibus sancti illi
Pneumatt^^ circa peccatorum differentias obs^oena quaedam, and impudica
exquirunt, quae sin^ Interrogati (cujus auribus inauditae turpitudines, and
lasciviae instillantur) rubore, and Interrogantis inhonesti appetitus
titillatione vix ullis v^^bis, aut ne vix quidem enunciari poslint. P^nt.
Tyard, Episc. Cabilon. de fratribus Jesu, page 35.
which cannot be mentioned without blushing in the Examinat, (whose ears tingle
at the hearing of unknown lusts, and uncleanness) and not without the
titillation of a dishonest appetite in the Examiner himself that moves them.
Oh times that such filthy communication not once named amongst the Heathen,
should be thus played withal; these Ghostly Fathers to be so carnal, this
penitential practice so obscene, this pretended Laver of the soul to become the
sink of iniquity; this Confession of sin a profession of sinning; where men
learn rather than leave sin; displeasing rather than appeasing God; and at the
end of this exercise become far worse than at the beginning. Pardon (good
Reader) the exuberancy of my speech justly occasioned, when the most holy
pretenses are the most fowly profaned. Good reason had Canus to tax such
Confessors, who by their foolish interrogatories became scandalous to their
Penitents, Nec eos quidem probo qui imprudenter interrogando Poenitentibus
scandalii in^iciunt, atque adeo eo; peccare docent: Qua in re confidenter etiam
reprobo sum is istas Confessionum interrogitionibus plenas, quae idiomate
vulgari non solum eduntur, sed passim^etiam mul^erculis, and Idiotis
conferuntur, ut inde discant non Confitendi, sed (ut ego sentio) peccandi
ratio^m, and normam. Can. Relect. de Poen. part. 6. page 908.
so far, as to teach them to sin; and withal confidently to reprove these
sums of Confessions, stuffed with Questions of that nature, and are not only
put forth in the vulgar tongue; but are bestowed abroad upon women, and simple
people, thereby to learn not the manner and form of confessing, but (as I
suppose) of sinning.

Our last exception against this Specifique enumeration of every sin in
Confession, 6. Of Venial sins. Of Reserved cases.

is derived from a practice of theirs, in exempting of Venial sins, and
reserved cases from the ordinary and parochial Ghostly Father. Venialia quamvis
r^cte, and utiliter in Confessione dicantur, tace^i tamen citra culpam,
multisque aliis remedi^s expia^^ possint. Council. Trid. c. 5.
Those as superfluous, and scarce worthy of a Priests skill, and notice; these
as too ha^nous, and desperate diseases exceeding his skill, Patribus nostris
visum^st ut^atrociora quaedam, and graviora crimina non a quibusvis, sell a
summis duntaxat Sacer lotibus absolveretur. Conc. Trid. de casuum reservatione,
cap. 7.
therefore reserved for Physicians of higher place, and power; and in such
cases every simple Priest is inhibited to proceed; but to send corpus cum causa
to such Penitentiaries, to whose jurisdiction they are immediately subject. Now
if all sins that come into a sinners mind must upon pain of the second death,
and that by Gods law, be opened to a Priest, by what law are some exempted, and
more reserved from his audience than others? Again, if Papal reservations, and
dispensations be in these sins and cases of validity, it will follow that the
precise enumeration of all sins is but a Church ordinance, or if Divine, then
no dispensation lies in such cases; it being a ruled case, that Papal power
cannot dispense with the Divine law, but with Ecclesiastical constitutions
only. Let the Jesuits try the horns of this Dilemma. Now by the same reason
that they take off such sins from Confession, may we make bold to leave out
such (as many such there are) that stand not in need of Priestly advise, and
absolution. It will be said venial sins are not here to be reckoned for,
Venialia exnatura and ratione peccati, quae non sunt contraria charitati Dei
and proximi. Bellar. l. 1. de amiss. gratiae, cap. 3.
because being of their own nature pardonable, nor so averse to God as to lose
his favor, they need not to be remitted this way; neither engage so deeply to
hell, nor make so great a breach betwixt God and man, as to require the Priest
to stand in the gap, and to make the atonement. To the contrary, although we
acknowledge great distinctions betwixt sin, and sin, and punishments proport
onable; yet we affirm no sin so little, but it is in its own nature mortal; and
no sin so great, but from the event may be venial. The least sin makes a breach
upon Gods law, and makes the delinquent accessory to the breach of the whole
law, is an offense against an infinite Deity, therefore may be punished in the
strictness of his righteous judgment; Doctor Field of the Church, Book 3. c.
32.
yea with utter annihilation, for that (says a profound Divine) there is no
punishment so evil, and so much to be avoided as the least sin that may be
imagined, so that a man should rather choose eternal death, yea utter
annihilation, than commit the least effence in the world. Again, if all
Spiritual wounds must pass thorough the Priests hands of necessity for
curation, then venial sins also; for though they are not vulnera lethifera with
the Cardinal, Bellar. l. 1.1. de Amiss. great. c. 2.
yet they are plagae leves, which slighted by neglect thereof may prove deadly;
a ship leaking at a little flaw may endanger drowning: The want of one nail,
(as the French Proverb is) may cause the loss of shoe, horse, and horseman,
Pour un clou on perd un fer, and pour un fer un cheval, and pour un cheval un
Chevali^r.
for great weights many times hang upon small wires, and however some Roman
controversie-men put off venial sin from Confession as in it self not mortal
but venial: Bishop Fisher dares not like of that avoidance, Quod peccatum
veniale solum ex Dei misericordia veniale sit, in hoc tecum sentio. Roffens.
contr. Luth. art. 32. p. 317.
but professes his consent herein with Luther; That venial sin is only venial
from the mercy of God; and in that respect may all other sins be venial too as
capable of Divine mercy: So venial sin has no prerogative that way, nor may
for that cause be justly exempted from auricular Confession.

For reserved cases wherein sins of the greater magnitude are made over to the
Pope, and whereby they shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, without being
opened by a golden key; we have little to say, save considering the great
expenses, tedious journies, continual delays, whereby much treasure was
exhausted forth of this Land, and many of the better sort of the Inhabitants
made slaves; we are to bless our God that this Antichristian yoke is cast off,
the tyranny overthrown, and our selves delivered from a more than Egyptian
servitude. And while the matter was proposed and scanned at Trent, Rem non esse
perspicuae veritatis; a nullo Patrum mentionem ejus fact^m; ^amo Durandum,
Gersonem, and Cajetanum magni nominis viros affirmare, non peccata, sed
censuras modo Pontificis judicio reservatas. -- Colonienses Theologi
affirmantes neminem ex antiquis Scriptoribus reservationis m^minisse, nisi in
casu publicorum peccatorum. -- certe haereticos cos accusare tanquam pecuniarum
aucupes. Hist. Council. Trid. l. 4. p. 283.
the Divines of Lovain objected, that it was not a point of evident verity,
mentioned not by one of the Father^; that Du^and, Gerson, and Cajetan affirmed
not sins, but censures to be reserved for Papal Judicature. The Divines of
Colen added, how none of the ancient Writers mentioned Reservation, but in case
of public sins, and that the Heretics would for certain accuse them for
contriving how to squeeze, and empty men's purses, and coffers. So then if those
men that stand so much for detection of all sins unto the Priest have made so
bold as to cut off the two extremes, v^z. the greatest, and the least offenses;
I see no reason but that we may use the like liberty, Auricularis Confessio
prout in Ecclesia Romans usurpatur, nihil fere est al^ud qu^m reticulam ad
hominum s^creta, and arcana expiscanda, artificiose contextam; Quod quidem non
fit ut aegris Medicina, vulneratis conscientiis opobalsamum, contritis solatium
solidum adhiberi prossit, sed ut au^um, and argentum inde conflentur, omniaque
ad ipsorum lucrum coavertantur. Mason, de Minister. Anglic. lib. 5. c. 12.
but upon far more likely, and better reasons. I shall conclude these
exceptions with the saying of an able Divine at home; Auricular Confession as
it is used in the Church of Rome, is almost nothing else but a Net artificially
woven, to fish after, and comprehend the secret and hidden things of men; nor
is it so used as to afford Physic to the diseased, or precious balm for
wounded consciences, or sure comfort for broken and contrite hearts; but
thereby to compass Gold and Silver, and to convert all into their own purses.

There are some Stories or rather superstitious Lies, (as Sir Tho Moore calls
them) devised to uphold this doctrine: The one is of a Woman who having
committed adultery, could never in eleven years space be brought to utter the
same in any Confession; Two Priests, whereof one was the Popes Penitentiary,
and another as holy as he, Ad quamlibet expressionem unius peccati Bubo exibat
de ore ^^us. Illi Buhones cum uno alio majoris and enormioris formae turmatim
ingressi sunt in os muli^ris and ventrem.
coming into those parts, and both being in the Church about their Priestly
affairs, the woman approached to the Penitentiary to be shriven and at every
sin she confessed, the other Priest standing within view, but not within
hearing, saw an Owl flutter out of her mouth, and after the flight of many
Owls, she stopped (it seems) at her concealed sin, and was no sooner
absolved of the rest confessed by her, and risen up, then the same Priest saw
all those Owls reenter into her mouth, with another more ugly than any of the
former. The Priests proceeding onwards in their journey, the one told unto the
other what he saw: The Penitentiary guessed that the woman had kept back some
sin in Confession; Spec. exemplor. d 9. Sect. 31. Quo libro miraculorum monstra
saepius quam vera miracula legas. Can. loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6. page 540. Did.
3. Sect. 46. De omnibus peccatis quae modo protuli, et quae non protu^^,
culpabilem m^sateor cor^m D^o and vobis.
he returned therefore, but at his return found her suffocated, and dead; to
whom her soul appeared tortured in a fearful manner, and all for burying of
that sin in silence; and being questioned by the Penitentiary for what sins
those of her sex were usually damned; For Fornication, (said she) wanton
dressing, and Painting, and for shame in not confessing. Hereby it is intimated
that Confession en party is of no validity; and one sin concealed hinders all
the rest from pardon. But another Woman though faulty in the same kind, yet had
better success, of whom the relation passes thus: She was otherwise very
religious, but in her younger days had fallen into a sin of that nature, as
she could not for shame utter the same unto the Priest, but used to conclude,
Of all the sins which I have opened or not, I confess my self to be guilty
before God and you; and could never be brought to specify the same; after her
death, and before her burial, she revived, and spoke to this effect; that she
had committed one sin which for shame she could not confess, but with many
tears was wont to utter the same before the Altar, and image of the blessed
Virgin, Coram ipsius altari vel imagine.
and desire her intercessions, that she might not be damned for this concealed
sin; and told withal that after her death she was seized on by evil spirits,
Constituit in S. ecclesia n^minem sine confessione salvari posse.
but rescued by the blessed Virgin, and by her means to her Son restored from
death to life, to confess, and be assoyled of that sin; which was no sooner
performed, but she again yielded up the ghost. Here three Popish tenets are
confirmed at one blow, 1. necessity to confess every sin, 2. worshipping of
Saints, and 3. before Images, and their Altars.
As this woman made her confession at the blessed Virgins altar, so Gregory
Turonensis relates, that Clotharius King of France confessed his sins at Saint
Martins shrine, Clotharius ad Sepulcrum Sancti Martini cunctas actiones quas
fortasse negligenter egerat, replicans, and orans cum grandi gemitu ut pro suis
culpis B. Confessor Domini misericordiam exoraret. Hist. lib. 4. Sect. 21.
and became an earnest suitor to that Confessor to become a mean for mercy for
him; but whether Saint Martin took that course with that Prince, as the blessed
Virgin did with her penitent, to send him back after death to be shriven by a
Priest, or tendered his confession unto God and there procured absolution, the
Author has not expressed. Such stories as these were thought meet for the
vulgar to ruminate on; yea the Pulpits sounded therewith, many Historians
(says Canus) have been content to think how by the true law of history,
Ecclesiae Christi vehementer incommodant, qui res Divorum praeclare gestas non
se putant egregie exposituros, nisi cas fictis and rev^lationibus and miraculis
adornarit. Canus loc. Theol. lib. 11. c. 6. p. 537.
they might record such things as the people thought to be true, not
considering the injury done unto the Church, as if Saints lives were not
sufficiently related, except their actions were set out with fained miracles,
and revelations.

In what credit such Fables were, the vulgar best know; But in truth it was
late in the world before men were called to so strict a reckoning. In the
former days either recourse was made to God only, or a general confession
before the Church, or a special discovery of such sins which made such a
combustion in the sinners breast, as he could not quench alone, but (the fire
all about his ears) must call for aid of his neighbors, and amongst them the
Priests, that are best able to abate those flames. Lighter sins, Quotidiana
incursiones, as Tertullian calls them, Quotidian shakings are opened in the
general confession of the Church; and it is not impossible for a Penitent
faithful and sincere, to make his peace with God himself for sins that press
more grievous. But in many sins and sinners it is found by often experience,
that notwithstanding their private addresses unto God, the wounded conscience
will still pinch fearfully, nor will the worm cease to gnaw. Then at such a
time as this, when a sinner can find no ease at home, what should he do but use
the best means he can to se^k it abroad? I said it was long before this busy
enumeration was enjoined: A general Confession, or an intimation of some
special sins which lay indigested upon the Conscience, was chiefly required.
Now if at any time such strictness were necessary, then at our last Audit, when
we are in extremis, and in the shadow of death, and about to take our leaves of
this sinful world, and to make our peace with God whilst the last grains of
sand are running in this glassie life. Yet as it appears in an ancient form
of interrogating sick persons, and ascribed to our Anselme, the Priests were
not then so particular: the form it self is worthy to stand in this place, and
is thus: The sickman languishing and at the point of death ought to be this
interrogated, Interrogatio facienda infi^mo in extremis consti^uto, ab Anselmo
praescripta; Infirmus langu^ is in extr^nis deb^t sic inter^o^^ri, and sic
r^sp^^d^re. F^^ter, l^^aris quod i^ side Christi^na m^^a^^s? Respo^d^^t, (...).
Fateris t^ (...) t^ ben? vixisse sic^t a^b^^^ti? R^sp. ^tiam. Fateris t^tai^
ma^e vi^i^sse, ^t ^e^it's ^uis aete^^^ p^^^^ ^b ^e^^^? R^sp. Etiam. Paenit^t
te? R^sp Etiam. Habes o^lunt^em ^mea^ ^^ndi te, si spa^ um (...) vivendi? Resp.
Etiam. Credis quod Jesus Christus filius Dei n^^us fuit ex Mar^a ^^rgine
gloriosa? Resp. Etiam. Cred^s quod Jesus Christus filius Dei pro te mortu^s
fuit? R^^p. Credo. Agis ei cratias propter ista b^n^ficia? R^sp. Etiam. Credis
t^ non po^senisi (...) ^^ias mortem salvari? R^sp. Etiam. -- Quo expleto dicat
infi^mus te^, In manus tu^^ commendo Spiritum meum, and Clero in idipsum respon
^ente, securus moritur. Edi^^ad sinem opusculi Epis. Roffens. de fide and
miserico^dia Dei a Georg. Cassandro.
and so to answer: Brother, do thou rejoice that thou may die in the
Christian faith? let him answer Yea. Q. Thou confessest that thou have not
lived so well as thou ought? Ans. Yea. Q. Thou acknowledgest that thou have
lived so evil, as thou have deserved eternal death? Ans. Yea. Q. Have thou any
purpose to amend, if thou may have further space to live? Ans. Yea. Q. Thou
believe that Jesus Christ the Son of God was born of the glorious Virgin
Mary? Ans. Yea. Thou believe that Jesus Christ the Son of God died for thee?
Ans. Yea. Thou art thankful unto him for these benefits? Ans. Yea. Q. Thou
believe that thou can not be saved but by his death? Ans. Yea. This was all
the Questioning in those days thought fit to be used at the hour of death;
which after some comfortable instructions how the sickman should behave himself
in this last encounter; the conclusion is, Let him rehearse thrice, into thy
hands I commend my spirit, and the Clergis answering the same, he may safely,
and peacefully depart. We see what kind of Confession then sufficed, and it was
not the work of one age to bring the people to any other. Haymo complained that
some in his days blushing to confess their sins unto the Priest, Erubescentes
peccata sua sacerdotibus confiteri, quoddam occasionis ingenium invenerunt,
dicentes sibi sufficere, ut soli Deo peccata sua consiteantur, si tamen ab
ipsis peccatis in reliquo cessent. Haymo Dominic. 14. post. Pentecost. page 401.
found out a witty occasion to forbear, saying it was sufficient for them that
they did confess their sins unto God, if so be they ceased from those sins for
the time to come. Others would not be brought to that full measure as began
then to be imposed, confessing, but not fully, their sins unto the Priest; as
may be gathered from a Council held at Cavaillon in the days of Charles the
great: Sed and hoc emendatione indigere perspeximus, Quod quidam dum
consitentur peccata sua, non plene id faciunt.
Wherein though those Fathers were otherwise minded, and desire it to be
amended, yet they intimate that in their times it was questioned, whether men
should confess unto God only, or to the Priest also. And they themselves put
this difference betwixt both these Confessions, that the one did properly serve
for the cure, the other for direction, in what sort the repentance, and so the
cure should be performed; their words ensue: Some say sins are to be confessed
unto God alone, Quidam solummodo Deo confiteri debere dicunt peccata, quidam
vero Sacerdotibus confi^enda esse p^rcensent: Quod utrumque non sine magno
fructu intra Sanctam fit ecclesiam, it a duntaxat ut, and Deo qui remissor est
peccatorum confiteamur peccata nostra, and cum David dicamus, Delictum meum
cognitum tibi feci, and in justitiam meam non abscondi; Dixi confitebor, etc.
and secundum institutionem Apostoli, Confiteamur alterutrum peccata nostra,
etc. Confessio itaque q^ae fit Deo, purgat peccata; ea vero quae Sacerdoti fit,
docet qualiter ipsa purgentur p^ccata; D^us namque salutis and sanitatis author
and largitor plerumque hanc praebet suae pot^ntiae invisibili administratione,
plerum ^ue Medicorum operatione. Conc. Cab. l. 2. c. 32, 33.
but others are of opinion that they are to be confessed unto a Priest; both of
which are performed in the Church not without great fruit, so verily as we
confess our sins unto God, who is the forgiver thereof, and say with David, I
acknowledge my sin unto thee, and my iniquity have I not hid; I said I will
confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin: and
according to the institution of the Apostle, Let us confess our sins one to
another, and pray one for another, that we may be saved: The confession
therefore which is made unto God purges sins, and that which is made unto the
Priest shows how they may be purged; For God the Author and bestower of
salvation and health, of^times affords the same by the invisible administration
of his own power, and many times by the operation of Physicians; wherein those
words are to be noted, that many sins are forgiven by God immediately, or by
the invisible administration of his own power, and consequently need not be
confessed unto any but God alone; and many again mediately by the operation of
soul-Physicians, and therefore are to pass thorough their hands, and ears also;
whence infer, that to Priests some sins, though not all, are to be confessed.

The condition of those sins as ought to be confessed to the Priest.
But what those some are is the point indeed: For if those some be left loosly,
and at random indiscriminatim, they will hardly prove any, or none at all. The
discerning of these sins must not hang alone upon the slender thread of a
Lay-capacity, and the sinners own discretion; for we seldom make any prospect
upon our worser parts, and never but with partiality, turning the perspective
so upon our own sins, as to make them appear Atoms, and in less figures than
they are; and so upon the sins of others, as to multiply, and dilate them; we
are not then in this behalf wholly to be left unto our selves. Venerable Bede
observes, that amongst the diseased healed by Christ, Nullum Dominus eorum
quibus haec corporalia beneficia praestitit, invenitur misisse ad Sacerdotes,
nisi Leprosos; quia Sacerdotium Judaeorum figura erat Sacerdotii futu^^ regalis
quod est in Ecclesia. -- Quisquis hae^^ti^a pravitate, vel superstitione
gent^li, vel Judaica perfidia, vel etiam Schismate fraterno, quasi vario color
per Christi gratiam caruerit, necesse est ad Ecclesiam veniat, coloremque fidei
verum quem acceperit, ostendat; caetera vero vitia tanquam valetudines, and
quasi m^mbrorum animae, atque sensuum, per semetipsum interius in conscientia,
and intellectu Dominus sanat, and corrigit. Bed. hom. de 10. Lepros.
only the Lepers were s^n^ by him to the Priests, because the Levitical
Priesthood was a Type of his own; and infers, that such as were tainted with
heretical pravity, gentile-Superstition, Judaicall perfidiousness, or Schism
from the brothe-hood, and were by the grace of Christ delivered thereof; should
of necessity resort unto the Church, and make profession of the true tincture
of faith newly embraced. But other vices, as it were diseases, and as if of the
members of the soul, and sense, the Lord heals inwardly by himself in the
Conscience, and understanding. Some sins then according to Bed^ are to be
presented to the Church, and not all; and as Christ healed many that were
diseased, and enjoined the Lepers only to show themselves unto the Priests; so
he forgiveth many sins privately to the Conscience of the Penitent, but some
are reserved for the Pr^ests cognizance. And in another place the same B^de
would have us to confess our daily and light sins one to another, Quotidianal
viaque peccata alterutrum coaequalibus confiteamur. -- porro grav^oris leprae
immunditiam, Sacerdoti pand^mus. Bed. in Jac. 5.
but to open the uncleanness of the greater leprosy unto the Priest. Herein
the Case held in the course of public Penance will somewhat guide us: for in
the first and strictest days of the Church, there were three sins held
incapable of mercy, but to be peccata ad mortem; of which Saint John speaks,
and directs not to pray for; Ubi nec postulationis ibi aeque nec remissionis.
Tert. de Pud. c. 1.
now where there is no place for prayer, there is no grace for pardon; and
these three were Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery. This cruel opinion lasted till
Tertullians days, who either ironically* or hastily, thus writes; The High
Priest* the Bishop of Bishops says, Pontisex scilicet Maximus, Episcopus
Episcoporum dicit, ego and Moechiae and fornicationis delicta poenitentia
functis dimitto: O edict m^ui non poterit ascribi, bonum factum^^ De Pudic. c.
5.
I absolve those that have done penance of fornication and adultery. O edict
which none can justly commend! Tertullian now a Montanist, sharply taking up
the dispenser of that relaxation. Sunt ista Ironica, Ponti^ex M. Christus puta,
edictum istud promulgaverit. Notae ^r. Jun. ad Tert. de pud. page 298.
By which Bishop if Christ be meant, Vixit Tertullian Zeph^rin. Anno 198.
as Junius, then the words are otherwise salved by that great Critic; or if
the Pope, as Petavius, then the dispensation must come from Zephyrine. The next
age waxed milder, not denying pardon, and yet not conferring absolution to the
guilty of these crimes, were they never so penitent, and zealous thereof, no,
not at the last gasp, and case of utmost extremity. It was old Serapions case,
lapsed in persecution, who could never (though ever desirous, (...). Eusebius.
Eccl. hist. l. 6 c. 36.
and promising a myriad of times to wade through all the degrees of the
Penitents) be admitted to communicate. Times were yet more gentle when Cyprian
was; denying not but withal deferring absolution till the point of death, and
then absolving the guilty of those offenses. This practice showed, that all
sins were not equally capable of grace, and pardon, that in some the spot being
fowler, and the guilt heavier, the justification was more difficult, and the
expiation more laborious, which to assoil was at one time held by the Church to
be impossible, and ever difficult to be loosed by the Ministerial key. Besides
those sins, there were others in the next rank, which they called capital
offenses, not in the sense of the School D^vines, Capitalia dicebantur, non ut
nos intelligere vulgo solemus, quaecunque Dei nos gratia, and spiritualibus
charitatis ornamentis spoliant, sed quae cum graviora caeteris esseat, tum
Canonibus, and Synodorum decretis nominatim expressa, quibus poenae a Canonibus
singillatim propositae -- alia vero leviora, de quibus nulla extat in
conciliorum decretis mentio. D. Petav. animadvers. ad Epiphan. haer. 49. page
238.
who make capital and mortal of equal latitude, and both which despoyls the
sinner of the ornament of Charity; but some more heinous than ordinary, and
which by name are expressed in the Canons, and decrees of Councils; and to
which several and distinct penances were allotted, and belonged. Other sins
also there were of an inferi ur alloy, and burden, and of them the Penitential
Canons took no notice, says their great Antiquary Petavius. So then as of old,
not all sins, but selected ones, were assigned for public exomologesis; the
like may be said that there is no necessity of revealing all, but some offenses
which press deepest upon the Conscience, to the Ministers of Reconciliation.

Moreover, we may learn by the Church Censures what sins properly appertain to
Confession. Absit ut quoties peccatum fuit, toties excommunicationis sententiam
exhibendam esse, aut publicum resipi scentiae testimon^nm a singulis personis
efflagitari -- Quam enim multa, nobis solis consciis, in dies, and horas
admittimus, quae privata coram Deo conf^ssione, adjunctis precibus condonantur?
Quorsum etiam erant quotidianae preces cum Sacrificiis matutinis, and
vespertinis inst^tutae sub lege? Quorsum nunc quoque sacros conventus a reatus
nostri consessione auspicamur, nisi ut quotidian^ peccata absque ulla alia
cognitione nobis condon^ntur? de solis igitur, and gravioribus peccatis, and
cum offendiculo Ecclesiae conjunctis, publicae satisfactiones intelligendae
sunt. Beza de Presbyr. and excom. page 42. edit. Genev. 1590.
God forbid (says Beza) that the Church should fulminate her excommunication
for every sin, or that public testimony or repentance should from all persons
be exacted, though in extremity every sin incur Gods displeasure, the sinner is
exiled his presence, and needs to be reconciled by repentance: for how many
sins do we daily and hourly commit, which are pardoned upon private confession
before God, with prayers annexed? To what end served the daily prayers, the
morning and evening Sacrifices under the law? To what purpose do we in our
sacred assemblies begin, and enter into our solemn prayers with confession of
our guiltiness, but that our daily sins might be forgiven without any further
acknowledgment? Public satisfactions therefore must be understood of such sins
as are heinous, and scandalous to the Congregation. Hitherto Beza. The
objection of Erastus was, All sins deserve excommunication, therefore the
censure was to be served either upon all or none. Beza denies the consequent,
and shows good reasons why all sins are not subject to the Censure; and which
serve also to show why all sins are not to be stood upon in Confession, because
sins of a lesser magnitude may be otherwise blotted out by private Confession
and tears, or by the general and public acknowledgment of the Church; and as
notorious, and scandalous, were only liable to the Churches censure, and
penance. So not all sins but such as afflict the conscience, and suffer the
sinner to take no rest, are necessary to be confessed. And this doctrine our
Church maintains, and wishes all her children to take it to heart; carefully
distinguishing the same from the so much abused Popish Auricular Confession
which they thrust upon the souls of Christians as an expiatory sacrifice, and
meritorious satisfaction for sin; racking their Consciences to confess when
they ^eel no distress, and to enumerate all their sins (which is impossible)
that by this means they might dive into the secrets of all hearts; which
ofttimes has proved pernicious, not only to private persons, but also to
public States.

To conclude then; Gravioris leprae immunditia, with Bid, the unclean and more
grievous leprosy; Bed. in Jac. 5. Bernard. hom. 16. in Cantic. Calvin. Instit.
p. 339.
Omne quod remordet consci^ntiam, with Saint Bernard, every sin that biteth the
Conscience; Quando quis ita angitur and afflictatur peccatorum sensu, ut se
explicare nisi alieno adjutorio nequeat with, Calvin; The sins that gore, or
prick the conscience, and out of which without and from without, the sinner
cannot wind himself: when a man cannot quiet his own Conscience, as the Church
prescribes, Rubric at the Communion. Bishop Morton Appeal. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Bishop Montagu Appeal. page 299.
or is burdened with sin; so the Bishop of Duresme: Or in the case of
perplexity for the quieting of men disturbed in their Consciences* as the
Bishop of Norwich: In all of which we are enjoined to show our selves unto the
Priest, and to seek at his hands both the counsel of instruction, and hope of
Gods pardon, as Bishop Morton: To receive Ghostly comfort, advice, and counsel,
and the benefit of absolution to the quieting of his conscience, as our sacred
Liturgy admonishes. Remember (good People) this Medicine is for your
diseases; this Balm for your griefs, advancing your safety more, than showing
forth the Ministers power; the treasure of absolution is yours, he keeps but
the key, to open the same for you upon a Penitential knock. A pious Priest
delights not in the sad story of your infirmities, Condolere norimus
peccantes aff^ctu intimo -- Quoties^unque alicujus lapsi peccatum exponitur,
compatia^; nec supe^be increpem, sed lugeam, and desteam. Ambr. l. 2. de poen.
cap. 11.
nor blames you with reprochful words, but embalmes you with many tears;
weeping with such as weep, and sighing with those that are in distress: his
crown, and rejoicing is like the good Samaritan to pour oil and wine into your
gaping wounds. Despise not Gods ordinance, it is powerful, and to those that
use it right, efficaciou^. Neglect not the benefit of the keys, for the Priest
bears them not in vain; slight not his Ministry, it is the word of
Reconci^iation. Keep thy conscience waking, and the eyes thereof open; the case
is fearful where the Conscience slumbreth, and the soul is dark where that
light is extinguished. Oh preserve the voice of this Turtle, Vox Turturis, vox
gementis. Bern.
stop not thine ears at this Charmer, it is Gods Deputy, and Watchman. Thou
have just reason to fear he has yielded up thy fort unto the enemy, when it no
longer keeps Sentinel. Keep this jewel alive; Preserve it with a meditation of
Gods Judgments, and thy deserts; feed it with the promises of the Gospel, and
yet it will inform thee when this Physic must be used. It will send thee to
the Minister, as the voice in the vision did Paul to Ananias. Act. 9.
It will open thy cause without flattery, spur thee on to seek comfort without
delay, and comfort thee more in the remission and pardon, than the terror of
the sin could afflict thee. Make the Conscience thy Examiner, and thou shall
the better discern in what cases the Priest must be thy Judge, and his
Ministry thy relief and comfort.

CHAP. VIII.
The Contents.
Of the Confessary, or Priest that receives Confessions, and his authority for
the same; Divided into two Sections.

ANd thus much for Confession of sin in the lips of the Penitent; proceed we
now to speak of the Confessary, as it relates to his ears, who is to receive
into his custody and discretion, the sad narration of a sinners life, and to
promote the just designs and purposes the penitent aims at. Of great and
necessary importance this practice must be, as much opposing our native pride,
in turning the best side outward, and beautifying our external carriage, like
the Pharisees clensing the outside of the platter; never taking notice, or at
least careful that others should not, of our inward corruption. Verily to
subdue this inbred tumor, and natural Typhon so far, as to lay aside shame,
and to lay open our sins, to discover our offenses, and to diminish our
reputation, it must needs be the end is heavenly when worldly respects are thus
trodden under foot to accomplish the same. As when David stripped himself into an
Ephod, and danced before the Lord in the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22.
and was for the same derided by Michal, as shamefully uncovering himself in
the eyes of his handmaids, answered, It was before the Lord, I will yet be more
vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight; and of the maidservants
which thou have spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor. So it is with a
devout Penitent, for how ever he may by discovering himself thus, be exposed to
the scoffs, and jeers of irreligious and profane Michals, yet he knows before
whom he does it, in the presence of the Lord, and that in so doing he shall be
had in honor of the Lords servants, his Priests, therefore he resolves vilior
adhuc fiam, I will become yet more vile than this; for with me to confess my
sin is nothing so vile as to commit, and blush more entering into the stews,
than coming forth, abasing my self in mine own sight to become precious in the
Lords eyes. (...). Heb. 12.1.
When therefore sin is (...), compassing, and besetting the sinner about,
beleagring his soul, and he finds it not in his own power to raise the siege,
nor to explicate, and unfold himself from such engagements, when the Conscience
is ensnared, and perplexed, and can find no peace at home. In such cases the
sinner has recourses unto the Overseers of his soul, for help, and ease, and
freedom, as the nature of his disease requires; as to a 1. Ghostly Father
indulgent to his Children, 2. as to a Physician careful of his Patients, 3. as
an Advocate and Counselor able to direct, and protect his Clients; and lastly,
but chiefly, as unto the Priest, whose office is to grant absolution to the
truly Penitent.
So that to the wounded Conscience here is a Medicine, to the perplexed counsel
to the dejected comfort, and to the distressed pardon. The sting of sin is lost
by the power of absolution; the filth of sin is purged by the Laver of tears;
the wages of sin struck off, by the Intercession of the great Advocate; the
deceitfulness of sin discovered by this Counselor, and the danger of sin
prevented by the balm of mercy. A Physician is sought unto for health, and
sometimes for remedy; A Lawyer for advice, and counsel; A friend for
consolation; A good Priest is virtually all these, and something more; thy
spiritual Physician against spiritual diseases, healing them by application of
thy Saviors merits; and prescribing rules for thy direction, and remedy
against sin. Thy spiritual Advocate to counsel thy soul in such cases, and to
plead thy cause before the supreme Judge; and which crowns all, he is the
Lords S^eward, and Deputy in his name to reach forth unto thee pardon, and
absolution. These, and such like to these are the motives, inducing a sinner to
deposit his mind and heart to the Dispensers of the Mysteries of God, viz. 1.
upon hope of Physic restaurative, and preservative, to heal his soul, and to
continue the same in health; 2. of good advice, to demean and behave himself
for future times; 3. and above all, upon the hope and comfort of absolution;
these are his inducements, and to be now treated of.
And therein the last shall be first, Nemo potest been agere poenitentiam,
nisiqui speraverit indulgentiam. Ambros.
as the chiefest, and choicest motive to confession of sin; namely the virtue
and power of absolution inherent in the Priestly office, and Ministry: that
saying of Ambrose being true, None can be truly penitent but upon hope of
Pardon.

SECT. I.
The Contents.
The vulgarly disesteem of the power of absolution in the hand of Priests. Keys
diverse; Of 1. Authority. 2. Excellency. 3. Ministry.
The office of the Ministerial key in discerning, and defining. Ecclesiastical,
and conscientious Consistories. The gift of Science in the Priest not properly
the key, but the Guide. Absolution a judicial act. Magistrates Spiritual and
Temporal, distinguished in their jurisdiction, and ends. Bonds of sin culpable,
and for sin Penal. Satisfaction expiatory, vindictive. God forgiveth sins
properly, and effectively. The Priest by way of application and notice, as also
dispositively, qualifying by his function sinners for the same, in which he
proceeds as a subordinate Cause both declaratively, and operatively. The
Priority of binding, and loosing on earth to heaven in respect of the sensible
apprehension in the Penitent, not of the purpose, and operation in God. Power
of Absolution primitive in God, in his Ministers derivative, and delegate. A
Penitent absolving himself by the finger of Gods spirit in what sense. The
power of binding in the Church rather privative, than positive, and declarative
only.

IF the Priests and Ministers of the Gospel were not in Commission to enquire,
to hear, and to take some order about the sins of the people, their function
were to as little purpose, and as little to be esteemed as the Lutins of the
times account it; (for as in the time of Galen they expressed weak-men under
the title of Scholasticks, Cujacius.
so are Priests entitled, by the Hotspurs of this age as silly, and
contemptible; mere (...) and John a Nokes.) Could men live without sin, or
enter into heaven with sin, or having sinned stand in need of no grace to
amend, of no gift to repent, and in fear of no Deity to be reconciled; or were
the wounds of sin so little, as to heal up of themselves, without any further
plaster; or were there no law that there might be no transgression; or if a
Law, with no great penalty to be inflicted upon the transgressors head: or if
the penalty were great, yet the Lawgiver of small power to inflict the same:
there could be no great necessity to erect this Court of Conscience, the matter
thereof no great consequent, and the Censures, viz. retention, and remission of
sins of no great importance, and sinners discharged of further suit, and
service. And the Priests might do well with Gallio, to care for none of these
things; and do drive the attenders from these judgment seats. But if no disease
be more deadly than sin, and no law has so powerful an avenger as God; it will
follow no ordinance to be more acceptable, and necessary, than that which
reconciles the loft favor of God unto the transgressors of his laws. Thou then
whosoever thou art that disesteemest the power of God in the Ministry of his
Priests, be first without sin before thou cast the first stone against it; and
except thou be exempted from common infirmities, vilify not these
Physicians. It is not the least of Satan's subtilties to weaken this ordinance
in many men's estimations, as no useful institution of God, but an usurpation of
the Prelates; serving more to establish their tyranny over the peoples
consciences, than to quiet and pacify them; and as the Priests are too
supercilious to prescribe, so the people may be too superstitious to observe:
thus the Serpent by degrees has brought this laudable practice first out of
credit, and next out of use for the most part; and so highly that by many
transported with impudence, the Priest is questioned as Moses was by the
Hebrew; Quis te constituit Judicem? Exodus 2.14.
Who has made thee a Prince, and Judge over us? though his intents be only to
part the fray betwixt God and the sinner, and set them at peace, as Moses
betwixt his contrymen. And as Korah and his accomplices said to Moses and
Aaron, Ye rake too much upon you, Numb. 16.3.
seeing all the congregation is holy, and the Lord amongst them, So is the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy traduced by our modern Schismatics for Usurpation,
Matthew. 12.14.
for Tyranny, for Lording it over Gods inheritance. Are not all the Brethren
Saints, why do you Prelates then lift up your selves above them? Saints let
them be, is there not principality amongst Saints as well as amongst Divils?
But, are not all Gods people a royal Priesthood? why do you Priests arrogate
unto you any prerogative above your fellows? to such tender ears the very name
of absolution is odious, and the keys themselves disliked because born
cross-wise at Rome; lest therefore such Monsieurs les Greffiers question us, as
the Scribes did our Savior; By what authority do thou these things? We will
clear the coasts, and evidence these disquisitions, 1. what power is given unto
the Priest in the matter of sin, and therein whence this commission issues,
and to whom it is directed; 2. what are the acts, and exercises thereof, and
wherewithal the same is executed; 3. then of the properties thereof, whether
the Priests sentence be absolu^e, and infallible, and whether Ministerial, and
judicial; 4. and lastly, the abuses shall be paralleled with the positive
truth, and thereby measured, and discerned.


The first grant of this power unto man, Of the Power of the keys. Matthew. 16.19.
is the promise of Christ made unto Peter, under the metaphor of the keys;
saying, I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever
thou stalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: a power of great latitude and extent,
equivalent in the opinion of Saint Chrysostom* as to give the places on his
right and lest hand in his kingdom: (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. 16. Tom. 2. page
344.
whereupon that Father questioneth, (but answers himself) how shall Christ
give the power of the keys, that has not in his hands the placing of the
seats? thereby also demonstrating himself to be God, in conferring that
property (power of remitting sins) which appertains to God only. These
terms are to be opened, 1. what the keys mean; 2. next how they are to be used
under these words of binding and loosing; 3. in the third place about what they
ar^ ^^oployed, the object quicquid, whatsoever; 4. and lastly by whom, Keys.
Tibi Dabo, I will give unto thee.
For the first: The holy Ghost compares a sinners case to the estate of a
person imprisoned, the very terms of keys, of opening and shutting, seem to
have relation (as it were) to the prison gate; and the terms of binding and
loosing, (as it were) to the fetters and bonds; as if sin were a prison, and
the case of sinners like theirs that are shut up; whereupon the power given
unto Christ as man, Luke 4.18.
was to preach (...) remission, or deliverance to captives. And keys imply a
faculty to that person to whose custody they are committed; as when Eliakim was
invested into Shebnabs place, Esaias 22.22.
it is said, I will lay the key of David upon his shoulder: which words seem to
be lent unto the Apostle, and by him applied unto our Savior, These things
says he that is holy, Revel. 3.7.
that is true, he that has the key of David, he that opens, and no man
shuts, that shuts* and no man opens: with this difference the word
[house] omitted in the latter, Discrimen est, quod illud videtur inferioris
Ministri puta (...), idque tantum in familia Davidis; hoc supremi Gubernatoris,
atque quidem totius regni. Brightman. Apocalypse. cap. 3.7.
and that advisedly, to distinguish betwixt the Type and the Truth, Eliakim and
Christ; in Hem resideth regal power, and despotical; in Eliakim Ministerial,
and Oeconomical only, as steward of David's house; for that room he sustained,
(...) aben Ezra, Thesaurarius super domum regalem. (...). 1 Cor. 4 1. 1. Clavis
authoritatis solius Dei. 2. Clavis excellentiae solius Christi.

as appears 2 King. 18. By the delivering then of this key, Peter was made
not a Lord over Gods inheritance, but a steward of the mysteries of God: for
our case was thus; As Adam was ex^led and shut out of Paradise, so are sinners
from heaven; and as Paradise was shut against him, so was heaven against them
also, sin being the embargo betwixt us and heaven. Now what key shall si^ners
find to open heaven gate? God has a commanding key, who only has authority
to forgive sin, against whom it is committed; and so often as a sinner is
pardoned, so often is heaven opened; this key God keeps to himself. 2. Christ
has an excellent key, which opens where no man shuts; for by his merits
has this Angel of the Covenant, like Peter's Angel, loosed our bands, Acts 12.7.
and set open the Prison doors, enlarging the Captives, and not them only, but
the Palace doors, Heb. 10.19. Sanguis Christi clavis Paradisi. Tert.
for by the blood of Jesus we have boldness to enter into the holiest; and
elegantly it was said by Tertullian, his blood is the key of Paradise. 3. The
Apostles had an Oeconomical key, as stewards in the Lords house, 3. Clavis
Ministerii.
(for in Princes Courts the key is the ensign of that Office) because unto
their trust is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation; of this key Saint
Ambrose thus; Behold sins are forgiven by the holy Ghost, Ecce quia per
Spiritum Sanctum peccata donantur, homines autem in remission em peccatorum
Ministerium suum exhibent, non jus alicujus potestatis exercent; neque enim in
suo, sed in Patris and Fihi, and Spiritus Sancti peccata dimittuntur, isti
rogant, divinitas donat, humanum enim obsequium, sed Munificentia supernae est
potestatis. Ambr. l. 3. de Spir. S. cap. 19.
but men contribute their Ministry toward the Remission of sin, but exercise
no right of any power, for sins are not remitted in their name, but in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; they supplicate and pray, God
grants and pardons; the service is from man, but the bounty from an higher
power. So then the higher power is the key of autho^ity; and the humane service
is the key of Ministry. These several keys were well known to Scotus, who
writes thus; Authoritas judiciaria sententiandi coelum huic aperiendum vel
apertum esse, tripliciter int^lligitur, 1. Authoritas simpliciter principalis,
solius Dei, 2. Non Princ^palis, sed praecellens, solius Christi, qu^tatum ad
duplicem prae minentiam, 1. unam quidem in universa^itate causarum
judica^darum; 2. aliam in si^mitate sementiae d^si^itivae;
and utraque praeemin^nia potest con^nircilli, qui omnia m^rita, and d^^^rita
novit, quae sunt ^ausae, prop^er quas coelu^^st aperiendu, vel claudendu^;
habet etia volu^ta^e^ insepara^iliter conformem justitiae divinae: propter
p^imu^ p^rest in omnibus causis sent^^tiar^, quia om^^es novit; propter
secuadum pot^st eju^ sententia s^aplicit^r esse fi^ma, and irrevocabilis, quia
sem^er justa, -- Non potest haec Clavis esse in ecclesi^ Militante, q^ia nullus
in ec^lesia novet omnes causa^ ^udiciarias, nec habet voluntatem im^nutabilit^r
justam. 3. Pa^ticula^is quant^m ad causas cognoscendas, and infirma quantum ad
sententiam ferendam, puta quia ipsa fit aliquando revocabilis, si quando
praeter l^gem divinam judicat, potest ergo esse in ecclesia una clavis coelum
aperiendi, sc. autoritas sententiandi particulariter, and non irrevocabiliter
coelum esse apertum. Scot. l. 4. did. 19. Sect. Haec secunda.

Judicial authority in censuring heaven to be open or to be opened to any man,
or not, is understood in a threefold sense; 1. as the most principal and
absolu^e, residing in God only; 2. not as the most principal, but a very
excellent auth^rity, appertai^ing unto Christ by a double preeminence, which he
has 1. ^ver all causes, as one who knows all men's hearts, and can judge
thereof 2. in the validity of his sentence, definitive, as ever just, and never
to be repealed;
which prerogative can only sort with him who knows how well or ill all men
have deserved; (for heaven stands open and shut toward us according as our
deserts are) as also in regard the will of Christ is, and ever was undividedly
conformable to divine justice; for the first reason, He may be a Judge in all
causes, who knows all things; and for the second, his sentence is firm, and
irrevocable, because always just. The militant Church is not capable of this
key, because there is not any member in that Church endowed with so ample
intellectuals, as to know all causes; nor has a will so confirmed in justice
as therein to be immutable. 3. There is a particular authority to hear causes,
but weak to give sentence, and is many times revocable, as pronounced besides
the law of God; there may be then in the Church a certain key to open heaven,
that is, the authority of sentencing in particular, and yet heaven not
irrevocably open unto any.
Thus much Scotus, from whose testimony clearly stream these deductions: 1. The
Ministerial key in the custody of the Church is not so ample, and firm as that
excellent key, which is upon Christ's shoulder, and those words, As my Father
sent me, so send I you; relate to the certainty of the Commission, and not to
the extent thereof. 2. That there is not in the Militant Church, (therefore not
at Rome) such a key as can fit all wards, or such a Judge as can take
cognizance of all causes; nor is there that Ecumenical jurisdiction intituling
Rome above all, and unto all, nor do all causes turn upon that Rota. 3. That
there is no mortal Judge either Ecclesi^stical or Civil so confirmed in
justice, Clavis triplex, 1. Authoritatis, and istam habet solus D^us, qui solus
dimittit peccata authoritative. 2. Excellentiae, qua^ solus homo Christus
habet, ia quantum essec^u^ Sacramentorum potest dare si^e Sacrameatis. 3.
Clavis Ministerii, and istam clavem habent Sacerdotes, per quam ligant and
solvunt.
Raymond. sum. tract. 4. de Poenit.
but that he may swerve, and deviate from that rule.
Nullus in Eccl^sia, says Scotus; In the Church, no, not one but has a will
subject to change: the Pope then that boasts of the infallibility of his
keys, either is not of the Church, or above it. And as this Schoolman has
expressed the differential properties of these keys; so a Canonist the several
titles, and persons to whom they appertain. The key (says he) is tripartite,
1. of Authority, and that is in the hands of God alone, who only forgiveth
sins with authority. 2. Of Excellency, which the man Christ has, insomuch that
he without the Sacraments can confer the effect, and benefit of the Sacraments.
3. Of the Ministry, and this key is in the custody of the Priests, by virtue
whereof they bind and loose.
The Church then must rest contented (and good cause she has so to do) with
this Ministerial key; for the first authentical key, posuit pater in potestate
sua, the Father has put in his own power; for the excellent key, omnem
potes^atem dedit filio, he has given that power to his Son; and for the
Ministerial key, habemus thesaurum istum in vasis fi^^ilibus, 2 Cor. 4.7.
we poor Clergymen are rich in this treasure, the vessels containing the same
are earthly, but the key is from the Lord, and heavenly, the excellency of this
power is from God, the Ministry from us only. And that we may not be thought
to accomplish any thing as from our selves, (...). Theophil. Com. in 1 Cor. 4.
but that every one who sees it may say, it is wholly of God; nipping withal
the false Apostles, who ascribed all unto themselves, as Theophilact piously
admonishes And indeed we need not be ambitious of further dignities, (...),
etc. Chrysostom. (...).
God having highly honored our Order with this depositum, for to which of the
Angels said he at any time, To thee will I give the keys, etc. and whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, Ignem veni ^^t^ere in terram.
Luke 12.
etc. He has made his Angels spirits, by nature, above Priests, but his
Ministers a flame of fire, by office far above them.

The key of Plenary power is in Gods own hands, but the key of subordinate
Min^stery is by him granted to the Church, and exercised by persons specially
deputed thereunto, and imports a power of letting in and shutting out from the
house of God. ^st pot^stas intromitt^ndi and excludendi; Qui (...) d^mus h^b^t,
qu^m vult int^o^^^^t, and qu^^ vult, ab ingr^ssu dom^s rep^llit. Zeg^din. l^c.
com. page 161.
Christ is the door, and they are the door-keepers, an office of no mean place,
who may say truly with the Prophet, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house
of God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. And in executing of this
Office, they must not be partial, in letting in or leaving out whom they
please, but in whom they see cause; nor promiscuously at hap-hazard, without
any notice of their deserts, but upon mature deliberation, and scanning of
their worth that press to be admitted. Not amiss therefore the Schoolmen and
Canonists describe the key, Clavis dicitur potestas judicande in soro animae,
non corporum, and haec pot stas ju licandi integratur ex duobus, sc. ex
potestate discernendi in causae examinatione, and definiendi in causae
terminatione per s^ntentiam condemnatoriam, vel absolutoriam: prima potestas
appellatur Scientia, secunda potentia. Linwood de potest. eccles. cap. Seculi
Principes, verb. Clave potestatis.
to be a power of judging in the spiritual Court of the Soul, and Conscience,
which judicial power consists of two p^rts, 1. the power of discerning in the
examination of the cause, 2. and of defining in determining the same by a final
sentence absolving, or condemnatory, whereof the former is knowledge, and the
latter power;
which some propose as two distinct keys; Others but as two distinct effects
from one and the same key. By the first the Priest taking notice to whom he is
to open and shut: and by the latter actually opening, and shutting unto any as
they may deserve. Now the key is a type of this Ministerial power; for as a key
opens the door by unlocking thereof, and so removing the obstacle that
hinders entrance: So does the Priest by virtue of his office, take away the
obstacle, i. e. the guilt of sin, by absolving a Penitent from the same, which
otherwise would hinder his admission into the Kingdom of God. This I say he
does not by his own power, but by reason of his place; absolving whom God
absolveth, and setting at liberty whom he has made free; as the Jailer
inlargeth the Prisoners, whom the Prince has pardoned.

Here the better to acquaint our selves with these proceedings in the Court of
the Soul we are to know, how there is first an Ecclesiastical Consistory, where
public si^s of that cognizance are censured by the key of Jurisdiction. Dup^^x
Eccl^^siae forus, unus secretissimus, in quo id^m est accusator and Reus: alius
forus publicus quia Eccl^sia habet cuthoritat^m corrigendi d^licta publica, ibi
etiam r^qui^tur duplex authorita^, quia ad quodlibet jud c^um requir tur
cognitio in causa ill^, and sententia, istae autem authoritates pertia^ates ad
sarum publicum dici possiat Claves. Scotus lib. 4. did. 19.
2. There is likewise a Penitential Court for secret sins, where the same party
is both the accuser, and accused; the Penitent arraigning himself upon hope of
pardon, and the Priest absolving upon presumption of Repentance. Now in this
(as in other Courts of Judicature) though otherwise distinct in the subject
matter, in the infl^ction of punishment, and making of satisfaction; yet all
agree in one form of preceding, viz. 1. in the cognizance of the cause; 2.
and next in the denouncing of judgment, where public causes require public
evidence, public sentence, and so public execution: but private sins are
otherwise argued and censured;
Whereas in the Court of Conscience the Penitent comes voluntarily in,
confesses his offense, Judicium i^ fo^o agimae, seu poenitentiae, praesupp^nit
^^^um p^^^^^en ^m per propriam confess^onem cum animo co^trito, and satisfacie
di proposito, sui Confessarii judicio s^ submi^^^at in. Apolog. pro Jure
Principum. page 171, 172.
with a sorrowful heart, and purpose of amendment, and submits himself to the
judgment of his Co^fessory. Di^ Ecclesiae, tell the Church, must in no case be
observed in the first place, and in many cases not at all: So in Secular Courts
the fact is questioned, in Ecclesiastical the fame, and in the Penitential
secret offenses, whereof there is no evident fact, Triplex sorum 1 Dei. 2
Eccl^siae. 3 Sui.

or fame, save the confession of the Peritent, and these come under the key of
Order, or Absolution. The first key then, D^ fo^o hominis dicit Apostolus, Si
nosmet ipsos judicaremus, etc. Raymund. sup^a.
(or rather the first act) is the discerning betwixt good and evil, and betwixt
evil and evil; for as in the skies one star differs from another in glory;
and as in diseases there is a distinction in noysomness, and danger, so in sins
there is a difference in shame and guilt. How then can a blind Judge discern of
colors? Here then is the necessity of the key of knowledge, 1. Clavis
discretionis.
which if not a distinct key, concurreth certainly to the true use of the key;
for though justice be blind, the Judge should not be so: Besides, there is
Scientia quae, and Scientia qua, the 1. object, 2. and h^bit of knowledge.
The word of God is Divinum Scibile, and in it self a key too; for by the word
of reconciliation does the Minister absolve, as shall be said hereafter; but
that refers to the applied act of this power, and exercise of this key,
rather than to the power it self. The knowledge here must be inherent, whereby
the understanding of the Priest is sufficiently enlightened, to distinguish
betwixt light and darkness, Recta determinatio rationis inter verum and falsum.
-- Quae consistit in apprehensione rei ut res est. Apol. pro jure Princip. page
173.
as also to determine of Leprosies according to equity, and to apprehend the
thing as it is, and not most times as it appears. Yet again, this habitual
knowledge although so requisite for all that, is not the key which is the
authority it self committed to the Priests for opening and shutting; Clavis
Scientiae non est aliqua Scientia habitualis, vel actualis, vel discretio
q^aecunque, sed authoritas commissa, qua ^a uti valiant ad claudeadum, vel
aperiendum. -- Authoritas cognoscendi etsi requirit Scientiam, vel discretionem
concomitantem rectum usum ejus, quemadmodum requirit clavis potestatis
aliquam-justitiam ad rectum usum sui; tamen sicut potestas judicandi non est
justitia, imma potest esse sine justitia, ita potestas vel authoritas
cognoscendi in aliqua causa potest esse sine cognitione aliqua. Scot. lib. 4.
did. 19.
whereby they have power to make inquisition into and examine the case of the
Penitent, as a man that stands by, may know as much Law as he that sits
upon the Bench, although he has not a Commission to examine the truth of a
cause then in question, according to his skill as the Judge has, for, says
Scotus, that authority whereby the Judge possesses himself with the true
information of the matter depending, although it may require skill, and
discretion to manage the same aright, even as the key of power requires
justice in the right use thereof; notwithstanding as the power to judge is
distinguish^d from Justice, and may be found where there is no justice, (as in
Pilat) so the power and authority to take cognizance of a cause, may ofttimes
be without any discretion, or science at all, (a^ in Festus, and F^lix, Saint
Paul's Judges) the gift then of knowledge, and understanding is not the key but
the guide thereof, and the authority rightly placed, when a man of
understanding is in place.

The Second is the Authority of censuring, 2. Clavis Potestatis.
or the key of power, which we call the power of absolution consisting in the
solemn denunciation of the Sentence; for the former key which investeth the
Priest with authority to discern, Claves sunt discernendi scientia, and
potentia judicandi, i. e. solv^ndi and ligandi, -- usus harum Clavium, 1.
discernere ligandos, and solv^ndos, 2. dein ligare, and solvere.
Magislr. l. 4. did. 18.
and examine between leprosy and leprosy, is but preparatory, maturing only,
and ripening the sinners case for sentence; Judicium sumitur prou^ significat
actum Judicis ut Judex est, and jus dicit, i. e. juridicam sent^ntiam
pronuaciat. Apol. pro Jure Princip. page 173, 174.
final determination being the scope thereof; wherein the Priest after a full
notice, and examination of the sinners case, and comparing the same with the
law of God, the rule to direct his hand, and key, judges according to that
law, and pronounces the sentence judicial: I say as delegated from God, whose
Commissioner for such causes he is, and proceeds not as a Witness to give in
Evidence; nor as a Herald, or Crier, or P^rsevant, to make intimation of the
Magistrates decree, as a Messenger only, but as a Judge, though subalternate,
clothed with authority from Christ, and Christ from his Father to give the
sentence. The Father (says Chrysostom) has given all power unto the ^on; and
I set that they, (...). Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 6. p. 16.
(the Priests) to have been made partakers of all that power by the Son; for
witnesses discover, and declare the fact, and Judges proceed according to their
evidence; for example, whether such a Murder were committed or no, the
eyewitnesses are the evidence as present, and observing the fact, although the
Mag^strate denounce the sentence, and punishment. The Penitent then becomes a
selfe-accuser and witness, and the Priest turns the key according to Gods law,
whose Deputy and Steward in that case he is. Nor does this power to be a Judge,
contradict his office as a Minister; for as Magistrates are the (...). Romans
13.4.
Ministers of God, and bear not the sword in v^in; so are Ministers the
Magistrates of God, and bear not the keys in vain. But of this there will be
occasion to say something in the exercise of this power, whether it be judicial
or no. Only thus, as the Magistrate is a temporal M^n^ster, and the end of his
power the preservation of public peace and tranquillity; so is the M^nister a
Spiritual Magistrate, to procure the salvation of souls, and the enlargement of
Gods kingdom: and as the Magistrates sword is Terrestrial, punishing evil
doers, and protecting such as do well; so is the Ministers key Celestial,
binding the obstinate, and loosing penitent offenders. And it goes well with
Church and State when the Ecclesiast^cal Ministry, and Civil government keep
the bounds God has set them; and in truth the mutual encroachments and
confusions of these two powers, have been the occasions of all the alterations
and combustions in Christendom. For as when the roof of the Temple rent in
sunder, not long after followed the ruin of the Temple it self: So if these
two principal beams, and Top-rafters, the Prince, and the Priest rent asunder,
the whole frame of Christian religion will be shaken. The abuse of the keys
has occasioned the Civil Magistrate to abridg in some cafes the lawful use
thereof; and when the Churchmen began to use them like swords, the Swordmen
seized upon them as belonging to their Regiment. Know then (O Priest) what the
inscription is that is engraven upon thy keys; They are the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and remember that he who gave the keys to Peter, said unto
the same man, put up thy sword into thy sheath. And let the Magistrate be
afraid to draw too near unto this holy ground, to handle the Censer, and
approach unto the Altar; or to Usurp upon the true function of the keys, 2.
Chro. 26.16.
which appertain not unto them, but unto the Priests that are consecrated, left
they participate in the judgment and leprosy of Vzziah. As the Spiritual keys
are of the kingdom of heaven, because they open and shut the same to different
offenders; Revel. 1.18.
so are they of Death and Hell too, from the dire effects thereof, to such as
are impenitent; for Hell has gates as well as Heaven, and the same key that
shuts Heaven-gates opens Hell; and where the gates of heaven are opened,
thos^ of hell are shut. Now heaven is opened and hell shut, when a sinner is
loosed and absolved; in like manner hell is opened, and heaven shut when a
sinner is bound, and his sins retained. The next thing we are to consider,
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc.

It had been more correspondent to the Metaphor, 2 Of Absolutio^. legation.

and use of the keys to have used the terms of opening and shutting, as did
Esaias the Prophet, and John the Divine; but the Holy Ghost has chosen to
express this power under the words of binding and loosing, Esaias 22.22. Rev. 3.7.
to signify the miserable estate of such to whom heaven is shut up, as
remaining bound with the cords of their own sins; Nempe ut intelligamus quam
misera sit conditio illorum quibus Co^lum clauditur -- manent enim ol st^icti
pec^aturum vinculis: Contra vero quam beati suntill^, quibus apertum est
coelum, qui scilicet a filio Dei lib^^nti sunt, and sint ipsius cobaeredes.
Beza Annot. in Matthew. 16.
and contrariwise, the blessed condition of those to whom heaven is opened, as
freed by the Son of God, that they might be coheirs with him, as learned B^za
conjectureth. Add hereunto another reason, to make the guilt of sin better
known; which is an obligation to punishment, and an obstacle unto happiness;
now the key in opening the door, does put back the bolt, and bar wherewithal
it was held, and God by the ministry of his Priests removes this bar, and
pardons this guilt, which has shut up the kingdom of heaven against us.

Absolution presupposes binding, as enlargement restraint; Vi^^^^ 1 Pec^^^ 2
Pro^^^^ ^^^catum.

we are then in the first place to distingu^sh betwixt the bonds of sin, and
the bonds for sin; for with the bonds of his own sin is a sinner captived; this
is the bondage and desert of sin, and so is he bounden for his sins by the doom
and sentence of Gods Ministers, which is the punishment, and Ecclesiastical
censure. It Is the grace of God only which loses the bond of sin, D^us ipse
so^^^t a p^^^ati m^^u^a, in ^tis caligi^^, and (...) bi^^. Magistr. lib. 4.
did. 18. Esaias 5.18. Prove. 5.22.
and the power of the keys that absolveth from the censure. The Prophet
acquaints us with the cords of vanity, and a cart-rope of sin; implying the
worse than Egyptian bondage of a sinner; and the wise man, who had great
experience of these bonds, says, his own iniquities shall take the sinner
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin. God shall not
greatly need any Lictors, or Tormenters, or to say bind him hand and foot,
Domino vinculis alioqui, and apparit^^^^^, vel torto ibus, qui cum ad suppli^^^
(...), nil est opus, (...) suis ipse (...) ^^^tringatur, quo minus poenam
ess^^^at. Me^cer. Comment. in Prove. 5.
for the sinners own offenses shall perform that office, and the knot fastening
these bonds is the habit, and custom the sinner has gotten to do evil, Non
potest facilit^r op^rari b^^^ pro^^^ habitum vi^^^sum inclinant^m ad (...).
Lyra in Prove. 5.
fast binding and fettering him from all good actions; the weight whereof
presses so sore, and the Chains are so strong, that the arm of God only
must alleviate the one, and break the other in sunder. These bonds Richardus
makes of two sorts, culpable and penal; by the first a sinner is b^und with
the bonds of Captivity, ^st obl^g^tion per quam h^^o obligatur ad cul^^m, and
(...) ^^^am; in uno (...) v^^culo captivi^^t^^, (...) alt^^^ debito damna^^^
(...) potest, qui (...) ^^^ipotens and ^^^tia potest. Rich. de Clav. c. 2, 3.
and by the latter he is liable to the debt of eternal death; both these
o^ligations are upon him, because sin is an off^nce against an ete^nal and
infinite Deity and both these obligations he only cancelleth that is
omnipotent and can do all things. Ano^^er lai^th a threefold bond upon a
sinner, the bond of sin, the bond of eternal punishment, and the bond of
satisfaction; Peccans mortaliter statim ligatur, 1. vinculo culpae; ab hoc
absolvit eum solus Deus. 2. Vinculo poenae aeternae, ubi Sacerdos absolvit, id
est, absolutum ostendit. 3. Vinculo satisfactionis, ubi commutat poenam
aeternam in temporalem.
Expos. cum Gloss. in Matthew. 16. MS.
in the first case God only grants absolution, in the second the Pri^st
absolveth; that is, shows whom God has absolved; in the third the Priest
absolveth by binding, or by commutation, fre^ing the sinner from eternal pain,
and obliging him to satisfactory Penance. The two former ways we well allow
of, but are scrupulous concerning the latter, by reason of the too much abused
handling of satisfactions, and commutations, as not ignorant who it is, that
has pacified his Fathers wrath, and by whose stripes we are healed; and that
we receive not the grace of God by way of exchange, but from the free charter
of mercy, though we hold it very reasonable, that where any person is wronged,
or the Church scandalized, satisfaction may justly be imposed; and herein we
distinguish betwixt the satisfaction of revenge and of expiation, 1.
Satisfaction expiatory is, Satisfaction expiatory. vindictive.
and propitiatory, in Christ. probatory, in Christians.

when the sin is blotted out, the sinner pardoned, and God reconciled; 2. and
vindictive when the guilt remains, the sinner is punished, and God revenged;
the expiation was performed by him who trod the wine press alone, Christ
Jesus. The Revenge if eternal is executed upon such whose sins are not washed
in the blood of that Lamb. If temporary, upon the Lords own servants, not
thereby to make an amends to the just^ce of God, but to make an amendment in
the Penitent. For instance, in David God put away his sin, but not the sword,
that was unsheathed all his time. Now this (...), or t^mporary penance
inflicted upon any, either by the censure of the Church, or voluntary by the
delinquent himself, In foro mundano peccata quatenus sunt contra bonum pacis
publicae, sub iciuntur potestati politi^ae, per quam judic^ri, and poenis
publicis puniri ^d beant: and in foro Ecclesiastico quatenus sunt offensa Dei,
and saluti spirituali nocent, subsunt potestati Ecclesiae. Apol. pro jure
Princip. page 178.
no more prejudiceth that plenary, and expiatory satisfaction made by Christ to
his Father for believing sinners, than the just infliction of temporary
punishment by the Magistrate upon Malefactors; where a pardon may come from
God, and judgment be executed by the Magistrate for one and the same offense:
God himself both ratifying the temporal punishment, and remitting the eternal.
Thus we have seen the obligations, let us now come to the absolutions: And
herein we must carefully distinguish what God does by himself, and what he does
by his Minister; what God has in his own power, from that power given by him
to his Priests: and the better to keep this distance, we will lay down these
assertions:

To forgive sins efficienter, that is, Assertion 1.
to be the true and proper cause of Remission, is a pretogative appertaining to
God only. Absolution from sin then directly comes from him alone; Who is a
God like unto thee that pardons iniquity? therefore when Christ made bold
with this power, Esaias 43.15.
claiming the same by virtue of his Godhead; the Scribes said within
themselves, Matthew. 9.3, 4.
this man blasphemeth, by usurpation upon the privilege of the most High; for
they held it no less than blasphemy for man to forgive sin; which our Savior
denied not, intimating withal that he might without blasphemy exercise that
power, who sustained in one person both God and man; thereby (says Irenaeus)
did Christ both cure the man, Peccata igitur remittens, hominem quidem curavit,
semetipsum autem manifest ostendit quis esset. Irenae. l. 5. adv. haer. cap. 7.
and manifestly discover who he was. And Chrysostom observes, that hereby
Christ showed himself to be God equal to his Father; otherwise he would have
said, (...). Chrysostom. hom. 29. in Matthew.
why do you attribute unto me an unfitting opinion? I am far from that power.
And proved himself further to be God, because be saw their thoughts; and by
many passages of holy writ it is evident, that God only beholds what man
bears in mind. Insomuch that as none but God can know the thoughts of men, so
none but he can forgive the sins of men; (...). Theoph. in Mar. 2.5. Athan.
orat. 3. contr. Arrian.
the like collection makes his Scholar and abridger, Theophylact upon Mark 2.5
And Athanasius makes this power to forgive sin not the least of his arguments
to prove Christ to be God. A truth that shined so clearly in the Fathers days,
that it was not altogether overcast, when the Schoolmen sat at the stern.
Peter Lombards conclusion is, God alone washes away the spot of sin, and
absolveth from the debt of eternal death: Solus Deus maculam peccati abstergit,
and a debito mortis aeternae absolvit. Lib. 4. did. 18. Obligationem culpae
solus Dominus solet and valet dissolvere. Rich. de Clavib. cap. 3.
and Richardus who gives the Priests more than their due, herein abridgeth not
God of his, but confesses, how God only is wont and able to dissolve the
obligation of sin; that is a reserved case, in a point then confessed on all
hands we will make no longer stay.

The Priest substituted by God, Assertion 2.
and in his name absolveth from sin, 1. applicative, 2. and dispositive;
first, Priest absolves applicative. dispositive.

by applying unto the Penitent the promises of the Gospel, and assurance of
pardon. And how welcome the Messengers of peace are, a distressed Conscience
can best declare; to whom these D^ves after an inundation of sin and sorrow,
are ever accepted with olive branches in their mouths. Although Christ the
good Samaritan puts wine and oil of pardon into our wounded hearts by the
finger of the holy Ghost, yet great comfort we receive in the further assurance
thereof, plighted by the Ministry of a godly Priest. A discreet word is the
physician of a languishing soul, (...), inquit ille, ego etiam dixerim (...)
quod and in corporis morbis usu evenit, ut qui se sentit jam convalescere,
magnopere praeterea audito peritorum Medicorum judicio confirmetur. Bez. de
Excom. contr. Erastum.
said he, but I say of a soul in health; which is seen usually in bodily
diseases, where a man sensible of his own recovery is much confi^med therein,
upon the hearing of the judgment of skilful Physicians. Great was the
consolation David felt upon those words of Nathan, The Lord has put away thy
sin: hence arises the first sense, and apprehension of spiritual joy; for
remission of sin, and the acceptance of a sinners person in the beloved, are
in God actiones immanentes, and nihil ponunt in sub^ecto, actions always
inherent in God, without any touch in the penitent; as Paul was a chosen vessel
long before he was cleansed, and knew not so much, till Ananias gave him some
light thereof; but are then transient and sensible, when the Minister brings
news thereof to a sinner that repents. God in Christ has reconciled the
world unto himself, 1. Cor. 5.18, 19
quantum ad rei veritatem, truly and really; and he has committed unto us the
word of reconciliation, Quoad veritatis evidentiam, to evidence and make known
the same by the due application thereof unto a contrite heart. There cannot be
a greater thing committed to the Priests charge, and peoples comfort, than
(...), the Ministry of Reconciliation. From Christ we come, whose Ambassadors
we are, and unto you sinners now in hostility with him, and our instructions
are to conclude a peace and reconcile you unto him. Good God! how highly does
Paul magnify his office! for Christ's sake (says he) are we Ambassadors,
(...). Oecumen. in 2 Cor. 5. page 639.
for we have taken his business upon us; in Christ's stead therefore are we sent
unto you, as if the Father by us did exhort you, who not only exhorted you by
Christ, but, he being crucified, does by us still exhort; as the G^eek Scholia
paraphrase upon the place: thus do Priests forgive, that is, apply the gracious
promises of the Gospel unto the penitent; Quis potest peccata dimittere nisi
solus Deus, qui per eos quoque dimittit, quibus dimittendi exhibuit potestatem?
Ambros. lib. 5. Expos. in Luc.
for who says Ambrose) can forgive sins but God alone? yet does he forgive by
them also, to whom he h^th given power to forgive? Quamvis D^i proprium opus
sit remittere peccata, dicuntur etiam Apostoli remittere, non simplaciter, sed
quia adbibent media per quae Deus remitt^t peccata; haec autem media sunt
verhum D^i and Sacramenta. Ferus in Joan. 20.
And to this purpose Ferus, Although it be Gods proper work to forgive sin, yet
the Apostles are said to remit also, not simply, but because they apply those
means whereby God remitteth sins, which are his Word and Sacraments; and this
is the first manner after which Priests remit sins, by way of application.

The second sense wherein the Minister of the Gospel absolveth from sin, is
dispositive, Remittit maculam peccati dispositive, in quantum suo Ministerio
assistit virtus divina quae peccata remittit. Sum Angel. verb. Claves n. 5.
as an instrument fitting and preparing, by divine helps and means, a sinners
heart so, as God in Christ Jesus may be merciful unto him, and so the sin is
cancelled by the Ministry of the Priest, or rather by divine virtue assisting
therein; for we are not to imagine that these choice graces, salvation and
remission of sins, are promiscuously thrown open unto all; that indeed were to
cast pearls before swine. Donare scit, perdere nescit. contrary to Otho. Tacit.
histor. lib. 1.
God knows how to give, not how to cast away his jewels. The Covenant of
grace requiring some conditions to be performed on our part; for we read of two
exceptions, 1. except ye repent, 2. except ye believe:
Now unto both of these does a Priest by the power of his Ministry render a
sinner well disposed: Luke 13.3. John 3.3.
For the first, Peter's Sermon wrought so effectually upon the peoples hearts,
that they were pricked therewith, and said unto him and the rest of the
Apostles, Acts 2.37, 38.
Men and brethren what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins. Where there is 1. preaching, 2. next compunction, 3. then Repentance, 4.
afterward Baptism, 5 and lastly, remission of sins, achieved by Peter's
Ministry.
And for the second condition, that faith is engendered this way, is more than
evident; for who has not heard of that of the Apostle, Fide ex auditu? Acts
4.4.
And many of them which heard the word believed; the increase and addition made
daily to the Church, was by the Apostles planting, and watering; it is true the
efficacy is from God, for neither is he that pl^nteth, any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. His the seed is, the Minister is
but the sower, or rather the hopper where it is deposited; and as the seed is
his, so is the blessing and increase; the Priest concurring as a servant in
this Spiritual husbandry, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (as
the world accounted it) to save them that believe. 1 Cor. 1.21.
Conclude we with Pacianus, Nunquam Deus non poenitenti comminaretur, nisi
ignosceret poenitenti; solus hoc (inquit) Deus poterit, verum est, s^^i and
quod per Sacerdotes suos facit, illius potestas est. Pacian. ad Sympron. Epist:
1.
God would never threaten the impenitent, except he were minded to pardon the
Penitent. But (it will be said) God only can do this; very true, but that
which he does by his. Priests is his power. And to these two heads, of
disposition and application, the more ancient Schoolmen limited the power of
absolution, preaching forgiveness not directly, Sacerdotes dimittunt ostendendo
and manifestando; habent se ad modum demonstrantis non direct, sed
dispositive, -- ea adhibentes per quae D^us dimittit peccata and dat gratiam.
and from themselves, but as disposing thereunto; exhibiting those means by
which God conferreth grace, and forgiveth sin. By the Word and Sacraments does
the Priest dispose and prepare sinners for repentance, thereby to make them
capable of forgiveness, and does actually apply unto such as are so disposed,
absolution and forgiveness; first chafing and preparing the wax to receive the
seal, and when their hearts are l^ke wax m^lted in the midst of their bowels,
Psalm. 22.14.
as says the Psalmist; then as Officers they put a seal to the diploma of
their pardon and absolution, in the name of Christ actually absolving them so
far as their Ministerial power can extend; them I say qui non ponunt obicem,
that hinder not by unbelief or impenitency: So the Minister in the first place
disposes to repentance, and then applies pardon to them that repent; and as
it appeared in David's case, upon whom the reproofs discharged by Nathan fell
like claps of thunder; the King thereupon truly humbled to repentance, 2 Samuel
12.13.
breaks forth into tears and confession, which Nathan apprehending, comforts
him with the sweet news of pardon and absolution.

And this is all we can safely afford unto the Priest, whose care must be not
to exceed his instructions, and to take that which is his own, and to go his
way. Thou will say, the words of his Commission give him further and more ample
authority, wherein the Priest has power not to apply merely, but to absolve;
not to bear witness, but to bind; and so far, that Heaven shall not only
ratify and confirm, but second and answer his definitive resolves; upon which
surmise Hilary thus addresseth himself to Saint Peter; O blessed Porter of
heaven, O Beat Coeli janitor, cu^us arbitrio claves aeterni aditus traduntur,
cujus terrestre judicium prae^udicata authoritas sit in coelo, ut quae in
te^ris aut ligata sunt, aut soluta, statuti ejusdem conditionem obtineant in
coelo. Hilar. Can. 16. in Matthew.
to whose disposing the keys of that eternal entrance are delivered; whose
judgment upon earth does prejudicate that authority which is in heaven, that
whatsoever is bound or loosed upon earth, the same statute should be of force
in heaven also. And Chrosostome affirms, the Priests throne to be founded in
heaven, (...). Chrysostom. (...) tom 5. p. 152.
and he that averreth the same is the very king of heaven himself* saying,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc. what can compare or be equal with this
honor? heaven takes the principality, or beginning of judgment from earth. The
Lord follows his servant, and look what the servant judges below, the Lord
confirms above. For the clearing of these evidences there are three points to
be debated: 1. If the Priest can be said to be an author or doer of absolution.
2. How and when his sentence is ratified in heaven. 3. And then how, and in
what sense these Fathers can rightly affirm, (and which the words of Christ
seem to import,) The Priests censure on earth to have the precedence, and to
take place of heaven; and to these the resolutions succinctly follow.


1. To the first, we affirm that the Priest does discharge his function,
Priests absolve Operative.
not only declaratively, as a Messenger, but operatively, as a causer, and
procurer of absolution; but a Causer after his kind, because he labors in
the work of the Ministry; such as take pains in planting and watering the
Lords husbandry are (...), 1 Cor. 3.9.
laborers together with God. And as the Apostle styles himself a Father to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15.
and that he begat them in Christ Jesus through the Gospel, though in the
adoption of sons the seed be immortal, and the quickner thereof the holy
Spirit; 1 Timothy 4.16.
and as Timothy by his doctrine is said to save himself, and them that hear
him, whereas salvation is from the Lord; So are the Priests said to absolve, as
instruments ordained by God to work faith and repentance for the procurement
thereof: Revel. 16.1.
for as in the binding part of their Ministry they are like the Angels in the
Apocalypse, which pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon earth, 2 Cor.
10.6.
having vengeance ready against all disobedience, and a charge from God to
deliver up unto Satan; yet are they not the Avengers, (for to God vengeance
belongs) but the inflicters thereof, (for unto the Priests the execution
apper^aineth.) And in the Levitical Law which concerns the Leprosy, by so
many of the Ancient made a type of the pollution of sin, (...) LXXII Levit.
13.6. and verse. 44. (...). LXXII.
we read the Priest shall cleanse him, and the Priest shall pollute him, and
the Priest polluting shall pollute him; where we translate, the Priest shall
pronounce him clean, and the Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; for
the Priest was not the author of that pollution, Haud dubium quin Sacerdos non
quo contaminationis author sit, sed quo ostendat eum contaminatum, qui prius
mundus plurimis videbatur. Hieron. lib. 7. in Esaias c. 23.
neither making him that had the Leprosy unclean, or him clean that was
cleared thereof, but only declared him to be polluted, (says Saint Hierom)
who before seemed unto many to have been clean. Now because Ministerial and
subordinate causes work in the power and strength of the superior and
principal, the effect ofttimes is ascribed unto them who have the least finger
in the business; and thus much to the first point.

Non sequitur Deus Ecclesiae judicium, quae per surreptione^, and ignorantiam
saepe judicat. Lomb. l. 4. did. 18.
when it proceeds according to heavenly directions, God leaving such judgments
in the Church, gained by surreption or ignorance, unto themselves. It being a
received maxim, that as the Judge of all the world cannot do otherwise but
right, no more can or will he approve of any censure but what is just and
righteous; that of Saint Augustine being true in this case also, that thing
cannot be unjust wherewi^h the just God is pleased. Injustum esse non potest,
quod placuit justo. Aug. Qui scit illum, intelligere potest non ni si grande
aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum. Tertul. Apologet. c. 5.
And as the most ancient and learned of the Latin Fathers said of Nero, The man
that has any knowledge of him, cannot but understand that it was some great
good that Nero condemned; So contrariwise, those to whom the justice and
goodness of God is known, cannot be ignorant, but that the cause must of
necessity be good and just which he approves, and bad withal which he
distasteth. Either suppose then the Priests sentence on earth to proceed
always according to equity, else not always to be ratified in heaven.

Non solum piissimu dispensatione Leprosi antequam ad Sacerdotes venirent, in
via mundati sunt, ut and ipsi mundatorem suum cognoscerent, and Sacerdotes
nihil horum mundationi se contulisse sentirent; juxta vero spiritualem
intelligentiam, Leprosi antequam ad Sacerdotes veniant mundantur, quia non
Sacerdotes, sed Deus peccata dimittit. Haymo Dominic. 14. post Penrecost. page
401.
and where contrition is not, the Priest absolveth but in vain; That as the
Lepers were cleansed in the way in going to show themselves unto the Priests,
so sin is no sooner repented of, but instantly the sinner by God is pardoned;
how can then this Ministerial absolution take place of that powerful one of
God? Omnes concedunt quod per contritionem veram and sufficientem peccatum
remittitur sine Sacramento in actu. Gabriel. l. 4. did. 14. Quaest. 2.
For answer whereunto these conditions must be premised; 1. The sinner that
stands in need of Priestly absolution, has his conscience perplexed and not
quieted. 2. The sinner, before the Priest has done his office, conceives hope
only of pardon from God, but no full assurance. But 3. upon the Priests
application of mercy from the word of God, he receives comfort, his conscience
is quieted, and be rests assured of forgiveness.
And to these we must premise again for our better understanding, that many
persons are members of Christ in election only, as Paul before his conversion.
2. Many in election and preparation, as Saint Augustine a Catechumen, Membrum
Christi, 3. 1 praedestinatione. 2 praeparatione. 3 concorporatione.
Rich. de Clav. c. 20. Cord credens, and devotione fervens ad baptisma
festinavit.
believing in his heart, and fervent in devotion, he made haste to be baptized.
3. And many in election, preparation, and admission* as reconciled penitents by
ablution and absolution.
This priority then is not in respect of Gods election, or preparation for
mercy, but in respect of the actual and complete admission of the Penitent
into his grace, and his sensible remonstrance thereof; for as the Divine
purpose to save a Penitent was from eternity, so to remit his sins also; but in
respect of the sinners first feeling and apprehension of mercy, (Gods goodness
intended unto him by the Priests Ministry, being reduced into the outward act)
Forgiveness may be first resolved upon in heaven, but first felt and
apprehended on earth: When we were enemies we were reconciled to God, Romans 5.10.
says the Apostle, who was himself a Persecutor, and yet reconciled to God,
and by him whom he then persecuted, quoad veritatem, but he reaped not the
fruit thereof, was not sensible of this reconciliation, quoad patefactionem,
and salutarem ^jus communicationem; in respect of the manifestation, and saving
communication thereof, till his Conversion. Now in regard a thing is said first
to be, when it is first taken notice of, so a Penitent is then said to be first
absolved, when the Priest makes known the benefit, and the sinner grows
first sensible, and communicates thereof; which because a sinner upon earth
first apprehends, and God in his heavenly word allows of that apprehension,
it remains that in this sense those sayings of the Fathers are to be allowed
of; and thus much for the clearing of those doubts.

The premises considered, the distinction is easily made betwixt the power of
absolution which God exercises by himself, and by his servant; for from God is
the Primitive and original power, the Apostles power is merely derived; that in
God Sovereign, this in the Apostles dependent; Ministri peccata remittunt non
(...).
in him only absolute, in them delegate; in him imperial, in them Ministerial.
Nor do the Bishops and Clergy forgive sins by any absolute power of their own,
(for so only Christ their Master forgiveth) but ministerially, as the servants
of Christ, and Stewards, to whose fidelity their Lord and Master has committed
his keys; and that is, Pract. of Piety, page 758.
when they do declare and pronounce, either privately, or publicly by the word
of God, what binds, what loses; and the mercies of God to penitent sinners,
and his judgments to impenitent and obstinate persons. They then do remit sins,
because Christ by their Ministry remitteth sins, as Christ by his Disciples
loosed Lazarus. John 11.44.
And the Ancients have made the raising and loosing of Lazarus, and the
cleansing and admitting of the Lepers into the Camp, a Type of the power
residing in God, and of the authority he has given unto man. And as Christ by
his power made Lazarus alive, and the Apostles only loosing his bonds, set him
free; so it is the grace of God which revives and justifies a sinner. The
Priests publishing his liberty, whom the son of man has made free. In like
manner the cleansing of the Lepers was Gods doing; the Priest serving only to
discern what God has already done, and to pronounce the same. Richardus herein
says well, though not always well; Distinguamus diligenter quid Dominus
faciat per semetipsum, and quid faciat per Ministrum suum: per semetipsum
resuscitat mortuum, per Ministros solvit ligatum; per semetipsum mundat
Leprosum, ministerio Sacerdotis reducit ejectum: Mortuum resuscitare, Iaeprosum
mundar, ad idem videtur respi^ere, nam utrobique solvitur obligatio culpae; sed
and vinctum solvere, vel rejectum educere, ad id^m nihilominus videtur
respicere, quoniam utrobique sequitur obligatio poenae. Leprosus mundatur,
quando perversus quisque pravitatis suae sordibus divinitus exuitur. Mortuus
resuscitatur, quando peccato captivatus ad been vivendum divinitus animatur.
Post emundationem leprae (Sacerdotali ossicio interveniente) ejectus prius in
sua reducitur, -- institis involutus, and a Domini Ministris abire, and ad sua
redire permittitur, quando per absolutionem, and consilium Sacerdotis ad vitae
novitatem reformatur. Rich. de Clavibus cap. 18.
We are diligently to distinguish what God does by himself, and what he does by
his Minister; by himself he raised the dead, by his Ministers he loosed him
that was bound; by himself he cleansed the Leper, by the Ministry of the
Priests he restored him that was cast out; To raise the dead and to cleanse the
Leper, have respect unto one and the same thing, for in them both the
obligation of sin is loosed; so also to loose him that was bound, and to
restore him that was cast forth, seem to be the same; for in both there
follows an obligation of punishment. The Leper is cleansed, when a sinner is
by God stripped forth of the filth of sin. The dead is raised, when he that was
in bondage unto sin, is quickened by God to lead a good life. After the
cleansing of the Leprosy (the Priests office intervening) he that was formerly
cast forth, is restored; and he that was bound with grave-clothes, and loosed
by the Lords Ministers, is permitted to depart, and return unto his own; when
through the absolution, and counsel of the Priest, he is reformed unto newness
of life. Thus much Richardus: where we plainly see that absolution in the hands
of a Priest is but an infranchising, not a reviving of a dead sinner; a
reconciling, and not a cleansing of a leprous Penitent.

The third way of absolution is, which a Penitent in some select cases, 3.
Spiritually.
by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, pronounces it upon himself; for remission
of sins is the proper work of Gods Spirit; therefore Christ endowed his
Disciples first with the Holy Ghost, and then with the power of remission and
retention. Hereupon says Ambrose, He that cannot absolve from sin, Qui solvere
non potest peccatum, non habet Spi^itum Sanctum: munus Spiritus Sancti est
ossicium Sacerdotis, jus aut^m Spiritus Sancti in solvendis ligandisque
criminibus est. Ambros. l. 1. de Poen. c. 4.
has not the Holy Ghost; the charge of the Holy Ghost is the Priests office,
and the right of the Holy Ghost is in binding and loosing offenses. Wherein
observe that Fathers distinction inter Spiritus Sancti munus, and jus:
Absolution from the Priest to a penitent is munus Spiri^us Sancti, the charge
and office of the Holy Ghost; whereas the absolution from a penitent to himself
is jus Spiritus Sancti, that right whereby the Holy Ghost testifies* unto his
conscience that his sins are forgiven. Origin after his manner feeding upon an
Allegory, understands by the gates of hell, sins, Portae inferorum nominari
possunt juxta species peccatorum, -- Sion autem portae intelliguntur contrariae
portis mortis; ut mortis quidem porta sit intemperantia, porta vero Sion
temperantia. -- arbitror quod pro unaquaque virtute cognitionis, aliqua
sapientiae mysteria respondentia generi vi^tutis aperiu^tur ei qui secundum
virtutem vixerit. Se^vatore dante i^s qui superari non possunt a portis
inferorum, totidem claves quot sunt virtutes. Origin.
and makes every several vice a several gate, and the gates of the daughter of
Sion he makes the contrary virtues; as intemperance is a gate of hell,
temperance of Sion, etc. and by the keys he will have meant the pious practices
of each virtue: So by the keys of Righteousness and temperance are opened the
gates of Righteousness and temperance: Our Savior conferring (says he) upon
such against whom the gates of hell prevail not, so many keys as there are
virtues. According to this Father, a man by sinning shuts heaven gate, and sets
hell gate open for his soul; and contrariwise by repenting, and practicing such
virtues as are opposite to his former vices, he shuts the gates of hell, and
sets open for him those of heaven. To the same purpose says Saint Chrysostom,
(if that Homily be his, whereof his learned publisher doubts;) He has given
unto thee the power of binding and loosing, (...). Chrysostom. hom. super Quaecunque
etc. tem. 7. page 268.
thou have bound thy self with the chain of the love of wealth, loose thy self
by an injunction of the love of poverty; thou have bound thy self with the
furious desires of pleasures, loose thy self with temperance; thou have bound
thy self with the misbelief of Eunomius, loose thy self with the religi^us
embracing of the right faith. Thus God has erected a Tribunal in the heart of
man, his Conscience arraigneth him upon Gods law, as a Transgressor, and guilty
of the breach thereof; but upon his confession, and detestation of the fact,
Justificatio in S. Scriptura actionem quandam forensem notat, qualis est
absolutio, aut absolutionis pronuntiatio. D. Twiss. de Permis. lib. 2. part. 2.
p. 434.
the holy Spirit recreates and comforts him with the sweet voice, and promises
of the Gospel, that his sins for Christ's sa^e are forgiven; kindling in his
heart faith, whereby he is justified, and at peace with God: For what else is
the justification of a sinner, but a pronouncing of his absolution? and this I
call the inward and Spiritual Absolution.

And this is all, our Church guided with Gods word, and invested with this
power, teaches concerning absolution; the Rhemists confessing the use thereof
in our Church, Rhemist. Annotat. in Joan. 20. verse. 23.
That the English Protestants in their order of visiting the sick, their
Ministers acknowledge and challenge the same, using a formal absolution
according to the Churches order, after the special confession of the party; and
for which it was even her happiness to have been accused by Schismatics, being
justified by the then gracious and learned Defender of her faith; for when
Archbishop Whitgift read unto King James the Confession in the beginning of
the Communion-book, and the absolution following it, His Highness perused them
both in the book it self, liking and approving them. Conference at
Hampton Court, page 12, 13. edit. 1625.
And when the Bishop of London acquainted his Majesty with a more particular
and personal form of absolution, prescribed to be used in the order for the
visitation of the sick, the said particular absolution being read, his Majesty
exceedingly well approved it, adding that it was Apostolical, and a very good
Ordinance, in that it was given in the name of Christ to one that desired it
upon the clearing of his conscience. And herein the English Church is
associated by her sister Churches of the Reformation. The Augustan Confession;
The Church ought to impart absolution unto such as have recourse unto
repentance; Ecclesia redeuntibus ad poenitentiam impertire absolutionem debeat.
Harm. Confess. S. 8. and quod absolutio privata in Ecclesiis retinenda sit. Ib.
art. 12.
and that private absolution is to be retained in the Churches. Absolutionem ex
potestate Clavium and remissione peccatorum per Ministerium Evangelii a Christo
institutum singuli expetere possint, and a Deo suo consequi se sciant; and
quando haec a Ministris eis praestantur, accipere ab his tanquam rem a Deo ad
commodandum ipsis, and salutariter inserviendum institutam, cum siducia
debeant, and remissione peccatorum sine dubitatione frui, secundum verbum
Domini, Cui peccata remiseris, remittuntur. Harmon. Confess. c. 5.
The Church of Bohemia; All persons may specially crave absolution from the
power of the keys, through the Ministry of the Gospel instituted by Christ,
and may know for certain, that they obtain the same from their God. And when it
is performed by the Minister unto them, they ought to receive it at their hands
with confidence, as a thing instituted by God, and serving for their profit and
salvation; thereby enjoying beyond all question forgiveness of sin, according
to the word of the Lord, whose sins thou forgivest, they are forgiven. And the
Saxon Church; We affirm the rite of private absolution to be retained in the
Church, Affirmamus ritum privatae absolutionis in Ecclesia retinendum esse, and
constanter retinemus propter multas graves causas; de hac fide and
commonefacere nos absolutio debet, and eam confirma^e, sicut confirmabatur
David, audita absolutione, Dominus abstulit peccatum tuum: ita tu scias voc^m
Evangelii tibi quoque annunciare remissionem, quae in absolutione tibi
nominatim proponitur; non fingas nihil ad te pertinere Evangelium, sed scias
ideo editum esse, ut hoc modo salventur homines side amplectentes Evangelium;
and mandatum Dei aeternum and immotu^m esse, ut ei credas. Art. 16.
and we for many weighty causes constantly retain the same. Of this belief
absolution ought to admonish us, and to confirm the same; as David was upon the
hearing of his absolution, The Lord has taken away thy sin: so may thou
perceive the voice of the Gospel to declare unto thee also forgiveness, which
by name is proposed unto thee in absolution; Thou may not feign the Gospel
to appertain nothing unto thee; but know that it is therefore set forth, that
by this meant, men by faith embracing the Gospel, may be saved; and Gods
commandment abiding for ever, and never to be removed, that thou may believe
the same. So the Transmarine Churches herein lend us the right hand of
fellowship.

And thus much for the power of loosing; Binding.
the other part of their office and power is in binding, For the Lord (says
Ambrose) has given the like power in binding, as in loosing, Dominus par jus
and solvendi voluit esse and ligandi, qui utrumque pari condition permisit;
ergo qui solvendi jus non habet, nec ligandi habet. Ambr. l. 1. de poen. c. 3.
and has granted the same upon the like condi^ion; therefore he that has not
the power of absolution, has not the power of ligation. Thereby the Father
refuting the Novatians, (Heretics of his time, and of whom we shall hear some
news anon) that arrogated unto themselves the power of binding, but not of
loosing; and affirmed the Church to have power to cast out a sinner, but not to
call in a Penitent; Ligandi facultas, and mandatum Evangelii Ministris datur;
quanqu^m notandum est hoc Evangelio esse accidentale, and quasi praeter
naturam. Calvin. harm. in Matthew. 16.
whereas both these properties are belonging to one key. The Church is armed
with this power, though loath to strike, and never but in the case of necessity,
the in^quity of men forcing her to use this weapon; it being not so natural to
the Gospel, but accidental only, to lock up sinners in their offenses. And
having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, (says the Apostle) when
your obedience is fulfilled, 2 Cor. 10.6.
q d. Revenged of the false Apostles we could be, (...). Theoph. in 2 Cor. 10 p
400.
and would, but for that you which are obedient, are mingled with them, we
forbear, lest some strokes might fall upon you also. Where note, that this key
is turned upon the disobedient only, and often respited for their sake who are
obedient. This power of binding being rather privative than positive; for the
guilt of sin binds the sinner over unto punishment, and the Priest is said to
bind, when be finds no cause to loose those bonds. Insomuch that whether you
respect the private exercise of these keys upon private notice of a sinners
state, or the public practick thereof in the Censures of the Church, the
Ministerial power of binding is declarative only, or applying Gods threats
generally expressed in his Law, upon refractory transgressors. So upon the
point the Priest is said to bind, when he loses not; and as induration of the
heart, blinding of the eyes, stopping of the ears, etc. are not to be
understood of God, (...) Damasc. Orat. fid. (...). c. (...). page 127. Graece.
as effecting and working the same, but permitting, and dispensing therewith
only. It being the usual guise of the Scripture to call the permission of God
his effect and operation. So the Priest is said to bind when he permits
only (and that upon just cause) the sinner to remain in the same pickle he
found him. And as Hen^y the VIII. King of England, is reckoned of for the
Founder of Christs-Church in Oxford, because he let it stand; In that sense do
Priests bind, leaving obstinate sinners standing upon the same terms they
formerly did, in a fearful expectation of Judgment, except Repentance come
betwixt; that we need not make any longer stay upon this subject. The handling
of this part, viz. the power of the keys in binding and loosing so at large,
shall excuse the brevity of that which follows to be considered in the other
parts and members of this promise.

SECT. II.
The Contents.
Peter seized of the keys to the use of the Church. Power of absolution
conferred, and confined unto Priests. Laics using the same not in case of
office, but necessity, and where they are the parties grieved. Bonds of the
soul, and sin only, loosed by this key The accomplishment, and actual donation
of this power. God remitteth by the Churches act. The form of Priestly
ordination. Heresy of the Novatians denying in the Church power to reconcile
Penitents. Seed and bellows thereof austerity of those times. Absolution in the
Priest not absolutely efficacious, but as relating to conditions in the
Penitent: the Priest not secured from failing in the act of absolution. The
erring key. Priestly absolution declarative, and demonstrative, and in a moral
sense energetical. Judgments forinsecal are applied declarations of the Law to
the fact. Absolution a Ministerial act, but powerful and judicial, but not
Sovereign nor despotical. The spirit of judgment to discern, and determine,
how necessary for Priests in the act of absolution. Fathers making Priests
Judges of the Conscience. The exercise of the keys, 1. In the word of
reconciliation; 2. In prayer; ancient forms of absolution expressed in a
deprecative manner, not indicative; 3. In the Sacraments; 4. In interdictions,
and relaxations of public Censures. Keys abused. at Rome, Dangerous to
Sovereign Majesty's, and Republics. The superciliousness of Roman Priests in
Usurping upon Divine right, subjecting the power of forgiveness in God to their
arbitrements. Their preposterous way in absolving first, and afterward in
enjoining Penance. The feigned virtue of absolution Ex opere operato,
destructive of piety, and penitency. Conditions requisite in the Penitent to be
relieved by the keys, and lawful use of absolution.

3. Persons. Tibi dabo.
IN the next place it comes to be considered who the persons are to whom this
Commission is directed; the Trustees to whose charge this power is deposited:
Some throw it open too far, extending it to all Christians; which if so, what
need of special offices and functions in the Church? He gave (says the
Apostle) some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11.
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. Now if all
are Pastors, and all Teachers, then not some; and if some are Apostles, and
some Prophets, then not all. Others shrink it up, and confine it unto Peter; or
if to his Successors, such as they appoint, entailing it upon those that sit in
the Chair at Rome. But if none but that Chair be Apostolical, Hoc modo
Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt; sicut Smyrnaeorum ecclesia babens
Polycarpum a Joanne conlocatum refert; sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro
ordinatum edit. Tert. advers. haeres. praescript. cap. 32.
Tertullian was mistaken in affirming the Chair of Polycarpus at Smyrna to be
Apostolical, and instituted by John, Christus Apostolis omnibus post
resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuit. Cypr. de unit. eccles. Universam
significabat ecclesiam. Aug. tr. 124. in Joan. Ecclesia quae fundatur in
Christo, claves ab eo regni coelorum accepit in Petro, i. e. potestatem ligandi
solvendique peccata. Id.
as well as the choire of Clemens at Rome ordained by Peter; and Cyprian in
writing, how Christ after his Resurrection bestowed the power upon all the
Apostles; and Saint Augustine, that Peter at that time represented the whole
Church; and again, the Church founded upon Christ received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, that is, the power of binding and loosing by Peter. And
Theophylact, All they have the power of remitting, and binding that have
obtained the sacred function of a Bishop, (...). Theoph. in Matthew. 16. p. 94.
Paris. 1635.
as well as Peter; for albeit, it was said unto Peter only, I will give to
thee, yet the keys were given to all the Apostles. It is the Inheritance of the
Church to whose use Peter was seized of these keys, and the power executed by
all that succeed in the function of Priesthood; nor can Peter boast herein to
have been anointed with any oil above his fellows. But withal as this oil
descended from Aarons beard to the skirts of his garment, so it condescendeth
no further; for omni, and soli sacerdoti, to all the Priests, and to them
only, is this authority conferred, and confined. To this purpose the Oracle of
our Divines, Bishop Andrews resolves, Sermon. of Absolution.
the Apostles to be three ways considerable; 1. as Christians in general, so
it was said unto them, Vigilate, watch; 2. or else as Preachers, Ministers,
Priests, so it was said, Ite, praedicate, hoc facite, Go, and preach, and Do
this, Mark 13. ul^
etc. 3. or lastly as Apostles, and so personally, They were to be witnesses of
his miracles, and Resurrection.
Now the power of absolution was not peculiar to them as Apostles, nor common
as Christians, but committed to them as Preachers, Ministers, Priests, and
consequently to those that in that function and office do succeed them; yet not
so committed unto them, as if God could not work without them, for Gratia Dei
non alligatur mediis, the grace of God is not bound but free; can work without
means of Word, or Sacrament, or Ministers either, but ordinarily this is an
Ecclesiastical act, or course by him established, the Ministry of
reconciliation to Ecclesiastical persons. And if God at any time vouchsafes by
Laymen that are not such, they are Ministri necessitatis, non officii, in case
of necessity Ministers, but by office not so. Hitherto are Mentis aureae verba
bracteata, the grave resolves of that learned Prelate; at the feet of this
Gamaliel we sit, and take these Dictates, 1. The Apostles received power to
absolve as Priests and Ministers of the Gospel, and so those that succeed them
in that calling. 2. That God can, and does remit sins by himself immediately,
without any subordinate means at all. 3. That this power conferred upon
Ministers is an ordinary, and Ecclesiastical act. 4. And that Lay men taking
unto themselves this power are Ministers in case of necessity only, and not
usual, nor called to that office.
Hereupon says Ambrose, This right is only permitted unto the Priests, Jus
hoc solis permissum est Sacerdotibus, recte igitur ecclesia vendicat, quae
veros Sacerdotes habet. Ambr. de Poen. l. 1. c. 3.
therefore the Church may truly pretend thereunto, that has true Priests. The
Church then includes Priests, and Priests absolution. The poor Christians in
the Vandalick persecution were sensible hereof, for when the Orthodox Clergis
were exiled by the Arrians, the People casting themselves at their feet, Victor
Uticens. lib. 2.
cried out, To whom will you leave us wretches, while you go forward to your
Crown? Who shall Christen these sucklings in the font of the everlasting water?
Who shall impart unto us the benefit of penance by reconciling, and indulgence,
absolving us from the bands of our sins? The Laity could not be in such
distress, if the grace of absolution had not been inherent in the person of the
Priests, and ready to go into banishment with them. Furthermore, the words of
absolution cannot have the same power from the lips of a Lay-brother, as from
them whom God has made able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6.
not of the letter but of the Spirit; nor can it be imagined that Laymen
(though otherwise of great knowledge and piety) should do it with such
efficacy, and assurance to perplexed Consciences, as they that are Gods
stowards, and Ambassadors, and are called to that purpose. For as God has
given the Pastor a calling to baptize thee to repentance for the remission of
sins, so has he likewise given him a calling 1 Cor 5.4.
and power, 2 Cor. 10.1.
and authority upon repentance to absolve thee from thy sins. -- And as no
water could wash away Naamans Leprosy but the waters of Jordan, (though other
Rivers were as clear) because the promise was annexed unto the waters of
Jordan; so though another man pronounce the same words, yet have they not the
same efficacy and power to work upon the Conscience, as when they are
pronounced from the mouth of Christ's Minister, because that the promise is
annexed unto the word of God in their mouths; So that what Christ decrees in
heaven in foro judicii, the same he declares on earth by his reconciling
Ministers in foro Poenitentiae. And to the same purpose Beza thus; If thou turn
over all the Scriptures thou shall no where find the words of binding, Si
universam Scripturam evolvas, nunquam invenies verba ligandi, and solvendi
aliis quam publico Ministerio sungentibus, and quidem metaphorice Divinae viz.
and Spiritualis potestatis respectu tribui: sunt enim judicialia haec verba;
jus autem istud tum ad universalem praedicationem in totius gregis coetu, tum
ad singulas oves, prout requirit necessitas, ac etiam particulares Presbyterii
censuras spectat. Beza de Excom. contr. Erast. p. 60.
and loosing given unto any, but such as undergo the function of the public
Ministry, and truly that metaphorically in respect of the Divine and Spiritual
power; for they are judicial words; and that law, or power belongs as well
unto general preaching had in the solemn assembly, or as applied to any of the
flock in particular, according to the present necessity, or as it respects
the public censures of the Presbytery. This may serve as a sponge to wipe
away that aspersion of Bellarmine, cast upon us, to grant that a Lay man, or
woman, Non minus absolvere potest Laicus, immo etiam femina, aut puer, aut
infidelis quispiam, aut Diabolus, vel etiam Psittacus (si doceatur ea verba)
quam Sacerdos, id concedunt adversarii. Bell. l. 3. de Poen. c. 2. Sect. Quarto.
or boy, or infidel, or Parrot (if taught the words of absolution) may absolve,
as well as the Priest. It being appropriated to that holy order in our
judgment, and practice no less than with them at Rome. This is all we say,
that in case a Lay-brother be offended, and he upon brotherly reconciliation
remit the offense, the same also shall be remitted in heaven; but in case where
God is wronged it concerns the Priests office, to pronounce the absolution, and
Theophylact has said the same; Not only whatsoever Priests do loose are
loosed in heaven, (...). Theoph. in Mat. 18. p. 106, 107.
but whatsoever we also that are wronged either bind or loose, the same shall
be either bound or loosed in heaven. And for which, the Divines of Colen
assembled at the Council of Treat, thought him injured by those Fathers, Addunt
Colonienses, Theophylacti interpretationem Can. 10. damnatam, de qua
Protestants triumphaturi sunt. Council. Trid. hist. lat. page 283.
as condemned in the X Canon there; and that the Protestants would triumph in
the censure of such a Father. And in the same sense Beza subjoyneth; Although
when one private man shall truly from Gods word, Etsi quoties Privatus privatum
rite and ex Dei verbo, and Christiana charitate vel arguit, vel solatur, neque
hoc recipere alter dedignatur, ratum est hoc etiam in coelis, secundum
Theophylact. and Aug. tamen verbis ligandi, and solvendi, sacram and solennem
actionem semper significari affirmo. Beza. contr. Erast. page 61.
and out of love rebuke another, and he take it not amiss, the same is ratified
in heaven according to Theophylact, and Austin; yet I affirm in the words of
binding and loosing, a sacred and solemn action ever to be signified. And thus
much we teach, and thus much for the Lords Commissioners.

By this which has been said, 4. Object of the keys.
the fourth and last circumstance is transparent; that by whatsoever is meant,
what sins soever. Peter received the keys from Christ, Claves a Christo Regni
coelorum accepit, i. e. potestatem solvendi ligandique peccata. Aug.
that is, the power of binding, and loosing sins, says Saint Augustine.
Understand by the keys such as bind and loose, (...). Theoph. Expos. in Matthew.
18.
that is to say, either the pardons, or punishments of sins, says Theophylact.
For in the performance of this promise, wherein Christ made good his word, John
20.23.
after his Resurrection; whatsoever here, is whose sins soever there; 2 Cor.
10.4.
and hereupon the Apostle says, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. And bonds of that
virtue as can setter the soul, and a power so efficacious as to release them of
spiritual bonds. Earthly Princes (says Chrysostom) have power to bind but the
bodies only, (...). Chrysostom. (...). tom. 6. page 16.
but this bond (which the Priests have) reaches to the soul it self, and
extends unto heaven. Then that clause [whatsoever] is to be taken not in the
full latitude thereof, but with a fitting limitation, Quodcunque non in tota sua
amplitudine, seu cum distributione completa; sed cum quadam limita^ione, seu
cum distributione accommoda, (ut dicunt Logici) usurpandum est; nam non de
quocunque ligamine, sed de certa tantum, ac determinata Christum Dominum
loquutum esse, nemo ambigere potest; de vinculo Anathematis Glossa, Ligamen
Spirituale, and superioris ordinis Suarez, and vinculo peccatorum non e vinculo
debitorum. Joan. Paris. Apol. pro Jure Princip. p. 178.
and d^stribution, for no man doubts but that Christ our Lord spoke not of a
binding at large, but of a certain determinate kind thereof; of the bond of
Anathema, as the Gloss wills, or a Spiritual tie, and of a superior order,
as Suarez holds, from the bond of sins, and not from the bond of debt, as
Johannes Parisiensis teaches. Sin then, or the cords thereof are the object
whereabout the power and ministry of the keys is exercised. And thus have thou
(Gentle Reader) the promise opened, and the Contents of this Commission.

I pass to the performance thereof, The Redhibition of the promised keys.
for without that all promises are but like Ixions cloud, flattering our hopes
for a season, but at last sending us empty away. Our God is faithful that has
promised, and will never cheat our expectation. The promise then was
accomplished, when Christ said, John 10.23.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto
them; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained: Wherein is a collation of
the former power shadowed under the Metaphor of the keys, and of binding, and
loosing; which being already sufficiently discussed, little remains to be
spoken, save the weighing of the words, and the method how they are set, and
placed. And so they are not only a concession of authority in remitting, and
retaining sins to certain persons, but a ratihabition, and confirmation of
whatsoever they shall do in the lawful use thereof. The Persons therein
mentioned are three, 1 (...).
1. the person of the sinner or penitent, in Quorum, whose sins soever; 2. of
God in remittuntur, they are forgiven; 2 (...).
but by whom? God, who in his own right pardons sins; 3. of the Priest in
remiseritis, ye, my Apostles and Ministers: 3 (...).
there are then three expressed, and where three are expressed, three are
required;
we cannot rend off one part of the sentence: If you leave out the sinner there
is no work for remission; and if God, remission has no force; and if the
Priest, no ordinary application. It is Gods will and ordinance to proceed by
the Churches act, and to associate his Ministers, and to make them workers
together with him; they cannot be more excluded forth of this than any part of
their function; and to exclude them, is after a sort to wring the keys out of
their hands, to whom Christ has given them; and to account of their Ministry
in what sins soever they shall remit, and of their solemn sending and
inspiring, John 20.21.
as if it were an idle, and fruitless ceremony. And so the Persons are
distinct. Now the Confirmation of the Priests power is wonderfully expressed
also, if we respect first the order, the Priests remiseritis stands first,
and Gods remittuntur second; whom the Minister forgives is seconded with Divine
remission; and it was Chrysostomes observation, (as I have formerly showed, and
explicated the sober sense th^reof) how forgiveness begins upon earth, and
that heaven follows after; so that whereas in prayer, and other parts of
Religion, it is sicut in coelo, sic and in terra, as in heaven so in earth;
Heaven being made a precedent for earthly imitation; here it is sicut in terra,
sic and in coelo, as on earth, so in heaven; as if earth were a fit Pattern for
Heaven to follow; which how that Father has amplified, as if heaven should
derive from earth authority of judging, and God come after his servant, giving
him leave to judge first, and himself after; and how the same may not be
understood, as if God did conform himself and censures to the Priests, but
confirm rather their just proceedings, has been by me formerly mentioned, and
not now to be rehearsed. I come to the next circumstance which is the time,
remittuntur, they are, not shall be remitted; no delay, instantly, upon the
conception of these words; as Na^han to David, not transferet, but transtulit,
the Lord has taken away thy sin. Thirdly, the manner, in setting down the
words so; as if Christ were contented it should be accounted their act, and the
Apostles the Agents, himself but the Patient suffering it to be done: For the
Apostles part is delivered in the active, remiseritis, ye shall remit, (...)
imperium obtineo, potior, superior sum, vinco, mordicus retineo. H. Stephan.
his own in the passive, remittuntur, they are forgiven; and so for the
retentive part, retinetis, whose sins ye retain, (the Greek signifying to
retain with power and force) they are retained. Fourthly, the certainty in the
Identity of the word, not changing the same; for it is not whose sins ye wish,
pray for, or declare to be remitted, but whose sins ye remit, using no other
word in the Apostles office, than he uses in his own right. It is well
observed by Richardus, against such as diminish this authority in the hands of
the Ministers, as if God used them but as Heralds, Criers, to declare his
pleasure only. Dicunt Apostolicos viros peccata remittendi, vel retinendi
potestatem non habere, cum Dominus hoc dicat; dicunt eos tantummodo habere
potestatem utrumque ostendendi, cum Dominus hoc non dicat, Quorum remiseritis
(inquit) peccata, non quorum remissa ostenderitis, remittuntur eis. Rich. de
Clavibus, cap. 1^.
Such men say; the Apostolical men have not power to remit, and retain sins,
whereas the Lord says they have; and say withal they have only power to show
forth the same, whereas the Lord says not so; Whose sins soever ye remit,
(says he) not whose sins ye show, or declare to be remitted, are remitted unto
them. The words then of our Commission we retain precisely, not challenging
more than the Lord has given us, which were presumption, nor abridging his
bounty, which were in us either supineness, or ingratitude. And these words
solemnly pronounced by the Bishop, are still used, and so ever have been; are
still accounted, and so ever have been, the very form, and soul of Priestly
order, and institution; thereby those Reverend persons exercise that branch of
their supereminent power, in conferring the holy orders of Priesthood, in
begetting Fathers, not Children; Masters, (...) Epiphan, har. 75. page 908.
not Scholars in the Church, as Epiphanius rightly; and this is the word that
spiritual seed, whereby that Paternity is conceived, and brought forth. And is
it not a wonder that any son of this Mother, any member of this Church, should
envy this power, or slight this gift, seeing the Ministers receive not this
benefit to their own use; put not this Candle under a bushel; lock not up this
treasure within their own coffers: But like the good Scribe bring forth new,
and old, as occasion serves; and like the faithful Apostle, That which they
received of the Lord deliver they unto you: Who then is Paul? or who is Apollo?
1 Cor. 3.5. Ve^se 9.
but Ministers by whom ye believed. You the people are Gods husbandry, we the
Clergy are laborers together with God. And are you troubled at the seed we
sow, or the implements of husbandry we use, to make you a fruitful field? ye
are the Lords building, and we his Builders; think you much of our skill, and
endeavors that you may be edified? Therefore whether Paul, Verse 22.
or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, all ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The
greater the trust reposed in us is, the greater is your hope, and our account.
The Charge is ours, but the commodity is yours, for whose good we are enfeoffed
with this power; then for any man to slight or disparage the gift, will argue
either a disesteem of the thing it self, or despair to reap any benefit from
it; rather give God the glory, that has given such power unto men, and
remember for whose sakes it was given. I shall make up this part with the
saying of Theophylact; Behold with me the dignity of Priests, (...). Theoph. in
Joan. 20. page 137.
how God-like it is, for to God it belongs to forgive sins; they are then to
be honored as from G^d. Let them be otherwise worthless, what then? They are
Ministers of Divine graces: Grace works by them, as it spoke by the mouth of
Balaams ass, for our unworthiness does not frustrate or hinder grace: seeing
then grace comes by Priests, in that respect let them be honored.

By this that has been said, Novatian Heresy.
it appears how much the Church was wronged by Novatus, a Bishop in Africa,
and Novatian a Priest of Rome; for those two laid their heads together in the
conception of that desperate heresy: Spoiling her of this Ministerial power in
reconciling Penitents lapsed after baptism into notorious offenses, though
their repentance were never so sound, or soundly demonstrated. An opinion
begotten upon the severity of those Primitive times, wherein the Fathers of the
Church, however they might believe that the Church had warrant to receive such
sinners, yet they abstained from the use thereof, Non quod lapsos ad
communionem and Ecclesiasticam pacem admittendos negarent -- sed quod nullam ad
eos reconciliandos, condonandaque delicta, jus in Ecclesia esse perfidiose and
crudeliter asseverarent, and quod Clavium potestatem Sacerdotibus detraherent.
D. Petav. Animadvers. in Epiphan. haer. 59. p. 226, 227.
leaving them to their grief, and Gods mercy; nor were those Heretics
proscribed by the Church (as Petavius informs us) for denying lapsed sinners
to be admitted to the communion again; but for cruelly and desp^tefully
maintaining, that the Church had no right nor authority to reconcile them,
Aiunt Novatiani se Domino defer reverentiam, cui soli remittendorum criminum
potestatem reservent; immo nulli majorem injuriam faciunt, quam qui ejus volunt
mandata rescindere; nam cum ipse in Evangelio suo dixerit Dominus Jesus,
Accipite, etc. Quis est erg^ qui magis honorat? utrum qui mandatis obtemperat,
an qui resistit? Ecclesia in utroque servat obedientiam, ut peccatum and
alliget and relaxet; haeresis in altero immitis, in altero inobediens, vult
ligare quod non resolvat, non vult solvere quod ligavit. Ambr. l. 1. de Poen.
c. 2.
and to pardon their offenses; and upon the point wrested from her Priests the
power of the keys. The Novatians (says Ambrose) tell us, how they ascribe this
reverence to God, as to reserve unto him only the power of pardoning offenses,
whereas in truth none do him greater wrong than those that go about to repeal
his commandments; seeing the Lord Jesus himself in the Gospel has said,
Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins soever ye remit, etc. who is it therefore
that honors him most? whether the man that obeys, or he that opposes his
commandments? the Church in both preserves her obedience, as well in binding as
in loosing sin. But this heresy in that is cruel, in this disobedient, and
will bind that it may not loose, and will not loose what it has bound. And in
this way the Latin Fathers set down this heresy, but the Greek (I know not how
truly) charge them further, as affirming them to cut off such sinners not only
from the society of the Church without hope of reconcilement, but from
salvation without hope of mercy; that those who denied Christ could not obtain
mercy; So Theophylact. (...). Theodoret.
And Epiphanius; Novatus br^ached this herefie, saying, (...). Epiphan. adv.
haer. l. 2. tom. 1. haer. 59.
there was no salvation but one repentance, and he that fell after Baptism
could never after be able to obtain mercy. But whether they called the mercy of
God into question, as they did the reconciliation of the Church, may be
doubted; and it may well be, whether Tertullian came home to them in this
opinion or no, in whom we read, Christianos cum his non misceri, eos neque
congregare, neque participare cum Christianis. Tertul. contr. Not. l. 1. c. 5.
That Christians should not be mingled with such grievous sinners who were to
have neither right nor fellowship with Christians; following the sharp
discipline of the times; wherein such lapsed sinners were made over unto God,
so, Tertulliani temporum disciplina ita firm observavit, Ut ii Deo
committerentur, i. c. ut post longam quamlibet diuque tractam poenitentiam,
pacem ab Ecclesia impetrare non possint, neque eorum ratio haberetur, verum in
perpetuum Ecclesia and absolutione vel in morie privarentur. Gottofredi Notae
ad Tert. Contr. Nationes.
as after a long and tedious repentance, they could not be admitted to be at
peace with the Church, without any respect unto them at all, but were for ever,
and at their death also, excluded from the Church, and absolution, says that
learned Civilian, who has of late enriched the Church with another piece of
Tertullian, and pieced the same with his learned Notes. Cyprian being censured
for the breach of this discipline, and dispensing, and admitting of such who
had fallen in persecution, Ut his qui libellis conscientiam suam maculaverint,
vel nefanda sacrificia commiserint, laxandam pacem putaverim. Cyprian. Epist.
ad Anton.
and through frailty had incensed unto Idols, made his apology for his practice
herein. The Church in his days, and the days following, not only claimed the
power, but acted, and used the same toward Penitent sinners of all sorts,
reaching the hand of absolution to such as devoutly craved the same. For God
makes no distinction (says Ambrose) who has promised his mercy unto all,
Deus distinctionem non facit, qui misericordiam suam promisit omnibus, and
relaxandi licentiam Sacerdotibus suis sine ulla exceptione concessit; sed qui
culpam exaggeraverit, exaggeret etiam and poenitentiam, majora enim crimina
majoribus abluuntur fletibus. Ambr. l. 1. de Poen. c. 5.
and has granted to his Priests license to absolve, without any exception; but
he that has aggravated in offending, let him increase his sorrow; for greater
sins are to be washed with larger tears; whereby we are given to understand,
that sins in themselves unlike are alike in pardon; and if a Penitent
distinguish of them in tears, God will put no difference in pardoning. 2 Cor.
2.10.
The incestuous Corinthian smitten with the Churches censure, is upon his
sincere repentance restored to his state again; and that speech of the Apostle
warranting his restitution, is urged by this Father against these Heretics; To
whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also; for if I forgave any thing, Cur
igitur Paulum legunt Novatiani, si eum tam impi e arbitrantur errasse, ut jus
sibi vendicaret Domini sui? sed vendicavit acceptum, non usurpavit in debitum.
Ambr. l. 1. de Poen. c. 6.
to whom I forgave it for your sakes, I forgave it in the person of Christ: Why
do (says he) the Novations then read Saint Paul, if they imagine he erred so
impiously, as to usurp upon his Lords right? but he challenged what he
received, and incroached not upon what belonged not unto him. The Church then
of old has maintained her own, which she has ever executed.

Hitherto our industry has sweat in discoursing upon that ministerial power,
2. The properties of the power of the keys.
which Christ in his Gospel has deposited to the Stewards and Dispensers of
the Mysteries of God: Our discourse must continue in laying down the properties
belonging to this power; wherein first it occurreth, 1. Abs^lution whether
absolute or conditional.
whether Absolution pronounced from the Priest be absolute, or stands upon
some conditions to make it powerful and efficacious: for answer whereunto, we
must know that Priestly absolution is not (...), the sole and self-working
cause of rem^ssion, but that more, and more principal Agents, and remarkable
conditions belong thereunto; For as the Cardinal observes upon that Quaere,
whether the Sacraments confer grace? there is a concurrency, 1. of Gods will in
the use of an external and visible sign; 2. and of the passion of Christ as the
meritorious cause; Bellar. lib. 2. de Sacram. in genere cap. 1. Sect. igiturut
intelligamus.
3. also the power and intention of the Mi^ister in consecrating the same
according to Gods word, as a remote cause; 4. then faith and repentance
disposing the Communicant in the right and profitable use thereof; 5. and
lastly, the actual participation of the Sacrament.
So likewise, that remission of sins may ensue upon Priestly absolution, there
is required the will and good pleasure of God to confer this pardon; the
suffering of Christ, to deserve the same; and a well-disposed heart in the
Penitent, whereby all obstacles are removed that may hinder the operation
thereof. It being a received rule, that Physic works not upon an indisposed
Patient. The effect indeed is attributed to Priestly absolution, it being Gods
ordinance, wherein he has resolved to declare his mercy. For example, 1. let
wood be dried, 2. fire stricken from a flint, 3. applied to the wood, and so
burn;
it is not dryness in the wood, nor striking fire on the flint, nor applying of
the fire, but the fire it self that burns: So it is not in God that wills,
nor in Christ that meriteth, nor in the sinner that repents nor in the Priest
that absolveth, but in the divine Ordinance, consisting in the strength, and
true use of all of these; that remitteth sins. And as our Lord said unto the
blind men in the Gospel, Believe ye that I am able to do this? Matthew. 9.28, 29.
upon whose affirmative answer, that they believed; he said, according to your
faith be it unto you: so is the absolution of the Minister efficacious
according to the faith and repentance of him that receives it. Such conditions
the Ancients held to be requisite; namely, Hierome, commenting upon those words
of Daniel, Dan. 4.24.
It may be God will pardon thy sins, rebukes (...), the temerity of such as
are so absolute and peremptory in their absolutions: When Blessed Daniel (says
he) who knew things to come, does doubt of the Sentence of God, they do a rash
deed that boldly promise pardon unto sinners. Cum B. Daniel praescius futurorum
de sententia Dei dubitet, rem temerariam faciunt qui audacter peccatoribus
indulgentiam pollicentur. Hieron. in Dan. 4.
And Saint Basil; The power of forgiving is not absolutely conferred, (...).
Basil (...). page 486. Grace.
but upon the obedience of the Penitent, and consent of him that has care of
his soul. The same resolution had place in the Schools. So Aquinas; When the
Priest says, I absolve thee he shows the man not only significatively, Cum
dicit, ego te absolvo, ostendit hominem absolutum non solum significative, sed
effective -- licet poss^t impediri ex part recipientis. -- Sed sufficiat
generalis revelatio fidei per quam remittuntur peccata. -- esset autem
perfectior expositio, Ego te absolvo, i. e. sacramentum absolutionis tibi
impendo. Aquin. part. 3. Qu. 84. art. 3. ad Quintum.
but effectually to be absolved. -- Although that effect may be hindered on his
part that receives absolution; where a general revelation of faith may
suffice, by which sins are forgiven, but the more perfect exposition is, I
absolve thee, that is, I bestow upon thee the Sacrament of absolution; clearly
differencing between the administering of the Sacrament of absolution, and
conferring the effect thereof, viz. remission of sins. And Canus, the better to
lay open and resolve this doubt, distinguishes betwixt the giving of
absolution, and the effect thereof: his words are these; In respect of the
Priest, Distinguo ex part Sacerdotis, and Dei absolventis; absolutus quidem
manet, sed ex part poenitentis ponentis obstaculum, absolutio Sacerdotis
praesentem non habet effectum.
and God that does assoile, the party may remain absolved; whereas in respect
of himself, the party peccant putting an obstacle thereunto, the absolution of
the Priest may take no present effect; and informs us further, that Great
difference must be made betwixt remission of sins, Remissia peccatorum 1. quae
habet annexam justificationem, 2. Judicialis est, continens sententiam cujus
virtute quis solvitior a peccatis, in tali peccatorum judicio remissivo, in
quem sensum Sacerdos non semper peccata remittit. --
Sacerdos absolvens fictum, verum absolutionis Sacramentum impendit, and
quantum in se est veram formam imponit, cujus effectus t^^c quidem impeditur
per indispositionem Recipientis; nec sensus formae Sacramentalis est, Ego te
absolvo, i. e. do absolutionem, quae nunc effectum suum habeat remissionis
peccatorum; sed sensus est, Ego judicialem absolutionem impendo, quae vi sua
potens sit te absolvere, si tu velis fructum ejus obtinere. Quemadmodum si
absolutionis sententiam proferret Judex, qua liberareris a carcere, in quo
postea tu voluntate tua manner vis, and si e^o extrinsecu, clave januae seram
aperirem, and tu volens intus obicem opponeres; Ego vere januam aperui. Canus
Relec. de poen. part. 6. page 930, 931.
to which the grace of Justification is ever annexed; and the sentence wherein
such a remission is juridically pronounced; where the sinner may be absolved
before men, but not before God: And concludes, After this manner the Priest
absolving an Hypocrite, conferreth the true Sacrament of absolution, and as
much as in him lies, applies the true form, although the effect be for that
present crossed by the indisposition of the receiver: the sense is not then, I
absolve thee, that is, I give absolution that shall take present effect, for
remission of sins; But I pronounce a judicial absolution which in it self is
able to absolve thee, if thou had any will to reap the fruit thereof; as if a
Judge should give sentence for the Prisoners enlargement and freedom, and he
have a mind to remain a Captive still. And although I on this side turn the
key, and thou bolt the door on the other, I truly unlocked the door, and open
it would be, if thou did not keep it still barred. By all which it appears
that this Spanish Prelate was fully of opinion, how a well-disposed mind in the
Penitent ought to concur to the absolution of a Priest, that good may come
thereof; Quantum in me est, ego te absolvo. Maldtom 2. de poen. part. 3. These.
5. Nisi suscipiens ponat obicem. Suar. tom. 4. disp. 19. Sect. 2. n. 20. Hanc
formammagis significare virtutem suam, quam eventum. Hugo apud Suarez. Minister
illis verbis nihil aliud significat, nisi se, quod in se est, Sacramentum
reconciliationis vel absolutionis impendere, quod vim habet in homine disposito
peccata omnia dimittendi. Bellar. l. 2. de Poen. c. 14.
from whence Maldonat borrowed that form of absolution, I as much as in me lies
absolve thee; and Suarez adds this implicit condition, unless the receiver
put some impediment, following therein Hugo de S. Victore, from whom he says
thus; that this form, I absolve thee, does rather signify the power, and
virtue, than the event of absolution. And the Cardinal himself, however he may
exprobrate conditional absolution in us as idle and frivolous, yet upon better
consideration his great heart comes down, and determines thus; The Minister by
those words (I absolve thee) signifies nothing else, but that he, as much as
in him lies, conferreth the Sacrament of Reconciliation or absolution: which
in a man rightly disposed has virtue to forgive all his sins. This shall serve
for the first property.

2. Whether infallible.
In the second place, as touching the Infallibility of Priestly absolution,
never any Divine was yet so simple to ascribe, or Priest so impudent to
arrogate any such privilege of preservation from error, in the exercise of this
Ministerial office: the promise of infallibility was amongst others an
Apostolical privilege, made unto them by Christ, as they were witnesses of his
name, and truth; it being a personal honor, as the gift of prophecy, and
revelation of future events, serving for the first plantation of the Church;
for the same Spirit was promised on their behalf, John 16.13.
not only to guide them into all truth, but to show them things to come; nor
may any that succeed them in the Ministerial office, pretend to be infallibly
guided into all truth, any more than they may unto the gift of prophecy. The
Penmen of the holy Scripture were in that action infallibly true; for they
were to prescribe a law, and set a just copy, which if Priests and Ministers
follow, they are safe, and their censures just; albeit they cannot challenge
that excellency, as that they shall always proceed according to that Canon,
the word of God. Those Primitive Planters were led into all truth absolutely,
for directions unto Churchmen their Successors; and they working by that
square are ever right, though not ever sure to work accordingly. The Apostles
then efficaciter could not err, as preserved by the Spirit, and grounded in
the truth; and Priests conducted by their writings and instructions have means
sufficient to preserve them from erring, though no assurance that they are
infallible. The School-Doctors make the key of excellency, which Christ keeps
to himself, Potestas excellentiae est in universalitate causarum judicandarum,
and firmitate judicii -- Potestas Ministerii est particularis quantum ad causas
cognoscendas, and infirma quantum ad sententiam perferendam -- Cui legi Dei dum
se conformant, a Deo approbatur, and firma manet; si vero dissentiunt ab ea,
infirma est, and a Deo revocatur. Gabr. l. 4. did. 18. Quaest. 1. B.
to differ from the ministerial key, not only in the universality of causes,
as fitting all wards, and censuring all men's actions; but in firmness of
justice, as confirmed in the right; and they assign the reason, because the
will of Christ is inseparably conformed unto Divine rectitude: now man has not
those clear beams to discern truth from error, nor his will so certainly
rectified, but that error may impose upon him, or he himself may of his own
accord deviate from the right rule. Their conclusion is, the power of
absolution exercised by the Priests, extends but to some persons and cases,
and is infallible in none; and then only in the right when conformable to Gods
law. And in truth, Quid opus est sic distinguere in Scholis, clave non errante,
nisi erret interdum clavis? Episc. Eliens. To^t. To^ti. page 67. Scot. l. 4. d.
19. Sect. haec secunda.
if Priests were freed from error, what need the Schools so carefully to
distinguish betwixt the erring and not erring key? Scotus marks the periods in
these proceedings well; 1. Sometimes (says he) absolution is ratified in
heaven on both parts, viz. when the sinner is truly Penitent, has fully
confessed, and the Priest rightly absolved. 2. Sometimes on the Priests part
only, when the sinner plays the hypocrite, and makes show of contrition
without inward sorrow; where the Ghostly Father performs his duty, for as man
he knows not the heart of man; but his absolution is not confirmed above, 1.
Aliquando ratificabitur arbitrium in coelo ex utraque frarte.
because the sinner is not capable of that grace he showed himself to be. 3.
Lastly, on the Penitents part, if he bar not, but present himself
well-disposed, and the Priest proceed erroneously, the Penitent reapeth the
fruit of absolution from heaven, 2. Ex part Sacerdotis tantum.
though not the formal words from below.
Thus the Confessee may come by the virtue and effect of absolution, 3. Ex
part Suscipientis tantum. Tunc vera est absolutio Praesidentis, cum aeterni
arbitrium sequitur Judicis. Greg. in Evangel. hom. 26.
although Qui a Confessionibus, the Ghostly Father may deny it, and the
Confesseur may formally and rightly absolve, and no benefit extend to the
Confessee. Contrition then is required in the sinner, and fidelity in the
Priest, that absolution may be efficacious. Now as the sinner is not ever
contrite and penitent in shriving, no more is the Priest ever faithful and
infallible in pardoning; the sentence of the Priest is then in force when
grounded upon Gods word, and treads the footsteps of the Judge eternal;
whatsoever sins ye remit, that is after the form of the Church, Quorum
remiseritis peccata, scilicet in forma Ecclesiae, and clave non errante,
remittuntur. Bonav. in Joan. 29. p. 20. Tom. 1. p. 417. Mogunt. 1609.
and not with an erring key, are remitted, says their Ser^phical B^naventure;
and Lyra limits the confirmation to just proceedings on earth; Hoc tamen
intelligendum est, quando judicium Ecclesiae divino judicio conformatur. Lyra
in Joan ^0.
sins are remitted and retained in heaven, when the judgment of the Church is
conformable to Divine judgment. Supposito hic in terra debito usu clavis, Deus
illud approbat in coelis, aliter non. Idem. in Matthew. cap. 16.
And again, Upon supposition of the true use of the keys, God approves thereof
in heaven, otherwise not. And these Caveats need not be entered, if the Priest
could not mistake herein. And Richard^^ observing the words, that they are not,
whatsoever thou have a will to bind on earth, Non dicit, quodcunque volueris
ligare, sed quodcunque ligaveris. -- Ligat itaque and absolvit sacerdotis
sententia justa, neutrum vero Sacerdotis sententia injusta. Rich. de Clavibus.
cap. 11.
but whatsoever thou shall bind; deduceth from thence, that it lies not in the
Priests pleasure to bind whom he thinks good, but as he finds just cause: and
concludes; A just sentence from the Priest binds and loses, whereas the
unjust sentence of the Priest is a mere nullity. The Schoolmen are seconded by
the Canonists. As the Minister or instrument has no efficacy in operation, but
as moved by the principal Agent: Sicut Minister, and instrumentum non habet
efficaciam in agendo, nisi secundum quod moventur a Principali Agente; sic
Sacerdos cum operatur per istas claves instrumentaliter, si utitur istis
clavibus secundum proprium arbitrium, dimittens rectitudinem divinae
monitionis, peccat. Sum. Angel. verb. Claves. nu. 4.
So the Priest who works by those keys instrumentally, If he use these keys
after his own appetite, and shall omit the just monition of God, sins, says
one of that rank: and another much to that purpose; It is not lawful for the
Priest to use the keys as he please; Sacerdoti non licet his clavibus uti pro
libito suae voluntatis, quia cum operetur ut instrumentum Dei, divinam motionem
sequi debet, aliter peccat. Barthol. Armill. aur. verb. Claves. n. 6.
for seeing he works as an instrument of God, he ought to follow the divine
motion, else he is out. Now what need these Cautions and restrictions, that the
Priest must be directed by divine monitions, if this instrument were infallibly
moved by the virtue of the first agent? and that advise to follow the divine
motion, if the keys in his hand were ever and undoubtedly swayed to the right
wards? These prescriptions are jealous of some eccentricities in the motion of
these inferior orbs, and of some tamperings in these lower keys. This
unanimous consent of Schoolmen and Canonists in this point, whether it proceed
from the beams of Divine truth, or for that they would not throw open the Popes
prerogative in Common, (whom they hold only to be infallible) I cannot say.
But it may safely be concluded, Absolution to be then only in force, when
matters are carried with right judgment, and no error committed in the use of
the keys.

3. Absolution declarative.
The third property, that Absolution from the Priest is declaratory; that is,
not absolving so much as pronouncing a Penitent, from God to be absolved. As
the two Apostles having healed the lame man, and the people filled with wonder
and amazement, had recourse unto them to do them honor; they professed that it
was not their power and holiness that had made that man whole, but that the
name of Christ, Acts 2.10, 12, 16.
through faith in his name, had made that man strong, as very shie and fearful
of Sacrilege, in concealing the theft of Divine honors which the peoples
opinion had stolen for them. So it is not the holiness or power of the Priest
and Minister that remitteth sin, but God in the Name and Faith of Christ Jesus.
The Priest is an Herald making intimation thereof; his absolution is not (...),
in his own right pardoning, but (...), demonstrative only, as a special
officer of the King of mercy. And as Gemini an old Astronomer delivered of the
constellations in heaven, that they are not the causes of rain, winds,
tempests, etc. (...) Genimi Isag. Astron. p. 36. apud Petavii' (...)
But because observation found such accidents usually coming to pass upon the
Cosmical and Acronical rising and setting of such asterismes, such effects were
ascribed unto them; whereas they were not causes thereof, but indications,
giving notice that the times and seasons were now come when such effects come
to pass. That which the Priest does is to dispose the Penitent, and by the
word, upon probable signs of sorrow to absolve him; which absolution is not a
proper act of forgiveness of sin, no more then he that brings the Princes
pardon can be said to pardon the Delinquent; nor has it any direct, necessary,
or Physical influence in forgiveness of sin, but he is only causa moralis seu
concilians, whereupon God is said to pardon the Penitent when he sees him
humbled. And as a Messenger of the Princes pardon is a mean whereby the
prisoner is actually discharged, and causa sine qua non, a cause without whose
message by him deliver^d, the offender had been still a captive, and perhaps
executed: So oftentimes the Minister is a cause, though not of pardoning, yet
of freeing the sinner; and though not of remission, yet of the sense and
feeling thereof, by applying the mercy of God, without which the poor sinner
might peradventure have been swallowed up of grief. Although then the Priests
absolution be declarative, yet it is not so jejune and leaden as many therefore
imagine the same to be; for what else are all Juridical sentences,
determinations, and judgments in all kind of laws, but the application of a
point in law to a matter in fact, and a declaration what the thing questioned
then is in law, and what justice either assertive or vindictivs belongs
thereunto. Now because the Judge is nothing else but the speaking law, and his
judgment an applied declaration thereof; shall his sentence be therefore
infirm, because he judges according to law? or shall the Priests absolution be
the less respected, because it is grounded upon Gods word, denounced in his
Lords name, and applied by his special direction? The place wherein they serve
is a Stewards place, and the Apostle tells them, 1 Cor. 4.2.
that it is required in stewards that they be faithful; They may not therefore
behave themselves like the unjust Steward, Luke 17.7, 8.
presuming to strike out their Masters debt, and put less in the place without
his direction, and contrary to his liking. Ambassadors they are for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20.
and must be careful to follow their Masters instructions, and not to entrench
upon sovereign points, as to imagine the power of proclaiming war, or
concluding peace lay at their devotion; this indeed were not (...), but (...),
to exceed their Commission, and upon the matter to subject themselves to the
danger of the law, and their proceedings to be vacated, and made of none
effect. The Master of the Sentences resolves this power to consist not in
binding or in loosing, Sacerdotibus tantu^tribuit potestatem solvendi and
ligandi, i. e. ostendendi homines ligatos vel solutos. -- In Levitico se
ostendere Sacerdotibus jubentur Leprosi, quos illi non faciunt leprosos, vel
mandes, sed discernunt qui mundi vel immundi sunt -- hi ergo peccata remittunt
vel retinent, dum dimissa a Deo vel retenta indicant and ostendunt. Lomb. l. 4.
did. 18. Sect. non autem.
but in showing forth only who are bound and who are loosed; and produces the
authority of Saint Hierome to maintain his resolution; that as in the Levitical
law, the Lepers were commanded to present themselves unto the Priests, whom
they made neither clean nor unclean, but discerned who were so; and concludes,
that Evangelical Priests remit and retain sins, when they discover and show
forth what sins by God are retained or re^itted. Lombard is followed by Oceam;
The Priests hind or loose, in showing men to be bound or loosed. Sacerdotes
ligant and solvunt, quia ostendunt homines ligatos and solutos. Occ. l. 4. Q.
8, and 9.
And they both by Ferus; Not that any man properly remitteth sin, but that he
shows and ce^tifieth from God that it is remitted; Non quod homo proprie
remittat peccatum, sed quod ostendat and certificet a Deo remissum; neque enim
aliud est absolutio quam ab homine accipis, quam si dicat, En fili, certifico
te tibi remissa esse peccata, annuntio tibi te habere propitium D^um; and
quaecunque Christus in baptismo and Evangelio promisit, tibi nunc per me
aununciat and promittit. Ferus in Matthew. 9. edit. Mogunt. 1559.
for the absolution thou receivest from man is nothing else then as if he
should say, Behold, my son, I certify unto thee the si^s to be forgiven; I
declare unto thee that thou have a merciful God; and look whatsoever Christ in
baptism or in the Gospel has promised unto us, he now by me declares, and
promises unto thee. And with this pregnant testimony we conclude this property.

Whether Ministerial and Judicial.
The last property to be inquired, If the act of this absolution be Ministerial
or Judicial; and my answer is, both ministerial and judicial, per parts to be
demonstrated. For the first, It cannot be otherwise, no effect exceeding the
virtue of its cause, and no property transcending the nature of its subject. If
therefore our calling be ministerial, so is every office and act thereof. And
let none of that order distaste the name, for Jesus Christ was a minister of
Circumcision; Romans 13.8.
and the Apostle styles himself a Minister of the Gospel, Colos. 1.23. 1 Timothy
4.6.
and Timothy a consecrated Bishop, a good Minister of Jesus Christ. Away then
with all contemptuous thoughts, 2 Cor. 3.6. Heb. 1.7.
for God has made his Ministers a flame of fire, able Ministers and of the
Spirit, Ministers of the Spirit and graces thereof (amongst whom remission of
sin is not the meanest) and not Lords. Therefore before they were habilitated
for remission of sins, our Lord is said to breathe upon them, and say, Receive
the Holy Ghost; for this is not the gift of man (says Ambrose) neither is he
given by man, Non humanum hoc opus, neque ab homine datur, sed invocatus a
Sacerdote a Deo traditur; in quo Dei munus Ministerium Sacerdotis est. Paulus
Atestolus in tantum se huic officio imparem credid^t, ut a Deo nos spiritis
optaret impleri. Quis tantus est qui hujus traditionem muneris sibi audeat
arrogare? itaque Apostolus votum precatione detulit, non ^us authoritate aliqua
vendicavit; impetrare optavit, non imperare praesumpsit. Ambr. l. 1. de Spi^itu
S. cap. 7.
but being called upon by the Priest, is given by God; wherein the gift of God
is the Ministry of the Priest; Paul the Apostle held himself so far unmeet for
this office, that he rather prayed we should be filled with the Spirit of God;
what man has so highly conceited of himself, as to arrogate the collation of
this gift? The Apostle therefore made his request by prayer, and challenged no
right by authority, choosing rather to entreat, and not presuming to command.
Ministers then we are, and suppliants on the peoples behalf, that they may
receive power from above, and not Lords or commanders of the Spirit of Grace.
The same Father also informs us, saying, Behold how sins are forgiven by the
Holy Ghost; Ecce quia per Spiritum peccata donantur, homines autem in
remissione peccatorum ministerium suum exhibent, non jus alicujus potestat is
exercent; neque enim in suo, sed in Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti
nomine peccata dimittuntur; isti rogant, Divinitas donat; humanum enim
obsequium, sed munificentia supernae est potestatis. Ambr. l. 3. de Spirit. S.
cap. 19.
but men exhibit their Ministry in the remission, exercising no right or
faculty of any power, for sins are not forgiven in their name, but in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. They entreat, but
the Deity bestows; the obsequiousness is from man, the bounty from an higher
power; and thus much for the Ministerial part.

Whether judicial.
For the second, I have cast my self into diverse cogitations why this office of
absolution should be denied to be a judicial act; Is it because declarative?
The like exception lies against all civil judgments, Judicium est definitio
cjus quod est justum.
which are declarations what Law is in particular cases; or is it because the
Priest may err in his declaratory sentence? and that lays hold of a Civil
Judge likewise, who has lawful authority to judge right, yet no assured infall
bility that his judgments shall always be right; Is it because Ministerial?
Then exclude all Judges from the Bench, that sit there by virtue of an higher
power: we determine then, that Ministerial power in the Priest is opposed to
Sovereign and Despotical, but not judicial; because the power in an inferior
Judge is Ministerial in respect of the Authority, and Judicial in regard of the
exercise thereof. A Judge he is, though not supreme, and in his own right. So
God is the Sovereign and absolute Judge, and in all cases; the Priest
subordinate, and substituted by his au^hority; yet a Judge, though the Lords
Officer, and gives judgment, albeit he declares his Masters divine will and
pleasure. In the case of the Incestuous Corinthian, Paul takes upon him the
Authority of a Judge, and denounces the Spiritual censure; 1 Cor. 5.3.
For I verily as absent in body but present in Spirit, have judged already, as
though I were present, concerning him that has done this deed; where the
sentence immediately follows. Now what judgment is here required and herein
to be used, will appear, Judiciu^ quandoque sum^tur pro discretione, unde
dicitur quod insans and furiosus carent judicio: quandaque pro examinatione,
seu deliberatione; quandoque pro authoritate. Abbas. Clavis discretionis.
if we consider the several kinds of judgments, which in Panormitan are
threefold; 1. of discretion, 2. of examination or inquisition, 3. of authority
or definition.
Of which the first is held so requisite, that one of the keys has been called
after that name, the key of discretion; and where this is wanting, the blind
Priest may call light darkness, and darkness light. Discretion serving like the
two lights in the firmament, to distinguish virtue and vice asunder; and the
more to be required in a Priest, who is not only to put a difference betwixt
light and darkness, but betwixt darkness and darkness, betwixt Leprosy and
Leprosy, betwixt sin and sin; and how shall a Priest know sin that is ignorant
of the law? and how shall the law be understood without discretion? In that
great variety of sins and sinners which may come before the Priest, he had need
to have his eyes in his head that shall take the true distance of Criminal
cases; for then is the sentence of the Priest approved and confirmed of God and
the Court of Heaven, Tunc sententia Sacerdotis judicio Dei and caelestis curiae
approbatur and consi^m ^tur, cum ita ex discretione prodit, ut Reorum merita
non contradicant. Quoscunque ergo solvunt vel ligant, adhibentes Clavem
discretionis Reorum meritis, solvuntur vel ligantur in coelis. Magistr. lib. 4.
did. 18.
when it proceeds from that discretion, as the merits of the guilty person
contradict not the same; whomsoever therefore they loose and bind by the key of
discretion, and according as the person may deserves, such are bound and loose
in heaven, says the Perpetual Dictator in the Schools, Peter Lombard. Of such
necessity is discretion. And when sins are discerned, great judgment is
required, as well in the curation of sin as in the punishment of sin, for in
some sinners it happens that the punishment of sin is the best help and means
for the curing thereof; of whom that may be verified, Perieram nisi periissem,
I had perish^d utterly if I had not perished. Of this sanative and purgative
humor are afflictions, like Northern winds blowing cold, but sweeping and
cleansing the air. Thus the incestuous person was delivered unto Satan, 1 Cor.
5.5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus: which censure was a curative Medicine from a Spiritual
Physician and careful, (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 5.5.
not from an enemy or destroyer, chastising the flesh for the benefit of the
soul. And is there not need of judgment in administering such receipts, where
the ingredients may be poysonable and desperate, if not allaied with much skill
and discretion? Again, the Priest had need to be judicious in discerning
unfeigned sorrow and contrition for sin; Poenitentia est quae dam dolentis
vindicta, semper puniens in se quod dolet commisisse. Aug. apud Aquin. part. 3.
Qu. 85. art. 1.
for as much as Repentance is an act of vindicti^e or corrective Justice,
whereby a sinner taking vengeance on himself for offending God, in a sort
preventeth his justice; And to repent is Ezekiel. 33.14.
to do judgment in the Prophet, or to 1 Cor. 11.3.
judge our selves, as the Apostle calls it, to which there belongs (...), a
revenge or punishment. Now there ought to be a correspondence betwixt sin and
sorrow; and an Analogy betwixt the iniquity of sin and the fruit worthy of
Repentance. And if the Priest find some sinners to take on but little for
heinous offenses, he is to aggravate the offense, and to proportion the sorrow;
not with any intent thereby to satisfy God, but to please him. And in the case
the Penitent be swallowed up of grief, he is to alleviate the burden; and
great judgment is requ^red in making this allotment, what sorrow sorteth for
each sin, and to pronounce when the same is defective and excessive. And
lastly, great judgment belongs in the right application of this power, that
it may work and produce good effect. To whom, and to whom not, and which way
the key is to be turned, to loose, or to lock the offender; since it is not but
with advice to be applied, nor hands hastily to be laid on any man, 1 Timothy
5.22. A place referred by the ancient writers to repentance, and the
circumstance of the place gives no less. Pacian. in paraenesi 16. Aug. de
Bapt. ^5.20, 23.
I said before that the best Physic works not upon indisposed Patients, nor
does one receipt cure all diseases. Judge then the Priest must of the nature of
the disease, of the state of the sinners soul, as well as the efficacy of his
Medicine. And it fares with those that are diseased in mind, as with some such
that are visited with corporal diseases, as not to question the virtue of the
physic, but to suspect their own weakness in the use and operation thereof; It
being usual with many (especially at the last gasp) not to doubt of the power
of remitting sins, but of their own indisposition to receive it, whether the
physic will stay with them or no, and work upon their souls; and a judicious
Priest must see to that. These circumstances considered, (and many more that
may fall in) tell me, if the handling of the keys and discreet managing thereof
be not a judicial act. In such balances as these causes are to be weighed, and
then the power of binding and loosing to be practiced; Causae ergo pensandae
sunt; and cu ligandi atque solvendi potestas exercenda, videndum est quae
culpa, aut quae sit Poenitentia secula post culpam; ut quos omnipotens D^us per
compunctionis gratiam visitat, illos Pastor^s sententia absolvat. Greg hom. 26.
in Evang.
Priests must consider what the fault is, and what repentance has followed
thereupon, that such as Almighty God does visit with the grace of compunction,
those the sentence of the Pastor may absolve. Greg. And hence it comes to pass
that the Fathers erect thrones for these Presbyters, making them Judges, and
honoring their resolves as solemn judgments. Saint Austin expounds the
thrones, Rev. 20.4.
and those that sat thereon, and the judgment given unto them in the
Revelation, Non hoc putandum est de ultimo judicio dici, sed seeds
Praepositorum, and ipsi praepositi intelligendi sunt, per quos ecclesiae nunc
gubernatur; Judicium autem datum nullum mela^is accipiendum, quam id quod
dictum est, Quaecunque ligaveritis, etc. unde Apostolus, Quid enim (inquit)
mihi est de his qui foris sunt judicare, nonne de his qui intus sunt vos
judicatis? Aug. lib. 20. de Civit. Dei, cap. 9.
not of the last judgment. But the seats of the Rulers, and the Rulers
themselves, are understood to be those by whom the Church is now gove^ned. And
the judgment given unto them cannot be taken better than of that which is
spoken, whose sins soever ye remit, etc. and the Apostle, what have I to do to
judge those that are without, and do not you judge of those that are within?
And Saint Chrysostom extols the same far above the glittering pomp of earthly
Tribunals. Although the Kings Throne seem unto us majestical for the precious
stones dazzling therein, (...). Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 5. p. 152.
and the gold wherewith it is beset. But withal the administration of earthly
things alone comes under the jurisdiction thereof; and further authority it
has not; whereas the Priests throne is seated in heaven, and matters thence
are turned over to their decision. And Saint Hierome; having the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, they judge after a sort before the day of judgment. Qui
claves Regni coelorum habentes, quodammodo ante diem judicii judicant. Hierom.
ad Heliod.
And Saint Gregory; Behold they are not only secured on their own behalf, Ecce
non solum de semetipsis securi sunt, sed etiam alienae obl^gat^onis potestatem
relaxationis accipiunt, principatumque superni judicii sortiuntur, ut vice Dei
quibusdam peccata retineant, quibusdam r^laxent. Greg. sup^a.
but receive the power of loosing the bonds from others, and obtain a
principality of judgment from above, that they may in Gods stead retain the
sins of some, and release the sins of others. Either then we must ascribe
judgment to the Priests in the Ministry of the keys, or else afford but little
in this behalf to these Doctors. Judges sure they are, if these Ancient
worthies have any judgment.

3. The exercise of the keys.
We are now come to the exercise of this power, which is indeed the very life
thereof; and this practice is spiritual, as the weapons of our warfare are;
containing the means, in the discreet use and application whereof God forgiveth
sin, and his Minister gives notice of that forgiveness. Dr Field of the
Church. Book 5. chap. 22. page 104. London, 1610.
Now there are four things in the hand of the Minister (as a great Divine of
our Church notes) the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, and Discipline: by the word of
Doctrine he frames, wins and persuades the sinner to repentance and
conversion, seeking and procuring remission from God. By Prayer he seeks and
obtains it for the sinner. By the Sacraments he instrumentally makes him
partaker as well of the grace of remission as of conversion; and by the power
of the discipline he does by way of authority punish evil doers, and remit, or
diminish the punishments he inflicteth, according as the Condition of the party
may seem to require. Thus that judicious man has reduced the practick of the
keys unto four heads; and we receiving this method from him shall open them
more particularly.

The first is the word of Reconciliation, 1. By the Word.
and consists in the preaching and due applying thereof; and the Ministry
thereof does the Apostle specially place as a powerful ordinance, 2 Cor. 5.18.
whereby a sinner is cleansed from his iniquity. Now are ye clean through the
word I have spoken unto you; whereupon Aquinas observes; God to have given us
the virtue, Dedisse virtutem and inspirasse in cordibus nostris, ut annuntiemus
mundo hanc reconciliationem esse sactam per Christum. Aquin. in 2 Cor. 5.
and to have inspired into our hearts, that we should declare unto the world
this reconciliation to have been made by Christ. Therefore it is called, 1. the
word of salvation, (...). 2 Timothy 2.15.
Acts 13.26. 2. and the word of his grace, Acts 14.3. and the word of promise,
Rom, 9.9. and the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. and the word of faith
which we preach, Romans 10.8.
Insomuch that when Timothy shall rightly divide the word of truth, that is,
promises to whom promises belong, and judgment to whom judgment appertains,
and that by preaching of the word, instantly; 2 Timothy 4.2.
and applying the same by way of reproof and exhortation, or by private
admonition, therein he does the work of an Evangelist, and makes good proof of
his Ministry. Solvunt eos Apostoli sermon Dei, and testimoniis Scripturarum,
and exhortanone virtutum. Hieron. Lib. 6. Comment. in Es. 14.
After this manner did the Apostles loose the cords of sin by the word of God,
(says Hierome) by the testimony of the Scriptures, Remittuntur peccata per Dei
verbum, cujus Levites interpres, and quidam executor est. Ambr.
and by exhortations unto virtue. And Saint Ambrose, sins are remitted by the
word of God, whereof the Levite was an Interpreter, and a kind of Executor. And
in this sense the Apology of the Church of England acknowledges the power of
binding and loosing, Ministris a Christo datam esse ligandi, solvendi,
aperiendi, claudendi potestatem; solvendi quidem munus in eo situm esse, ut
Minister dejectis animis, and vere resipiscentibus, per Evangelii
praedicationem merita Christi and absolutionem offerat, and certam peccatorum
condonationem, ac spem salutis aeternae denunciet, etc. Apol. Eccles. Anglic.
of opening and shutting, to have been given by Christ unto the Ministers; and
the power of loosing to consist herein, when the Minister by the preaching of
the Gospel shall tender the merits of Christ, and absolution to dejected
spirits, and truly penitent, and shall denounce unto them an assured pardon of
their sins, and hope of eternal salvation. Luke 11.52.
This is that key of knowledge mentioned by our Savior. Matthew. 23.13.
And as the Jewish Scribes were by him justly reprehended, for shutting up the
kingdom of heaven against men by their wicked and adulterine expositions of
the Law; folding up the prophesies, lest the people should read Christ therein,
and believe; maliciously detaining the key of knowledge, (...). Theophyl. in
Luc. 11.
and not opening the Gates of the Law, that is, the obscurity thereof, as
Theophylact notes. So the good Scribes praise in the Gospel is, to open to his
hearers by preaching of the word the door of faith; Acts 14.26.
unlocking (as it were) the kingdom of heaven unto them by giving knowledge of
salvation unto his people by the remission of sins; Luke 1.77, 79.
to give light unto them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and
to guide our feet into the way of peace; for to whom doctrine and instruction
is committed, that man has the key of knowledge, says Theophylact. (...).
Theophyl. supra.
The key of knowledge is the authority of teaching, (says Lyra) by which the
true understanding lying inwardly hid, ought to be opened; Clavis Scientiae est
authoritas docendi, per quam debet intellectus latens interius aperiri; and
ipsi e contrario claudebant, perverse interpretando. Lyra in Luc. 11.
and they on the contrary did shut it up by perverse interpretation. Upon the
point then, to shut up the kingdom of heaven is to handle the word of God
deceitfully, or not at all; and Christ's woe unto you Lawyers, which take away
the key of knowledge, is equivalent with Saint Paul's woe unto me if I preach
not the Gospel. And this key is truly turned, when the word is duly applied.

The next means ordained by God for procuring remission of sins, 2. Prayer.
and wherein the Minister does exercise his function, is Prayer; Jam. 5.14, 15.
Is any sick amongst you? (says Saint James) let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the Name of
the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. And as the
chains fell off from Peter's hands, upon the prayers and intercessions of the
Church; Acts 12.6.
so the Angel of the Covenant touches a Penitents soul, and the bonds of sin
are released upon the prayers of the Presbyters. Saint Chrysostom informs us
that Priests do not only exercise this power of forgiveness of sins when they
beget us again in Baptism, (...). Chrysostom. (...). 6. page 17.
but after the administration thereof, that power of remitting sins continues
in them; and for proof of that continuance he alleges that former passage of
Saint James, and thereupon infers, that Priests forgive sins not by teaching
and admonishing only, but by helping us with their prayers. Aug. de Bapt.
contr. Donat. l. 3. c. 17, 18.
And Saint Augustine makes this one special way whereby the power of the keys
is exercised in remitting sins; and to this end he advises offenders to do
public Penance, that the Church may pray for them, Agite poenitentiam qualis
agitur in Ecclesia, ut oret pro vobis Ecclesia. Aug. hom. 49. ex 50.
and impart the benefit of absolution unto them; and that which has already
been alleged from Leo, Qui pro delictis Poenitentium precator accedit. Leo in
fine Epist. 80. ad Episcop. Campan.
that confession of sin is to be tendered to the Priest. who comes in as an
intreater for the sins of the Penitent. And that of Ambrose but lately quoted,
The Priests entreat, Isti rogant, Divinitas donat; humanum enim est obsequium,
sed munificentia supernae est potestatis. Ambr. de S. Spiritu l. 3.19.
but the Deity bestows; the service is from man, but the bounty from an
higher power. And his reason is sound, because it is the Holy Ghost only that
forgiveth sins by their function, and none can send the Holy Ghost but God; and
stand he does not at the Priests command, but entreaty. In the Schools two not
of the meanest rank, Alexander Halensis, and Bonaventure, are clear of opinion,
Alex. Hal. in sum. part. 4. Qu. 21. memb. 1.
that the power of the keys extends to remission of sins by way of
intercession only, and deprecation, not by imparting any immediate absolution;
whereof the later gives reasons why the form thereof is deprecative, and
indicative, Secundum quod ascendit habet se per modum inferioris, and
suppl^cantis; secundum quod descendit, per modum superioris and judicantis:
secundum primum modum potest gratiam impetrare, and ad hoc est idoneus;
secundum posteriorum modum potest Ecclesiae reconcilia^e, and ideo in signum
hujus, in forma absolutionis praemittitur oration per modum deprecativum, and
subjungitur absolutio per modum indicativum; and deprecatio gratiam impetrat,
and absolutio gratiam supponit. Bonav. l. 4. d. 18. art. 2. Qu. 1.
for that by the former he looks upward, and ascends unto God by prayer,
and as a suppliant obtains grace and pardon; by the second he reconcileth to
the Church, and for a sign and demonstration hereof, to the form of absolution
there is prayer premised by way of request, then follows the absolution it
self by way of recognition; the prayer begging for grace, and the absolution
supposing the same to be obtained. And the ancient method or form of Divine
Service observed in the absolving of a person excommunicate, was, first to
repeat a Psalm, or say the Lords Prayer; Primo dicat aliquem Psalmum seu
orationem Dominicam; secundo dicat, Salvum fac servum tuum Deus meus sperantem
in te. Verse. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Resp. Et Clamor meus ad te veniat.
Verse. Dominus vobiscum. R^sp. Et cum Spiritu tuo. Oration. Deus cui proprium est
misereri semper, and parcere, suscipe deprecationem nostram, ut hunc famulum
tuum quem excommunicationis catena constringit, miseratio tuae pietatis
absolvat, per Christum Dominum nostrum. Dein dicat, Ego te absolvo, etc. Sum.
Angel. verb. absolutio. 3.1.
secondly, O Lord save thy servant which puts his trust in thee. Verse. O
Lord hear my prayer. Ans. And let my cry come unto thee. Verse. The Lord be with
you. Ans. And with thy spirit. The Prayer. O God, whose property is ever to
have mercy and to forgive, receive our humble petition, that this thy servant
whom the chain of excommunication binds, the pitifulness of thy great mercy
may absolve, through Christ our Lord. Then say, I absolve thee from the bond of
excommunication in the name of the Father, etc. And accordingly in the new (as
well as ancient) rituals of the Latin Church, the form of absolution is
expressed in the third person deprecatively, as if it proceeded from God, and
not indicatively in the first person, as if it proceeded from the Priest
himself, thus; Almighty God be merciful unto thee, and forgive thee all thy
sins past, Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and dimittat tibi omnia peccatatua,
praeterita, praesentia, and futura, quae commisisti coram eo and Sanctis ejus,
quae confessus es, vel per aliquam negligentiam, seu oblivionem, vel
malevolentiam abscondisti; liberet te Deus ab omni malo, hic and in futuro:
conservet, and confirmet te semper in omni opere bono, and perducat te Christus
Filius Dei vivi ad vitam siae fine manentem. Confitentium Cerem. ant^q. Colon.
1530.
present, and to come, which thou have committed before him and his Saints,
which thou have confessed, or by some negligence or evil will have concealed.
God deliver thee from all evil here and hereafter; preserve and confirm thee
always in every good work; and Christ the Son of the living God bring thee to
the life which remains world without end. After this form are conceived all
the Absolutions prescribed for use in the Liturgy of our Church, as savouring
of more modesty, and less superciliousness, and that none of Gods glory might
be thought to cleave unto the Ministers fingers; for instance, In the general
absolution upon the confession of sin at the entrance of Gods worship, He
pardons and absolveth all such as truly repent them of their sins, Forms of
Absolution in the Church of England.
and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel: wherefore we beseech him to grant us
true repentance, etc. And after a general confession of sins premised by the
Communicants, the Minister (or Bishop if present) turning himself unto the
people says, Almighty God our heavenly Father, who for his great mercy has
promised forgiveness of sins to all such which with earnest repentance and true
faith turn unto him, have merey upon you, pardon and forgive you all your sins,
strengthen and confirm you, etc. And at the visitation of the sick, the sick
party having confessed any weighty matter wherewith his conscience is troubled,
the Priest absolveth him after this sort; our Lord Jesus Christ who has left
power to his Church to absolve all sinners which truly repent, and believe on
him, of his great mercy forgive thee thine offenses, and by his authority
committed unto me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the Name of the Father,
etc. By all of which it is evident, how much the Church attributes to prayer,
and Divine authority in this ministration.

A third Ordinance whereby the Minister remitteth sins, 3. By the Sacraments.
Sacrament a non excludimus, quae verbo tanquam sigillo regio app^ndi solent.
Masar. de Minister. Anglic. l. 5. c. 10. page 635. Acts 2.38. Acts 22.16. ^ur
Baptizatis, si p^r hominem pecca^a dimi^^i non licet? in Baptismo utique
remissio peccatorum omaium est. Quid interest utrum per poenitentiam an per
Lavacrum ho^ j^s sibi datum sacerdotes vendicent? unum in utro^ M^aist^rium
est. Ambr. l. 1. de Poen. c. 7.
is in dispensing the mysteries of God, the holy Sacraments; and these added to
the word of God render the pardon under seal, the more to confirm and quiet a
distracted Conscience; for of Baptism it is evident, Repent (says Peter) and
be baptized every one of you in the Name of the Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins. And now why tarriest thou? (says Ananias unto Paul) arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins. And the Nicene Creed, I believe one Baptism
for the remission of sins. Upon which ground Saint Ambrose questioned the
Novatians that baptized, and yet acknowledged no power in the Church to remit
sins. Why baptize you, if sins may not lawfully by man be forgiven? assuredly
in Baptism there is a pardon for all offenses; What difference is there whether
Priests claim this power as given unto them in the reconciling of Penitents, or
in the washing of Baptism? The Ministry in both being one and the same. So
for the holy Eucharist, that lively mirror of our Saviors passion, wherein
Christ is crucified (...) Before our eyes: wherein the Bread is broken, and
delivered in token that his body was broken, and his merits given unto us;
wherein the Blood of the new Testament is shed for many for the remission of
sins. Matthew. 26.28.
Now the virtue annexed to these Blessed Sacraments (which are seals of the
Promises of the Gospel, as the Censures are of the threats) is from God, whose
Sacraments they are, and not from man, who is but the Minister thereof. From
his side flowed the blood and water, and because both rise from that spring,
they have both this power. Herein is no power for man, where the grace of the
Divine bounty prevails, says Ambrose. It is one thing to baptize by the way
of Ministry, Nulla in his hominis potestas est, ubi divini muneris gratia
viget. Ambr. supra.
and another thing by the way of power (says the Oracle of Hippo) the power of
baptizing the Lord retains to himself, Aliud est baptizare per Ministerium,
aliud per potestatem, -- sibi tenuit Dominus potestatem baptizandi, servis
Ministerium dedit. Aug. tract. 5. in Joan.
the Ministry he has given to his servants. And that School-man argued not
amiss that framed this conclusion thence; To baptize inwardly, and to absolve
from mortal sin are of equal power. Paris potestatis est interius baptizare,
and a culpa mortali absolvere; sed Deus non debuit potestatem baptizandi
interius communicare, ne spes poneretur in homine. -- Ergo pari ratione nec
potestatem absolvendi ab actuali. Alex. Halens. sum. part. 4. Qu. 21. Memb. 1.
But God ought not to communicate the power of baptizing inwardly, lest any
hope should be placed in man; therefore by the like reason ought he not to
commit the power of absolving from actual sin unto any. To conclude this point
touching the Sacraments; Cyprian (or the Author of the XII Treatises De
Cardinalibus operibus Christi) writes thus; Forgiveness of sins, Remissio
peccatorum, sive per baptismum, sive per alia Sacramenta daretur, proprie
Spiritus Sancti est, and ipsi soli hujus efficientiae privilegium manet. Cypr.
tract. de bapt. Chr.
whether it be given by Baptism, or by other Sacraments, is properly of the
Holy Ghost; and the privilege of effecting this remains unto him alone. So
much for the third mean wherein the power of the keys is exercised, viz. in the
due administration of the Sacraments.

4. By excommunication and ecclesiastical censures.
The fourth and last thing wherein the power of the keys is discerned,
consists in the interdictions and relaxations of public Censures. Therefore
Divines refer the promise of the keys made unto Peter, Matthew. 16. to the
Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel, Illa deligando and solvendo Petro facta
promissio, non alio debet r^s^^^i qu^m ad v^^bi ministerium -- locus Matthew. 18.
ad disciplinam excommunicatioms p^rtinet quae ecclesiae promissa est. Calvin.
Instit. lib. 4. c. 11. Sect. 1, 2.
and the mention of the keys to be granted again, Matthew. 18. to Ecclesiastical
discipline and excommunication. The censure of the Church is, Let him be unto
thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. Where it appears to be twofold;
Matthew. 18.17.
the greater and the lesser, as they are usually termed. The lesser excludes
from the Sacrament only; and the greater shuts out of the Church also, and
makes such interdicted persons like unto the Heathen, for whom it was not
lawful to enter into the Temple, or set foot on holy ground; whereas the
Publican was admitted to come within the Temple, and to make his prayers there.
And this discipline is derived from the Jewish Synagogue; our Lord investing
his Church with the same power. There are with us, (says a late learned Elias
Levita.
Rabbin) three sorts of Anathemaes, or censures; NIDDUI, CHEREM, and SCHAMMATA.
Niddui, that is, 1. NIDDUI.
elongation, which separation was partly voluntary, when the unclean betrayed
themselves, and desired the expiation; Niddui sugati, in Novo testamento (...).
and partly unvoluntary, when the unclean person was condemned by the Sanedrim
or Council; (...) immunditia, menstruum, and Hieron. expiatic, and menstruata,
immunda, quod a viro and Templo elongeretur. S. Pagnin. LXXII. (...).
whence the water was called Niddah, from expulsion, or separation, because it
was used in the expiation of such persons, upon solemn confession of sin had
also. But if any person repented not, that is, neglected the expiation, or
behaved himself refractorily to the decrees of the Council, 2. CHEREM.
they did then excommunicate him by Cherem, and this is to cut off from Israel,
or from the congregation; Quo si quis non resipuisset, anathematizabant eum per
Cherem. (...) Consecratio, devotio, Anathema.
and that man so cut off was to be esteemed no longer an Israelite, but an
Heathen, as our Lord speaks: but if after all this he repented not,
Meschammatabant cum, they did abominate him with SCHAMMATA, that is, judge him
guilty of eternal death; 3. SCHAMMATA.
and it is called Schammata, So Elias Levita in Thesbyte. But Drusius derives
it from (...) a name, and (...) venit, he comes. The Syrians called it
Maran-atha, the Lord comes. Drus. in Praet.
as if he should say Death is there. And peradventure this Anathema so
aggravated was irrevocable. By this custom thus unfolded, not only the saying
of Christ, but many other passages of Saint Paul, receive light and
interpretation. This is the binding part. The Relaxation or loosing is the
amoval of the censure, the restoring to the peace of the Church, and a
readmittance to the Lords table. Which the ancient Councils and Fathers usually
expressed, 1. by bringing them to the Communion; 2. reconciling them to or with
the Communion; 1. (...). Council. Laod. can. 2.
3. restoring the Communion to them; 4. or admitting them into the fellowship;
2. Communioni v^l communione reconciliari. Council. Elib. canon. 72.
5. granting them peace.
Neither is this kind of binding and loosing lightly to be esteemed; 3. Reddi
cis communionem. Ambr. l. 1. de poen. c. 1.
for how fearful a thing is it to be exiled from the Society of Gods people, 4.
Ad communicationem admittere. Cypr. Ep. 53.
and participation of the holy Mysteries? 5. Pacem dare, and concedere. Id. ib.
The keys of the kingdom of heaven (says Saint Augustine) has Christ so
given to the Church, Claves Regni coelorum sic dedit Christus ecclesiae, ut non
solum diceret, quae solveritis, etc. verum and adjungeret, Quae ligaveritis in
terra erunt ligata and in Coelo, quia bona est and vindicandi justitia; illud
enim quod ait, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus, and Publicanus, gravius est quam si
gladio feriretur, si flammis absumeretur, si feris subigeretur; nam ibi quoque
subjunxit, Amen dico vobis, Quaecunque ligaveritis, etc. ut intelligeretur,
quanto gravius sit punitus, qui veluti relictus est impunitus. Aug. tract. 50.
in Joan. c. 12.
that he said not only, whatsoever ye shall loose, etc. but adjoined,
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; for vindictive
justice is good also; And that which he says, Let him be unto thee as an
Heathen, or Publican, is more grievous than if a man should be smitten with the
sword, consumed with flames, or cast forth unto wild beasts; for there he has
put to Amen, or, Verily, I say unto you whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven; that we also might understand how much more grievously he
is punished that seemed to us to be left unpunished. And so I have unfolded
those Four ways wherein the power of the keys is usually practiced by the
Ministers of the Church.

4. Abuse of the keys.
And thus far with Gods assistance have we waded in declaring the power granted
by Christ, and the true employment of the keys. But as Sovereignty may
degenerate into Tyranny, and power into violence and oppression; even so it
has fared in this Ministerial office: Some have been puffed up with
Pharisaical honors, as to dilate their fringes, and pass the bounds of Christ's
Commission. That man of Rome who pretends to have Peter's keys only, or
principally at his devotion, cannot be content to sit in the Temple of God, but
will there sit as God; and intrude upon the Royal prerogative of our Lord and
Master; planting his throne far above Princes, and not content with that, but
to usurp upon Divine honors. Thomas Aquinas (or whosoever made that book De
regimine Principum) tells us of strange things, and says we must say so too:
Oportet dicere in summo Pontifice esse plenitud^nem omnium gratiarum, quia ipse
solus confert pl^nam indulgentiam omaium peccatorum; ut competat sibi, quod de
primo principe Domino dicimus, quia de plenitudine ejus nos omnes accepimus.
Aq. de Regim. Princip. l. 3. c. 10. fol. 83. Paris 1509.
That in the Pope there is fullness of all graces, because he alone grants
full pardon of all sins, that it may be verified of him, which we say of the
chief Prince and Lord; for of his fullness we have all received. Quod si dicatur
referri ad solam spiritualem potestatem, hoc esse non pot^st, quia corper^le
and temporale ex spirituali, and perpetuo dependet, sicut corporis operatio ex
virtute animae. Id. ib.
Nor must this fullness be confined unto spiritual power, but comprehend the
temporal also; because that which is corporal and temporal depends upon that
which is spiritual, and perpetual, as the operation of the body upon the power
of the mind. Nor can any Laws hold him in, for with the key of dispensation he
turns them loose at his pleasure. The like power he claims over vows and
oaths. Over Princes to absolve them from their Scepters, and subjects from
their obedience. Christ says, I came not to destroy, but to fulfill, and his
pretended vicar comes not to fulfill, but to destroy; not to dispense, but to
dissipate. So the keys at Rome give him all power over all persons, and in all
cases, to do what he please. And such was the carriage and deportment of
Gregory the VII. who no sooner occupied the chair at Rome, but began to glory
that both persons of King and Priest were imposed upon him by Christ; Utramque
personam sibi impositam esse a Christo, se quodcunque ut lib^ret, ligare, and
solvere posse, jactitare, utramque personam agitare. Aventin. h^st. Boiorum. l.
4. p. 564. Ingolstadii, 1554.
that he acted the part of both. bo^sting that he had power to bind and loose
any thing, and as he pleased. -- Insomuch that he could not err, Utpote qui
errare non possit, and a Christo Do^^^o servatore nostro, Pet: oque acceperit
p^^ statem, ut solvat, ligetque utcunque libeat. ld. ib.
that he had received power from Christ our Lord and Savior; and from Peter to
loose and bind as to him seemed good; Plerique Antichristum esse praedicabant,
titulo Christi n^gotium Antichristi agitat, in Babylonia and Templo Dei sedet,
supra omne id quod colitur extollitur, quasi Deus sit, se errare non posse
gloriatur. -- Homines non peccetis, sed l^gi Christi at que Sacramentis solvit,
-- Nimium si^i de Pharisaeorum supercilio sumit, ut quosque damnare vel solvere
arbitretur: Cum apud Deum non sententia Sacerdotis, sed vita hominis quaeratur.
Aventin. hist. Boior. p. 573.
whereupon many preacked openly against him, calling him Antichrist, that he
pretended for Christ, but promoted the affairs of Antichrist: That at Babylon
he sat in the Temple of God; and was extolled above all that which is
worshipped; glorying that he cannot err, as if he were a very God; loosing men
not from their sins, but from the Law of Christ, and from their fealty and
oaths; taking upon him too much of Pharisaical loftiness; and in imagining he
can condemn any man, or set him free; whereas God enquireth after the man's
life, not after the Priests sentence. The stories of these times are full of
the licencious proceedings of these Prelates, serving their ambitious designs
under a pretext of Christ's keys. In the next age they lay still, humbled by
the swordmen, by the exploits of the French under Lewis the XII. on that side
the Alps, against Julius II. that warlike Pope; and of the Imperialists under
the conduct of Charles Bourbon, sacking Rome, and shutting up Clement VII, a
man taken from being a Knight of Malta to the holy Papacy. But of late revived
in the insolent attempts of Paul V. interdicting the Venetian Republic,
wherein his Flatterers and Proctors bore him up as a God upon earth, Quarrels
of Paul V. with the State of Venice, lib. 4. page 208.
a Sun of Justice and light of Religion: How the Judgment of God, and sentence
of the Pope were one and the same thing; as also the Tribunal and court of the
Pope and God; that to doubt of the power of the Pope, is as much as to doubt of
the power of God. But the best of it was, that prudent Senate made small
reckoning of these Rodomontado's, and through their resolute carriage, all his
pretensions and censures came to naught; and those formidable names of Peter's
keys, and his sword; of the Sea Apostolic, and infallible judgment, and his
unlimited jurisdiction, (by all which Christendom was formerly enchanted and
held in awe) proved but Panick fears, and vain titles of Papal usurpation.

And what humility can be expected from the Scholars, whose Master is thus
swollen, and puffed up; where the meanest Priest in this army that follows
this king of Pride, Negatur remissio cis quibus noluerint Sacerdotes remittere.
Bellar. l. 3. de Poen. c. 12.
arrogateth such fullness of power in opening and shutting of Heaven Gates, that
forgiveness is denied unto them to whom the Priest will not forgive. As if Gods
mercy were pinned upon his sleeve; and Priestly absolution were to be
preferred, and more to be ascribed thereunto, than unto God. Note (says
Richardus) that God loses the band of damnation conditionally, but the
Minister of the Lord simply, and as I may say wholly, Notandum est quod
vinculum damnationis Dominus solvit conditionaliter, Minister vero simpliciter,
and, ut sic dicam, integraliter, Poenitentem namque a debito damnationis Deus
absolvit sub tali condition, ut eum oporteat (prout potest) Sacerdotis
absolutionem quaerere, and ad ejus arbitrium debito modo satisfacere, nam si
facere neglexerit, periculum aeternum non evadit. Rich. de Clavib. cap. 9.
for God absolveth a Penitent from the debt of Damnation under such a
condition, that it behooveth him (if he can) to seek the absolution of a
Priest, and to make satisfaction in a fitting manner at his pleasure, which if
he neglect to do he escapes not eternal danger. As if Gods absolution were
incomplete, till it be pronounced by the Priest, and he should say, I absolve
you as much as in me lies, but go unto the Priests, and tell them the story of
your lives, that you may be thoroughly cleansed, so licensing them (as it were)
for Priestly power, from whose ultima manus, and lips must be their Quietus
est, and full discharge; yet not so full as you imagine, for (says Sir
Richard) As the absolution of God from eternal death implies this condition,
Rich. tract. de Clav. cap. 9.
to confess saltem in voto, and to be absolved by a Priest; so the absolution
of the Priest from the debt of future purgation, (or of Purgatory) is
conditional likewise, viz. if that satisfaction be performed as the Priest in
foro poenitentiali shall enjoin. According to this Doctor God absolveth a
penitent from hell, but conditionally, if forsooth he submit himself unto the
Sacrament of Penance. And the Priest so too from Purgatory, if the Penitent
observe, and fulfill the satisfaction of Penance; and with this last condition
(sc. doing of Penance) a Papal indulgence, or pardon will dispense. Upon the
matter then the doctrine of indulgences may take away the fear of Purgatory;
and the doctrine of Purgatory the fear of Hell. Thus for all their great cry in
their power of absolving, it sits down in a point of no moment, not in loosing
from sin, or eternal punishment, but from temporary pains only, and that by
way of commutation; the fire of Purgatory being extinguished in undergoing such
Penance, as the Priest imposes.

The disorder of Romish penance and pardon.
And herein is justly reprehended that preposterous course observed in the
Church of Rome; for whereas in the Primitive Church open sinners were put to
penance, and after due performance thereof, they were reconciled, and no
discharge nor absolution could be expected from the Minister, till all
reckonings were ended by the Penitent: It is the fashion in this Church, to
absolve immediately upon confession, Hod^e statim a facta confessione manus
poenit nti imponitur, and ad communionis jus admittitur, and post absolutionem
opera aliqua pietatis quae ad carnis castigationem, and reliquiarum peccatorum
expurguionem saciant, injunguntur. Casland. Consult. Art. 11. de Confessione.
and after absolution to impose the penance, and so come in with their
after-reckonings. And what is this but as some of the Ancients have observed,
first to loose, and afterward to bind; Putting herein (as that Ecebolius of
the times, and Renegado Spalatto once observed) the cart before the horse; La
Romana perversita pone il carro inanti alli Bovi; and prima concede la
remissione, poi impone l'opere di penitenza, quali dourebbono procedere dal
Pentimento, and cosi molto piu precedere la remissione. Marc. Anton. de Dominis
Predica in Londra, appresso Giovanni Billio 1617.
first conferring pardon, and afterward impose the work of Penance which ought
before to proceed from the Penitent, and much more to precede Remission. But
not the least wrong committed against the just use of the keys, is in making
the absolution of the Priest a Sacramental act, conferring grace by the work
wrought; and that absolution issuing from the Priests lips strikes such a
stroke, that by virtue thereof attrition does become contrition. Absolution not
efficacious ex operato.
As much as if they had said, that a sorrow arising from a servile fear of
punishment, and such a fruitless Repentance as Judas carried to hell with him,
may by virtue of the Priests absolution become a godly sorrow, working
repentance to salvation not to be repented of; which must needs proceed from a
secret and mysterious kind of operation in the absolution it self, when as
sorrow conceived upon dread of punishment, and that may be found in wicked
Cain, as well as in righteous Abel, shall be changed into such a sorrow as
arises upon an hatred of sin; upon an apprehension of Gods displeasure, and
his abused mercy that his gifts are slighted, and virtuous ex^rcises too much
neglected, which is a filial sorrow, and proper to such which are sealed by the
Spirit to the day of adoption. It cannot be conceived the great harms that
fall out upon this Spiritual cosenage, which flattereth and milketh sinners,
that although they bring not perfect repentance, D'attrito si sacci subito
contrito, cioe che se been non ha il vero, and persetto pentimento d' suoi
p^ccati, ma un certo picciolo, and leggiero, per timor solam^nte d^l divin
castigo, and non per odio del peccato, con l'assolutione; Egli goda il
beneficio della remissione tanto, quanto se egli havesse il vero, and perfetto
pentimento, col vero odio del peccato. Predica. supra. page 47.
but a light and small sorrow, conceived upon fear of punishment, and not upon
hatred of sin, pieced with absolution, they shall obtain remission of sins, in
as ample manner, as if they had brought all the sorrow in the world, and their
repantance had been as complete as might be, accompanied with a very hatred of
sin. Is not this to dandle sinners in their evil way? And as for that temporal
punishment which is supposed to remain for the Priest to inflict, and to
afflict the sinner, either a formal penance, or a Papal indulgence shall strike
off that likewise. A plausible doctrine for those that would live after the
flesh, that sin may be pardoned without hatred of sin, that sorrow in it self
imperfect, by virtue of another man's help may be perfected. That there lies
such virtue in absolution as to qualify persons, otherwise indisposed, to reap
the fruit thereof; for what sinner would stand so much upon contrition, if
attrition would serve the turn? or earnestly repent, if such a small or crude
sorrow might be accepted? I may not well stay any longer upon this abusive part
of the keys. And at the length soit peu soit prou, as the French man speaks, be
it little or much, I have, (God being my help) absolved this point; the
Ministry of the keys being no small part of our Sacred Function, and with what
success, I had rather the judicious Reader suppose, then make the relation my
self; it being a matter not usually, or at least not methodically unfolded by
your ordinary writers.

By all this that has been said, Conclusion.
you may discern how powerful and useful the keys are, how far forth they
conduce to remission of sin by the act and benefit of absolution, promised
Matthew. 16.19. and accomplished John 20.23. Now little or no use can be made
hereof, except the sin, and inward contrition for the same be discovered by
some sensible demonstrations. And no sins either for number or greatness are
excepted from absolution. Christ teaches us to forgive till seventy times
seven, which amounts to 490 times accounting (as it ought to be) a Jubilee to
consist of 49 years, not 50. Psalm. 40.12. Orat. Manasseh. Luke 4.27. Qualities
requisite in such that desire to be relieved by the benefit of the keys.
ten Jubilees of pardon; and we have example of one, whose sins were more in
number than the hairs of his head; and of another, whose were more than the
sands of the sea, that obtained pardon: Yet as Christ says, There were many
Lepers in Israel in the time of Elizeus the Prophet, and none of them were
cleansed save Naaman the Syrian. So many sins there be, and many sinners there
be, and none remitted except they be of the Quorum remiseritis, by God or the
Ministry of his Priests. You may perceive by what has been discoursed, that
many things are required to remission of sins: The Priest may do his devoir,
yet the absolution may not close, except the Penitent stand rightly disposed.
The party then rightly qualified; 1. he must be within the house or family to
whom the keys belong, to judge those that are without? It is required then that
he be within his jurisdiction, that is to say, a member of the Church, and a
believing Christian. In the Law the Propitiatory was annexed to the Ark, Exodus
26.34.
to show that they must hold of the Ark as Gods people, that would be partakers
of the propitiation for their sins; Remission of sins being sors sanctorum, and
dos ecclesiae, the inheritance of the Saints, 2. Also he that would claim any
benefit of the keys, must be repentant, for in Christ's name are preached
Repentance and forgiveness of sins, Luke 24.47.
and those whom he has put together, man cannot part asunder.
And to Repentance there go two things, 1. a feeling of chains, and
imprisonment, 2. a grief for them with a desire to be loosed; for sentiat onus
qui vult levari, and sentiat vincula qui vult solvi;
let him feel the weight of his burden that would be eased, as David did, when
he cried out, Psalm. 38.
my sins are too heavy for me to bear; and the straitness of his bonds, that
would be freed, as Paul did, when he saw the law in his members bringing him
into captivity unto the law of sin, and thereupon exclaimed, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Romans 7.23.
And no otherwise does Christ proclaim it, that none should come unto him but
such as are weary and heavy laden. Grow sensible then of thy oppression under
sin, how the Irons enter into thy soul, Matthew. 11.
be sorrowful for captivating thy self with those bonds. Resort unto the
Priest, show him thy fetters, and crave his assistance to strike them off; and
then whom the Son of man shall set free, or the Priest in his name, he shall be
free indeed. And this is the first, and most remarkable consideration, why unto
the Priest sins must be confessed.

CHAP. IX.
The Contents.
Paternal affection in the Confessary. Good for sheep if the sheepherd know
their diseases. Medicinal Confession. The grief better healed when clearer
opened. Ghostly counsel of great importance to a Penitent. Great care in the
choice of a discreet Confessor. Romes rigid Tenet. Absolution denounced by any
Priest besides the Ordinary to be invalid. The inconveniences thereof. The
Parochial Priest not to be deserted without just cause, and the same to be
approved by the Diocesan.

II. Priest a spiritual Father.
THere are other inducements besides that which has been spoken, inclining to
the practick of Confession, which are now distinctly, but succinctly to follow
in their order; as first the Relation of a Spiritual Father, for that Paternal
affection is (or should be) betwixt the Pastor and his people; Love being the
chain that tieth the one to his charge, and the other to his due respect. Now
what secrets will a dutiful child conceal from an affectionate father?
especially secrets of that nature that may be redressed by the fathers help;
and may prove obnoxious by the sons concealment. A good Father tenders the
infirmities of his child, and upon notice thereof will either cure, or cover
them. Thus stood Saint Paul affectionate unto the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 5.14.
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. q.
d. (...); Theoph. in 1 Cor. 5.
I speak not from a malicious mind to calumniate or disparage you, but unto
children, and that beloved; pardon me if I have spoken something harshly, it
proceeded from love: I reprove you not but warn you; and who will not with
patience endure a fathers warnings? he proceeds, (...). Idem. ibid.
many instructors you may meet withal but not many fathers, and their care may
be much, but not like my affection; and however they may instruct you, yet it
is I that in Christ Jesus have begotten you through my Gospel, in that natural
way expressing how great his love was, as Theophy lact observed. Now if love
thus descend, why should it not ascend? why art thou ashamed to make known thy
state to such a father? who will neither write, nor speak to shame thee, and
whatsoever he does therein is by way of monition only, and no way prejudicial.
Greg Nyssen. de Poen. in appendice operum Paris. 1618. p. 176.
Take then as Gregory Nissen advised) the Priest for a partner of thine
affliction, and as thy father, show unto him without blushing the things that
are kept close, he will have care both of thy credit, and of thy cure. See this
testimony more amply before.

The next denomination is of a Sheepherd and flock, III. Priest a Pastor. Heb.
13.20. John 21.16.
a name which the Apostle has given unto Christ the great Sheepherd of the
sheep; and Christ to his Apostle, in feed my sheep. Now it cannot be amiss for
the sheep if the sheepherd know their (...). Th^oph. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians. p. 552.
diseases. Christ the Arch sheepherd differs herein from all others; for
whereas some sheepherds are clothed with the fleece, feed upon their milk, and
kill their sheep for meat; contrariwise, Christ clotheth them, feeds them,
and was slain for them likewise; and His sheepherds herein differ from our
sheepherds: for how ever they are clothed with the fleece, fed with the milk,
and reap temporal things, yet have they not power over their lives, to kill
them, but to feed and preserve them; yea, if by negligence any of their flock
suffer damage, it will be set upon their head and reckoning. It was wittily
observed by that learned and ancient Father; (...). Clom. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
page 203.
Clomons Alexandrinus, that the Sheepherd and the Cook view not the sheep
alike. The Butcher handles him if fat and fit for the slaughter; the sheepherd
contented with the fleece, and milk, and increase, has care and watches over
his flock. Let the sheep then distinguish the sheepherds voice from a stranger,
and to him let their griefs be unfolded. And let the same mind be in the
sheepherds, that was in Christ Jesus. He that is studious to heal the vices of
humane infirmity, Qui studet humanae infirmitatis emendare vitia, ipsam
infirmitatem suis debet sustinere and quodammodo pensare hum^ris, non ab^^c^re;
Nam pastor ille Evangelicus lassam ovem vexisse legitur, non abjecisse. Ambr.
l. 1. de Poen. c. 1.
(says Ambrose) must take upon him the infirmity it self, and bear it as it
were, upon his own shoulders, not cast it off, for that Evangelical sheepherd
is said to have born the wearied sheep, and not to have cast it off. And can
thy infirmities be better known to any than unto him that will take them to
himself, and bear the burden upon his own shoulders?

IV. Priest a spiritual physician. Tacentibus non facile potest medela
opportuni and necessarii sermonis adhiberi. Ex lib. Clement. MS.
The fourth Correspondence is as unto a Physician, wherein that adage of our
Savior holds, the whole need not the Physician, but the sick; And as a sick
patient possesses his Physician with each remarkable passage in his sickness,
that the grief being fully apprehended, the remedy may be the better applied:
So should it be in the case of spiritual diseases also. The Fathers are very
plentiful in their inlargements upon this Medicinal Confession. God, says
Origin, as he has prepared medicines for the body, Sicut corpori medicamenta
praeparavit. -- ita etiam animae medicamenta praeparavit, in his sermonibus
quos per divinas Scripturas seminavit atque d^spersit. Archiatros est salvator,
qui possit curare omnem languorem and infirmitatem. Discipuli vero ejus. Petrus
vel Paulus, sed and Prophetae Medici sunt, and by omnes qui post Apostolos in
Ecclesia positi sunt, quilus curandorum vulnerum disciplina commissa est; Quos
voluit Deus. in Ecclessa sua esse Medicos animarum. Origin. hom. 1. in Psalm.
37. circ. Principium.
so has he for the soul likewise, that we should seek for salves in those
Sermons which he has sowed and dispersed throughout the divine Scriptures.
Christ is the chief Physi^ian, and who is able to heal all diseases and
infirmities. But his Disciples also Peter and Paul, yea, the Prophets are
Physicians likewise. Yea, all those who after the Apostles have their place in
the Church, and to whom the discipline of healing wounds is committed, whom God
has placed in the Church to be soul-Physicians. To which purpose Saint Cyprian
writes, Peccatores per Confessionem animi sui pondus exponunt, salutarem in
delam parvis sc. and modicis vulneribus exquirunt. Cypr. l. 5. de laps.
how sinners by confession expose [unto the Priests] the burden of their mind,
and seek for wholesome medicines even for small and sleighty wounds. And Saint
Hierome of him that is bitten by the old Serpent the Devil, and concealeth the
wound, says, that the Doctor who has the tongue to heal, can avail him
nothing, Magister qui babet linguam ad curand in, facile ci prodesse non
poterit; si enim erubescat aegrotus vulnus Medico consiteri, quod ignorant
Medicina non curat, Hieron. in Ecclesiast. cap. 10.
for if the sick man be ashamed to confess his disease unto the Physician, no
Physic can heal that it knows not. And again, The wound that is not
perceived is slowly healed. Vul^us non intellectum tardius sanatur. Idem.
And Saint Chrysostom taking notice of the small care we have of our souls
health, and of the spiritual Physician, and eke of our backwardness in making
known our infirmities; (...). Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 6. page 10.
Herein (says he) much skill must be used, that those who labor under such
diseases, may be persuaded willingly to submit themselves unto the Priests,
that they might be cured; and not that only, but that they may know withal
how to be thankful unto them for such cures. And indeed our general
unthankfulness herein, argues few to be cured, or to understand the cure, and
by whose means it was perfected; for were we sensible of this benefit, Si
transgredimur in aliquo peccato post Baptismum, ordinavit nobis poenitentiam
proter fragilitatem nostram; idro debemus confessiones nostras veraciter
confiteri, and fructus d^gnos facere, id est, praeterita ne (...), secundum
jussionem Deum timentis Sacerdotis. Qui Sacerdos ut sapiens Med^cus primum
sciat curare peccata sua, and postea aliena vulnera detergere and sanare, non
publicare. Nos sequamur, perquiramus, etiam talilus consilium salutis nostrae
ineamus. Aug. epist. III. ad Julian. Com.
we could not be ungrateful unto those that in any sense procured the same.
Saint Aus^in unto Count Julian has written thus; If we offend by any sin after
Baptism, God for our frailty has ordained repentance; therefore ought we
truly to make our confessions, and to bring forth worthy fruit, that is, not to
renew our former offenses, according to the Priests prescript that fears God,
who as a wise Physician first knows how to heal his own sins, and afterward
to scour the wounds of others, and to heal, but not publish them. Let us
follow after such, enquire them out, and of such take counsel for our
salvation. And we read in Ecclesiastical story, that when Ambrose that devout
Bishop demanded of Theodosius that penitent Emperor, with what plasters he had
cured his wounds? Quibus pharmacis curasti vulnera ista? Respondet Imperator,
Tuum opus est and ostendere and miscere Pharmaca, m^um vero suscipere. Histor.
Tripartit. l. 9. cap. 30.
the Prince answered, To you it belongs to temper the plasters, and prescribe
the salves, and for me to receive the saeme. I have read the relation of a
dream, (and dreams may admonish, and illustrate, though not confirm, says
Gorson; Audivi quosd^m referentes de Scriptura etsi non certa, tamen non
destruente fidem, sed potius delectante. Author operis imperfect. in Matthew.
Homil.
or as Chrysostom of the strange shape and form of that Star which shone
before the Eastern Sages, Matthew. 2. related by some, that it did not destroy
but delight the truth.) Then solace thy self (Christian Reader) with this
fancy. There was a Gentleman that loved a widow besides his wife, and privily
in his garden under the covert of a certain tree committed folly with her;
shortly after lying in bed with his own wife, it came to pass that she was
sorely terrified with a dream, whereof he demanded the cause; she told him how
in her dream as he was standing under such a tree, Clam in proprio horto sub
quadam arbore pulcherrima adulterium commisit.
the very terror whereof (she tendering her husbands safety) put her to that
outcry. The dream was no sooner opened, but his Conscience made the
exposition; that it was the sword of sin which had wounded his soul: Saeviens
Tyrannus per medium cordis tui^ut eras sub tali arbore cum gladio acutissimo te
perforavit.
When the morning was come, and both risen from their bed, he advised her, (for
that she had not quietly rested that night) to go to Church, and afterward to
repose her self upon a couch which she did. In the mean space my man sent for
his Confessor, brought him to the same place in the garden under the same tree,
and there abundantly weeping, Quo audito, animadvertit ille esse vulnus peccati
animae ipsius.
confessed that sin with the rest that were behind unto him. The Ghostly Father
perceiving such plenty of tears and contrition, imposed but an easy penance
upon him, viz. the recital of five Ave Mary's; and afterward as the Gentleman
and his Confessor were come into the house, and as they were sat at dinner,
the wife newly awaked, entered the room, and folding her hushand within her
arms, kissed him. He wondering at her behavior, and unseasonable imbracements;
she excused the same for joy of a new and fresh dream, which had clean
extinguished the grief upon the former; for (quoth she) as I now slept, it
seemed a certain Physician came unto thee under the same tree, Vidi Medicum
quendam ut eras sub tali arbore, ponentem quinque flores in vulnere, unde
continuo sanatus es. Spec. Exemplor. did. 8. Sect. 4.
and put five flowers into the wounds, which instantly healed it, and this is
the cause of these my unusual salutes. Where, (...), is figuratively expressed
the wounding of the soul, and curation thereof. But we rely not much upon such
pious dreams, little better than pious fables, where we have a more sure word
of prophecy. The Priests may rather justly complain how little they are
frequented, and of the scarcity of their Patients; and that must needs arise
from the obnoxious conceits of many, preferring shame before danger, and had
rather keep the disease by them close, than to have it cured by publishing the
same. Yea, if some proceed so far as to discover their disease to the
Physician, they either sl^ght his prescriptions, and imagine like Naaman-Syrus,
their own Rivers as powerful to heal their Lepryes, as the Priests Jordan; or
else dislike them as too corrosive and bitter, and thereupon grow angry and
discontented with the Physician. Curae impatiens populus and medelae, in
perniciem Medentis exarsit. Orig. hom. 1. in Psalm. 37. Jer. 8.22.
A people impatient of the cure and h^aling, as Origin once complained, are
incensed against him that would heal them: whatsoever may be the cause, this
way of healing is so little thought on, as if there were no balm in Gilead,
and no Physician there, that the health of the daughter of my people may be
recovered.

V. The Priest a counselor and comforter. Book of Common Prayer, at the
Communion. Prove. 19.20.
The fifth and last motive to confess unto the Priest is for advise and comfort,
insomuch as the weightiest affairs stand most in need of counsel, and comfort
is not more welcome than to a wounded spirit; this our Church wills, Let him
open his grief to me, or some other learned and discreet Minister, that he may
receive such Ghostly counsel, advice and comfort, as his conscience may be
relieved. Hear counsel (says the wise man) and receive instruction, that thou
may be wise in thy latter end: as if he should say, wisdom is augmented in
the nursery of counsel, and instruction. Now in the case of sin there cannot
be greater danger, nor greater happiness than to decline the stroke; discreet
counsel therefore that tends to that end is much to be prised. Thine own heart
is deceitful, and ofttimes conceals the sin, or else diminishes the guilt, or
excuses the offense. And if thou gain a sight of thy sin, very seldom shall
thy contrition be truly poised; either thy sorrow swallowing up thy self or
else thy sin swallowing up thy sorrow: sure it is not the least art so to order
contrition aright, that it may arise upon just cause, be moderated with fitting
discretion, and directed to such ends, that it may prove a godly sorrow, and
such which accompanies salvation. Again, it is not the least of a sinners
unhappiness the loss of God and his favor; now to recover the same, what
counsel can be thought superfluous? if the favor of a great man be lost, how
much means, how many friends, and how great advise should be used to gain him
back? And when his favor is obtained, what study and diligence shall be
practiced in the continuance thereof? when a Penitent has hit upon a right
contrition, has hopes and comfort of the return of Gods favor, he cannot be
ignorant of his own frailty, and therefore needs directions as much in way of
remedy against relapse, as in way of Physic for recovery. Lay all these
together, the deceitfulness of thine own heart, and of sin, the danger of
contrition lest it prove not sincere; the great peril in the loss of Gods
favor, and the difficulty in the recovery thereof; the procliveness of man's
nature to plunge into former sins; and tell me if there be not need of more
heads than a sinners own in this case of contrition and reconciliation. We read
in the bastard-epistles of Clemens this constitution, which is there fathered
upon Peter, that if envy, or infidelity, Quod si^forte alicujus cor, vel liv^r,
vel infidelitas, vel aliquod malum latenter irrepserit, non erubescat qui
animae suae curam gerit, confiteri haec huic qui praeest, ut ab ipso per verbum
Dei and salubre consilium curetui. Clem. Ep. 1. ad Jacob. fr. Domini.
or any other evil did secretly creep into any man's heart, he who had care of
his own soul, should not be ashamed to confess those things unto him who had
the oversight of him; that by Gods word and wholesome counsel he might be cured
by him. This constitution sure is Apostolical, though the Epistles be not; for
better advise cannot be prescribed in the case of sin than how to repent
thereof, and prevent it. In ancient times the Priests advice was held so
necessary, that penitential laws were enacted, and Canons ordained, Certas
Poenitentiae leges condere, quibus and tempus and modus s^ngulis peccatis
expiandis praestitueretur (Canones Poenitentiales vocant) quibus ut fieret
satis, opus crat sacerdotem in consilium adhibert, praesertim a laicis.
the better to enable him for direction, wherein the time and manner of
Repentance is set down for sins in particular: for the observing of which, the
Laics were to be advised by the Priests; Severe jubent in legibus suis, ut
Sacerdotes Poenitentialem Librum been calleant, -- ut accepto ab eis salutari
consilio, saluberrimis poenitentiae observationibus, seu mutuis orationibus
p^ocatorum maculas diluamus.
hence the Imperial laws commanded Priests to be well versed and seen in the
Penitential Book* Theodulphus Bishop of Orleance stated confession to be
therefore necessary, that wholesome counsel being received from Priests, we may
through the saving observations of penance, and mutual prayers, wash out the
spots of sins. Such laws with us in England were ordained by Theodore sometimes
Archbishop of Canturbury, to inform the Priests to become able Penitentiaries.
From whence Beatus Rhenanus concludes in this sort; Vides igitur necessarium
fuisse Sacerdotis uti consilio, quatenus institutis Poenitentiae legibus fieret
satis, quae laicis non perinde cognitae erant. B. Rhen. praef. ad Te^^l. de
Poenit.
Thou see therefore how necessary it is to use the counsel of the Priest, in
as much as the laws instituted for penance might be fulfilled, which were not
so well known unto the Laity.

For Consolation, wherein not the least part of the Priests counsel consists.
A Priest must fit his words upon the wheel, Prove. 25.11.
that they may be as apples of gold in pictures of silver. Cordial Physic
being necessary for some patients. His care must be, not to quench the s^^oking
flax, nor to break the bruised reed; often imitating his Masters words, which
were to languishing souls, Confide fili, son be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee: that High Priest was sent to heal the broken hearted, Luke 4.18,
19.
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind;
and to set at liberty them that are bruised, Deus crimen nullum excepit qui
peccata donavit omnia. Ambr.
and to proclaim the year of Jubilte, or acceptable year of the Lord. And the
Priests of his order have the same errand. God makes no exception of any
offense, that pardons all sins. Great encouragements then to come unto the
Priest, if you respect the power of absolution no small benefit, the careful
love of a Father, no mean affection; the wholesome receipts of a Physician, no
little profit; the sound advise and welcome consolation of a Counselor, no
small happiness: what should bar thee from making use of these no Punctigl^o's
or mean furtherances of thy souls good? And in pio Sacerdote haec insunt omnia:
All these graces are lodged in the bosom of a good and indulgent Priest; for
we do not (says Ambrose) make our selves merry upon the hearing of other men's
sins, Non ergo gaudeamus super alicujus peccatum, sed magis lugeamus. -- nec
immerito, quoniam qui lapsu alieno gaudet, Diaboli gaudet victoria. Ambr. lib.
2. de Poen. cap. 8.
but we bewail them rather, and that not without just cause; for he that
rejoices at another man's fall, rejoices that the Devil has got the day and
victory.

To a Minister thus qualified address thy self; I hear thee say that thou
would gladly do so, Confessor Ordinary is he that has cure of souls.
but can not meet with one of a thousand adorned with these properties. (My
good friend) let not the supposed scarcity of virtuous Priests retard thee from
thy duty, lest this pretense seem not a real truth, but a Diabolical fancy and
supposition; for the Devil knows all ways to the wood, and when he feels thy
heart well disposed to confession, will cast into thy head distasts of the
Confessors, that out of some dislike unto the persons, the act of their
Ministry might be neglected, and thy soul remain a captive under durance of
the same bonds still. Do herein as thou would do with thy Lawyer and
Physician; for although the professors in those faculties are not universally,
nor perhaps usually of the honestest sort of men, yet a Lawyer thou must
retain, and a Physician thou will resort unto, in hope to light on learned and
honest men (as either profession yields store of Reverend and learned
personages) where then so much chaff is mingled with corn, the use of Law and
Physic must not be left off, only thou art to fan the persons, and be more
circumspect in thy choice. Besides, the power and efficacy of the keys depends
not upon the dignity of the Priests Person, for an evil man may be a good
Minister; yet a clean Cook is preferred before a sloven in dressing of meats.
The Arabians have a Proverb, (...) a Jos. Scalig. and Tho. Erpenio. Edit.
XXXVI. page 30.
Open not thy secret unto Apes; that is, detect not thy secrets unto scorners;
for as Apes are mimical imitators of men's actions, so do skorners usually act
and represent their words and gesture whom they would lay open to derision;
from Priests of this nature set a lock upon thy lips; and choose with care thy
Minister, and make use of his Ministry with Conscience. It was one of Diogenes
his Apothegmes, who upon the view of Philosophers and Physicians, amongst other
men, Il avoit de coustome de dire, quand il voyoit des Medicines, and
Philosophees entres les hommes; que de tous les animaux l'homme estoit le plus
advise. Thever des illust. hommes live. 2. chap. 6. v^e de Diogenes.
was wont to say that amongst all living creatures a man should be best advised
of these two. Our choicest treasures we usually commit to our choicest friend.
And what Jewel more precious than the ^oul of man? and what thing more
necessary than the salvation thereof? Make good proof (says Origin) of thy
Physician, to whom thou ought to expose the cause of thy languishing.
Tantummodo circumspice diligentius cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum; proba
prius medicum cui debeas causam languoris exponere, qui sciat infirmari cum
infirmante, flere cum flente, qui condolendi and compatiendi noverit
disciplinam, ut ita demum si quid ille dixerit, qui se prius and eruditum
Medicum oftenderit and misericordem, si quid confilii dederit facias and
sequaris. Orig hom. 2. in Ps. 37.
Be very circumspect to whom thou art to confess thy sin, that he know how to
be weak with those that are weak, to weep with those that weep, and can well
skill of condoling and compassion; So at length if he shall prescribe any thing
that has showed himself a learned Physician and a gentle, the counsel he shall
give thee embrace and follow it. He therefore that minds his souls good, must
consider that much rests in the choice of a skilful Physician, but much more
in the paint that must be taken by the Patient himself. Aliud est favore vel
odio proprium Sacerdotem cont^mnere, quod Canones vetant; aliud cae cum vitare,
quod Urbanus monet. Lomb. l. 4. did. 21. Sect. Caveat aut^m.
Therefore our Church confines not a parishioner, but gives him leave to come
unto his own Minister, or some other that is discreet and learned; so that if
discretion, or learning, or both reside not in thine own Minister, thou art at
liberty for some other: But let thy Conscience bear thee witness that thou
forsakest him only for defect of these, and for no other sinister respect,
lest this liberty be unto thee an occasion of sinning; and thou forsaking thy
shepherd, prove but a wandering sheep. The Church of Rome is too much in the
other extreme, not only censuring those that resort to other Priests, but
making their censures void also. He that shall wittingly address himself unto a
strange Priest, Qui scienter alienum accedit Sacerdotem, and non habentem
potestatem super cum, non absolvitur, quia talis ponit absolutioni obi cem per
praevaricationem praecepti ecclesiastici -- immo bona fide accedenti alienum
Sacerdotem negligenter, ignorantia non excusat, nec talis percipit absolutionis
fructum. Ru. Tapper. Art. 5. p. 85.
and that has no power over him, is not absolved because such an one puts a
bar to absolution, by transgressing the precepts of the Church, (says Tapper.)
Yea, and more than that; he that shall mistake through ignorance a strange
Priest for his own, his negligent ignorance shall not excuse; nor shall he
partake of absolution: A rigid assertion. Saint Paul obtained mercy at Gods
hands because he did it ignorantly; but no mercy may be obtained at the Priests
hands, though the Penitent do it ignorantly also. And this the School men say
is for want of a subject matter for the power of absolution to work on. The
Priest at his admission into holy Orders, says Scotus, Habet Sacerdos ex
ordine potestatem activam judicandi, sed non passivam, sive materiam; sed
oportet aliquem subditum sibi dari, in que^ habeat jurisdictionem, non solum ad
hoc, ut vite absolvat, sed ut simpliciter absolvat. Quia sententia a non suo
judice lata, est nulla. Scotus lib. 4. did. 19.
receives the active power to judge, but not the passive, or matter whereupon
he is to sit; for it is necessary that there should be some subject to his
jurisdiction, not only for the right use, but for the use it self of
absolution; for sentence given by a Judge that has no authority is a mere
nullity. And what is this but a net and snare for troubled minds; for may it
not be suspected, whether this Priest be thine own Confessor, especially when
he is landed from beyond the Seas, and here moves in no certain orb? Our
English Romanists may do well to consider, whether their Priests without a
faculty from Rome can hear confessions, and absolve in England; and whether
every errant Priest is so furnished, that comes unto them in that name? there
will lie (I fear) against many of them exceptionem fori. A key indeed you have
Sir Priest, but it will not fit this lock; because it belongs not to your
warehouse; I am no sheep of your pasture. Again, if the material part of this
jurisdiction be not Divine, but Ecclesiastical, (as Divisions of Diocesses and
Parishes are) how can the form and power thereof be divine? and if the faculty
to absolve conferred upon a Priest be a Divine right, how can any
Ecclesiastical Ordinance frustrate the same? God indeed is the God of Order,
and there are several flocks depending upon each Pastor; and as Ordination does
enable, so institution into several charges does enact our Ministry; and it is
very fit that none ought to put his sickle into another man's harvest: But if a
Priest Baptize in my Brothers Parish, and that Baptism is good; if I celebrate
the holy Eucharist, and that consecration is Sacred: Why if I absolve upon
Confession, should that absolution be invalid? But (...). Now as we grant a
liberty to a Parishioner to wave his own Pastor, so great care must be had that
this prove not a licenciousness. Thy Parish Priest is thine ordinary Confessor,
to whom the care of thy soul is committed, and ordinary means must be used,
except in extraordinary cases. The case therefore of thy soul is not usual, or
thy Minister is not regular, when addresses must be unto another; and in such
events thou a Parishioner art not thine own judge. Ridiculus esset, immo
nefarius summus Pontifex, si examen and probationem idonei Confessoris
relinqueret arbitrio cujuslibet popularis. Canus Relect. de Poen. part. 6. page
952.
Canus questioneth whether the Pope himself can enable any Laick with this
freedom, to choose what Ghostly Father himself pleases: and concludes, that
his Holiness would be ridiculous, yea impious, in relinquishing the examination
and election of a fit Confessor to a popular person. Thou will say, who shall
judge betwixt the Parishioner and his Priest? surely who, but the superior
Diocesan, the Bishop, who is set over them both? and he upon the hearing of thy
reasons, may receive thy confession himself, or license thee for some one whom
he shall judge a fit Confessor for thee. The election of a discreet Priest is
not committed unto us (says Aquinas) to be made at our pleasure, Electio
discreti sacerdotis non est nobis commissa, ut nostro arbitrio facienda, sed de
licentia superioris, si forte proprius Sacerdos esset minus idoneus ad
apponendum peccato salutare remedium. Aquin. did. 17. Qu. 3. art. 3.
but by the leave of a superour, in case our own Priest is not so fit to grant
a wholesome remedy for sin. For who can make better provision for thee than a
Father of great experience and learning? and who more ready to pleasure thee
than such a grave personage that has the chief charge of thy soul, and is
thine ordinary Pastor and Governor? But I shall rest no longer upon this
subject: not doubting but if this Pastoral collation between the Minister and
his flock were revived, our Reverend Overseers would have an eye upon all such
inconvenience. Alterum, ne quis alieno Sacerdoti confiteatur; alterum ne quis
Sacerdos non examinatus confessiones audiat. Canus Rel. part. 6. page 952.
I wind it up with Canus; It may well stand with Christian reason to ordain two
Canons, the one that none might confess but to his own parish Priest; and the
other, that none might be made Priest, or admitted to receive either cure of
souls or Confessions, without due examination; the due observance whereof would
cut off many quarrels and exceptions.

CHAP. X.
The Contents.
Many Positive precepts without fixed times. The practique for times and
seasons left to the Churches arbitration. Times necessary for Confession. When
particular persons and consciences are perplexed. Times convenient for all
Christians; 1. When visited with desperate diseases. 2. Upon the undertaking of
solemn actions and exploits accompanied with danger, and needing special help
from God. 3. Upon the receiving of the Blessed Eucharist; before which
Confession to the Priest is always convenient, and sometimes necessary, and
the neglect thereof in some cases damnable.


WE shall proceed from the duty it self to the time for the performance
thereof; it is true of all positive precepts that they bind semper, sed non ad
semper, are always in force, but not always to be used. And as that devout
Christian, which beside the frequenting of public prayers, has his daily
addresses in private unto God, opening his heart with the day, and shutting the
same upon his knees, may be said to pray continually: So that penitent which
makes his confession as often as a distressed Conscience shall suggest, and
applies himself to the use of this salve so often as the nature of his wounds
shall require, may be said to make continual use of Gods ordinance, and shall
feel in his heart the effect and content thereof. The word of God is
replenished with holy precepts, Praeceptis instituitur vita contra peccatum,
remediis restituitur post peccatum innocentiae; infelix ille qui praeceptum
contempsit and remedium.. Bern.
to avoid sin, and holy remedies to heal us of sin; and that sinners condition
is only formidable, that contemnes both the precepts and the remedies. First,
obey Gods command in abstaining from sin, and if that be broken, frequent the
remedies (whereof Confession is one) to free thee from the guilt of sin. The
whole need not the Physician, and would God we had no sins to confess; a
felicity indeed much to be wished; but if thou have sinned, the next felicity
unto that is the grace of Contrition and Confession, which I say is ever to be
used upon urgent occasion. For in the practick of Christian Religion, there are
many precepts, of piety, of fasting, a^mes-deeds, etc. which are not fixed unto
stationary times, but are left to the discretion of the Church, and by her
appointment fitted unto times and seasons. Our Church commands each
parishioner to receive the Eucharist three times a year, whereof Easter to be
one; yet confines not a Communicant to these times only, but that he may enjoy
the blessed use thereof at other times also, as his devotion and the
opportunity of the Sacrament serve. Christ has so left the precepts of
communicating and confessing, Sic praecepta de sumenda eucharistia and
confessione reliquit Christus, nec revera potest determinari ex solo divino
jure, quo tempore haec praecepta nos obligent. Canus Relec. de poen. part. 6.
p. 957.
that it cannot be determined from divine law only, at what time they b^nd us
in the use thereof. I can resolve that a wounded man should have recourse unto
a Surgeon, and the greater danger is therein, the greater must be his speed
and necessity for a salve; but cannot prognosticate at what time he shall be
wounded: to repent of sin is necessary, to confess that sin, at least
convenient but to sin it self contingent, falling out at no certain time,
though at all times; how then can that be regulated to times, that is in it
self, and in the event so irregular? There is a late Lateran. sub Innocentio
III. Imponit necessitatem non differendi confessio nem ultra annum, non autem
dat licen^iam differendi. Bonavent.
Council that enjoins Confession once a year; that is to say, the Glossers
thereof once a year at the least, but the oftener the better, if occasion be;
not that any should defer to the end of the year, but that none should go
beyond the year. Yet Divines well advising upon the point, have prescribed
three solemn times for the use thereof; and amongst them some are peremptory,
that those prefixed times without great offense may not be omitted. Others hold
them not binding, but advising and counselling all Christians to practice
confession at those times appointed. They follow;

I. At the time of Death.
The first is when death seems by the weakness of the body, and violence of
the disease to be at hand; then the advice of the Prophet to Ezechias is very
seasonable, to set the house of our souls in order, when we must die and not
live. Rubric at the visitation of the sick.
The sick person is directed by our Church, to make a special confession, if he
feel his conscience troubled with any weighty matter; after which Confession
the Priest shall absolve him, in a special form immediately following: Here
Canus distinguishes betwixt the peril and the point of death. Non idem esse
periculum mortis, and articulu^ mortis; est periculum mortis in his duntaxat
unde mors frequ^nter solet accidere; and articulos mortis, cum regulariter
certa mors est, dut a morbo, vel vulnere, aut ab exteriore vi. Relect. de
poenit. part. 6.
They are then said to be in the peril of death, who are in such actions or
passions as are usually accompanied with death; as battles in War, and
tempests at Sea, and grievous diseases: and the point of death is where that
fatal stroke certainly ensues; as at the time of the execution of Malefactors,
or when a man labors of such a disease which is regularly past recovery. I
dare not by any nice distinction remove Confession from the peril to the point
of death; but would advise any of my charge to make use thereof, not only in
the point, but the peril of death also, as their hearts shall serve them; for
the fruit of devotion is never out of season.

II. Upon achievements and undertakings full of hazard and danger.
The second time upon the undertaking of any solemn action or exploit joined
with certain danger, and where the divine assistance and blessing seems more
specially to be required. As when a people or Nation humble themselves by
fasting for the removal of some judgment, or the diverting of some imminent
danger; that act of humiliation cannot but be more auspicious, if the people
call to mind that Gods hand is heavy upon them for sins, and that every man
would suspect himself to be the Achan for whose transgression Israel is put to
flight; and then by confessing his sin to his Minister, implore his aid and
advice upon the same, I am confident our religious fast would be more pleasing
unto God, and his favor more easily compassed. So when we are to bid Battle
unto our enemies, considering that it is not our shield nor spear that can save
us. I am persuaded that no soldiers can be more valiant and better armed than
those that are prepared with confession, and have made their peace with God. We
read in the history of our own Nation, how in the time of Henry the V. that
victorious Prince, when the Pride and strength of France was discomfited by an
handful of men, and those shrewdly weakened with penury and a tedious march, at
the Battle of Agin-court; Fabians Chronicle in Henry V. Anno Regni 3. and
Christi 1416. October. 25.
The English Host the night before was occupied in Prayer and Confession; and
that the King then present caused the Bishops and other spiritual men to give
unto them general absolution. And what courage his men showed, and what a
Blessing came from God, that happy victory was a glorious testimony.

The third is upon the receiving of the holy Sacrament; III.
wherein though we are not so forward as they are that make the omission
thereof damnable in a Communicant, though otherwise well disposed; but affirm
with Saint Paul, that A man may examine himself and so eat; And Saint
Chrysostom, Let every man examine himself, and then let him come; (...) Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. 11. Ho. 28.
he does not bid one man exam^ne another, but every one himself, making the
judgment private, and the trial without witnesses; And Theophylact, I set not a
Judge over thee, but make thee thine own Judge: yet for all that, (...).
Theoph. ibid.
the same Father makes the Priest a special Overseer in admitting of
Communicants to the Lords Table; (...). Homil. 17. ad Heb. tom. 4. p. 524.
for (says he) as at the Olympic games the Herald there made proclamation
that none of the Pretendants that were servile, thieves, or of ill manners,
should enter into the lists, or contend in that Agon: So the Priest before the
Communion calling upon the Saints to enter, by that voice tries diligently,
and looks into them, (...) Pastorum est, singularum ^vium vitia explorantium.
Quid si ligamus (...); Notae Donnaei. tom 8. page 589.
lest any should enter unprovided. Learned Downs for (...) sustituteth (...),
but I suppose the first word may stand; for (...) amongst the Ethnicks, (...).
Strom. l. 4. page 380. lin. 2. edit. Heynsii.
were the Priests which viewed the Sacrifices, and the exta, that were
presented at the Altar, and upon that inspection made their predictions, (...),
as Clemens Alexandrinus flyles them; or else shepherds, inquiring into the
diseases of their flock in particular; intimating thereby, that the Priests
under the Gospel did (...), by a previous examination view the bowels and
conscience of those that approached to the Table of the Lord. And our Church
instructs, that if upon this examination where God and the party about to
receive are only present; the Conscience remains unquiet, but further
comfort and counsel is required; then let him make the Minister of his privy
counsel also; his presence may do thee good, it cannot hurt thee. In my opinion
then, in case where the conscience wrings, and that there may be great reason
to fear the Judge may be prejudicate, and bribed with self-love in his own
cause; the approbation of the Priest is always convenient, and sometimes
necessary; as the Communicant finds himself in case: and thus much briefly for
the time of Confession.

CHAP. XI.
The Contents.
All convenient secrecy apprimely requisite in the Confessary. Suspicion of
discovery a great enemy to Confession. Sins already committed with expressions
of grief to be concealed. The Schoolmen bringing sins de futuro to be
committed, within the compass of the seal, The damnable doctrine of the
Jesuits, that Treasons and Conspiracies yet Plotting against Church or State,
and confessed to the Priest, ought to be shut up in privacy. The odious
consectaries and inconveniences thereof. Examples of sundry Confessors
revealing treasons detected in confession. The preservation of Prince, Church
or State to be preferred before the secrecy of the seal. Sins opened in
Confession, the concealment whereof complieth not with the Priests fidelity to
his Prince and Country, to be discovered. Marriage in the Clergy no prejudice
to the lawful secrecy of the seal, especially if the penalty of the old Canons
against the violaters thereof should be revived.

THat which comes next under our consideration is a necessary adjunct and
condition, wherein the discretion of the Priest is much desired, that is, that
he be (...), one that can lay his hand upon his mouth, seal up in all
convenient secrecy the sins that are mustred up in Confession, that they may
never once see the light, but lie buried in eternal silence. And truly this
condition must be observed, else few will come to confession upon the least
hint of publication. No man in his right senses will lie naked in his Tent, and
expose himself to the scorns of a scoffing Canaan; therefore the Priest may
shut his ears, except his lips be closed; for few men would have their doings
brought upon the stage: And if a course may be thought on to preserve men's
reputation, and yet this part of the Priestly function may be executed, I see
no reason but the same may and ought to be preserved. In the reprehension of
one Brother that has trespassed upon another, Christ enjoyneth in the first
place private monition of his fault between them two alone, Matthew. 18.15.
and so thou have gained thy brother, and he has not forfeited his reputation.
Christ's will was, sinners to be reproved in private, (says Theophylact) lest
being openly rebuked, (...). Theoph. in Mat. 18.
they may grow past shame. The reprehension then must be privately carried to
preserve the offenders credit. Open reproof for the most part begetting either
despair or impudence. If such care must be had upon the redargution of a
sinner, then greater must be the respect of his good name, when he comes in as
a voluntier upon his own confession, accusing himself upon hope of pardon. And
it is very fit where God covers the sins in mercy, the Priest should cover
them in secrecy: for besides the prescript and light of nature, which wills
us to do as we would be done by, Celare peccatum de lege naturae eleganter
probat Scotus quatuor rationibus: 1. ex ratione charitatis: 2. ex ratione
fidelitatis: 3. ex ratione veritatis, and veracitatis: 4. ex ratione unitatis,
and mutuae utilitatis. Biel, l. 4. did. 21. Qu. Unica.
and we would be loath any secret of ours should be divulged, whereby our credit
might be questioned, and good name (which to all men is a precious odor)
should be defamed. Besides, we repute the Betrayers and publishers of secrets,
no better than betrayers of trust, and faithless persons; and not so only, but
false in their promise and word, whereby they engaged themselves to privacy.
Now if these reasons have force for keeping secret a matter of importance,
which as a secret has been commended unto us; and we passed our words for the
Concealment thereof. All these conditions should swear the Priest to convenient
privacy. For the Penitent comes to him of his own accord; acquainteth him with
the state of his soul, turns the inside of his conscience outward, and
resorteth to him as Gods Deputy for comfort, for absolution; and the Priest
herein should resemble God whom he represents: amongst the miracles of whose
mercy Saint Chrysostom places the concealment of sin confessed unto him, and
the not upbraiding of a sinner for the same, as well as the forgiveness it
self; his words are; (...). Chrysostom. (...) to. 6. page 608. lin. 10.
This is not only wonderful that God forgiveth sins, but that he does not
reveal them, nor lay them open, or make them manifest. And how reserved Saint
Ambrose was herein, appears in his Life written by Paulinus, who reports
thus of him, the causes of sins which the penitents confessed, Causas Criminum
quas [Poenitentes] confitebantur, nulli nisi Domino soli, apud quem
intercedebat, loquebatur. Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
he spoke of to none, but unto the Lord to whom he interceded for them. He is
unworthy sure of the Ministry of the keys, so to wrong that grieved party, as
to be unto him a further occasion of sorrow; he came to find grace in God^
eyes, and not to lose his reputation in the sight of men, and to make use of
the Ministerial key to unloose the bonds of sin, and not to unlock the secrets
of his heart in the open view. Let that Priest be branded for a Doeg, a Judas,
and what not, that shall not keep this trust that is committed unto him; that
through his folly breaks off that spiritual commerce betwixt himself the
Pastor, and the sheep of his pasture in the case of sin, absolution, direction,
and consolation; for take away the opinion of trust and secrecy, and confession
will grow weak and languishing.

The Priest then is conjured to secrecy; but whether in all cases and sins as
may be brought before him is a great Question. The Canonists restrain and
confine this secrecy to such sins only, as are detected in foro poenitentiali,
that is, to such sins as have already past, and for which signs of sorrow
appear in the Penitent; never extending the same to future sins; for to cry
Peccavi, I have sinned, may be the voice of a Penitent, but Peccabo, I will
sin, never: now where there is a resolution to sin, there with safety can lie
no absolution. Then if such sins are to be locked under secrecy which are
confessed in ord ne ad claves, with relation to absolution and remission; It
will follow that peccata committenda, sins purposed to be committed, and in
fieri to be done, not in fa ^o done already, although spoken of in confession,
are not so necessary to be concealed. Panormitan puts the case, A certain man
confessed unto the Priest, Quidam fuit confessus Sacerdoti, quod intend bat
interficere Sempronium, vel aliud malesicium committere, and quod non poterat
abstinere, Nunquid Sacerdos peccet revelando? Innocentius instat, and
conclud^t, quod hoc peccatum non dicitur detectum in poenitentia, tum quia
peccatum est committendum, and non commissum; tum quia non habet contritionem.
Unde Sacerdos d^bet (quantum cautius potest) revelare, ut peccatum impediatur:
and ^ene hoc semper menti, quod peccatum commissum, and non committendum
dicitur deteg^ in Poenitentia. Panorm. supra 5. de poenit. and remiss. c. Omnis
utriusq. n. 24.
that he had a mind to kill Sempronius, or to do some other mischief, and that
be could not hold his hand. The Question is, whether the Priest offends in
revealing the same o^ no? Innocentius instanceth, and at length concludes,
that this sin cannot be said to be detected in a repentant way, as well because
the sin confessed remains to be committed, and is not committed already; as
also because the sinner had no contrition; wherefore the Priest ought (as
warily as he may) to reveal the sam^, that the sin may be prevented; for keep
this always in mind, that sin committed, and not to be committed is commanded
to be concealed in Penance. And Friar Angelo, when any one confisseth that he
will do a mischief, Quando quis confitetur se velle faccre aliquod malum; quia
istud non est dictum in poenitentiali foro, ut ideo propter rationem istius
Sacramenti non tenetur celare, -- sed quando vergeret in periculum
communitatis, vel alterius, tum si nullo modo cessaret talis, quin illud
faciat, credo sine praejudicio, quod non solum potest, immo tenetur revelare ei
qu^ potest prodesse, and non obesse, ut m^lo obvi^tur. Sum. Angel. v. Confe.
ult. nu. 7.
because the same is not opened in the consistory of Repentance, wherefore the
Priest is not tied by virtue of that Sacrament to conceal the same; -- but when
it shall verge, and incline to the prejudice and danger, either of the whole
Commonalty, or of any man in particular, then if the sinner cannot be taken
off, but that be will needs do it; I am of opinion without prejudice to any,
that the Priest not only may, but is tied to ^eveal the same to such an one,
as will further and not hinder the prevention of further mischief. This
Canonist makes the purposed evil to be of two sorts; 1. either when the damage
may light upon the sinners own head alone; 2. or which may redound to the
prejudice and hurt of others:
the former the Priest may reveal if he please, but the later he is bound to
discover, for the crossing, and averting thereof. And the first School-man, our
Country man Alexander of Hales thus; A man may confess a sin not present,
Potest quis confiteri peccatum, non tamen ut praesens, sed potius ut est ^n
proposito de futuro; ut cum dicit se velle fornicari, and nolle desistere: dico
ergo quod non tenetur celare simpliciter, nec si Sacerdos tal^m confessionem
revelaret, posset condemnari tanquam violator sigilli confessionis: tamen quia
hoc species esset mali, and infamia sequeretur, propter hoc credo, et si non
tenetur de jure talem confessionem occultare, debet tamen celare ratione
publicae honestatis, nisi inconveniens aliquod grave sequeretur, tunc enim
credo, quod non esset talis confessio penitus tacenda, nec tamen public
revelanda propter periculum infamiae, sed caute, and secreto alicui, qui possit
and vellet prodesse innotescenda. Alex. Halens. part. 4. Qu. 28. nu. 2. art. 2.
in Resp.
but yet to come, and in purpose, as that he will commit fornication and not
forbear. I say therefore that the Priest is not bound simply to conceal it; nor
may he for any such detection be justly cond^mned, as a violater of the seal of
Confession. Yet because it may seem to have an outward show of evil, and infamy
may follow thereupon, for that cause I am thus minded, that although by law he
is not tied to hide such a confession, yet he should do well to conceal it for
public honesties sake, except some grievous inconvenience may like to ensue
upon the same, then I believe that such a Confession ought not altogether to be
silenced, nor yet openly to be published for dread of infamy, but cautelously
and secretly to such an one, that can make good use of the discovery; wherein
he would seem to be more circumspect, and cautelous in the manner of the
detection, than those Canonists; whereas the following Schoolmen, Scotus and
Biel are so strict upon the matter, that purposed sins, and not committed, come
under the seal of secrecy also. Non solum peccata commissa, sed etiam
committenda in confessione detecta sunt tanquam secreta celanda. Biel, l. 4. d.
21. Qu. 1. Conclus. 3.
And again, it is not lawful for a Priest in any case, come what will come, to
reveal confession whether the party confessing be Penitent or not, In nullo
casu licet Sacerdoti revelare confessionem, sive confitens poeniteat, sive non;
sive confiteatur peccata jam opere perpetrata, sive perpetranda; sive sit
peccatum in moribus, sive in fide. Biel, sup. resp. ad dub. 2.
whether he confess sins already committed, or which he has a mind and
resolution to commit, whether it be a sin in faith or in behavior. And the
Modern Divines in the Roman Church are no way moderate herein, but so Stoicall
and stiff for the seal, as let the sin be what it will, whether past or to
come, it skils not, whether the welfare of Church or State depend thereon it is
not material. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, rather than the seal of
Confession shall be opened. A Ghostly Father, (says a late Sorbonist, Car
estant en le place de Dieu il n'a point de bouche pour reveler ce qu'il a
entendu, Os habent and non loquentur. Et le Sceau de la confession est si
important, and religieux, que pour rien du Monde, il ne peut estre viole. P.
Bess. Ca^esme. Tom. 2. page 736.
and preacher in the Court of France) being in the place of God, has no mouth
to reveal what he knows in Confession; and for proof hereof he alleges that
of the Psalmist, They have mouths but speak not. By his words setting him in
the place of God, but by his proof making him an Idol: the seal of confession
(says he) is so important and religious, that it may not be violated for any
thing in the world. And so great is the religion of the seal of confession
(says a Jesuit) that in no case, Tantam esse sigilli confessionis religionem,
ut in nulla casu, propter nullum finem, etiam pro tuenda tota republica ab
ingenti malo, temporali vel spirituali violare illud liceat. Eudaemon Joh.
Apol. pro Garnet. p. 335.
and for no end, yea though it were to protect the State from any great
mischief, be it Temporal or Spiritual, it may not be violated. They are the
words of Eudaemon. or rather Kacodaemon Johannes; and adds withal, that this
is a received principle amongst men of his rank, with whom the keeping of this
seal is preferred before the keeping of the Princes safety and State: Yea, a
deep silence is herein required, that if our Lord Jesus Christ should again be
conversant on earth, Perpetuum silentium praestare licet cum Regis and
Reipublicae internecione conjunctum, vel certissimo Salvatoris nostri interitu,
si nobiscum hic denuo versaretur in terris. Jacob. Rex. Medit. in Orat. Dom. p.
63.
and Judas and the Priests conspiracy to do again, and the same delivered under
seal of Confession, to save our Saviors life, it must not be detected, as our
late Dread Sovereign has observed from the writings of some of that society.
No marvel then at those that ^each the seal must not be broken to save a Kings
life, Non debet manifestare quae audivit in confessione -- etiamsi aliquod
gravissimum malum non revelando immineret, ut ^ccisio Regis vel civitatis
ruina. Armil. Au. 5. Confess. n. 5.
or City from ruin, that will not break it to save the life of the Son of God.
Could it ever be imagined that reasonable men should broach such fearful
paradoxes, prejudicial to Church and State, God and man, King and subject,
making the office of Confession the den, and cave of villainies and treason, and
the keys of heaven the keys of hell to lock up sulphurious treasons, and to
keep in that fire and brimstome that it should not break forth, except the
Prince and flower of the kingdom be born up before it. Inconveniences attending
the popish seal of confession.
The holy Eucharist the seal of Grace is with such Fiends the seal to fold up
horrid treasons, sealing them up with the receiving of that Sacrament, and
silencing their confessions with the pretended seal of another. Yea in some
cases the preservation of this seal may prove of much detriment to the
Confessor himself, Debet plus timere D^um, and se offerre Martyrio, quam
transgredi Dei legem, and Ecclesiae, revelando confessionem. Gabr. l. 4. d. 21.
Q. 1. ad primum.
not go back, for that were to break the seal, but proceed rather and die a
Martyr, so sealing this seal with his blood. It causes a necessary connivency
and toleration of sin: As if a man confess unto his Priest that he has married
in other Countries two wives already, and in his parish intends the marriage
of a third, the former yet living; the resolution is, rather than to break the
seal the Priest is to marry him and to give the Benediction. It is also a stop
and bar to the proceedings of justice. If a Confessor be examined upon oath
concerning a truth detected unto him in Confession under the seal, Angel in the
bush said to Moses in the person of God, I am the God of thy father, etc. But
Scotus likes not this evasion, Sacerdos non audit confessionem ex persona Dei,
sed Ministerialiter, loqui autem ex authoritate alterius, and loqui in persona
sua propria, ex commissione alterius. Scotus.
because the Confessor speaks not in the person of God, but as a Minister of
his put in authority under him; therefore he advises him to fly in his answer
to equivocations. E Seminariis missi Sacerdotes -- ad intestinas seditiones sub
Confessionis sigillo concitandas. Cambd. Elizab. ad An. MDLXXX. p. 298.
School and nursery of treason. A Traitor may first feel his Confessor (let it
be F. Garnet) with general notions if he be fordable. Another may crave his
advice by way of Consultation, what course may best be taken to promove the
same, and in case it take effect, he may be questioned who shall succeed in the
Crown; and because these detections, consultations, and questions were proposed
under the veil and shadow of Confession, Cave vero ne contra odiosa magis fiat,
si soveat in sinu scelera talia tam and odiosa and perniciosa. Tortura Torti,
page 292.
be sure of the Confessor, his mouth is stitched up, not a word for a world,
because these things relate to confession, and the seal and confession would
wax odious should the seal be ripped up. But as a Reverend Prelate replied,
Take heed if it grow not more odious, if it cover and nourish in its bosom
crimes so odious and pernicious. And because there may be security given on
both sides, the Confessee or Penitent is obliged to keep close what the
Confesseur or Ghostly Father shall say or do at that time also; Non solum
Confessor celare tenetur acta and dicta Confitentis, sed etiam Confitens ad
ipsum tenetur quantum ad acta and dicta Sa^erdotis. Gabr. l. 4. d. 21. Q. 1.
Concl. 3.
so that in this vault Traiterous plots may be conferred upon, and banded to
and fro without fear of any discovery; Genesis 49.6.
O my soul come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be
not thou united. Yet for all their close dealings, sometimes mischief will come
out, yea has; when such hellish projects have come before loyal Priests,
Sundry Examples of conspiracies confessed and detected. Bodin. de Repub. lib.
2. c. 5.
that have made more Conscience of the safety of their Anointed Sovereign than
of the secrecy of this seal. A Gentleman in Normandy confessed unto a
Franciscan, how he had a purpose to have slain King Francis the first, but that
he repented thereof; the Friar absolved him, but kept not his counsel,
revealing the matter to the King, who commended it to the Parliament at Paris,
where the cause was heard, and the Traitor adjudged to suffer pains of death;
and the Friar not so much as questioned for the breach of the seal. For the
like offense, and by the Arrest of the same Court was the Lord of Haulte-ville
executed, who in the time of sickness being like to die, Hist. de Paris. page
305.
onfessed the like purpose of murdering his Prince; he recovering of his
sickness, and being accused of his Confessor, had judgment to die for Treason.
And not many years since one Peter Barriers was tormented upon the wheel by the
Hist. de Paris. page 144.
judgment of the Lord Steward of the Kings household, for that at Lions he had
confessed unto a certain Jacobine, a resolution to destroy his Sovereign; the
Confessor being not able to take him off from his hellish design, revealed the
same to the Storetary of State, whereupon the Traitor was apprehended and
deservedly executed. And at home a Noble Historian mentions, Lord Bacans
hist. of King Henry 7. page 125.
that when Perkin Warbeck had personated Richard Duke of York (smothered in his
infancy) so at life as he could hardly be discerned from the Duke himself, and
found many and great adherents. Henry the VII that prudent Prince, being lost
in a wood of suspicions, and not knowing whom to trust, had intelligence with
the Confessors and Chaplains of great men. Imagining that through those
peeping holes he might discern men's thoughts, and take the depth of their
hearts, and sound their affections; and as Confessors are too often the bars to
keep in, so they may sometimes be the keys to unlock treacherous attempts. And
such was the fate and fall of a great Peer of this Land, Edward Bowhen* Duke of
Buckingham, Hall Chron. An. RR. Henrici 8.13. He was executed May 17. 1522.
where a Monk instilled and induced the Duke to the treason, and John Delacourt
Priest, his Confessor was one that accused him, who by his Peers was found
guilty, and had judgment by the Duke of Norfolk, then Lord high Steward, and
for that offense lost his head. And lastly; James Hamilton Archbishop of Saint
Andrews in Scotland was executed as accessory to the Parricide of the King of
Scots, Ex judicio sacrifici, qui hoc quondam ex Regicidis inter confitendum fe
audivisse affirmarat. Cambd. Eliz. ad An. Dom. 1571. page 192.
Grandfather to our late Sovereign, upon the accusation of a Priest, who gave
in evidence that some of the traytorous Parricides had in confession detected
so much unto him. For mine own part I confidently aver, there is no honest
Priest in offenses of this nature that concern the safety of the sacred Person
of his Sovereign, or the State, that will give sleep to his eyes, or slumber to
his eye lids, till he shall have unfolded the same to the Magistrate next at
hand. Yea Garnet himself arraigned for his treachery in this point, Action
against F. Garnet. page 99.
openly said, I willingly acknowledge such laws as forbid treasons to be
concealed, to be just and wholesome; for it is not fit that the safety of the
Prince depend upon another man's conscience: and accordingly does a Friar of
their side conclude in certain Articles maintained in the University of Paris;
Potest quis id quod novit sub sigillo Secreti manifestare, si id quod novit
vergit in detrimentum Reipublicae, vel in perniciem totius communitatis. Jacob.
Lup. tract. de Confess. Propos. 36.
A Priest may discover that which he had notice of under the seal of secrecy,
if that which he knows tend to the detriment of the Commonwealth, or to the
destruction of the whole Commonalty.

Sins then or treacherous attempts against the dignity of the Crown, or State,
or the fundamental laws thereof, as dangerous or destructive of the public
good, must be held in under no seal, and folded up in no secrecy, but brought
into the light, that the danger may be averted, and the offender punished, and
all others warned to be faithful and obedient. For in just fears even divine
positive laws lose their hold and obligation, Religion commanding such things
which make ad lucrum and custodiam charitatis, says Saint Bernard, for the
gain and preservation of charity. But whatsoever and whenever they prove
contrary unto charity and destructive thereof, Si contraria forte charitati
visa fuerint, nonne justissimum esse liquet, ut quae pro charitate inventa
fuerunt, pro charitate vero u^i expedire videtur, vel omittantur, vel
intermittantur, vel in aliud forte commodius demutentur? Bern. tract. de
dispens. and praecepto.
It is very just that such ordinances, as were made for the good of charity, if
they appear prejudicial to the same, should be omitted, or intermitted, or for
charities sake altered into better; as the Father prudently advises. And what
greater breach can there be of charity, than to rake up such offenses under
silence, by the concealment whereof the King and State may be so highly
impaired, and the just laws thereof not executed upon the Malefactors? Thou will say what must be done in these cases where the finners conscience is
perplexed, and cannot be quieted without confession and absolution from a
Priest, and confess he dare not for fear of detection? Indeed many are the
reasons that fight for the seal, but more that fight against it. And in cases
of this nature I say, what have I to do to judge these things that are without
the law of charity and secrecy? and further say, how I could heartily wish them
known, that the offenders may be made manifest and punished, and the peace of
the Realm secured. Although the Casuists are generally concurrent in this, That
such sins may be omitted in Confession, as would either scandalize the
Confessor, endanger the Penitent, or defame a third person.

Setting aside then sins of this nature, I could very well approve of a fitting
privacy in the carriage and exercise of this Ministerial function, Poena
revelantis Confession^m, quod ultra peccatum mortale, debet detrudi in
Monasterium, and deponi. Sum. Angel. verb. Confess. ult. nu. 19. Marriage in the
Clergy no obstacle to the seal.
and wish those Canons revived that punished the betrayers and publishers
thereof with deprivation and loss of all spiritual preferments, and with
incapability for attaining any future advancements. It will be here said, How
can any penitent secure himself of such secrecy at the hands of the Married
Clergy? As if the relation of a husband were not distinct from the office of a
Minister; By the like reason exclude all married men from being Privy
Counselors to his Majesty, or from being acquainted with any designs which
require privacy. Yea a Priest by the same reason must be without a friend, as
well as without a wife, for more secrets are unfolded upon terms of friendship
than upon ties of Marriage. That condition of life, and Christian liberty
granted to our Clergy, is not yet beheld without envy and contradiction.
Although the Apostle (says Clemens Alexandrinus) admit of marriage to be used
by Priests and Deacons, (...). Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p 338.
as by Laymen without offense; where that Father is at the pains in learnedly
answering the objections of the old Heretic and new Papist against the same;
yet what vociferations are taken up and renewed in our days against Married
Churchmen, as exhausting Ecclesiastical means upon their posterity, and
advancing their children to the fattest Benefices. I know not how far affection
may transport some of them that way; but the same exception lies against the
single Clergy also, unless you suppose them all to be like Melchisedeck,
without Father, without Mother, without Kindred, and Ally, Cum Factor Rerum
privavit semine Clerum, Ad Sathanae votum successit turba Nepotum.
as well as without Wife and Pedigree. For amongst the unmarried Clergy, do not
mine eyes behold Nephews sitting on the right hand, and Nieces on the left, in
the most fertile preferments of their Prelacy? Such single Prelates as
earnestly endeavoring the raising of the Collateral, as the other do of the
direct line. But (...), and turning my self toward the followers of Rome, I
say there is not less danger of publication by means of a Priests Lemman, than
a Priests Wife; and am persuaded that as Greenwell did open the Powder Treason
unto Garnet under a formal confession, so that Father could not conceal this
secrecy from his dear daughter Mrs Anne Vaux, opening that secret to his own
destruction, Earl of Salisbury.
(as a great * Statesman of the times charged upon him) which he concealed for
the safety of others. The Letters betwixt him and his Mistress import no less,
than as if Mrs Anne had taken in writing the Confession of a Jesuit under seal.
For let any of his Proctors answer me; Two only knew of that secret, Titius
and his Mate; the Penitent and the Ghostly Father. The sinner, viz. Greenwell
was gone and fled, and would not of all likelihood betray himself, now who else
could reveal what was confessed but Titius himself, that is, Father Garnet or
Mrs Vaux, who stepped in and was entrusted with the same. But of these matters
enough. I conclude this point, that if the peril of deposition were in force,
the married Priest would be well advised, how his Dalilah should come so near
as to endanger the polling off the hair of his livelihood, and sustenance.

CHAP. XII.
The Contents.
An Historical relation of the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of
England concerning Confession, and the Practice thereof by some of the chief
Members in the same.

THus as God has enabled me is my purpose brought well-nigh unto a Period, and
I begin to see the end of my journey. Now forasmuch as Confession belongs to
the practick of Christianity, and is not so much a matter of faith as fact, I
held it not amiss to make a brief collection of such Provincial Constitutions
and National Laws, as have been heretofore established in this Church of
England; together with such observations and passages of story, which mention
the same to be practiced by the Heroes and principal pillars of this kingdom;
which I shall faithfully relate, and leave the censure to indifferent Readers.

Anno 668. Theodorus. Scculari and Ecclesiastica Philosophia praeditus, Graece
and Latin sufficienter instructus, probus moribus. Chron. Florentii Wigorn.
The first man that took any order herein is said to be Theodorus, 1. At
Heortford, etc.
by birth a Greek, born at Tarsus in Cilicia, and by place Archbishop of
Canturbury, 2. Putta at Rochester.
advanced to that See An. Dom. 668. and sat in the same XXII years. 3. At
Hethlege, Ethelward hist. lib. 2. cap. 28.
A man seen in the Greek and Latin tongues, well versed in Secular and
Ecclesiastical Philosophy, and of good courage, says the Monk of Worcester,
exercising all the functions of an Arch-Prelate; 4. Winifride from Lichfield.
1. in erecting of Diocesses; 2. in consecration of Bishops; 3. in convocation
of Synods; 4. and deposition of Prelates.
Primus omnium antistitum Cantuariae vigorem Pontificalem exercuit in tota
Britannia. Malmes. de gest. Pontific. lib. 1. page 112. Edit. London.
The first in the rand of Archbishops that bore the swing thoroughout all
Britany, says Malmsburiensis; which reaching to the North, was of that force
as to strike Cedda and Wilfride from their chairs; whom forasmuch as we can
conjecture, Injuste quantum nostra habet conjectura ejecerat -- cujus statuta
etsi perperam acta enervare illa seeds non omnino voluit. Malmesbur. sup a.
he unjustly put down (says he likewise) and was so highly favored at Rome,
as Wilf^ides appeal thither could not be heard. The Pope resolving to repeal
none of Arch Bishop Theodores acts, how ill soever they were made. So that it
seems in those days kissing went by favor. This stirring Prelate, says Beda,
Described in a mavelous discreet manner censures for offenders, Theodorus
Archiepiscopus peccantium judicia, quantis scilic^t annis pro unoquoque p^ccato
quis poenitere debe^t, mirabili and discreta ratione describit. Bed. in Chron.
that is to say, how many years they ought to repent for several sins; which is
not that Capitular which Ivo and Burchardus have set down in their decrees, but
another Penitential much different therefrom.

Sir Henry Spelman that great ingrosser of Antiquity, and faithful Champion of
the Churches Patrimony, has published the heads of that desired Penitential*
the Original whereof is extant* among the precious Archiva of the Library of
Bennet College in Cambridge. The Copy (as unwilling to be prolix to himself or
his Reader) He purposely omitted; the 10, 11, and 14, chapters thereof promise
by their titles to yield something of this subject to such students who have
the desire and opportunity to survey that ancient Record. Whereof, a^ I am
certified, an ancient Copy is to be seen in Sir Robert Cottons Treasury; and my
occasions have not permitted me yet to gain a sight thereof, otherwise in this
place should have stood so much as had been requisite for this purpose; Instead
whereof let my Reader be informed, that such Penances for years, or months,
etc. were not satisfa^tions to God for to appease his wrath, and make him
amends, (a piece of work which none could or has performed but Christ alone)
but rather satisfactions unto the Church, whereby the scandal was taken away,
and the sinner by strict observation of the discipline rendered more pious. He
that truly repents, Qui agit poenitentiam non solum diluere lachrymis debet
p^ccatum suum, s^d ctiam emendationibus factis operire and tegere d^licta
superiora, ut non ci imputctur peccatum, ergo tegamus l^psus nostros
posterieribus factis. Amb. l. 2. de Poen. c. 5.
says Saint Ambrose, ought not only to wash away his sins with tears, but
amends being made, to cover and hide his former defects, that his offenses may
not be imputed unto him; Satisfactio duplex; 1. Propitiatoria; pro nostris, and
totius mundi peccatis, Christus est. 2. Quam Ecclesia exig^t a peccatoribus;
vindicta ^st, quam ex praescripto sacerdotis velut spiritu^l^s Medici de nobis
sumere debemus, comm ssis peccatis contraria sacientes. Grop. de Sacram.
Poenit. p. 107. Edit. Antw. 1556.
let us therefore cover our former faults with good deeds following. Sound is
that distinction of Groperus; 1. there is a propitiatory satisfaction, which is
Christ Jesus, for our sins and the sins of the whole world; 2. and there is
another which the Church requires of sinners; a Revenge, which according to
the prescriptions of the Priest our spiritual Physician, we ought to take of
our selves, by performance of holy actions diametrically opposite to the former
iniquities;
whereby the sinner is humbled, God is pleased, and the Church satisfied, and
the dregs of sins by the contrary acts of virtue defecated and cleansed. Thus
much for Theodorus.

Egbert was the next who made Ordinances on this behalf. Anno Dom. 740. Egbert.
A man who by his birth as Brother to a Egbert King of Northumberland.
King, and by his office an At York.
Archbishop might well be sufficiently authorized for such proceedings: A
Penitential was by him prescribed, highly esteemed, and carefully preserved
amongst the huge devastations of Religious houses and Libraries, although time
had like to have deprived him of the honor of such a work, Opus poenitentiale
in magno olim fuisse precio; and post veterum MSS. Codicum insigne^ cladem,
quae Coenobiorum subsequuta est cataclysim, supersunt hodie diversa exemplaria
splendide quidem and antiquissime exarata. Spelman. Council. page 275.
and given it to one whose learning and piety might render him suspicious
thereof; for placed it is at the end of Venerable Bedes works, under this
Title, Canones ad remedia Peccatorum, are antidotes for sinful and sorrowful
Patients, and the Priest as Ghostly Physician is taught well and seriously to
advise upon the sex, age, condition, state and person of each penitent,
Sacerdos Christi sexum, aetatem, conditionem, statum, personam cujusque
poenitentiam agere volentis, ipsum quoque cor poenitentis curiose discernat, --
ne post stultum Medicum vulnera animarum fiant pejora.
to distinguish exactly of several maladies, to enquire (all he may) into the
heart and inward man, and accordingly to administer, lest in case he proceed
confusedly, the wounds in the soul by the Physicians folly prove more
dangerous; for prevention whereof, Non omnibus una cad^mque libra pensandum est.
there follows a catalogue of sins, and of such penances as concern the same;
holding an equal analogy between the malady and the medicine, the sin and the
sorrow; And all this not to expiate or satisfy for what has passed, but to
exclude and prevent what may follow; non pro remissione peccatorum, sed pro
remedio, Poenitentibus atque lugentibus vera medicamenta salutis.
not for the remission of si^, but for remedy against sin; for so much they are
entitled Exc^rpta Patrum, and remedia animarum, Receipts of the Father^ for
the souls preservative: All which sour and sharp potions prescribed by the
Ancients serve not to justify, but sanctify real converts. For, the not
imputing, the remitting, and covering of sin appertain to the righteousness of
faith. Whereof cordial sorrow, fasting and chastising of the body, Psalm. 32.1.
almesdeeds, etc. are the fruits of a good life, and evidence of justifying
faith: Place then such exercises of piety under sanctification, and no
incroachment will be upon the solemn Sacrifice of our Redemption. The like
construction charity may put upon all the subsequent testimonies. These Canons
were decreed about the year of grace 740. at which time Egbert possessed the
Chair at York, and for that cause could not be published by Bid, dead four
years before, as Florentius Wigorniensis, Beda in magna devotione and
tranquillitate ultimum e corpore spiritum efflavit, Flor. Wigorn. ann. Dom.
735. Chron. page 271. Land. an. 1592. Fasti Regum and Episcoporum Angliae ad
finem Rerum Anglic. Scriptor. Land. a Dom. H. Savilio editi.
and the Savilian Fasti testify.

A Council celebrated at Calchurch, situated (as Hollingshed will have it) in
the Mediterranean Kingdom of this Island; King Offa then reigning, in the year
of our Lord, 787. where a Roman Legate presided, and where were assembled the
Arch-BB. and BB. of both Provinces; Gregorius Ostiens. Episcopus Praesidens,
ponit Author Antiq. Britan. Ecclesiae in Northumbria; Hollenshedus vero rectius
in regno Merciorum.
insomuch that the Noble Collector styles it Concilium Legatinum and
Pan-Anglicum. A Convocation of all England, Si quis autem (quod absit) sine
poenitentia, and confessione de hac luce discessit, pro eo minime orandum est.
where amongst other Chapters and Constitutions, there is one De conversione,
poenitentia, and confessione; and for Confession, thus: If any person (which
God forbid) depart this life without repentance and confession, that man is not
to be prayed for: and not to pray for the Dead was in that age held as
uncharitable, as with us to pray for the living is esteemed charitable. And
that Confession there mentioned is the same made unto the Priest, the words
immediately before specify, where we read, According to the judgment of the
Priest, Juxta judicium Sacerdotum, and modum causae Eucharistiam sumite, and
fructus dignos poenitentiae sacite.
and nature of the offense receive the Eucharist, and bring forth fruit meet
for repentance. Inter Concilia Orbis Britan. etc. opera and scrutinio V. C.
Henrici Spelman Equ. Aurati, edita Land. A. D. 1639.


King Athelstane, who began his reign over all England by him reduced to a
Monarchy, A. D. 924. King Athelstane.
and Crowned at Kingston by Athelmus Archbishop of Canturbury, in the year of
grace 924. amongst his and other laws of the Saxon Princes, collected by Mr
Lambard, this is fifth that was enacted by him; If any being condemned desire
to confess himself unto the Priest, that all do earnestly and diligently
promote all the Laws of God, etc. I have not seen the law in Lambard himself,
(the Treatise being in few men's hands) where I suppose it is more at large, but
rather as it is pointed unto, Book 16. page 1360.
and the title rehearsed by Doctor Bridges in his defense of the Government,
etc.

Afterward King Alured wearing the Diadem of this land, amongst the
Ecclesiastical laws by him ordained, and ratified by his Son and successor King
Edward and Guthrune the Dane Confederate with Edward in the government of
England; in the fifth chapter is thus ordained; If any Malefactor guilty of
death earnestly require the space and speech of confession or shrift, (...)
no man shall ever deny him. This favor extended to persons condemned to die,
Si quis rei capitalis damnatus sua ingenue Sacerdoti peccata confiteri
cupiverit, id ei conceditur. Ita vertit Guil. Lambard, ARXAION fol. 53. Londini
ex officina Joan. Daii. ann. 1568.
argues the use of Confession commonly received, and the good construction
thereof, as redounding (in their opinion) to the comfort of such miserable
offenders.

Many are the laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil enacted by King Edgar, A
Prince of pious, Rex decenter instructus passim improbos oppressit, rebels
redarguit, justos and modestos dilexit, destructas Dei Ecclesias renovavit, and
dilatavit, ad laud^m Creatoris summi monasteria constitui jussit -- Erat itaque
vir discretus, mitis, humilis, benignus, liberalis, armipotens, jura Regni
bellica potestate regaliter protegens, populum in obsequio principum, principes
ad justitiam imperiorum formavit, leges rectas instituit, regno tranquillimo
potitus est* Florent. Wigorn. Chron. p. 355, 356.
and prudent education, who curbed the oppressors, subdued the Rebels, loved
the just and bumble, repaired the decayed Churches, and amply endowed them;
erected Religious places and Convents, to the land and honor of the great
Creator: A person of huge discretion, humility and bounty; of much valor and
skill in feats of arms, Royally protecting the Laws of his Kingdom with his
Militia; his people framed in subjection unto his Nobles, and his Noblemen to
the subjection of his sovereign commands, preserving his State in peace, and
his just Laws in power; such praises does the Monk of Worcester heap upon him.
Amongst his (...) or Ordinances, are extant Canons, toward the end whereof is
an Appendix or Postscript, containing the total charge of Confestion, and the
mutual duties requisite in the Penitent and Priest who grants audience, who
is there styled (...), a Shriver and Ghostly Physician, and manna (...) the
physician of men's souls. The form of confession to be observed by the penitent
the specifique enumeration of sins, the unfeigned sorrow at the rehearsal
thereof, and the voluntary submission to the penance enjoined, are therein
delineated. Let the Repentant person address himself to his shrift right
humbly, and say first, (...)
I believe in the Lord the Father most high, who weldeth all things, etc. And
after a brief recital of his faith, (...)
let him in a rufully-sighing mood, make his confession full devoutly to his
Confesseur, and bowing down his head say, I confess unto Almighty God,
Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, and confessario meo, spirituali medico, omnia
peccata quae malorum spirituum inquinamento unquam perpetravi, sive in facto,
sive in cogitatione, sive cum masculis, sive cum foeminis, aliave creatura;
sive secundum naturam, sive contra naturam.
and to you my shriver and Ghostly Physician, all the sins which through the
defilements of wicked spirits I have at any time committed, other in deed,
other in thought, other with mal^, other with female, other with any kind of
Creature, naturally or unnaturally; thence falling into a particular
commemoration of such sins by name, as boiled upon his conscience, needing
comfort and absolution. And through all that Penitential it is very remarkable
(says that Venerable Antiquary) that among the several penances there
mentioned, Non est autem temerarium, quod hic in injungendis poenitentiis
nullum usquam ad imagines imperatur confugium, nulla ad Sanctos unquam
provocatio, ne ad Virginem ipsam Beatissimam; nec probare videtur author
precariam illam Magnatum poenitentiam Romana (uti perhibent) sultam diligentia.
Dn. H. Spelman Council. p. 476.
(and whereof there are store) there is no sending of the penitent to any
Saint, no Pilgrimage enjoined to any Shrine, no news of any Indulgence, or
Commutation for striking off penance by money; that age was not yet guilty of
such deceits, or recent-Roman impostu^es. This glorious King Edgar began his
reign according to the Savilian Fasti, A. D. 959. and finished his reign and
life, A. D. 974. Also these Canons and Penitential yet remain entire, Habentur
Canones isti, and poenitentiale idiotismo Saxonico vetustissime scripta, in
celebri Bibliotheca Collegii Corporis Christi Cantabrig. Dn. Spelman ubi supra.
in an old Saxon Copy and Language, within that famous Library of Bennet
College in Cambridge.

In a Synod held at Aenham under King Ethelred, Circ. an. 1009.
the XX Chapter is for making of Confession and taking of Penance, thus; Let
each Christian man (as is suitable to his profession) have diligent care of his
Christian state, (...) page 518.
and that he usually frequent shrift and confession; often entertaining
Christian and wholesome conference with the Priest; Christidna quique colloquia
frequentia and falubria cum Sacerdotibus crebro exerceant; suaque sibi peccata
inverecunde depromant, ac confiteantur, confessaque juxta Sacerdotis
institutionem poeniteant atque emendent. D. H. Spelman Conc. p. 528.
and laying shame aside, confess his faults, and carefully practice such rules
for amendment, as the Priest prescribes. The acts of this Synod both in the
Saxon as also in the old Latin tongue, and both revised and published by that
diligent and noble Collector.

In a Capitular extant in Saxon and Latin, are contained many Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, amongst which is Confession directed unto God in the first
place, humbly imploring for mercy, and to the Priests likewise, which so far
avails us as by means of the saving counsel we receive from them, (...).. 30.
page 605.
and the observation of regular penance, our souls may be fortified against
sin, and our iniquities done away.

Likewise in Paragraph 31. de peccatis in confessione enumerandis, Confessio
quam Sacerdotibus f^^imus, hoc nobis adminiculum adsert, qui accepto ab eis
salutari consilio saluber^imis poenitentiae o^servationibus, sive miautiis (
Leg. munimentis) peccatorum maculas diluimus.
each particular offenses are to be opened in confession to the Ghostly Father,
whatsoever in word, deed, or thought have been committed And the Priest who
receives Confession is commanded to aid the Penitent, (...) Confessiones dan
dae sunt de omnibus p^ccalis quae sive in opere, sive in verbo, sive in
cogitatione perpetrantur. D. Spelm. ib p. 606.
and to lesson him so, that he conceal no known sin at that instant, but make
full discovery of all to his best remembrance.

These constitutions are sound amongst the Archives at Bennet College, (...).
page 607. De loco^ and tempore quibus tribuenda sunt haec capitula, nihil
^dfero. H. S.
as the same worthy person affirms, though be can give no certain account
when they were established.

The next Item for Confession is contained amongst the laws of King Canutus, A.
D. 1020. K. Canutus. Canut. regnare coepit, an. sal. hum. 1016. Canut. regnare
desiit, an. sal. hum. 1035.
Guil Lambard. (...), fo 9^.
who began his reign, A. D. 1016. and died 1035. as Mr Lambard writes, or one
year later according to the Savilian Fasti. Anno 1017. R^x Canutus totius
Angliae suscepit imperium. Flor. Chron. p. 319.
Or as Fabian will have it, he began his reign A. D. M. XIX. Cnat Rex cum
viginti annos regnass^t, vivere destitit apud Scaftesbirch. Hen. Hunt. p. 208.
2.
or two years sooner according to Florentius Wigorniensis, and reigned XX years
in great power and justice. He died at Shaftsbury, and lies buried in the old
Monastery at Winchester. Amongst the Laws of this King Canutus, or Knute, or
rather of King Edgars Laws by him confirmed, and to be observed by all the
English and Danes his subjects, these are found; (...). 23.
We advise that for all mo^tall sins comm^tted through diabolicat suggestion,
(...) Prostat etiam apud D. H. Spelman. page 550.
the counsel of the Ghostly Father be diligently obse^ved. Another provision
there is also made for guilty persons adjudged to die; Let liberty be granted
to them to confess their sins to the P^iest, (...) Lamb. (...). fo. ^14.2.. 41.
Si quis rei capitalis damnatus confessionem anxie cupiverit, nemo illum unquam
arceat.
they much desiring the same; and a pecuniary mulct imposed on such as shall
cross or hinder them the opportunity.

Si quis Latro, aut alius condemnatus ad mort^m, quaerit confessionem, nullo
modo ei denegetur: Quod si quis fecerit, Regi emendet, aut se purget.
If a thief or any other person condemned unto death, desire to confess and
shrive himself, by no means let it be denied him; which whosoever shall hinder,
let him make satisfaction to the King, Qui fornicatus fuerit cum alia foemina,
vel, quod pejus est, cum alia conjugata, faciat Poenitentiam secundum librum
poenitentialem.
or purge himself. Again, He that shall commit fornication with a woman, or
(which is worse) with a married wife, A Pascha usque ad Pentecosten nullus
jejunet, nisi sit praeceptum pro publica poenitentia. R. Cnuti Leges. MS.
let him do penance according to the Penitential book. Again, from Easter unto
Whitsontide let no man fast, except it be inj^yned him for public penance;
wherein is mentioned, public penance, and the Penitential Book, no question
the same with Theodore's; a great argument that if public confession, sure
public penance was not then discontinued.

Yea so precious in their eyes was this Christian practice, that with the
Ancient English no religious or solemn act was undertaken, except the parties
were auspicated, and dedicated by confession. Ingulphus relates of one Heward
a Saxon Lord, groaning under the bleeding tyranny of the Norman Conquest, for
redress whereof having raised some forces, and to gain the more power over
them, he repaired to a religious man, one Brandon then Abbot of Bury, Se fieri
legitimum Militem (praemissa primitus omnium peccatorum conf^ssione, and little
percepta absolutione) supplicavit.
and desired at his hands to be admitted Knight, first premising confession of
all his sins, -- Anglorum erat consuctudo, quod qui Militiae legitime
consecrandus esset, vespere praecedente diem consecrationis suae ad Episcopum,
vel Abbatem, vel Monachum, vel Sacerdotem aliquem contritus and compunctus de
omaibus suis peccatis confessionem saceret, and absolutus, orationibus and
devotionibus and afflictionibus d^ditus ia Ecclesia pernoctaret; in crastino
quoque missam auditurus, gladium superaltare osserret; and post Ev^ngelium
Sacerdos benedictum gladium collo militis cum benedictione imponeret, and
communicatus ad eande^ missam sacris Christi mysteriis, denuo Miles permaneret.
Ingulph. Hist. p. 512. 2. Land.
and thereof procuring absolution. And to boot, the same Historian tells us
what the custom in England then was in conferring that Military honor of
Knighthood. The Candidate upon the eve before the day of that solemnity was
with much compunction to make confession before the Bishop, Abbot, or Priest,
of all his sins, and receiving absolution, to watch all night in the Church at
his prayers. On the morn to resort to Mass, there to offer his sword upon the
Altar, which, after the Gospel said, the Priest was to hallow, and to put the
same upon the Knights neck with a blessing; where he was to communicate the
sacred Mysteries of Christ, and thence to remain lawfully Knighted.

Many years after in a Synod held at Westminster against the prohibition of the
then chief Justice of England, by Hubert Arch Bishop of Canturbury, A. D. MCCI.
and in the third year of King John, amongst other constitutions then composed,
there is one that bears the title, De Poenitentia, wherein Priests that hear
confessions are thus enjoined; Praecipimus ut Sacerdotes in poenitentia
diligenter attendant circumstantias, qualitatem sc. Personae, and quantitatem
delicti, tempus, locum, causam, moram in peccato fact^m, devotionem animi
poenitentis; and ut poenitentia talis injungatur uxori, unde non reddatur
marito suo suspecta de aliquo occulto and enormi peccato. Id^m de Marito
conservetur. Nullus ettam Sacerdos post lapsum antequ^m confitcatur, ad altar
praesumat accedere celebraturus. Id adjicimus ad Sacerdo^um cupiditatem
resecandam, ut Missae non injungantur his in poenitentia qui non fue^iat
Sacerdot^s. Roger. Hoveden. annal. pars poster. p. 458.
We command that Priests in penance diligently weigh the circumstances, viz.
the condition of the person and of the offense, the time, place, cause, and
continuance in the sin, and devout mind of the penitent: that no such penance
be enjoined upon the husband or wife, as to raise a suspicion of the offense to
either party. That no Priest after his fall into sin. presume to celebrate at
the Altar before he make his confession. And to cut off all occasion of
covetousness in Priests, we add, that no penitents shall be enjoined to provide
Masses to be said, excepting Priests only.

Stephan Langton, A. D. 1^05. Stephan Langton.
the same that was obtruded upon King John, and put into the chair at
Canturbury by the Pope against the will of his Sovereign Lord, ordained in a
Council at Oxford, Ann. M. CCV. Linwood De officio vicarii, l. 1. c. statuimus,
and lib. 5. de poen. and remiss. c. Quoniam.
That Bishops in their own persons should sometimes receive confessions and
enjoin penances; and therein were provided discreet persons to take the
confessions of the Clergy. In whose quarrel the Pope thundered out his interdict
against the Church and State. Insomuch (says Fabian) that the Chu^ches and
houses of Religion were closed; that no where was used Mass or Divine Service,
nor any of the VII Sacraments; nor child christened, nor man confessed, Rob.
Fabians Chron. King John, an. RR. 10. and an. Dom. 1209.
nor married, except in such places which had purchased licenses and special
Bulls. But Caxton is more large in discovering this mystery of iniquity, then
of great strength: where the Pandolphus.
Legate is brought in telling the King what the cause was; For the wrongs that
ye have done to the holy Church, and to the Clarge: and the extent thereof, We
assoyle clean Erls, Barons, Caxton. part. 7. of K. John.
Knights, and all other men of their homages, servis and feautes that they
should unto you done. -- and we assoyl them all by the authorite of the Pope,
and command them also with you for to fight, as with him that is enemy to all
holy church. Tho answered the King; what may you do more to me? Tho, answered
Pandolph, we sayen to you in In the word of the Pope, he should say.
the word of God, that ye, ne none heir that you have, never after this day be
crowned. The King for all this cursing waxed not pliable to the Popes will;
whereupon, The Pope tho sent to the King of France in remission of his sins,
that he should take with him all the power that he might, and wend into
England, for to destru King John; the tydeings whereof put him into such a
fright, tho (says mine Author) the King put him to the Court of Rome, and to
the Pope; and tho yaf he up the Realm of England for him and his heirs for
evermore. -- and tho took the King the Crown off his head, and set it on his
kneys, and thief word^s said he in hearing of all the great Lordis of England;
her I resign up the Crown, and the Ream of England into the Popis Innocent
hands the third, and put me holy in his merci, and in his ordenance: Tho
Received.
underf^nge Pandolph the Crown of King John, and keepid it V. days. I have
inserted this story as not altogether impertinent, making good the abused power
of the keys at Rome, to the disinherison of a supreme Monarch, and independent,
and the disfranchise of a free State, wherein the pride of the Pope, or
dejection of the Prince, I know not what may be more admired.

Not long after followed Edmund de Abington, A. D. 1234. Edmund de Abington.
Archbishop of Canturbury, in the year of grace MCCXXXIV. who made a
constitution for women with child and near their time, that in respect of the
approaching danger they should confess unto their Priest. Quod propter imminens
periculum confiteantur Sacerdoti. Lindw. l. 5. de Poen. and Remiss. c. in
confess.
In his days there entered this Kingdom a Legate from Rome called Otho, sent
from Gregory IX. Otho.
who exacted much upon the Clergy, Edmundus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus Legati
Romani frequentes exactiones, quibus sacerdotes divexabantur, libere
reprehendit. Pol. Virg. l. 6. histor. Ang. p. 300.
emunging, and squeesing their purses, so far forth, that Archbishop Edmund
(afterward Saint) freely and sharply reprehended the polling Legate; Ut viri
prudentes, and fideles constituantur per Episcopum Confessores, quibus
Personae, and minores Clerici confiteri valiant, qui Decanis confiteri
crubescunt forsan, and verentur. In Ecclesiis vero Cathedralibus Confessores
institui praecipimus generales. Constit. Othonis Rubr. de Confess. Praelatorum.
By whose Legantine power it was decreed, That certain discreet and faithful
men should be appointed by the Bishop of the Diocese throughout every Deanery,
to receive the Confessions of Parsons, and other Clergymen of an inferior
order, who might be afraid peradventure, and ashamed to confess unto their
Deans. He ordained also general Penitentiaries in Cathedral Churches. And not
long after him there arrived another Legate armed with the same power, named
Octobon, Octobon.
and he in a Synod at Northampton made laws also, Ab Urbano missus anno Dom.
1262. Pol. Virg. hist. Ang. l. 14. p. 257.
Polydore tells us that he was sent from Pope Urban, but he himself that he De
manu sanctissimi Patris Domini Clementis. Prohem. ad constir. Octoboni.
came from Pope Clement; his coming then could not be in the year of our Lord
MCCLXII. as Polydore places it; Obiit Perusii Non. October. an. Dom. 1264.
Onuphrii Chron. ad finem Plat. Creatus absens Perusiae per compromissum,
praesentibus 20. Cardinalibus Non. Febr. erat enim Legatus in Anglia.
Onuphrius, ib.
nor in the 45th year RR. Henrici 3; for Urban the IV. died not till the year
MCCLXIV. and Clemens who came next after, succeeded in the Papacy An. 1264/5,
elected at Perusa upon the Nones of February, or the fifth day of that month,
being at that time absent thence, and here in England; a Metachronisme of three
years in Polydore, and I could wish that were the worse mistake in his elegant
history. Now amongst the Constitutions of this Legate to be observed by the
Clergy and Laity, there is no mention of Confession, but for the third order
the Religious Votaries of that age; who like Meteors shone above in those days
in the middle region of the air, and oftimes went out with as foul a stink as
some Meteors do; for them it was ordained, Requirant saltem semel in mense
Confessores Fratribus deputatos, ut sic illos qui non frequenter confitentur
graviter arguant, and ad confitendum inducant. Constit. October. Rubric. ut
Monachi frequenter confiteantur, and frequenter celebrent.
That Abbots, Priers, and superiors in their absence should procure
Penitentiaries, or Confessors once a month for their Friars, and to rebuke
sharply such as frequented not Confession, and to induce them to the same. It
seems the Religious came but slowly on to shrift in those days; and what may
we then think of the Laity?

The same Edmund who moderated the Church of Canturbury in the time of that
first Legate Otho, A. D. 1240.
made a Constitution concerning the behavior and deportment of the Confesseur
or Ghostly Father, In confiessione audienda h^beat Sacerdos vultum humilem, and
oculos, ad terram dimissos, nec faciem respiciat Confitentis, and maxim
Multeris, and patienter audiat quicquid dixerit, and in spiritu lenitatis
supportet eam, and ei pro posse suadeat, and pluribus modis, ut integre
confiteatur; Peccata inquirot usitata, inusitata autem non nisi a long, and
per circumstantias, and expertis detur modus confitendi, and inexpertis non
detur occasio delinquendi.
at the time of shrift; That he should set with an humble look, his countenance
downward, not once beholding the penitents face, especially if a woman, to
afford a patient audience unto whatsoever shall be said; and to support with
the spirit of lenity, to use all persuasions to extract a plenary confession,
to enquire after usual and customary sins punctually, and after strange ones
afar off, and by circumstances, and with that discretion, as to teach the
penitents how to confess, not how to transgress. And advises the Confessor to
pick out the greater sins as Murder, Semper majora crimina, and praecipue
notoria Majoribus reserventur. Linwood lib. 5. de Poen in. and remiss. c. in
Confess.
Sacrilege, Incest, sins against nature, etc. for such as are of greater place,
and set them by, as reserved cases for the Pope, not to grant absolution
therein, but at the point of death, and that upon condition of their recovery,
they present themselves at Rome, with Letters testimonial from their own
Confessors; of the nature and quality of the offense; the Popes it seems had
then seized upon fat sins, as well as the fat of the Land; this constitution
was made about the year of our Lord, 1240.

But Richard, surnamed the great, his predecessor, A. D. 1229. Richardus Magnus.
and one that should have taken place of him, however the Compilers of the
Constitutions have set him behind, for he was sacred Archbishop in the year of
grace MCGXXIX. He made a very pious and necessary law, That forasmuch as the
soul, far excels the body; Physicians are strictly charged, Cum anima long
pretiosior sit corpore, sub i^terminatione Anathematis prohibemus, ne quic
Medicoru^ pro salute corporali aliquid suadeat aegroto quod in periculum animae
convertatur; -- ut aegrum ante omnia admoneat, and inducat ut Medicos invocet
animarum, ut postquam fuerit infirmo de spirituali provisum medicamine, ad
corporalis medicinae remedium salubrius procedatur. Linwood. lib. 5. de poen.
and remiss. cap. Cum anima.
sub interminatione Anathematis, under pain of the Churches Ban and curse to
recommend no such thing unto their Patients, for the recovery of their bodily
health, which may not be undertaken without danger to the soul; but before all
things, to exhort them to send for the soul-Physician, and after spiritual
physic has been prescribed and provided and administered to the soul, then to
proceed in the name of God to give Physic to the body. A Canon which if duly
observed by our Physicians, I am persuaded their Physic would work much better
than it does. But now the Spiritual Physician is hardly thought of, and his
visits accounted ominous; as if sin were not worth the healing, or he wanted
the power and cunning. For after Luke the Physician, and Zeno the Lawyer, we
send for Barnabas the son of consolation, when the soul is senseless of his help
and Ghostly comfort.

Bonifacius, Uncle to Queen Elenor, A. D. 1244.
wife to King Henry the third, and advanced to that Metropolitical See, An.
MCCXLIV. provided against these that molested or any way hindered such that
would do penance, and be confessed, Praecipim^s ne aliquis praesumat impedire
quin sacramentum poe^itemiae unicuique petenti libere impendatur, and spatium
liberum confitendi, quod potissime propter incarceratos suadetur, quibus
saepius inhumaniter ne dicamus infideliter denegatur. Lindw. l. 5. de poen. and
remiss. cap. Cum sacramentum.
and appointed that convenient time be allotted for that sacred action; and
specially to prisoners who many times inhumanly and unchristianly are denied
the use hereof, or else so little time afforded unto them as to put them rather
into danger of discomfort and desperation, than matter of spiritual joy and
consolation.

John Peccam who sat in the Sea of Canturbury, A. D. 1279.
An. Dom. MCCLXXIX. Ordered that Parish Priests should diligently take heed,
Parochiales insuper sacerdotes caveant, ne alicui dent corpus Domini, nisi
prius constet ipsum confessum fuisse, testimonio and judicio fide-dignorum.
Lindw. l. 3. de Missar. celebr. c. Altissimus de terra.
that they administered not the Body of the Lord to any Communicant except it
might appear unto them that such a person was formerly confessed by the
testimony and judgment of credible persons.

The next law or Constitution is of Walter Reginald, A. D. 1312.
who possessed the place at Canturbury in the year of our Lord MCCCXII. He
wills the Priest to rip up the nature of the diseases, Diligenter attendat
sacerdos circumstantias criminis, qualitatem personae, tempus and locum, causam
and moram in peccato. -- Sacerdos ad audiendum confessiones communem sibi locum
eligat -- and in locis absconditis non recipiat alicujus confessiones maxim
mulieris -- talem injungat uxori poenitentiam, ut viro suo non reddatur
suspecta -- ne aliquibus injungat poenitentiam, nisi cum restitutione --
consulat Episcopum, vel alium qui vices ejus gerit, aut provectos, and
discretos viros, quorum consilio certificatus, sciat quos, and qualiter ligare
possit, and absolvere -- manus absolutionis non imponi nisi se corrigentibus,
etc. Lind. l. 5. de poen. and remis. c. Sacerdos.
and to sift the circumstances of sin, such as are the condition of the person,
the quality of the offense, the time and place when and where the sin was
committed, all which must be spoken of in Confession. He also appointed an open
and visible place for shrift, to cut off all occasion of scandal and suspicion,
especially when women make their approches; admonishes that Priests impose no
such penance to the wife, as to cause suspicion in the husband: To be careful
(the nature of the offense requiring) to enjoin such penance, as may imply
restitution to the party grieved. To consult with the Bishop or his Suffragan,
or with experimented and discreet Priests, that he may know the better whom and
what to bind and loose, and where he sees no probable sign^ of sincere
contrition, and no purpose of abandoning the sin confessed, to suspend his
absolution, and to dismiss the sinner for that season with admonitions tending
to unfeigned repentance. Prohibemus ne ullus sacerdos lapsus in peccatum
mortale ad altar praesumat accedere celebralurus, antequam confiteatur, nec
puto (ut quidam errantes credunt) quod mortalia deleantur per confessionem
generalem. Lindw. l. 3. de celebr. Mis. cap. Lintheamina.
The same Archbishop also forbad Priests that had fallen into mortal sin, to
approach unto the Altar there to celebrate without making their confession;
adding that he could not suppose, (as some others erroneously believed) that
mortal sins could be washed away by a general confession. Where by the way note
that Parenthesis (good Reader) [as some believe] intimating that there were in
those days some that so believed, viz. that general Confession might procure
remission of sins, and were not perhaps so punctual for private particular
confession, whose belief that Prelate censured for erroneous. By the same man
are Ghostly Fathers under a great penalty conjured to secrecy and silence; That
if at any time or by any means, or upon passion of hatred, Nullus sacerdosira,
odio, metu etiam mortis audeat detegere quovis modo alicujus con^^ssionem
signo, motu, vel verbo generaliter, vel specialiter. Et si super hoc convictus
fuerit, sine spereconciliationis non immerito debet degradari. Lin. l. 5. de
poen. and remis. c. Prohibemus.
or fear of death, shall lay open by signs, motions, or words, either generally
or specially, what has been privately deposited in Confession, and shall be
convicted thereof, he shall be degraded without hope of reconciliation. Also
another Constitution of the same man's doing, for the reviving of Public
penance for notorious and scandalous offenses, Ut peccata graviora, and
vulgatissimo suo scandalo totam commoventia civitatem, sint solenni poenitentia
castiganda. Lindw. l. 5. de poen. and. remis. c. Praeterea.
complaining that by the neglect of the ancient Canons the same has been long
buried in oblivion, whereby heinous sins have been the more frequented; and the
reins and rigor of Christian discipline too much remitted. And a Lindw. lib.
5. de poen. and remiss. c. Licet.
fourth, for the substitution of a grave and learned Penitentiary in every
Deanery; to take the Confessions of the Clergy, residing within the same.

John Straiford Archbishop of Can^urbury, A. D. 1334.
MCCCXXXIV. made a Provisional Law, that Priests should not be cited
juridically, and thereby forced either to detect such arcana, as they received
under the seal of Confession; Et illis ex tunc Parochiani peccata renuunt
confiteri. Lind. l. 2. de Judiciis c. Exclusis and infra.
or else offer violence to their consciences, lest thereby Parishioners might
refuse to come to confession. It seems equivocations, mental reservations, and
such juglings devised to cheat justice, were not up, nor thought on when this
course was taken, that Judges should forbear to examine them.

The last of these Metropolitans that made any law for Confession, is Simon
Sudbury, who was preferred to that eminency, An. Confessiones mulierum
audiantur in propatulo, quantum ad visum, non quantum ad auditum. -- Moneantur
Laici in principio Quadragesimae, and ^ito post lapsum confiteri, ne peccatum
suo pondere ad aliud trahat. Lind. l. 5. de poen. and remis. c. confessiones
mulicrum.
MCCCLXXV. He ordained women to be shriven in an open place, where they may be
seen of all, but not heard. -- And to admonish the Laity to repair unto
Confession every year about the beginning of Lent, and whilst their sins are
green in their memory, lest the weight of one sin press them upon another. He
ordained likewise to confess, and communicate three times a year, viz. at the
three solemn Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide. And to prepare
themselves with such abstinence, as the Priest should prescribe: Prius tamen se
praeparent per aliquam abstinentiam de consilio sacerdotis faciendam -- vivens
ab ingressu ecclefiae arceatur, and moriens christiana careat sepultura. Lind.
l. 5. de poen. and remis. c. Confessiones.
And all and every such Persons as should not come to confession, and to the
communion once a year at the least, to be debarred from entering into the Church
in his life time, and after death his body not to be interred in Christian
Burial. By which constitutions we see how other times were appointed for
Confession as well as Easter, but then chiefly required; for four causes, and
at those times is Confession required, 1. Ratione sacramenti, sc. si vult
celebrare, vel communicare, vel sacrum ordinem suscipere, etc. 2. Ratione
periculi, si est in periculo mortis. 3. Ratione conscientiae, ut si dictet sibi
conscientia quod statim teneatur confiteri. 4. Ratione dubii, ut si nunc habeat
confessoris copiam, caeterum per totum annum non habiturum. Lindwood supra.
says Lindwood; 1. In respect of the Sacrament whenever the same shall be
celebrated and received, so upon admission into holy Orders, etc. 2. In respect
of the danger or dread of death. 3. In respect of the Conscience, if a man's
heart shall tell him that he has present need of Confession. 4. If it be
doubtful a Confessor cannot be had within a year, to take him while we may.
Some of these Canonical reasons we have before examined, and censured.

These were Ecclesiastical Constitutions made by several Churchmen in their
times. A. D. 1533. A book of Religion entitled, Articles devised by the Kings
highness, set forth an. Reg. Henrici 8.28.
But when Henry VIII had wrested the Supremacy of Spiritual causes from
foreign Usurpation and annexed it to the Crown; then for essays of that new
authority, was substituted a Vicegerent for the Clergy. Articles of Religion
set forth, and said to be devised by his Highness, which caused the commotion
of the April 28. an R R. Hen. 8.31 Hall. Chron. p. 228.
Lincolnshire men. And in a Parliament held at Westminster was established
Hall. fol. 224.
the act of the six articles, which was named the bloody statute, and the whip
of six strings; which drew so much blood upon poor Christians, and whereof
Auricular Confession was one of the strings. The procurer of that Draconical
law, together with the occasion thereof is particularly described by our
Ecclesiastical Annalist Mr John Fox; whoever was the chief doer therein,
Ecclesiastical persons were the chief sufferers. The King upon some distaste to
his Clergy, was willing to sharpen the edge of the Law against them; and his
mind being known, there wanted not abbetters to whet him thereunto. So fearful
is the condition of the Church, if once removed from under the shadow of the
Crown, and wings of the Royal Seepter, and would soon become a prey to the
little foxes, if the Kingly-Lion should not protect. And as in that Princes
days the truth began to take place in the hearts of many, so that party which
stood for the old Mumpsimus, as well as the other that embraced the new
Sumpsimus, Adeo ut uno codemque l^co, and tempore in Pontificios laqueo, and
dilamation^, and in Protesta^tes vivicomburio sae^ir tur. Cambd. Appar. ad
Elizabeth. page 6, 7.
escaped not the penalty of his rigorous Statutes: that it was no strange
spectacle to behold at once a Protestant at the stake, and a Papist at the
Galhouse. By that law Incontinency in Priests and Marriage were equally made
felony, and death in their persons either to use the sin or the remedy; and the
benefit of the Clergy otherwise a privilege, was to them a snare; and that
offense capital in Churchmen, which then was scarce criminal in the Laity. A
man that shall survey the Acts of Parliament under that Prince, shall find that
they were truly under him, who melted the courage of both those Houses as wax,
making them capable of any impression, Unde domi terribilis, and for as
tyranaicus hiberetur. Camb. ibid.
and his Will a Law. But of him and his memory enough; as also of such Laws and
Constitutions which have to my observation been enacted in this point of
Confession, and of what force they are at this present, it were much to be
wished the Reverend of that profession would determine.

Sundry Princes of England that used confession.
I will add hereunto such inctances as have obviously occurred unto me of those
Princes that have worn the Diadem of this Kingdom, and yet not abhorred from
this exercise of Piety, but have confessed their sins unto Spiritual Fathers
and Pastors in hope of absolution: I. King Edred reigned 10. years and died A.
D. 955.
the first is King Edred, who ended his reign and life in the year of the
Worlds redemption, DCCCCLV. of whom Florentius Wigorniensis writes thus; The
glorious King of England Edred fell sick, in the tenth year of his reign, and
despairing of recovery, sent away with all speed for holy Dunstan the Abbot,
Qui missa celeri legatione confessionum suarum Patrem Beatum Dunstanum, scil.
Abbatem, accersivit.
and Father of his confessions, who in all haste resorted to the Court; Vox
desuper clare sonuit, Rex Edredus nunc in pace quiescit. Florent. Wigorn. ad
ann. 955. page 353, 354.
and having come half his journey, a voice from heaven sounded clear in his
ears, King Edred rests now in peace. At which voice the horse whereon he
sat, not able to bear the burden, sunk under him to the ground, without any
harm unto him upon the back. The Kings body was brought to Winchester, II.
William Conqueror. Resumpto animo, quae christiani sunt executus est, and in
confessione, and viatico. Malmsb. de Will. 1. page 63. col. 2. Lon.
and there by Abbot Dunstan decently interred. By which it seems Dunstan was
the Kings Ghostly Father, though he came too late to take his Confession.

The second Prince is William the Conqueror, whose sickness increasing at Roan,
and the Physicians upon inspection of his Urine had judged his death to be at
hand; upon the hearing whereof (says William of Malmesbury) he filled the room
with lamentation, that death had prevented him, long bethinking how to amend
his life. But pulling up his spirits, he did the duty of a Christian, in
confessing and receiving the blessed Sacrament.

The third is Margaret the Queen of Scots, III. Margaret Q. of Scots.
but extracted of the Sister to Edgar Ethling. Presbyteris ad se accersitis,
eisque peccata sua consessa, oleo se perungi, coelestique viatico muniri secit.
Rog. Hoved. Pars prior Annal. page 266. Edit. Land. A. D. 1093.
English blood, having heard the fatal news of the death of King Malcolme her
husband, and Prince Edward her son, slain by the English as they were invading
the Marches of Northumberland, she took it so much to heart, says Roger
Hovedon, as suddenly she fell into a great infirmity, and without delay having
sent for her Priests, she went into the Church, and there made confession of
her sins unto them, caused herself to be anointed, and to be housled by
receiving the Sacrament, beseeching the Lord with fervent and daily prayers,
that he would not permit her any longer to live in this sorrowful life, and her
prayer was heard; for the third day after the slaughter of her husband, being
dissolved from the bonds of flesh, (as is believed) to the joys of eternal
salvation. This sad accident fell out in the year of Grace MXCIII. and the VI.
year of William Rufus.

The next is William Rufus, IV. William Rufus. A. D. 1102.
who came to an unfortunate end by the glance of an arrow, whether aimed at him
or no, is uncertain, or whether he stumbled upon the same; but by the wound
thereof he took his death, as he was hunting in the New Forest called YTENE, 2d
day of August, In Nova Forresta quae lingua Anglorum Ytene nuncupatur, a quodam
Franco Waltero Tyrello sagitta incaute directa percussus vit^ finivit 4. Non.
Augusti fer. 5. indict. 8. Florent. Vigorn. Chron. p. 469, 470.
and in the XIII year of his Reign; which sudden accident was the more
lamentable, as preventing his repentance and confession, and other comforts his
soul might have found, if sickness had given him notice of his approaching end.
The want whereof Eadmer a grave Historian thus lamenteth; Upon the second day
of August he fetched his last breath, Secunda dies Augusti vidit eum
expirantem, siquidem illa die mane pransus in sylvam venatum ivit, ibique
sagitta in cord percussus, impoenitens and inconfessus e vestigio mortuus est,
and omni homine mox derelictus. Eadmer. h^st. Nov. l. 2. p. 54.
for upon that day breaking his fast, he came into the Forest to hunt, and
there was wounded with an arrow; and forthwith died impenitent and unconfessed,
and was immediately abandoned of all men. The want of Confession had not been
worth the noting, if the use thereof at the last close had not been generally
received.

To him succeeded his Brother Henry I. a moderate, and as those times afforded,
a learned Prince; V. Henry I. Beauclerk.
who after he had swayed the Scepter full XXXV years and odd months, then
being in Normandy, sickned of that disease whereof he died: And perceiving his
own weakness, sent for Hugh, whom he had constituted his first Abbot at
Reading, (where he founded a goodly Abbey, and there lies interred) and after
advanced him to the Metropolitical See at Roan; which Archbishop in an Epistle
to Pope Innocent, relates the pious end of that Prince thus; Prout ei
dicebamus, ipse ore proprio sua confitebatur peccata, and manu propria pectus
suum percutiebat, and malam voluatatem dimittebat -- pro nostro officio tertio
cum, and per triduum absolvimus. Crucem Domini adoravit, corpus and sanguinem
Domini devote suscepit, Elecmosynam suam disposuit -- ipsius pia petitione oleo
sancto eum inunximus, and sic in pace quievit. Hugo Rothmag. Epist. ad
Innocent. 3. extat apud Malmesb. hist. Novell. l. 1. p. 100. col. 2. London.
He being surprised with a grievous sickness, dispatched a Post to us with all
haste to come unto him; we came and abode with him being full of pain for three
days, and as we advised him, he confessed with his own mouth his sins, and
with his own hand beat his breast, and put away his ev^^l mind. Through Gods
counsel and ours, and other Bishops, he promised to observe and amend his life,
and by reason of our office, we thrice in three days space absolved him. He
reverenced the Lords Cross, devoutly received the Body and Blood of the Lord,
gave a^mes, -- at his request we anointed him with holy chrisme, and so he
rested in peace. This Prince departed this world in the year of our Lord God,
MCXXXVI.

The like preparations of dying well were made by that Ceur de Lion, VI.
Richard I. 1200.
King Richard I. who besieging the Castle of Gaillard in Normandy, was wounded
in the arm with a venomous Poisoned arrow. Caxton. part. 7. in Rich. 1.
quarrel; The Castle won by a sharp assault, and the soldier that hurt him
apprehended, the King finding the wound to be mortal, caused him to be brought
into his presence. And (faith Caxton) wen he come before the King, the King
axed him what was his name, and he said mi name is Bartram Gutdon: wherefore,
said the King, have tow me slain, since that I did the never none harm? Sir,
said he, though ye did me never none harm, ye your self with your hond killed
my fadre, and my brother, and there for I have quyte now your travel. Tho said
King Richard, he that died upon the cross to bring man's soul from pyne of Hell,
foryef the my death, and I also foryef it thee. Tho commanded he that no man
should him misdo -- and the VI day after the King did shrive him, Poenitentia
male hactenus actae vitae affectus, de peccatis illico rite confessus est, ac
Eucharistia multa cum vencratione sumpta percussori pepercit. Pol. Virg. hist.
Angl. l. 14. p. 257.
and sore repentance having of his misdedis, and wos housled and anointed. Thus
much out of that old Chronicler concerning the last demeanor and death of this
heroical Prince, forgiving him that was the author thereof. He left this life
when he had reigned IX years, VIII months and odd days.

And the miserable end of King Richard II. VII. (...) Richard II. A. D. 1400.
deprived first of his Crown, and consequently of his life, murdered at
Pomfret-Castle by that wretch Sir Pierce of Exton, and VIII villains in
harness, is not impertinent: where the King wrested a Bill out of the first
man's hands, and manfully defending himself, had slain IV of the Assaylants, was
traitorously felled to the ground by Sir Pierce, and then shortly rid out of
the world (says my Historian) without either confession or receipt of
Sacrament; Hall Chron. in Henry 4. page 14.2.
bewailing the loss of opportunity to prepare himself for death by confessing
his sins, and receiving the blessed Sacrament no less, than the Parricide it
self, though most inhumane, treacherous and barbarous. And thus have I related
what these Princes did at the evening and shutting up of their time; casting up
their audit unto God, and making an account here, that they might not be called
to an after reckoning; wherein I doubt not but that other Princes did as they
did, though our Annalists may be silent therein; and my small storehouse, and
Adversaria be no better provided of more Collections. Take these Laws and
Examples in good part, (Gentle Reader) and make the best construction thereof,
and of my self, for the relation.

The Conclusion.
SO by Gods mercy, and the guidance of his good Spirit, we are now in the
haven, and at the end of this Treatise. A journey has been taken not long, (to
speak truly) nor tedious, but dangerous and difficult; spent rather in the
beating of unknown paths, or renewing of ancient tracts worn out, and well-nigh
desaced with desuetude, than in following any usual rode or beaten way before
us; for in this voyage (we may boldly say) not many Travelers, especially that
set out from home with us, have kept us company. And yet the subject matter, as
it concerns all Christians, so I suppose, is inferior to none of those
Mysteries in power and operation, that are committed to the Lords Stewards,
much profiting, but much opposing fleshly wisdom; as the best potions are the
most bitter, and the more repugnant to the disease, the more sanative. The
Spirit is contrary to the flesh, and the work of Christianity is to deny our
selves, and to take up Christ's cross. You shall hardly see a man that will
lay open his infirmities, though I read of an Apostle 2 Cor. 11.30.
that gloried in his. Our humor is naturally Pharisaical, to make clean the
outside of the Platter, and who is he that will turn the worst side outward?
Very few will speak evil of themselves, and fewer that will suffer others to do
so with patience. It is a fringe of pride (says Gregory) in a man freely to
disparage himself, and yet to take it ill at another hands that shall do so.
Superbiae vitium est, ut quod de se fateri quisquis quasi sua sponte dignatur,
hoc sibi dici ab ali is dedignetur. Greg. Mor. l. 22. c. 51.
If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine inquities in my bosom,
Pour monstre cette propriete, and inclina de Phomme a se tenir close, and
couvert en ses iniquitez, and la victoir, qu'il avoit obtenu sur lui, de
s'accuser soi m^sme, etc. D. Bes. Caresme. Tom. 2. p. 716, 717.
Job 31.33. thereby intimating our natural inclination from the loins of our
first Parent, to cover our sins; and his victory over the same, Certe sublimis
apparet (Job) etiam in peccatis suis -- Ego in eo non minus admiror
confessionem humillimam peccatorum, quam tot sublimia facta virtutu^ --
Unumquodque malum quamvis robusti us vitetur, tamen humili us proditur. Greg.
ib.
to be his own accuser. Job was admired by all for his rare virtues; But in my
eyes he seems mavelous in his sins, (says Gregory) Let other men extol
his chastity, commend his integrity, praise the bowels of his pity and
goodness, for my part I no less wonder at the humble confession of his sins,
than so many famous exploits of his virtues, it being as great a conquest to
trample down same and shame, by laying open our sins, as to resist, and not
commit them; for though greater strength be showed in shunning sin, yet greater
humility is discovered in confessing of sin: for by the former our sins are
conquered, and by the latter our selves. And I am of opinion many are
displeased with Confession, not for any hurt of distaste at the thing it self,
but at the difficulty thereof; and abstain from it, not as an act unlawful, but
unseemly to men of their quality, and disagreeing with their disposition. No
small argument that it is a work of grace, whereas our corrupt nature so much
frowneth at it. But how burdensome soever it may seem to flesh and blood, sure
the burden of a wounded Conscience is greater, Acts 15.25.
for who can bear it? It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and unto us (as the
first Council in the Church decreed) to lay upon you no greater burden than
these necessary things. It being not the least part of prudence to cut off
things superfluous, as withal to impose necessary. This later age has not
been so much a vintage, as a pruning of the Churches vineyard: And it is not
impossible for a quick and fruitful branch to be amputated and cut off amongst
so many fruitless and unprofitable. Matthew. 13.9.
Those Weeders had need to have great care, that pull not up some hopeful
blades amongst store of weeds. There is not any (I suppose) that can thoroughly
purge his floor, and gather the wheat into his garn^r, Matthew 3.12.
but he whose fan is in his hand, and will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fi^e. I honor the memory of the first Reformers of the Church as good men, yet
but men, and not exempted from error; and verily believe that the great abuse
and juggling under the sacred veil of the keys, Confession and Absolution; the
merchandise and trading in Indulgences, the lewd profaning of Ecclesiastical
censures, made them less zealous for the true use of Confession, the keys and
censures; and so by a kind of connivency there waxed a general coldness in all
the parts of the mystical body of Christ, in the commendable and necessary
exercise thereof. The Ministers and Pastors of Christ's flock could wish no sins
for Confession, no perplexity for the Conscience, no wounds, no diseases in the
soul, and that all the flock were so sound and whole, that there needed no
Physicians. But they may wish the best, and fear the worst, and find too much
work for Physicians, if thoroughly employed; too many bonds and bars for their
keys, and too many infirmities for their power to work on: Confession cannot be
out of request so long as there are so strong temptations to assault, and so
weak a fort and poorly manned to defend. Let then thy soul be of more worth than
thy body, and to the healing of spiritual wounds lend a quicker ear; for thy
bodily health what will thou not undergo? (...). Clem. Alex. Sir lib. 1. Ut
valeat corpus, serrum pati^ris and ignes;
Arida n^c suicas o^a ^^g^bis aqua:
Ut valeas animo, quicquam tolerare recuses:
At pars haec pretium corpore majus habet.

what not endure? lancing, burning, purging, vomiting: and is a little shame in
confession, a small austerity in penance tedious to be undertaken for thy souls
good? thou set not that price upon the better part of thy self, which thou
ought, that refusest such receipts for the safety thereof. For (says a
Father) he is nothing near such a Benefactor which freeth the body from a
disease, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. p. 258.
as he that delivers the soul from unrighteousness, in regard the soul is far
more precious than the body. Let then the great benefit redounding to the soul
by confession vanquish the shame and natural repugnancy. Declare thou thy sins
first that thou may be justified, Esaias 43.76. as the LXXII read it.
Justification follows upon that declaration, not condemnation: Whereupon Saint
Chrysostom assigns the difference betwixt the consequent of confessing at the
tribunal of God, from terrestrial bars: For at these external tribunals below,
after accusation and confession of sin, (...). Chrysostom. (...). tom. 5. p. 139.
death follows: but at the divine Tribunal, upon confession, where the sinner
accuses himself, there goes a Crown. And herein is a beam of Gods mercy, in
not extorting Confession (as our Judges do) to the prejudice of the accused,
but as a Physician to know our diseases, for their better healing; and his
justice too after a sort herein shines, that the sinner in confessing might
blush for sin, whereof he was not ashamed in committing. By this means does the
Shepherd of the flock come by notice of the several kinds of infirmities
wherewith his sheep are troubled, and can the better prescribe the remedies. By
this discovery of sin many disorders may be rectified at this consistory of
Conscience, which no Political Benches of justice can search into, or redress;
hereby secret wrongs may be recompensed, secret amends may be made, secret
injuries remitted, and secret enemies reconciled. The greatest gainer is the
Penitent himself; for besides the assoyling of his offenses, he has purchased
a Counselor to advise him for the best how to avoid sin; a Comforter to
embalme his wounded conscience from Gods word, sweeter than the honey or the
honey comb; and an Advocate to plead on his behalf to God with prayer and
intercession. By this high minds are abated, and a sinner waxes sensible of a
higher power incensed by his sin. By this unbridled offenders are kept in some
awe and discipline. By this Gods Priests are the more reverenced, and his
ordinance in their hands more powerful. In a word, amongst all the Tribes,
Judah, that is Confession, has the Star, Scepter, and promised seed. The
Answer then returned by the Neophytes, or new Christians in Japonia,
Percontanti mihi quosnam Religionis Christianae ritus, quaeve instituta sibi
max^me crederent prosutura; Duo illa semper sc. confessionem and communionem
sine controversia responderunt. Epist. Japon. l. 1. p. 59.2. Dilinguae 1571.
is very remarkable; when Xaverius had often demanded of them, what rites and
exercises in the Christian Religion seemed unto them most profitable and
availing, constantly answered, those two without all controversy, the
Communion and Confession.

KOLOPHON Ad eos qui in libellum inciderint YPHEIN.
FUll Nineteen courses has that glorious Bridegroom of heaven made, and in
which (...) or space the other Luminary has through many various revolutions
returned to the same point in the Celestial girdle, (...) Lunae a Sole in
Enneadecaeteride est, 46.56 cui in signifere respondit gr. 16.56.
since this Treatise past the Authors last hand and eye, having (for ought he
knew) like the Antique subterraneous Obeliskes lain buried, or by the late more
then Civil wars been driven into coverts: in which process of time being grown
out of knowledge and memory, is by the hand of that immense providence sweetly
disposing all things, (...).
and poysing past and future events as two scales in a balance, awaked and
exposed to public view, but as (...), 1 Cor. 15.8.
an abortive issue, or one born out of due time; for serene and quiet were the
seasons, and Truth seemed to look down from heaven, when these conceptions were
formed; giving hope also to this issue of entertainment. But alas those
Halcionia are fled, and days of calamity have succeeded; and the Cloud upon us
when dispersed, He only knows, in whose hands are times and seasons, and we
may sigh out these sad complaints in the Churches name; Where is thy nursing
Parent, Reverend Paranymph^ honorable Pillars, vigilant Officers, devoted
members, thy fenced discipline? Cantic. 6.4.
all which made Thee terrible as an army with banners. Is not thy vineyard laid
waste, thy breasts dried up, thy Common Prayer and administration of the
Sacraments laid aside, and the glory of thy Liturgy departed? the dispensers of
thy Treasures disesteemed? and what hope can there be for the practice of this
piety, where the keys and Stewards are despised; or to enlarge thy rites, where
thy just claims are denied? much less to promise the admission of this piece
of discipline, where the Nerves of all thy Ecclesiastical policy are dissolved?
where the garments of thy Revenews are parted amongst Soldiers, and thy
seamlesse coat of discipline which they spared, rent by others? though found
they are, that associate their endeavors to make up those breaches, but at a
loss; whereas no form will fit, but what contex'd by thy Bridegroom, or his
Apostles, and in all ages continued upon thy back, till stripped by
Sacrilegious hands, and defaced.

Great and manifold are the insinuations of the Old Serpent, and his
prevalencies more by secret Mining against Gods building than open force, as
not ignorant how ugly sin shows in its own colors, which he disguiseth under
cunning intrigoes and appearances of virtue, (...). Ephesians. 4.14. Et (...), cap.
6.11. Aslechanchas del Diablo. Bibl. Hispan.
which the Apostle terms the sleight of men and cunning craftiness and the
wiles of the Devil, ambushes, or entrapping plots. The Clothing of Heresies
under Scripture phrases is his old sophistry, Faetores coelestis eloquii velut
quodam aromate aspergit, and austera quaedam temperaturus pocula, prius ora
melle circumlinit. Vincent. Lyr. contr. Haeres. cap. 35.
as the honey used to besmeer the deadly cup, that the poison may be more
sweetly devoured. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Romans
2.22.
where the abhorring Idols is (...), the over-spreading sanctity, but the
commission of Sacrilege (...). The spoils of the Church are the plotted design.
An ancient and prudent Historian was careful to advertise his Reader of the
wide distance betwixt the causes and occasions of war; Polybius lib. 3.
and tells us, that the causes why the sword is unsheathed shall be concealed
till occasion of blows is offered, the beginning whereof may probably be
maintained, whereas the real cause would make the undertakers ashamed. Some
occasions might be tendered to disgrace the Clergy, which censorious spirits
readily seized on, the design through their sides being to wound the
Profession, Neque unquam Ecclesiae status ita tranquillus, ut non aliquod
fuerit aliquando dissidium. Heming. ad Principes German. apud Sleidan.
Commenrar. l. 9. p. 264. Argentorati edit. an. 1621.
though indirectly, and to heap contempt upon Gods own Ordinance. The Heathen
by the spectacles of nature could discern the Priests to be worthy of honor,
(...), etc. Homer. -- (...).
and the affronts done to them to draw judgments upon the heads of scorners,
who striving to render the Fathers of the Church scandalous, have proved
themselves ridiculous.

Satan has planted, and what Mines have played to work his pleasure upon the
Church of God. A double drift he had, 1. to make heretics of the unsettled
religious, 2. and the profane persons to become Atheists;
rendering these of no religion, and those of worse than none; and in whose
persons he despaired to root out Religion utterly. He moves every stone, how
it may become vain and unserviceable, by the erection of many though false and
ridiculous; like that Valentinian College, and Gnostics of old, bringing in
Confusion under the title of Religion; Confusio praedicatur, dum religio
asseveratur. Tertul.
wherein the rabble of rude inventions exceed the Poetry of the Ancient
Paynims. How pregnant this Lying Spirit is in the mouth of his Adherents, the
present monstrous-shapen heresies are open proofs; in whose conceits Religion
seems like a cracked Mirror, broken in pieces by their vain imaginations, and
reflecting multiplied images of their conceited Divinity, as if the highway of
the Church were a walk too public, and too much beaten, and their spawn good
for nothing but to increase and multiply. O how secure are those paths, fenced
with the authority of sacred Scripture, Ab Apostolis -- traducem fidei, and
seminae doctrinae Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and quotidie mutuantur ut Ecclesiae
fiant. Tertul. praescript. contr. Haer, c. 20.
and the tradition of the Catholic Church? They are assuredly in the right who
go after such directions; Fides munita divinae legis authoritate, tum deinde
ecclesiae Catholicae traditione. Vinc. Lyr. cap. 1.
as hands stayed and guided by a rule draw straiter lines than those that are
left to their own wills and motions. Fides ia regula posita est -- cedat
curiositas fide, cedat gloria saluti. Tertul. praescript. cap. 14.
And albeit that (...), and multiplex (...), that more than many-headed Hydra
of several opinions, and harvest of numerous errors may be esteemed with
Machiavels Confidents a State policy, to hurry the people, and wheel them about
with diverse Sects and new religions, thereby multiplying several claims and
respective interests; begetting so many apartiments, and special dependences;
yet those Praetorian Cohorts devised at first for the safeguard of the Roman
Emperors, proved their Confusion; and Ephraim may rise against Manasses, Isai.
9.21.
and both against Judah. In the mean space the dissentions of Heretics afford
some peace to the laboring Church, Bellum Haereticorum est paae Ecclesiae.
Hilar.
who from a firm rock beholds at sea their storms and confused struglings.

Satan gain upon the Church more, than under that specious pretense of
Reformation. Diverse good Christians of religious humors, as averse to abuses,
have lent too quick an ear to such Zealous out cries; and in sober truth, as it
is a necessary duty to cut off enormity and disriegled inordinances, so a
difficult office to carry an even hand; where a business of that consequence
desires to be undertaken upon assured grounds, and to be unalterably preserved,
lest the remedy may be more nocent than the disease; ordinary defects would
better be charitably concealed, than published to a scandal; besides ambitious
heresy may lurk under this covert, and such spirits of no great altitude at
their highest growth of place and preferment, may attempt to trouble the
waters, to advance their own interests; and who in the old form were but the
tail, might become the head in the new Classis. If we still continue Scepticks
in the settlement of Church and Doctrine, without the attainment of any period,
Tertul. praescript. cap. 10.
Ubi erit finis quaerendi, ubi statio credendi, ubi expunctio inveniendi? when
will there be an end of quarrelling, a standard of faith, or a full point of
enquiry? It was the glory of Queen Elizabeth (whose times none behold without
reverence) to have proceeded in reforming with much peace and prudence,
confining reformation to choice and necessary points, and her self ever after
to her first resolves, which seems no less, by that wise answer or Oracle she
returned to a Pragmatick Petition, Neque id praeceps, aut acri impetu, sed
prudenter, and tempestive.
preferred at the entrance to her reign, Aulicus quidam libellum supplicem ei
porrexit -- restare adhuc quatuor aut quinque vinctos, idque inunerito, -- cos
esse quatuor Evangelistas, ac Apostolum Paulum diu in ignota lingua, ac carcere
conclusos, and inter populum conversari non posse; illis se libertatem ut
reliquis petere: cui illa prudentissime; sciscitandum adhuc meli^^s sab ipsis
esse, utrum liberari v^llent. M S. in felicem memoriam Elizabethae R. Authore
sui feculi Nesto^e Jacobo L^y, Marlbrigii Comite, summo Angliae Quaestore.
wherein was contained, That it being a gracious time of enlarging prisoners,
there remained four or five yet in durance without cause, and so straightned in
an unknown tongue, as they could hold no commerce with the people; such were
the four Evangelists and Saint Paul. To which request She discreetly answered,
It were well the prisoners minds were first known, if they desired so to be
freed: the heat of that Zelot, and many others being by that her sage response,
and mature proceedings much abated. But that Reformation is never more justly
suspected, when set on foot by the sons of Machiavell to keep up their
reputation with the people, as if they would appear with eyes more intent upon
disorders, careful of the public, and all their thoughts being how errors may
be redressed; by such arts continuing their credit, and at once under the noise
of clamorous Reformers, conveying to themselves the wealth of Sacred things
devoted to augment true p^ety, and to add luster to the greatness and majesty
of Religion; for that Reformation (...) would be deemed undertaken upon
Spiritual grounds, which in the entrance and ending thereof is performed
without Sacrilege. The Rebels in Edward sixth's time, as if Piety were chiefly
aimed at, and a show of justice levelled, caused Psalms to be sung, and
Sermons to be made under an old tree, Speed in Edw. 6. an. 111.
and a Tribunal was there erected, which they styled the Oak of Reformation.
God best knows how many such practices have since been set on foot under the
shadows of such Oaks; where Religion is pretended the incendiary to kindle,
Potentisumum ad ciendas seditiones telum religio. Thuan.
and Trumpet to blow the coals, and ensign to hold forth and carry on
seditious insurrections. Undoubtedly there has not issued a more dangerous
ambush for Sacrilege, to surprise the possessions of the Church, and to
Secularize her patrimony, than forth of this den. The Parties to the late
league in France thereby reconciling to themselves no small credit and power;
till at length it was discovered, that they went about to contrive a
Spanish-cloak of the cloth of Religion: Ex religionis pallio penulam Hispanicam
facere. Thuan.
so hugely is Religion, and the sincere professors thereof by such pretenders
scandalized and abused.

Of late times many have been the prejudices had against the Clergy, and happy
was the Envious man to have found a probable fallacy for his malice to work
upon; the Church was then leading forward to devotion, which the Devil seeing,
thought it seasonable to trip up the proceeders heels in those paths of
Righteousness, and there to make his batteries where the fort was weakest, the
defendents fewest, and the entry easiest. But at what sparks the persecution
first kindled, those Incendiaries know best that first blew the coals. In which
Agon (besides their intention) new combats, Crowns and triumphs were by them
dedicated. Persecutions, no news to the Church, seemed new to our peaceful
estate. Providence ordaining a Scene for us, and that we also should bear a
part, and be acquainted with the troublesome style of the Primitive times; and
our flourishing Church to be tried, with what uprightness she would demean
herself in raging seasons, that by patience and long suffering she might reach
those laurels, triumphant in glory the Stars far under; A Patron and Defender
she had in whom she much gloried, Tam mala Pompeti, quam prospera mundus
adorat. Lucan.
and of whom (as times are) she is not ashamed; that Antiqua Moles, great and
venerable Pile will yet stand in our greatest City, as a monument of his
intended munificence, and the present usage; whose Faith he maintained with his
Pen, defended with his Sword, and seated with his Blood: By him were her
immunities asserted, Patrimony prorected, and Discipline vindicated; and quid
amplius faciendum fuit vineae? Reform^tam Apostolicam religionem sc^iptis
nervose confirm^ns, n^efuso tantum atramento, sed sanguine vind^cans. Elench.
motuum Nuper. Esaias 5.4.
But her Grapes were wild, and God was just, and Satan malicious, and man
avaritious, and the wild Boar ready upon all occasions to root up the vincyard;
Insomuch that her Angels are fallen, her fixed stars become planetary, and that
whilome Stupor mundi clerus Britannicus, as one of her Mell fluent Senators
termed her, is in her exile still stupor mundi, the am^zement of the world,
Bishop Hall, (...). Heb. 10.33.
being made a gazing stock both by repoches and afflictions -- wandering about
in sheepskins, and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented: upon
whom how fordid and mean soever such clothing be, yet if composed by
affliction, and worn with patience, not Solomon in all his royalty was so
arrayed. And to considerate minds the lightness of affliction in one scale, and
the weight of glory ponderated in the other; the eternity of the one, 2 Cor.
4.11.
and the momentaneous brevity of the other would appear so heavenly wide,
(...). Clem. Rom, Epist. ad Corinth. 1. page 23.
that all Gods people could not be offended to be clad as one of those.

There are amongst the sons of men three different dispositions; incapable of
instruction, and not to be wrought upon by afflictions; whose Hearts are so
hardened upon the anvile, and by the God of this world, as not made malleable
or mollified by the thunder of any judgments; so secured with answerable
success in all their undertakings, as to kick at the least contradiction;
wherein humane felicity is the mist and veil, (...) Demosthen.
hindering the sight from distinguishing good and evil; unto such undeserving
persons and undeserved favors, like the Rhodians always enjoying the Sunshine
of prosperity, (...). Isid. Pelus. lib. 2. Epist. 122.
without the least cloud of sorrow, or spark of piety; that only do evil, and
suffer none; we keep silence and stand amazed, and are filled with expectancy
what the judge of all the world will do.

non proficients, not bettered the least tittle by afflictions, have been long
kept at school with no improvement; whose dross in the crucible is so much,
and rust in the Iron so deep, and spots in the garment so foul, as no Fullers
soap can cleanse; against such there goes out a speech from the Lord, Isa. 1.5.
Why should ye be stricken any more? They are no longer for the rod, their
stubbornness is mature for other judgments. A sad sign the disease is deplorate
and desperate, when the sovereign Physician gives the patient over.

Ship tossed with winds, beaten upon tocks, and rolled in waves, upheld by
divine power is not broken with that shipwreck, but rides securely, where the
hand of the most High supporteth, and where supreme care is the rudder of that
ship, (...). Musaeus.
the ship of that Navy, and the Navy of that Pilot and Admiral who steereth all
with his Providence, it shall not miscarry. It is much to be desired of us (and
desired I fear it may be, more than yet expected) that all of us in one vessel
were bound one way, and would not vainly imagine to sail diverse courses in one
ship, but rather like that Apostolical assembly, be (...), all of one accord in
one place; Act. 2.1. Psalm. 133.2.
and like Brethren to dwell together in Unity. And that such harmony were set
in our Church music, as all parts might agree to meet at the service; and that
several interests might not break the peace of Christendom. The common enemy
to the Cross of Christ, having from their mutual discords drawn no small
advantage; nothing more encouraging the barbarous arms of the Ottoman family
against them, than Civil broils. And in our divided world there are not more
dangerous inlets of ruin than our domestical divisions; our sins having
separated from God, and our discords from our selves, self-interests having
eclipsed a glorious Church, and self-opinions well nigh extinguished it. Philip
of Macedon minding to subdue the Oricians, Philippus Macedo Oricios suos hosts
in potestat^m redigere, and in hoc exercitum misisset, scripsit, M^ssos a se
milites, quod comperisset cos seditionibus vexari. Thuan. hist. Tom. 5. page
318.
and invading them with an Army, said; That finding them at odds with
themselves he had sent them an Army. Such of late have been the results of the
Turkish Council, if they should display their Ensigns against the Persian in
the East, or against the Western Empire; where his Martial Senate resolved for
the West; for that the expedition undertaken against the Christians in the
West, Inter tot dissidentes religione, lingua, moribus, nationes, ex quibus
auxiliarem exercitum conflari necesse est, procul dubio esse quin male
conveniant, ac proinde lent and improspere administrari: Haec in Divano
agitata. Thuan. Histor. Tom. 5. ad an. 1592. page 277. edit. Genevae, A. D.
1620.
was there safest, where their discords were greatest; so a mighty storm fell
on Hungary. Such dangers from abroad might be weighed by them that have from
our dissentions at home sucked no small advantage. And to boot it would be the
soundest advertisement, to strike at the root of all sin, and especially those
Epidemical ones that have pulled on our heads these National judgments; and to
know how sin is best drowned in the tears of Repentance; and the best evidence
of true repentance is the forsaking of sin, according to that Arabique adage,
Optimum paenitentiae est paucitas delicti; (...) arabic. Adag. 68.
That is accounted the truest repentance, which is accompanied with fewest
faults; serious sorrow for sin is a sure forsaking of sin, and there can be no
sound repentance, where is no solid amendment. If such meditations would fall
under our considerations, the Author of these might hope, that This, or
Antidotes of this nature might be sought after, and prayers directed to heaven
for wished success. And no doubt God would then give audience when our
devotions are incensed with piety; (...). As true a position of a blind Poet,
as of the blind man, John 11.31.
nor can there in this spiritual warfare be better weapons than prayers and
tears. K. Gustavus. Ferdinand. 3.
That hardy Swede dreaded more the prayers of that Christian Emperor than his
forces; surely at last prayers in the one prevailed above arms in the other.
United prayers would compass this Island with greater safety, than her Seas, or
Shipping: And it seems by an Ancient story, this Nation long ago to be owned as
Gods peculiar, by an answer returned to a holy Prelate, Brithwoldo apud
Glascon^am excubiis liccubranti and de Regia stirpe pene deleta angenti,
responsum est, Regnum Anglorum est Dei, etc. Will. Malmesb. de Gestis Anglor.
lib. 2. page 51. Londini.
anxious of the State and Regal issue well nigh extinguished; Regnum Anglorum
est Dei, post te (Edward Confessor) providit Regem ad placitum sui.

Lastly, though small is the appearance of the approbation of this Treatise to
the Practick thereof, yet the prayers of the faithful may even in this behalf
prevail; and herein Gods will be done. The Setter hereof has to his best skill
planted and watered, the increase is from God; Philosophia pancis contenta
scholaribus, Christian Philosophy is content with few scholars, and Wisdom is
pleased to be justified of her children. And remain it will (if for no other
end) yet as a Needle in the Card to show our aberrations.

Soli Deo UNICO and TRINO Honor and Gloria.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Book.

Page 7. l. 18. r. (...). l. 26. r. (...) P. 11. l. 15. r. intimating. p. 20.
l. 36. r. (...). p. 29. l. 23. r. the. p. 32. l. 30. r. N'erra. p. 37. l. 16.
r. (...). p. 99. l. 32. r. as do. p. 120. l. 13. r. lepers. p. 124. l. 18. r.
convene. p. 135. l 6. r. Bench. p. 137. l. 28. add, but. p. 147. l. 18. dele,
a. p. 171. l. 5. r. composed. p. 184. l. 2. dele, and. r. bait and. p. 208. l.
6. dele, yet. p. 212. l. 17. r. to drive. p. 228. l. 16. r. fides. p. 271. l.
29. dele, the. p. 316. l. 13. r. the fifth.

In the Margin.

Page 4. l. 10. r. (...). l. ult. r. Levit. 5.5. Psalm. 32. 5. p. 5. l. 5. r.
Psalm. 26.7. p. 11. l. 7 r. (...). p. 17. l. 18. r. haeres. p. 21. l. 5. dele,
a. p. 22. l. 21. r. (...). p. 24. l. 14. r. (...). l. 31. r. (...). p. 30. l.
17. r. Boior. p. 32. l. 1. r. Apparet. p. 33. l. 16. r. Thevet. p. 34. l. 21.
r. iste. p. 42. l. 5. r. solvendo. p. 47. l. 12. r. (...). p. 49. l. ult. r.
Mercer. p. 54. l. 17. r. (...). p. 59. l. 13. r. (...). l. 1 ^^r. Tom. 1. p.
60. l, 15. r. (...) P. 70. l. 5. r. ascavair par le main. p. 72. add against l.
20. Waldens. tom. 2. de Sacrament. cap. 137. p. 99. l. 9. r. Occulte ago, apud
Deum ago. p. 103. l. ult. r. animis. p. 116. l 8 r. quin aliquis. p. 117. l.
18. r. concilium. 119. l. 4. r. promulgatum. p. 120. l. 6. r. ite. p. 126. l.
7. r. talis. p. 138. l. penult. r. qui. p. 172. l. 29. r. fatta. p. 186. l 9.
r. consentantum. p. 194. l. 6. r. importabile. p. 230. l. 12. r. (...). ibid.
(...). p. 238. l. penult. r. Orthod. p. 271. l. 12. r. Mason. p. 298. l.
penult. (...).


