THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS Of the Principal Nations of EUROPE.
Gathered together by the particular Observation of JAMES SALGADO, a Spaniard,
in his Travels through those Countries; and Translated into English by the
Authors Care, Anno 1684
In Counsel.
THE German's slow, but sure, no froth nor flash;
The English resolute; The French are rash;
The Italian's subtle, politic and wise;
The Spaniard cautions, wary to advise.
In Consilio.
COnsilio est lentus Germanus; Fortiter autem
Anglia res tractat; Gallia precipitat;
Italus est semper subtilis, singula lustrans;
Cautus and Hispanus prospicit acta sua.
In Faith.
The German's firm; the English does distrust;
The French unstable, light as Summers Dust;
The Italian does, as Interest bids, believe;
The Spaniards Faith is, that he may deceive.
In Fide.
Germanus retinet promissum; Diffidit Anglus;
Esse levem Gallum frons probat; Italia
Respicit ut Centrum sua commoda: Nec dubitamus
Hispani Genium dicere fraud malum.
In Love.
The Germans know not what this passion means;
The English somewhat; France is all extremes;
The Italian Loves Intrigues can carry on;
The Spaniard Loves to purpose like a Man.
In Amore.
Delicias Artis Germania nescit amandi;
Anglus amat formam conveniente loco;
Gallus amat semper; studio moderatur amorem
Italus; Hispanus novit amare been.
In Stature.
The Germans they are bulky, big, and tall;
The English comely, well proportioned all;
The French do twine, and twist their Bodies so,
That th'Devil himself can scarce their Stature know;
The Italian's middle sized, not short, nor tall;
The Spaniard is ill featured, swarthy, small.
In Statura.
Corpore procerus fertur Germanus; Et Angles
Pulcher in ore color corpora concelebrat;
Gestibus est pictus Gallus; Tuque Itale servas
Quod decet; Hispanus squallidus usque manet.
In Clothes.
The G^rman's Garb is course, Cloth spun at home;
The French and English change with every Moon;
In all their changes lavishly profuse,
As though 'twas all for show, and not for use;
In their Apparel the Italians spare;
And all the Spaniards very modest are.
In Vestibus.
Pauperis est instar Germanus; Prod gus Anglus;
Mutat Gallus amans; Parcus habetur enim
Italus ad Vestes quod spectat; seque modestum
Hispanus perhibet; nam novitate caret.
In Science.
The Germans Pedants are in Sciences;
The English Philosophically wise;
The French does something of all Knowledge sound;
Italians Doctor-like; Spaniards profound.
In Scientia.
Mimicus affectat Germanus singula; At Angli
Philosophos referunt; Gallia scitque aliquid
Ex multis; Similis Doctoribus Italus estque;
Hispanus penetrat quaeque profunda cito.
In Secrecy.
What Germans hear, it gets out of their head;
The English know what should be done, or said;
The Leaky French for Secrecy are Fools;
Secrets run through them, through some thousand holes:
The mute Italian has no Tongue for this;
The Spaniard close, faithful, and silent is.
In Secreto.
Germanus languens totum obliviscitur; Anglus
Prudenter loquitur; Gallia nilque tacet;
Italus abscondit sibi tradita mente silenti;
Hispanus reserat nulla tacenda sibi.
In Language.
The Germans madmen like, speak wild and bold;
The English speaks, for fear his Mouth catch cold,
Like Lady small-mouth; and the French does cant,
As Madam-singing, agrees in Patch and Paint;
The Italian like Stage-Play'rs acts his words;
The manly Spaniard Nature's Voice affords.
In Lingua.
Haud aliter loquitur Germanus, quam furibundus;
Angli Lingua refert semineum Genium;
Gallus ut est Cantor; sic Italus Histrio fertur;
Hispanus loquitur verba decora quidem.
In Injuries and Favors.
The Germans neither good nor evil do;
The English both, it Causes call thereto;
The French their good forget, their wrongs forgive;
The Italians love, whom they their Friends believe,
Firm to their hate, in their Revenge they are mad;
The Spaniard's most alike, if not as bad.
In Injuriis, and Beneficiis.
Germanus cyphra est; Anglus mala, bellaque praestat;
Nulla recordatur Gallulus acta sibi;
Italus ex damno rabidus sit, commoda pensans;
Hispanusque bonum connotat, a^que malum.
In Feasting.
The German drowns in Wine his Wits, and Might,
In various Plenty The English do delight;
Mounsieur's for kick-shaws delicate, fine knacks;
The Italian's sober; but the Spaniard lacks;
When he does feast his Lords and Dukes, he has
But one poor pound of Meat, and twelve of Grass.
In Conviviis.
Ebrietas vincit Germanos; Anglus abundat;
Gallia, mente levis, deliciosa manet;
Sobria Gens Romae est; Parcusque Hispanus habenas
Usque negat stomacho; nam brevis offa datur.
In Manners.
The German's clownish; the English are austere;
The French are courteous, kind, and Debonair;
The Italian's in his Carriage very civil;
The scornful Spaniard proud as any Devil.
In Moribus.
Moribus aggrestis Germania dicitur; Anglus
Austerus gestu est; Gallia semper amat
Urbanos homines: Civilia praestat, and optat
Italus; Hispanus temnere saepe solet.
In Courage and Mind.
Rough like a Bear, the Germans seem to us;
Like Lions the English, Great and Generous;
Quick piercing Eagle-like the French; no less
The Italian Fox-like, thrives by craftiness;
The Spaniard bears an Elephant-like state,
Majestic, slow, grave, and deliberate.
In Animo, and Audacia.
Ursa etenim es Germane ferox; Ac ut Leosaevis
Anglia; Galle quidem nunc Aquilam sequeris;
Itale tu spectas cautae v^stigia Vulpis;
Hispanusque Elephas, pondera magna feret.
In Grandeur and Stateliness.
The German's Grandeur is where none does see;
The English love Magnificence at Sea;
But the French Court is glorious, great and brave;
And sumptuous Churches will the Italians have;
The Spaniard loves his Armor should be fine,
And seeks in splendid Coats of Mail to shine.
In Magnificentia.
Angulus est Testis number sit Germania splendens;
Angelus est Anglus, magnificusque mari;
Inque Aula Gallus versabitur; Italus ornat
Templa sua; Hispanus ferra gerendo micat.
In Beauty.
The Germans seem like Statues made of Brass;
The French has Man's, the English Angels face;
The Italians so and so; but you may trace
The Devil's Hoof, in the Spaniards cloven Face.
In Pulchritudine.
Germanus Statuam forma demonstrat; At Anglu^
Angelus est; hominem tu been Galle refers;
Italus en medium sibi possidet; Ater ab ortu
Hispanus Furiis assimilandus erit.
In Writing.
The Germans speak but bad, yet much do write;
The English Speech's not well, his Lines polite;
The French speak well, yet they can best indite;
The Italian is but so and so in both;
The Spaniard would do well were it not for sloth.
In Scriptura.
Germanus Lingua loquitur male, multaque scribit;
Lingua Anglus peccat, scribit at ille been;
Sermonem Gallis exornat scriptio; scribit
Italus ut medius; pulchraque scribit Iber.
In Presence.
The German is a Sot, so speak his Eyes;
The English looks not over Fool, nor wise;
The French seems mad, yet few their wit can scan;
The Italian seems, and is a prudent man;
But formal Spaniard with his deep Gravity,
Would fain seem wise, yet none more Fool than he.
In Praesentia.
Apparet demens Germanus, fit quoque demens;
Angle, Tibi alterutrum dicere nemo potest;
Insanire putes Gallos (hui!) Ut (Itale) dicunt,
Tu sapis; Hispanus stultus, and usque gravis.
In Laws.
The Germans Laws are rigid and severe,
Yet toward these they strict Observance bear;
France to good Laws gives no Obedience due;
The English still are hankering after new;
The Italians have good Laws, which they observe;
The Spaniards from not good nor bad dare swerve.
In Legibus.
Germanus strict as Leges observat; Et Anglus
Saepe novas optat; Gallia transgreditur;
Italus, ecce! bonas Leges custodit; At omnes
Fervidus Hispanus prosequitur studio.
In Service.
Germans are Slaves; the English Freemen all;
Humble the French; the Italian punctual;
The Spaniard, as it does his state befit,
In Service 'doth obediently submit.
In Servitio.
Mancipium perstat Germanus; Liber at Anglus;
Seque humilem Gallus praebet, and optat onus;
Italus in punctis versabitur ordine certo;
Subditus Hispanus praestat agenda cito.
In Humor and Disposition.
The German's changeable like Wind and Air;
The French is cheerful, brisk, and jocular;
The English is consorious, full of Gall,
Tart in Reflections, and Satirical;
The Italian he is Complaisant and Brave;
The Spaniard Majestic is and Grave.
In Humore.
Germanus varius perhibetur; Momus and Anglus;
Mimicus en Gallus scit Joca laeta dare.
Italus, ut socius, cunctis placet; Ac gravitatem
Hispanus retinet, quam retinere cupit.
In Religion.
The German is Religious throughout;
Zealous the French; the English are devout;
The Italians every Superstition try;
The Spaniard's stuffed with grave Hypocrisy.
In Religione.
Religionis amor per te Germania splendae
Anglia devotis dat documenta viris;
Gallo Zelus inest, Idolaque muta veretur
Italus; Hispanus dissimulare doce^.
In Marriage.
The German's Lord and Master of his Wife;
The English with them lead a slavish life;
The French like yoke-fellows, keep to the Law
Of their Estate, and equally do draw;
The Italians Wives may them their Jaylors call;
The Spaniard's cruel, and tyrannical.
In Matrimonio.
Germanus Dominus; servus quoque dicitur Anglus;
Gallus at est socius; vita beata quidem!
Italus est dirus custos; Nomenque Tyranni
Accipit Hispanus; saevit enim ra^ide
The Women.
The German Women are good, chaste, and cold;
In England they are Queens, free, headstrong, bold;
The French are Noble Madams, but (all know it)
They Are wanton and lascivious like a Goat;
The Italians they are wicked, though confined;
In Spain they are Handmaids of an Amorous mind.
Mulieres.
Est bona Germani mulier, sed frigida; Sela
Anglia Reginas nutrit; and ardet iis,
Quae Gallos pariunt (heu!) men's turpissima; Claudit
Italus has vinc'lis; Foemina Iberis amat.
In Diseases and Infirmities.
The knotty Gout does rack the German-Toes;
The great Sir P -- gets Monsieur by the Nose;
The Scurvey does the English overrun;
Italy is by Pestilence undone;
The Spaniards for cold Swellings have no ease;
King's Evil is their Catholic Disease.
In Infirmitate.
Ecce podagra gravis Germanos occupat; Anglo^
Scorbuticus morbus; Gallicus atque leves
Possidet en Gallos morbus; sic Italus urit
Peste; Ac Hispanos Regius exagitat.
In Civil Business and Meetings.
The German well begins, concludes amiss;
The English man wedded to his Judgment is;
The French capricious, windy, giddy, vain;
The Italian shows he has a Politic Brain;
But various the Conditions of Spain.
In Negotio and Conventione.
Principio Germane bonus, sed finis in actu
Es malus; Angle tuum dogma perenne manet;
Galle petis ventos; Romana Politica gens est;
Tu Caute Hispane es conditionis amans.
In Merchandising.
The Germans care at last, at first neglect;
Gain puffs not the English, nor does loss deject;
French covet all, if without any pain;
The Italian well does weigh his loss and gain;
The Spaniard never did great feats in Trade,
Because to venture far he is afraid.
In Mercatura.
Principio friget Germanus, denique fervet;
Commoda, nec damnum computat Anglus; Agis
Galle tenax, pauca; Ah! gemis Itale damna videndo;
Hispanusque timens cuncta, parum peragit.
In Traveling.
The Germans Travel, 'cause their Custom it is;
The English a Fool's humor for to please;
The Italian, and the French, like wise men, when
They Travel, it is to learn both things and men;
The Spaniard Travels for some want or strife,
To feed his hunger, or to save his life.
In Itinere.
Extera regna videt Germanus, mos sibi quod fit;
Anglos fronsque movet; Moribus addit opes
Plurima regna videns Gallus; Tuque Itale discis;
Hispanumque movent maxima damna domi.
LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden for the Author. 1684.


