THE MINISTER OF STATE. Wherein is shown, The true use OF Modern Policy.

BY MONSIEUR DE SILHON, Secretary to the late Cardinal RICHELIEU.

Englished by H. H. Tandem didici, animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring; And are to be sold at his shop at the George
in Fleetstreet near Cliffords Innt 1658.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, THE LORD VISCOUNT SCUDAMORE.
My Lord,
THis Translation makes its first address to your Honor's Accurat judgment,
but craves no protection for the Matter, or Expressions of the Original; For,
the Matter is but the result of your Reasonings; and the Expressions, but the
repetition of your Eloquence. In The Author, two things, besides his exact
knowledge in Civil and Divine affairs, are very remarkable; his Love to Truth,
and Hatred to Detraction: As to Truth, he holds it forth, as the best and most
permanent Policy for Princes, and their Ministers of State. Buy the Truth, but
sell it not, says Solomon. Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit. As to
Detraction, he condemns the practice of it in all persons, and gives the example
to others. For he is sparing in the discovery of some sharp Truths, and permits
the Matter, Errors, or Crimes, to publish the men. And it were to be wished,
that personal obloquie were not as modeable in our days, as new dresses.

In the business of Religion, he may be found zealous, but not superstitious,
and rather of the Gallican, then Papal persuasion. Deceits and Vices are
decryed by him, in what subject soever he finds them; Piety and Virtue highly
exalted. For he made them, if report be true, his daily exercise; as knowing,
that nothing can be perpetual, but what is founded upon Piety or Virtue: for
they are equal in the Balance, when Vices endure no equality. And being bred
in the School of that eminent and successful Cardinal of Richlieu, and
cherished in his Conversation and House, did collect the most resined products
of his Policy, Wit, and Experience, and gather the choicest Flowers of his
Garden.

The Book had a very high esteem in France, at the publication in Paris, and
has justified its credit in the present use, as an approved Jewel; and it
cannot go less in value here, where Learning and good Wits abound, and the
judgment of discerning a true Diamond from a Pibble stone, though never so well
set; equal, if not superior, to any Nation of the World.

My Lord,
Forgive th'excercise of your patience so long, in the Porch of this beautiful
and regular Edifice, raised from the materials of the Brain, and adorned with
the Beauties of Rhetoric, and Examples drawn to the life. But the Key being
now in your hand, your Lordship may enter at pleasure, and dismiss,

My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servant, H. H.


ADVERTISEMENT.
READER,
I Have some Considerations to represent unto thee concerning this Work,
whereupon I beseech thee to cast thy eyes. The first is in relation to the
Matter, which is composed of Reasonings and Examples. As to the Reasonings,
thou shall know them to be wholly mine, and a pure product of my wit, and by
consequence imperfect, and tastes of the weakness of the principle from which
it is derived. When I discourse of past Occurrences, and of things happened in
the Reigns of the King, If the true motives have not always been encountered
by me, nor the essential causes of their success; I have nothing to say to
thee, but that I had not the spirit of Divination; That I have not received
remembrances or instructions from any person; And that th'Actions of Princes
are like great Rivers, the beginning and springs whereof sew persons have seen,
though an infinite of persons see the course and progress of them.

If any person thinks my Judgment too free, chiefly when I speak of the Pope
and the matters of Rome, I beseech him to consider that gentler Consequences
cannot be drawn from The Examples that are brought; If the examples are false, I
have not invented them; the springs are well known: There Is cause
nevertheless to praise God that some of the Pastors who have governed his
Church have not been so black as they are painted. If they are true, there is
cause to admire the Divine Providence in preserving his Church from decay and
spot, in the time of corruption of some of its members, and in maintaining of
it in health, the plague being so near it. That is to say, as I understand it,
that nothing was altered of the means which God has appointed to guide us to
our supernatural end. That the Doctrine of Faith which is one of the
Principles that makes us act Christianly, and which has works for her nearest
end, is always the same. That the Sacraments which conferr and increase grace
in us by virtue of the Institution of Jesus Christ, and not by virtue of what
we bring unto it of ours, as of a meritorious cause, are not changed for the
number, their matter, or their form; That the permanent and incorruptible
State in these two things is found only in that holy Hierarchy which makes that
mystical Body of Jesus Christ; which is composed of a head that represents it,
and of many principal and subalterne members who hold of that head, and with
an admirable dependency and union amongst themselves. That it never happened that
this Head, and those members to whom it belongs to guide others, have together,
and with a common consent, failed against these two things; and that it will
never happen to the end of the world, at least if the Promises of God are
eternal, and his word unchangeable; and therefore no person is to wonder, if
out of the Church there be no salvation, since the Church only contains that
means that brings us thither, and preserves inviolable the substance and number
of the Sacraments, and the purity of th'Evangelicall doctrine. Moreover, and
for what respects every member of the Church in particular, That God has
left them in the hands of their counsel to believe or live as they please;
that he has put before them fire and water, that they may make their choice,
and that he imposes no necessity upon them, but leaves them be power of their
will, that is to say, the power to follow that good or to forsake it, to do
evil or to abstain from it.

When I speak then with liberty of the vices of some Popes, and of the
corruption of some of their Agents; I do not think to wrong Religion, nor to
offend the Church. The Cardinal Baronius relates, with much more soverity or
less allay then I do, the abuses which overstowed the Court of Rome when two
famous whores Theodosia, and Morosia, governed it, and the Popes of that time;
A man must not always set himself against known truths: Who support ill
causes lose their credit, and make themselves to be suspected, when they have
good ones to defend; and resemble certain persons who being equally honest to
all the world are not so to any person; and putting neither difference nor
measure to their civilities, and treating with the same honors and
complements, the persons of small merit and base condition, oblige not so much
the one as they wrong the others. Nevertheless if I am not deceived, I do
exercise such a moderation in speaking of Popes, and so well support what is of
Gods institution in condemning what proceeds from the weakness and from the
corruption of man, that I am so far from believing my self guilty of blame,
that I think, without vaunt, to have merited somewhat from the Holy Chair, if
without passion judgment be passed upon me. Howsoever if I flatter my self in
my apprehensions, and if the love of my work deceives me, I submit with a
complete submission to the judgment of Superiors, and of them who have power
to regulate my opinions, and to impose laws upon my understanding. What they
shall condemn, I condemn it; I do now retract what they shall not esteem
good, and I have not so little of Christianity as not to know that it is better
to obey and exercise a necessary virtue, then to make a noise in the world and
gain a vain reputation of spirit, in defending an ambiguous Opinion. Let this
be said in passing-by, and by way of prevention.

As for the Examples which make out the other part of the matter of this work; I
advise thee Reader, that if the Authors from whom I have taken them are
deceived, I will not be their security: If I have mistaken my self in what I
have taken from them, I confess freely that that fault is voluntary; that it is
a defect for which a remedy might have been found in consulting with knowing
men or books, but that I have not done it for want of leisure or industry: If
any person take it ill that I do make so frequent use of Spanish Examples, I
beseech him to consider that I do it for two or three reasons. The first, that
its the French humor to be more sensible of strange things than them of their
country. The second, in so much that they will serve the more to make known
the Conduct of the Spaniards; which is a necessary knowledge to the Agents of
other Princes, since that Nation holds other Christian nations in perpetual
exercise, and obliges them to be with her or against her. The third, insomuch
that, speaking generally, that Nation understands the Art to govern and
command men better then any Nation in the world. If I speak in many places with
praise of S. the Cardinal; be it considered apart from the interest of any
person, that I take nothing from another to give to him: That I do attribute
always to the King the chief glory of good success; That I do represent him
as the principal and first cause of the good fortune of France, and that the
praises which I give to S. the Cardinal, are applied unto him in such a manner
that they rebound nevertheless upon the King. That I condemn not in
particular any living person. That I commend others whom J meet with in my
discourse who deserve it, and give honor to virtue wheresoever I find it:
That I do report what passed under the Government of that great Minister of
State by way of Example, and as I do relate the Actions of a Ferrand Gonsalve,
or of a Gaston of Foix, of a Prince of Parma, or of a Duke of Guyse, that I
add nothing to the Actions; that I speak not but of the things we have
touched and seen, whereof our senses are Judges, and whereunto all Nations
give Evidence. I do but reason upon it, let it be examined whether my
reasonings are weak and ill grounded: and if they who take offense have better
Moralls and better Politiques then mine; I do not pretend to hinder them of
the light or of the value they shall put upon them; with these Precautions. It
cannot be thought strange that I praise a Person who has rendered so great
Services to the King, which are known to all the world, who has so much
merited of the State and of Religion; that our Neighbors and they that love us
not, have an infinite esteem for him; and that he is my Master.

It remains to speak of the form of the Work, which is the style: Whereupon,
Reader, I do timely advise thee that I am not enflamed with eloquence: That I
have labored Things more then Words: That I have not read Quintilian, nor the
Rhetorique of Aristotle, unless it be that part where he speaks of the
passions of Men, and of the affections of diverse Ages. And therefore, if there
be any thing that relishes of this Art, know that it entered by chance, and
slipped in by accident: That it is a plant that grows of it self, and without
being set; and that I have done like the needle of a Watch which marks the
hours, without knowing of it. Notwithstanding I confess that I have not
neglected to give it ornaments after my fashion; that is to say, natural; and
that I had strewed more flowers if J had had them, or more leisure to have
gathered them; Thou may find there some inequality, and some places that are
not so strong or so well digested as others. But it is, that all the matters or
the manner wherewith they ought to be handled are not capable of the same force
and graces. Forgoes much better, when the subject carries us, and that we have
wind and tide, then when we cannot move but by the strength of Arms and Oars.
And the Masters of fortifications say, that there are places upon the Earth
which cannot be made strong; not for want of Art, but by reason of the vicious
platform and situation.

I beseech thee also, not to start back at the Entry, and at the reading of the
first discourse which has some Rudeness in it, whereof I am very sensible and
which is not sufficiently polished nor adorned.

THE MINISTER OF STATE.
First Book.
First Discourse.
That, An Excellent Minister of State is an Evidence of the Fortune of a
Prince, and the Instrument of the happiness of a State.
IN the course of Affairs, it is certain, that Designs only are in the power
of man, and that all Events are disposed by some Power above him, and which
being infinitely wise, does nothing by Chance. Th'hazard, to which so many
things are attributed, is a work of our brain, and none of the Principles of
governing the World. All things are guided without our help, in Light and
Justice; and the blind goddess, that is called Fortune, is a fancy, which
Philosophy has not adored, and Religion has abolished in the destruction of
Idolatry. The invention nevertheless has not been unprofitable. The
miserable, charge the causes of their misery upon it; and the imprudent, the
effects of their ill conducts: Her name is in the mouths of all persons, the
wise and unwise do equally employ it; and use is made of it sometimes, to be
the better understood, and not to depart from a received custom, nor from the
terms that are practiced. But to declare what it is; The Power we speak of, is
no other thing, than God himself; insomuch that he undertakes the government of
free causes, and disposes of them to his ends, whether they be conformable to
theirs, or contrary to them. And as the first Mobile, without destroying the
natural motion of the other Heavens, does make them subject to his, and
carries them from the East to the West, so God does manage in such sort the
actions of the Creatures, which work with liberty, that without violating their
freedom, and by the encounter of other causes, wherein he does cast them,
infallibly draws the effect which he proposed to himself, and which from
humane foresight is often little expected.

In a word, the workman that observes the rules of his Art, is never
disappointed of his intention; the Painter, that perfectly understands the
mixtures of Colors, and the proportions of Figures, draws at pleasure
exquisite Pictures; the Architect, that casts his designs by the rules of
Architecture, makes them happily to prosper. But the fairest operations of Man,
wherein his noblest part has most interest, are not solely capable of
attaining their end, and the effect aimed at. Hannibal acted the full duties of
a brave Captain, and yet was overcome by Scipio. Cicero forgets nothing of the
charge of an excellent Orator, yet Milon was condemned; and Andre Doria sees
the Fleet of his Master perish in the Port of Argiers. notwithstanding his
skill and experience in Maritime affairs. But what God adds to the Principles
that are in us, the occasions which He causes to arise for us, the means which
he suscitates, the obstacles which he diverts in our favor, and all the
assistance which He gives us, to make our desires to prosper, is, that which we
call, Good fortune, and them, Happy, which receive it. But this good success
does not always accompany Justice, and Holy enterprises, as God does not
always oppose unjust and violent designs; the Insidells have often triumphed
over the Armies of Christians, and of Catholieks. The most holy of our Kings
has been unhappy in his two Voyages beyond the Seas; and the Cause of God, for
which he made War, and the Interest of Religion, could not secure him from
prison, nor from the plague. On the contrary, nothing is read comparable to the
success of Usurpators; nothing put a stop to Alexander's successes, but his
death; and a Prince, for whose ambition the world was too little, and that had
the vanity to think, that there was not matter enough therein for his courage;
had fortune so favorable, that she covered his faults, and rendered his
failings happy. Caesar had most success, in the most unjust War he ever made,
he had no more to do than to go and conquer, in dissipating the Roman
Commonwealth. She that gave the Law to all the Earth, fell, in less time,
than is laid out in taking of a City; and three years have destroyed the works
of many ages. Attila and Tamberlain have passed like lightning in their
conquests; and the Race of Ottomans, which takes away Religion from God, and
liberty from men, has obtained so many victories, and extended so far Its
Dominions, for these hundred years and upwards, that no foreign force seems
sufficient and capable for the present, to abate the forces of that Empire; and
that it has nothing more to fear but its own greatness and excessive powers.
The reason of this diversity is, that God does not always work miracles, and
disorders not the order of things for the love of honest men; and as it is very
reasonable to raise their courage and confirm their hopes, that God should
sometimes visibly hasten to their releife, it is also most conformable to the
laws of his providence, and to the sweetness of his conduct, that second
causes be suffered for the most part to act according to their capacity and
extent of their force: and therefore, in order to that, the weak to give way
to the stronger; that a lesser virtue, politic I mean, obey the greater; and
that they, who have notorious advantages of their enemies, have also upon them
notorious success: otherwise truly he should oblige himself to repair all
the faults of them who have good intentions. And if goodness alone should be
successful in the world, prudence should be banished from the civil life, and
industry from the train of affairs.

As to the successes of Usurpators, It is easy to give the reason, if we
search causes of the change of States, and of the Revolution of Empires. It Is
certain that the greatest and most Extended are not always the firmest, nor
the most durable: on the contrary, as the most delicate fruits are sooner
spoiled then others, and a perfect health is an instance of a disease
approaching; it happens also that States which are in the flower of their
force, and at the last round of their happinesses, are not far from their
fall; Pleasure enters with wealth; power produces ambition, and these two
passions, which aspect always their ends without exception to means, draw
with them so many other evils, that of necessity those unhappy States must
perish and be translated into a new form of Government; In this fatal
conjuncture, if a person of courage and of ambition to conquer, take Arms, he
finds the matter ready prepared; God seconds his design, and abandons them
unto him whom ambition had divided, and whom delicacies had deprived of
Judgment, and affeminated their courage, not that he does inspire the
conquerors with unjust thoughts nor with those furious motions which thrust
them on to usurp what belongs to others, and to violate the rights of humane
society; but acted of their own accord, and by their own election, he may
lawfully favor them; and his justice will not suffer many good actions of
theirs to pass unrewarded, nor them unpunished who have abused his graces.

But when he makes choice of a person to repair the disorders of the world, or
for the good of a particular State; Then his care is showed in furnishing him
with necessary principles to undertake great matters. The thoughts are put in
his soul by God, and he gives the power to execute them; he troubles and
confounds his enemies, and leads him as by the hand to victories and triumphs;
and one of the greatest expedients whereof he serves himself for this purpose,
is, to raise unto him, excellent men, to whom he communicates his cares, and
who help him to bear the weight of Affairs.

And as the operations of the soul do themselves good or ill according to the
conditions of the organs and quality of their temper; the prosperity or
adversity of Princes depends on them, in whose hands their authority is placed,
and who dispose of their power. Alexander had never conquered Asia, nor made
the Indiaes to tremble but for Ephestion, Parmemo, and Clytus; Caesar gained
many battails by the hands of his Lieustenants; and the fairest Empire of the
world which ambition and ill of the times had divided into three parts, was
reduced under the dominion of Augustus by the Counsel of Mecaenas, and by the
Valor of Agrippa; Justinian triumphed over Persia, and destroyed the Vandals
in Africa, and the Goths in Italy, by the aid of Bellisarius and Narcete.

The Count of Dunois, Pothon, the Hire, and the Maid Jane delivered France
from the invasion of the English; And the first Man of the past-age of whom it
may truly be reported, that he was too happy for a Christian Prince, has by
his conduct, or with the aid of his Ministers of State, taken Rome and Thunis,
a Pope, a King of France; given chase to Salyman, and made it appear to
Germany that it was to be conquered. That very Prince who was so intelligent in
all things, and had added so many acquired qualities to the gifts of nature,
took the liberty to tell his Son in presenting to him the Secretary Eraso,
that he gave him somewhat that was greater than his States, and than the
Crowns which he had resigned unto him. By such sort of persons, Principalities
and Monarchies have been first founded. And for the love of them the people
have voluntarily renounced their Liberties; and they are the persons who renew
also under their Sovereigns the natural and primitive order of command, and of
that obedience which is amongst men: And truly 'twas very reasonable (since a
difference ought to be made amongst them) that Merit should begin to make it:
The Society to which they are born, and without which they cannot subsist, is a
Consort so delicate, and a Fabric composed of so many pieces, that if it be
not guided by a dextrous prudence, and maintained by a sovereign virtue, a very
little thing confounds and disorders it.

And insomuch that they who attain to such a condition are Extraordinary, but
not Immortal, and have not always successors of their virtue, as they have of
their dignity; It happens ordinarily that they leave, in favor of the people,
a representation of their reason, and as a Monument of their Philosophy, The
Laws and good Orders: And again, because all Laws are not good in all times,
and that they cannot provide against all occurrences and the accidents of life;
it is necessary that he raise also some wise Person, whose prudence may supply
the defects, and give them such a just temper and wholesome proportion as may
best fit the Time, Men, and Affairs.

It Is then a most certain truth, that good Ministers of state are the glory of
their Princes, and happiness of the people: on the contrary, the wicked are the
shame of throne, and despair of the other: They are the natural principles of
the Corruption of States; all ill humors are awakened under their conduct;
they serve for pretense, to the spite of discontented, and to the disturbance
of factious persons; and the people who are troubled to permit the Government
of honest men, are carried to License, and inclined to Rebellion, when they
fall under the power of those who are dishonest. It seems to them that it is
enough to have one Master, to whom necessary obedience ought to be paid, and
whose yoke God does oblige them to carry how grievous soever it be made; but to
obey them who are not their Sovereigns when they do them hurt, when they
triumph in their vexations, and nourish themselves in their blood; It Is a sad
necessity for them, and a hard essay of patience. In effect, If Aristotle has
defined a Tyrant to be, The person who has his peculiar interest more before
his eyes, then the good of his subjects; Into the hands of how many Tyrants do
the miserable people fall, when they are governed by corrupt Ministers of
State? and nevertheless it is a Flayl which they seldom want; And as the Prince
looks upon the State as a Wife that belongs to him, and which cannot be taken
from him: There are Ministers of State to be found, who cast their eyes upon it
as a Mistress, whom they endeavor to strip naked whilst they do enjoy her.

Second Discourse.
That thou art to govern is doubtful, and difficult; and receives a great
relief from Learning.
It Is not strange that so few honest men are found in the frequent occasions of
sinning; not that the knowledge of governing should be so rare when it is so
difficult. The reason of State which is the matter, is so perplexed and
ambiguous, and th'affairs have so many lights which confound our sight, that
it is no wonder, if we are often troubled to choose our party; and if the choice
made in so great a confusion be rather a stroke of chance, and trial of our
liberty, than a rational election; Moreover the greatest part of politic
precepts which are left us, and reduced into a form of science, are such
abstruse things, that if Nature or Experience give not the art of Application,
they become pernicious or vain; instead very often of making an able man, they
make only a Pedant, they communicate presumption rather then wisdom, they
make many to wander, rather then discover unto them the nearest way; and for an
uncertain reformation which they promise, they confound and alter all things by
the novelties they introduce. The way also by Examples, is so deceitful, and
the past makes so ill a judgment of the future, that no certainty can be
raised out of it: And as two Faces equally beautiful, or two Days of complete
resemblance are rarely seen; so the condition of affairs is always various,
where the Virtue of the persons that manage them is not alike, nor their
fortune equal. And again, as there is not much cause for him to deliberate, who
has not two faces, nor a party to follow, nor reasons to dispose him; There
are none also, who want examples and accidents to favor them.

The Pope, the Duke of Milan, and the King of Naples make a league against
Florence: To divert the tempest, Larance of Medicis, seeks the last; casts
himself at his discretion, and by that brave confidence withdrawes him from the
league, and prevents the lightning that was ready to fall, and might have
burned his Country.

Charles the eighth entered Italy like a Torrent, which drowned all that it
encountered; nothing made resistance; and Florence that was on his way trembled
for fear of her liberties. In this fatal fear and consternation of spirits,
Peter of Medicis, Son of Larance, goes to meet the victorious, and casts
himself unhappily into his nets; The Example which he would have followed, was
destructive to him, and he returned not till he had put the keys of the States
of the Commonwealth into our hands, till the Country way plundered of all
without, and in danger to be lost, if the generosity of the Citizens had not
been greater than the resolution of Charles, and than the fortune of that
unwise Conqueror.

When the Sr. of Lautree undertook th'enterprise of Naples, Hugo Moncado
resolved to defend only the City, and to abandon the rest of the Kingdom. The
Duke of Alva took a contrary course, when the Sr. of Groyse assaulted him
there, and by the advice of Ferrand Gonsalve, resolved to dispute all, and to
destroy us by a multitute of Sieges; both resolutions prospered, and two very
different Counsels had the same end, and the same effect, The victory. There
have been some whose single presence, and first words, have instantly appeased
th'insurrection of the people. And there have been others whom this monster
has suddenly devoured, to whom they have not given the leisure to speak nor to
open the mouth. How often by this means has Caesar and Germanicus appeased
the tumults of the Soldiers, and the sedition of Armies? And how many others
have perished in the same way, whose sight enflamed the humors that were but
moved, enraged those that were but provoked, and caused in them a desire of
satiating themselves with their blood, who before murmured only against their
Governments. In like manner they that have condemned Henry the third for
leaving Paris in that notorious revolt, which is called the Baricados, have at
least left as much cause to resist their judgment as they had to condemn a
Prince; who chose rather to retire, then to expose himself to an evil that
had no remedy if it happened; who permitted his people to be felons, rather
then to put them in a condition of being Patricides; and that would not
willingly suffer their faults to be completed, nor that the greatness of their
crimes should make them seek, in the death of him they had offended, impunity,
which they believed was not to be found in his clemency: But it is the error of
the greatest part of men, to exclaim always against th'unfortunate: There Is no
disgrace, whereof they that suffer it are not guilty in the opinion of the
people. Of all the expedients which they had in hand, they were the best which
they had quitted, when those they had taken did not prosper; and no old man
ever dyed, were he never so decayed or decrepit, to whom his life had not been
lengthned; if such a thing had not been done, or some other thing had been
done. And though it thus fall our, it must nevertheless be confessed, that
nothing does sooner polish a well composed understanding, then Policy and
History, nor that any thing is more profitable for it then conversation with
the dead, and absent persons: therein he knows in a little time th'affairs of
all Ages; there he enjoyes the experience of all the great persons that have
preceded; and there also he finds lights which hinder him often to fall, and
which make out the dangers unto him which he ought to pass; and th'ambushes
which he ought to avoid: at least by the favor of Books and Studies, he gains
that which prepares him against surprises. And sudden accidents, give not him
the disturbance they give to ignorant persons; since nothing is so near unto
him, whereof he has not read something approaching, or like unto it. The life
of man is so short, or so vexed, that it hardly holds out for five or six
important Negotiations; and ordinarily they who have but the single common
sense to act, cease to live, or have not health when they have experience: on
the contrary, they whom study prepares, and are guided by Philosophy, prosper
quickly if they meet with very profitable discourse. They are dextrous so soon
as they touch upon business, and have the same advantage over the first; as in
Painting, they have, who enjoy the science of Design and Proportion, over them
who have nothing of Acquisition when they begun to paint. Of this, we have,
without going from the modern time, illustrious examples, and eminent persons.
Monlue, Bishop of Valence, under Francis the second, and under Charles the
ninth. Pinai, Archbishop of Lions, under Henry the third; and the Cardinal of
Ossat, under the same Prince, and under Henry the Great, have been consummated
almost as soon in business, as known in Councills: And for the war, the
Marquess of Pescary, who was so brave, and whom the League of Italy judged
worthy to be opposed to Charles the fifth, when he was most happy. The last
Prince of Orange, whose life had been too glorious if it had been shorter, and
if fortune had suffered him to have perished in the relief of Bergen Opson. The
Marquess of Spinela, who deserved at first to command th'Armies of Spain, and
to be the Rival of the last Prince of Orange in military science: The greatest
number of these great persons, I say, owe to Books, a part of the honor which
they have gained without watching, and of that high reputation which they have
so timely obtained.

But why should we search into the Age past, and amongst strangers for proofs
of this truth? since we have them so clear and visible in the person of Sr. the
Cardinal of Bichlieu: It Is true, that Nature has given him all she had to
give, to make him perfect; and that she has powered out upon him with full
hands, her favor and riches. But it is true also, that he has labored very
hard to complete himself, and that study and meditation have acquired unto him
almost all that was wanting to nature, and all that could be expected from
experience. Th'affairs have served more for matter to his understanding in the
exercise of it, than for occasion to instruct it: He knew how to command before
he had ever obeyed; and there is nothing so great in Peace and War, which was
difficult unto him, when he had undertaken it. We will make, God assisting, in
another place an express discourse of the profits of knowledge.

The third Discourse.
That the knowledge of the Moral, is a necessary preparation for the Politic.
There Is no question but that the knowledge of Manners is a necessary
preparative for the Civil knowledge; and that they who aspire to this without
being furnished with the other, may be resembled to sick persons who undertake
to run before they have the force to go. The conduct of man in his particular,
is an abstracted picture of the Government of States: In all things there are
difficulties to be surmounted, and enemies to be overcomne. A command, and an
obedience are there to be established; labors within and without are to be
exercised, and a felicity is to be there gained, as the end of both life's;
wherefore I will speak here a word of the Moral, and of its usage. The matter
is thorny, but it shall be profitable; if it be not agreeable, it shall be
wholesome; and if there be neither colors nor perfumes to delight the senses,
there shall be substance, and truth, for the satisfaction of th'understanding,
and for discovery of reason. However, the discourse shall not be tedious,
because it shall be very short.

The Moral then respects Man all alone, and out of the tumult of affairs and
public agitation, it considers the two parts whereof he is framed, and that
strange Engine which is composed of body and spirit, of sense and
understanding. It acts in maintaining the order which ought to be preserved
betwixt two so different natures and extremities. It would have the noblest to
command, the most illuminated to govern; that profit give place to honesty;
that virtue be preferred before pleasure. And that what is most conformable to
the dignity of Man, hold also the first rank in his inclinations, and be the
principal object of his cares, and the chiefest endeavor of his life. In this
order consists his glory and natural felicity. The contrary, that is to say,
when the composition has so obstructed th'understanding, and seized upon the
faculties, that it becomes slave to the body, makes out a fearful confusion,
and a lamentable Anarchy. The middle condition is a state of civil War, wherein
common persons are always engaged, and from which wise men are not ever
exempted. It Is betwixt reason and passions, the one whereof is the property of
th'understanding, and resides in the chiefest place of the soul: And the others
are formed in the low Region, and in that brutall capacity which follows only
th'impressions of sense, and is concerned only in the good of th'Animal part.
They are raised and enflamed, as the object that provokes is violent and rapid.
But it is not necessary, that in themselves there should be that violence and
force which stirs up th'appetite; it suffices, that it is received in
th'imagination where it enters. There it takes the form and the color as
pleases to that fantastic faculty; there it swells or abates, as it seems good
to that Fool. In one place it communicates joy, in another it raises sadness:
Now it is but an Atome, which is hardly felt, and which does but scarcely touch
upon the superficies of the soul; and in four moments after it is a Monster,
which tears and divides it into pieces, which makes havoke in all its powers,
and which brings trouble even to the Will which it would corrupt, and even to
Reason also which it endeavors to suborne; so certain is it, that the
imagination is supple and various, and that things act not in us according to
Their measure, but according to Hers. It Is true, that the objects which are
agreeable to the sense, and promise them their felicity, are to be feared. And
there is no imagination so weighty nor dull, which is not raised; nor appetite
so cold and so mortified, which is not heated; moreover the disturbance is
sometimes so great, and the tempest so furious, that it is not in the power of
the soul to quiet it: but in case she stand firm in the desire of good, which
is most convenient for her, and whereof she has made choice; honor is always
on her side, and to overcome; It suffices not to be overcomne, and to dissent
from pressing temptations. In conclusion, after many combats and defeats of
such nature, she will remain peaceable, the lights of the Imagination shall be
abated. The Appetite shall have no force longer to rebel, Reason will reign
with resistance, and the man that is arrived to such a state, deserves of
natural right to be preferred before other men: lets pass further.

The Moral requires not only Man within himself, and engaged in the
disorders of the body and spirit of reason and passions; but considers him also
in his conversation and in the Crowd. For that end he teaches him a virtue,
which is called Justice, which instructs him to live well with his Neighbor,
and inclines him to render unto him what is his due, and which for the present
is wholly almost employed about the division of Riches, and th'introduction,
which has been made in the world, of Mine and Thine. Introduction nevertheless
very necessary for the good of society, for the ornament of the civil life,
and for the plenty of all such things as are commodious for man. The
Legislators and Founders of States, have regulated this justice; and in regard
that she appeared to them a little too much in common, and that it seemed to
them a very dangerous thing to leave the conduct thereof to every man's
judgment and inclination: they have bounded her in certain Laws and customs
which they have made: they have established public persons to distribute it;
they have put the sword into their hand to make men afraid of it, and have
given it a scabberd with the name of a Prince, and of his Authority, to gain it
the more respect.

But insomuch that notwithstanding the great care has been taken to adjust the
Rule, it remains imperfect, and that the foresight of humane understanding is
not so great as the variery of cases which interpose in Traffic; an honest
man will not stay there, he will have recourse also for the regulating of his
actions, and forming of his life to the fountain of Equity, and to the first
spring of Justice, which is the Law of nature, or to walk after a more certain
guide, and by a light free from corruption; he will follow the dictates of
Religion and motions of Charity, which is the end of Christianity, which is the
fullness of other Laws, and the definitive measure of all good things. He must
have a respect for the formalities of ordinary justice; but he must not believe
that they make up the perfection of a Christian, nor of a Philosopher. He must
know that the Laws of Conscience extend themselves further then her^; and that
they endure a severer and more general obligation; In effect, if conscience
only were in the world, we should be dispensed of many things which we are
bound to do, we should have probity good cheap; the duty of an honest man would
be very large, and the way that leads to heaven would not be so long and
straight as the Bible describes it.

The fourth Discourse.
How that saying of the Philosophers is to be understood, that, who commands
ought to be wiser and better then the person that obeyes.
It Is true then, that the Moral is one of the foundations whereupon the
Politic is raised, and ought to prepare them that aspire to the Government of
States, and to that direction of the people. From thence is taken that common
saying of Philosophers, That who commands ought to be better then the person
that obeyes; and that, The Government of men belongs not to him that is a slave
to his passions, nor to govern another unless he has the better sight. It
serves not therefore a Prince to have ordinary intelligence, or a common
qualification of manners: But to satisfy his duty, and fill up worthily his
charge, it seems that he ought to have a more sublime reason, and disposition
of will more perfect then his subjects; This proposition nevertheless is not to
be understood literally and in a very rigorous sense. That was good in the
founding of States, and in the first liberty which the people had to make
choice of their Superiors and Masters. Then it was necessary that the Election
should be made of extraordinary persons, whose merit ought to be as high as the
dignity to which they are called. But for Sovereign Princes who come by
succession, who are born with the Character of a Prince, and are received
without choice; they must be taken as God sends them, in wrath, or in the love
he has to his people, which ought to be submitted unto them. But whosoever
they are, they cannot always be perfect at the instant of Reigning, nor have
that force of reason, nor temper of manners which the Philosophers require in
them that govern; Prudence, and other moral and politic virtues are not born
with us, and come not of themselves. They must be gained with meditation and
exercise, and by consequence with time and years. And though the principles
are in our souls, and the seed in our reason, they remain barren till they are
cultivated, and, if pains be not taken to preserve them, they are smothered in
the seeds of evil which are in our senses, and in the corruption of our
nature; The intention then of the Philosophers, is, that the virtues of Princes
are of more esteem then the virtues of particular persons, in regard that they
have a greater extent of exercise, and a more universal influence; that they
are more communicable; that they dart their beams at greater distance, that
their bounty attracts more imitation, and that it is not so easy to command,
as perfectly to obey; nor to lead as to follow; That if such great qualities
are not to be found in their person, if their birth be unhappy, and if the
matter whereof they are made cannot receive such divine forms, they ought at
least to be in them of their Council, who act with their Princes, in the
conduct of Affairs.

When the Prince is stupid or depraved in manners; when they are contrary to
the function of his charge, and to the dignity he does exercise; when they move
directly, and of their proper motion to the ruin of their subjects; What can
be expected from such a Government if the infection has also gained upon the
Ministers of State, if they resemble their Master, if they do not counterpoise
his vices; And if th'evill be entertained by the multitude of evil persons,
such was the Council of Jeroboam, when he called to Council only young and
deboshed, instead of ancient persons, who had been eyewitnesses of the
Government of his Father, and saw that wisdom acted which was infused without
the discourse of Reason, and the cares of Experience. This nevertheless is not
extraordinary in the world, and it happens but too often that such as approach
the Persons of Princes, study not so much to be ministers of their dignities,
as instruments of their passions; They are rather their Corrupters then
Counselors; that th'imploy Vice when Virtue is unprofitable to advance them,
and that they esteem nothing base or dishonest that may satisfy Ambition, or
assure their fortune; And though the way they take, lead to precipices, and
that there are many fresh and sensible examples of them who have therein ruined
themselves; that makes no impression upon their minds: The ill fortune of
others concerns them not, and they have so good opinion of themselves, that
they imagine to have better conduct, or better fortune to warrant their
behavior. And truly although in a sea so tempestuous, at the Court, and where
tempests are frequent; they see also by consequence that shipwracks are
ordinary there; the pieces nevertheless of that wrack are so fair, that they
seem to them of greater value, then the condition from whence they had been
taken, and then the advantages of their birth. It Is true, that Corruption
sometimes is so extreme in the soul of a Prince, and his Manners changed into
so profound a deboshery, that Ministers of State are compelled to abate of the
severity of virtue in treating with him; They bank those passions which they
could not safely assault in a straight line; They suspend the reproof of vice,
where roots were not to be stocked up; They practice diversions, when the sick
person cannot endure Remedies, and of two Evils, in one whereof they must
undoubtedly fall, they divert him toward the lesser, for fear his inclination
should force him to the greater evil; A strange unhappiness, that to prevent
Incests and Adulteries, they must consent to other deboshes less criminal and
less injurious; and to avoid sacriledges, to permit him to act single ruins:
Seneca and Burrhas found themselves reduced to this miserable necessity; and
the Philosophy and virtue of those two great persons were constrained so to
bend under Nero, and to divert with industry the impetuosity of his vices:
which by opposition would have been the more enflamed. This conduct
nevertheless which ought to be secret, that it may work the better effects, and
be stolen from the eyes of the Prince, least it should hurt more then profit,
is many times ill interpreted; and the people consider not, that there are
sovereign Princes who are not to be handled as men, but governed as Lions, and
as furious beasts: and that it is a a great work to restrain their fury, and to
hinder them from killing and devouring. Thanks be to God, we are in another
condition; we have a king whose qualities to this time have been rather desired
then seen: God has given him to the world to repair the disorders of it; we
are bound to him for our safety, and they that have merited in the past
actions, were the instruments only of his fortune, and the imitators of his
virtue. Above all, it is a mark of heaven's gracious aspect upon this Prince, to
have raised for him so generous and so wise persons, so understanding and so
faithful as they of his Council. But it is an evidence also of the excellency
of his Judgment, and of the strength of his understanding to have made so good
a choice, and to have fixed his particular Election, upon his person who is the
Chief and first Intelligence.

Truly, if that be true which Aristotle says, that he alone has the pure use
of Reason, and by consequence the most perfect virtue, that has no violent
passions; It may be aver'd without flattery, that never person brought to the
service of Princes, and to the government of States, greater liberty of the
soul, then Sr. the Cardinal. His condition exempts him from the strong
impressions which blood and nature stampd upon the spirits of his fathers; He
is a stranger to all those inclinations, which being rooted in the body, carry
away the soul entirely, or divide it betwixt the pleasures of sense, and the
operations of the understanding. And as for that villainous appetite of wealth
which traverseth so many illustrious persons; which subornes the most useful
servants of Princes; and which has often blotted the fairest Life's: It is
far estranged from his humor; It Is certain, that if he has ever leaned to
any extremity in the way to virtue, it has been toward prodigality; and that
he found nothing so easy as to be in danger of poverty for the service of his
Master: insomuch that it may be said of him, that he has a soul so quiet, that
not a Motion arises in it, but what his duty does suggest; not an Agitation,
but what the love he bears to his King has occasioned; and that nothing has
been acted but what Reason has consented unto, and what Philosophy has
conveyed into the souls of the wisest persons.

The fifth Discourse.
That good Ministers of State have not always the Recompense which they
deserve; and that their Services are often paid with Ingratitude.
THat a Minister of State proposes to himself to act for the Love of Virtue,
and to draw from himself the Approbations of Conscience, as the chiefest
Recompense for the good he does; For to hope always, or for the most part,
Acknowledgement, or Justice from the souls of Princes, is not to know their
humor, and to mistake their nature. It Is to be ignorant that the great
services which are done them, are so many great Crimes, when they have not
wherewithal to requite them: That there are not in the world such dangerous
debtors as Princes, when they are insolvent; that they make away their
Creditors when they cannot pay them, for the fear they have that they will pay
themselves with their hands; That they are never confident of the faithfulness
of their subjects, who have power to hurt them; and that they forgive willingly
enough the offenses which have been done them, but never pardon the ill which
may be done, though there be no will to do it.

There are so many Examples of this truth, in Histories and in all Ages, that
it is almost a superfluous thing to make stay upon it. But amongst all, I see
none comparable to the disgrace of Bellisarius; that great person who had no
other crime then his Reputation, and was not culpable, but that he was
powerful. Having conquered Persia, and subdued Africa, humbled the Goths in
Italy, lead Kings in Triumph, and made appear to Constantinople somewhat of
old Rome, and an Idea of the ancient splendour of that proud Republique: After
all that, I say, this great person is abandoned to Envy. A suspicion
ill-grounded destroys the value of so many Services, and a single jealousy of
State wipes them out of the memory of his Master: but he rests not there, for
the demeanor had been too gentle; if cruelty had not been added to ingratitude.
They deprive him of all his honors; they rob him of all his fortune: they take
from him the use of the Day and Light: they put out his eyes, and reduce him to
the company of Rogues; and Bellisarius demands a charity. I confess when I
consider the chief Captain of his Age, and the greatest Ornament of the
Empire, of Christians, after so many Victories and Conquests, accompanied with
so high and clear a virtue, and in the midst of Christendom, reduced to the
height of misery; it seems to me that I read the Metamorphosis of Fables: A
desire possesses me to give the lie to History; and I cannot hold from
exclaiming against the memory of Justinian, that could not suffer the glory of
one of his subjects, who had been so useful to him, and that of a Cabinet
person and compiler of Laws, had made him a Conqueror and Triumpher over
people; so that basnesse cost him vey dear, and obliged Narces who was as well
a successor in merit, as authority to Bellisarius, not to expose himself to
the like fortune. This Narces upon a single act of disdain, which was past upon
him at the Court of the Emperor, conceived that they might pass to a more
cruel passion, if he prevented not the ill, and that it was better to shake off
the yoke, then to stay to be oppressed. That spoiled th'affairs of Justinian in
Italy: The Goths revolted, and Fortune could not forbear to be of the party
which Narces followed, nor to find the Barbarians where so great a Virtue was
engaged.

All Princes nevertheless are not of his humor, and there are some whose Reign
is more Christian, and Conduct more just; and with whom desert is in safety;
where services are acknowledged, and in whom brave Actions beget love, without
giving them the least jealousy: However the Reign of our King is an eminent
Exception to a proposition so general. And if Machavell had observed many such
in the world, he had not advised them who rise very high by their Virtue to
descend timely, and to quit their greatness, or to maintain it by force; He had
known that there is yet a medium betwixt two extremes, and the King had made
him see that his servants might continue great without making ill use of that
greatness to become Rebels.

The second Example that I will propose, is the disgrace of Ferrand Gonsalve;
It Is not in truth accompanied with so eminent a persecution, nor with such
cruel marks of Ingratitude and Injustice, as that of Bellisarius: But it has
nevertheless circumstances which deserve to be considered, and whereupon a
Minister of State ought to pause. It must be confessed that Gonsalve is the
greatest person that ever Spain brought forth. He may pass among the greatest
of all Ages: He was worthy to enter the Lists of comparison with great Scipio;
and the Spanish vanity has not invented so high a Title to honor him withal,
which he has not made good by his Actions, and merited of his Enemies. He
finished the conquest of the Kingdom of Granada, and had the honor to conclude
a War of ten years, and to gain for Ferdinand and Isabella, the Surname of
Catholics. He chased us from the Kingdom of Naples for to re-establish the
Arragons; And when Ferdinand shared with Lewis the twelfth, the Goods of his
Parents, and that those Princes divided betwixt them the Inheritance of an
unfortunate person; He conquered his Master's share and forced ours from us: He
defeated our Armies in all places, but at Seminara where he did not command; He
took all the Towns he assaulted, and which were defended by us: He knew how to
overcome, and to make use of the Victory. And though no State in the World was
more moveable or subject to Revolutions then that of Naples; He assured it
notwithstanding entirely to Ferdinand and his Race. He stopped up there the
Springs of the War, and of Disorders: He pulled up Factions that tore the
Nation in pieces; and, if some root had since appeared, it had so little life
and force, and such weak and faint motions, that the safety of the Kingdom was
not shaken, nor its health altered.

He did not only excel in War, and exceed all Captains of his time in the
glory of Arms; but he supreamly understood the Art of Negotiations, and the
knowledge of Affairs. His Eloquence was admirable; His speech had inevitable
charms, and his Tongue furnished infallibly to gain those whom his good
Countenance had shaken, and whose liberty was weakened, and courage abated;
Being a Prisoner to a King of Granada, He gained him to the service of his
Master, and persuaded him to given himself up to Ferdinand, who would have had
much trouble to overcome him: He withdrew the Colonnes and the Ursines from
th'interest of France, for to cast them upon th'interest of Spain: And knowing
well that long and inveterate hatreds as they were of both Families, are fatal
to the parties where they enter, and dangerous in the occasions that awaken
them. He reconciled the differences, and for a time healed th'Emulation they
labored of. He was moreover so zealous of the Greatness of his Master, and so
passionate for the good of his Affairs, that he quitted his Conscience, and
broke his faith to whom he had given it: As in the Treaty he made with the Duke
of Calabria, whereof I shall speak in another place, and when he seized with
subtilty upon the person of Caesar Borgia, and deceived that subtle person, who
had deceived so many other persons.

Th'incomparable qualites then of this person, and infinite services which he
had done to his Master, rendered him a suspected person. And though they love
treason, yet they hate the Traitors: on the contrary, the Virtue of Gonsalve
gives Apprehensions and Alarms to Ferdinand, for whom it had gained Kingdoms,
And the conquests also of Naples, and th'entire reduction of that of that State
being finished: He began more willingly than he should have done, to lend his
Ear to the complaints made against him; And the Calumny became insolent, to
assault him when it received credit from his Master. It Is impossible that they
who have Commissions for great Commands, should give content to all the world:
And it is hard to give employments to all such as believe to merit them, or
recompenses to the esteem that every Person has of his services, and to the
value he sets upon them; and therefore there are always persons that do
complain, because some do believe themselves ill used; and who make spite and
hatred to succeed at the rate of the good they have been disappointed of: This
unhappiness befell the great Captain; And it happened also that the complaints
made against him in Spain, were not disagreeable to Ferdinand, who sought
occasion only to destroy him, and did not act an Injustice willingly, but when
he had some pretense of Justice for to color it: It Is strange, what torments
and inquietudes the reputation of Gonsalve gave to Ferdinand all the rest of
his life; The most loyal and best disposed of all his Subjects; He to whom he
owed a part of his Greatness, who rendered him more formidable to other
Princes, then all the rest of his powers, held his soul on a perpetual wrack:
And he never had any Enemy from whom he suffered so much and so long as from
him. He was almost persuaded to extreme Remedies to be rid of him, and, if he
had not apprehended that in missing of his stroke, he gave him occasion to
become a Rebel, he had caused him to be arrested upon the single Motions of
Jealousy, and had given an instance of the force of the greatest of all humane
passions, which is the love of Sovereignty.

This passion which so much vexed Ferdinand, is worthy to be represented: and
th'Artifices used by the greatest Politician of the world, to ruin his own
subject, are too subtle, and too curious to be concealed from a person of
State; The moderation also of Gonsalve, and the strength he had to resist his
own Greatness which was in his power, and to repel a temptation which had a
Kingdom for prize, deserve to be proposed to the subjects of other Princes.

The sixth Discourse.
The Artifices used by Ferdinand to destroy the great Captain.
FErdinand then upon the bare complaints of discontented persons, whereof the
number is ever great against them that govern, lesseneth the power of the great
Captain, and reduces him to the ordinary Authority of Vice-Kings in a Kingdom
which he had conquered. How sensible this thing was to a person of great
courage, and what Emotion it ought to raise in the heart of Gonsalve, may be
judged by the displeasure all men have to fall, and to be degraded in the eyes
of the world; And it may be judged by the hatred all men naturally bear to
ingratitude, but they only that exercise it; and by th'injustice it contains;
that not only the services that have been rendered, shall be frustrated of the
reward which has been merited, but that they also shall be the original of the
disgraces suffered, and of the will entertainments, because a sufficient
Recompense cannot be received. Gonsalve notwithstanding subdued his
resentments, and appeared much greater in conquering himself in so ticklish an
occasion, then he had done in conquering so often the enemies of his Master.

The patience wherewith he supported this injury, did not sweeten Ferdinand,
nor cure his sick spirit. On the contrary it made it irreconcilable: He hates
him the more whom he had newly offended, because he gave him cause to resent
it, and takes the moderation which Gonsalve used for an Artifice, because his
passion would not suffer him to attribute it to the greatness of his Courage;
That made him resolve to bring him back from Naples, though his presence there
way yet very necessary, and to deliver himself at once of all his fears, and
of all his apprehensions, in removing him from that place where he was so
powerful. He commands him then to return into Spain, since the affairs of
Naples, as he said, were in good condition, and informs him that he had use in
other places of his person, and of his service. The great Captain prepares for
his departure, but not with that nimblenesse which Ferdinand desired; To whose
inquietude precipitation would have appeared slow, since it seemed to him that
he could never be soon enough healed of the distrust which did torment him;
This slowness which was for his service, and for the confirming of Ferdinand's
authority in the Kingdom which Gonsalve would not leave tottering, increases
his fears and multiplies his jealousies.

The Enemies of Gonsalve close with this humor in Ferdinand; Envy again rises
against his Virtue, and there were but too many persons in Spain, and in Italy,
who cried down his Faithfulness, and represented his Ambition to such a
height, that it would not fail speedily to compel him to assume the Pitle of
Sovereign, whereof he exercised the Power.

That made him again resolve to send Peter Navarre to Naples, with private
Orders to ceaze upon the person of the great Captain, and to make a Prisoner of
him in the new Castle. And at the same time to lay him asleep, and for fear the
distrust he had of him, should occasion the injury he feared, if it were
discovered; he writes him a Letter, by which he does promise him at his return,
the great command of Saint James; A dignity, that did not truly equal the
services of Gonsalve, nor pay the just price of his Actions, but was the
highest in Spain next to the Sovereignty. As he was ready to execute this
scandalous resolution, a person of Credit arrives at Court, from the great
Captain, with Letters, which give him so great assurances of his fidelity, and
confirm with such strong Reasons the just cause of his stay, that Ferdinand
abated for that time the violence that transported him; but at last finding no
lawful Causes, or very visible pretenses to use extreme Remedies against
Gonsalve, and being not assured of the possession of Naples, so long as
Gonsalve was in condition to take it from him, he resolved to go in person to
draw him away.

He was hardly arrived at Genes, but he understood of the death of his Son in
law, with whom he had so many troubles, and who had handled him with so much
indignity. Reason seemed to advise him to go back, and to retake the possession
of the Government of Castile, before any change might happen there, that the will
humors of that State were raised, and that the will had taken root there by his
absence. That was represented to him by his Council, and by his servants which
he had left in Spain. But Naples must be provided for, since he was so near; He
must pull the Thorn out of his heart which pricked him; And although he would
not expose his person thither, when we were powerful there, when we contested
the Kingdom with him, and that fortune then held in the Air the two scales of
the Balance where Victory hung uncertain; He made no question to go thither to
destroy the power of a person that was most faithful to him. The prudence and
dexterity of Ferdinand, made a wonderful noise on this occasion which was
heard in all places, and whereon all Christendom was attentive. At his Arrival
he made extraordinary Caresses to Gonsalve: He gave him honors that would have
satisfied the most ambitious spirit of the world. He had no sufficient praises
to extol his virtue, nor power enough to requite his services. In brief, one
might have said, that, he would give him a share of his Authority, and of his
subject make his Companion.

In the mean time this great Captain is solicited from diverse places, to take
more advantageous Conditions then he had from his Master. The Pope with whom
Ferdinand had founded intelligencies to make War against the Venetians, desires
him for the General of the Churches Armies.

The Common wealth of Venice offers him the Command of their Armies; The
Emperor endeavors to gain him for his service; every person thought that
Victory could not be severed from him, and his reputation dispatched above
th'halfe of Affairs; His virtue truly was too fair not be tempted; But it had
force enough to repel Temptation, and to resist the Baits wherewith Endeavors
were used to corrupt it; He had given infallible Evidences thereof to Ferdinand
during the persecution of Castile: And when almost all the Grandees of Spain
had declared themselves in favor of his Son in law, and adored that new Power;
Gonsalve stood firm, and assured him that what change soever happened to him in
his fortune, none should ever befall him in his affections; This was truly
admirable in an occasion, where he had so many examples of failing, and, it may
be, some Cause to do it during Philips life. Moreover being so able a person,
and having long acted by th'orders of Ferdinand; It, was not possible that he
should be a stranger to his diffident Humor, and to his Covetous Inclination,
and therefore ought to believe, that his services would pass unrequited, and
that passion whereof his Master labored against, would not be appeased but by
his Fall and Ruin. However Ferdinand, to defeat th'intentions of the Pope, and
to make void all solicitations that were made to Gonsalve; endeavored to
persuade him, that he had all the good opinion of the world of his fidelity;
gives him a Patent of the great Master ship of Saint James, which was
passionately desired by Gonsalve, and prayed the Pope to grant the Archbishop
of Toledo power to confer it upon him; He well knew that the Pope would resist
it, and be troubled that Gonsalve should receive that dignity from any hand but
from His, and that so whilst, Endeavors were used to overcome that difficulty
and pass that Ditch, he should be in Spain, and out of Danger to be deboshed;
He grants him after that an Authentic Declaration of the great services he had
received from him; at of the esteem he had for his merits, and for the
inviolable zeal he had had for his Affairs. He sends this Declaration to the
Courts of all Princes of Christendom, to efface, said He, th'Impressions that
might have been made against the faithfulness of this great Captain; and that
no spot might remain upon the honor of so great a person, He draws him from
Italy, and brings him with him, by these eminent Artifices and Pompous
Demonstrations of his good Affections. The interview made at Savona with Lewis
the twelfth, enflamed his jealousy, and rendered the Virtue of Gonsalve the
more suspected, because he saw it so much honored by him, to whom he had done
so much Evil, and from whom he had taken a Kingdom; For Lewis obtained of
Ferdinand, that Gonsalve might dine in their company, an extraordinary favor,
especially for a subject of Spain with his Sovereign.

At last he is conducted into Spain, where all the hopes which had been given
him, and the magnificent promises wherewith he had been fed, are reduced to the
Condition of a private person, in which Condition he is permitted nothing more
then only to live. They labor to discredit him, They use him ill in relation
to his Parents: All his desires are refused, though very Civil and Just: And
notwithstanding this stripped person is Ferdinand's Flayl, and a virtue
destitute of all the helps of fortune, troubles his spirit, and puts him into
great pains. But as Princes feel not passions as other persons do, and take or
leave them according to their Interest; The prosperity of Lewis the twelfth's
Arms in Italy, under the Command of Gaston of Foix, and the disgraces of
The Army, of the League whereof Ferdinand was a member, enforced him to cast his
eyes upon Gonsalve to send him thither.

This great Captain prepares for this Expedition; Spain dis-furnisheth her
self of brave persons for to follow him there; and the greatest part of great
persons, notwithstanding the fierceness of their humor, and good opinion of
themselves, resolved to accompany him thither. This struck Ferdinand more then
can be imagined; And the greatness of Gonsalve that became higher then ever;
and the will condition of th'affairs of Italy which could not be recovered but by
his virtue, trouble him with irresolutions. But fortune that had been so often
favorable unto him, forgot him not in this occasion; she would not give men
the pleasure to see the two chief planets of the world in Conjunction, and
duest not decide a difference where parties were so equal. Gaston is slain at
the Batted of Ravenna; by his death Italy changed her face, our affairs began
then to decline; There was no further need of Gonsalve, and Ferdinand was
delivered of the fears which had so strongly vexed him, and so long pursued
him. The great Captain after that continued entirely estranged from Court, and
from affairs, and a very little after quitted the world, where his virtue was
become unprofitable, because it was too great, and where he had lost the good
graces of his Master for having overmuch merited them.

The seventh Discourse.
Of the disgrace of the Duke of Alva.
SInce we are upon the subject of Disgraces which happen at Court, and tempests
which are there raised; Let us add the Duke of Alva's to the former examples.
He was one of the greatest Captains Spain has brought forth, since the death
of Gonsalve; He performed threescores years services to Charles the fifth, and
to Philip his Son, and with so strange a misfortune, that he was ever odious to
the one, and never beloved of the other: He made War almost in all the parts of
Europe, and in Africa; he had the Command of the Germane Army, where the first
League of Protestants was beaten, and one of their Commanders taken Prisoner:
He preserved the Kingdom of Naples to Philip: He staid the progress we made
into Piedmont; He suppressed the growing Rebellion in the Low Countries; and
though his conduct was too violent, and that the severity of his deportment,
and too great Inclination for blood, had forced the people into despair; yet if
he had not been recalled, when he was of most use there, It Is believed, that he
had finished the reducement of them, or hindered them from growing greater.

And nevertheless after so long Course of services, and so many years spent
for his Masters; Philip forbids him the Court for a light fault; for an
inconsiderable Cause which carried only the shadow of disobedience: His
Country House he assigns him for his Prison, and neither his services past, nor
his Age which was worthy of some respect, nor the good wishes of all the people
of Spain, nor th'entreaties of the Pope who interceded for him, could bend
Philip, or prevail with him for his Liberty. But at last the business of the
succession of Portugal happening, and Philip having need of a Commander of
Reputation to manage the War which he had there prepared; It was of Necessity
to repair to the Duke of Alva. He accepted the Command with an incredible
Gentleness, and without obtaining so much as the permission to see the Court;
And He was to raise the Regiments of Foot, as He said, from Towns to conquer
Kingdoms. The success of that War was such as Philip could desire it. But the
Conclusion was glorious for the Duke, since he dyed after the reduction of
Portugal, and in the Palace of Lisbon, where he had given Entry to his Master.

I do not truly find it strange that so many Princes are unthankful, because it
may be they think all to be due to them, and that they are not indebted to any
person. But I cannot but admire the faithfulness of those great persons of
whom I have lately spoken, and that General obedience they have given to their
Masters, even then when they were so ill used; This is the Cause that I will
add another example to the former, and of a person of the number of the most
famous of the Age past.

Albuquerque subdued Ormus, took Goa, and settled The Empire of the Portugals in
the East Indies. He caused the power of his Masters to be adored, where their
name was not so much as known before his time. His Conquests enriched Portugal,
and the precious Jewels which the Sunrising engenders in The East, past in
abundance, since his voyages, through all Europe. After all these services, and
in his great Age, Manuel, King, of Portugal, sends him a successor, and he had
the displeasure to see himself stripped of an honor he had not received, and of
a Dignity he held not of the bounty of him which took it from him, but from his
personal valor. The news truly of that Affront which was the recompense of
his long and profitable services, troubled him much at the first -- And, making
a great disturbance in his soul, forced him to say these words: Good God, of
how many Evils do I find my self encompassed! If I am faithful to my King, I
offend men; and I offend my King, if I follow the Inclinations of men. But this
violent passion being appeased, and that his reason was returned, he justified
the proceedings of Manuel, and reduced willingly to the condition of a private
person; If Death, which sometimes happens too late to many great persons, had
not ceazed on him, before he arrived at Goa from Ormus.

You may believe that Albuquerque was solicited by his friends, to possess
himself of that State, and to establish himself in a place where he was
powerful, and where he had in his favor the love of the people; It Is therefore
the Custom of Princes, not to permit long the Government of a Country to him
that has subdued it, for fear lest in time he take root there, and that the
sweetness of the Command, and the Convenience of making himself Master,
should cause in him the Desire of it. So Ferdinand of Castile, left not the
Government of the West Indies to Christopher Columbe, who had made the
discovery of them. So the same Prince withdrew that great Captain from Naples,
as has been above expressed. So Fernant of Cortes was recalled from the
Kingdom of Mexico, which he had gained for Charles the fifth; So the Peru was
filled with Combustion and Wars, because the Pizarres who had made the
Conquest, would not acknowledge the Governor which Philip the second had sent
thither; nor obey in the place where they had accustomed to command.

The Eighth Discourse.
That in the affairs of State, men do that sometimes which they would not do,
and that there are inevitable Faults.
THat a Minister of State then suffer not himself to be transported with his
charge, nor be drunk with the fume of it; That it be always in him under
jealousy: And consider that it is of the nature of Glass, and not of the
Diamond; and that if it have some Clearness, yet it is frail. And that he may
the better comprehend this truth, and make use of th'instruction it bears; he
must know, that he is to defend himself not only from men, and the designs of
Envy; But that he must also depend upon some superior power, that will make
him when it pleases to forsake his prudence, and compel him to act against
his proper Maxims; that will carry him whither he would not go, and will so
Invert his understanding, that he cannot but commit voluntary faults, nor to
enter the precipice which he shall see open in the midst of his way; That, if
in the war of the Body and Understanding, and in the seditious Motions, from
the worse part of the soul, we do commit often the Evil which we would not do;
The Condition of the person of State is much worse, and that of the proud
Directors of the people, who are sometimes constrained to do the Evil they
would not do, if they were Masters of affairs, and if th'impetuosity of
Destiny, and violence of some Cause stronger than them, did not overruled them;
And nevertheless the world fails not to blame them: Princes are angry against
unfortunate, as against guilty persons: Particular men that discover sometimes
in their private affairs somewhat like his, do not forgive for all that the
Condition of public persons: And the pitiful Boatmen, who can hardly save
themselves upon a small River, when it is but a little moved, condemn the great
Philots when they suffer shipwreck in the Ocean, and cannot resist the fury of
an implacable Element. Behold very eminent Examples to Confirm the truth of
what has been said.

In the league made between the Venetians and Charles the fifth, against
Soliman, a memorable accident happened. The Venetians were fully resolved not
to break with Soliman, and to avoid a War wherein they were to receive the
first strokes, and furnish the Field with th'action that was preparing, (and
the theater with the Tragedy; They remembered, that they never had to do with
the house of the Ottomans without loss, and that they never justled with them
but to their ruin: They would not forsake th'Alliance of a Prince whose faith
was known to them, in whom ambition permitted Justice, and was accustomed to
distinguish between what is honest, and what is only profitable; They would not
deprive themselves of the great advantages which they drew from those States,
nor cut the pipe of Riches, and the root of Abundance, which came to their
subjects from thence; They were not ignorant of the Nature of Leagues and their
weakness; They, knew that good deeds penetrate less then injuries, and that
the desire of Revenge is more active and violent in them that are provoked,
then Acknowledgement in them who are assisted. They consider that a wise Prince
ought not to engage, but on extremity in the affairs that have nothing certain
but the expense, whereof the future is always trouble, and whose conclusion is
not necessarily conformable to Principles, and to the first Appearance.

Upon these foundations or others, they resisted th'endeavours of Paul the
third, who solicited them to enter into that League, and not to abandon the
common Cause of Christians; Soliman also on his part desired to continue fair
with the Republique of Venice: He was afraid to have so many enemies together
in Hand, and how great soever their ambition was, the virtue and the power of
Charles did not seem so inconsiderable unto him, but that he judged them
Capable alone to exercise him; But as fortune often deceives the desires of
men, and laughs at their wisdom, it disappointed in this occasion, as well
th'inclination of Soliman, as that of the Venetians. The encounter of some of
their Ships, and of unexpected Accidents which happened, obliged them to fight,
and engaged them also in spite of them to a total Breach; And the Venetians
were constrained to accept of the League, which they had so solemnly refused;
By this truly it appears, that the Venetians could not avoid with all their
Conduct, th'evill they had foreseen; And that he also from whom they were to
receive their damage, could not be prevented from doing of it, though he had a
design to be their friend. For it happened that the Galleys of The Emperor
having not done their duty at Prevese, and Andre Dona having betrayed the
Christian Republique, and suffered Barbarosse to escape when he might have sunk
him; The tempest that ris' in the States of Charles, fell upon them of the
Republique; and Soliman, offended that the Republique, as he thought, had
disdained his friendship, or had not sufficiently respected it, turned his
Forces and Designs against their Islands, besieged Corfu, and was within little
of taking the Bulwarks that defend Christendom; He took besides that, all that
they had in the Archipelagus except Naples of Romaigna and Malvoisca, which he
forced from them since, by a Treaty of peace; after the losses they had
suffered, after The Expense they had made, and after a great diminution of
former Reputation.

Behold other Examples, to show that there are faults which seem fatal. In the
first troubles of Heresy in France, and in that Tragique Confusion, the memory
whereof has since been often repeated; All the world observed, that the siege
of Poictiers had been the Stone of offense to the Huguenots, and that the
fairest Army they ever had perished, there. The Cardinal of Lorraine
reproached it to Sr. of the None; and though faults are customary in the war,
more then in any other function of life; He assured him that they who commanded
th'Armies of the King, would prevent committing of the like; yet
notwithstanding after the Battle of Moncontour, which poured out so much
Hugenots blood, and where that party received such large wounds, that it
depended only on the Conqueror, that the soul was not let out; Instead of
following the flight of The Army which was routed, and them that saved
themselves from the storm; The Duke of Anjou, unhappily dissipated his Army by
lying down before Saint John. He stormed that Town, and lost the fruit of his
Victory, which ought not to have been taken of a single place, but the
Reducement of the whole party; not the remission of the Malady, but the health
of the State. By this fatal stay, I say, he failed to make an end of the work
that was so well begun: He gave means to The Enemies to breathe and recruit: He
rendered again the fortune of France doubtful, and deprived it of the honor of
terminating a War which is never ended by weakness, but inability; nor by
Reconciliation, but by the Ruin of the Conquered.

The Ninth Discourse.
Where the precedent Discourse is confirmed by the Example of the Spaniards.
I Will confirm former Discourse by a newer Example, and from the most prudent
Nation of the world. The Spaniards who have their Reason so subtle, and Motions
so regular; who make no Consultations, but they observe all the differences of
the time, and have always in their thoughts the future and the past, when they
deliberate only of the things in hand, or that are not far from their eyes.
These prudent, I say, and Circumspect persons, are not free from errors; They
commit faults like other men, they go out of the way as well as we, and more is
not to be said, then that it seems their failings are either voluntary or more
inavoidable then ours; And as we fall ordinarily as it were by night and in
unknown ways, They fall at full noon, and in the midst of a high way. And as
other people have reproached us, that we are capable to Conquer all, and to
carry by assault what makes resistance; But that we are not able long to
preserve that heat, nor to maintain our Conquests: The same may be said of the
Spaniards, that their designs have sometimes good beginnings, which attain not
always their Ends because they are Immoderate; That they begin well, but
finish not always the work they undertake, because they withdraw themselves to
other work; that they make not an end of all things they undertake, in regard
that they undertake too much at a time, that they Grasp more then they know how
to hold and devour, more then they can digest.

It Is not for want of patience, but for their too great Ambition; nor, that
they forsake the Labor for being a weary and to rest themselves, but they
suspend it, or slack it in one place to attend it in another, where they think
to prosper better: And as the Covetous person has no sooner the desire in his
heart of being rich, but he desires suddenly to become rich; The like is the
condition of the ambitious person, there are no degrees for the growth of
passion, it is great as soon as it is born, and he has th'unhappinesse, that his
Imagination knows not how to bound the Conquests which it meditates upon, nor
lengthen the time, must necessarily be employed to act them. This has happened
to the Spaniards; It may be said, that they have found their enterprises more
difficult then they were represented unto them, in having too great an opinion
of their own virtue, or too little of other men's virtues. Lets come to the
proof of this truth wherewith they have furnished us, and whereof they have
given us cause to beware.

They observed that th'Enterprise upon England, and preparation for that Fleet
which they called Invincible, broke the course of the Victories of the Duke of
Parma; that it drayned Spain of Money and Men, and hindered that Prince from
receiving necessary recruits to continue the War. They also acknowledged, that
the journies he made into France, to relieve the League, had unfurnished the
two Countries of their best Soldiers, and left those fair. Provinces for a
prey to their Enemies which had been so long their Indyes, and since have been
so long their Poverty and Churchyard.

We may indeed say here, by the way, and then we will return to our subject;
That Philip the second did not a little forget himself in these occasions, and
that his Conduct was then too wise, or not wise enough. That it was not truly
ill argued for the subduing of the Hollande's, first to ceaze on France, and
Conquer England; to cut off at once The Arms that supported them, and force
away the Dugs which fed the Rebellion of that people. But also, that it was too
vast a Design for a Prince so decayed, and a way too long and too dangerous for
a person of so small strength, and short breath; That if he was transported by
the zeal of the house of God, and could not suffer Religion to perish in the
first Kingdom of the world: If he was concerned in the will of France; and if he
so vehemently loved the Church, that he could not permit so fair a member to
be separated from her; It must be confessed, that his zeal had been
commendable, if it had been more prudent. But he should have remembered that
true Charity excludes not Justice; that it perverts not the order of things;
that it disorders not the duty of life; and that it has as much light as heat,
and of moderation as force: And therefore that it had been better to withdraw
the people from Heresy which God submitted to him, and from rebellion wherein
they were involved, then to engage in the affairs of his Neighbors, whereof he
was not to give an Account, and that he was more obliged to labor the Cure of
his sick subjects, then the lesser diseases of strangers. But lets speak the
truth, It troubled Philip much to lose so fair an occasion as that which then
presented it self, to gain by our disorders; And he well saw that after the
French were divided into Factions, and that the Children had torn in pieces
their Mother, it would be easy for him to recollect the scattered members and
the pieces of The Inheritance. That if the lost this Conjuncture, he might after
in vain desire it; that the madmen might return to their senses, and that they
had been corrupted by Charms and Drenches; That they being cured might change
their love into hatred, and be animated against them who had put them into that
Condition.

Though the Spaniards made the forementioned reflections, they failed not to
strike upon the same sands, and to repeat their faults. The Emperor had
incredible success in Germany; His Conquests forced in upon him like a Torrent;
God sent him Victories like those of the Children of Israel, when they marched
under the Conduct of Moses and Joshua, and it was no more a Caesar by name, and
the vain Imagination of what he ought to be, but he had the power and the
majesty. His Authority gave reputation to the Spaniards. His Armies rendered
them more fearful than they were, and they saw their desires crowned with the
taking of Breda, which Spinola boasted to have taken in spite of four Kings,
and th'ayds of diverse Nations in League: After that nothing was thought
impossible for them. And notwithstanding instead of pursuing the great progress
which they had made in the Low-Countties, and to follow their Fortune which
marched before them; they provoked troubles in Italy, and sharpened the spirits
of diverse Princes, in possessing themselves of the Valtoline. The usurpation of
that passage gave occasion to make a league for to make it free, and the War
was carried into Piedmont, whither they conveyed great forces, which served
only to make th'affront more eminent, which they received before Verrne, and
to augment the shame of that retreat.

But they fell not alone into the precipices: They drew in the Emperor, whose
name they made use of to vex Monsieur of Mantoue. To put I say, a poor
Catholic Prince into his shirt who reverenced him; they compelled him to
agree with the King of Denmark, and to make a dishonorable peace with the
Protestant Enemy. They constrained him to take the Law of the Conquered; to
restore him his Losses, and to let loose the Chain which pressed all Germany.
There Is appearance, that if he had continued the designs he had in that Country,
and those in Flanders; They had completed His Happiness; At least they had
avoided the disgraces which happened unto them; they had given no scandal to
Christendom. Boldne had been preserved, and so Catholic a City had not
entertained Heresy within its walls, nor lamented the loss of the ancient
Religion. But in this they had not only men for Enemies, but God seemed to
declare, and to make War against them; And as he suffered heretofore the
Philistines to take the Ark of the Covenant, and with it the fortune of the house
of Israel; He has also permitted that the wealth of the new world should pass
into other hands then theirs: That their Fleet should be beaten, and that
Heretics whom they name Rebels, made use of the treasures against them, which
were destined for th'oppression of a Prince whom they took for their Enemy, in
regard that he was not their subject, or ought not to be their Neighbor
without depending on them. Yet, praised be God, we have been wiser; for what
the King had undertaken, his Constancy was never tired, and He Acted not by
halfs, nor labored without Effect; no irregular passion could make diversion
upon his designs: He finished all of them; He has dissipated all the will
humors of the State; He has confounded the Rebellion of his subjects, and our
Allies have seen all the powers of France displayed, and all the virtue of the
French, to master their ill fortune, and draw them from the bottom of the pit.
In that miraculous passage over the Alps, when Italy saw her deliverer to
descend; and that Milan durst take some free breath; and Naples think of a
gentler Domination, who would not have believed that the King would have
pursued his Victory, and taken in Italy a Revenge of the losses of his
Ancestors? And nevertheless by a Council that was understood a few persons,
and by an extraordinary prudence, he quirted the deceitful appearance of good;
He retired from Italy, and contented himself for that time to stench the blood
of it, and bind up the wound, for to finish in Langnedock the Cure of an Evil
that was in its Crisis, and which a greater stay might have made incureable;
But of that we will make, God aiding, hereafter a discourse apart,

The Tenth Discourse.
That Princes do approve but of the Services they Command, and punish
oftentimes them that are done against their Orders.
LEt a Minister of State know that he does always ill, when he acts against
th'orders are given him. That in the State, good intentions are not warrantable
if the effects are not agreeable to the Prince: That the works of supererogation
are not current there, and that the services that are rendered, if they are not
commanded, are things put to hazard, which are exposed to the capricious humor
of a person interressed, and shall sometimes be condemned by him, who would be
sorry if they were not done, who draws profit from them, and hereby
accommodates his affairs; so true it is, that reason of State is a strange
thing, and that the Condition of men, and chiefly of public persons is
unhappy; The Examples will declare better then discourse which is to be observed
in this matter.

The Carthaginians punished with death the Captains that had gained a battle
without advice, and against the rules of War; nothing is read answerable to the
jealousy the first Romans had for Command. They could not give a good
countenance to the successes which were obtained with disobedience. And there
were Fathers, who would not give life their Children, that were victorious in
Combats that had been forbidden them. At the siege of Cambrey, or of Dourlans,
the Count Fuentes caused the head of a master of the Camp to be cut off, who in
an assault advanced further then he was commanded, and took a post of very
great Importance. And though the profits of these happy faults, and of those
blind successes, remain to the Prince and Country; It Is certain, there is cause
for their punishment to hinder th'imitation which is often dangerous; And for
th'Evill is in it, that the Judgment of a superior should be slighted by a
particular person, and his Authority violated: Amongst us, these Attempts are
praised when they prosper, and they are not punished when they are unfortunate.
But it is a condition inseparable from our humor, and an effect of that
blindness which possesses almost all France, To neglect prudence and Order,
and to have an esteem only for Impetuosities, and to Idolize nothing but
Courage.

Observe an Example very remarkable in our time, and a fault of another nature,
then the prudence and love of the Country would have advised, and the Prince to
whom it was of Advantage, judged it worthy of punishment. At the peace which
was made 1617, by the Mediation of the King, betwixt the Republique of Venice,
and the Archduke Ferdinand, who is now Emperor; The King of Spain, and the
Duke of Savoy. The Republique of Venice employed Octavian Buon as their
extraordinary Ambassador, a Gentleman of great opinion among the Citizens, to
manage that affair with the Gussony, their ordinary Ambassador near the King.
The Instruments given to their Ambassadors, commanded them not to consent to
any Treaty of peace, but on condition the Galleres, which had been taken from
the Venetians at Spalatre, by the Duke of Ossone should be restored, and that
that blot was taken out from the honor of the Republique: They had also Orders,
though not so formal and express, to oppose th'union that was in forming
between the two Crowns, to give jointly the Law to Italy, and to the rest of
Europe.

Nevertheless the Spaniards, who sail with all winds, and raise profit out of
all occasions, put a great value upon th'Evidences of Esteem and Affection,
they made out to the King, in submitting to him so great differences, and
exposing of their affairs to the judgment of his Agents. But to sell this
honor to him at a very dear rate, they pressed th'union whereof I have spoken;
Union which they had long in their thoughts, and had sought since France was
delivered of the Spanish Invasions, and had secured her self of their
Ambushes; Union to which they aimed with the same heat they did at the
Monarchy, since it was to be the Bridge to pass them safely, and the necessary
principle for the ruin of other Christian States, and loss of their liberties.

Bentivoglio Nonce, and now a Cardinal and Protector of France, joined his
good endeavors to those of the Spanish Ambassador, in favor of that so much
desired Union and fatal Intelligence.

However if that design fail, they would have peace, not being able any longer
to make War: That Gradisque which the Venetians besieged, was upon its last
breath; That the Duke of Savoy swollen with the relief was come to him from
France was powerful, and Don Petro of Toledo weak, and his Army shattered
since the siege of Vercel. They would have, I say, peace, but after their
manner, and upon a vain shadow of honor which they believed to have done us,
and upon a light smoke of difference wherewith they thought to have intoxicated
us. They would exempt themselves from Evils which hung over their heads; they
would have it nevertheless with vapouring and reputation; as if fortune had
been propitious to them; They would have no mention made of it in the Treaty of
the restitution of the Ships of the Republique, and that the Ships should
remain with them as Trophies of a Victory, and as marks of Triumph: They
promise to deliver them to the King's Officers, as a great Bounty which should
be exercised for love of them, and to oblige France; They would not also that
any express or particular mention should be made of Vercel; In regard, it was
more convenient, say they, for the greatness and dignity of their Crown, to
deliver up that place without Constraint, as they promised to do, than by a
Treaty of Accommodation; Our Agents induced by Causes, which were then, it may
be, lawful, and which would not be endured in the generosity of the present
Government, engage th'Ambassadors of the Republique between two extremes; They
press them to sign the peace upon the foresaid Conditions, or threaten them
with th'union which would have been so prenicious to Italy. A strange and hard
necessity to which they were reduced; They desire time to inform the Senate,
and to receive thereupon their pleasure. It Is refused, and three days only are
given them to resolve; of the two Evils whereof Election was to be made, they
chose the less, and accept of a shameful peace; and, contrary to their
instructions, to avoid an inconveniency which contained an Evil, they had
order to fly, and the other Evils they had cause to fear, which were
comprehended in th'union: They offend but for the good of the Republique: They
expose their heads, but for the good of their Country: They would perish if
their ruin might serve their Country. The Senate advised of what their
Ambassadors had done: Condemn their proceedings, and resolve to make them
examples of their Temerity: All their reasons though necessary are rejected,
And if the King had not interposed his authority for the safety of the poor
men, they had run the hazard of being exposed to that Justice of State which
attributes so much to Conformity, that it makes no distinction betwixt the
unhappy and the guilty, and that seeks ordinarily th'advancement of the
public good in the ruin of particular persons. Certainly it was to the
advantage of the Republique, to embrace that peace, as it did, and to take it
as a medicine, to cure it self of a greater Evil that threatened it. The
Republique had reason also to seem willing to preserve her Dignity, and for
th'interest of the right of Nations, to punish her Ambassadors that dared to
be wiser then the Republique, and procure her good against her Prohibition.

These are only gentle Notions, and it is a Conduct that ought not to hurt a
Minister of State, when he is desavored of things treated upon by his own
propensities: and a Prince may sometimes lawfully make use of the advantages
which befall him upon a Treaty he disavoweth, without being obliged to repair
the fault which another Prince has committed by his facility and sottishness.
And it would not be thought strange, since that as well in the Commerce of
Princes as of particular persons, the fortune of wise men is ordinarily made at
the expense of fools, and the good success that happens, proceeds more from the
Defects, and imprudence of them with whom they have to do, then from
th'industry and virtue of them that, obtain it. Behold an Example which
happened under Lewis the twelfth, which will make clear what has been said. It
was in a season when almost all Christendom conspired against us, and when the
Assauls of almost all our Neighbors were at one Time to be resisted; The most
dreadful Nation of that time was without doubt, that of the Suisses, and the
greatest Enemy to this Crown. They entered into Burgundy with the body of an
Army, and in great Numbers; They begin suddenly to make desolate that Province:
They made daily progress, and made no question of starving Paris, and to force
Victory to its very Gates. The King sends Tremoville to allay this Tempest, and
stop this impetuous inundation; He makes haste, and as he was a great person
for war and business, he managed the spirit of the people with so much
dexterity, that he sends them home to their Country laden with some spoils,
and promises he made them, and hopes he had given them. Th'Artifice was
profitable to France, the storm that threatened it was diverted, and the stroke
we could not have put back by violence, was avoided by cunning. But
neververtheless the King did not think himself obliged to perform what
Tremoville had promised without his Order, nor to be warrant for th'imprudency
of the Suisses, who abandoned their present Advantages, and them that the
future did infallibly promise them, for uncertain promises and vain Hopes.

When I consider the noise which the Suisses made for the breach of that
Treaty, and how odious and new that. Artifice was unto them: when I consider
Thou Art of deceiving, which since has been introduced, and which shows it self
impudently in th'affairs of Princes: when I consider also the legality used by
Lewis the twelfth, in th'observation of the League at Cambray, in making
Conquests for Princes that were not friends to France, and in putting them into
their hands, and the maintaining of them unto them; I say unto my self, that
the time is very unfortunate, where the vices of our Ancestors are become our
virtues; where in stead of gaining knowledge, an Expedient is found to corrupt
the Manners of men with reason; and where, in stead of studying to reconcile
Virtue with Interest, and with personal love, men have so shamefully falsified
and disquieted in such sort the Resentments of Good and Evil, That if Religion
had not forbid us to believe it, we should be of Aristotle's judgment, who
doubts in some places; whether Virtues are good by nature, or by the opinion
and consent of men.

It must not be forgot that there are Princes who would that their Ministers of
State should sometimes be cruel and forsworn, provided that it were done
without their knowledge and order, They love not malice, but seek the profit
that may thence arise, and are of the humor of Pompeye's Son, who was so
worthy a successor of the virtue of so great a Father, and contested with
Anthony and Augustus The Empire of the world. This Pompey entertaining Anthony
and Augustus in his Galley; the Captain which commanded it, demanded leave of
him to weigh th'Anchor, and to carry away his Guests, and to make Prisoners of
his Rivalls; He answered him, that he ought to have done it without telling him
of it, and should have made him great without making him forsworn. Certainly an
honest person will never be of the mind of this Captain. He will serve his
master with his Estate and Goods, but not with his Honor and Conscience.

The Eleventh Discourse.
That a Minister of State ought to regulate his Demeanor by the interest of
the State, and of his Prince; Provided that he offend not Justice.
THat a Minister of State is to conceive, that the soul of his behavior, and
the first manner of his Actions, ought to be the good of the State, and
interest of his Prince, that he has no other Law to follow, nor other way to
take, and that he must never go aside; provided that Justice be not offended,
which is an inviolable rule, and admits of no Exception nor Contradiction.

Particular persons may part with their Rights in many things, and make
voluntary losses to act generous Actions; In that they exercise only what
belongs to them, they lose nothing but whereof they are Masters and
Proprietaries, and the Damage they suffer is sufficiently requited by the glory
of the good they do; But Princes, (and this the more strongly concerns the
Ministers of State) instead of being generous in forsaking th'interest of their
Countries become imprudent; and they are unjust if they prostitute what is not
theirs, and which has been put into their hands as a sacred Deposite, by the
people who have stripped themselves of it. And since their first obligation is
to prevent their unhappiness, who have delivered up their Liberties unto them,
and have put themselves under their power: It Is certain, that they offend their
Dignity, and sin against what they are, who suffer the loss of any Right of
State, or of the diminution of any member; and that the subjects may oppose it
with Justice, and dissent without Felony; According to this Rule which is well
grounded, the State of France had reason to hinder th'Alienation of Burgundy,
and the Assignment of that Province, which Francis the first had promised for
the price of his Liberty: And The Emperor was to blame to refuse money in lieu
of it, and to require of Francis, that being unable in that case to perform the
Conditions of the Treaty, or overcome the resistance of his subjects; He ought
to return to prison, which was, said he, the least he could do: since in all
Rigor that Obligation had no force, but in the not-observance of what wholly
depended upon him, and was promised fraudulently, and with intention to break
promise. That, if it be permitted to a particular person, to get out of prison
when he finds the door open; If it be not forbidden to a person in Chains, to
force his fetters, and to quit his misery; If some impressions of the
privileges of nature to the person escaped, may be found in the right of
Nations; why should it not be commendable in a great Prince, to make use of it?
Why should it be forbidden him to preserve the good gained upon a faithful
account, in repairing, by what is in his power, what he could not execute by
being at the disposition of another.

It Is upon this foundation, in my judgment, that Princes who finding in their
States some Member thereof to have been usurped by their Predecessors, retain
it in conscience, after the possession has been long peaceable, and the
occupation not interrupted nor contested. For in this, it is the Usuper that
ought to answer the action, and that has been obliged to repair th'injury that
has been committed, and the violence that has been exercised, otherwise truly
the Conditions of all Princes were miserable; They could never be assured of
their States; They should be always in quarrel with their Neighbors, and the
peace of the world should be altered by too frequent Changes, and by eternal
revolutions. It is nevertheless true, that although the retention be not
unjust, and in Conscience be defended; yet that hinders not the just
pretensions of others to those States, or that they may not also in Conscience
pursue the recovery of them by Negotiation or by Arms; Provided nevertheless,
that there be no Treaty nor Agreement equal to it, by which they have
renounced their right; that they have done no action contrary to it; and that
so great a time be not elapsed, that the place be held by a formal demission
of the right, and embrace the universal Consent of all Nations, and of all
people in favor of the possessor. So the King may lawfully keep Mess, Thou,
and Verdum, though these places had been unjustly taken; so we may pretend in
Conscience to the Sovereignty of Flanders, and to the States of Milan, Naples,
and Navarre, since we have for that, Pretenses well grounded, and undoubted
Titles: that our Claims have always been made; that they are known of all the
world; and that we have not by Treaty nor Action, destroyed the force of them;
so we should be condemned to endeavor the recovery of the losses of the first
successors to Charlemaine, and to deter those quarrels whereof with difficulty
History has perserved any entire impressions, or any light that were not
troubled.

That if Sovereigns are bound up with so great rigor and hard Chains for the
good of the people, who are their subjects; How much more ought the Ministers
of State, and Agents whom they employed to be bound up: And how religious ought
they to be in the management of the thing that concerns so many persons, which
enlarges it self upon sacred and profane heads, and where th'interest of God
mixeth with that of men; It Is not to be understood by what has been said, that
I would banish Liberality and Magnificences from the life of Princes, and from
the condition of public persons; nor that I would cause these virtues to
descend below the Thrones, and below the Purple, since they are properly there,
only in their Glory and Dignity; and that Great persons have no other
advantage of mean persons that are honest men, then th'ability of doing good,
which others have only in Will and Inclination, for want of power. But there is
a peculiar art in conducting of these Virtues, without which they pass easily
into the nature of the Vice that is nearest to them; and resemble Torrents,
which in stead of refreshing, destroy, and in pressing too hard the course of
their waters, and to precipitate their fall, are presently dry, and leave
nothing behind them but marks of desolation, and impressions of ruin. But
thereof I shall treat in another place; Let us return to the subject from
whence we parted, and give the King the honor, that no Prince ever had more
tender or lively resentments, for th'interest of his States, or for the dignity
of his Kingdom, then himself. There Is nothing so hazardous that this passion
did not cause him to undertake, nor nothing so difficult that it has not
mastered. It has made him change th'apparance of things, such as appeared
impossible, have been affected; and th'Evils which were believed desperate,
have found their remedies and Cure. He had no rest till he had made himself
master of all his Subjects, and he has constrained them to be faithful, who
knew not to obey so long as they could defend themselves. He went abroad in all
places where our Interests lay: The relations of blood concerned him not so
much as those of his Crown: All other Duty has given place to that of
Regality, and he has the content to have rendered unto it entirely, the two
things that maintain it, Reputation and Power.

But it is not to be forgot, that God has raised a Person to second his great
and just inclinations, who having an understanding and virtue above the
Ordinary of men, has employed all his wit and virtue for his Masters Greatness
and Glory; He laid aside the consideration of a particular Capacity, so soon as
he became a public person; nothing could divert him from doing his Prince
good service: He feared not the hatred of great persons, nor the bitings of the
people. And he kept his way and pace at well through the contradictions and
resistance was made him, as through th'acclamations received, and the prayers
given him. Then also when he might have landed after a glorious Voyage, when
Envy was silent, and reduced to observe the future; finding nothing in his past
Actions for reproof, but for Commendation, when he might have enjoyed the
sweetness of that Rest which attends happy troubles, and honorable labors.
He would not, because it was necessary for us; that all foreign winds were not
laid, and that disturbances were busy amongst our Neighbors and Allies. He
chose rather to commit a full and entire glory, as his was, to the hazards of
the future always doubtful, and subject to revolutions, than to permit his
Master and Country to desire his care and aid; And that which is most
admirable, is, that his love so necessary, and duty so inviolable, have
sometimes prevailed with him to suspend resentments which troubled him nearer
then his personal preservation, which were dearer to him then his life, and
which he preferred to all his fortune at Court, and to all the greatness of the
world. In pursuance of this, I say also what concerns the manners of particular
persons and their Government; Charity commands us to lay out on them the best
Colors, and most favorable Interpretations. But when the question is of the
good of States and Interest of Princes, a greater severity of Judgment must be
used. All appearances of Evil must be attended with distrust, and diverse
expedients must be used to avoid surprises, and to secure against Ambushes. The
reason is, that it is not permitted to commit small faults in such great and
general matters, and that the will does not engage to prepare us against
deceit, when a great opinion is had of the honesty of the persons that are to
be treated withal. But if precaution be at any time necessary, and if there be
need at any time of preservatives against so subtle and piercing a contagion;
it is principally in that season, when Treachery makes a part of politic
Prudence, and where the simplicity of them who suffer the surprise, is more
shameful then the perfidy of them that deceive to their own advantage; Add
th'Artifices that are employed to disguise it, and the subtilties which have
been invented to represent it under another name then its own, and cause it to
pass under shows contrary to its nature; insomuch that though it be always
condemned by the mouth, and in Coversations, I do not see nevertheless that
it is cast out of the commerce of Princes, and use of affairs, but by the event
when it proves fatal; let us conclude then, that in these occasions diffidence
is the Mother of safety; and not to be deceived, preparation must be made as if
it were to be expected.

The Twelfth Discourse.
That a Minister of State ought endeavor to make his Deportments more
Profitable than Eminent.
THat a Minister of State ought to be a stranger to th'Apprehensions of the
vulgar, that he ought not to be subject to the weakness of Low spirits, nor to
touch upon th'objects which entertain them. That he know how to make difference
betwixt the reality and appearance of things; betwixt the solidity and the
brightness; that he prefer not Glass before Gold; because the one is more
shining and luminous, and the other more dark: He must not value so much the
colors of the Bow in heaven, which are but a beam of light fixed for an hour
in some drops of water thickened in the air, as the firm lasting Color of the
Ruby, Emerode, and Opale. He must make a noble expense when it shall be
necessary, and be splendid on important occasions, and appear for the honor of
his Master; He must not neglect th'occasions whose principal Quality resides
in Magnificency: As the Embassies that are made upon the coming in of a King,
upon the Crowning of a Pope, for an alliance or a marriage; but let him not
fall sick upon such expenses, nor be transported, nor make it the greatest
Ornament of his conduct, and choysest expression of his life, nor fix his
greatness upon a transitory Pomp, nor his glory upon a Magnificence that flies
away; and above all to beware, that instead of being magnificent he become not
prodigal; for as Vice cannot be made beautiful what Ornaments soever are put
upon it. It Is certain, that the people are provoked when a vain ostentation is
made of their substance, and a triumph of their sweats and pains. They are
amazed and at a stand; but in the same manner as they behold the pulling down
of Temples, and th'overflowings of Rivers: Wise persons are troubled, when the
principal force of the State is dissipated, the security of peace, and
th'instrument of War, which is Money, in superfluous expenses, since there is
never enough for the necessary occasions.

The things which I have said, are chiefly in relation to the people, which
astonish and ravish them, at the instant they make them afraid. There are other
things also which touch upon the great Spirits, and transport the highest
Courages; Such are th'Arms of War, and th'objects of Valor: There Is no virtue
in the opinion of the greatest part of men more in esteem than this, and no
matter is more acceptable for Conversation, nor any Entertainment more
bewitching, then the effects of War; wherefore Historians shun the times of
peace and dead seasons, as Mariners do the gentle seasons and calms of the Sea;
on the contrary, they triumph in War, and in Tumults; the Seditions and
Insurrections of the people, are the lights of their writings; and their
fairest subjects and most excellent Arguments, are raised upon the Ruin of
Empires, and the death of great persons; wherefore they that frequently read
Tacitus, do not so much fix upon the subtilties and deceits of State, whereof
his Books are full beyond probability; at upon the routing of the Roman
Legions; upon the Revolts of Armies against their Generals, upon th'inundation
of the Sea, and wrack of Fleets; Thou Art of Tiberius to govern, is not read with
so much pleasure; nor the Artifices of Sejanus to establish himself, as the
poisoning of Germanicus, or the violent death of Seneca; The dexterity
practiced by Tiberius, in the name of Sejanus, is not so earnestly considered,
and the subtle and captious Letter he wrote to the Senate to be rid of him, and
whereof he was an Hearer; as the punishment of a person who had raised his
Statues to the side of his Masters, and th'overthrow of that Colossus, who had
commanded all The Earth. It Is not, says Aristotle, that Valor is the first of
all Virtues, or that Justice is not to be preferred before it; but that it acts
with more boldness then other Virtues, and is exercised in surmounting of
dangers, and in despising of death. It Is reasonable that the Recompense that is
due to it from abroad, be the greater and the more eminent; that it be Crowned
with Glory, and they that give their Lives to the service of their Princes, and
to the good of their Country, obtain another life not subject to perish; and to
be preferred in the memory of men, and to flourish always in the mouths of
the Renowned.

Though these things here do raise admiration, and that the spirit of man which
attends naturally actions of Eminency, lays out excessive love upon them,
though a Minister of State ought to esteem them highly, and honor the Conduct
when it shall be necessary; yet he ought to proceed further, and know that
there are more silent and concealed operations, which are better then
the others, because they are more useful for the public, and want of that
outward recompense; Time only discovers them, in regard that secrecy is their
principal Condition, and the wise only consider them according to their
merit, because they make but little noise, and touch not upon the senses which
make up the reason of the people; They resemble the Rivers, which running
gently from the womb of their Center, fill the fields with fruitfulness, and
Cities with abundance; or the motions of the Heavens, whith being almost
undiscernable, turn upon the Earth the power of the Sun, and the wealth of the
Stars.

To foresee th'evills which may befall a State; to prepare preservatives to
hinder their growth; to suppress the Causes before they have produced their
Effects, are things very little considered: And yet a greater Obligation is due
to a Physician, that preserves the health from all sorts of Alteration, than to
him that restores the health when it is lost; A greater Debt is due to him that
hinders a person from falling, then to him that draws him from a precipice; And
it is a better and more difficult thing to preserve a State, then to Conquer it:
The preservation of the Creatures is as noble and excellent a work of God's, as
their Creation. They are both of the same price, and the one is but the
continuation of the other. But it is not the same in Conquests and preservation
of States; The first are not gained but by pieces; one Province is added to
another, and there is need of several Ages, and of great Revolutions of things,
before a Monarchy can attain the Greatness that composeth it. But the second
takes notice of the whole frame of an Empire, no part is exempted, and the
pieces which have been made one after another, ought to move together as in a
Watch, and to point out th'hours. The glory of Conquests is derived from many
Causes, many Persons contribute to it; Fortune interposeth as well as Virtue;
and the faults committed by Enemies, do advance them as much as the Conduct of
the persons that obtain them. But the conservation, is the effect of a single
person, or the work of a few persons: Imprudency enters not there but to
destroy, and confound, and the door of Hazard, and so all th'Avenues of
Fortune, is as strongly shut as it can be locked. It Conquests, force mingles
with prudence, and the Body acts with th'understanding; but in Conservation,
Reason only is employed, and Wisdom the noblest of her habits.

In a word, great Princes have found the last of these things more difficult
then the first; Augustus endured much labor before he could confirm the Empire
his Uncle left him, and it was not done without changing the face of the world,
and without seeing all Nations armed against one another; That he reunited the
body that was divided into three pieces. But he was so much troubled to
maintain that Composition, and to govern that Frame when he became absolute,
that he had it in deliberation amongst his friends, whether he ought to strip
himself of so weighty a greatness, or bear it with the inseparable Cares and
Thorns that are fastened unto it; Some have been found, who having tried the
weight, and rusted the bitterness, have chosen rather to abandon it, and cast
themselve upon the quiet of a private life, then always to be encumbred with a
multitude of Persons and crowd of Business. There are some who have given the
lie to that common opinion which Ambition has invented, That an Empire can no
more receive a Companion, than the World two Sunt, and have permitted others to
share with them in a thing so full of jealousy as Commands, and so
incommunicable as Sovereignty. The Conduct of Tiberius for peace has not been
less admired, nor th'Artifices he used in his Age, less exactly observed by
the Historians, then the Wars he made in his youth, and th'evidences of Valor
which he gave in his most flourishing time. The life of one of our Kings Which
deserved the Surname of Wise, is not less considerable then the life's of them
who have carried the Titles of Conquerors; and a Prince our Neighbor, has
given him this praise, that no King ever raised fewer Armies, and that no
person ever gave him so much disturbance. The Difficulties wherewith he was
assaulted both within and without; th'Artifices he was constrained to resist;
the Conspiracies from which he was to be secured, and th'Enterprises of
strangers, which he made useless by his prudence, delivered him to posterity,
worthy of a Title which has been given to meaner persons, as that of the Great.

Few Princes had greater Affairs in hand then Lewis the eleventh, or more
Enemies; His principal Officers betrayed him; the Princes of the blood forsook
him; He saw England, Burgundy, Flanders and Bretany, in confederacy for his
Ruin, and yet his dexterity surmounted those difficulties; He overcame his
Enemies without conducting of Armies, or giving of Battails, and without making
much noise of eminent Attempts; He defeated all that was raised to destroy him;
but never person was more to be feared in the Cabinet, nor had done greater
things abroad, without stirring from home, then Philip the second. From the
Escuriall where he had shut up himself; He governed two Worlds, with three
fingers of Paper. He was also as absolute in Peru, as in the Kingdom of
Castile; with three words he changed the Governors, and deposed the
Magistrates in America, and in Japan; And it is certain that never Prince was
less seen of his subjects, nor more respected by them than he was.

According to what has been said, it is not possible to suppose a more eaven
Conduct, or more intelligent then that of of Sr. the Cardinal's. He never
offends against the conveniencie of things, and his Intelligence is so pure,
and Reason so clear, that he assigns them always their just price and place;
He is magnificent, and spends with Eminency; not that he has no esteem
naturally for wealth, or has never adored th'Idoll of the Court, and the mean
favors of Fortune; but because prudence has so ordained it, and that his
Occasions and Dignity require it. He makes not nevertheless that glorious
dispensation, and high use of Riches, which is but for show, and th'exterior;
the Basis of his honor, or foundation of his glory. He knows that all
prodigalls have more desire to spend then himself, and that public Robbers
have sometimes been seen in great States, who have had more power. But for
the other Employment, which is the love of great Courages, which is th'Ornament
of the Annals, and Histories, and which has made the greatest part of the
Gods, th'Ancients have adored; It has occasioned in him a great contest of
body and mind, and he has not forgot the thing might make him to prosper in
it. It Is true, that he was furnished with the principles which accompany a
noble blood, and an Illustrious Birth: It Is true, that his Reason, and the
lights of his Understanding, have completed that Disposition for all sorts of
Good, which nature has infused into him; notwithstanding it must be avowed
that he followed such a profession of life, as had restrained those generous
Inclinations, and hindered the seeds to grow; If they had not been raised up by
his love to the King, and to the necessities of his Country.

But he loved his Master too well, to stay in the Calm whilst he was in the
storm; and he was too sensible of th'evills of France, to give only his
Counsels for its relief, and to suffer the Remedies to be applied by other
hands than his. The things which have been done in the Wars, where he was
present, are incredible, and prosperity will be puszled to believe the wonders
which happened in our time. But it must be confessed also, that in these
Occasions he did not only contribute his Courage, and the force of his soul,
but blended also that secret Art and insensible Address, which is the highest
degree of Civil science, and the perfection of Ministration. And as
the encounter of two Stars of different qualities, produces here below effects
which would not happen without that mixture, and confusion of Virtues; It Is
certain also, that th'Industry which Sr. the Cardinal added to the Power, has
advanced the Kings Victories, and made them easy. It mollified th'hearts which
could not have been broken but with great difficulty; It opened the Gates of
Cities, where it had been dangerous to have entered by Breaches; it spared blood
that was not to be despised, and an infinite number of life's which have not
been unprofitable to the State.

What has not this Art done in the midst of peace, and in the quiet of
affairs? how many designs, which had been fatal to France, have been stifled
in their Conception? How many storms diverted at the very instant that the
matter began to gather? and how many ill affections have remained barren for
having been prevented? And abroad and amongst our Neighbors, has not the same
Art made discovery of its virtue and influence? It has disappointed the
subtilties of Italy, from doing of us any harm; That th'Artifices of Spain have
not surprised us, and that we have surmounted the prudence of strangers as well
as their forces. That Prince beyond the Mountains that lived so many years,
and reigned so long time, who always repaired his weakness with his Crafts
and his Courage; and deceived Fortune so often, that had made it her design to
destroy him; had the displeasure to see his Charms defeated, his Finesses
discovered; and all that inverted upon him, which an experience of above fifty
years, and the vivacity of his spirit, had furnished him with, of inventions to
hurt us; The Spaniards, who have always such plenty of means to attain their
Ends, who set such subtle and invisible Twigs to catch other Nations, and have
often finished in their Treaties the designs began in their Wars, were amazed
to find a person so subtle as themselves; And, as the covetous persons believe
they have lost all they do not gain, the Spaniards have complained that they
were deceived, when they saw that we knew how to hinder their deceit.

The Thirteenth Discourse.
That it is of Importance that a Minister of State be Learned.
SInce this elose Art, whereof we have now spoken, is so profitable for States,
and gives sometimes such extraordinary strokes; since its hidden influences are
so powerful; since that its secret virtue is so active: Lets see a little from
what spring is runs, and with what forces it is accompanied. There Is no
question, but for this as for all great Actions, the birth must be happy;
Th'aspects of the Stars must be favorable, and Nature propitious to us,
otherwise it is to labor in vain. If it be contrary to us, it is to build
without a foundation, it is to sow seeds on the Rocks; or, at best, it is to row
against the stream of a rapid River. When Nature and Birth have distributed
their Gifts and Advantages, there are two things which help to gain this Art,
and to form it, Learning and Experience. We have treated thereof in the first
Discourse of this Book. But in regard the first of them is ordinarily too
little esteemed by them who make no use of it, but as an unprofitable moveable,
and superfluous Ornament. And that it is sometimes too much neglected by them,
who have great Obligations upon them to be furnished with it. Who have no
motions but what are accompanied with public Interest; no passions but such
as are fatal to a State, and whose faults resemble the irregularities of the
Sun which confound th'Harmony of the World, and make a total change in Nature:
It may not be superfluous, besides what has been said in other places, to
raise it here a little, and to withdraw it from the disdain which some would
throw upon it.

The aneient Romans, whose least praise is, that they have not been imitated by
any other Nation. They who were ordained to Govern the Commonwealth, that
commanded all the world; They who had Commission to lead Armies, and subdue
free people, became hearers of the Rhetoricians, and Disciples of the
Philosophers: And though in the first Times, and golden Age of that Republique,
the study of Sciences was not known, and that the persons of that time were
instructed only by Nature, and had no other Precepts to live well and to well,
but The Examples of their predecessors and fellow Citizens. Though old Cato who
deserved all the praise of a person born for the good of others; who in his
Country gained all th'honours of Peace and War; who raised the question,
whether he was a better Citizen or greater Captain, seems to have been an Enemy
to men of Letters; The Judgment nevertheless of a single person, nor the
Consent of a few Ages, are not even infallible, nor the sovereign Rule of the
truth of things.

It Is true, that there are Sciences so superfluous, and occupations of the
Understanding so frivolous, that the loss of time is the least Evil committed
by them that make their Address; which do not only puszle but corrupt; which
divert from Action dissipate the powers of the soul; fill it with effeminate
Habits, and make a man sometimes unable to serve the public, or to be useful
to himself. And such were the Sciences from which no doubt Cath endeavored to
divert the Roman youth. But as for other Sciences that form th'understanding
and refine Prudence; which rectify Manners, and regulate the Duties of life;
that fortify Courage, and kindle the desires of Glory; He could never have
consented, as I conceive, to the banishment of them from Rome, if they had been
there taught, he would not have driven away the Socratians, the Platonists, the
Aristotelians, and the other Masters of human kind, as he did the Greek Orators;
He would have known that from their Schools, did issue the Epimanendas's, the
Xenophons, and the Alexanders; He had known that the Republiques called for
them in Order to reformation, and that Tyrants sent for them to secure their
Dominion, and to make lawful the countenance of a power whose beginning was
unjust.

That if Ages sometimes have produced great persons for Peace and War, who
became such without th'ayd of Sciences, and the lights of Philosophy; If the
Goths could not endure in their Country th'exercise of Learning. If some Pagan
Emperors have judged it for the best Expedient to take away the hearts from
Christians, to leave them that sullen contemplation, and that languishing
Entertainment; And if Lewis the Eleventh would not suffer his Son to learn
above five or six Latin words, which he believed to include the whole secret
of Government, and to comprehend all the substance of that Art. As to the
first, it must be confessed, that they were the strains of Nature which fortune
favors; that they were persons of very good common sense, and of very high
Courage, and completed by the use of Affairs, and managment of Wars which they
governed: Such have been the Marians, the Tamberlaines, and the first Romans
whereof we have above spoken. But it must be also acknowledged, that if study
had been added to the rich gifts of Nature, and if Philosophy had cleared their
understandings, that their valor had been fairer, and their glory more
eminent; That it had not been stained with so many faults as it was, and that
their valor so high and happy in their Youth, for being rooted in the body,
had nor failed, nor departed in Age, as it happened to some of them.

That if th'health of the Commonwealth changed, when Sciences flourished much
at Rome, and if it fell in a time when its Captains were Philosophers;
Philosophy for that Cause must not be charged with it. You must not condemn
the innocent, nor believe that she who labored to moderate the passions, and to
purge the soul of its blots and weakness, did infuse that violent Disire to
reign, and that immoderate Ambition, which could not be restrained, neither by
the inclinations of blood, nor by the love of their Country. This great
disorder then proceeded from the temper of certain spirits, who after they had
a long time commanded in those Provinces, and given Laws to the people, could
not reduce themselves to equality, and civil obedience, nor suffer Companions
and Masters. Moreover that whilst the Romans were employed, and that stranger
Enemies exercised them at home, they thought only of subduing or defending
themselves. But since all the world yielded to their Virtue, or submitted to
their Power; that with the Conquest of the World, the wealth of all Nations was
brought to Rome: That great persons made many servants and parties in the midst
of the City, and in the Provinces: That Prodigality and Luxury had devoured the
best Families, and that the change of state had given hopes of the change of
fortune to them, who could not be worse then in their present Condition; no
wonder at the disorders that happened. It must not be thought strange if Factions
were raised where Ambition was so hot: if Novelty was desired, where there was
so much Poverty, and so much Wealth: and if the Ruin of one of the parties was
attended with the ruin of the State, where the power that was shared became
absolute by victory.

As to the second, it may be agreed, that for the simple function of Soldiers,
it is not of importance that they be furnished with knowledge and Learning. And
it is true, that those Qualities which ordinarily swell up th'understanding and
make it overflow; weaken obedience which is so necessary for them, and render
them less tractable for commands; chiefly if they have not a great opinion of
their Commanders; which they have but seldom, because they have too much for
themselves. Besides that presumption which arises to them from the small
advantages which Letters give them above others that have them not; causes,
them not to expose themselves willingly but upon th'eminent occasions, and that
they scorn to apply themselves to mean and small Factions, which are often a
great occasion for great Executions, and to obtain the Victory. Wherefore
Lodowith Sforza, who by his Ambition overthrew the peace of Italy, and opened
the door to Strangers, who have since subdued it, said, That a great Wit made
an ill Condition in a Soldier, and that he received not easily into his
service them who were proud of it: It Is true also, that it infinitely concerns
States that are obliged to entertain great Armies, and are jealous of the
Reputation of Commerce, without which they become poor, and the Revenue of the
Prince decays; That there be not so great a number of Scholars, as are seen in
France; That irregular number of men who cast themselves into the Church, ir
into th'exercise of Justice, is the cause that such formidable Armies, as
heretofore cannot be raised, and that many who would make good Merchants, and
their Families to flourish, if they had been bred in Trade, ruin or
incommodate them, by becoming ill Doctors, and dangerous or unprofitable
Members of the Court of Justice.

For what concerns Lewis th'Eleventh, it must not be understood that his
opinion comprehends all the duty of a Prince, and all the knowledge of
Government it makes but a little and dangerous party, and that there are nobler
Maxims for Reigning, and more exalted Principles, than dissimulation. And
truly the seeds of good which were in his Son, remained imperfect for want of
improvement. His Courage that was high, wanted Rule and Conduct, and his
Understanding had not force enough to resist the Corruption of them, that had
environed him, and the designs of his Ministers of State, who ruined his
business to do their own.

The Fourteenth Discourse.
That it is of importance that a Minister of State be Eloquent.
YOu have what I would say in defense of Letters, which help to form Thou Art of
a Minister of State, and sometimes serve for a Guide, and Torch, to them who are
to walk ofton in the dark, and amongst Precipices. It remains now to speak a
word of Eloquence, which is as the hand of that Art and Instrument wherewith it
enters the hearts, stirs up the passions, gives to things the form she
pleases, and renders her self Mistress of Men and Businesses. It Is a quality
of an incomparable perfection which requires all the favors Nature can bestow
upon a Body and Wit: All the polishings that Labor and Industry can bring unto
it, and all that good Custom and Experience can add unto it. It Is so full
also of Glory, that it is never exposed to Disdains, as sometimes the Sciences
are. She makes her self to be feared, if not to be beloved; she has
Lightnings as well as Crowns. She raigns in all places, and to that height,
that she undertakes to change the order of Providence, and to take away the use
of Liberty from the Causes, to which God had given it.

This Quality then which cannot be perfect, nor in its true Dignity without
Virtue and Philosophy, is worthy of the Cares of a Minister of State. It
wonderfully adornes Peace, and is of great service in time of War. It Is by her
power that The Ancient Orators protected the Innocence of particular persons,
and defended oppressed Provinces. It Is by her force, that the fall of States
has been sometimes prevented; and fatal Conspiracies dissipated. It Is by her,
that Cicero merited honors, which he preferred to the Triumph of Conquerors.
And by her, he pretends to have place amongst the Founders and Restorers of the
first Commonwealth of the world. It Is she that has often secured the
Victories that were doubtful; that has given courage to the Soldiers that
had lost it; that struck fire and boldness into the souls of them who
compelled Fortune to favor them, and that would die or overcome.

And without speaking of Xenophon, of Caesar, and of the greatest Captains of
Antiquity; who have gained in the Modern Ages a higher and clearer Reputation
than Scander-beg than the great Captain, and than Gaston of Foix? And is it not
true that these three great persons have always begun to prepare the Victory
by Discourse, and by persuasion, which after they completed by Conduct and
Valor, In effect, it is no small favor which God has done to the reasonable
soul, by giving it power to communicate its thoughts, and to bring to light its
affections; And Speech is a present of an extraordinary price, wherewith she
may distribute part of her excellencies: She can give without loss, and make
rich without becoming poor; she can see the Treasures abroad she has within
her self, the Lights that beautify her, and those admirable Representations
whereof she is at the same time the Painter and the Table: And it is for that
chiefly, that she has received so exquisite a Gift: For in relation only to
the Body, and the single necessities of th'animall life, It Is probable that
Nature would have given it certain signs, and some exterior Motions to express
them, as it has done to Beasts and little Children. But as health of it self
is a silent good, and is scarce felt, if pleasure do not animate it, and
delight give it life; so the Dignity of Speech is unknown, if it be not
accompanied with Graces, and expressed with Pomp.

It seems that Reason scorns to go abroad unless she be adorned; that she has
no force without allurements; and effects Complaisancy, that she may be useful:
And it is Eloquence, and that divine faculty whereof we speak, which fits and
trims Reason to so high an Admiration; It Is she that does furnish her with
Flowers and Ornaments; It Is she that causes Reason not only to bring Light to
be understood, but also stirs up Love to be followed.

I will not speak here of the knowledge of Sr. the Cardinal, nor of the wonder,
that laying out so much time for Action and Directions for public Affairs,
there should remain to him any time for his study, and for to gain that
general knowledge he has of all good things. It were also to be ignorant of
his strength and dignity of his subject To speak of his Eloquence, it were to
seek light from the Sun, to undertake the publishing of that Divine Faculty
which is every day admired in Councills: which has so eminently appeared in
Assemblies, done so great services to France, and has so often by his Mouth
and Pen made the Christian truths to Triumph. It Is such, and his soul is so
strangely imbued, that as there are places in the world, from whence nothing is
taken, but what is perfumed and odoriferous; In liker manner, even the most
familiar Discourses, and ordinary Entertainments of Sr. the Cardinal, hold
forth some Tincture, and give some taste of the virtue fo that excellent
quality.

The Fifteenth Discourse.
That the Council of a Prince ought to be composed a few persons.
It Is of importance that the Council of a Prince be reduced to a few Heads, so
as they be well chosen; and that the number be not the Evidence of his Dignity,
but the Merit and Virtue of his Counselors. Unity is the last measure of the
perfection of things; and the first of all Beings, is the most single of all
others. This Being is God himself, who without suffering Division of Parts, or
mixture of Qualities, is infinitely perfect within, and infinitely active
without, and by a power infinitely pure, and infinitely single, and without
th'adjunction of any foreign virtue, has produced the wonders we see, and
that variety of subjects which are united to make the world: And without him
the most noble Natures, and most excellent, are the least composed and the most
indivisible; And we rejoice much more in a sight not limited in th'extents of
its objects, and that can know all the colors of Nature, and the Figures of
all Bodies; then if we had as many eyes as the visible Objects are diverse, and
Colors different in nature.

So, if it were permitted to make fair Dreams and magnificent Wishes, it were
to be desired that a Prince alone should make up his Council: That he were the
sole Director of his business; That he were the sole intelligence to give it
motion, and that he alone held the Helm, and handled the Scepter. But insomuch
that such a Prince was never seen, and that th'Idaea remains in the head of
Xenophon, that History does not propose the like to us; that th'imperfection of
humane things suffers it not; Lewis the Eleventh.
and that he who boasted that his Horse carried him and all his Council, did
sometimes commit such enormous faults and foolish errors, that all the world
takes notice of them. A Prince ought at least so to order his business, that
his power be not loose, that it enlarge not, and be restrained to a few
persons, that it may be the more active and absolute, and its operation the
more nimble and efficacious. But that the goodness of this order may appear the
better, and th'advantages that accrue to a State, where it is observed to be
the more evident; It may not be amiss to demonstrate it by the comparison of
other forms of Government which are more disunited, and where the Authority to
resolve business is more dilated; for the things of this world do appear best
by opposition; the shadow quickens the colors and the Lights; Recovery from
sickness is more agreeable then health: and there is no good that would not
lose one half for its just price, if there were no evil contrary to it; I
will say upon the subject in hand, a word of the Republique of Venice, of that
of the Suisses, and of the Government of the Polaques, which is a mixed kind of
Government, and composed of Aristocracy and Monarchy.

I think that no Republique was ever established with so great Wisdom, or that
received Orders more apt to attain th'ends of a civil life, which is the
happiness of Inhabitants, then that of Venice: It Is not but that some have
made a greater noise in the world, and whose Empire has been more enlarged,
and Dominion more glorious. But as the greatest bodies, and of highest stature,
are not ever the soundest; and as the vastest buildings are not always the
firmest: so the good policy of a State, and the goodness of its Composition,
is not to be judged by the extent of the Country it enjoys, and by the great
quantities of Earth and Sea it commands; so whosoever considers the duration of
the Republique of Venice, and its quiet for 1200 years, and observes that it
has never been strongly agitated within, and has felt but a leight intestine
sedition; may easily conclude that the Noble parts have been very sound, and
that the Foundations are very deep and solid: And though of late it may seem
that her Forces are diminished, that her best condition is past, and that the
violence of some strange cause has blasted the beauty of her Countenance;
there is no matter of astonishment, nor any great wonder that old Age should
produce wrinckles; that what is mortal should be sometimes sick; that the
strong should offend the weak: and that Prudence should not always be Mistress
of Fortune, nor good events the necessary effects of good Counsels.

Though this be thus, yet there is some change to be wished, as to the manner of
their Treating, and resolving the affairs of that Republique; and it is a great
mischief, that they are carried through so many Assemblies, and pass by so many
Heads, whereof the Senate is composed; the Secret which is never very safe with
a multitude, has much ado to be there preserved; Length is unavoydable there,
and many times Fortune flies away, and good occasions are lost; whilst they
deliberate, and before they have concluded. Heretofore in pressing-matters, and
where dispatch was requisite, and Secrecy extraordinarily necessary, they were
treated, and resolved in a Council, which they called of Ten, with the same
force and Authority as in the Senate. But they have since judged, that the
supreme Authority, attributed to Ten persons in matters regarding the whole
State, was of too dangerous a consequence, and that that Order might in time by
The Ambition, and by th'Artifices of particular persons, degenerate into a pure
Aristocracy, and corrupt th'essence of their Government, which is blended of
three others.

From thence may be seen the fatality of humane things; that the good is ever
accompanied with some evil, and that nothing is so well accomplished, as not
in some part to be defective. Of all sorts of Government, under which the world
rowls, the most excellent are not exempt from spots. It Is not, but that they
who invented them, foresaw th'inconveniences: but that they could not do
better, nor provide a Remedy, where none was to be had. Prudence is not so
often employed in choosing the greatest Good, as in avoiding the greatest
Evils; and as we see in the Composition of the humane body, that there are but
a few parts capable of pleasure, and which touch upon the pleasant Objects: and
that on the Contrary, all parts are exposed to grief, and to share Resentments;
so it happens that in all other things, th'evill enters by more ways then the
good, and finds more places to make its impression, and exercise its violence.
If this be to be seen in all of Nature, and if it be an experience which
passes even to Beasts; it ought not to be thought strange, if in a matter so
mixed and so confused, as States are, and where Fancies so different, and
Inclinations so various, do enter; if the pure good be not there found, nor
such a perfection as no sort of vice can alter: Let Us go on.

As to the Commonwealth of the Suisses, it is a sort of Government very loose,
and in some measure tumultuous; The Bond that ties them, is not stronger than
that which joins the Leagues; and there is only this difference; that they do
but ordinarily pass, and have no durable cause; that they are not good, but to
repel an Evil suddenly fallen upon some of the Confederates, and which
threatens the rest of them; or to prevent some storm and inundation of some
great approaching power; But so soon as the danger is over, or that
th'oppression is taken away, they fall of themselves, and go out for want of
aliment and matter.

Of this I will treat at length in the second Part of this Work. But th'Union
of the Suisses cannot perish nor dissolve, but by an outward violence; It has
an everlasting foundation, which is jealousy of Liberty; and though they dwell
only in Rocks, and that poverty stirs not from their houses; yet they would
not change their Condition, which appears not so ugly, but that there is great
cause for them to be in love with it, and to believe that the Wealth which
Nature has denied their Country, is plentifully repaired by the Independency
wherein they have fixed themselves, and by the Freedom under which they live.
Their Policy then, which is at greater distance with Unity, that that of the
Venetians, is by consequence more imperfect, and has greater Inconveniences:
Secrecy is not to be found in their Meetings; the Convocation is made with
extreme tediousness: Their Resolutions are not taken but very late. And besides
th'error which is common to all Assemblies, To dispute much, and conclude
little; It Is certain the variety of Religions wherewith they are now in labor,
causes that when the Dyets are composed of all the Cantons, that interests
more opposite, and passions more opinionated are brought, than heretofore were
practiced; And it has been seen, and we have made very troublesome
experiences; that when our Forces were not fully known to us, and that our
Infantry was almost raised out of Suisses; that the services were so slowly
made, and came so late to us, that very often we lost fair Occasions, or
received notorious hints before we were in condition to resist or undertake;
And that is one of the Reasons which obliged Francis the first, to establish
Legions in the respective Provinces, to have the Body of an Army of French
Infantry always in readiness, and not to depend, when he had a mind to Arm,
upon th'humours of that heavy Nation, and fancies of so brutish and mercenary a
people.

The Government of Poland is not a pure Monarchy, as I have said, but a mixed
body composed of Aristocracy and Royalty. The King cannot deliberate any thing,
not undertake any thing for Peace or War, without The Assembly of Nobles. This
Constitution is subject to a thousand inconveniences, and by reason of the
tediousness it brings with it, it is at least certain it can never receive the
Designs, where success depends upon the Promptitude, and where Execution ought
to surprise and be Sudden, that it may be Happy; it is an Enemy to Secrecy,
which is necessary to guide safely all sorts of Enterprises. It gives means to
enemies, to use prevention, or to expect with Advantages, and to provide
against the Tempest they see coming, and which grumbles and makes a noise
before it breaks out: There Is nothing so easy as to steal-in Corruption and
Schism, and it is impossible in so numerous and irregular Collection of men, as
compose their Assemblies, that all parts should be sound and unalterable; and
that all the Members should agree upon the general good of the Body, so
composed. In a word, no great or extraordinary thing is to be expected from
this kind of Policy, and the Polaques ought not to think of Conquests, or to
extend by War Bounds of their Country, so long as they govern themsemselves in
that manner. On the contrary, they have often suffered great losses, and
received notorious outrages from the Turk, from the Muscovites, and
particularly from the Tartars, before they could draw their Forces together to
repel them, and fight them upon their retract. And if Nature, or rather the
Corruption of Mankind, had not raised other Thiefs, which are called Cosaques;
They would suffer yet more invasions, and more sudden Enterprises from their
first mentioned Enemies. But it seems that these Cosaques are the
Counter-poyson, and Remedy, and often exchange it with them, and run with ruin
and desolation into their Country, and even into the Dominions of the Turk who
protects them.

And though it be thus, that this Policy has so remarkable faults, It would be
a difficult matter to reform it: The natural Inclination which the
Septentrionalls have for liberty, would make there a great resistance, and I
do not think that there is a benefit, which th'absolute and independent
Authority of the King could promise to the Polaques, which would in their
opinion equalize the pleasure and profit they find in being above their King;
to do justice to themselves; to provide by their own hands against the evils
that hurt them. And in a word, to taste of the sovereignty and absolute power.
To speak freely, there are precipices on what side soever you look, and both
extremities are attended with its Commodities, and has its Flowers and
Thorns. And as th'Aristocratique and mixed Government is a bridle to Princes
that would abuse their Authority, and hinders them to exceed: It Is true also,
that when they have good Understanding, and an upright Will, the condition of
their subjects is better them otherwise it would be; and the affairs of State
breathe more wholesome Air, and take safer Course. All nevertheless being well
examined, the best expedient is that every person live conformable to the Laws
and Customs of his Country were he dwells; That he love the form of Government
which is there established; that he observe the Policy there in use; and
conceive that Change is the worst of all Evils that can be there introduced
which almost never enters without violence, and ever almost tears up that which
it would take from its place.

The End of the First Book.
THE MINISTER OF STATE.
Book II.
First Discourse.
That a Complete Minister of State ought to be able for Counsel, and for
Execution; and ought to have a free power particularly for the War.
It Is certain that a single Quality makes not up the perfection of
Administration; and to form it, the highest powers of Man are necessary, and the
noblest habits of those powers. It is not satisfied with that, nor content
only with the inward beauty, and with private satisfaction. It Is Inclinations
are more vast and ambitious: It suffers, if it remain concealed; It desires the
Light; It will appear abroad; It must enlarge and communicate it self; In a
word, Action is her end and her Crown, and without it, it should be a treasure
half lost: or as the veins of Gold in the bosom of The Earth, which no person
has discovered. Her beginning is that light of the Soul, and that product of
th'understanding, which is called Prudence. But as the light of the Sun is a
general Quality, and which alone would produce nothing; so Prudence has use
of diverse other Virtues to execute her Orders, and to give motion to her
Deliberations. And again, as those Virtues have need of her Light and
Influence, to know the object whereon they ought to look and to pursue; In like
manner also Prudence refines her self by th'exercise of those Virtues, and by
the troubles and storms which the imperfection of humane discourse lets fall.
They take them away, and are made clearer by experience. It Is not necessary
that he who deliberates should always execute; That he who has a very sound
head, should have also strong Arms; nor that he who has Prudence, should have
all the virtues requisite for Action; it is sufficient that she guide them and
direct them in what subject soever they are found, and upon what matter soever
they are employed. But as th'Artificer judges much better of the work of his
hands, and of th'excellency of his Ideaa, when he sees it upon the Cloth or the
Marble; so Prudence also is much better assured of the goodness of its
Judgment, by The Effects then by the single Discourse that precedes them, and
by the sole Agitation of the Reason which goes before: And in my opinion, it is
of that perfect prudence, and which use has completed, that Aristotle is to
be understood, when he says, That there is no true Prudence without the other
Moral Virtues.

It Is true, that when these Virtues do meet in her company, when they dwell
together, when they proceed from a common principle, and from the same Root;
Their Conduct is more certain and more happy; Prudence is the more intentive
upon her business; She governs them with more tractablenesse, and by constant
illuminations; secures them with more ease from the Ambushes of Fortune, and
from th'unexpected inconveniences of the times; Wherefore in matters of War,
the execution of an enterprise ought always to be committed to him who proposed
it, provided he be a capable person to perform it; for therein he is excited to
do well, by the glory of Success, and by the jealousy of his opinion, which is
a violent and imperious passion; and, strayning to defend the noblest and most
exalted faculty of the Soul, which is the Judgment, seldom abates of the
Contest and pursuit. As also it is not safe to put the execution of a design
into the hands of them that voted against it; who will be always slow in
Action; who will bring to it but the half of themselves; who will have but
faint motions, and conformable to the passions that shake them, which are
irresolution and distrust,; and who have wherewithal to comfort themselves in
the will of success, by the truth of the Prediction they had made, and by the
Reputation of Wisdom, and providence they had gained to themselves.

Though it be so, and much better, that be who is capable to resolve, be also
capable to execute; It Is nevertheless a rare encounter amongst men; and as
there are but few places on The Earth which bring forth all that respects the
pleasures of the Senses, and the necessities of Life; so, there are but few
souls that have all the virtues proper for Governments; and it seems that the
Law of humane Society, as that of Nature, would have a dependency betwixt the
spirits of men; as there is a Commerce and Communication betwixt diverse
Countries, and different Nations of the World, so the Coldness of Parmenio
tempered th'heat of Alexander; so the Wisdom of Cyneas restrained the Courage
of Pyrrhus: so Scipio observed th'orders of Laelius, and Augustus found a
temper in the prudence of Metaenas, and valor of Agrippa, to which nothing was
impossible.

Wherefore a Minister of State that has all these perfections, ought to be of
high price with his Prince: The State ought to reverence him as an
extraordinary person; and the virtues which being severed merit a price, and to
be esteemed; deserve highly some new respect, and a particular Veneration, when
they join in a single subject for the general good of the World: At least it is
certain, that the will which attends the great variety of Agents is avoided; They
that uphold them, agree rarely together in the same Design: Concord is seldom
sound amongst them, unless it be in Looks and Words, because the heart is false,
or interessed; and Jealousy is there the stronger, for that it proposes to it
self the possession of so great a good, as the favor of the Prince, and the
power of the State; They that are only for Counsel, and whose virtue shines
only in the Cabinet Council, incline always to peace how dishonorable
soever. It Is then they truly reign, when all other greatness bows to theirs.
And that they see at their feet the glory of Arms, and the Crowns of the
Victorious. On the contrary, during the War they are out of countenance, and
their Authority declines in that troublesome season. They are darkened by a
profession that has more pomp and light then theirs; And in regard that those
who are called to Command, are usually extraordinary persons, it makes them
strongly jealous, and apprehend th'encrease of power upon the spirit of their
Master, and the taking of root in his Inclinations; wherefore they endeavor to
make them unprofitable, that they might be the less considerable. They trouble
them in their employments, that they might be the less happy. The great
Victories make them more afraid then great Losses, and our Generals have often
seen dis-banded th'Armies they Commanded, and enterprises ruined, whereof the
Beginnings were plausible; for having not timely received, or in the fit
Quantity the provisions necessary for continuing of the War. They on the other
side prolong the troubles, and lengthen the confusion to th'uttermost of their
power, to subsist in Credit and esteem. They love the storms because they help
to guide the Ship? They desire sickness, because they are employed in applying
the Remedies; but nevertheless they would have no end made, for fear of
remaining idle Pylots, and uprofitable Physicians. Moreover they complain
always first: They frequently accuse them of their own faults, and ease
themselves upon them of th'envy of their ill successes and disgraces that
attend it.

And when it does not so happen, and that there should be amongst them a
perfect understanding and general agreement; The Obligation nevertheless
which some of them are under to receive Orders for Action from others, and that
regular Dependency, is over importunate, and sometimes pernicious; Whilst they
consult the Council of the Prince, occasions do pass; Things take another
Countenance, and so many unexpected Accidents happen, for which sudden
provision must be made, that by their Violence they are carried away before
Remedy can be applied, and the business perishes for not daring to relieve it
when it was in their power. This unhappiness has been particularly observed
in some of our Neighbors States. The Venetians have made little use of
th'occasions of the War, and their Generals have often seen a good occasion
pass away before them, without daring to stay it, or to hinder it from flying
away, because they had not the Senate's Order. They begin also to withdraw from
that dangerous Maxim, and are no more so scrupulous as they were, to permit
them to act of themselves, and to take th'Advantages which offer themselves. It
is also observed, that th'affairs of the Low Countries suffered much for the
same reason toward the end of the life of Philip the second; and that they
changed extremely by reason of the great delays they were constrained to use
at the time of the want of his health, and decay of his age; The Will was, that
they would take most cognizance of all things when they could worse do it, and
were most earnest to retain business when the time was elapsed. That Prince
changed his Conduct, and in safer occasions he was accustomed to give almost a
sovereign Authority to them whom he employed. The Duke of Alva had it most
absolute when he came into Flanders to make War to the growing Rebellion. Don
John of Austria had it very large, when he was chosen chief of the Christian
League against the Turk, after the Conquest of Portugal; The Cardinal Albert
had an unlimitted power to reform the Kingdom, and Philip the second procured
him a Legation, that he might act with the greater Authority, and he was at one
and the same time absolute Judge of temporal and spiritual Affairs.

Insomuch that if the Cardinal had carried with him in his second journey,
beyond the Mountains, a Commission as ample as some have described it; and that
the noise which was but a Fable, had been true, it-had not been new nor without
Example; Our Neighbors have showed us the way, and that Nation also which
understands Thou Art of governing better then any Nation in the World. But the
moderation of this Lord has been such, that he sought not any extraordinary
Power in that Occasion: That he has not done nor undertaken any thing, but by
the express. Orders of the King, and they that have studied his Life, and
observed his demeanor, know that he has chosen rather to be considered by
th'Actions of the compleatest Obedience which a Subject can give to his
Sovereign, than by the particular marks of Honor and Affection which he could
have received. But beyond this, let us confess, that he is that extraordinary
person, who has in an eminent degree all the Qualities fit for governing,
which are rarely seen, but severed in others; who executes what he advises;
appears in Calms and Tempests; who has deserved the honor of Peace, and the
triumph of War, and in whom Virtue is not limited, neither by he Condition of
the Times, nor Diversity of Affairs.

The Second Discourse.
whence the Virtue of keeping a Secret proceeds, and how necessary it is for a
Minister of State.
WE have showed in the precedent Discourse, how necessary it is that the
Council of a Prince be reduced to a few persons, and how difficult it is for a
multitude of persons to keep a Secret; This may be added to th'happinesse of
the King's Reign, that never Council was more faithful then his, nor where
the secret of Affairs lay more secure. The number is very small, but of
excellent persons. Nothing is capable to untie their Tongue but when it is
necessary. They are not weak, nor to be Corrupted. Their Virtue is proof to all
Trialls. That Condition is particularly remarkable in him who is the Chief, and
in whom resides that Unity which is a Beam from the Sovereignty, and the last
measure of the perfection things. Few persons have been of profounder thoughts,
nor of higher exaltations of soul; And but few have been seen that could better
retain them, or that were more the Master of them. And nevertheless the best
thoughts of the world, and the most happy productions of wit have this in them,
that they ought to resemble fruits which should be gathered in season, that
they may be wholesome; but they have this Imperfection, that they are like to
Wine, which when it is new, endeavors to break out and to run out: The wit of
man is so in love with it self, and has so hot a thirst to make it self
known; that so soon as it has conceived something which may, as it believes,
deserve praise, has impatience to discover it: It makes haste to bring it to
light; it cannot attend the just time of delivery; and it ordinarily falls out,
that it loses by too much haste the value of what would have been excellent,
if it had been brought forth in season, and had ripened at leisure. Besides
this defect which is always natural to us, and which is the proper French
Temper; There Is another Cause for which the greatest part of men cannot conceal
long a design, without giving it Air, nor retain unto themselves a good
Thought; It Is the small power they have to resist common reports, and
th'opinions that run abroad. It has always been th'humour of the people to be
the Censurers of the designs of Princes, and of the conduct of their
Counselors. It Is a disease which cannot be cured in them; And it seems to
them, that after they have made them their superiors, and have put their goods
and life's into their hands; that at least the liberty is reserved unto them of
judging of their abilities; Strange folly, that they who make so ill and
crooked Judgments in their own affairs, whereof the extent is so short, and
th'intelligence so easy; constitute themselves Arbiters of State Affairs,
whose principal circumstance is secrecy and which ought to be in the eyes of
the people, as prophesies, which are not to be understood but by their success.

And nevertheless, though the knowledge of things be hid from them as much as
may be, and that the Causes are concealed; they forbear not to pry into them,
and that they may have always matter of disturbance. And wherewith to torment
themselves unprofitably; They believe all things their sense represents unto
them, or that another passion suggests unto them. A dexterous person then, and
one who has a strong understanding and high Courage; makes always toward his
End without disturbance for these popular infirmities. He rests in peace,
whilst they who have nothing to do, but to take their ease, and cherish their
health, are in trouble and in a fevers, and imitates the Heavens which alter
not their Course for the Tempests of The Air, nor for the noise that is made in
that stormy Region. On the Contrary, weak understandings cannot sustain the
liberty of Judgments, nor th'indiscretion of Tongues; The conjectures of
Curious, and the speculations of idle persons offend them; They make haste to
give a reason of their Designs, and by a precipitated judgment which they
pass upon them, they see them abortive or fatal.

Sr. the Cardinal has not done the like; When Envy was raised against him,
when the Wits did mutiny against his Government; when his Enemies opposed him
silently, or have assaulted him a outward force, or by public Defiance; all
that, has not disordered him. His Actions were neither slow nor confused: And,
as if such Difficulties improved his Judgment, or gave him new Forces; He
never appeared so intelligent, or so valiant, as in all occasions that seemed
to be desperate. Whilst the English possessed th'Iland of Rhee, and that
Languedoc was in Rebellion; and that one part os the Huguenots had declared
themselves, and the others observed the success of foreign enterprises; That
the discontented Catholics did rejoice at th'ills of the State, and that
others feared the future which they saw troubled and full of storms; never
person was more exposed to complaints and ill language, then himself.
Indiscretion was extreme; Insolency raised to threats, and that purple which in
Venerable in the eyes of Catholics, and the Dignity of a Prince of the Church,
were in danger of that common License, of being violated: His soul
nevertheless changed not its place; His Courage was not shaken; He did not use
violent or faint Remedies, as had been sometimes done to stay the Disorder; He
did not use hateful preservatives against an ill, which inflames by
opposition, and is provoked by resistance: He chose rather to fight them with
the greatness of his Actions, than by the fear of his punishment; and resolved
that his Virtue should confound th'Artifices of the wicked, and th'Errours of
the simple.

But how many sinister Judgments and sharp discourses, did the siege of
Rochell raise? How many passions: did that Town-stir up amongst the
Protestants, and amongst the Catholics? How many Oppositions were set on foot
against that Design, in the Kingdom and abroad, by them who were our declared
Enemies, and by them who would seem to be our friends? What had not been said
of the expense of that siege, if being so vast it had been unprofitable? How
much had they cried out against us, if we had suffered our Allies to perish,
and if that we had not reduced to obedience the rebellious French. And
nevertheless, so many different passions, and all those irregular Motions, did
not stop our pursuit, nor th'heat of an Enterprise, which has secured the
foundations of the State, and the foot of the Crown. And at that last business
of Italy, How many disgraceful Discourses, and outrageous Murmurings did it
produce against the Reputation of that great Minister of State? It seemed that
there were persons hired in all places, of purpose to cry down his Actions; His
Enemies had found th'occasions they sought for, to discharge their Malice with
color, and vomited their Hatred with liberty: The people that ordinarily wish
ill to them that govern them, and suffer themselves always to be led by
running Reports, especially when they are bad, remember no more th'evill from
which they were delivered, but demand the good which they could not so soon
receive, and few persons considered what was done, nor the progress of the
Kings Arms, nor his Conquests, but what was yet to be done; Even our Allies
applied themselves to us for repair of their Losses: And as if they could not
be imprudent or unhappy in our Company; It seemed good to them that we should
answer for their faults, and for their disgraces; and the worst. Accident of
all, was the sickness of the King, so very violent, that it gave no place for
hopes to honest men, and in such a conjuncture, that if this Prince had dyed,
the world must have changed its face, and must have taken another Course, then
what it ought to follow. In this Confusion of Spirits, and of Affairs, the
Constancy of Sr. the Cardinal, lost not it self; His Reason was still awake,
the Provisions for the relief of Casal, were not interrupted; and he made it
appear that the wise Man is above all passions; and the true grief he
suffered for the love of so great a Master, lest him strength and Address
enough not to let go the Helm, and to bring us to our Haven in spite of
contrary winds.

The Third Discourse.
That a Minister of State cannot have an equal Soul, unless he has made
trial of Good and Bad Fortune.
THe quality whereof we have lately spoken, and that invincible constancy which
is necessary for a Counselor of State, is not a disposition of the soul,
which nature has infused, or that Philosophy has completed. It has besides
these, need of exercise to form it; And that divine Temper which has its Roots
in our selves, and has cause to raise it self betwixt the Discourses of
Reason, and Examples of History, ought to take its just growth from the Trials
where fortune does place us, and from the various Countenances it shows unto
us. There Is nothing in the world she suffers with more impatience, not that she
beholds with more malign and more envenomed eyes. In every place where it is
found she assaults it; in all places she forms parties against it, she will
have it by force or by Artifice, and no causes or dissimulations shall be
wanting to corrupt it, nor rudeness of violence, that shall not be exercised
to overthrow it. So they that can warrant themselves against her designs, and
have power enough to resist her Charms, and her outrages; have competent
Qualities t'aspire to the Government of State; wherefore Galba protests, in
Tacitus, that he called Piso to the succession of The Empire, because he had
been unhappy and constant. And that he whom fortune could not overcome, was
worthy to command the people of Rome; and to give Laws to the Conqueror of
Nations, and Triumpher over The Earth It Is to know only the Moiety of ones
Life, to have tasted only of prosperity; It Is not to have sailed far, to have
the winds always in Poope, and the Sea propitious; It Is to have matter only
for a part of the virtues which compose a Minister of State, to have been ever
happy; Adversity has also her Virtues, as night has her Stars: There are some
that are wholly proper for it, and which cannot be practiced but in so rude a
season, nor appear but in tumults, and in the midst of storms.

The life of Sr. the Cardinal, ought to be too highly raised, not be exposed
to this variety of Accidents, and too eminent to want examples of every Virtue.
His Actions have deserved Clappings from all hands, and praises from all
Mouths; They have given him days of Triumph, they have pierced the most
retired parts of the World, and in all places there are but a few Names so
great as his, after that of his Master; But he has had his back blows and
contradictions; He has not been exempted from private Misfortunes, and
public Vexations. Fortune and Envy have diversely exercised him;
notwithstanding, his Courage failed him not; his Conduct was equal. The
Revolution that surrounded him, made no change in him, and whatsoever happened,
his soul was neither puffed nor abated; this equality nevertheless is not
ordinarily found. And as amongst the brightest Colors, there are but a few
that preserve the same luster, and the same apperance to the light of a Day,
and to the light of Torches: Histories have also furnished us but with a few
examples of Illustrious persons, who have been equal in Prosperity and
Adversity: Spain commends the constancy of the Duke of Alva, and that he was
never so great as in his afflictions. But it confesses also, that prosperity
made him overflow; that he was insolent when he was prosperous; and that the
Victories he gained were odious to his Masters, though they were profitable
unto them.

On the contrary, let us consider the three Princes of Spain, that have known
how to reign for an Age and half, and have dared to introduce immortal
Designs, in a form of Government where Sovereigns dye, and which changes
often their Master: Lets consider, I say, Ferdinand, Charles the fifth, Philip
the second, and we shall find that all their lives have been nothing but a
Composition of good and evil, and a confusion of contrary things. We shall
there see Prosperity without Number, Disgraces without Measures; Wounds dressed
with Laurels, Triumphs adorned with Mourning, and above all that, constant and
firm Courages, and an immovable Virtue.

Behold Ferdinand, glorious in the reduction of the Kingdom of Granada, and
with the Title of Catholic; Behold him triumphant in the Conquest of Naples,
and of the fortune of France. Behold that a fancy gives him Navarre, and that
chance finds him an unknown world and new wealth. This neither enflames him,
nor effeminates him; He is not the more lazy, nor the less vigilant; He
forms: greater designs, and lays the Platform of a Monarch which shall
exercise his Nephews a long time, and trouble the rest of other Nations, and
the peace of the world. Moreover, lets contemplate thill sucesse of his life,
and the other side of the Medall. We shall see a Prince ill handled by fortune,
and a Diadem bruised by her strokes. We shall see a Father bury his own Son,
and make Funerals for his eldest Daughter: A Husband that loses his Wife, who
was his Glory; and had been more the Companion of his troubles than of his bed;
A Master aban doned by his Servants and Creatures, an old Man forced from his
House, and a Father in law stripped his own Son in Law. In this Sea of
Disgraces and of Afflictions, we shall also see an admirable serenity of
spirit. A Calm that overthrows not it self; or if there was some kind of
emotion, it did not pass into a storm, and was not violent not dangerous. It Is
true, that his Courage had a weakness in it which I cannot conceal, and a fault
too visible to be dissembled; which is, not to have been able to suffer the
reputation of he great Captain, not the Virtue of his own Subject that was
faithful unto him. As to his Nephew Charles, it is certain that he was never so
tractable as in prosperity, not so inflexible in Adversity. He never yeeled to
force; no Prince of his time gave so much, and lost so little; and the
Spaniards say that the never broke his word, but t'exercise Clemency, and to
pardon his Enemies, whose Ruin he had sworn: During the tempest that arose in
the Haven of Algiers against his Fleet, and when the Heavens destroyed it in
his sight, no other word every went out of his Mouth, than that wherewith our
Savior Christ has taught us to pray, That thy will be done. He was humbled,
but not overcome by that disgrace, and in that terrible Chaos, where
The Elements were confounded, and Nature in disorder, His Courage stood firm,
His Judgment lost not its Light: and he gave order for the embarking of his
Troops, which were not perished, with the same liberty of soul as before he had
done, when he returned Triumphant from the taking of Th^nis, and from the
spoils of Africa. The life of Philip is a Table much mixed, and a
representation of diverse former, and contrary Adventures; On the one side are
seen Countries gained or recovered; the Springs of Gold and Silver discovered;
Victory obtained against Christians, and Infidels, and that incomparable
Advantage to govern peaceably, from th'Escuriall, a part of two worlds, and to
be feared in the middle of this Cabinet, from one end of The Earth to the other.
But lets turn our sight a little, and we shall find that this prosperity had
frequent and long Eclipses, and that the shadows of the Pictures exceeded the
lively Colors. We shall encounter the Death of four wives which he tenderly
loved: The fancies of his eldest Son which gave him so much trouble, and forced
him to put off the resentmen of a Father, to execute the office of a King, and
function of a Judge: The jealousies which the good success and great virtue of
Don John of Austria gave him. The defeat of his Ships by Tempests, and by
Enemies; The Rebellion of the Low Countries which have deserted Spain, and made
poor the Indies. And amongst all that, and in the midst of that Revolution. and
that confusion of Accidents, not to wander, and to preserve his Constancy; It
must be acknowledged, that it belongs to such persons by all sorts of Rights,
to govern the People, to the Superiors on Earth, and sovereign Arbiters of the
destiny of men. Amidst so many good successes and rude experiences, where in
the virtue of Philip was not lost, I have made choice of a very remarkable
Example; It Is of them that enter in prosperity, and be in the favors of
fortune, and th'evidences of Love which she gives. And therefore it is the
fairer that it is so rare, and that it is more difficult not to be overcome by
pleasure, than to resist force, and to prevent bending than breaking. And as a
gentle and temperate heat penetrates our bodies easier than the cold, because
they expatiate themselves to receive it, and cloze to repel the cold. So
th'Allurements of prosperity are more active, and enter sooner into the soul,
which by desire, and the hope of enjoyment, goes to meet them, than by
th'attempts of ill fortune, against which the soul fortifies her self, and
defends all 'th Avenues by which she might assault it. After then that the
Christians had gained the battle of Lepantha, and that God had them that
memorable Victory, the price whereof was lost by their ill Conduct; He that
carried the news to Philip, was so transported above himself, and seized upon
by so strange an emotion, that with great difficulty could he make the report
of it. On the contrary, Philip stood as cold as if it had nnot concerned him,
and so little moved, as if the news had been indifferent unto him. He replied
only with a serious Face, and settled Countenance, THAT DON JOHN HAD MUCH
HAZARDED. From what cause soever this coldness proceeded, either from a spirit
abated by a long Apprehension, least the battle should be lost, or from a soul
prepared for all sorts of chances, and for all the Accidents of life; or else
from a Consideration which suffered him not to rejoice at the glory of an
Action, whose principles it may be he did not esteem reasonable enough.

From that cause soever, I say, it proceeded; the view is always fair, and the
substance very noble. And I am no more astonished, if the person, who was not
transported for a success, which delivered Italy from an approaching Ruin, and
all Christendom from a great fear; received since with any apparent.
Tranquillity or true Constancy, the news of the Routing of the Fleet, which
had cost him so much money, and ought to have tied England to the Chain, and
contented himself to say, That he had not sent his Fleet to fight against the
Winds.

The constancy of Ministers of State, has this advantage over that of
Sovereigns, That the Sovereigns are always pitied in their ill success,
though it happen by their fault; and that Love or Respect which the people
bears them, does discharge them from th'envy of the Losses which they make by
their imprudency. On the contrary, they cast upon the Ministers of State, all
th'evill of the State, though they are not guilty. The require from them a
continual felicity, though it be not in their power. They will have them
security for all the chances, though they ought only to secure their Counsels.
They make them instruments of all their afflictions, and of all their
sufferings, though ordinarily their sins are the cause. In brief, they handle
them in the same manner, and with the same injustice as the first Christians
were handled by the Pagans, who took exceptions to them for th'anger of Heaven,
and for the wounds of The Empire, and made them The Authors fo th'Inundations,
and of the sterilities, and of the plagues, wherewith the Nation was grieved
Truly, Sr. the Cardinal has always acted in such manner, that what
Countenance soever The Affairs have taken, and whatsoever traverses the time
has raised, he was never astonished nor cast down; He abated nothing of his
pursuit; He continually respected the Dignity of the Master he served, and the
reputation of the Crown which he labored to sustain. And whatsoever happened
unto him, and how strange soever the Tempest was, he resolved, to perish with
the Government in his hand, and to be able to say, what Francis the first wrote
to his Mother, after the loss of the Journey to Pavia; All is except The Honor.
But this Courage which has shined so eminently in Disgraces, was not
effeminated in proserity, and that magnanimity which he expressed in his ill
fortune, when it undertook to exercise him, changed it self into an excellent
Moderation, and into a most perfect acknowledgement of that which proceeded
from the hand of God, and from the fortune of a Prince.

The Fourth Discourse.
That the Science to discover the merits of Men, and t'employ them, is
necessary for a Minister of State.
ONe of the Noblest Conditions which forms the Minister of State, and the
perfection of Administration is the Science to discern other men, and Thou Art to
employ them: Truly, as our soul, how heavenly soever it is and all spiritual,
has need of the Body to make its operations: And as God makes uses of second
Causes, to govern with them the World, and to renew Nature; so a Minister of
State, how excellent soever he may be, has necessary use of a number of
persons, to labor with him, and to help him to carry th'Engine of the State,
and burden of Affairs. It Is the Pilot that ought to give Motion to all other
Officers in the Ship. It Is the head that ought to put in exercise The Arms, and
the other parts of the Body; And as that ancient Captain found no Title so
glorious, nor Argument more magnificent to make himself known, than to answer
him who demanded of him. If he was a man of complete Arms, or an Archer, or a
light Horseman; That he was the person that commanded all those men there. So a
principal Minister of State, ought to have a spirit, superior to other
Officers of State, and not to be ignorant of the Duties of Generals of Armies,
nor of the Duties of Judges, nor of them who manage the Treasury. This
Condition is remarkable in Sr. the Cardinal; and it is true, if a man have but
one good Quality, he knows how to make choice of it in the midst of many
defects, and to discern a Grain of Gold in the midst of Gravel and Dung. The
Earth is not more various in its proprieties, nor the Heaven in its influences,
than men are in their Tempers and Inclinations. And it is an extraordinary thing
to find a soul capable of all sorts of good, or a Temper proper for all the
functions of the soul; Lets place here some few of its Differences, and of its
Proprieties, for the clearing of our subject. They in whom Imagination is
predominant, and who have subtle and hot spirits, are very proper for the
Intrigue. They are Rich in expedients, and have present Apprehensions which
warrant them from surprises, which suffer them not to be confounded, and which
resist the first impression of Accidents which have not been foreseeen; and the
newness of Occurrences. They speak ordinarily with grace, and express
themselves with facility. Their Action has somewhat, I know not what, that
pleases, and a certain Harmony which charms the senses, and glides even
Reason, and to The Affections of the soul; They are bold to undertake, and for
that Difficulties appear less to them then they are, or beneath their
strength; They cast themselves blindly upon them; they precipitate in stead of
walking; And if they meet with a Ditch in the way, it stops them not; either
they fall in, or leap over it. They are pleased with Noise, and love
Disturbance; they appear strong in troubled times, and the Consusion of
Affairs is their element, and the matter which is proper for them. They do
sometimes great things; and it is not possible that undertaking much, all should
succeed ill. That they encounter only, if they fail in their choice, Hazard,
where th'Election is of no use to them, and that being so seldom wise, they are
never happy; They are nevertheless of great service, and of incredible prosit,
when they fall under the Direction of a wise man, who tempers th'heat by his
judgment, and moderates their impetuosity by his Prudence. And as Philosophy
observes, That Choler serves for a spur to Virtue, and puts life to it: It Is
also true, that when these active humors are accompanied with a good Sense,
and perfect Reason, nothing seems difficult or impossible to them; But also
when they are Masters of their Actions, and Arbiters of Affairs; their Conduct
is much to be feared: It is more dangerous then profitable; They cannot commit
easy faults, having always great designs in their heads, and they seldom
fail of making them, having not circumspection enough, or foresight to avoid
them. They that are of a cold temper, and in whom reason abounds, are more fit
to govern. And though their Actions are not so glaring and tumultuous as
the others are, yet they are more lively and more efficacious; The common
people, who have no understanding but for th'objects of sense, and comprehends
but what it sees, and what it touches, admires these less then the former
persons. They are nevertheless of a higher price in the judgment of wise men;
and have the same Advantage of them, th'Architects have of Masons; that Pilots
have of Mariners; and that they who draw the designs of Pictures, have of them
who know only how to mingle their Colors, and to habit the Figures? They
seldom contribute to the fall of States by Imprudency; in so much that the
first Law they observe, is, to commit no faults. As the first Inclination which
Nature gives us, is to shun th'Evill, and what is contrary to us. They seldom
shipwreck, because they know the nature of the Seas, and of the Winds; That
they know how to foresee the Tempests, and that they put out in time, and gain
timely the Haven; They are fit for War and Peace; they are good to gain, and to
preserve: their Virtue is ever present, and there is neither condition of time,
nor exception of affairs that hinders them to act, or renders them
unprofitable. There are others in whom Imagination may find heat enough to act,
if there were dryness enough, and if it were not drowned in the Phlegm, and in
an abundance of moisture which duls and cooles it. And nevertheless they have
not the vivacity of the first, nor the prudence of the second. I speak of that
high and divine Virtue which resides in the understanding, and in that supreme
Region of the soul, which is the Guide and Torch of other Virtues, and which
chooses the means of things that are feisable; for as to the rest, they have
but an imperfect and diminutive virtue, which is as the Shadow, and a light
impression of the true; if Aristotle must be believed: Their principal study
is to hide their defects, to daube the breaches which they cannot make up; to
paint the face, and to deceive the world with apparances of Good, and by
postern Virtues. But in so much that'tis hard to appear a long time what a man
is not, and that a lame person counterfeits to little purpose, when he cannot
walk far, but he will be observed; so Thou Art of these men is easily discovered,
and a little Conversation undresseth that borrowed person, and that
Stage Player; when they are in Employments, they are secret t'excesse. They
keep silence not by discretion, but by fear; and in so much that they cannot
distinguish betwixt the things they ought to conceal, and such as ought to be
published; They suppress all, and so betray sometimes innocently th'honours of
their Master, and the Reputation of his Affairs. they bring some design and
subtilty to all they do, which is that petty and imperfect Prudence, whereof,
as I have said, Aristotle makes mention. But had he been of our time, he had
also knowm that as the Alchymists being unable to make perfect the Metals that
are not, change them that are, and thereof make false Money: so also it happens
that these subtle persons being not able to conduct their little Artifices,
and the disposition they have to subtilty, even to the true Prudence; change it
into Juggling, and make an Art of it, which is the slime of humane society, and
the poison of Commerce. They have nevertheless commonly somewhat of good, and
were not made by chance; Heaven has cast some favorable aspect upon them, and
they are capable to serve, if they are employed according to their Forces. If
they are not good to deliberate and to resolve, they are good for the execution
of such Orders as are prescribed them; They want not confidence to act, nor
compleasancy t'insinuate into the spirits of them, with whom they treat. They
are exact to perform their charge, they shun not labor; and though the
softness of their Complexion withdraws them from it; their duty nevertheless
whereof they usually have care, and the vanity whereof they are ever sick,
press them to it, and maintain them in it: That is also the cause that they
are not very wicked; That they are not capable of great Vices, no more then of
great Virtues. And, if The Example does not Corrupt them, or some violent
occasion transport them. That they will never be guilty of those black Actions
which stain The Honor, and destroy the Conscience.

There Is a fourth kind of Men, who have the soul heavier then all the others,
and in whose Composition Nature has laid up more of Earth. These men are
capable of great pains and long patience; they never yield to labor; they
never work but to work; they know not what belongs to honest leisure. And that
rest which is the end of th'active Life, and which the Philosophers seek for to
be happy, is their torment and misery. They are unapt for Negotiation: But in
so much that in the midst of that Mass whereof they are compounded, they have
some beam of good sense; and although their Understanding makes no flame, it
has nevertheless some sort of clearness; they are not to be despised; they
are not improper for the Economy: They may serve in an Army to press on
labor; to make provisions for Victuals, and for the like services, wherein the
Body has a greater share then th'Understanding, but that they have need of
both.

The Fifth Discourse.
Of a fifth Temper, which comprehends the perfections of all the others.
TO conclude, There Is a fifth Order of Constitutions, which a few persons enter
into, and which the world sees seldomer than Miracles: For this, Nature opens
all her Treasures, becomes prodigal of her graces, draws forth her Art, and
goes to the very bottom of her power; And as the ordinary Constitutions are
formed of the substance of the Elements, and of the hidden virtues of Heaven,
which are mingled with Harmony and Symmetry: It seems that these are composed
of what others have of most rare and pure; that they are Extracts and Elixirs;
and that the bodies which are so furnished, are not Prisons for the soul, but
very commodious Palaces; nor rebellious slaves, but tractable Servants, or
obedient Subjects. In effect, As The Heavens have general Qualities, and which
agree, and enter into society with all the qualities of The Elements, and of the
Bodies which they produced; In like manner those divine Constitutions whereof
we speak, are proper to all the faculties of the soul, and for all the
operations of those faculties; There Is nothing in them of malignant, nor any
thing that hinders; The Abundance of the memory makes not the judgment poor:
th'Action of th'understanding does not lessen the benefits of the Memory, and
dissolves not its Representations; Memory and Judgment take not from the
Understanding its edge, its vivacity, nor its presence; All works there with
facility; and that which causes disturbance and trouble in other bodies,
produces here a miraculous Harmony and perfect Intelligence. Th'understanding,
as it has been said, is so much Master of the body, that it obeyes it without
resistance. It Is supple to all its desires, takes pains as if it were strong,
though it be sometimes sick and weak; and as if it were born up by the others
strength, or raised by its Agility; It holds the body to all sorts of toil, and
is not over come by the greatness of the labor or continuance of it.

The sensitive Appetite is there very quiet; no Motion almost does there arise,
which is not voluntary either in its birth or duration. The Desire of glory is
the sole passion which makes its self violently to be felt; and which is so
imperious, if it be not suppressed, that it confounds or makes all the others
subject unto it, when it is without bridle; it is not content to reign over the
lower part of the Soul, it will domineer in the highest: She will command
Reason; she declares that it belongs to her to violate Justice with praise; She
stirs up Usurpators and Robbers of Provinces and Kingdoms; whom she causes to
be called Conquerors: she commands the Title of Great to be given Alexander,
for having unjustly possessed himselse of part of the world, and he had a will
to have invaded the other part of it; She causes, that even to Christians,
The Emperors Honor themselves in their qualities, with the Name of a person
that has raised The Empire, to which they succeed upon the Ruins of their
Country. In brief, it causes that one is called the Flayl of God to color
his Invasions, and another the Corrector of Princes, and of the Nations of
The Earth. But when the desire of glory is submitted to Reason; when the Soul
loves it without being transported; when she takes it not for the end of
Virtue, but for the pursuit of it, and proposes to it self a second Glory,
which is more certain than what Fortune does distribute, and than the opinion
which Men give; There Is not a passion in the world so fair, nor more
profitable: She takes away the tastes of all others that are base or effeminate:
She acquires Imitators of Virtue, and by the present or near approaching
Recompense which she offers her, renders her more fertile, and more efficacious.

To conclude, The Constitution whereof we speak, sends marks of its Nobility,
even to th'outside, and to th'exteriour, of Men; It imprints there certain
Characters, which make him to be reverenced of them, that see him. It covers
his face with Majesty; it puts into his eyes a fire, which is more bright than
that of ordinary eyes; and gives him, in a word, some beam of that Beauty
whereof Jesus Christ himself has not refused the praise; and which, by the
means of the senses, makes a sudden impression upon the will, and gains,
before Discourse be entertained, and reason persuaded.

I will not speak here of the Constitution of Sr. the Cardinal, nor of a Good
which he has not done to himself, but received it from th'Indulgence of
Heaven, and from the Cares of Nature. There are truths which would not always
be published; And this season would hardly permit them in his favor, the
knowledge whereof depends upon so profound and delicate speculation, since she
is ingenuous enough to Contest with him The Experience of senses, or to change
the face of things which we have touched or seen. I suppress then my Judgment
in this subject, to accommodate my self to the time, and to th'Inclination
which reigns. I will only say in General, that as there are Diseases, which
are to be discovered by the encounter of several Symptoms; and as, for the
discovery of Gold which is in The Earth, there are many signs which ought to
appear above ground, and in the Superficies; so you must conclude this high and
divine Composition, whereof I speak, by a multitude of great Actions of diverse
Kinds, and of different Condition, which the same subject has produced. Let
reflection now be made, if there be a mind for it, upon the life of Sr.the
Cardinal. Let past Governments be compared with his; let it be examined, what
the King has acted since he had him for his Instrument; Let the Greatness,
the Variety, and the number of things which have been done, be considered: Let
the shortness of the time be observed, which shuts up all these wonders, and
which amazeth th'Imagination of them who have seen them, and will weaken for
the future the faith of History; And after that, let every person judge of the
Matter proposed, according to his sense or passion; and let him make himself
voluntarily blind; If he be afraid to behold a Light that offends him, and a
Truth that angers him. I will not forbear t'observe, that although Sr. the
Cardinal in acting, gives somewhat t'Honour; That he is very sensible of the
Glory of fair Actions, and is not exempt from a sense which all generous souls
partake of; That, nevertheless, has never changed his Duty, never did wrong
to his Conscience, and to the Counsels which he has proposed. He has not
only considered the Justice of things, but many times proceeded to Charity,
which is so seldom called to the Councills of Princes, and which makes with
Convenience, the two extremes betwixt which, Reason of State is shut up. This
has been seen particularly in the Conduct which the King observed toward the
Emperor, and the Spaniards, before he began the War of Italy and had renewed
it: but I will speak thereof in another place.

I return to the first subject of the precedent Discourse, and to make it
appear, that Sr. the Cardinal in a sovereign degree has the spirit of
Discerning, whereof I have above spoken; I will fix upon some Elections which
have been made since he was in the Government.

No person is ignorant of th'Eminency, and of the weight of the Charge of the
Keeper of the Seals. It Is one of the noblest parts of the Body of the State:
It Is the general form of the Justice of the Kingdom; it is an universal Cause
whose Influence is not Circumscribed, which penetrates within and without;
which makes its power known near and far, and operates in all places where we
have Communication or power. And it is of Importance that they who possess it,
deserve it; and that they who exercise it, fill it up. And it is true, that for
that Dignity, the Kings choice could not fix upon a person worthier then that
of Sr. of Chasteauneuf; I speak not of the splendor of the Family from which
he is come, nor of the faculty it has had to this day, to give Illustrious
persons to the state; They are Accidents which are not Proprietics, and
Conditions which may fail in Families. And though the seeds of good, grow
ordinarily with good blood, It Is not to be said that they ought always to
fructify: And though the Spring be very pure, it follows not but the Stream
may be poisoned, or become troubled, and taste of the will Qualities of the
places it has passed. These Advantages then of birth, and privileges of
fortune, are but incitements to do well by The Examples of their Predecessors:
To render the good the fairer, which they encounter, and to make the
Counterpoyse in a promotion betwixt two equal Virtues. But for Sr. of
Chasteauneuf, he has no need of the Lights of his Ancestors to make himself
seen. He is sufficiently observable in himself; besides the knowledge he has
gained. He has highly that which Nature gives, which is the good sense; He
has watched in Employments and Negotiations. He knows our affairs, and the
affairs of Strangers: He is neither weak nor interessed: His virtue is without
Artifice, and th'evill which represents it self publicly, or that comes
more dangerously under the vizard of good, and with its Liveries, is not
capable to deceive or corrupt him: wherefore he has received nothing but what
was due to his Services, or to his Merit, and therein the choice of the King
has but followed the public desires, and the Predictions have been made even
from a former Reign. And when it was in Question to relieve th'Island of The,
and to uphold France ready to fall into precipice, there was need of a man that
despised Death, and dared to cast himself on a manifest danger; who had enough
of affection to be willing to perish for his Master, and prudence enough to
manage the least Beam of safety that should appear, and the highest Appearance
for good to be seen in a deplorable Occasion. But whom could Sr. the Cardinal
propose, or the King choose, that was more capable for that purpose, then Sr.
of Chombert? so The Event did not deceive th'opinon had of the Virtue of so
great a person, The End of that enterprise exceeded all that could have been
desired of good success; Our friends were delivered, and the Rout of our
Enemies completed the Victory, which we sought not but in their retract. After
the first passage of Suza, could Montferrat be trusted, in surer or more
esteemed hands, then those of Sr. of Thorax? And again, as fortune had
preprepared him that Occasion, and reserved him for the defense of Casal, and
to confirm The Honor he has gained in The; It seeems also, that by a certain
fatality, Sr. of Chombert had been destined to go to relieve him the second
time, and to complete the Glory of that Siege by the safety of that place. In
those last Emotions of Italy, did not the King appear admirable, in the choice
of the men which he employed there? And though Policy permits not many Chiefs
of equal Authority in an Army, He understood nevertheless so well to discern
the just proportion of their humors, and the necessary Temper to conserve
Concord amongst them, that he joined and changed them to so good purpose, that,
it may be, his service was advanced by that plurality, and his Armies were the
more happy.

And when the passage was to be opened for our Troops, for the Relief of
Casal, and the resistance of Armies to be forced which opposed it; To whom
could that design be more rationally committed, Monsieur Mount Moraney.
than to them who have executed it? What might not be expected from that Lord,
who came into the world, lighted with the virtue of his Ancestors, and Crowned
with their Glory? who labored so much to improve that immortal Inheritance;
who is not so absolute in th'Armies he commands by his Authority, as by
The Affections of the Men of War; That Love makes more men follow him in
perilous occasions then Duty; who shows to others the way of doing well, and
whose example would inspire the strongest passions into the most fearful
souls. Veillane and Carignan shall be for ever famous by the effects of their
Valor, and by that of the other Marshal, Monsieur Feat.
who accompanied them with his Courage and Prudence; and made himself to be no
less considerable in War than in Peace, nor in the Field than in the Cabinet;
Above all, it is a thing worthy of Consideration, and a particular mark of the
Kings judgment, and of the wisdom of his Council, in leaving the Marshall of
Force constantly in Italy, and in making that Army as the foundation of our
Armies in that Country, and him the Director of the War.

Age which ruins th'Active Qualities of so many other persons, offended not
his; old Age, which chils the blood, did not diminish his Valor. It Is a habit,
which had not in him its Original from th'heats of the Body, but in the lights
of Reason; and he was as bold when there was cause, as he was ever wise. His
long and ancient experience, and the good sense wherein he naturally abounded,
permitted him not to commit any fault; He knew the Spaniards too well to fall
into their snares, and into a surprise by their Deceits, and with the
Companions which the King gave him. There was nothing to be feared, and all
good success was to be hoped from his Conduct.

It must not be forgot, that Sr. the Cardinal, considers not only Merit in the
choice of them whom he proposes, but would also have good Birth, if it be
possible; That things may be acted with Glory, and that the reputation of
affairs might improve by the Dignity of the Persons who manage them. He is very
far from th'humour of a certain King, who made his Physicism his principal
Counselor: And from the humor of another, who made his Surgeon enter into
the Council of State, and permitted the same hands to handle the Seals, which
had newly quitted the Razour and Launcet; wherefore the Nobility is more
employed in Negotiations then heretofore it was. They who lead Armies, or help
to make War are called to manage Treaties of Peace, and the suspensions of
Arms; And it is true, that ordinarily th'affairs do prosper well in their hands,
because they are usually bolder in Action, and have the sense, less
sophisticated, than persons of the long Robe.

The Sixth Discourse.
That a Minister of State ought not to form his Conduct by the Example of
strangers; and that be ought to treat with them after a Different Manner.
There Is nothing so universal in the world, as Diversity, and it seems that
God has affected it, to show his power by it, and to render Nature fair. The
number of Angels, as it is said, surpasses the number of other Creatures. But
if the Schools would have believed St. Thomas, the diversity of kinds which is
amongst them, had equalled the number of particulars, and there had not been in
those high and divine Hierarchies two Natures alike; However insomuch that they
conceived that the Dignity of the living Creatures increased by the multitude
of th'Individuals, which composed them; and that Philosophy has sent back the
Phoenix to the fables of the Poets, who have sung of him as being alone, The
greatest part of the Schools have departed in that sense from the judgment of
that Doctor, whose opinions are so often adored by them. Let Us go on: The
Varieties of bodies which issue from The Elements were incredible, if Nature had
not submitted them to our sense; and if Art did not discover unto us an
infinity of Words, which are made of a few Letters; and an infinity of Figures,
which are drawn out of a small quantity of Colors; And an infinity of Colors,
which are taken out of a small quantity of Drugs. This is not all; The divesity
which Nature could not place in Essences, she has put to the forms which
accompany them; what she could not do to the principal, she has done to the
Incidents and Accessaries; and the conformity which is in the faces of men, for
to distinguish them from Beasts, is changed by many Marks of dissemblance, for
to distinguish them from one another. This Second Diversity proceeds from the
first mixture of The Elements, which enters into the Composition of the Bodies,
from the virtue of Heaven, and of the Stars which are therein predominant, and
from the quality of the Climate, and of the place which have a great share in
the Composition, and in the Constitution of all things that are born.

That if the Compositions of bodies of the same kind, are so diverse for the
Causes above mentioned; How much greater ought the Difference to be, which is
found in the manners of men, where th'Inclinations of the Body do interveyn,
the motions of Reason. Examples from without, and strange suggestions; but
above all th'Inclinations of the Body prevail, and the strength of the
Constitution: Reason is very seldom heard, Men live almost wholly by passion,
and as if the whole Man were but a lump, the greatest part of them act, but
according to that party, and choose rather to submit unto it, to be at rest, if
they can, then to have War in resisting it; and incline rather to peace by
servitude than by Victory. Insomuch that a Minister of State ought ot take
great care not to act by Imitation; not to frame his Conduct by The Example of
strangers, not to follow remote Idaea's, and not to suffer himself to be
couse^ed by what is practiced in the Government of another State, which he may
see powerful and happy, that if the Physicians of Italy and Germany, handle in
a different manner the Diseases of those Countries; If the Moral have not an
exact and indivisible Medium for the virtue it teaches. If the Church for
fastings and abstinencies, be less Indulgent in relation to the people of the
East, than of the North; And if all proceeds from the inequality of
Complexions, which arises in part from the difference of Climates, and places.
Why should not the same Considerations be received in the Conducts of States;
where not only the Constitutions of men are unlike, and their manners
contrary; but their foundations are different, and their policy diverse; And
where the Contest brought to maintain them is the more ardent, because it is
raised under the pretense of general good, and is upheld by the multitude of
them who are interressed, and from public force.

Lets come t'Examples; The severity which the Spaniards affect, and which is
conformable to their Constitution, is necessary for Spain; and those
Melancholic and glorious Spirits, are more stirred up then the spirits of
others, by the shame of punishments, and by the hope of rewards. Their
Inquisition which appears so dreadful, and which is so formidable to all other
Nations; it one of the principal causes of the peace which they enjoy, and of
that high tranquillity wherein they repose themselves. Error dares not openly
appear there: There Is no contagion for their spirits; and if there be any
remainder of Mahometism, after the forcing away of so many thousands of Moors,
it lies concealed in their hearts, or passes not out of Caves and Darkness.
They serve not only against Infidelity, and for security of Consciences. Many
Crimes purely civil, which cannot be punished according to ordinary forms,
are sent thither, and sometimes innocent persons are there exposed; who are to
be made Examples for th'Interest of the State, and to save the honor of the
Prince. The disgrace of Antonio Peers is a famous Evidence. That person who had
no greater Crime than to be esteemed by his Masted, The Sacretary of Don John
of Austria, was killed in the Inquistion by Philip's Order.
and to have the assurance of it, after he had been di^ years variously vexed,
was at last condemned to th'Inquisition; and if the people of Saragoca had not
taken him away by force, he had made experiment of the danger of keeping a
great Persons secrets, and of being th'Instrument of an Action he would not
have known.

But when they undertook to settle in other places that severe Inquisition,
'twas then that the spirits of the people Mutined; That Tempests have been seen
t'arise; and that they have run to violent Remedies to hinder them. Heresy
entered into Flanders under Charles the fifth, and Religion began to be altered
there, by the Trade with England and Germany, Graniuelle, who commanded there,
repaired to the Inquisition, to smoother an evil that seemed weak, because it
was new, and began only to show it self, and to bud. But he spoiled all with
that Remedy: and whether he was forced by a good zeal, as is probable; or with
a desire to ceaze on the Goods of the discovered persons as he was accused; He
caused so many to dye, and provoked so many other persons, that The Emperor was
constrained to suppress that pursuit. The seeds nevertheless of the Disease
dyed not, though they were laid asleep,: The'Ulcer was concealed, but not
healed, and a part of the people passed since from Heresy to Revolt, which
they have changed with the time into a lawful Dominion. The Spaniards believed
also, that the Inquisition after their manner, would secure the Conquest of
Naples; That it should serve as a Bridle for that untamed Horse; That it would
hold that changeable and unstable people under the yoke, and abate the highest
heads of that Kingdom, who loved naturally disorders; but they were deceived.
And so soon, as Don Pedro of Toledo attempted it, Naples rebelled, and the
people took Arms as for their common Liberty: and if The Emperor had not taken
away that Design; and if the Pope should have consented to the proposalls of
Cardinal Caraffe, they had hazarded the loss of that State, and what they had
in Italy.

So soon as Philip the second war returned from Flanders into Spain, he sent
diverse Heretics to be punished: He pardoned neither Sex or Quality; He caused
the Effigies of Constantine Pontius, the last Confessor of his Father to be
burnt: He Commanded Bartholme, Archbishop of Toledo, to be arrested; This
Proceeding astonished all the world; And if that Prince did not spare the
memory of him, who held in his Arms the dying Emperor, and received his last
Breath; nor the chief Prelate of the Spanish Dominions, and who was heard with
Admiration in the Council of Trent; And if he protested daily, that he would
bring Wood to burn his Children, if they were Heretics: What grace could be
expected from him by nocent persons? There Is no question, but that severity
has preserved that Country from Heresy, and made impressions on the people,
whose nature is circumspect, and seeks safety in all their undertakings.

And as to The Example of the Prince, and that by his Advice, endeavors have
been used t'exercise the same proceedings in France. The same success has not
been encountered; whether that the Remedy was unseasonable, or that our humor
mour is incapable to submit to force: It seems that the door t'Errour was
opened upon that occasion; Many to whom new things were odious, were lost by
the Curiosity to know what the Doctrine was for which so many persons did run
with vehemence, to death, and suffered with joy. That vain Image of constancy
amazed weak spirits, and them that knew not, That the Justice of the Cause, and
not the Rigor of Torments made Martyrs, imagined that they could not
cheerfully perish, but for the Cause of Jesus Christ. Severity then is not
good, but for the speculative and fierce humors, as the Spaniards are, who
consider always the furture and the consequence of things. To whom gentleness
appears Cowardice, who neglect them that flatter them, and make themselves to
be feared of them who make discovery of fear. It acts also powerfully upon the
fearful and Coward people; as they of The East, where th'heat of the Air
dissipates that of the Body, and dryes up excessively the spirits which are
th'Instruments of Boldness and Courage; so Monarchies have taken their
beginnings in those Countries, the people being easily reduced under the power
of a single person; and Ottoman had no labor to make slaves of them whom he
subdued, nor to banish liberty from his Dominions, as the greatest of all
Crimes.

On the contrary, Gentleness is proper for the governing of the Germans, and
other people of the North. They are enemies to all force; There Is not a Chain
which weighs not with them, thoughit be necessary and just. And The Abundance of
heat and blood inspires them with undaunted spirits, which makes them resist
all sorts of Domination, if it be not in their hands. Wherefore they would have
all persons governed by Common wealths, or at least have no Kings which should
not be Elective and subordinate to their Authority. And for that reason also,
it is very easy to make them revolt against the Church, because it was their
Mother; and to make them hate the Pope, because he was their Superior.
Insomuch, that I do not think that the death of seven and twenty Lords, whose
heads were cut off after the battle of Prague, and that bloody spactacle which
they boasted of to Germany, procured so much terror, as it raised hatred
against the house of Austria, and the Spanish Government. And I do not believe
that the manner of nourishing the War which Wallastein introduced into that
Country; The rigor of the Contributions there raised; Th'oppression of the
Towns taken, or of them that obeyed; have so much assuted the Victories of the
Emperor, as they have disposed that people to Insurrections. And if the
prosperities of the King of Sweden continue, that they may cause a strange
revolution, and destroy those violent Conquests which have neither foot nor
root. At the end of The Account, I do not see that the Emperor has made other
Advantage of those great emotions which lasted so many years, than in avoiding
the Ruin that threatened him; nor that he became the richer for making such an
infinite sort of persons poor, nor that he did other thing, then impose a
necessity to keep always on foot a dreadful Army to make them afraid, or to
see his greatness decline, or to give over The Ambition of rendering himself
Master of Germany, and of reducing the people to a total deficiency, from whom
he could not take any away, the will to rebel. As to the zeal which he has
expressed to holy things, and as to th'exercise of that Religion which he
re-established in all places; It Is a work whereof th'Apparance is very
plausible and Christian. Yet insomuch that all-that is but without, and that
souls give place to Arms, and obey not the truth; It Is to be feared that such
a Reformation will fall in the change of the Emperors fortune; and that
Heresy may more dangeously overflow than it idd, if it ever recover impunity,
and its first License.

To further confirm what I have said, I will make use of th'evidence of the
Spaniards, who confess that the Duke of Alva was too blame, t'employ
gentleness to gain the Portugals who were only to be overcome; And that is
was to make them worse to flatter them in subduing of them. On the contrary,
that severity lost the Flemmings, and that the floods of Blood which he there
made to run out, the more provoked the rebellion, and gave pretense to
disobedience, to show it self, which had been till then modest, and irresolute.
Gentleness then in general, is proper for the Conduct of the Northern people,
and severity for the Spaniards, and them of The East, for the aforesaid Reasons.
They that are under a temperate Climate, as the French, and whose Complexions
are tempred by the clemency of The Heavens, and the situation of Country, have
also need of a moderate Conduct, and of such a temper of Justice as takes
impunity from vice, and renders it not always to the Culpable, desperate.

Upon what has been said, it is easy to judge, that it is not always safe to
act by Imitation; That The Example of what is practiced in a Nation, is an ill
principle for the Government of an other Nation; That universal proposalls are
dangerous in the public. And t'establish general Rules to be observed of all
People, and upon all occasions, is to fit the Robe of Fables to all the States
of the Moon. It Is to give the same form to two contrary natures; It Is to range
under and equal measure two different Quantities. And that a Minister of State
may the better comprehend this truth, which is very Important; Let him know,
that except some most general propositions, which are in the practice of
affairs, as th'ultimate principles of the Metaphysiques in the Sciences, There'
none that is not disputed and contradicted; which has not reasons and examples
to favor it, and which are contrary to it, as I have elsewhere showed; and
therefore ought either always to be followed, or always to be rejected; Let Us
see it by Experience, and discourse in passing by of the use of severity and
gentleness, since we are upon that subject.

they who advise that a Prince should rather make himself to be feared, then
loved; and that Rigor supports a Scepter much better than Easiness of Manners,
and Indulgency; may at once say, That though it may be true, that sovereign
Authority is equally preserved betwixt the fear and love of the people; That
nevertheless the means which gives birth to the first of these two passions,
are more certain then those that engender the second: That their operation is
more infallible, and that good Deeds act not so certainly upon the spirits of
men as punishments; That it is always in the power of them who have Forces in
their hands, to make themselves to be feared. But that it is not in the power
of them that are good to make themselves; to be beloved. That men love,
voluntarily and by Election; but fear for the most part of necessity, and in
spite of Reason, and against the resistance of all discourse. That for all
times, The Corruption of Mankind has been such, that it had had more need of
Justice for to subsist, then of the goodness of its Superiors; That, the
State of innocence is very rare in the world; but that of Repentance is common,
and in continual use; and that the Governors have been always more exercise
to heal Diseases, than to preserve health, and the good condition of States.
That in a word, The Nature of the people, is to fear much, and to love little;
but nevertheless that they love not the Reigns under which they live: That
they are never content with they present Condition: That they are sensible
only of the memory of things past, and hopes of the future; And that
ordinarily the dead Princes are their delights; And though sometimes they may
have Love for their Masters, and that their Inclination therein accompanies
their Duty; There Is no passion that changes so easily in their understanding
as this; And whether the Manners of Princes change and degenerate, or that they
are disguised and falsified to the eyes of their subjects. There Is nothing so
easy as to pass them from Love to Disdain, and from Disdain to Hatred, and
to Revolt. The Life of Henry the third, is an illustrious example of this
Truth; and the Inconveniences wherein he fell after he had attained the Crown,
make it appear what foundation is to be laid upon the will of the people, and
upon the inclinations of that beast which stirrs, and his thr^st; and which,
after it had adored the Duke of Anjou, persecuted the King of France, and dared
to make War with him.

On the other side, it may be said, that no Emperor is furer, nor power better
established, than that which is founded upon Love; And it is certain, that
things are conserved by the same causes, and with the same means which give
them birth; there is also no doubt but that the sovereign Authrority is the
firmer, when it is supported by the good will of the people, from whence it
took its Original; In the second place, no violent thing is durable, its
proper force consumes it, or some other that resists it, and which is greater:
And it is true, that every sort of Chain, save that of Love weighes upon the
spirit of man, and that every sort of yoke, if it be not voluntary, opresseth
it; To conclude, to reign only by severity, is to renounce the peace of the
spirit; it is to charge upon himself the passion given to another; it is to
expose himself to an eternal necessity of distrusting all persons, and to
make them Enemies whom he would not suffer to love him, for fear of not being
sufficiently feared; It Is to fall into the the same mischiefs which traverse
jealous husbands, and in over-straining his subjects to be faithful, to give
them a will to rebel, and to quit their obedience, which would not be trusted
to their virtue and to their inclination.

To the first, Answer may be given, that severity alone conserves very ill the
power of a sovereign; and that t'employ violence against th'evills of a State,
it is to use nothing but passion and fire against all the Maladies of the body,
and every sort of Ulcers. That if great persons sometimes have affected an
austere and hard humor, and seem thereby to maintain themselves in Authority;
That effect nevertheless proceeds from another cause: And, insomuch that that
terrible conduct has not been alone, and was found in the Company of many
great virtues that have tempered it, It has not done th'evill it was
accusstomed to do. This was observed in the life of Torquabes, of Mariust of
Sylla, of Corbulon, and of many others of the Ancients: And of the Modern, in
the Life of the duke of Alva, of the Marquess of the Holy Cross, who left such
cruel Marks of his Humors to the Terceres, of the County of Fuentes and
Wailstaine of this time who was so absolute in th'Armies, he commanded, that
the name of the Emperor was but the Image of the Sovereign power, He
exercised; If these great persons, I say, had known only how to command the
setting up of Gallowses, and to send men to death, they had not been followed
by their Soldiers, in the occasions of glory; and they had been unknown to us,
but a examples of Misfortune, whereinto severity does precipitate.

It may be also aswered to the second, that Indulgency is a Means, as little
safe as facile, to give power to reign, or to compel obedience; that if the
first men of the past and modern ages, seem to have neglected severe ways,
and the Examples of Rigor, the better to subsist in the spirits of their
subjects, or of their soldiers, It Is that in effect, they had extraordinary
Qualities, and I know not what of admirable in their persons, which appeared in
their face and countenance, and inspited respect with love into the souls of
them who came near them; such were Alexander, Scipio, Caesar, Germanicus; such,
Gaston of Foix, Don John of Austria, Ferrant Gonsalve, and the two last Dukes
of Gaise, whose single presence-bewitched the world, forced the wills of men in
spite of Reason, and constrained their Enemies to change their passion or to
suspend it at the sight of them.

From this discourse I draw two Instructions, which may be applied to the other
matters of Policy. The first is, That for the use of gentleness and severity,
and general Rule cannot be Resolution must be taken upon The Occasion;
Consultation had with the nature of Affairs; with the condition of the times;
with the Quality of the persons; and leve the disposition of the event to
fortune, and to other causes which are without us. The second, That although
the difference brought of th'inclinations of diverse people, requires or the
most part a very different application of the Means, which are to be used for
governing of them; so it is that as in the Economy of the humane body, and
dispensation of the humors which compose it, there is of course one that
predominates, and which serves for a law to Physic, and for a that it is
necessary sometimes to keep under that commanding Humor, and that predominant
Quality, To raise others, alter their order, and change the course of certain
Occurences, and according to the nature of the diseases which happen or
threaten. It Is the very same with the Humors of the People and Complexions of
States. There Is a certain Conduct which is as natural to them; but, it ought
not to be inviolable. A Minister of State ought not to be a slave. He may quit
it, provided that he does not abandon it, and may resume it; and a Minister of
State is sometimes constrained to go out of the high way, t'avoide an ill
passage or an Ambush. There are people who are to be retained with Rigor, and
whose obedience is not ascertained, but under a severe Empire. But that ought
not to be eternal; It Is good sometimes to gain them and not always to subdue
them; To bend them, and not always to break them; and occasions do happen
wherein it is of necessity to flatter them, and to stroke them for fear of
affrighting them; lest they take the Bridle in their teeth, and Carry him away,
that ought to Lead them.

The Seventh Discourse.
That a Minister of State ought to treat in a different Manner with strangers,
as they are powerful and free.
A Minister of State ought not only to conform his conduct to the Inclination
of the people which he governes, or with whom he treats; But he ought also to
adjuste it to their power and to their weakness; He ought to Imitate that wise
Physician; who considers as much the strength of the sick person, as the virtue
of the Remedy; and seeks the proportion of that which acts, with that which
suffers. There are States, whose Greatness is in themselves: which subsist upon
their own weight: which can passe-by all others: which have very little to
fear from without, and can hardly fall but bu their own weightiness, nor
perish but by the Corruption within, and by the vices of the noble parts. Such
was the Ancient Republique of Rome, after that so many Nations had submitted
unto it, and that there remained nothing in the world wherewith to fill up the
Ambition of one of its Citizens, nor sufficient to make him Great enough
without the Ruin of his Country. Such is also at this day the Empire of the
Ottomans, whose body is so dilated and power so vaste, that it seems, that
nothing ought to affright the Head but the Members, nor dissolve the Mass, but
its own Parts; There are others, whose Extent truly is not small, nor forces
incosiderable; But which have nevertheless need of foraine Aid^ for to support
them; To fortify themselves with Alliances; To form Leagues; To make use of
diversions. In short, to repair with Industry what of force is wanting in
them, either for resistance or enterprise. There are Princes who subsist only
by the Conveniences of their Country, and by the benignity of its situation:
Two great powers betwixt which, It is shut up, and to whom It serves for
Barriere, are in perpetual jealousy, that the one or the other will make its
Accommodation of it, and there is nothing that they would not do to hinder them
from the change of Master, and from submitting to a Domination by them
suspected; This passion of State has been the original of great wars, which
have been seen in Piedmont since hundred years, and of so much Spanish and
French blood as has been shed in that Province. There are others, who have
quit themselves under a voluntary dependency upon a greater power, or by reason
of some good turn received, or to be delivered of the Expense from disturbance
and from fear, which the Neighborhood of a greater brings, when he is no
friend, which is seldom but to their Advantage, so, he is in some sort the
Master of the petty States, which he protects; without Citadelle and Garrison
he Commands them; and he receives when he has need, considerable supplies of
Money and Men.

There are others who are under a forced Dependancy, and are become Captives
without thinking of it, who have given the matter of their Chain; and
furnished the Stuff, whereof the yoke was made that oppresses them:
Covetousness has precipitated the Genoueses into this unhappiness; That
villainous passion has forged their servitude: The Money which they have put
into the hands of the Spaniards has betrayed them, and by an Inverted order,
the Creditors put themselves to the Mercy of their Debtors: They cannot now
unsay it; they have given them pawns and cannot recover them, and which they
will not suffer them to loose; A single free thought cannot enter their
spirits; They dare not accept th'aid of them who would redeem them for their
Captivity; and being slaves to their Money, they must or necessity be to the
Men who keep it for them. On the other side, it is a pleasant way of gaining a
State that which the Spaniards have practiced toward the Genoueses; It was
never doned so good cheap, in other places; All others have cost them
something; if the Great Duke be obliged to the defense of the State of Milan,
they have rendered unto him the fortresses of the Toscane, and given him
Sienna. If the Prince o Parma, ought to furnish them with Men and Money for the
same subject, He has received also the Citadelle of Pleasance. But here they
only tendered the hands to take the Money which has been voluntarity unto
them; They enjoy it and are the Masters of it; In leaving to others the vain
Names of Creditours: and if ^metime they give them somewhat by may of profit;
even that returns to them and resembles the water of Certain Fountains,
which by a constrained Motion being forced out of its reserve, returns thither
by a Natural motion, and by a necessary fall. Let this be said in passage.

To conclude, There are States which are not conserved but by reason of their
weakness, and in regard they are so inconsiderable, that they deserve not the
violation of Justice in a Conqueror, nor that his Ambition be rendered odious
for the desire of them: such is the Commonwealth of Ragouse, which is so
little, that to this day it has not provoaked the Appetite of the Turk; and so
poor, that almost all its Revenues is laid out, to feed the great Persons of
the family of Port, and to serve for entertainment to the Sangiaes, who are
their Neighbors. A Minister then of State must know, That every sort of State
requires a different Conduct; That the one ought not to serve as Example to the
other for Government; and when any business is to be had with them, that they
are to be treated withal according to their Power and Liberty. Whilst the
Commonwealth of Venice was in disorder with Paul the fifth, and that
Christendom was divided upon that Quarrel, the Commonwealth of Genes fell
into almost the like Inconvenience; This nevertheless did bend under the will
of the Pope, And having cast it self into a shameful servitude, was careful
to perform such Actions as might deserve the Name of a lawful obedience; and
that Spain, whose Aid it wanted was but too much carried to dispose it, to
raise a prejudice against Venice. On the contrary, Venice remained inflexible
in its pretensions, because it had power to maintain them, and pursued the
business to The End, that the Liberty which it had not received but from God,
and wherewith it was borne, might not be weakened. The designs then of the
Pope, which prospered for Genes, were vain for Venice; and the Inequality of
those two states could not admit of the same Remedies, though they labored of
the same Evil, and of the like Accident.

The Eighth Discourse.
That a Minister of State ought not inviolably to act that which has been
always practiced in the State.
HE not only acts safely, who forms not his conduct upon that of strangers,
not treats equally with two unequal powers: But a Minister of State is far
from that he ought to be if in the State where he acts he tie himself
servilely, to what has been done before him: If he dare not go out of the
beaten Road: If he have no other mark then the example of them that have gone
before him; If he will always walk upon their paces, and adore only their
footsteps. No comparison was ever more natural or report more just, than that
of the humane and politic body, The Economy of the one may serve for Model
to the other; They are both subject to the same Accidents and to the same
Symptoms: Both of them have ordinarity the birth weak, the progress proud and
rapid; the subsistence trembling, and the fall precipitated. And nevertheless,
each of those ages requires a different Regiment, and a Conduct altogether
diverse. These considerations also have place in the Ecclesiastique State, and
in the government of Souls. And though its foundations be eternal, and that
it is built upon an immovable Stone; Though this Bark cannot perish nor make
Shipwreck; Though the Doctrine be infallible that hinders not, but regard being
had to the manners of particular persons, but that some alteration may often
happen in it: That Compliance must be made with the time; sayls shifted
according to the nature of the winds which blow; Relaxation from the severity
of discipline, and much submission to the inclination of the people; Miracles
have founded the Church, and the Holy Ghost aids it with his protection; But
it requires also that the prudence of Prelates should interpose to govern it.
Reason is not banished, provided that it remain subject to Faith; and the
Truths which have been proposed to us all naked and with the sole Authority of
signs, are not declared unto us by the Councills, but after great inquiries,
and answerable consultations.

And nevertheless Prudence requires, that, in the Conduct of souls, what is
best in it self be not so much considered, as what is most conformable to them;
That a violent subjection be not imposed upon them, for fear least the yoke
being made too heavy, it give a desire to shake it off. Heretofore the Churches
Arms were very dreadful, and the greatest Princes tremble at the Noise of the
Thunder of Rome; The Prudence of Pastors, who made no unlawful use of their
powers, and the opinion had of their sanctity; caused that they who were
threatened, held themselves at that instant culpable, and that they had even
fear of unjust excommunications: But as there is nothing so good, which man does
not abuse; nor any thing so holy which his Malice or fragility does not
corrupt; It has happened that in these latter ages, have been seen great
alterations of Manners in Pastors, and great abuses in the exercise of Justice:
There was no fault of Boniface the eighth, and of Jules the second, which did
not pass the bounds of the Spirit, which confines their power, and instead of
opening the Kingdom of Heaven whereof Jesus Christ had left them the keys,
endeavored to take away the Interest of Lands from their true Masters, and
lawful possessors; Besides that, the too frequent use of Excommunications, and
the application thereof to matters of nothing; The Scismes of the Popes, which
have vexed the Church, and caused many persons to take up Arms, who ought to
have been governed by a single person. All this is the cause, that they are now
less respected then they ought to be, and make not sufficient impressions of
terror upon Christian Souls. In effect, There Is nothing that so much conserves
the reverence due to Holy things, as the Rarity, nor that vilifies them more
then to render them popular; Those things principally which are of an Order
superior to the body, and whose effects are not sensible, and respect another
Life then this; have need of these precautions, that they may be wholesome,
Insomuch that it is to misunderstand it, to draw a consequence from the time
past, when Ecclesiastique Discipline was in vigor and the consciences of
Christians docile, when there was nothing but heat and flame among the
faithful; when obedience was general, and that superiors had not so much use
of a Spur to provoke the love of virtue, and to the pursuit of good; as of a
Bridle to retain, and to hinder the excess by the impetuosity of Zeal. It Is
ill done, I say, to draw consequences from that time to this present time, when
not only Heretics change the Truths received, but Atheists assault the
Principles of Faith and the Foundations of Religion: In the dispensation of
Ecclesiastical punishments, The Prelates and the Sovereign chief of the
Church, ought not to decline the end, for which God left then the power
t'impose them: Instead of building they ought not to pull down, nor destroy a
whole body in cutting of a perished member and sick part; To conclude, There Is
nothing that Superiors, spiritual or temporal ought more to avoid, nor
wherein they ought to be more difficult, than in putting their Authority to
Reference, and to make Laws that are not observed; It Is to offend against the
form of what they are, and it is much better to suffer Evils, and to Tolerate
abuses in a State, then to discover its wants of power in not correcting of
them, or manifest its weakness in contesting too much to surmount their
Resistance. Truly, since, Sr. the Cardinal has had the power of
Administration, it cannot be said, That the Example of strangers has put us
out of our way, nor that we have lost our selves in following our predecessors,
and for nor daring to be bolder, and wiser than they. This great Minister of
State has so well known the Nature of the Ill we labored of, and our Boar;
and the Remedies have been dispensed with such due proportion, and equality,
that the defect hindered not the operations, nor the excess sharpened the
disease; The sweetness which the King used toward the Rochellers when they
were not in condition any longer to resist his forces; The grace which was
afforded to Criminalls, when they were in his power; and the Clemency he
exercised when the might have used Severity, without blame; and have made
examples of Justice which could not have had any ill consequence, nor dangerous
revenge; On the other side the Comportment at Privas, and that sad spectacle
which seemed to have been procured by some superior providence, To supply, it
may be, the too great humanity of the King, and that of his Ministers of State;
The Manner of harkening to the propositions of accommodations not to make the
culpable desperate, and to press the War, and hasten victory; To take from them
the means of expecting any thing from time, which is the hope of unfortunate
persons; The industry which Sr. the Cardinal has added to force; The Art he
has used to sow division, and to convey distrust amongst the Rebels: He
divided their Interests, and has made them weak for want of Union; The
assaults of his Eloquence, and of that divine faculty, which has so charmed
the Hearers, that all the passions that nourished Rebellion were quieted; The
hottest Motions of desyance they had for us, were stayed; The most opinionated
could not but consent to what we would have; and the most valiant durst not
seek their safety in Arms but in Obedience, and subjection. Moreover the most
scrupulous observation of promised things, and that Legal, and new proceeding
wherewith fears were not allayed, but their hopes were surmounted: That I say,
has reconciled all their spirits; has rendered the victory perfect and firm
in gaining the wills of the Conquered; has cut off the last Roots of
Rebellion, and finished the work which had been so often begun, and as often
destroyed by ill Fortune or by ill Conduct.

If the King would have believed the old Ministers of State, and the wise
persons that had Governed in other Reigns; He had never assaulted the
Hugenots: He had not offended a party his Father feared, nor touched that Frame
which stirred not but by shakeing the Pillars of the State, and the foundations
of Monarchy; Insolency, said they, must be suffered to avoid Felony; and
Lenitives applied when sharp Remedies were mortal.

They nerve Concluded for war but when it was made to them. The End of our
Arms was not for Victory but Peaces. They did not embarque to sail, but to
return to the Haven from whence we were put out; They could not endure tossing
at Sea; and were they in a small Boat or in a ship of Burden they would make
for the Land; In the mean time the fire of the Revolt was not put out; The
springs of disobedience remained full, and if they were stopped for a time from
Running, they swelled and became great t'overflow the stronger, into another
Channel. In a word, the King had always Companions in his kingdom; and at
most the Subjection of Half the French, consisted in sharing his powers with
Him, to leave him the name only of a Sovereign.

If the Maxims observed during his Minority in Relation to his Allies, had not
been changed nor; more Courage expressed than when the Spaniards stripped the Duke
of Savoy; If our Reliefs had been as faint, and fearful, as they in that time;
and it we had as much feared three Powers as they did one; What had become of
Monsiur Mantove and of our Reputation? The Liberty of the Holy Chair had been
weakened, and Italy in a Chain. They had suddenly been over the ditch of France,
having there nothing abroad more to take; No person would have more trusted us;
And at this day, we should not have been the Protectors of the weak: we should
be the forsakers of the afflicted. To conclude, if Sr. the Cardinal should
have had only in sight, the Example of our Fathers, and their wisdom; The
design of Navigation should have been only in Idea, and we had not seen the
Progress of a thing whose Beginnings aided so much for the taking of Rochell;
and without it, the greatest States were never but half Powerful, nor but
half Rich.

The Ninthe Discourse.
That the Counsels of Strangers ought to be suspected by a Minister of State.
A Minister of State ought to suspect the Counsels that come from abroad, what
show soever they make of good, and what pretense soever of God-will they Cloth
themselves withal. Let them take it for certain, That the greatest part of
Princes have neither hate nor friendship but for Convenience, and have no
passion but what their Interest gives them; And therefore no Friendship is so
dear to them as the least of their Affairs; That there is not a Parent whom
they will not turn out of a great Good, if he be never so little Dammageable
to them; whom they will not sacrifice, if it turn to their profit; and expose
them to the uttermost Mischief, if it be for their Accommodation. The fair
passions of Resentment for good turns, and of Acknowledgment, are the
expressions only of Particular and of Vulgar persons; They are seldom born
amongst Princes. It Is a Traffic, and not a Commerce of friendship, which is
practiced amongst them; The laws of Merchandise enter much easier into their
Treaties, than the laws of Philosophy, Interest is the sole bond that ties
them. And insomuch that reason of State learnes not to do well Generously, it is
no wonder if they know not ordinarily either to owe handsomely, or handsomely to
acknowledge. In a word, there is but little Counsel given by Strangers, whose
spring is not tainted, and which is not corrupted either by the Ambition of
them most powerful, or by the jealousy of Equals, or by the fear of
Inferiors. Great persons endeavor to catch Inferiors in their Nets, or to do
their business at their Charges; They engage them in their Quarrels, and
forget them in their Accommodations, or interesse them in others Men's, to keep
them under in ayding of them, and retain the securities they had seized under
Color of defending them; Equals would be very glad to withdraw themselves
from Concurrence; To gain the upper hand, and not to serve for Counterpoise in
the forces of the others, nor obstacle to the Greatness whereunto they aspire;
Inferiors are always in fear of great Persons when they are ambitious and
look upon them as Monsters, from whom they expect to be devoured. They cannot
have good will for them, whom they distrust; and they raise no Altars nor offer
sacrifices for them, but as the Ancients did to the Plague and to a Feavour to
be preserved from an Evil which they feared.

In the beginning of the Civil discords for the Matter of Religion, and when the
new Sect severed them from the obedience due to the King whom it had withdrawn
from the obedience due to the Church, Philip the second caused Katherine of
Medicis to be advertized by Manique his ambassador, that It concerned her much
to take great care not to flatter the Evil, or to come to any Composition with
it; That lenitive Remedies were Mortal; and that Rebellion and Heresy were to
be pursued by the sword and fire. I doubt not but the Council of Philip had
the honor of God for their End, which was offended by that new Doctrine, and
the interest which was Common to him with all the other Princes, Not to permit
disobedience in the States of other Princes. But in the choice of the Means he
proposed to oppose that Evil and to fight it; It Is certain that He considered
not so much the Effect it would produce, in France, as the Good the low
Countries would receive by it, where the Contagion was already entered; He would
make us swallow the Medicine for the purging of his subjects. He thought to
astonish the culpable of his Country, by example of the Justice, which should
be acted in ours; and take away the heart of Heresy, when it should see it
self so ill handled in other places, and be taken every where for the hatred
of Princes, and horror of the people. Lets observe here, upon occasion, That
the Prince whom they called the Solomon of his Age hindered to his power the
Flemings from taking Religion for the pretext of th'Insurrection they studied,
and th'Impatience they had to rise; He saw clearly that they who had so often
quarrelled their Princes being present, and could never Love but the race of
them; would hardly contain themselves in their Absence, and permit the
Domination of stranger Governnors. But he judged also that it was easy t'order
the people that Mutined when the' engaged not God in their Revolt, and opposed
not the Command of providing for their salvation, to that of obedience to their
superiors. TO avoid that, he accords them all their demands, though they were
unjust: He takes away the Spanish Garrison wherewith they said they were
oppressed; He consents that the Governors of strange places should be Natives
of the Country, and named by the States. He remits the Cardinal Grantuelle to
the Franche County whose person was odious unto them, and Conduct
insupportable. In brief, for the love of them, He overthrows the functions of
Sovereignty and chose rather to receive the Law from his Catholic subjects,
than to be constrained to give it to the Heretic Rebels. But he knew too
late Nature of the people and their diseases; And as it is sometimes good, when
the Appetite of Novelty is appeased, which vexed it, and tired with its own
disorders, To bring it back with sweetness; To give it liberty to retire from
Evil with some show of Reputation, and to seem less Culpable then It was;
That nothing but force can reduce it, when it begins to shake and is full of
fancies of the future and of hopes of Change: That to flatter them is to lose
them, when they are in that Humor; and it is then that they make themselves to
be feared, when the least Evidence of fear is discovered unto them: The
easiness of granting the first demands does furnish them with boldness to make
new ones; The desire of evil is increased in giving them powers to execute it;
and at last, It Is found, that instead of a weak and irresolute Mutiny as it
was, A powerful enemy is made, and an Irreconcilable persecutor. I handle this
Matter very particularly in the second part of this work; So it is that Philip
fell into the Inconveniency, which he had a design t'avoyd, and he saw
Religion perish, and his Subjects of the Low Countries to rebel, for not using
seasonable Remedies, which might have wrought, if they had been applied in
season; in employing Severity and Gentleness in counter time, and in making too
much or too little use of the one or the other; It may be also that there was
of Fate in the Accident of that new Power, and that God suffered it to rise in
opposition to the Spanish Ambition; and to stop, with so small a thing that
Torrent which threatened the overflow of all his Neighbour-Countryes.

Our Kings also, under whom Heresy has risen, have spoiled all in following
violent Counsels; They have always either strained too much or slacked too
much: And, as if they had been carried with Contrary winds, They never knew,
how to take the Medium, nor find the temper betwixt and Excessive Rigor, and a
too Loose Indulgency. The shameful Peaces, accorded in diverse times tho the
Hugunots, sad Edicts made in their favor, declare clearly what spirit acted in
France; and that there was no need of fighting Battails, nor of the burning of
Towns, for to put things in the State they were before the war. On the other
side, the violent designs, and bloody Resolutions which were taken t'ill
purpose, have been the fruits of Spanish Counsels, and of I alian suggestions;
The impatience which some had to see our Miseries finished, have retarded the
Cure in making too great haste; And the hopes which others had to make profits
of them, has been the Cause that they enflamed more, and prepared a long and
new Matter for our Discords, which were of Advantage to them.

The Execution of St. Bartholomew is a work of their spirit, and they glory
that their King had a particular hand in it, and that the Duke of Alva did
advise it in his journey to Bayone. I will not discourse of the nature of the
Action, which found even Catholic spirits divided, and their opinions
different to approve or condemn it; The Incertitude wherein they always were,
in what manner King Charles concurred; whether by pretension, or by a pure
design, and the particular resentment of a Prince, which engaged with the Zeal
of public good; are the cause that no judgment can be made thereof, but what
may be dangerous or rash. I suspend mine also, to rest me upon the success
which was not conform to the Hopes were had of it; And were it that we knew
not how to make use of our advantage; or that the Election of the Duke of
Anjou, for King of Polonia, lost the fruits of the victory that was at hand; or
that God would not bless an Action wherein it was presumed, that the public
Faith, whereof he was always Protector, was violated; We have seen the Fire
the more kindled, which they thought had been put out by that bloodletting;
and pretense given to cruelty, to be animated against the Catholic blood.

The Cardinal of Lorrain also, made a great wound in the State and Church, in
being promoter of the discourse of Poissy. After he had been so contrary to the
Protestant Ministers. The persons being of obscure birth, and their Lives
charged with faults; who had been shaken by many Declarations and Edicts; who
had so often shunned the Light for to save themselves in dark places and in
Woods; who had deliberated upon the Doctrine they published: To bring forth I
say this people to a day so glorious as the Cardinal had made it, to draw them
to so famous a Combat, and to give them the meeting in the Field, where they
had him for Adversary, and the King and the Princes for Spectators; It must be
confessed that he was much too blame, and that it was to pass too dangerously
from one extreme to another. He ought to have believed, that it was a means to
cherish them in Error that were shaking, and to confirm them that were
irresolute: That that Honor would excessively swell their heart: That it would
give them a greater Opinion of their persons and doctrines, than they had
before and would put those proud spirits into a condition never to Renounce the
propositions so solemnly debated. He might have believed, that no jealousy is
so violent as that which we take, in favor of our Opinions: And for the matter
of Sect, that come into the World; The Authors ought to be gained before they
are publicly declared; or else they must be destroyed.

But when they had overcome the first encounterd resistance, and that
apprehension which the greatness of their Enterprise gave them; and that the
uncertainty of the success was ceased; The disease must take its Course of
Necessity; Hope and fear are weak Remedies against it, and Man labors in vain,
If God does not show himself with a powerful Arm to defend his own cause.
The example of Luther was fresh in memory, and the causes of the miserable
Schism in Germany known to all the World. So long as Luther did only Hazard
his Doctrine, and had no other design but to cast out his spite, and revenge
the wrong he believed was done to them of his Order [for not permitting them to
preach, as they were accustomed, the Indulgencies, in the Duchy of Suxe]; It
had been easy to have reduced him: But after he had conferred with Cardinal
Caietan; That he had been heard of Charles the Emperor, and that Leon the
tenth had fulminated against him; He changed the passion; Vanity succeeded
cheller, and the honor to have to do with so great persons, renders him
irreconsilable. In vain after, the Messengers of Paul the third endeavored to
sweeten that sharp spirit: In vain, did he represent unto him the evil would
happen, in overthrowing the peace of the World for a doubtful belief; And in
vain did he offer him Red Hatts, and the first dignities of the Church for the
price of his conversion; All that, moved him not; That ambitious man could no
longer submit after he had contested with Cardinals, Emperors, Popes. And
after he had been made equal to them; He could not believe himself great
enough, if any person were above him. This digression may seem, affected, but
it will be nevertheless profitable: Lets return to our subject. It Is then true,
that it is almost an inevitable necessity to receive or demand, Counsel; But
it is an extreme disgrace not to be able to resolve of ones self, and to
distinguish betwixt another interest and the good of our affairs. Behold other
Examples: Peter of Medicis whose imprudence and misfortune made him famous in
Story; took Refuge at Venice, after he was driven from Florence. Charles the
Eighth, who was the subject of his disgrace, offered also to be the cause of
his Restablishment, and in restoring him to his first powers, to assure
himself of the Florentines, who were so necessary for his Italian designs; He
advised him then of his Intentions, and tendered him his Aid for that purpose.
Peter consults the Republique, and demands what he ought to do. The Senate who
had jealousy of Charles's stay in Italy; who would not have him take Root
there; who had it then in consideration, how to send him beyond the Mountains,
and to release by Consequence Florence, which was the breast of his Army, and
of his Interests; dissuade Peter from casting himself into the Arms of the
King to gain his Return. They represent to him the danger of employing so
great a Mediator; That it would more inflame the hatred of his Countrymen
against him, and that they conceive the King would sell the grace he should
procure him, and oblige him at the Charges of the Common Liberty; So with these
Reasons, whose appearance was specious, and with the promises they made him to
labor his return, The designs of Charles, and the hopes of Peter were
frustrated.

The Venetians who are so industrious to counsel others, and who for the
opinion of wisdom they have gained in the world, are sometimes Consulted with,
even from the uttermost Confines of Asia; Take no Counsel from others but for
Convenience; nor otherwise, than, as an Evidence of the affection of them that
give it; All the Powers of Europe were interessed in the disturbance of the
Interdict; The Christians, and the Turks, the Catholics and the Protestants
did engage, and there was not a Prince which made not offers, or gave advice to
the Republique; Nothing of that nevertheless could shake it. She stood
immovable in its proper Resentments, and never wandered from her End,
whatsoever was proposed to the Contrary. I do not think it can be said, that
Counsels from abroad have acted amongst us since Sr. the Cardinal has been
in the government, nor that foreign Infusions have seduced us, since He
governed. I do not think that it can be reproached to this Great Minister of
State, That the Gold of our Neighbors; has put out his eyes, t'open his heart
to their suggestions; nor that their subtlity has Caused them to unty the
Tongue to discover the Kings designs, and the secrets of the State; Heretofore
they governed in our Counsels, though in the posture of third persons. They
have there proposed their opinions by French-Interpreters; some of our
Ministers of State were but bodies assumed, to which their spirits gave Motion
and language; And in regard they were venall persons; no man need wonder, If
they were for them that would give most, and by Consequence their's; since they
never found too high a price for the Purchase of the fidelity of the subjects
of other Princes.

But to assault with these base temptations a Person who would not make use of
all the Just ways of getting wealth; who had so often refused to search into
the Coffers, which his Master opened unto him; who made scruple of receiving
Benefits from a Prince, which were offered him. To Avoid the gathering of the
spoils of an unhappy person, and oftentimes Hazarded all his Means t'assure
ours. There Is no reason for it.

Besides, that Interest which has been ever powerful in France; The fear
that has been long entertained of provoaking Neighbor forces, has often
spoiled our Affairs or weakened our Reputation. For fear of displeasing them, a
pernicious Compleasancy was exercised in favor of them; their proposalls were
harkned unto with too much respect; They durst not break their Designs with
force; they were diverted by Treaties, and interventions. And insomuch that we
had not Courage, to act with them as Equals; They took the boldness to treat
with us as our superiors and Masters. A strange Maxim that possessed some
spirits, to permit in private all the tricks of a Mutinous faction, under
pretense that we wanted power to repress it, and to suffer the Spaniards to do
a part of what they would do abroad, t'avoyd disorder with them; and least the
hatred of that formidable Nation should be added to the spite of discontented
persons, and to the disturbance of Rebels. It was upon this Principle that
they suffered the Duke of Savoy to perish, and that the frontiers of the State
of Milan were enlarged to the foot of the Mountains; It was upon the same
principle, that Affronts were permitted to be done to the Venetians; That they
have suffered a person to triumph with their vessels, as a Conqueror, who had
taken them, only as a Pirate, and whom they forced t'escape into Gradisque,
and conserved that place to the house of Austria: In search whereof, they have
formerly consumed a part of their treasure, and thirty thousand Men without
taking of it. It Is by reason of this principle also, that the Hugonots
complained (whether of right or wrong is not for me to judge) of the Breach of
the peace of Montpellier to the prejudice of the King's Intentions. And that
they who made it to suppress another Caballe which could not subsist but by the
Continuation of the war; had also broken it t'accommodate the humor of Italy
and of Spain, where some murmured, that a party was suffered to Live, which,
as was Imagined, might have been stiffled. And others were angry for the
remission of our Evils, and for the Interruptions of our discords, which they
would make perpetual. How ever, It was, that breach, whether true or pretended
has been the beginning of the most dangerous war, which as yet we have had
in the State; and the Ministers of State, which succeeded had received
(according to the Custom) the shame of the faults of their Predecessors, if
they had not the Virtue to repair them.

But Sr. the Cardinal entered with Counsels as bold as disinteressed; He knew
the power of our Neighbors, and the forces of his Master; He conceived that
all his Master's forces were not to be employed against them, so long as they
held theirs divided in diverse places; which without question they will always
do, till they cease to be Ambitious, or become Weak.

And therefore upon this Infallible Principle, the King has beaten down all
that did arise in his Kingdom against his Authority, and hindered the great
persons abroad to grow great at the Charges of the lesser; and of the Allies of
France.

The Tenth Discourse.
How Advises from Rome, and from the Mediation of the Pope, are to be
entertained.
WHat I have said in the Precedent Discourse respects only the Princes
manifestly interessed, and whose intentions are suspected to their Neighbors,
by reason of some irregular passion they labor under. A consideration apart
must be made of the Advises that come from Rome, and Interventions of Popes in
the affairs of other Princes; But insomuch as that dignity which regards only
the spirit, and th'hopes of the other Life is joined in time to a temporal
power, wherewith it is not incompatible; It has also happened, that they who
have been provided of both, have cast themselves on other Interest then those
of God, and mingled the Zeal of the salvation of Souls with the passions of
the Earth. And as it is seen that Man suffers himself to be ravished with the
Objects of the senses, and acts not but according to th'animal faculties,
though he have spiritual and divine faculties. In like manner some Popes have
been seen to forget the functions of the Chiefs of the faithful, in addicting
themselves wholly to the functions of the Princes of the World, and place
Ambition and Avarice in the Throne of Holiness; Moreover some persons have
been found who by interessed designs or with an indiscreet heat have
endeavored to over-straine the temporal greatness of Popes, and for some
reasons of compliance, attribute unto them more jurisdiction over Catholic
Princes, than God has given them; they have by that means blown up the Courage
of some of the Popes; They have made them t'assume unreasonable pretensions;
They have caused that boldness in them, to trample under their feet the Crowns
of Sovereigns, and to march upon their Heads, who acknowledge God only to be
above them in temporal, Jurisdictions. From thence are borne the Quarrels,
they have had with diverse Princes, and chiefly with the Emperors of the West;
from thence have been kindled so many Wars in Germany, which have passed into
Italy, and brought desolation to all Europe; From thence, were formed those
famous factions of Guelphs and Gibelins, which have divided the Fathers from
their Children, which put Schism into Families; which made Cities to be burnt,
and Provinces to be plunderd; and held the World in combustion for a Quarrel
which was not that of Jesus Christ. The doubtful pretensions, or less clear,
which some Popes would pass for indubitable, have occasioned that they who
were interessed, have maintained their Rights with the more violence, and with
less respect then they ought; and did cast themselves into extreamities in a
Cause, which moderation might have made lawful.

But moreover, When a Pope either by his proper Motion or by the suggestions of
Juglers and Flatterers, wherewith sometimes they are infested, has assumed a
Right he had not, though his design has not prospered, and that he has
encountered impediments, which have stopped his course, some indiscreetly
zealous Authors have been found, who set forth his Action for a Title, to
entitle the subsequent Popes to that Right, and to re-ingage them in a Quarrel
which should be made as strong by their own Authority, as by that, wherewith
they secure themselves by reason of the prescription, and that it has the
favor of time. From thence it arises, that they are very sensible of what
they conceive to touch them; that there is so much severity at Rome, for what
concerns them; and when that matter enters into the Affairs which are treated
with them, or into the Negotiations which their Agents manage, that great
Circumspections are there to be used; The Eye must be open to all things, and
to tread with address and lightness upon so slippery a Pavement.

I will place here a long consideration, but profitable, and that shall enter
without Violence upon the subject in hand. The wealth which has been given to
the Church for the glory of God, and for the Ornament of that fair Hierarchy,
which composeth the Mystical body of Jesus Christ; has had in many of their
members an Effect contrary to their End. The Sovereign Shepherds themselves
whose Life's are the Lamps of the Gospel, that it be not hid under a Bushel;
have sometimes given scandalous examples in this matter; Their Manners have not
shined, but to lead into precipices; They have betrayed the bounties of Honest
Men, and converted the Monuments of the Piety of the Constantines, of the
Pepins, and of the Charlemaignes into instruments of Ambition, or of some other
passion, less Honest: And as all the motions of the soul, when they are
irregular, and that imagination in stead of discourse does govern them; enter
into a wilderness, and find no object to confine them, no bridle to check them;
So the wealth of the Holy Chair, though it be great, has been little to
satisfy immoderate desires, and the too vast designs of some Popes, and to
furnish the excess of their Expenses. That has obliged some of their Agents,
who burnt with a contrary passion to seek out extraordinary Means for Money;
and to have recourse to violence and sacriledges, being unable by lawful
Expedients to satisfy the Prodigality of their Masters, or their personal
Avarice; They have not only set impositions, and subsidies upon their temporal
Subjects as other Princes do; But they have also abused what was most holy in
Religion; They put to sale the things that were above Price; They have sold the
merits of Jesus Christ; and sold to children what came from the Indulgency of
their Mother. Besides this, the venality of Offices, which some Popes have
permitted to be introduced into the Court of Rome, and that Spring of Rapine,
which has been stopped to the uttermost of their power, in all well polished
States; The greatness of their kindred which some have procured with too much
heat; The Wars wherein they did embarke themselves to ill purpose; The
sumptuous buildings and the too proud goods: In brief all that furniture, which
was seen at Rome, of things which were not invented but for vanity or for
pleasure, and whereof the most unprofitable were the most precious; All this,
has raised an ill opinion of the dignity of the Order in many who cannot
distinguish it from the Person, nor make a difference of what was of Gods
Institution from what proceeded from the Corruption of Man. The face then of
the Court of Rome so notoriously defamed has caused some to confound it, with
that of the Church, though they are two very different things; That they
applied the spots of the one to the other that had none at all, and have revolted
against the Holy Chair because they could not suffer the vices of the Pope.
The Authors nevertheless of this great Attempt have not sinned of ignorance,
and were not carried thereunto by the zeal of the honor of God. They knew
well, that the License of Manners is not incompatible with the purity of
opinions; That the Will may follow Evil though the Reason does not approve of
it; and that the same Authority which forbids us t'imitate the deboshes of
Pastors, commands us to respect their doctrine, and to hold us in the way they
teach us, distinct from the mire they are fallen into; But they were put on, by
other Motives. Avarice and Spite animated them against the dignity, to be
revenged of the persons that possessed it; Instead of stopping at the abuses
they exercised, they assaulted the power which God had given them. Instead of
pruning the branches, they would cut down the body, and take away their
Neighbors Life, to hinder him from Doing ill. And as those Creatures who draw
Poison from Flowers, and Simples, whereof men make perfumes and Medicines;
Instead of admiring the care God has for his Church, in hindering it from
spoil in the midst of corruption, and to sink in so violent tempests; They
have severed themselves from her and have endeavored to cut the bands of the
Members and the Head; and to abolish that divine dependancy, which makes a
regular body, as Dissolution makes a Monster.

God also has raised many great persons to fight the designs of the Revolted,
and to revenge th'injury done him in destroying, what was of his Institution,
for the vices of Men; and in judging of the virtue of the Sacraments by the
goodness of the Priests; and the force of the work, by the merit of the
workman: But as it is hard for the humane spirit to observe moderation in its
designs, and that it be not transported in the pursuit of good, for which it
has passion. It has also happened, that they who have run to the Relief of
the Holy Chair, have truly prospered in that defense, and repelled the
imposture of them that have assaulted it; yet all have stayed there; some have
passed their bounds, and being pressed with too much heat, which the love of
truth had inspired into them; have not only supported the spiritual power of
the Pope, but have also attributed unto him a temporal which was unknown to the
Apostles; unheard of, in the Primitive Church; which gives jealousy to other
Princes; which has not ot this time edified, which has destroyed much and
made Schism to enter into those States which had been Catholic, the space of
many ages. And insomuch that they who have been raised to this Supreme dignity,
which severs them from the Community of men, are nevertheless men, and
sometimes have common inclinations; There Is no wonder, if some of them are glad
to see their Authority extended, To see themselves made more powerful then
they thought to be; that the light which does surround them is greater and
disperseth its Ray, further then they did imagine; and if they are easily
persuaded to a thing so conformable to their desires and to the most violent
appetite of reasonable Nature which is that of Domination. Insomuch, that it is
not only true that the change of Fortune is ordinarily accompanied with the
change of Manners, but also sometimes of Opinions; That it disorders all the
powers of the Soul; That it alters the disposition of th'Understanding, after
it has changed that of the Will. And some Popes have judged more favorably of
the greatness of the Holy Chair, when they were in it; they they did before,
when they were but single Cardinals, or in some lower dignity. Wherefore in
subjects, which look either directly or obliquely upon the Holy Chair, A
Minister of State ought to be very circumspect: He must slide upon that
Pavement, if he must pass upon it; If he be constrained to touch upon so
delicate parts, Let it be done with a subtle and light hand, and that he do
not pierce too deep, if it be possible, into a matter wherein it will be hard
not to be offended, if he do not offend. Above all, that he stay always in the
bounds of Reason, and in the bounds of Justice. That he take nothing away from
another, but that he permit not, any thing to be taken away from his Master;
That his imprudence, or softness do not occasion any prejudice for the future
to the State, and that he remember the proceeding of Charles the fifth, when he
came into Italy to be Crowned Emperor. The Legates who were sent to receive
him, prayed him that he would swear to do no wrong to the Liberties of the
Church, nor injure the spouse of Jesus Christ; He answered that he would swear
neither to alter the rights of the Church, nor the pretensions of the Empire;
That had an aspect to the Cities of Pleasance and of Parma, which the one
pretended to be a Fiefe of the Empire, the other of the Holy Chair.

Truly, Sr. the Cardinal behaved himself so well in Occurrences of this nature,
that the Rights of the Crown and Dignity of the Holy Chair have been
inviolable, in his hands; That nothing but Justice held the Balance, that he
gave to God and Caesar their due; and maintained equally the Quality of a
Minister of State, and of a Prince of the Church; He is not ignorant of the
Temper which ought to be betwixt a blind Zeal, and License scarce Catholic;
He knows the way was to be held betwixt these two precipices; He knows how to
sail without striking upon the Rocks; He cannot wander for want of light; He
has a most profound knowledge of Holy things, and of the things of the world;
and the Sorbone admired him as their Ornament, before it did reverence him for
their benefactor and protector.

Wherefore he took care not to see with other Men's Eyes, as others have done,
or to Move with the passion of strangers; So no soul also was ever less
prepossessed then his; or more direct in its apprehensions; There Is no
Irregularity in the functions of his powers, and with exception to the Commerce
of Faith which is always privileged, the Will gives not its opinions to the
Understanding, but receives its heat, and affections, from his discourse and
his Illuminations. Wherefore it is easy to judge how imprudent the Calumny of
them was, who assaulted him during the Negotiation of Cardinal Barberin, or a
little after. Rome did not complain of Him, and the Holy Father knew well that
the necessities of State, and the hidden Causes of its Conduct, do not ever
permit; That to the zeal of honest Men, all be given that they would have. None
then but ill Frenchmen have complained, or strangers that hate us; and to whom
Pretenses are good, when Causes are wanting to them; That cry us down who are
incensed against us; Those black Manifests also, and those violent and sharp
Writings which France has seen, have done no hurt to the Reputation of this
Great Minister of State. They have resembled those stinking Vapors which are
exhaled from Moorish Grounds, which evidence clearly the Corruption of the
place, whence they come, but infect not the Sun against which they arise. They
have given themselves the Lie, by the things that have happened. The time has
inverted them upon their Authors. They have seen that Delinquent of the
Hugonots fastened invariably to the Ruin of all that was rebellious in that
party. They have seen Rochell fall in part by the cares of that Cardinal of
Rochell, They have seen Heresy humbled by that Great politician, and reduced
under the Common Right and General Obedience, as well of Obedience as of
Opinions to his Mode: they have seen what he dared in the Affairs of Monsieur
of Mantove; what he undertook t'assume the Liberty of the Holy Chair, and to
what he exposed himself for the Love of that Rome, which by imputation was
despised by him; They have seen, that neither the open force of Conjured
persons, strangers; nor the great Resistance of ill disposed Frenchmen;
Barrenes nor the Plague; could hinder the King from being the Liberator of
Italy, as He has been the Restorer of France.

But how has the Prudence of that Great Minister of State shined in the
Dispute of the Authority of the Pope, which had been awakened some years since
amongst us? How dexterous has he been in the Manadgement of a Matter so
dangerous? How very happy in laying dead that Quarrel which shall ever be
fatal to Religion, and which cannot be deterred but by opening the door to
Schism? He alone found the Expedients to pacify the Sorbone, which was in
Tumult on that Subject. To re-joynt the body which was torn in parts; To
reduce opinions, too much flattered; To content the Pope, and to preserve our
Liberties and the Rights of the Crown. This action was so necessary, that
without it our Affairs had never taken a Course so advantageous as they did,
and so difficult, that I dare affirm, It could not have been done but by a
principal Minister of State, by a Prince of the Church, by a great Theologian,
and excellent Politician altogether.

The Eleventh Discourse.
Considerations upon the precedent Discourse.
WHat I have said in the Precedent Discourse is not to Condemn the wealth of
the Church, but to blame them that abuse it; Nor, to conclude, that she is not
ever the same though she was born poor, and that she is now rich; That Charity
is diminished: That the Manners of the greatest part of particular persons is
Degenerated; and that their Life's are contrary to theirs, who were the first of
the Faithful. It Is ever the same face, though the good Graces are not the
same, and the Color is gone; The figures remains; The features and
proportions leave it not, and it is still the same Soul which gives it Life; It Is
always the same River though its water is sometimes troubled and sometimes
clear, that it flows at one time and ebbs at another. The Channel is
permanent, The spring is fixed, and its Course tends always to the Sea which
is its first Original. There are in Religion, things, of an eternal
Substance; and there are, that may suffer Change and Alteration. And as the
beginnings of Nature are always weak, and perfection comes by degrees into her
works; so that which issues purely from the hand of God is usually perfect, and
if it stay not in that state; It Is the fragility of Man that alters it, and the
necessity of the Condition that makes the Change.

Since God determined that great Design of the purchase of men, and that he
would be the End and Means of their happiness; It was Convenient, that the
Church which he should establish, should be born poor. And, that the world
might know it to be his work; It was necessary that she should be raised by
Means, contrary to the ordinary; That she should triumph over Riches, in her
poverty; over Greatness, in Disdain; and over the Wsedome of the Age, in the
Ignorance of humane things: Otherwise truly, if it had come in Abundance; If
its Entry into the world had been environed with Glory; and the doctrine which
she brought, persuaded by the ornaments of Rhetorique and subtiltyes of
Philosophy; It had been under jealouzie with us: No person would have been
astonished at the progress It has made in so Little a time: and that it being
come out of a Corner of Palestine; It had passed in an instant to the uttermost
Bounds of the Earth, and penetrated even to a world severd from ours; No person
would have thought it strange, that Covetous Men should run after wealth; That
Ambition had followed Pomp, and that Eloquence played with the Credulity of
simple persons. That famous Impostor, who has found so many followers and
whose Errors entertain, as yet to this day, two thirds of our world; had been
alone, if he had been poor; and had never deceived the people if he had not
subdued them. It was the necessary, That Religion truly divine, had the marks
of the Principle from which She proceeds. That she comes Contrary to the Rules
of Prudence and establishes her self by that which ought to destroy her. But as
she has the Love of God for her End, and Charity for her Neighbor, and that
chiefly it ought to distinguish the disciples of Jesus Christ from the rest of
Men; It Is from thence happened, that the first Christians carried their Lands,
and Goods, to the foot of the Apostles, and stripped themselves of the
propriety which did belong to them; to make it Common to their brothers. A
permanent stock nevertheless of those offerings was not made. They did only
pass, and were shared in Measure as they were received, and as in proportion
the Faithful had occasion. The flames of Charity since growing by the Number
of Converts, and the Goods which were daily offered to the Church being
extremely increased by that Multiplication; It was judged expedient to preserve
the stock, and that the distribution of the Revenue might serve to maintain
the Pastors, and to relieve the poor. This order was introduced even in the
time of the Apostles, as we may conjecture, or a little after. In conclusion,
the stock which made a great sum was divided into proportions, and the
portions assigned to them who served the Church, and constantly applied to
other uses, and without being any more mingled or Confounded. This order has
lasted to our time; And how holy or unlawful the use of the goods of the
Church has been in the hands of particular Men; It Is at least not to be
doubted but that the Charity of the Givers has been precious before God, and
their zeal extremely meritorious. But moreover I say, that after the Golden Age
of Christendom, and that very happy time wherein they only knew Jesus Christ
crucified; and when from the Poverty and Abjection of the faithful, Miracles
were seen t'arise: It has not been Inconvenient That the Church should be
rich. And since for the future the supernatural means which have founded it,
ought to be in great Esteem with Men, God has also Consented that the Church
should draw wealth from abroad; Advantages which should render it the more
Venerable; and hold the people who regard not much more then the Exterior, and
are not moved but by the objects of sense, into respect that is due unto it.

But with Riches, they say, a thousand Evils passed into the Church; Vanity
and delicacies put themselves into the Throne of virtue: The Charity of our
Fathers is become the food of the profusion of our Nephews, and the poor dye
for hunger; whilst they that ought t'ingage their Lives for them, leave them
not their Substance. To this I answer, that although they are vicious
Ecclesiastiques, because they are rich, and that in many the License of Manners
grows from the Abundance of Goods; It follows not therefore, that the Church
ought to be robbed: That this is common to them with all good things, to be
exposed t'ill usage in the hands of wicked persons. That the Sacraments are not
to be abolished, because there are Men that commit sacrilege; That God does
not deface the beauty of Nature, because it serves for an occasion of sin to
the weak; and no person is bound to pull out his Eyes when they are unchaste,
and are ravished by forbidden Objects and dishonest Curiosities. There are
Churchmen spoiled, which would have been honest Men if they had not been rich;
And there are whose Life is full of Edifying and of exemplary Charity, whose
virtue would be concealed in poverty and unprofitable Holiness. Poverty and
Riches are of themselves a Matter without Form; They are susceptible of
Contrary impressions; They may receive the Figure of Good and Ill, and neither
of these things has any Merit, if Charity does not raise it. But the number is
said greater of the Abuses of Riches in the Church, than of them that make good
use of them, and the intentions of them that have given them is oftener
perverted than executed. To that I also answer, that, It being supposed for
truth, it follows not that the Church should be made poor; That God suffers the
iniquity of sinners, and the vices of the World, for some virtuous Actions,
that are therein exercised; That he makes his Sun to shine upon a multitude of
wicked, for a small number of Honest men that serve him; that he had forgiven
six thousand culpable Persons, if he had found Ten innocent persons in Sodom
and Gomorrah; And in the deluge which swallowed the World, if there had been in
it ten just Families, He had not, it may be, made that great Example of
Justice; So, both the order of things, and conduct of providence persuade us
that Riches ought not to be banished from the Church for the abuses at whose
birth they serve for an occasion; since they are the cause of a number of good
Actions which are thereby done; That they serve the best of virtues which is
Charity; and it is certain that returning to the hands of secular persons, they
would be more dangerously employed, and would cause more ill, and less good,
than in the hands of Ecclesiastiques.

What concerns the purifying of the Ecclesiastique Order, and to restore it to
its first beauty, and its original innocence, it is a thing easter to be
desired than done, and which is not neither the work of a little time, nor of
the common force of men. It were to leap from one Extreme to another. To pass
suddenly to such a severe Reformation; It were to put new Wine into Old
Vessels, and to sew New Cloth to a torn Garment, (following the parable of
our Lord): And in driving away of Devils, the custom whereof had taken away
what was most offensive which is the scandal; To introduce greater, by filling
their spirits with sharpness, and the World with Tumults. The Alteration is so
general, the Interests of temporal Princes are so confounded with the
interests of the Church, and the greatest part of men so fastened to their
present condition; That it would cost God less to raise the Dead, than reduce
things to the state of their birth, and bring back all Christians to to the
Aunc ent Discipline. It suffices, That in what state soever the Church is
found, every person may find salvation there, If he will; and that out of it,
none can avoid Damnation; It Is nevertheless true, that as it is to purpose,
that the Miracles where upon the Church has been founded, be sometimes
renewed, and that the belief of things past be confirmed by some present
Sign; so though the Ecclesiastical Order has received some stains, and lost
its purity in some of its Members; God always raises some good souls which
without forsaking of the Church, sever from the corruption of particular Men,
and express in their life's the Image of that great Virtue, which appeared, at
the birth of Christianity; and which was common to the first faithful persons.

Considerations upon the Behaviors of Popes and their Agents which may serve
for forewarnings to the Ministers of State of other Princes, who shall have
occasion to treat with them.
THough the following Discourse might have been handled more commodiously in
the second part of this Work, where I show at large how a Minister of State
ought to act with Strangers; Nevertheless, to keep such matters together which
are best understood, when they are joined, and not to weaken the light they
draw one from another; I will place here at one time, what I had to say upon
the subject of Popes, and upon the precautions wherewith their advises ought to
be received, and they and their Ministers of State treated withal.

I say then, that although the Popes of the first ages, had only very pure
thoughts and affections of fathers toward Princes who were their Children;
Nevertheless since they have assumed another Quality than that whereby they
represent Jesus Christ; That they have mingled the Interests of the Church with
them of the World. And that the Crown they carry has as many Diamonds as
Thorns; Some of them have been found to have a Zeal very unlike to that of the
first Popes, who have followed other motions, then the effects of that Virtue
which makes no Acceptance of persons; Who have burnt in the passions of the
World; From Shepherds (as they ought to have been) were changed into Wolves,
and have sometimes made Abomination to arise even into the Sanctuary; And not
to go out of the two last Ages. Alexander the sixth; did he ever discover any
other passion to the world then that of, making great his Children? was there
any means refused to gain that end? did he not for the love of it abuse,
profane and divine things? Did he not break all the Laws of Christianity? all
of nature, and all the rights of humane society to make his second Son to
Reign? Briefly, Treasons, secret Murders, Poysonings and perjuries were his
Manners and Habits; If Historians may be believed. Let Us pass to Jules the
second, successor to Alexander. His Life indeed was not so black nor his
conduct so Criminal as the other's was; He was nevertheless possessed with so
furious an appetite of making War; and with so violent a desire of extending
the Ecclesiastical revenue, That he suffered not Italy nor other Princes to
rest; and he could never find that peace, which God gives and the world gives
not, because he sought it in the midst of Arms, by Ambition, and in Tumults.
The heat wherewith he persecuted Lewis the twelfth, and the pretext he furnished
Ferdinand of Castile withal to usurp. Navarre, will deliver his name for ever
with an ill Character to the French, and his Memory odious.

Leon the tenth had excess of passion for his Relations, whereof many Popes
have been sick. The prodigalities used in their behalf; The goods of the
Church he not only gave them, but poured them our upon them with full hands,
and exhausted them without measure: And the Present he made his Sister of the
profits of the Indulgences, which should be preached in the Duchy of Saxe; were
the petext of Luther's Apostasy, and the cause of the Schism in Germany, and of
the Fire that has burnt the North. What did not Clement the seventh for the
greatness of his House, and to secure the State of Florence In the Family of
the Medicis? How often did he quit for that design that indifferent and free
spirit which Popes ought to have? And how compleasant did he make himself to
the Ambition of Charles the fifth, t'enter his Nephew into his Alliance; and to
make him Duke of Toscany? what did he not in love to the Marriage of his Niece,
Catherine of Medicis, with the Duke of Orleans? Insomuch that if his Life was
unfortunate, and agitated with great Tempests; It may at least be said, that
his last days were serene and fair; that he gained the Haven in Triumph, and
that he dyed full of the prosperities of his House so much desired; The same
defect also has been observed in the Life of Paul the third, and his Virtue,
which otherwise was very pure, had that stain That he procured with too great
violence the greatness of the House of Farnese whence he issued, and did too
much apply himself to the humor of Charles the Emperor to put his Nephews in
possession of the states of Pleasance and Parma, and to surmount the resistance
the Emperor made for the pretentions of the Empire.

But when the Intentions of the Popes which should be ever good, and their
Wills in an inviolable Justness: when their Zeal shall have no other heat then
what Duty inspires, and the Love of justice communicates; Their understandings
may be prepossessed. They may do it with a good faith; They may wander thinking
to be in the Right way and satisfy the passions of their Kindred believing to
satisfy their Charge; The state Ecclesiastique is now governed in such sort,
that the Popes ease themselves of the greatest part of their Affairs upon
their Nephews. The Cardinals who out of Council seem to be the Natural
Members of that head, and should help to sustain the weight of the Monarchy;
signify now almost no more then to improve the Majesty of the Holy Chair. The
knowledge of Affairs is almost denied them, and if they are sometimes proposed
to the Conclave, it is rather to give Authority by their Approbation of what is
done, than to resolve it by their suffrages.

This proceedings, which on the sudden may seem strange, is not without ground
or appearance of Reason; Amongst the Cardinals some are natural Subjects of
Princes, to whom besides the Duty of birth, they owe also their fortune and
also their promotion; and the Glory of the Purple they wear, is a Beauty which
belongs not to them but by reflection; and was borrowed by their Masters from
the Holy Chair to be Communicated unto them. And by consequence it is no wonder,
If they are bound only to their Interests; If they follow only their
Inclinations, and labor only for their Glory, and the good of their Affairs;
Or they are Children of some petty Sovereign, and therefore full of the
humors of their House; of desire to make it Great; and in the same dependancy
with it; To conclude, the greatest part of them, who from a Mean or low birth
attain that high Dignity; depend upon great temporal Powers, either by
benefits received, or by gift of pensions, or by hopes wherewith they hold
them fast. There Is the state of Venice only, which never gave themselves up to
that practice, and which has ever neglected to make themselves great in the
Conclave. It Is at no charges to gain Cardinals, and contents it self to
Command them of their States which are never above Two at a time, and pass
Ordinarily into separated Interests from theirs though not Contrary. These
passions then and those dependancies change the wills of Popes in regard of the
Cardinals; Make all their offices suspected to him, and cause the Resolution of
Affairs, to be reduced to him and his Relations, or to some of his Creatures,
whose faithfullness he has tried, and whose Abilities are esteemed by him.

But that great Authority which Popes deliver up to their Nephews, and the
power of the Holy Chair, The disposition whereof they very often leave entire
and free unto them, are not ever governed by pure hands; It Is hard, though not
impossible, that the zeal of the general good should entirely possess them
who are not public persons but by participation, It Is hard to forget ones
proper Condition, and to have no Motions but of what a Man is not: It Is hard to
betray self Love, and to separate wholly from ones self, and it is to no
purpose to shut up the highways to interested Designs and to particular
Ends. They will light at our Houses if we are not infinitely virtuous, by some
stolen Path, or by a secret Address; The Intentions of the Pope may be holy,
but the Intentions of the Nephews may be unholy. And if that be so, what
expedient is there to stay the Contagion with them, and that it infect not the
Pope? What defense against an Evil, that admits not of Preservatives? To
answer for what one sees, if no sight be had but by the sight of others? To see
a thing as it is; if the outside be disguised? If the Appearances have been
Changed, and if the sellers of paint and plaster, who are many in great
Courts, have prepared it before it be showed? But to gain sometimes the
Nephews and corrupt the Agents employed by them, in the Quarrels of Princes;
the way is open to them who can do good and promise Recompenses. For so soon as
the Pope is mounted into the throne which draws him so near to God, and
places him so much above other Men; It seems to the greatest part of his
Relations, that they cannot with modesty stay in the crowd nor in the obscurity
of particular persons, so long as th'Uncle or the Brother is encompassed with
the greatest Lights of the world; And therefore some of them are tenacious of
all that may establish the greatness of their house, and raise them to the
State of their Ambition. The Spaniards, understand better then all the Nations
of the world these practices, and have larger Means to exercise them then any
other Nation. The Pensions which they distribute without Measure; The Livings
they have to confer in their States of Italy, and to the Advantage of them
that act at the Court of Rome; The Means to advance their Relations to
th'Offices of Peace and War. Th'Estates which they sometimes give them, or
make the purchase thereof easy unto them, and Advantageous, and Rich Marriages
which they procure for them; are strange Engines to Shake the Probity of
Italians, if it be not very well Confirmed. The marriage of the Heir of the
house of Jesualde of the most famous of the kingdom of Naples, against the
express Clauses of he father's Will, which Gregory the fifteenth dispensed in
favor of one of his Nephews; gave the entry to the Spaniards into the
Valtoline, rendered them Masters of that Valley under the name of another power,
gave that great wound to Italy, and the Arms of Holy Peter aided there to
advance the Ambition of Spain, and to weaken the Liberty of a Province where
they are adored. And Moreover when hopes are weak to draw a person to their
party, They then add fear; It Is not possible, but that the one or the other of
those Passions may have its Effect, and they that resist their gifts and
promises in relation to their Interests, are careful at least not to justle
them, the better to avoid the Tempests which they raise, and the Persecutions
they stir up. Besides the Resistance they give them who aspire the Pontificate
when they are of a Contrary Inclination, They have yet other Expedients to make
themselves to be feared. I will not believe that they were the Principal Cause
of the unfortunate Ends of the Caraffes. All three were hanged.
The deportments wherewith they abused the Authority of their Uncle. The Evils
wherein they plunged Christendom by their ungoverned Ambition: The fire which
they kindled in the State Ecclesiastique, and which endangered the destruction
of it.

In short, all that a great power armed with Impunity could produce of fatal,
gave but too much foundation for Justice, to make so great an Ensample. But
it is true also, that the Contrivances of Spain, and the Ardent pursuits which
their Agents made against them, did not abate the spirit of the Judges, nor the
Rigor of the sentence; But without that, the persecution wherewith they
agitated the Cardinal Aldobrandin after the Death of Clement the Eighth, and
the little safety he had also for his person, till he had suppled them by
Imploring their Aid; Make out clear Evidences how dangerous a thing it is to
have been their Enemy, or not to have been for them which is almost the same
thing.

Presently after the coming of Paul the fifth, to the Pontificate, That
Cardinal found himself thrust at from so many places, and saw so many snares
laid about him, and so many plots formed for his destruction; that he was
constrained to leave Rome and to retire to Ravenna whereof he was Arch Bishop,
nor did he find there the safety he sought for; and the unexpected storms
which there did arise compelled him to leave that place where he was bound to
reside, and to provide for his safety by his flight. He retired then into
Piedmont whereby the Duke of Savoy who knew the original of his Evil, and the
Remedy that might heal it; who knew from what Corner the winds of the
persecution blew and the Means to appease them; Advised him to Cast himself
into the Arms of the King of Spain, and to employ his Mediation to reconcile
him to the Pope. No person is ignorant of the war they made to the Cardinal
Baronius, and with what obstinacy they assaulted him for clearing the Rights of
the Holy Chair to Sicily, and for publishing a truth they would have had
concealed. In that Treaty, where that learned Cardinal endeavors to prove that
the Body of St: Inques is not at Compostelle of Galico, They have truly
answered with Reasons and Proofs which much weaken the contrary opinion, and
make theirs very probable who support it by the belief of Christian Nations,
and ought to be known for public satisfaction. But in the Treaty of Sicily
they have re-parted with Fire, because, it may be, that reasons failed them,
and commanded the fourth Volume of the Annals of that great Person to be burnt
by the hand of a Hangman, to declare the doctrine it contained, criminal,
because it was not favorable to them. Truly, this evidence is to be rendered,
and praise to be given to the Spaniards; That there is not a Nation in the World
which has so violent jealousy, as they, for the Interests of their State, and
for the dignity of their Crown. And it must also be said, to the shame of ours,
that there are none so strongly laboring under a contrary passion, as the
greatest part of Frenchmen. I will report the causes of both, in the second
part.

Besides this, what did not the Spaniards in the Conclaves, where the suffrages
inclined to Baronius side to choose him Pope? What Artifices did they leaven
unattempted to oppose that promotion? What Efforts did they not employ to break
it, and what Engines did they not set a going t'overthrow it. The Cardinal of
Sourdis stormed, and made a noise to no purpose at their practices; The
greatest part of Honest men were scandalized, and desirous, to no better
effect, that the Church might be governed by a Person that had so much merited
from her. the wishes of honest persons were unprofitable. They sighed in vain
for so Holy an Election: Baronius his Enemies carried it, and the general
Interests of Christendom gave place to the particular Interest of Spain. These
Examples, and many others astonish them who upon other accounts have no
Inclination for that Nation, and the fear which every person has to procure
himself Evil is the cause that many are diverted from doing the good they
would, if liberty were not interdicted, and generosity assaulted by odious
means and by those violent ways. I will handle in the second part, Whether
Christian Princes ought in Conscience to meddle with the promotion of Popes,
and how.

The Thirteenth Discourse.
That the Mediation of Popes is very profitable in the differences of Christian
Princes, and in the Affairs of Christendom.
I Do not intend t'infer from the precedent discourse, that Princes ought to be
deprived of the Mediation of Popes nor to reject their offices when
Christendom is agitated, and that It Is Princes are in discord. I should be an
ill Logician to draw no better consequences, and it were t'act against all the
principles of Reason, and all the Maxims of Morality; To forbid the use of good
things for their cause that abuse them, To hinder good Superiors to do their
Duty, because the bad neglect it, and not enjoy the Beauty of the Sun, nor the
benefits of its Light because of the Eclipses which sometimes interpose, and
steal it away from the World. It Is true, that there have been wicked Popes,
and who have been the shame of the Holy Chair, and the scandal of Religion.
There have been of them who did not engage in th'Affairs of Princes, but to
trouble them; who brought only poison and fire against the diseases, and who
infected with their venom and breath, all that they touched: But all are not
of that Nature, all are not guided by that Spirit. There have been some very
honest Men, full of the spirit of God, who burn only with Holy Zeal, and having
been raised to that supreme Dignity, have renounced all affections of Blood,
for t'assume only the affections of common Fathers of Christians, and, of
incorruptible Arbiters of the affairs committed to them. And as they have the
heart very sound, and the will free from all irregular passion, some of them
also have the sight clear, and th'understanding much enlightened, having a
great intelligence of the things of the World, and that the goodness of their
understanding and the Employment they have had from other Popes, have put them
into a condition, neither to be deceived by the artifices of their Relations,
nor bewitched with strange illusions. The corruption also of their kindred, and
of their Ministers of State, is not so Universal, but that many are exempt,
and who mingle nothing of particular with the Zeal of public Rest, nor any
thing of Strangers with the instructions of their Masters.

And without considering, that the Holy Chair is the foundation wherein
Religion is supported, and that there is no salvation for the members who
abandon that Head; This Good arises to the Princes his Children. That his
Authority is much respected by them when it interposeth in their Affairs, and
that his offices are very powerful or very proper to determine their
Quarrels, when the fire is kindled betwixt the two great Crowns, and that
France and Spain make war. What power is either high enough or impartial
enough to interveine to put it our? who can have force enough, to retain those
two great Engines when they move, and to stop such Impetuous and rash Motions,
but the Holy Chair. Besides that the Empire has long stood without its first
Glory, and without any marks of its ancient Majesty, but the Name, Arms; Who
knows not that it depends on Spain, or is in Communion of Interests with it?
who knows not that it has withdrawn The Empire from the precipice wherein it
was falling; That it subsists not but by its subventions and Reliefes; and that
Charles the fifth left not a stronger Recommendation to his son, than to be
always in amity with his Cousins, though their friendship cost him very deer,
or to preserve it at an excessive price and with Immoderate Conditions.

For what concerns the Crown of England, which was heretofore the
Counterpoise of the other two, and Arbiter of their differences; It is no more
so proper, as it has been t'Act in their discords. Change of Religion has
spoiled it, it cannot entertain any good Intentions for the Catholics.
Having that venom on the heart, it cannot behold their prosperities with Eyes
entirely pure. Their good Intelligence ought to be suspected, and if it
advances sometimes toward Spain and sometimes toward France, It lasts so
little, and is done with such languishing Motions and so sudden a Return;
That it is very visible, that it is not a perfect Amity; it considers but a fancy
of Goodwill which presently disappeares and an abortive of Affection which is
produced by some light Cause; As to the Republique of Venice, It has truly
Wisdom, and Greatness enough, to labor in the Quarrels of the two Crowns;
But'tis so very Jealous of the power of the one, and so great an Enemy to their
Ambition, that their Endeavors would not be less suspected then th'offices of
a Declared Enemy. As for the other Princes of Italy and Germany, they are so
little or so dependant or so enstrainged from th'Inclination of Spain; That for
their sakes they would not forsake their Animosity, nor submit to their good
offices.

The Pope then remains the sole Mediator of their Discords. The Quality of
Children of the Church, which Catholic Princes do Glory in; obliges them to
honor Him who represents the Chief, and whatsoever jealousy of Honor they
labor under, they do no wrong to their Courage or Ambition, to submit to him
who is above them and Conjures them in the Name of Jesus Christ, by whom they
reign, not to despise the peace he has so much recommended. Those Princes
also, who are sometimes a weary of quarrelling, and to whom th'Evills of war
are dreadful, and the Misery of their subjects gives them cause of Pity, are
very willing to be invited to Rest, by so powerful Authority; It cannot be
denied, but that the peace of Vervins so necessary for Spain and profitable for
France, was the work of Clement the Eighth, and that Henry the Great and Philip
the Second had been much troubled to lay down Arms which weighed so heavily
on both parties, without so great an Interposer. I have said, that when Princes
are tired with Quarrels and emptied of Moneys and Men, or that they have in
other places more important Employments which they cannot attend but in quiting
the first; otherwise truly when Ambition is supported by force, and when the
appetite to Conquer is provoked by th'hope of victory; It Is hard to extinguish
it with Treaties, or to appease it by offices; To the greatest part of Princes
that make war, the same happens, as t'opinionated Lawyers, who cease not to
plead by Election but by Insufficiency, who owe their Rest to the poverty, and
not to the moderation of their spirit; and who stop not in going, but stand on
the way for want of Force to go further. Besides The Experience which we have
made of these last motions of Italy, we have memorable examples in the Life's of
Charles the fifth, and Francis the first. The state of Milan was the Love of
those two Princes, and the most violent objects of their Ambition. They both
burned with an Equal heat of possessing it, and the animosity which they
Conceived upon that subject one against another, was so great that neither time
nor men could ever evercome it, Paul the third spared not his person and
exposed himself to long journeies, to labor so necessary a Reconsiliation.
The inundations of the Turk from all parts upon Christians sufficiently
solicited The Emperor. And nevertheless nothing of that could bend them: They
resisted the prayers of the Pope: The miserable Condition of Christendom
touched them not; and that fatal obstinacy cost him besides the blood of his
Children, The loss of Rhodes and the diminution of the fairest portion of
Hungary.

Popes have not only lent their endeavors to Christendom to determine the
Quarrels of those Princes; But have also often aided in securing it from the
Ruin that threatened it, or to revenge its affronts or recover its Losses, had
it not been for their Mediations and Offices: the Protestants had finished the
defacing of it, or the Turks had subdued it, and God, who has chosen them to
be the visible Cheifs of the Church, has also ordained that they should be
sometimes the Liberators of the Country, where the Church is preserved; and
th'Instruments of temporal conservation to the people that do acknowledge her.
The most famous League the world ever saw was formed in the Council of
Clermont at th'Instance of Peter the Hermit and by The Authority of Urban the
second; Four hundred thousand fighting men put themselves under the command of
Godfrey of Buillon for the conquest the Holy Land. Christianity never
overflowed so largely as at that time, It never obtained such Eminent success;
and never so great a Number of adventurers, and voluntary Soldiers were so
long together for the same design, and with so much courage.

But not to go from the Age past, and from the things happened in the times of
our fathers; Who knows not that Paul the third was Author of the League was
made between the Venetians and Charles the Fifth to beat back Soliman who
threatened Italy, and to chastise Barbarosse, who robbed the Coasts. That if the
Christians suffered the victory to escape which they had in their hands, if
they would have taken it; If the Maritime power of the Turk was not abated at
that stroke; If Barbarosse was not destroyed at Prevese, as he might have
been; The cause must be attributed to Andre Doria, as I have said in another
place. It seemed, that these two Pirates had shared the Empire of the Sea, and
the one desired not the ruin of the other for fear of being less
considerable to his Master, when he had defeated his Enemies, and to lose
credit with the loss of exercise: Barbarosse also repayed the Courtesy and
gave the revenge to Doria near Villa Franca where he would not destroy him, as
it was easy for him after a Wrack, nor pursue his Ships which the Tempests had
scattered. It may be also there was some hidden Cause, and some concealed
Motive from the Emperor, for which reason he sought not Victory in the League
we speak of, but the retrayte of his enemies, and cessation of the War. I will
treat of this matter in the second part, in the treaty of Leagues.

Pius the fourth, laid the foundation of the League for the relief of Cyprus,
which was concluded under Pius the fourth, That if it was not fortunate enough;
If the hopes conceived faild of their principal End, and if Cyprus was lost
for want of relief; The delays the Spaniards bring t'all their undertakings;
The tempests that were frequent that year upon the Sea; The Plague which
emptied the vessels of the Venetians; and a secret disposition of the Heavens,
that afflicted the Republique, were the causes of that Disgrace; The League
nevertheless was profitable, and past-ages nor all the powers of the ancients
did not produce upon the Levant Sea any thing so memorable as the Battle of
Cursolary; That, if the Christians had not betrayed themselves; If the would
have made use of the victory, and have followed the fortune Constantinople and
the Levant offered them; we had been largely repaired for the losses we have
lately received. We ware Masters of the Mediterranean Sea, the Turk was
reduced to the Land, and the Virtue of Don John of Austria might have given
hopes to Spain, not t'envy France the glory of its Godfrey, and the good
success of it is Armies. But the distrust the Venetians had of the Spaniards,
and the Experience they had made under Charles the fifth, in the taking of
Chasteauneuf, how unjust observers they were of the agreements of Leagues; On
the other side, the jealousy the Spaniards had, that the Ruin of the Turk,
was the greatning of the Venetians, That they would gather the best pieces of
his overthrow, and the principal fruit of the War; That having no cause to
fear the forces of the Turk, they would the less consider the Spanish
strength; and becoming more powerful, they might the more cross them in
their designs for Italy; That, I say, corrupted the victory and frustrated the
hopes of Christendom and the attempt of the World. They that know the humors
of Princes, what the reasons of State are, and the nature of Leagues, will not
think that strange which I have now said.

However we have drawn two notable advantages from the victory of Lepantha.
The One is, that if we have not been wise enough to make profit of the Good
offered us, we have been sufficiently happy in avoiding th'Evills which
threatened us, if the forces of the Turk had not been shattered, and that
formidable Fleet dissipated which covered all the Gulf of Venice with
Crescents and the lower Sea of Italy. The other advantage is, that we have
given him to understand, that if his forces are greater then those of a single
Prince; they are inferior to the forces of united Christendom. And if by a
design worthy the name they bear, they combine together against him, his
Greatness in a small time would be humbled, the Crescent shattered, and
himself sent to the bottom of Soythia, from whence he took his original. The
continuation of the League, and the good Fortune of Christendom, dyed with the
Life of Pius the fifth, and if his successor had had as much Zeal as he to
maintain it; He was not happy enough to support it, for he had the displeasure
to know, that the Venetians had broken it, and was agreed with Selim without
the knowledge of their Confederates; whether they had Reason or not, I will
discourse in the Second part, where I will examine the Causes of the Treaty of
Moncon, which we made some years past upon the business of the Valtoline.

For what concerns the wars at Land, It Is very well known, what Popes have
done against the Common enemy of Christians, and against Heretics. In the
second Expedition of Soliman against Vienna, and in th'heat which possessed him
to purge off the shame of the first Expedition, It was necessary that
Christendom should employ all her forces; That her rest was to be set up and
oppose its greatest power to a Conqueror, whom Spite and Ambition animated to
her Ruin; It must be confessed, that in this Occasion Charles the fifth was
truly the Caesar of Christians, and that he fought for Religion in defending
his patrimony. But it must also be confessed, that the Cares of the Pope were
very sedulous to send him forces; To solicit for him in all parts, and to put
him into a Condition to receive that formidable Adversary; So Soliman, as
powerful as he was, durst not advance toward him; He durst not put his Glory
to Competition with that of Charles; And as religious as he was, He brake the
Oath he had made, Neverto return to Constantinople but as Conqueror of Vienna,
and laden with the spoils of Austria.

So soon as the Heresy of Luther multiplied and felt it self powerful, It
appeared rebellious. All the Septentrionals almostconspired against the
Emperor; nothing was ever seen so proud as that League, because it was very
strong. The Standards of the Commanders were filled with proud Mottoes and with
threatening words; And two Great persons the one for the war, and the other for
the Intricacyes of affairs, which were the Duke of Saxe and the Langrave of
Hessen, made up the soul and gave it Motion. The Emperor in appearance ought to
be suppressed with the storm that surprised him, and religion to have suffered
final shipwreck in Germany; so truly it had happened, if the Pope had not run to
his relief. The forces which Paul the third sent him under the Command of his
Nephew, were the sinews of Charles the fifth's Army. And with that
re-enforcement which consisted of ten thousand chosen men; That great Leavy of
men was dissipated. The Duke of Saxe was taken prisoner after he was overcome;
The rebellious Cities opened their Gates to the victorious, and the Victory was
at the issue the Pope desired it; who apprehended, for the Interest of
religion, the progress of protestants Arms; and th'too great prosperity of
the Emperor, for the Interest of Italy; These latter years when Heresy
overflowed at the Diet of Worms, and that it proposed to change religion in
all places, with the Change of States; All Germany almost conspired in this
Design; and the forces which ought to have been Employed against the Turk and
for the Recovery of Hungary, were turned against the house of Austria, because it
was Catholic or too ambitious. The revolt of Bohemia, and th'Election of the
Count Palatine; The show of their first Arms, and the weakeness of the
Emperor, gave fear the other Catholics, and raised the Courage of the other
Protestants in Europe; Italy was then threatened, Rome was also devoured in
hopes; Babylon, said they, must be purged, and that which had been so long the
principal seat of Religion, ought to be the principal seat of Heresy; In
this public Consternation of Catholics, and in the fear of more tragical
Events; This Evidence is to be given to the Holy Chair, That eminent Reliefes
were raised against the Evils which happned, and against them that were
feared; and that the Catholic League of Germany, has been principally
the effect of the Popes Authority and zeal. And truly it has been so happy,
and God so visibly declared in its favor, that we should be troubled to
believe the prosperities which happned, if we had not seen them; and nothing
has fallen out more Contrary to humane Discourse, and to the show of things
than the Ruin of the Palatine and the resurrection of the Emperor.

The Fourteenth Discourse.
Of the Prudence which ought to be observed in treating with the Agents of the
Pope, and whether it be Lawful to use dissimulation, and How.
THough it be easy to infer from the precedent Discourse, How necessary it is
that the Pope interpose in the Quarrels of Princes, and that he be made the
Mediator of their Discords; It Is easy also to conclude with what circumspection
their Agents are to be treated with. Another Minister of State then, treating
with them, ought never to be free from distrust; which assures business; which
avoydes snares; which defends from surprises, and leaves not deceit in the
power of deceivers. That he takes it for Certain, That they are persons who
bring Art to all they do and never descend to Action but well prepared; Who are
Enemies to Impetuosity, and ordinarily have no violent passion which Confoundes
Discourse and disorders Reason; That of all the humors whereof the body is
composed, esteem nothing so much as Phlegm; nor of all the virtues that enter
into affairs, as Patience for to tire them: He ought to know, that they lose
nothing, and make profit of all, That sometimes they go back, to advance the
better; That the last thing they discover, is their first Intention. That they
turn the back, where they would salute; as they do, who row: And though the
straight lines are the shortest, they love the oblique better to attain their
Ends, and to hit the Mark they propose to themselves.

He ought then to be prepared against their Art and against all their Cringes:
But he must in such a manner regulate his behavior and govern himself with
such a Temper, that he never make Discovery of his Distrust; That he make show
of free deportment, and that the outward Appearance make out nothing but
freedom. He must fortify the Entries of Conferences with the opinion he has
of the Integrity of him with whom he treats, of the uprightness of his
Intentions, and of the purity of his zeal for the public Good. He must give
him also a taste of His Master's Inclination, If he be our friend that he may
observe it, or that of his family, if it have passion for us, that he may not
depart from it. From this open Action and free proceeding in show of design
and artifice, of three things one will arise; either Impression will be made on
his will; an Entry on his soul; or an Insinuation into his Inclinations, which
will be an augury for us, of the good success of the affair. It Is a point which
they ought ever to aim at, who manadge business, and that they may assure
themselves, that so soon as they have gained the will of any person, they
become Masters of his reason, and understanding. It Is strange what power the
second Faculty of the soul, has, which is, to speak truth, nothing but heat
and affection, above the first Faculty, which is Light and Intelligence. When
she pleases, she draws her by whom she ought to the guided; she makes her
walk after her desires, though she ought not to moved but by her discourses;
She makes her find painting and dresses, for the ugly things she has Love for,
she makes her disguise, under the appearance of true, a lie which she will
follow; and under the appearance of Good, the injustice which she will
practice, This rule ought inviolably to be observed in all Negotiations, that
they may be happy, That they benot manadged by persons that have aversion for
one another. The second is, that if the person with whom one has to do, stands
firm and suffers not himself to be shaken by that kind of freedom and
compleasancy. If he resists that charm and catch not at that bit, He will be
the less on his guard when nothing shall be suspected by him. He will be
easier tasted, he will breathe out some words to manifest his thoughts, and it
may happen to him as to strong places and well provided for, which are
sometimes lost by too great confidence had in their Forces, and by the little
care is used to preserve them, believing that there is no need of it; To
conclude, if some profitable use be not made of this Conduct, the mischief
which attends an open Distrust, at least, will be avoided which is ever
injurious to him in whose behalf it is exercised, which would raise in him
sharp thoughts against us; and would draw th'Inconveniences we would avoid; or
divert the successes which we believe, not t'owe to the Good Will of another
and to his industry, but to our subtelty, and to our address.

Two things also are to be remembered, The One that the Art which I advise is not
Art, if it be not concealed; and that it works an effect contrary to what a
man proposes to himself, so soon as it has taken Air. This so beneficial
confidence then, is to be expressed without affectation and excess. Otherwise
truly, when it makes a noise and is irregular, when it speaks loud, and makes
its action too pressing, It Is suspected of some design; it engenders distrust
and creates a belief of the contrary he would persuade, And in this
particularly, That excellent Rule in Logic is to be observed; That who proves
too much proves nothing, or that good word of the Ancients, That nothing be
done too much, or that advice of St. Paul, To be wise to sobriety and with
measure. The Excess of complements wherewith the Court is infected and
th'Irregularity of Tatling which receives neither exception nor bounds, are
certain proofs of what I have now said. So there are none but fools and new
comers, that delight in it; able persons believe ordinarily the contrary, and
seek the truth of intentions in the contradiction of words. The Other thing
particularly to be observed, is, Not to employ this Art indifferently, and to
all the uses whereunto is proper; Not to make use of it t'assault, but to
defend ones self; Not to deceive, but to secure from deceit; and not to make a
poison of what ought to be a preservative. According to this sense, It Is also
true, that dissimulation is permitted, and That whosoever knows not how to
Dissemble, knows not how to Reign. The foundation of this opinion is, that
though lying be forbidden, and that it is a thing unworthy of man, and a
villainous perspective in his demeanor; That the exterior should contradict the
Interior; That the Tongue should belly the Heart, and that the Word should
betray the thought, whereof it is The Image and Character; It Is so, That no
person is bound always to declare his sense, to retayle all that is in the
soul; To make the first commer his confessor and his Judge, and it is certain
that God has as well recommended silence to us to conceal Dangerous truths,
as he has given us speech to publish the Necessary Truths.

The dissimulation which tends to the Ruin of ones Neighbor, and serves for a
cover to injustice, ought to be shunned of honest people. And what gain soever
it proposes, and with what hopes of recompense it is attired; She cannot
repair the evil of the breach of the bond of public Faith, and of
overthrowing the foundation of human Society; It Is a false prudence which the
Ancients have condemned; which the light of nature detests; which takes away
credit from man, and makes even his good Actions to be suspected. In a word, it
destroys ordinarily them that make use of it, and those double spirits and
subtle motions are often seen to fall into the snares they have prepared for
others, and into the precipice they have dug for them. They who teach this
doctrine, and make science of deceit, propose examples, which are capable to
divert a Man, and the tragical ends wherewith she is diverted make it appear;
That when the justice of men fails, God at least fails not to interpose his
justice; To catch the Wise in their Wiles, and the Cautious in their Malice.
The conduct of Caesar Borgia which was the Model of Machavell's Prince, and
that villainous Original whereof he made so dangerous a Copy, had in the
beginning some considerable success; But God who had permitted that person to
be borne in his wrath and to punish the sins of Italy, and to be the Flayle of
them that were less wicked then himself; abandoned him at last to justice;
Took his judgment from him for destruction, permitted that no faith should be
observed to him who had so often broken it; That he who was so distrustful
became Credulous, and was blind to the Nets the great Captain laid for him.

Italy, as it is the Theater of great vices and virtues, gave a little before
another great Example of the same nature. Lodwick Sforsa believed himself the
subtillest person of his times; His Picture and Devises retained ever some
mark of that vanity and all his entertainments are filled with that folly. He
made profession to lead the great persons of Europe whither he listed; To have
in his hands the Peace and War of other Nations, and to have been more
powerful with his wit and address, then the Conquerours were with their Force
and Armies. It happened at last, that he who had overthrown the peace of Italy,
wherein she reposed, to satisfy his ambition; who had so often broken his
Confederacies and Alliances; and had opened the way to Soveraignry by Poison
and Parricides; that he, I say, besides the great Disgraces which vexed his
Life, was betrayed at Navarre by the Suisses that were paid by him; sold to
the French that made war with him; Imprisoned in the Tower of Loches; and for
ten years together served for a spectacle to all Europe of the frailty of
greatness, and of the Inconstancy of worldly things.

Our History is not unfurnished of illustrious examples in this subject.
Charles of Navarre who had neither Faith nor Religion; who was the Firebrand of
France and the perpetual disturber of its rest; who so often played upon the
easiness of the people with his Eloquence, and so often abused the gifts of
the Spirit which were admirable in him, to afflict this Kingdom; with how many
evils did he see himself pursued? His Quality of Prince did not exempt him
from poverty nor prison; He was eaten with long and sharp sickness, and at
last Fire consumed him by the Imprudence of a servant, with a Cloth wet in
Aqua-vitae. The Constable of Saint Paul subsisted long in the dissimulation he
completely practiced: but in long running his Art ruined him, and desiring to
make use at one and the same time of two contrary parties, He was so deserted
by the one and sacrificed to the other. Truly if deceits and wicked ways were
not subject to violent accidents, and to such fatal conclusions, the
Ignorance, or Corruption of men is very strange, to help of nature the ways of
reigning, and to destroy their affairs which they might find more certain, and
honorable with prudence and discourse; what pity it is that so many
experiences which have preceded cannot make them understand, that if virtue be
sometimes unhappy, it is always esteemed; That it rises oftener then Malice,
when it falls, and that the good fortune of this consists not in the souls of
them that exercise it, but in the opinion of them, that behold only the
Exterior which covers it, and the superficies that does surround it.

The Fifthtenth Discourse.
Whether it be lawful to make War with the Pope; Wherein the Demeanor which
Phillip the second, observed in the War he made is Commended, and that of
Charles the fifth Condemned.
TO resolve this matter well, and give it a full day and a perfect Cleerenesse;
It Is necessary to make use of the Metaphysicall abstractions, and to
distinguish the things which are effectively joined with the Spirit; But are
truly diverse, and have nothing of common but the subject which holds them, and
the stock on which they are grafted. The Popes then are not now to be
considered as Vicars of Jesus Ghrist, Who has protested that his Kingdom was
not of this world, but as Princes of the Earth, and Lords of certain States in
Italy and in the country of Provance.

That being supposed, I say in the first place; that it seems that they who
have given these Estates to the Church could not bestow them with other
Intentions, than as they did enjoy them, and subject to the same inconveniences
they were in the time of their enjoying them. And therefore the Popes, which
enjoy them are not exempt from the right of Nations, no more then the first
Masters of those estates, and that they ought to propose to themselves;
Besides, that injustice is more odious in them then in other persons, who ought
to act only by charity; 'That it is permitted the other Sovereigns to do Justice
themselves, when it cannot be obtained of them, and that they abuse to the
ruin of men, to temporal power they have received from men. So when Paul the
fourth declared War against Phillip the second and would take away the Kingdom
of Naples from him, to give it the one of his Nephews; The advise of the most
eminent Theologians of Spain and Flanders, and amongst others of Melchior
Canus Porta, was; That he ought not only to attend in his dominions, the Popes
Forces, and beat them back; but that he might also with a good conscience enter
upon the Lands of the Church by way of diversion, and to prevent the storm
which was raised against his Territories.

I say, nevertheless, that here distinction must be used, and it is very
probable, that a War purely offensive against the Pope may not singly be
undertaken; That there is no title of just War, nor consideration of State,
which can dispense a Prince to retain with conscience, what he has gained in
justice from the Holy Chair, and that consequences are not to be drawn from
what intervenes in the Commerce of Princes purely temporal, and in the
Quarrels they have together in relation to what respects the good of the
Church, and the Revenue of St. Peter. The Reason is, that insomuch that amongst
the first, it is sufficient that the War be probably just t'authorise the
conquests that are made, and make the possession lawful of what is gained.
Which happens not in the Wars that are made to Popes. To make out the true
difference, it is of importance to stay a little upon this doleful matter, and
to descend even to the Root of that justice, and to the final cause which
makes the War lawful. The Sovereign Princes who have no superiors on Earth,
who hold only of God by themselves, and are independent as to all other men,
are dependent as Justice. And therefore so often as they violate that Virtue, and
break that Divine bond, which sustains The Order of the World; Another Prince
which shall be wronged, may repair himself of the wrong he suffers, and
satisfy himself with his own hands. And in this, Conscience is safe, and the
Wars, mads to repulse violence, are agreeable to God, and the blood there
spilt a sacrifice of a good Odor before his Divine Majesty. Wherefore in the
Ancient Law he has stirred up his people to Arm themselves, and to fight; and
he has not disdained amongst his most Magnificent Qualities and most glorious
Titles to assume that of God of the Armies.

This at first seems strange by reason of th'Inclination Man ought to have to
sweetness and peace; And since it is not seen that Beasts are greedy of the
blood of their kind, nor Tigers cruel against Tigers; There Is cause of great
amazement that men should be so ingenious to destroy one another, and so fierce
to ruin their very kind, That the noblest of all Virtues is Valor, and that
of making war the most famous Art. That the glory of Alexander and Caesar
needed two Millions of Life's, to rise to the height it is at; And that ancient
Rome allowed not the triumph but to the Murderers of all most a whole Nation,
and to them who had depopulated a Country of the Flower of their Inhabitants,
and poured out the Noblest blood of a Province. That would truly be strange, if
it was done by an Instinct of Cruelty, If it proceed from a blind Envy, to
drink up humane blood; and was conducted by any other spirit then that of
Justice.

That if we make no Question to take Physic, To permit opening of veins, and
to make use also of Poison, and of fire t'heat our bodies; How much less
difficulty ought we make to employ violent Remedies when gentle are
unprofitable, and that there is no other provision to be made against the
Irregularities of Princes and of people, nor to Maintain justice which is the
health of States, and the soul of the politic Body. That if what sovereign
Princes practice in the person of their subjects, and the Example they make of
their Crimes are, agreeable to God, and necessary for the world; How much more
ought that to be just, which they exercise against other Princes, and is of the
more General faults, and concern all the Nations of the Earth in Consequence,
and an infinite of particular persons in their private Interest. It were well
to be wished, That of two parts which Compose the distributive; The world knew
only that which gives Crowns to virtue, and Recompenses to Merit: But since
Corrupted nature enclines more to evil than to good, and that the objects of
virtue are not so frequent and active, as those of vice; That part of justice,
which distributes punishment, has by Consequent a more necessary use and more
extended then the other; and Sovereigns ought no more to be exempted, then
particular persons, since they are alike faulty, and more dangerously Culpable.
It Is the reason God has put the sword into their hands, and has Commanded
that they should have power to punish, not only the Criminalls of their
states, but also to revenge the injuryes done them, and require reason
themselves of other Sovereigns, which had offended them, since they have no
superiors, as particular persons who do the wrong.

I speak here of the wrongs which one Sovereign does to another; For what
concerns the Sovereign to the subject, it is a business which other Sovereigns
have nothing to do with, but to behold; as not submitted to the Jurisdiction of
any person, and what God has reserved for his Tribunal and for his Justice;
when the power is Legitimate the use may be violent, without being Lawful, for
any person whatsoever to alter it with force. The people who are oppressed,
have nothing but prayers to divert it, or Patience to suffer it; Beyond that,
there is no Resistance just, nor exception to be admitted. The Duty regardes not
the person of Princes, but the Authority God has put into their hands. The bad
as the good possess it; and therefore he wills, that we acknowledge them
equally, and reverence, as The Image of his power, them whom we cannot love as
the Image of his bounty. The result of what has been said, is, that a
Sovereign may sometimes strip another Sovereign without injustice; That the
states of the one, may be the price and matter of Reparation for another that
has been offended; or of the Expense which he has made in the pursuit; and
that there is nothing Committed, against the order of things, if Innocent
subjects suffer for the faults of their Masters. That they partake of his
Evils, as of his Benefits and receive the badas good influences of the head
whereof they are members. But for what concerns Popes and the Patrimony of the
Holy Chair, The Considerations is very different; They have Privileges which
are not Common the other Princes, nor the other States. God extends to them a
Certain propriety, by reason of Jesus Christ, for whose Love they have been
given, which renders them unalienable, which are not to be usurped without
sacrilege, and above the Right of Nations, and those universal Laws to which
all Nations have consented for the General Good of the world. And it is not
always true, That the things which change Master cannot change Condition, and
take the Qualities of the last possessor which they had not with the former; If
the waters attract the virtues of the Mineralls by which they pass; If the
goodness of the soil communicates it self to the plants which are brought
thither, and gives them a grouth they had not in another; If the proprieties of
a Crown descend upon the Members which are united to it; And if Bretanny be
subject to the Salique Law since it was incorporated into France; why should
not the dignity of the Holy Chair infuse some what of particular to the States
which are belonging to it? Why should it remain Barren? why should it be
without virtue and action in that behalf? Why should not Holy things have some
exemption above the profane? and the Reflection which is made toward Jesus
Christ obtain some Respect from Christian Princes, which they give not to one
another, and some special Distinction.

I say, in the third place, when the Pope quits the functions of his Charge;
and that, of Father (which he ought to be) becomes the Enemy of his Children;
when he breaks unjustly the Calm of Christendom, and carries the war to the
States of other princes, They may preserve for their defense, and make use of
the offensive by way of Diversion and prevention; provided that neither the one
or the other tend to Conquest, but only to Conserve, and pass not the design
of a lawful Defense. So the Duke of Alva did exercise it in the war he made
against Paul the fourth. He stayed not to make his defense just, till the
Ecclesiastique, and French Armies were joined and made Incursions into the
Lands of his Master. He drew into the field whilst they were preparing; Enterd
the Lands of the Church, took many places, and gave Terror to Rome. And if he
would have forced the Victory as far as he might, he had seen it crowned with
the taking of the Chiefest Town of the world. But his design was to affright
the Pope, and not to hurt him; To show lightning, and restrain the Thunder, to
constrain him whom he could not bend, and to bring him back to his duty by
violence, who voluntarily estranged himself from it; So after we had received
affronts before Civitella, and before other places by the fault of the
Caraffes; After that our Army was Constrained to draw back and might have been
defeated, If the Duke of Alva had been disposed to have gained bloody
Victories, and not to have prepared bridges for his Enemies. In their Retraite,
He made an Accommodation with Paul and an Accord, which I prefer before the
greatest Victory Spain ever obtained. He restored all the places he had taken.
He confessed his error. He was at Rome to make his submissions to the Pope; He
demanded pardon for the fault'he had committed; so Rome received him, as in
Triumph; He had the honor to eat with his Holiness, and merited of his bounty
the praise of being the defender of the Holy Chair whilst he made war with it;
And since when after six years of service, and for a matter of nothing, as I
have else where expressed, Philip the second sent him a Prisoner to his house
in the Country; Gregory the third interceded for him, and endeavored to gain
him his Liberty. In the representing to him the long and great services, which
he had rendered to Spain, and to the Church, and particularly the Moderations
h' used in behalf of the Holy Chair, when it was in his power to have defaced
ir, unpuni shed; to make use of the privileges of a Conqueror, and to
exercise Advantages, which force gives to them that have it; This proceeding is
worthy of the Approbation of all Ages, and the Imitation of all Princes.

The Action of Charles the fifth in the same subject, is very different from
the other. Let us represent it as it is and in its natural posture. Lets take
away the policies and painting wherewith the Spaniards have disguised it; Lets
not flatter a Monster which cannot be formed too hideous, and that so
scandolous and black a Crime rest not unpunished in the Memory of Men. I am
Content that the taking of Rome by Bourbon should be taken to be a Blow from
the hand of God, and an effect of his provoked Justice, and that the war
inclined it to that side against the Intention of Charles; and that Treaty
which Moncado made with Clement was done without supecery, and with Design to
Cause it to be observed by Bourbon, and to suffer the Pope to enjoy the Truce
of five Months, which had been accorded unto him; And that the Army of Bourbon
took the bridle in the teeth, and marched toward Rome in spite of his
General. I speak not of the raising of 14000 furious Lutherans and burning
with the first Zeal of that Heresy, t'employ them in a War, where the Holy
Chair had so great a part: But after that Rome was taken, and that dreadful
accident was happened by the course wherewith it was guided; After that the Holy
City had served for spectacle to the World of the justice, and of the Impiety
of Men; After that the Pope was besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo; Why did
not the Emperor cause the scandal to cease at the first news he heard of it?
Why did he not deliver Rome of that heretic Garrison, which abused the holy
things; who profaned the most sacred Mysteries, of our Religion; and added to
all the kinds of cruelty, all the kinds of sacrilege. Why did he suffer the
Pope to be put to Ransom, to redeem himself with Money from the vexation of
victorious Heretics; and that Ostia and the other strong place: of the
Ecclesiastique State, were the Price of his liberty, and the Arguments of his
servitude. I know well, that some answer may be made in his favor and for his
discharge; That it is permitted to make use of the Advantage; which we have not
sought, but fortune has offered; That it is lawful to draw good from th'evill
which happens against our intentions; That it is the destiny of the things of
this World, That the prosperity of some is raised by the Adversity of others;
and that th'affairs of State are like those of Merchandise, wherein the
greatest secret is to know when to make right use of the time, and to employ
the occasions to profit when they are offered. To that I answer; first that the
evils which I have spoken of, and those dreadful Accidents, were the sequells
of the breach of many treaties made with Clement, and of the violation of
public faith in his person. And therefore, that the effects could not become
Lawful, whose causes were so notoriously unjust; That the River cannot be very
sound, if the Spring be poisoned; That conclusions retain always the
conditions of the principles from which they arise, and partake of their spots
and weaknesses; and that they who have been the promoters of some Evil, or
have not diverted it when they were obliged, are bound to repair it, and ought
to be security for the ill consequences, they bring with them. In the second
place I answer, that the person of the Pope and the dominions of the Holy
Chair are priviledged-things and of right are not subject to all
th'Inconveniences, and to all the disgraces to which the Person, and States of
other Princes are exposed; for the Reasons above given and which shall not here
be repeated.

As to the affliction the Emperor seemed to declare, at the News of
th'Accident, and the Demonstrations he published of an eminent grief; As to the
mourning he put on to make his Displeasure visible; and to the Processions he
made upon that occasion; And the Rejoycings for the birth of his Son, He caused
to cease; To weep, the ill fortune of the Pope; All that, was but illusion and
Comedy. So that false sadness suddenly disappeared, and that vain show of
grief was presently belyed by the proceedings above mentioned. And moreover
Francis the first reproached him in one of his Manifests; that he had dared to
think to send Clement into Spain, and conceived that monstrous vanity, To have
at the same time in his hands, the two principal persons of the World, and two
so great prisoners as a Pope, and King of France, The Spaniards answered that if
Charles had had the will, who could have hindered him, to have executed it? And
who are strong enough to oppose his designs, in a time when Fortune refused
nothing to his desires, when his prosperities gave fear to England, and Italy
was amazed at the blow which it had newly received. When France was mortified
for th'Imprisonment of its King, and th'heretiques of Germany made brags of the
purging of Rome from its abominations, and abating the Pope dome under
The Authority of a Catholic Emperor.

To that, Answer may be made with Francis the first, That Charles was diverted
from that design by the Horror the proposition raised to all Spain. That the
people murmured and the Clergy raged, when there was speech of leading the
Vicar of Jesus Christ in Triumph, and to make a Prisoner of the head of the
Church.

Though it be very hard to justify the truth of this fact, and to make visible
a matter so dark; it is better to leave it in darkness, and to suspend herein
ones belief, for the honor of a Prince that has much merited of the Church
in diverse occasions, and to whom the glory of beating back Soliman cannot be
denied, and th'assuring of all Christendom in the defense of his patrimny, and
the States of his brother. At least, it is certain that if he was a sinner, he
was a Penitent; and that he washed his faults with the tears of three years,
which he poured out in his retraite from the world, before death took him away
from it.

Others aggravated this fault by th'Evills which Fortune raised t'interrupt his
prosperities, and by the diverse faces which she showed to them of his Race.
They mentioned the disgraces of his Brother, The Route of his Armies at
Ezechio, and at Bude, and the other Victories which Valor did not so much give
to the Turk, as the ill Fortune of Ferdinand, and the Cowardice of his
Captains. They did not conceal the occasions wherein he saw his designs
overthrown, and his person in danger; The sinking of his Fleet in th'haven of
Algiers; and that fearful loss, which has not been equalled by any loss
made by Christians on the Sea, but by that, which his Son made in the Sleev of
England; They represent the success which the second League had against him in
Germany: The Chase which Maurice Duke of Saxony gave him; And the necessity
whereunto he was reduced, to save himself by night, and the sixth person at
Isburg, and to consent to the peace of Passo so injurious to Religion, and so
unworthy of the Empire: And to conclude, they add the ill success of the
Enterprise of Provance, and the shame of the siege of Mets, which was the last
deceit fortune put upon the Emperor, and the accomplishment of the design he
meditated to put himself out of her power in quitting the World where she is
so sovereign. I will not affirm, that all these Evils befell him in revenge
of the sacking of Rome, and the affront offered to the Holy Chair. It might
happen that God sent or permitted them for that subject; And it might fall out
also, that they sprang from other reasons, and were the effect of another
cause. Insomuch, that according to the judgments that are made upon that
Matter, and The Examples which are alleged of them whom God has punished for
offending of Popes; There Is more in it of opinion then of science, and of
conjecture then certitude. For who has been of God's counsel? who ever entered
in to the depths of his Wisdom? Who has pierced the darkness where he hids
himself? Tenebrae, latibulum e^us.
and to whom has he discovered the secrets of his providence, and th'hid
causes of the government of the world? The Death of Bourbon of the first
instances given is not so concluding an Example, nor so demonstrative as it is
believed, against what I have now said. I deny not, but that God might have
permitted it as the punishment of the sacrilege he committed in forcing Rome,
or as the vengeance of the breach of a Treaty whereupon Clement trusted, and
whereof the confirmation had been often repeated unto him to surprise him. But
I know also that the violent end of that Prince might proceed from a cause
merely accidental, and th'ordinary fruits of a profession which spares no
person, and where Musket shot makes no distinction betwixt private Soldiers
and Generals of Armies. It might also happen; that if the justice of God did
particularly consider that death; It was to correct a man whose Revolt did so
much evil to his King, and cost so dear to his Country; or more likely as a
Revenge for Lombardy which he deserted to be spoiled with Gruelties and
Rapines, and not to suffer his perjury to pass unpunished when he promised
Milan t'ease it of the Garrison that devoured it, and to draw from it
willingly, the last drops of its blood, and what remained in it of Substance.

The Sixteenth Discourse.
The defense of Gaston of Foix against them, who say that God punished him for
making war to Julius the eleventh; with the comparison of that Prince, and of
the great Captain.
I Am sorry that Gaston of Foix is placed amongst the Examples whom they say
God has punished for having made War. The respect I bear the virtue of that
Prince; The great things he did in his very youth, and the value some Lords of
France have with me; being of his blood, and who have with him the same
Original, are the causes that I will defend him here of Calumny, and aver
that he had the Noblest Death and most glorious Life for the time it lasted,
that History makes mention of, or fame does publish; It Is certain that Gaston
made war in a time when the Nations of Christian Princes were confused, and
their passions very different for th'Interests of the Holy Chair. Julius the
second, who was then in the Chair, seemed to have forgot what he was; and to
have renounced the Quality of common Father to make himself, Head of a party;
or at least Member of a League formed against France; The jealousy he had to
see us in the heart of Italy; The implacable hatred he bore to the King, and
the effects whereof he had made him to feel in the person of the King of
Navarre, whose kingdom he had interdicted; Obliged Lewis the twelfth to
prepare against the Tempest that threatened him, t'exercise the Right of Nature,
and to oppose force to force, and to repair to counsel to stop the violencies
of the Armies of the Holy Chair, which Julius had on foot, nor t'heal but to
kill; not to edify, but to destroy.

In this occurrence, when the Right seemed to be of Lewis's side, Gaston had
the command of the Army in Italy. And though the subject ought not to discourse
upon the design of his Master', when he ought to follow without enquiry
whither he goes, and that the Law which ought to be observed, does not always
declare the virtues of what it ordains; Gaston executed the orders of the King
in a cause evidently lawful. To whom he owed obedience, even in Matters whose
right had been ambiguous, and justice doubtful; That if he were slain at the
battle of Ravenna, and perished in an Occasion whereunto no person goes not to
dye, but to overcome, as he did, The chance of Arms has so ordained it, and
his Death was the more noble, that it encounterd with his Duty, and that he was
slain in the Exercise of his Charge.

I sspeak not at this time of other Circumstances, which make his death
glorious. To dye at the age of two and twenty years, being almost as soon
Captain as Soldier; having almost at the same time put forth flowers, and
brought forth fruits; after a Number of Victories whereof none were small, and
the least might have laid a foundation, of Reputation for an eminent person;
and in the midst of a prosperity so constant, that it was never in the power of
fortune to interrupt it; and so sudden and Impetuous, that ordinarily the
last successes troad upon the former without Interruption, and the news
followed one another without Intervall. Add to this, the Esteem his virtue had
gained when he dyed; the fears and hopes it diversely occasioned in the world;
and the contrary passions it produced in equal degree in the souls of his
Friends and Enemies. It was such, that the French could not rejoice in the
Battle they had gained, because that Prince dyed there. That Lewis the twelvth
wished the like Victories to his Enemies to ruin them; and, what is most
eminent and remarkable, That it forced Ferdinand of Castille to reconcile
himself to the great Captain, and to withdraw him from that Retiredness to
which a jealousy of State had confined him, to send him back to Naples and to
oppose Gaston, if he had longger lived; That it constrained an old Man, and a
Soveraign-Prince to suppress so imperious a passion, and to restore to
Employment one of his subjects whose greatness was in jealously with him. To
dye in that high Reputation, and go out of the world, before trial was made of
the Revolutions of it; If it be a stroke of vengeance from Heaven, and the
price of some great Crime; Let generous souls, that have the appetite for
Glory, and some Resentment of honor, be Judges of it.

Since we have said that Gonsalve was to pass into Italy to oppose Gaston, and
that Ferdinand had designed him that Great adversary, if he had outlived the
journey of Ravenna; Lets observe a little on whom in that war the advantage
might have rested, and on what side the victory have leaned, in a Difference
where the Parties were so equal.

It may not peradventure be amiss to divert the Reader with pleasure, and to
entertain him with a piece not unpleasant, though of no relation to the work.
Titus Livius has sometimes done the like amongst the Ancients, and Paruta
amongst the Modernes, and I cannot be much blamed in the Imitation of them, nor
to have failed after two so great Examples. It Is true, that the subject which I
shall treat upon is extremely ambiguous and much troubled. If it be
nevertheless lawful to ground some judgment upon the future, and to cast our
eye upon the thing collected, It Is probable, that the virtue of Gonsalve had
given place to that of Gaston; that it had given him the field; and that
fortune would not have abandoned a young servant, that knew how to make use of
her favors, for a person that made no esteem of it, and was compelled to
retire in the midst of Enjoyment. The long time that had passed wherein
Gonsalve had not made war, and the great Cessation, in a profession that
affords always somewhat to be learnt; had without question much changed him
from what he was: And as Iron rustes, when it is not handled, and Air
corrupts, that is long shut up and putrifies; so the Art of making war is
unlearnt, if it be discontinued; and military Abilities are weakened, if they
are not exercised.

Secondly, Age that has the property to take away the good sense, and to ripen
prudence; has also the defect to freeze the blood, and the spirits, and to
weaken the active Qualities, which are the Chiefest principles of Execution,
and the nearest Causes of Victories. Insomuch that the Coldness of Age, if it
have nothing but experience, prevents sometimes the committing of faults, but
not always the suffering of Losses, and is not capable of Enterprises that are
not happy, because they are bold; nor of Certain designs wherein there is
less need of Circumspection then of Courage. We have also seen a great number
of Brave persons whose Age has taken away their Reputation, and whose Glory
has been effaced by long Life. We have no example of this truth more visible
then that of Marius. His valor accompanied always the disposition of his
Temper, It entertained it self in his fairest years, and fell in the fall of
his body, and in the cadency of his Age. It has also been observed, that the
greatest part of Conquerours, and vanquishers of Nations, did not attain the
Age of sixty years; and that Many of them have finished their days much short
of that time by natural death, or by a precipitated or violent End. Caesar,
Charles the fifth, Francis the first, Henry the fourth, and the last Prince of
Orange, failed betwixt fifty and sixty years. And one of these stayed not to
give over business, till he was in Condition no longer to retain it; nor to
give over his greatness, till death would have taken it from him; But by a
Prudence, higher then that of the world, and by Motives more generous then
those that had made him to undertake so great things; He quitted the functions
of the Empire, to exercise them only of a Man; and chose rather to end his
Life in the humility of a Religious person, then with the Ambition of a Monarch.

The Prince of Parma, who had the honor, to give Life to the Military
discipline of the Ancients, and to advance that fair work which the Prince of
Orange had finished, dyed at the age of Eight and forty years. And it is true,
That his Glory began to decline, that the affairs obeyed him no more, as they
had before done; and that his last designs had neither the good fortune of
Event, nor the grace of Execution as the former had; Alexander, Germanicus, The
Marquis of Pessary, and Don John of Austria have encountered the same period of
Life, and a death almost alike. All four passed not the Age of thirty and three
years; and all four fell rather by the Malice of others, and with great
suspicion of poison, then by the fault of their Complexion or by open force.

This rule nevertheless is not so general, that it admits not of Exceptions;
and there all valors, which resist the Ruin of the body, and th'injuries of
Age they maintain themselves in spite of the Time. Insomuch, that it is not
the blood that heats them, but reason that enlighteneth them; And without
speaking of the present Age, the past has produced a Constable of Mountmorancy
and a Duke of Alva, who have preserved an entire Reputation to the very
extremity of Age; whose last actions have been the Crowns of the first, and
the Conclusion of life, the glory of all the rest. This nevertheless is very
pure, and it is otherwise true, That fortune has been pleased to favor young
Captains, when they were wise against the old, who have not the Courage so
active, nor the Virtue so violent. And by consequence there is some appearance,
that she would have declared for Gaston, and been of his party against the
Great Captain.

Thirdly the great Captain came to the Government of an Army whose officers
and soldiers were scarce known unto him, nor had the army other knowledge of
him then his Reputation and Glory. Insomuch that it is a Question, if there had
been any Sympathy at least at his first coming betwixt the head and the
Members, whether their Manners, had agreed, and the Proportion had been
adjusted to the Command and obedience. Fourthly, he came to Command an Army
shattered and of unfortunate Troops; and he was necessitated at the same time
to fight the despair of his soldiers, and the boldness of his Enemies. On
the Contrary Gaston was in Exercise, and in breath, and the war he carried
into the kingdom of Naples had been but a Consequent of his good fortune, and
the Continuation of that. He newly finished most happily in Romagna: He
exercised a Sovereign power in his Army: He had the heart of all his
Soldiers: they loved him as their Companion, and respected him as their
General: His beauty and good fashion, and the other Graces of the body which
render virtue the fairer, and in an age when they make strongest Impression,
and have an action more lively: His beauty that was extreme and just; that was
neither excessive, nor retentive; who knew how to give much, and to distinguish
of Persons; who obliged honest Persons, and contented the covetous. His
Courtesy was capable to compel his Enemies to change their passion, and so
wish him in the practice of it; Th'Eloquence wherewith he changed the spirits
of Men, prepared Courages for him as he would have them; and brought Moderation
to impetuous spirits, and boldness to the fearful. All those Qualities, I
say, together, might give him hopes to lead his army as far as humane force
could go, and he ought not to have proposed any difficulties to himself but
impossibilities.

Briefly, The opinion the soldiers had of his Fortune and Virtue, and
The Experience they had so often made of The one and the Example he had given
them of The other; Enabled them to dare all dangers under so valliant a
Commander, and t'hope all good success under so happy a Commander.

From all these Conjectures, I conclude very rationally, that the death of
Gaston, has been the good fortune of Gonsalve. That if Gonsalve, deserved to
be compared to Scipio, That our Heroique Gaston, if he had lived long, had
deserved preference to both of them. And if the greatness of things he ought to
have done, were to be judged by them he had done; That none of the ancient
Captains had surpassed him in the Glory of Arms, and that He had surpassed
all the Modern Captains.

Considerations upon the principal things which the King has done, since the
Landing of the English in the I Will The, which will declare some Conditions
necessary for a Minister of State.
The third Book.
The First Discourse.
Of what Importance, Care and Vigilance are, for a Minister of State; and that
nothing is to be neglected, principally in War.
CAre, Labor, and Vigilance, are not things purely spiritual; The body seems
therein to have the best part, and if they derive their Original from the
understanding. they determine in the matter, and sensible objects do bind them;
They are the nearest causes of execution, and without them a Minister of State
may peradventure be wise, but can never be happy. On the contrary; there is no
difficulty, nor resistance which may not be forced by their aid; with them
fortune is constrained to follow; Good counsels are assured; Bad are
corrected; Things are supported and overthrown; and that form is almost given
to business which is proposed; It Is then of great Concernment to neglect
nothing that may be profitable, That no accident is to be esteemed small, if it
may incommodate; That every moment ought to be of precious esteem, if it be
necessary for us. And that the Maxim of Morality be remembered, That evil is
raised out of the least defect in things; and that Good to be such requires
that every part be entire and sound.

Above all, in great misfortunes, and in the violence of fortune that all
advizes must be heard; and all things attempted, though they seem impossible;
For then, much must be hazarded, provided that it be not all, unless we are
constrained thereunto, and cannot save our selves but in ruming a course to
destroy our selves. Moreover, we ought to Imitate the Wise Physician, who will
never ordain dangerous Remedies, and whose operation is doubtful, but they
will try diverse, of whose goodness they may not be fully assured but that
they shall not kill if they heal not, and will not make the evil worse if they
do not ease it; In a word, it is not to be believed what great and incredible
effects are produced by an exact care, by a constant diligence, by an
infatigable contest, and by that prudent inquietude which always acts, which
forgets nothing, which never gives it self liberty, and forces at last what
holds too fast, and draws what will not follow.

Caesar was incomparable in these Qualities, as in all other that form a great
Captain. No person ever took more pains in the War; or exercised more
functions together in his Army, nor that more desired to be present in all
occasions, or that was more obstinate t'execute his resolutions, not to retire
when he was once advanced, and not to stand in the midst of an enterprise; It Is
true that he deliberated much before he undertook any thing, and did not cast
himself blindly upon any design; He did not prepare to make war after he had
begun to make it; The provisions answered always to the time, he had forecast
to make them continues and the execution never deceived his providence. But
after that he lost not a moment of time, nor an occasion of advantage, and
never remitted to the next day what he might execute the same day. He seldom
trusted but to his eyes and judgment, and for the most part he went in person
to view the Country he would assault, and the enemies he was to fight. When the
occasion pressed, he made incredible Marches. He passed Rivers by swimming, to
avoid going about to gain Bridges; He crossed the Seas in small Vessels to make
the more diligence, and chose rather to sail in Storms, then suffer his
business to run hazard; and to put his person in danger, rather then his
fortune: And it must not be a wonder, if in his profession he left all the men
in the world behind him; And if it has been doubted, To whom the victory had
remained, if Alexander had made War to the growing Commonwealth; No Question
can be made but he was inferior to Caesar, who destroyed it in its most
vigorous Age, and in the excess of its force, and made it fall from th'height
of its greatness, and from the top of its Power.

On the contrary, the reason why the Reputation of so many Men, is seen to
pass with the time, and their glory to extinguish; It Is the diminution of
Labor, and the default of Vigilance; This diminution and default proceed from
several causes. The first is, that as in the condition of particular persons,
a man's fortune does not always advance with equal pace, and with an uniforme
progress; That it stops toward the end or moves slowly, though it come with
impetuosity and swiftness: Insomuch that he who burnt with impatience in the
beginning to quit poverty, and labored with Zeal to become Rich; So soon as
his desire is satisfied, and that he sees himself in plenty, H' abates of his
cares, and would enjoy with rest th'fruits of his industry. So the man whose
spirit is possessed with the passion of glory, and meditates the great actions
which do beget it; when he has attained his end; That he has filled the World
with the reputation of his virtue, and has formed in himself a great opinion
of himself; The hunger of honor which pressed him at first, becomes moderate;
and by consequent, his first contest weakens, and his ordinary diligence
diminishes.

A second cause of this diminution, is Age; and it is no wonder, if the body
which destroys it self grieves the Soul; and if it operate not with the same
vigor, as it did, when the Organs are spoiled, and th'instruments of use wear
out; This rule nevertheless is not absolutely true, and has its exceptions,
as I have said elsewhere.

A third cause are the diseases; which produce the same effects, and more
dangerous then Age, because they produce them more suddenly, and with more
violence; and it is not possible, that in the grief of the body, and weakness
of nature, a man can intend things, that are without him, and at the same time
contest with the disease and business. Besides, what has been said before of
Phillip the second, The Spaniards have also observed, that their affairs in
the Low Countries declined with the health of the Prince of Parma, and began to
change when he began to be sick; and nevertheless being of a very vast spirit,
and active humor, He would not abate any thing of his accustomed occupations.
He would do more then he could. He would retain the same authority in
business, as when he had his health. He could not ease himself upon the cares
of another, and thought that nothing was well done, but what was done by his
Orders. When he was hurt before Candebu; He put the command of the army into the
hands of his Son; and in regard he was but a young Prince, and to whom
experience was wanting, and that sort of Capacity which comes not from study,
or nature; He would supply that defect by his Counsels; The Army was at
Iuetot, and the father at Candebu where he was dressed of his wound? There he
would be Consulted with upon all Occurrences, and the order for what was to be
done was fetched a League off. In the mean time, the time passed in going and
coming; the state of the war changed Countenance; new Accidents demanded new
Counsels, and the Spaniards lost fair occasions to inomomodate us whilst they
went to ask his permission, and we made no small advantage of the Disorder of
a body, that was so disunited from the head that governed it.

But to make the benefits of Vigilance the better to appear, and the
operations of that sharp virtue, and of that unquiet Prudence, which is ever in
Action, which makes profit of all things; that suffers nothing to escape, and
particularly in the war where occasions stay not and never return, when they
are once fled away; Lets demonstrate this by apt examples; When Gaston of Foix
drew to the Relief of Bonlogna against the Army of the League which had
besieged it; If at th'entry of the Town, he had drawn out to Charge the
Enemies, he had surprised them; He had defeated them without resistance, that
had not been on their guards because they distrusted nothing; and the delay of
one night which He gave at the Requests of his Captains for some rest to his
soldiers, ravished from us a victory which had all Italy for price, and cost
us a little after the Life of that prince which was of more virtue then all
Italy. The evening before the battle of Jury, The late King had taken his
quarter at Menoncour; The Marshall of Charters was to discover it, and observed
that his Army was weak and affrighted; Sr. of Maine nevertheless would not
Charge that evening to untire his soldiers, who were haressed with the Labor
of the way, and with the long Marches they had made; in the mean time three
thousand foot, and Eight hundred horse, arrived in the night to the King, who
gave Courage with the hopes of victory to his Army, and after prevailed for the
gain of the Battle; which they run hazard the day before to lose.

As to the Important victories, which Care and Diligence have occasioned, and
have as it were forced from the hands of destiny; I observe three famous ones
amongst the Modern and which ought to be observed with a particular attention.
The defeat of Francis the first before Pavy is without doubt, a work of the
Emperors fortune, and of the virtue of the Marquis of Pessary, who was one of
the chief Commanders of his Army. But it ought chiefly to be attributed to his
Industry, and to that Indefatigable and hot humor which never gave him any
Rest, which held him in perpetual action; which exercised him day and night,
and forced business to obey him, and to come to the point he had proposed to
himself. In that manner He overcame us against all show of Appearance, and got
the better of us, though we had then no need of any thing but patience to
overcome; That we had nothing to do but to defend our selves, and to hinder
being defeated for to defeat them: First he did beat down the Forts which
covered our Army, and rendered his Avenues safe; He advanced toward us without
loss of time, or taking of rest, and before almost we could see them come. He
fell into the Kings Quarters, and constrained him to fight, and to put to
hazard what he had assured, if he had kept his advantage. On the contrary
there is no place of excuse for Francis, nor palliate his blindness, and that
stupid negligence, wherewith he was possessed in the midst of his Army, without
knowing the State or Number of it, but by the report of his Captains; and not
knowing the designs of his Enemies, till he was not in a Condition to break
them, and not being prepared to resist them but believing them too weak to
assault him. A notorious fault in War, wherein the necessity of fighting
should never be permitted, nor to act at the pleasure of enemies; where they
ought never to be despised or esteemed weak; where the Eyes ought to be
employed on all things, and nothing neglected, and where small Accidents are
ordinarily the beginnings of great Revolutions, and the original of the good,
or bad success of Enterprises. The second Example is of the last Duke of Guise,
when he defeated the Army of Germans which came to overcome France under the
Command of the Duke of Bouillon, and of the Baron of Auneau. So soon as he had
discovered the Army he never allowed in any rest, and lost not an occasion of
Incommodating it; He gave it Continual A larmes to tire it; He had it in his
Brain, when it Marched; He vexed it in its Quarters. He cut off the ways of
Provisions from all sides, and at last in three encounters at Vimony, at
Auneau, and at Mount beliart, dissipated the whole Army.

The third Example is, the Relief of the Island of The. It must be acknowledged
that the glory of that success, which will appear another day a Miracle in the
life of the King, or a fable in History, is an effect of the piety of that
Prince, and a visible Argument of the Inclination which the heavens have for
him; But it must be also confessed, that this good fortune was not given him
freely, and that he has aided the Hands of God to work this wonder; The fever
has newly left him: His recovery was yet uncertain, and it was necessary for
his Courage to complete the support of his body when he put himself into the
way to find the English: what he did in an Occasion apparently deplorable, may
be judged by his accustomed Actions, which were always of greatest difficulty;
And though the Actions of Princes resemble the Essences which contain a great
Virtue in a small Quantity; and though they do little, yet operate much by
reason of the force of the Example; So it is that the King would not have
believed his Charge to have been discharged but in doing more then the others.
If he had put them only on their way, to let them after that march of
themselves; had he not always served them for guide; If he had not made way for
them without Interruption; and if he had not been the last to quit labor and
to retire from Action. Moreover it must be further avowed, that as in
the affairs whereof we now speak, He has forgot nothing of the duty of an
Active, and labourious Prince, and that he has also there Compleately served;
so that the Instruments which he there employed, betrayed not the virtue of the
principal Cause; Monsieur his Brother made his first Arms there very
remarkable, and the beams of that rising valor have been so lively and pure,
that it was visible they could not proceed, but from a spring extremely fair,
and that greater beginnings could not be expected from the son of Henry the
fourth, and from the Brother of Lewis the just. As to Sr. the Cardinal, it is
certain that he brought unto the work an extraordinary Contest of body and
spirit, and that the cares and diligence He used in that Occasion were
incredible, as the effect that did arise from them. He manadged it in such
fort, as a sick person is handled, to whom so little of life remains, that the
least sinister Accident that befalls him, destroys him; and the least things
forgot of what might be Cordial, would kill him. Two hundred posts dispatched
in less then two Months, so many orders given, within and without the
Kingdom; no advice neglected, that had any appearance of Good; so many vessels
got together in so little Time, and so many provisions made for the
revictualing of the place besiged. In Brief, all that humane Industry has of
Inventions; All that prudence has of Conduct: All that diligence has of
activity, and all that Courage has of boldness, employed in this Occurrence;
are the Infallible proofs of what I have said.

But to act in this Manner; It imports that a soul be extremely free, and have
no passion but for his duty; That it be not divided, and it is not too much,
that it employes all its forces in Occasions whereunto enough cannot be
brought, and wherein th'Affairs are but imperfectly done, if any other
Inclination divide them; That if we have seen great persons, as Caesar, burn
with Love and Ambition and done incredible things; That if he gave himself up
to the pleasures of sense, and to the conquest to the World; It was that those
two Passions never entered into contest in his spirit, nor disputed of the
Victory; and when the last appeared, the first gave it place, and left the
field free; yet it is not possible, but they savoured of the relation, and that
the contagion of the one could not but offend the other. This happened even to
Caesar as incomparable he was, and the Love of Cleopatra had once almost
destroyed him, and had cost him with his Life The Empire of the World, If he had
not by swimming, passed the Nile to save himself. But that Sr. the Cardinal
has this Liberty of soul whereof we speak, I have elsewhere showed, and
therefore unnecessary to be here repeated.

The Second Discourse.
That the true exercise of Politic Prudence consists in the Knowledge of
Comparing things with things, and to choose the greatest Good, and to avoid the
greatest Evil; And to consider whether the Counsel Sr. the Cardinal gave to
pass into the Island of The, was grounded upon the Rules of Prudence; And if
the King did well to march into Languedoc after the taking of Suze.
It Is a strange Hazard, and a hard necessity to be shut up betwixt two
troublesome extremes, and of two evils which present themselves jointly, to
choose the least. This last is a thing which all the World desires to do, and
for which Nature has imprinted in us a violent and sharp instinct. The lesser
Evils appear good when they are preservatives from greater, and physic is
good by reason of the diseases it is ordained against. But to know how to make
use of so dangerous a Composition, to know how t'hold the Balance strait, that
is filled with venomous drugs, and whose odor strikes into th'heads of them
that hold it; and to discern of things, whose quality astonisheth the sense
and confounds the judgment, if it be not accompanied with Courage; It Is not
The Effect of an ordinary prudence; It Is not employed with less difficulty
though with more compleasancy pleasancy when good things are to be compared
amongst themselves, and to discover the difference; when the spetious things
are to be distinguished from the profitable; and them that have weight in them,
from them that make a show; when we are to be exercised amongst the Caresses of
Fortune, and the favors which she offers us, to stop at the greatest of them.

I have observed two places amongst many others in the Life of the King, where,
as I conceive, he has divinely prospered in these two kinds of Prudence, as he
has made most wise choices upon the Counsels which have been proposed. The one
upon the Counsel Sr. the Cardinal gave to pass part of the Army into
th'lland of The, to fight the English, who without that had been Masters of it.
T'expose of one side those brave Troops and Choice Soldiers; sacrifice so much
Nobility whereof there were Princes; To send poor Boats against a Fleet of
great Ships. It seems truly to have hazarded much, and to give up too much to
Fortune. But also on the other side, who shall consider that the loss of our
Troop: was not infallible, but that th'losse of the Island was if they had not
passed, That the remedy was dangerous, but that there was none other t'heal the
disease, and that one part of the State was ready to be divided betwixt
Domestique Rebellion and foreign Domination, if th'Iland had not been relieved;
must confess that this Counsel was not less commendable in the spring than
in the success. If it was very bold, it was entirely necessary, and one could
not only not do better, but it could not have been well done if it had been
otherwise done.

The Other observation is in respect of the Counsel, which Sr. the Cardinal
gave to hasten to Languedoc after the taking of Zusa; It must truly be
confessed, that then there was a necessity to make a defense against the most
subtle attempt and fairest show of good, which might have seduced an
understanding if it had not been very strong to make resistance. On the one
side the State of Milan was in prey, and that beautiful Country which
heretofore gave so much love and jealousy to two great Princes, To Francis the
first, and to Charles the fifth.
which cost France and Spain so much Blood, and put Christendom so often into
a Combustion to know who should have it; was ours without resistance. It
depended upon the King in appearance to become Master, and to take revenge of
th'affronts which we have received there, and of the five times that they had
driven us by force out of the Country. It was unfurnished of men of War, and
there was but some miserable Troops, that had escaped at the siege of Casal,
and which the sole report of our Arms had overcome. All the Princes of Italy
made us tender of their Aides, and believed that the Hour was come to take
away the Fetters from their feet, and deliver their Country from the yoke which
was not natural to it, and from that violent Domination whose shadow was
dangerous t'all its Neighbors, and weakened their Liberty if not oppressed it;
The Emperor was diverted against the King of Denmark and he could not draw
his Armies from thence without abandoning his Victories, and without betraying
his good Fortune.

Spain had neither Men nor Moneys; It was astonished at the loss their Fleet
had newly suffered; it saw powerful preparations in Holland, which threatened
the Low Countries, and a formed tempest which it could not conjure down: In a
word, Milan lost, Naples could not be preserved; and Flanders would have been
lost of it self, in shutting up that passage, from whence it received its
principal supplies to make War. And nevertheless this great power which
gave fear to so many powers, which was formidable even to the Turks and
Barbarians of Africa; which is fatal to the rest of Christian Nations, which
obliged all of them to be with us or against us; Had been beaten with that
single stroke, and we had nothing more within to fear when the springs of our
troubles had been stopped without, and the Instruments broak which make and
nourish our divisions, and humbled The Authors or Promoters of our civil
discords. These were the thoughts that in that time exercised the spirits of
many persons, and particularly of the Italians; and as it is the custom of men
t'accommodate their thoughts to their interests, and to flatter themselves in
their desires, they imagined that ours were like theirs; Though in that point,
our Interests were disagreeing. But also on the other part, who shall consider
that men must not spend their time about setting their hair, or paring their
Nails when the Heart and the Brain are sick; That great States never perish by
a Foreign violence, so long as the Interior is in health, and th'Entrails
sound, and that they ruin of themselves when the corruption is within, and
th'Evill has seized upon the Noble parts: That in long Wars abroad, a Prince
ought not to engage himself when the Diversion is ever ready within, and that
there is a formed feaction in the middle of the State, which will not fail to
disturb for to prevail of th'Occasions. That the discontented will foment, if
they dare not public assist, and to whom strangers will give heat, or forces
to disturbus by our selves; For to consume us at easy Chargges and always to
weaken us either by loss or victory; Who shall consider, I say, these things,
will avow that the Return of the King into Languedoc was a stroke of the
gain of the decision of our Domestique Affairs and the good of Foreign
Affairs. Furthermore, Could a greater misfortune befall us, then to lose the
occasion of finishing the Ruin of a party, that hold France in Languishment
more then sixty years, and had reduced it to a State equal to that of certain
persons, who know not what health is; but are always busy either t'heal
th'evills they suffer, or to present them they fear. The conjucture past; It
was probable it would not return of a long time, and that 'twas to no purpose
to hope or expect it; It was so contrary to that party, that it could not but
be relieved from Germany, that labored to defend its proper Liberty; That
England was wearied in protecting an ill cause; That the Hollanders durst not
irritate France openly by reason of the use they have of it; and that they have
learned to regulate their Charities by their Interests, and the Zeal of
Religion by the Zeal of State: That the Spaniards had greater action in
Flanders and Italy, than they could master; and could not act against us, but
with a little Money, and with vain promises.

In the third place, The Reputation of the Kings Arms was incredible, it could
alone make conquests; It could overcome without fighting, and never Prince was
better served of his Soldiers, or more feared of his Enemies. Our Soldiers
were in heat and full of hope. The past victories were certain arguments of
future, and after the taking of Rochell, and forceing of Suza, overcomming what
was defended by Sea and covered with mountains; They ought not t'apprehend any
thing impossible, nor any thing difficult. It was then the only proper season
to defeat that party which Sr. the Cardinal most judicially observed, and the
King most divinely made choice of. If that expedition had been longer deferred
the plague alone had been sufficient to force us from Languedoc, and to defeat
our Armies; and if we had been engaged in Italy what had not Monsieur of Rohan
don with the Aid of strangers, which had not failed him? If the Spaniards, who
ever promise timely and almost without deliberation; who perform slowly, and
after long consultations; but who spare nothing when they are well engaged in a
business, and have put those that serve them in a condition not to be able to
repent, or unable to unsay it; If the Spaniards, I say, had performed the
conditions of the Treaty they had made with him, and furnished the Money they
had promised. If the forces of Savoy had passed into Danphine to join with him
as the resolution was taken; If ours had been divided within and without the
Kingdom, and if the hope of Change and Expectation of a better fortune, had
withdrawn from their duty, them of that party which fear retained; He had
without doubt broken all our designs, because they were destitute of its
Advantages; frustrated of foreign promises; Abandoned of the soundest and
most Considerable party of Hugonotes in the poverty of all them that aided him;
and in the distrust of some, and irresolutions of others. In certain Corners
of a Province where he commanded, He gave so much trouble, that the presence of
the King was necessary and six Armies to reduce him.

Moreover it is a great discourse to speak of the Conquest of Milan, and to
renew beyond that Mountains the pretentions of our fathers; It Is a design
which well deserves Consideration before it be attempted, and requires another
Conjuncture, than that wherein we are found; For who is ignorant, that it is not
for the good of France, nor the Interest of Italy, that the King be Duke of
Milan? Who knows not that, our Conquests, if we should Maintain them, would
give greater jealousy to the Princes of that Country, then the domination
whereof they complain; That they esteem us worse Masters, and more dangerous
Neighbors then the Spaniards; are more Conformable unto their Phlegm and
severity, than our Heat and License. That they believe that we are a more
certain and assured Counterpoyse to the Ambition of others than they would be
to ours; That the facility we have to make our Armies descend into their
Country, and the abundance of men to relieve them, might give the desire of
undertaking and usurping it; That the occasion stirs up the most lazy, and
raises the most sleepy; That present objects do raise all the faculties; and
that Commodity and Convenience provoke the Appetite of Conquest which is
otherwise moderate and quiet. And though the Ambition of the Spaniards has
neither Moderation nor bounds; That they desire violently and desire Many
things; That in the order of their Counsels which neither change nor dye, They
have declared the war to all Nations, which hold not of them by subjection or
dependency; since this End is immovable, and that they are troubled only in
finding just Means t'attaine it; and that they sometimes take such as are not
just, when others fail, since of a long time they have made love to Italy That
they can no longer dissemble their passion; that for some years past, they
have put off their Mask, and made it known that they must have it, and enjoy
it, though they should ravish it; since they are not so poor of Men as they
have been, since Germany is for them, and that they have at their devotions
that great spring of Men of war, so it is that the Italians see well, that the
victories of the Emperor have no deep roots, That its prosperities do yet
shake; that them he holds, make great attempts t'escape him; That the Turk, it
may be, will make him one day quit his hold, if he make an Accommodation with
the Persian, or some Christian powers, that his ruin may not be so strange, as
the Greatness to which he is arrived; and that in his Fall the wonder will not
be so great, as it has been in his Rising; In Brief, that he cannot live
always; That the Empire may pass into another House that may be Contrary to
his; That may hate the Spaniards; That would purge Germany of their Garrisons,
and at The End of the Account they shall endeavor the greatness of that power
which in conclusion will devour them. Insomuch that the Italians will be ever
glad that we have a way open into their Country, not for to stay there, but to
relieve them when they are assaulted, and if that little Liberty which remaind
unto them be offended, they would have us love the walk, but not the stay;
That we become the Rivalls but not the Masters, and that we have jealousy not
for possession, but to hinder others from taking of it; Beyond that, it must
not be hoped that they favor us, or that they be not Contrary to us, and we
shall labor in vain if we labor not for them, and leave them not our
Conquests. Yet we should not so easily have gained the State of Milan as is
imagined; A number of good places would have stopped our progress, and given
Leisure to the Spaniards to send thither great releefs from Flanders and
Germany; That if they have quitted the low Countries for a part of Montferrat,
and exposed those fair Provinces to the Hollanders, for a little Convenience
in regard of Milan; If the Emperor made a shameful peace with the King of
Denmark to intend that Affair; If he left his victories imperfect for that
Cause, and plenty of forces to the enemies of the Emperor to renew the
Quarrel, and to give him Trouble; what would they not have done, if the State
of Milan had been assaulted: was it not probable that they would have set up
their rest to have saved it? That they would have stirred up all the ill
humors of France to divert us? That our frontiers of Champagna, and Burgonia
had not been safe in that war, and instead of assaulting of them, they had, it
may be, put us to the terms of defense? Insomuch that we had exposed ourselves
to a present and certain Expense for an uncertain profit, and at a Distance;
and for an affair wherein the Appearance of damage which we should have run,
was greater then th'hopes of gain we could have made. And when all things
should have prospered, that Wind and Tide had been for us, and that the event of
the war had not deceived our desires nor frustrated our hopes; The fruits of
the victory, and what might have been raised by our Labors had been no more at
most then to have weakened the Spaniards in imposing an eternal necessity of
Quarrel with them, and to Consume France in maintaining the Conquests which
should not have been ours, and to assure to the Italians the good which we
should have don them.

From all this I conclude, that the prudence of Sr. the Cardinal never
appeared more eminently then in the Counsel he gave to quit the hopes of the
Conquest of Milan, for the Certain reducement of Landuedoc, and that it
appertained only to such Eyes as his, and to an extraordinary wisdom not to
suffer himself to be blinded with the Appearance of the Good which fortune
offered us, and to have preserved the King from so specious an Ambuscado.

The Third Discourse
That one and the same Conduct in war is not to be observed.
IT may be also observed in that valiant resolution which the King took for the
Relief of The; That the Art of making war has not a positive form, and that
it ought to be diversified according to the State of Occurrences. They that
will commit nothing to Fortune, nor undertake any Enterprise whose event
appears not to them infallible; who labor only to consume their enemies in
temporizing; to make Benefit of their faults, and to attend the occasion to
cast them into their nets: They I say do sometimes great things, and observe a
better Conduct then they who have accustomed to Hazard, and endeavor only to
come to strokes; and will owe their Victories only to their Courage, and seek
dangers to overcome with the more Glory; But as the first receive but little
notable damage nor great Losses by their fault; so they fail often, to obtain
great success by their fearefullness, and to be happy by their too great
wisdom. Such have been amongst the Modern, Prosper Colomna who took from us
the State of Milan, and that of Genes; such, Francis of Rovere, Duke of Urbin
who was so long General to the Venetians, and whose Memory to this day is
preserved with honor, and his portraites with veneration. But beyond the two
others, the Duke of Alva who always preferred the slow means when they were
sure, to the quick that were to be suspected, and never so little dangerous;
Who was a great husband of the blood of his, though he had a very bloody
humor; who did never cast enemies into despair, when he had taken their
Courage from them; and who has often refused advantages which fortune offered
him, because he could not receive them without some danger, and that he
distrusted some Ambush; Such had been also amongst us, The Admiral of Coligny,
if he had been absolute over th'Armies he commanded; and if he had not governed
a people, that were Indocile because they were ill paid or voluntaries.

They are nevertheless some considerations to be raised in this matter, and
certain Rules to be observed.

A Prince that has but one Army which is the sinew of his power, and all the
force of his State, that has not Money to raise another when the first is
defeated; ought never t'hazard it: nor give the Command to a Commander of an
hot humor, or that has the Spirit agitated with an excessive desire of glory.
The Venetians complain to this day of Asuiane and of his Courage; At the
Battle of Giragdale and that of Vicenna.
His conduct was fatal for being so bold: It made them lose at one blow all
their firm Land, and put them another time upon the Borders of their Ruin.
And nevertheless all Historians agreed, that that person had done wonders
under a Prince that could have hazarded much. That his virtue was worthy of the
fortune of a Conqueror; and that in the journey to Marignan his arrival with
five hundred Horses put in disorder all the Suisses, and made fall in our side
the Balance where the victory was hung. In the weakness wherein the Hollanders
found themselves, and in the small means which they had to renew their Armies,
The dead Prince of Orange has ever been very backward to give Battle. Even
that of Newport which he gained was not without some stain, and some shadow of
Imprudency, and he has been condemned in suffering himself to be forced to
fight; and reduced to a Necessity, wherein there was to be feared more ill in
losing then hope of good in obtaining the victory. But however a very few
persons have been long in that profession but have committed some fault, or
fell into some Misfortune. Another occasion wherein this slow Conduct is very
profitable; and where a victory is to be obtained without fighting if it be
possible, and to be expected without forcing it to come, is, when we have to do
with heady and hot Enemies. But in that case also its necessary that they who
are to be commanded be capable of a great Patience, that there be wherewithal
to make them long subsist, and that the faylor of necessary provisions oblige
them not to disband. It was the Advantage the Duke Alva had in the Wars he
commanded, and if Francis the first had brought a little less and
precipitation then he did before Pavia, and suffered the Imperial Army to
consume which sustained it self only upon th'Hopes of a Battle; He had not
filled the vegeance of one of his subjects, nor completed in the spirit if the
Emperor, the design of the Universal Monarchy. With tumultuary Armies which
are not to stay long in COMPAIGNA; which do only pass and pour in and steal
out quickly; Care must be had not to come to blows: Passage must be given to
them; They must be used like Torrents, which are permitted to run without
resistance, and to whom no opposition is made when they swell and overflow.
Such have been heretofore the Armies of the Suisses, when that Nation disdained
all others; and boasted never to have gone out of their Country but to
suppress the excess of Princes, and to defend the weak from the violence of
the powerful, and from the designs of The Ambitious.

Other Nations have had in this matter ill opinion of ours, and believed that
we were not capable of patience or order. But if the Marshall of Monlue be to
be believed, and what is seen every day in Holland, and what of late has been
in France and Italy; Our Soldiers are capable of all things, when they are
under good Commanders; and that there is no Nation that takes sooner then ours,
the vices or virtues of their Commanders. However, a great Captain ought ever
to be Master of his Art, and above all the forms of making War, without
being subject to any; He ought to change them according to the occasion, and
know diverse means, and many ways t'attain his end, and gain the victory. By
such expedients Caesar, rendered himself admirable to all people, and Ages. He
diversified his conduct better then any man in the World. He gave not the same
form to all his designs, nor the same countenance; Industry or Courage,
Patience or force served him equally. One while he assaulted his Enemies with
Retrenchments and Forts; He Labored chiefly to take the Advantage of places,
and to ceize upon the most commodious Posts. He cut off the Springs of
Victuals, and of all other necessaries, and forced them at last to the
necessity of rendering, having taken from them the Means of retyring, and
th'hope of fighting; He gained his end in that manner of Petreius and Aphranius
whom he besieged in the midst of a Compagna, and from whom he shut up so
dexterously all passages, and all Avennues that being but half a Mile from a
River, they dyed with thirst, and were overcome for want of that whose
abundance is almost in all places; sometimes he overcame his Enemies by
storming of them; He made them fall without Myning; His victories were infamous
for flesh and blood, and the most merciful of all men seemed to be come into
the World to decline it, and to have been born for the Ruin of mankind. The
dead King had reduced almost to the like extremity the Prince of Parma at
Juetot, and all believed infallibly, that he must dye of hunger and thirst, or
render at discretion, or be defeated in giving Battle. But the design of the
King had not the event answerable to Caesar's, no more then the vigilance of his
Captains was conformable to that of the other; The Prince of Parma deceived them
and exchanged subtilties. He fortified the place he meant to quit, for to make
them believe that he would defend himself in it; and his Army had passed the
River and made its retrait, before the first News came to our Army; Fatal and
un-head of Negligence for an Army that touched ours, and was invested, and
which was suspected of design, in some of the Commanders that governed it.

Amongst the Modern, I see no General that has surpassed Ferrant Gonsalve,
nor any person more universal in the Art of making War; I have not seen any
person that commanded his forces to better purpose, or made better use of
Patience. With those two Qualities he always overcame us, and has taken a
Kingdom from us. He has done us as much hurt in making us suffer, as in
acting against us, and has consumed us when he was not strong enough to defeat
us. Nothing almost has been read like to the Resolution He expressed at Cinture;
where we had reduced him to the last pain of Misery. He was invested with our
Troops; The Plague and Hunger was in his Army; He was drowned with continual
Raines, sunk in the dirt; exposed to all th'injuries of a Rude Winter. In
brief, he had against him the elements of Men. And nevertheless, at length we
were more a weary t'incommodate him, then he was to suffer, and destroyed us by
the course we made Choice of to ruin him. But when open force was to be
employed, and true Valor set a work; who ever performed it with more Courage
or judgment then he? Has ever a more generous voice been heard from the mouth
of a Captain then the answer he made at Cirignolle, to him who advised him to
draw back; and to abandon a Post he could not maintain but with great danger;
He had rather, said he, find Death and his Grave an hundred Paces beyond it,
then to lengthen his Life many years in retraiting ten Paces and turning his
back to his Enemies. And, before the Battle of Garillan, He answered him that
would have diverted him from fighting, and giving of Battle, who presented
unto him, that he was weak in respect of us, and the Match ill made betwixt
his Army and ours, That he knew of what importance that Daye's Labor was to
his Master's Affairs, and that he was resolved to perish that day, or overcome.

It Is true then, that there are Occurrences, wherein somewhat is to be
submitted to Fortune: Where the less is to be hazarded to save the greater:
And where when the Question is of the whole Affair, not only a part of the
Forces is to be hazarded, but also the Generals of the Army; and those
precious heads which command so many other heads ought to take resolution
rather to dye, than see the Victory in the Enemies hands, and to outlive it at
their Loss. So did Caesar in Spain at the Battle where the Children of Pompey
were slain, and the rest of that miserable Commonwealth finished their dest
uction; so did Monsieur of Andelot, when he defended Orleans against the Army
of the Duke of Guise: So did the Prince of Parma at the siege of Antwerp, after
that the Hollanders were seized of one part of the Ditch, and that th'Engine
which they made to play, had made them fly which defended it; The One and
the other run with Swords in their hands to the Danger; both were then
transported Declaring that he would dye, if it were impossible for him
t'overcome, and made appear by his action somewhat that savoured of despair,
or rather of that excess which Philosophy attributes to the Heroes, and
distills into the souls of extraordinary persons. The Example of that pathetique
virtue, and of that generous emotion was not barren. The Soldiers that saw it,
felt the same heat, and by that means some of them forced The Enemies from the
Town where they were far entered, and others Recovered the Ditch where the
Hollanders began to fortify after they were lodged in it; Lets conclude then
with The Examples of the greatest persons of Antiquity, and with the first of
the Modern, That the passage of our Army into the Island of The was not
projected by chance, and without the Advice of Reason; That it has not been
The Effect of a light, troubled by ill success, and of a Discourse confused by
ill fortune; but of a Resolution illuminated by that high prudence, which
diversifieth its conduct according to the diversity of accidents which happen;
which shift; sails according to the nature of the Winds which Reign: Which
knows to apply Remedies to the state of the Maladies; which dares quit the
Highways, when'tis expedient to take the Bypath, and which guides not
always common virtues, but sometimes inspires, and gives birth t'Heroique
persons.

The Fourth Discourse.
Of the Alliances of blood which are practiced amongst Princes; and whether the
King was well advised when he made that Alliance with England.
I Treat at large th'Allyances of State in the second part of this work, and
particularly of that we have with the Turk, and with the Republique of
Holland. There I do clear many Doubts which respect the Soul, and take away the
stones of offense whereat they strike, who have not known the foundation, and
stumble for want of Light. I give nevertheless nothing to convenience that is
contrary to justice, and flatter not the conduct of them who submit all other
Reasons to that of State. I take nothing there, from God to give it to Caesar,
I hold the just Balance, and stay at the temper which God has advised, in the
prudence of Serpents and the simplicity of Doves. Here I have thought it
expedient, to speak of the Allyances, which are practiced in the families of
Princes, to justisfie that which has been made with England. All the spirits
that were formalized at it, are not yet satisfied. The Wounds which are shut up
leave all ways some marks; Some malign impression remains a long time after a
poison is driven away; and ordinarily the opinions that are left, part not so
neatly, but some impression remains. On the other side, they that have observed
the sequells of the Alliance whereof we speak; who have seen the Depraedations
upon our Seas, and th'Invasions of our Islands, and the other enterprises the
English have made upon us; Who have understood, that their Ministers of State
manadged that business with poisoned hands; that they did undermine us when
they seemed to help us; That they stretched the Cloth whereof they were after
called Merchants, and laid the foundation of the War which they made against
us. These I say, have believed that there was somewhat wanting in the prudence
of our Ministers of State, and that the house was ill built that fell so soon
to Ruin. Wherefore having discoursed of that War; I thought this the proper
place to speak of the Alliance which did precede it.

I say then, that the Alliances of blood which are entertained amongst Princes
serve very little to divert their designs, or to change their Inclinations.
The dispositions they find in their spirits are there left; They put up
nothing, but at most palliate them, and suspend for some time the Action of the
Causes which they cannot take away; And though it falls out otherwise in the
Condition of particular persons, no Consequence is to be drawn for that of
Princes. The Quality of Sovereigns which Princes sustain, has privileged
Duties, and begets passions to which all others are subalterne. The King in
this is above Man. The Consideration of Parentage is inferior to that of the
State, and th'Obligations of blood which are bounded in a few persons ought to
give place to the obligations of the Charge, wherein an infinite of Persons are
Interessed. To that truly, Princes need not to be Exhorted; They are but too
much carried to it naturally; They ordinarily offend less against their
Dignity by default, then by excess. The love they have for it, degenerates
rather into Jealousy, then into Idleness. And if you would have them forsake
their interests, and the good of their affairs; It must be under the show of
something that resembles it: And it is not the will, that a Man ought to propose
to himself to be gained, but the understanding, which is by Endeavor to be
seduced; But it is true, that of too Extremes which bound the duty of Princes,
they carry themselves oftnest to the Excess, and that the passion for
Commanding preserves not only what belongs to them, but makes usurpations upon
all the Rights of Reason; upon all the privileges of Humane Society, and upon
all the Respects, which are brought by Relations. The Examples are so ordinary
that a Man must have seen or heard nothing to call it in Question. I will not
speak of what has passed in the time of the Pagans, nor of that Ambitious
Roman who caused her Chariot, to be drove over the Body of her Father, to whose
kingdom her Husband ought to succeed. I pass by that which they might have
done who thought, that the glory of Command was the ultimate End of Man, and
Ambition somewhat a nobler and a better thing then justice. But even amongst
the very Christians, and in the houses which Piety has made famous, that
Passion has been seen to overflow to the prejudice of blood, and violate the
holiest laws of Nature, and which the very barbarous people Reverence. I will
recite here a Memorable Example. It Is a thing sufficiently known in the world
what the house of Austria was to the Alliance of blood; and if devotion, as it is
said, has been the foundation of Greatness, it is well known, that Alliance
has built it up, and carried it from a Moderate beginning to that high Power
wherein it is seen, and to that vast domination for which the Heaven has no
Horizon, nor the earth Limits. Maximilian the first has gained by that means
the Low Countries, and those fair Provinces which by their fertility, and by
the wealth wherewith they abound, have deserved to be called the Indies of
Europe. Philip the first and his posterity have obtained by it all Spain, and
those Countries of the new world, where the sun in retiring from us goes to
beget Gold, and those other unprofitable things whereof men are Idolaters.
Philip the second came to the Crown of Portugal by that means; and to all
those States which that Nation possessed in Asia, in Afrique, and the East
Indies. That very Prince thought to incorporate England to Spain by the
marriage of Mary his first wife, that was Queen thereof. But the judgments of
God in that supplanted the prudence of men, and permitted that Princess to dye
without Children, either to suppress the growth of a Power which would have
been fatal to the Liberty of Christian Nations, or for the punishment of the
Iniquities of the English, and that base Compliance, wherewith they had
received the Schism which Henry the Eighth introduced amongst them, and
applauded the passions of that Prince who chose rather to quit the Church, then
to separate from a Concubine. The same Philip also aspired to the Crown of
France for his Children, by reason of the Marriage of his third wife daughter
of Henry the second; and the most important Article wherewith the Instructions
of the Duke of Feria were Charged when he came to Paris during the league, was,
to cause the Salique laws to be Abolisht, and to root out from the spirit of
the French their Aversion of having no Sovereigns that spin, and of not
submitting to the yoke of Women. Insomuch, that it has been always the
design of the Spaniards, and a premeditated prudence of the Princes of the
house of Austria to look about them, and to cast their nets upon the parties
that could join some new estate to theirs, and under a Title so innocent and
just t'extend their domination. With what heat did they labor to cause the
eldest Daughter of Lewis the twelfth to be given to Charles the fifth who
brought for her Dowry the Duchess of Britanny and of Orleans, and our
pretentions for Italy? How many propositions were made upon that foundation,
and how many treaties concluded, which the Time has made abortive, and which
Fortune laughed at; Nevertheless as they have been ever Industrious to draw to
them as much as they could, th'estates of their Neighbors, They have been also
careful, not to permit any of theirs to be alienated, nor to suffer any
division without knowing the Means of Consolidating it; and to destroy the
divided Members, and the loose pieces.

The Emperor Charles never promised the Low Countries, or the Duthy of Milan
upon the Marriage of his daughter, or of his Niece with the son of France, but
with Intention to break his promise, or at least with hopes, that Fortune which
had done such strange things, in his favor; that had so often given the Lie to
Apparences, and disturbed the order of things for the Love of him, and which
had sometimes sent him prosperities which he desired not, would exempt him from
that Obligation under some plausible pretense, as it did. And when Philip the
second transmitted the Low Countries to the Arch Duchess for her Dowry;
There Is appearance that he was assured, that time would make up that Breach, and
that he made not so great a wound in the rest of his Estates without preparing
the Remedies to heal it. But to return to my design, and make it appear,
That the Alliances of blood, work softly upon the spirits of Princes, and are
but weak bonds to hold their Amities; I will represent the original, and the
effects of that which has been the most profitable to the house of Austria, and
it may be the most dammageable to the Christian Commonwealth. Philip the son
of the Emperor Maximilian, married Joane youngest Daughter of Ferdinand and
Isabella, Kings of all the dominions of Spain. The Eldest was married into
Portugal according to their Custstome. The Catholic King had also a son
called John who dyed young, and whom Spain saw almost as soon put out as
shine, and had almost at one time the Contentment to see him come, and the
Grief to lose him; Presently after the death of that Prince, th'Arch Duke
Philip, and Arch Duchess his wife who lived only by the love she bare to her
husband, and was Idolatresse of all his motions and passions, caused themselves
to be Called Princes of all the Dominions of Spain, to the prejudice of the
Queen of Portugal, to whom the Crowns did belong in priority of birth to her
sister. That attempt ill digested and out season, and that precipitated
Ambition, displeased Infinitely Ferdinand and Isabella, who judged of the Tree
by the fruits, and gave their son in Law and daughter t'understood, that they
were to leave that borrowed Title, and to put off that imaginary Quality, and
which did not belong to them. Behold a very pleasant Beginning of Philips
Ambition, since it made Invasions upon its own Relations, and the first show
of that furious Appetite to reign which has vexed his Posterity; After that
he guided his Interests apart from them of his Father in Law; He held him
always at distance, he looked upon him only as a Prince which stood in his
light, and there was no other Communication amongst them but a continual
Commerce of Complaints and disorders; In a Treaty which Maximilian and he, made
at Blois with Lewis the twelfth, being permitted to either parties, to
Comprehend therein whom they would, He made no more mention of Ferdinand, then
as if he had not related to him, or that He had been indifferent to him. He did
also the same thing in another Treaty which his Father made at Hugano with the
Cardinal of Ambois; so Ferdinand had his Revenge in disavowing the Treaty his
son in Law made at Blois with Lewis the twelfth for the kingdom of Naples, and
in Contracting a second Marriage, and marying of Germania sister of Gaston of
Foix, and Niece of Lewis, with Conditions that were Advantageous to us, if they
had been observed. That which I have said nevertheless was nothing in respect
of what Philip did, since the death of Isabella, and after taht the succession
of Castille was open unto him. The things past were but sweetnesses for
Ferdinand in Comparison of the usage he received after that death. The first
strokes did scarce raise the skin, but the last entered deep and made Large
and dangerous wounds. Philip will go into Spain not only to take possession
of what was his, but to take from his Father in Law what belonged to him by the
Testament of Isabella, Ferdinand employed all his Prudence, and all his
subtilties to divert him. They Contest long upon that Article. Their wills were
diametrically opposed; what the one would not have the other desired, and it had
been less difficult to accord Contraryes, and to join extremes, then to
adjust their pretentions. Force being wanting to Ferdinand to overcome the heat
of Philip, He used diversion; He caused Lewis the twelfth to interpose who
threatens him with his Armies, in case he went for Spain, and raised the Duke
of Gueldiers against him who cut him out business in Flaunders, and gave him
enough to entertain him in that Country.

In the End, th'obstinacy of Philip being stronger then the Artifices of
Ferdinand, and the difficulties which stopped him being taken away or sweetened,
they agreed upon the Conditions of his journey. Thereupon Philip put himself
on the way, but with a resolution to break the Treaty he had made, and not
performeth' Oath he had given to his Father in Law, which he ought to have kept
to an Enemy. Being in Spain he flatters the great Persons; He unties them from
Ferdinand; He draws them to his party, who had but too great Inclinations for
it, and were but too earnestly carried to adore the rising Power, and a Light
which began to show it self; Insomuch, that Ferdinand found himself alone:
All his friends were unfaithful to him; all his Creatures abandoned him except
the Archbishop of Toledo Ximenes, and the Duke of Al^a: so true it is, that
there is but little Assurance in the will of Men, and that the Law of Interests
is powerful upon their spirits; and the Memory of Good turns received, weak
in Comparison future Benefits.

After that, Ferdinand presses an Interview with his son in Law; The
Counselors of Philip oppose it with all their powers, and raise troublesome
difficulties to divert it; They had seized upon the spirits of their Master,
and taken his will from him having prepossessed his understanding. They were
afraid, that Ferdinand would take off the Charm, and that the Reverence of a
Father, and dexterity of a Great Politician would deface that usurped Empire,
and tyrannous Domination: wherefore they omit nothing that might distate
Ferdinand from the meeting he solicited, and which he pressed for the
Resistance; They propose exorbitant Conditions, which he accepts of; They add
shameful Circumstances which he refused not; They use him unworthily and he
bears it; and a Great King had the displeasure to receive the Law from petty
Companions, who abused the Inclination of an easy Master.

At last the Interview being resolved, Ferdinand renders himself at the place
appointed for that purpose, but with a small train, and accompanied only with
two hundred Men unarmed, and mounted upon Mules. On the Contrary, Philip
advances thither, in the Equipage of a Man of war, with the Body of an army
of Dutch, which Marched before him, and flanked with almost all the Great
Persons of Spain in arms, and in the posture of persons who went rather to
War, then to a Treaty of friendship, and to a fight rather then to a
Reconciliation. The two Princes met together in a Chapel, which had been
Chosen for that Interview; Don John Manuell, principal Counselor of Philip,
and absolute disposer of his resolutions would assist at their discourse, and
but for the Arch Bishop of Toledo, who hindered him, He had been present at a
Conference, which the Respect of proximity and the Dignity of those Two
Princes, would have to be secret.

After an hour and halfes discourse they part, and the Conference passed
without any mention made by Philip to the Father of his daughter, nor of
Ferdinand to his son in Law of his wife. He dissembled for that time his
desire, though he had an extreme passion to see her, and to Comfort his old
age by the sight of an Object which was so dear to him, and which was the
Remainder of his substance.

There was a second Meeting betwixt these two Princes, wherein some
demonstration of friendship appeared, or less coldness then at the first
Interview; But the Conclusion of all the Conferences was the first design of
Philip, that Ferdinand should renouce the Government of Castile,
notwithstanding the disposition of Isabella, and against the express Clauses
of her Testament, Ferdinand, who had learnt to obey the time and submit to
Necessity; who knew how to strike sail when the Tempest was too strong; and to
put in when it was not safe to sail; Bends under his ill Fortune, and resolves
to abandon Castille till a better season called it back, and to banish himself
voluntarily from a kingdom which he had so long Commanded; Philip stops not
there, He endeavors all he can to discredit the past Government, He annulls
the greatest part of the Orders his Father in Law had made; He deposes the
principal officers, and the principal Governors, which had been placed by
his Hand. He would not, if possible, that one entire mark should remain, nor
one visible Impression of his Administration. But it had been too little for
him to have ill used his Father in Law, and his Ambition, it may be, had been
pardonable; if it had at least pardoned his wife, and if he had not used her
ill who had brought him so fair States, and such certain Hopes. She was truly
the Queen of Spain, and who infused into her Husband, the Authority of
Government, and the Right of Commanding that Country. And nevertheless He
would not suffer her in that society; He would not permit, that she who was
Companion of his Bed, should be the Companion of the Scepter which he had
received from her hands; and seeks shameful pretenses and odious Causes to
exclude her. A warmer love was never seen, than what that Princess had for her
Husband; It seemed, that she lived only by the sight of him, and dyed when she
was severed from him. That Excess of passion and Imbecility of soul changed
in some sort her senses; and the jealousy which mingled with the troubles of
his Absence, weakened a little her Brain and changed the Organs; and
nevertheless though that defect proceeded from so honest a Cause, or so
supportable; Though Compassion ought to have obliged Philip to cover it, if
Love were wanting to do it; and though Convenience and his honor obliged him
also to that duty, when he had neither Compassion nor love; He will
nevertheless that that accident be the foundation of his design, to seize
upon all the authority ad to Reign alone. He will have his wife to be entirely
troubled of her senses, though she was only a little weak; He will, that she
has lost all he Reason, though she had only diminished it; That there was no
Light at all, when there was only a Mist; and that she was in a total
inability to govern, though there remained in her enough of good sense to act;
For that effect, and the better to hide his Game, he keeps her shut up, and
permits not any person to see her of them that durst speak to her of the State
of her disease. A strangeproceeding, to take away her Liberty, after he had
taken away her Honor! and not to leave the se of the first good of natural
life after had ruined the Ornament of the Civil; The Father durst not open his
mouth to him of it, in the first Conference they had together, and chose rather
to suppress his Inclination, then to sharpen more that spirit, which was but
too sharp; and to touch him in a place where he was so sensible, as I have
above observed. In the second Meeting, Philip obtained of him a secret
Declaration by the which he consented that he alone should have the
administration of State, by reason of the Inability of his daughter, though
after he made a public protestation, That his son in Law had forced from him
that Declaration, and that he gave way only to the Malice of the time, and to
the violence of the stronger, according to the Maxim of wise Men. Philip staid
not there, after that Ferdinand was retired into Arragon, He would oblige the
Grandies of Spain to subscribe an Act, which he had caused to be drawn, of
the weakeness of the senses wherein the Queen was fallen. But therein he found
Resistance. The Admiral of Castille opposes it generously, after he had
visited that Princess, and discovered that the disposition of her
Understanding was not entirely spoiled; Represented unto him, the
Inconveniences that would arise from that Enterprise; The noise it would make
in the world, and the ill hmours it would raise in Spain, where the people
love their Masters naturally, because of the Roialty they exercise, and
reverence that Character in every person in whom it is Imprinted.

At last, to give the world the final Example of ingratitude, and an Eminent
evidence of the power of Jealousy, to reign without a companion when it has
taken possession of the soul; He would cause his wife to be declared troubled
in her senses in full assembly of the States, and by Consequence unable to
govern, which he could not obtain. There was his acknowledgment of the
incomparable fidelity of that Princess, and the payment of the most violent
and durable love, that ever wife bare to a Husband. Therein was his recompense
of that eternal passion which possess her during the Life of Phillip to the
change of his spirit; which could not be abated by his Death, and time that
overcomes what is most firm in the World, and most opinioated, could never
diminish. For it is true, that after the Death of Phillip which was
precipitated, and which cropped him in the Flower of his Age, and with some
suspicion of poison, she never forsook the body, she caused his Coffine very
day to be opened; she took it with her when she traveled, and accomplished
what had been prophesied by an Old Woman of Spain, who had said, seeing
th'entry of Phillip into that Kingdom, and that proud Magnificence wherewith he
took possession, That he would walk there longer after his death, then during
his life. At last, after his body was laid in a Chapel of Granada in the
Sepulcher of the Kings of Castille, she made her constant stay in that City,
and powered out into Tears and Groans the rest of her Life, upon the Ashes of
him, whom she had loved with so great Heat, and upon the Ruins of a body which
she had Idolized.

To what end serves then th'Alliances of blood, which are made amongst Princes?
and since they have been instituted t'unite in friendship diverse families, and
t'extend them the more, and enlarge that virtue which is one of the Principles
of the civil Life, and one of the bonds of humain society; what use are they
of in the conditions of Sovereigns? They may serve much, and are not
unprofitable; provided that they come not in competition with th'Interests of
State, and with that invincible jealousy which Princes have for the good of
their Affairs. The treaties where they intervene, are made with more reputation
and dignity, They are precious pretenses to lay down Arms, which two Princes
are a weary to bear; they are honest doors to let out wars, from which
otherwise they cannot retire with honor, and which they cannot Continue
without damage. And there is no resentment so just which they may not safely
submit to the Consideration of the Parentage into which they enter, and of that
sacred bond which is instituted to conjoyne what is divided, and to unite the
wills which are disunited. Francis the first recovered his liberty with more
honor by Marrying the sister of Charles the Emperor, and he made appear to
the World the Esteem he gave to his Prisoner, in seeking his alliance. The
peace of Soissons which followed a war wherein the same Princes did run two
great though different Fortunes; The one to lose a part of his States, and the
other of his Reputation in retiring; Had for foundation the Marriage that staid
it; and which was not accomplished betwixt Charles third son of France, and one
of the Daughters of the Emperor, or one of his Neeces. The peace of the Castle
of Cambrey which was so pernicious to France; which took from us in one day,
what we gained in Forty years, which being the End of our foreign wars,
was, it may, he the Beginning of Civil wars; Comprehended the Marriage of
Elizabeth, Daughter of Henry the second, with Philip the second King of Spain.

The daughters which enter into Sovereign Houses may also do much for the
Interests of them from whence they come, when they seize upon the spirits of
their Husbands, and gain the Ascendent upon their Wills which sometimes
happens. That subtle Portugese which Married Charles the third Duke of Savoy,
did what she would with him; in the differences of Francis the second, and
Charles the fifth. And in that famous dissension whereof Piedmont was so long
the Theater, she turned Her nephew of the Emperors side, though the good of
his affairs obliged him, to be of our side, and made him take the most
disadvantagious part in a war, wherein he had even done himself wrong if he
had stood a Neutrall. That Lacedemonian understood it better, and her Conduct
was more judicious though it may be not just enough. Her father and Husband
were Entered into a Quarrel, and labored with great Obstinacy the Ruin of one
Another.

In that hard Access, and cruel Conjuncture, wherein she could not gain
without loss; she proposed to herself to follow always the fortune of the
weakest, to make the Counterpoise to the strongest, and to dispose them to
Reconciliation, when both despaired of the victory, which succeeded unto her.
Alliances are also good to preserve union, and nourish the Intelligence of
Houses which otherwise are obliged to be of good understanding, and which a
Common interest does conjoyne and bind. Insomuch that if they make not the
knot, they tie it faster, If they form not the friendship, they heat it; if
they do not introduce the concord, they confirm it; It Is for that reason they
are so frequent amongst the Princes of the House of Austria, and were
heretofore betwixt them of France and Navarre, and betwixt them of Castille and
Portugal, before the union of those Crowns. But what must be understood of
most certain from Alliances, and to which Princes who make them, and their
Counselors, ought chiefly to have an eye; is, to draw some present utility, or
some future good, whilst the Wills of them who are conjoined in Alliance, are
in heat, and the emotion which that Bond brings does last. Francis the first
married Elnor, Sister of Charles the sisth to recover his Liberty, as I have
said; Phillip the second gave his youngest Daughter to the last Duke of Savoy
to make him seize upon the Marquisat of Saluce, and to cause the Gates of Italy
to be shut against us, and to deliver Milan, from the jealousy which that
neighborhood gave it. Ferdinand of Castille Married Germania, Niece of Lewis
the twelfth, to break the Leagues which were framed betwixt Lewis, the Emperor
Maximilian, and the Arch Duke Phillip to his prejudice, and to dissipate
th'Intelligences of those Princes that were not favorable unto him.

In consideration whereof I say that the Alliance which the King had made with
the King of England, ought to be placed amongst his wisest Elections in the
felicities of his Reign. And that they who advised him to it could not give a
sounder Counsel, and that it has been a great honor to Sr. the Candinall to
have mingled his Cares with those of his Master, and his disturbances with his
Master's for the accomplishment of that work. It Is not a small advantage to
render ones enemies weak; and to make a power retire that is contrary to us or
suspected, is a great advance; But it is the perfection of wisdom to draw to
ones self a good that was intended for them that love us not; and to gain that
which we make them lose. If we had not made haste, Spain who suffered that
Alliance t'escape their hands, and which sometimes loses her Advantages in
seeking of them too cunningly and too great; Had, it may be, renewed it. And if
that had been, is it not probable, that it had invention enough and Artifice
for to keep us always in Check by the means of England; That it had manadged
at pleasure the Protestants of France with their hands, and had assured all his
designs in making the Counterpoyse to ours with that party which was also
entire; That the losses which they lately received had affrighted them more
then beaten them, and that the sight of their wounds yet bloody, and the desire
of revenge rendered them irreconcilable; it is at least certain, that it diverted
the Ruin, and was opposed to its damage.

That if England has turned her Arms upon us; if it has since quarreled us;
and if the capricious humors of a particular person has been the Torch of a
public dissension; It was a stroke which was not in the power of humain
discourse to foresee, and the reason of State did not permit that a Prince
should give so pernicious an example to his subjects, as openly to favor
Felony in the states of another Prince; yet it may be said in truth, that the
peace which ensued that War, and which was so advantageous to us, is in part an
effect of th'Alliance whereof we speak, and the work of that Princess which
shall be hereafter the Indissoluble band of the friendship of the two Brothers,
and the Immortal subject of the Concord of both Nations. Add to this the
Interest of Religion which is very considerable in this Alliance, of the great
good it produces to have accustomed the English to permit the exercise of it
in the Queen's family. It Is no small matter that they are made acquainted with
our Holy Mysteries, and that they are no longer offended at that which they
have had a long time in detestation; It Is to be believed, that this holy
humanity which now is in safety amongst them, shall not be there without a taste
of its Graces; and that The Example of good souls to whom'tis permitted to
provide for their safety without crime, may touch them, and bring them to the
knowledge of that truth their fathers had forsaken.

The Fifth Discourse.
Of the Greatness and Importance of the Siege of Rochelle.
I Will not play th'Oratour upon the taking of Rochelle, nor amuse my self
with the Flowers of Rhetorique, and the Ornaments of that Science which has
not significant expressions, how rich soever, for the subject which I treat. I
will not exalt the glory of that siege by the Reputation of a City whose name
has passed to the Indies with reputation, by the course and Merchandise it
made upon all Seas. The Heresy and Rebellion to which it served for sanctuary
in France; The friendship of Protestants, and hatred of Catholics which it
equally exercised; had rendered it famous in The Earth. I speak not now of the
place, nor of th'advantages of its situation, where it seemed Nature had
placed all she had of strength and Art, had laid out all she had of Invention.
I pass by the comparison of the sieges of Tire and Antwerp, which others have
spoken of, and which are inferior to ours. Though one of them was the
principal work of the Prince of Parma, and the admiration of the past Age,
and the other the great effect of the power of Alexander, and the Industry of
Greece. I take another way and will endeavor to declare the value of the
Conquests which we have made in other Ages. Heretofore nothing was more easy
to a Conqueror then to subdue a Province, and the gain of a battle delivered
up a whole Country to the victorious: wherein there was scarce any strong
place. Now that the Art of making War has changed face and conduct; That
it is in all Countries almost reduced to cast up Earth and to retrench; That few
Battles are fought; that the life of Men are better Husbanded; and that an
Army cannot March very far, but a Fortress is in its way; It Is no marvel,
if there be as much difficulty, and by consequence as much glory to take a
Fortress of Reputation, as there was heretofore to gain a Province. And not to
go far from past Ages, and the memory of our Fathers. Have we not seen with
what facility Mahomet the second has taken two Empires from Christians, and
carried from them Twelve Kingdoms? Will it not be said, that he did run only
in conquering, and that the exercise of a walk had been as long as the time of
his Rapid Victories? It Is, that, in effects, in those great Territories of
Country, and extent of those vast Regions there was not a good place but
Constantinople. And yet that place was lost rather by the Conwardise of
Christians, and in the fury of the justice of God, than by the valor of the
Turks, and industry of the besiegers. Selin the first had only the Mammeluns to
defeat in the Field to be Master of all Egypt and Syria, and the progress
which the Grand Seignors made heretofore in Persia, and the facility they found
to possess that Land, proceeded from that they encountered not one strong Town
that stopped them and hindered the Inundation of those Monstrons Armies which
they brought thither. On the Contrary, who doubts but that the conquest of
Rhodes, was not more honorable to Soliman, then that of the Empire of
Trob^sonde to Mahomet; Who makes Question that Strigonia, Buda, Alba Royal,
and Zighet were not more eminent pieces and more famous Monuments for the glory
of that Prince, then a dozen Kingdoms for the other's glory? And if he could
have added Maltha and joined Vienna to his other victories, the past Ages had
not seen fairer Trophies then his, and he might have marched in Front with
Alexander, Caesar, and Tamerlan, though he had not run over so many Nations as
they had done, nor invaded so great a number of Countries.

To give some new Light to my subject, and some extraordinary colors, I will
propose also that noble difficulty which some have written of. To wit, Which of
the two Actions is most noble, and meritorious, either the gain of Battle, or
the Taking of a good place; without staying upon that which has been said upon
this subject. It seems to me, that the last of these Actions requires a more
profound and more general ability; That it exercises more virtues; and by
Consequence there is more honor in taking a Fortress well defended, then to
win a Battle though it be well Contested. The reason is, that in a siege Men
must fight above the Earth, and in the Earth. The strength of the place is to
be overcome, and the Resistance of men. Fresh enemies are to be encountered,
which are Concealed and do expect. Men are exposed to the Artifices of fire,
and to those horrible Inventions which with death bring the torments of Hell,
and pains that are not natural; Long labors are to be endured, Continual
watching, and all the Injuries of time.

Briefly, Industry works more there then force, and fortune acts less there
then virtue; That happens not in a Battle, where Men fight only above Ground
against Men; where all things are almost equal on both sides; where Men are
not consumed by Languishments, and Travel; and where four hours decides the
business; where Impetuosity does act sometimes more then Conduct, and valor
gives not so much the victory as extravagancy of fortune, as a command ill
understood of the Enemies side, as an unexpected Accident, and as a Pannique
Terror.

But to decide this doubt with a more exact and certain Policy; I say, that
those Means are more noble and Estimable which produce the End that is
proposed, and brings a Man to the Mark he Aims at; than they that leave a Man
in the Middle of the way, be they never so glittering, and what show soever
they make. And therefore if the gain of a Battle were the Conquest of a
Province as it heretofore happened, and the taking of a Town the reducement of a
single place, as it falls out for the most part; There Is no Question but the
second Action is inferior to the first, and of an Inferior Merit to that of
the other. But when after the gain of a Battle the enemy continues strong,
where there are other armies to fight, and a number of good places which stop
the Conqueror, and put a Bridle to the victory; Who doubts, but the gain of
that Battle is less Considerable then the taking of a City, which is the head
of a whole Country, or of a whole party; which will bring in all the rest to
the obedience of the victorious; and after that no Resistance to be made but
what shall be weak and rash. Who doubts that Scipio did not more in subduing
Carthage, and making the Rival of Rome the Subject of Rome; than Hanibal did
in the three Battles wherein he Conquered the Roman; since Rome subsisted for
all that, and that the spring of the war remained unstopt. And therefore who
can also doubt, that the reducement of Rochell, after the loss whereof we have
seen a party fall, which had so long a share in France, and divided the
Sovereign authority; which had offered so many affronts to our Kings; which
had so often opened our parts; and our frontiers to the Enemies of the State,
and made the Country of their Birth, a Country of Conquest; who can I say
doubt, that the taking thereof is not to be preferred before four Battails,
which have been gained against it; because they left life and force to recover;
since that all-bloudy and coverd with wounds, it was formidable unto them that
had put it into that Condition; since after that, it gave the law to the
victorious, and forced a peace of as much advantage, as could have been
expected from a victory. That consideration obliged the Holy Father to answer
Cardinal Borgia who had represented unto him, that he had not made the like
demonstration of joy for the taking of Breda, which he had done for the taking
of Rochell; The Taking of Breda was no more then the taking of a Town whereof
the Hollanders had their Revenge a little after. But the Taking of Rochell, was
beating down the head of a body and overthrowing the foundations of a Building.

The Sixth Discourse.
Of the Instructions may be drawn from the siege of Rochell; and from what the
King did after the Reduction of that Town.
AFter the precedent Considerations, lets see what may be observed in that
siege which serves for my principal design, and for th'Instructions of the
Public. It Is not Hannibal alone that knew how to overcome, and knew not how
to use the victory. The like faults are encountered in all ages, and the cause
why sometimes Men are not happy enough, is because Men are not always wise
enough. Fortune alone may very well begin the greatness of a Man, but she
cannot finish it, without virtue. And though it be not in the power of expert
Pilots to make the winds propitious; It depends nevertheless upon their
Industry to make good use of them, and to husband them well while they last; Of
them then who give over at the first successes they obtain, and stop at the
Entry of their prosperity; some of them are astonished at their happiness, and
insomuch that they have been forced into the Haven, and that they did not bring
themselves thither; They dare not any more put forth to Sea. They content
themselves with what they have gained. They will not put their Reputation to
Reference, and resemble certain persons who having leapt over by night, or in
the excess of a passion, a very large ditch or some very dangerous passage,
are ravished with what they had done upon sight thereof by day, or that their
souls are sunk, and are not bold enough to attempt the same. Action, after the
consideration of it; Others will taste of the good which is happened to them and
rejoice in the victory, and consider not that in that time, th'Occasions steal
away from them, fortune retires, and the Enemies gather strength which hinders
them to march on. There are some, that decline not to do well so much by
distrust of their virtue, or by the weakeness of their Courage, as for fear of
Envy; and had rather possess in peace a Moderate reputation, than provoke that
malign passion which causes us to be more afflicted for the good of others,
then for our own ills; and that even friends cannot behold the glory of their
friends, if it be very high, nor suffer their Brightness if it be very lively.
The examples of what I have said are but too ordinary. The Grecians have very
often committed such faults; and it is certain that the Batteli of Salamina
opened unto them the door for the Ruin of Persia, and for the Conquest of
Asia, if they had known their advantages, or if they had not been glutted with
their success. The victory of Lepantha brought nothing to the Christians,
which they had not before that war. The most famous Battle that was ever
gained upon the sea was unfruitful in their hands, all the gain of the
victorious, was, not to have been overcomed. The price of so memorable an
action determined in it self, and gained nothing from abroad, that Crowned it,
and was its Recompense. Charles the fifth also as Great a person as he was,
forgot himself after the journey of Pavia; an if in the Consternation wherein
France was fallen, for the Imprisonment of their King, and for a stroke so
little expected; He had assaulted our frontiers, He had not met with any
Resistance. He had not, it may be, left Rivalls to his nephews; and had paid
himself by his hands the ransom of his prisoner. The King did not handle it
so after the relief of R^e, nor corrupt the fruits of that victory for want of
pursuit. It was truly much to have performed an action which was held almost
for a miracle, and to gain an end of what was esteemed Impossible. It was much
to have revenged so many affronts the English had heretofore done us, and
purged the shame of the losses of Creci and of Poitiers after two ages. But it
had not been enough for the King if he stayed there, and though the Effect was
great, It was not reasonable for a Prince to retire whose forces were strong,
and to whom so much remained to be done.

The second Consideration, and which is a necessary sequel of the first; is the
Encounter of the time the King made choice of, very seasonable for that siege.
The choice it may be of the time, is the greatest secret in Affairs, and most
powerful Means to make them prosper. Caesar did supremely possess it, and it
was one of the words of Charles the fifth and of Philip his son, I and the Time
to Two others. These words may admit of too Interpretations; The one is to
know, how t'order a man self in the time of ill fortune; To strike sail when
the Tempest is too strong; not to oppose ones self to the violence of a
destiny provoked. TO avoid the strokes with dexterity which cannot be resisted
in a straight line; To put them by, to cast ourselves on Quarter, and to
observe the occasion of some favorable Revolution, and of a better adventure.
Charles the fifth gives that Counsel to his son in the instruction he left
him, and the Spaniards have been accustomed to make better use of it then any
people in the world. He practiced it at the peace of Passo, which had been
shameful to the Empire if the Necessity had not rather made it, then the
Inclination of the Emperor. He practiced it at the peace of Soissons, where
the want of money interrupted the prosperity of his arms, and he was
constrained to offer himself for Hostage to the Germans, who without that had a
design to seize upon him; The Spaniards practiced it also some two years
since at the peace of Suza, and they diverted in flying, the storm, which did
threaten them, and restrained the Thunder which was ready to fall on them, if
they had not humbled themselves. The Truce which we made the last year at
Carignan, when the plague defected our armies, and that the war was the least
of the Flailes of the anger of God, was a stroke of that address, and gave us
means to prepare for the Relief of Casal, and to save Italy.

The other Interpretation, is, to know how to make choice of the best time to
make an Enterprise. For it is true, there is a certain Moment in time, and a
certain Encounter of causes in affairs, which being passed they return no
more together, and it is to no purpose to attend the Effect, when the Causes
cease. The Italians have called it very aptly Conjuncture, but it was not
possible to find a more favorable then that under which the siege of Rochell
was formed. That town was almost without a Garrison, the English had emptied
it of Victuals. Holland durst not send it but a desavoured Releese, and by
Consequent weak. England which we had so ill handled, could not send any but
fearful persons, and the Rebels were reduced to expect more from the
Elements then from Men, and from out Impatience then from their Force. The
third Consideration is the Enterprise of the Ditch, and the Acceptance of the
proposition which was then made; It must be Confessed, that there was use of an
extraordinary virtue for a work without Example, and there was not less need
of Light and understanding to Comprehend the possibility, then of fire and
Courage to propose the Means of reducing it in Act, and t'overcome the
difficulties which were not ordinary; Tire and Antwerpe have nothing seen of
like, whatsoever is said, unless, it may be, they will Compare the
Mediterranean Sea with the Ocean, and a straight and quiet Channel with a
Channel extremely Agitated, and unmeasurably Large.

In the Matter of these novelties, There are that do generally reject all of
them, by reason of the vanity that is found in many, and who had rather believe
nothing then expose themselves to the shame of being too Credulous. It Is to have
too little Judgment, or too great a distrust of ones self; and in the Affairs
of the world, The universal Maxims are not ever to be followed which are
sometimes deceitful, though they are many times true. But a great Minister of
State ought to know how to distinguish what is manifestly false; from what has
some appearance of true, and what is feasible from what is Impossible. It Is not
that it is necessary that He possess all the Arts with the same perfection, as
they who make profession but of one; But it suffices that he know them in such
a degree, and with so just a light, that he may secure himself, from the
Imposture though it be very subtle, and observe what is good though it be not
very excellent.

The fourth Consideration, that the Enterprise of the Ditch, is the Evidence of
an extreme vast soul, and of a Courage not distasted by Difficulties, nor
wearied by Time. The Humors of the French are ordinarily too lively to
langnish after a design. They will suddenly see, the End, or abandon it; what
they carry not at the first Assault, rebukes them: The strokes they lose,
weakens them as much as those they receive; and their proper Impetuosity tyres
them not less then the Resistance of what they Assault. But the king has made
it appear in this occasion whereof I speak, that having not the vices of the
French, he had in an Eminent degree the virtues of other Nations; and that he
had a very great Boldness t'undertake and Constancy to pursue it, and Patience
to finish it; The first spoil the Sea made upon the Ditch, had shaken any
other Courage but his, and the violence of the Equinoctialls had daunted an
Imagination less firm: but He believed, that the fear which might fall into
the souls of Men commonly constant, ought not to fall into his, and that it
was too little for his power and fortune t'overcome Men, if he did not also
resist the force of the stars, and Elements, and what nature has of most
impetuous and rapid. There are affairs which must be abandoned so soon as they
are begun either in regard of their Impossibility or that they serve for
hinderance to better and more profitable designs. And it is true, that to
opinionate in this, is a Manifest imprudence. That the shortest follies are the
best, and that the further a Man goes when he is out of the right way, the more
he wanders. There are others which are infinitely important, and are but
difficult; and of them an end must be had whatsoever they cost, or perish or
carry them. After that the Earl of Fuentes had besieged Cambray, and reduced
that City to the Terms of being taken or of rendering; Sr. of Vie entered with
some Relief. So soon as he was Entered, he changed all the order of the
defense, and spoiled the Enemies by the faults they had committed in beginning
the Seige. He dismounted their Cannon with his; He made their Batteries to fly
with his Mines; He rendered unprofitable a part of their Labors, and did
Incommodate them in such manner, that it was proposed in the Council of the
Spaniards, either to raise the siege or to begin it again, and give it another
form. The Earl of Fuentes knew well the Error, which had been committed in
the beginning; and that the sheep wherewith he had to do were the same, but
that they were governed by another Shepherd, notwithstanding that he protested
that he would dye there rather then retire, and that he had rather be obstinate
in overcoming the Difficulties which were there in continuing the first
design, then discover his Imprudence in quitting it, and take by that Means
courage from the soldiers, and Reputation from his Arms. When Caesar had laid
down before Alexia or Vercingentorix, it was shut up with four and twenty
thousand Men to defend it. He saw come upon him four hundred thousand fighting
Men which came to besiege him, and such a fearful Cloud of Men of war to
surround him. That nevertheless did not trouble him, and insomuch that the
Question was of the decision of a great Affair, and that he would with one
only Blow affright all the body of the Gauls, He resolved upon a bold Charge,
He did not abandon the siege and marched to meet the Enemies which drew toward
him; He defeated them, and compelled the besieged t'yeeld, and Vercingentorix
to humble itself, and to lay its greatness at his feet; which they could not
preserve with all the force of the Gauls; And after that the Spaniards had
surprised Amiens, The dead King, did he not resolve to lose himself or retake
it; T'hazard rather all his State, then to suffer that breach to remain, open;
and that it was begun in a place which discovered the heart, and left nothing
secure even to the Gates of Paris. This proceeding appeared at first a little
strange, and seems to hold more of Despair then of force, and of obstinacy
then Constancy. That nevertheless is not so, and that which seems to be beyond
the Limits of virtue, is not ever so but by Comparison.

These Limits are not fixed and immovable. They have Many degrees according to
the abilities of them that exercise them: And the Excesses which the
Philosophers permit to Heroique virtue, and the extreamities wherein they
suffer, which she passes over; Are not Excesses or Extremities for her, but
for the ordinary virtues, and for the Common of Men. If they that served the
Duke of Aniou in the siege of Rochell had had the faithfulness of Sr. the
Cardinal or his prudence, if they had loved the Good of the State so well as
he, and the Reputation of their Master; They had not advised him to rise at the
Evening of taking of it, and to give the victory that was Ripe and ready to be
gathered. They had rather imitated that Great Captain, and had said as the
other did at Garillan, That they knew of what Importance that Enterprise was to
the King, and that it must be gained or perish. But it is not of new Date; that
there are people in the State which love Confusion, and who Imagine themselves
to be like Physicians who should not be Considerable without the sins of
nature, nor in honor if there were not sick persons.

The prosperities of the King stop not at the taking of Rochell; our Arms were
instantly beyond the Mountains, and Casall saw its deliverance at the sole
noise of our passage. That unheard of Quickness equally surprised our Allies
and enemies, and those who believed, that the Conquest we had newly made, was
of the kind of those victories, which make the victor to weep; would never have
imagined that without tireing or taking breath, we went to force the Alps in
the midst of winter, and seek beyond the Mountains a new harvest of glory. The
Rebels of Languedoc immediately after saw the King with them, and we have seen
in less then two Months all the places rendered or taken, and those fearful
Bastions which have consumed twenty years labor, and the wealth of that
party, humble themselves to his powers. It Is that virtue, which the Romans
called Celerity, and which we call Quickness wherewith Caesar made himself
Master in 40 days, of Italy: in 60, of Spain; and in less then three years
of all that which Rome had Conquered in more then seven hundred years. It Is
with that virtue, that Gastan of Foix in less then six weeks relieved Bologua;
Defeated the Venetians at Villa Franca; retook Bresse, and gained the battle
of Ravenna. This is to know how to make use of the victory, but in in an
admirable Manner. It Is to sail as long as there is any wind; It Is to second
Fortune; It Is to make use of the occasion. There Is glory in acting a number of
great things; but this a marvel to perform them in a little time, and to
place in a small intervall, the Actions that will honor the course of many
years; one victory nevertheless begets another, and as a needle rubbed with
th'Adamant attracts many; Prosperities tread upon th'heeles of one another,
Provided that men give not over: That they are the same Chiefes that govern,
and the same soldiers that act, and the same discipline that does exercise
them.

The Seventh Discourse.
That the general of an Army ought always to Intend the End of an Enterprise;
and that Foresight serves more then Courage to attain it; and whether the King
had Reason to make the truce, was made at Carignan.
THat a General of Army propose to himself to go always to the End of what
he shall undertake, and that he know that if a good Beginning makes half the
work that nevertheless nothing is done, if the end fail; and therefore let him
make Choice of the most proper Means t'attaine it, and not them that cost most
fire the Execution and have the most Pomp. They shall be in their dignity and
have the price they deserve when The End is gained. Let him not then be shaken
at what the world shall say; and that he remember the Conduct of Fabius
Maximus, who suffered the Roman people to wond his Reputation, and endured the
bitings of that Beast with many heads, rather then quit the design he had
framed to destroy Hanniball, without fighting him; For at last he obtained of
the same people, the Surname of most Great which they had not given to any but
him, and which they gave not to any other Captain after him.

That he remember th'Answer the Prince of Parma made to the dead King, when he
sent him the offer of Battle dureing the siege of Corbiell; That his Master
had sent him into France to relieve Paris, and t'hinder the growth of Heresy.
That if to attain that End he found, That the best and quickest Expedient was
to give Battle, that he need not doubt, but he would give it; if not, That he
would not fight at the will of his Enemies. The end then Crowns the work and
whatsoever a Man does of Eminent and extraordinary. If he stay in the way, all
that will not produce unto him but an imperfect honor, and an Abortive of
glory. What served the gaining of four Battles by our Kings against the
protestants; to have spilt so much French and stranger's blood; and lay wast so
many Towns and provinces for that Quarrel, since that Heresy and Rebellion
have after that subsisted? Of what use were so many past Expeditions into Italy
and into other places, since that after the fairest Entries and the happiest
Beginnings in the world; The victory remained to our enemies. From thence was
formed that opinion which had its course amongst other people, and which latter
times have belied, That nothing was to be feared from us but the Assault and
first heat. That Is not to say, as some have interpreted it, That we are more
then men at the beginning of Combats, and less then women at the End; That's
not true; and our valor has sometimes, a continued posture and equal
pursuit, and sometimes Accesses and Remissions as well as other nations. But
it is true, that ordinarily in the Beginning of our Enterprises, we bring a very
hot Courage, and a Resolution more then humane, but a little after we abate; we
fall into languishment and defects; we have no more force nor breath.

According to what I have said, the Truce which we made at Carignan, and which
was so ill understood of the greatest part of the world deserves a particular
praise; since it gave us Means to enlarge our Troops, and to take away the
Matter of the plague which made them desolate; TO assemble new forces; To
prepare fara Revictualling of Casal, and to deliver that place which was the
nearest End of the war, we made, and a part of the General. In vain without
it had we so happily begun the war and raised the siege of Pignerol at the
face of three Armies and of four great Captains. In vain with a handful of
Men should we have defeated so many enemies at Villana, and overcome
th'obstinate Resistance of the old Regiments of The Empire; and in vain should
we have fourced at Carignan redoubles of three half Moons, and beaten those
brave Spaniards, whose number of fighters was know by the dead, and the
Prisoners.

But as boldness, discipline and obdience are the virtues of soldiers;
Prudence, Conduct, and constant Meditation of the Means which cause the
victory are the virtues of Captains, and Generals of Armies, It Is with these
Qualities that they ought to distinguish themselves from them that are under
them. These are properly the form of their profession; They do constitute the
difference. Courage, and the Contempt of death are not, to speak properly, but
the body and the Matter; and there is not so much glory for a Chief to go to
blows, to enter upon dangers when he must, and when the occasion presses, as
there would be shame Not to do it; That would be more pardonable in a single
soldier, whose wounds are the springs of proverty and misery, than in great
persons to whom they are Characters of honor, and the seeds of Immortality;
which give them place in History whose marks are venerable in the eyes of a
Prince, and in the eyes of the people, and adorn them better then all their
Ornaments and precious stones. It should be a strange thing if the most
illustrious profession of the world, and the noblest of all the functions of
life, which is that of Commanding Armies; should be so easy, as that there
were no more to do then to run to death and to castones self into danger to
make him Worthy. There would be too easy a bargain had of eternity which it
promises, and the Gladiators might more lawfully pretend to, it, then those
exalted souls which prepare themselves for it with great Cares: who make the
boldness of Reason to descend to the heart, and who make that divine part, the
principle of their Conduct, and of all their Actions.

If Caesar had had but Courage in the degree he had it, and that violent heat
that gathers about the heart at the sight of danger; He had not effaced the
glory of other Romans; many had been found to have equalled him in that thing,
and Coriolanus, Capitolinus, Marcellus, and Catiline also had disputed
The Advantage with him. Courage alone had not rendered Epaminondas the chief
person of Greece; and Pelopidas, and Leonidas, and many others, had not yielded
unto him in the Resolution of dying for their Country. Ferrant Gonsalve had an
admirable prudence, and, as it was said of Epaminondas, That it was not known
which of two Qualities prevailed most in him, Knowledge or Valor. For my part
I make it a question whether Epaminondas was the greater Captain or
Counselor, whether he was more Capable to govern an Army, or to guide a
Negotiation; And more proper to subdue Men or gain them. And to speak of
ours; Gaston of Foix had Courage, and Good sense equally raised in him. He
acted at least as much with the last as with the other. The Command of the Army
of Italy against that of the League was given him, not as to the most Famous,
but as to the most Capable, and he did not so much sustain the dignity of
General by reason of the splendour of his Race, as by reason of the Merit of
his person. I will give you two examples which will make it appear, That he
was truly in all senses The Head of his army; and had a Wit superior to all
them that obeyed him. When he went to releeve Bologna, he manadged that design
with so great secresy, that he was on the way before his Army doubted it, and
was within it before his Enemies knew it; At the journey of Ravenna he alone
ordered and disposed of the Battle. Of three bodies which composed it, He
chose not one of them to command. He reserved only for himself a Troop of
voluntary Gentlemen to be free, and to charge where there should be need. I
speak not of his eloquence; It Is sufficient to say, that it lives yet with
honor in history; and has been admired of strangers, and of them also who
esteemed us Barbarous. It must be confessed that that Prince at the Age of 22
years wherein he died was a complete Man, and that no life was so short and
more glorious then his. The Head then and the good sense are more necessary for
a General of an Army, then Arms and impetuosity; and it is foresight that
begets the victory, rather then courage. It Is study, Meditation, and conference
which ought to prepare the great Person whereof I speak; and it is the Practique
and Experience which finish and complete them. For that reason, It was said of
Epaminondas, that never man knew so much and spoke so little. It Is not that he
esteemed silence a great virtue, as some have interpreted, nor that he
preferred it to speech conducted by good sense; But it is that, in effect, he
always tumbled up and down some great design in his Brain; That he thought
of raising Thebes of humbling Sparta, and of subduing the Grecian people, which
to his time had been invincible.

How excellent Sr. the Cardinal is in this Matter; How active and lively his
Reason is; how infallible and just his providence, and how efficacious the
disposition of his Conduct; Lets not amuse at words to declare it, and let us
lend nothing of strange to a truth that has no need of it; lets add nothing to
the effects, and to what has been touched or seen but a natural
Representation; let us leave the Artifices, and painting for moderate Beauties
and for Common virtues. For this effect, I will content my self to speak of
the second war of Italy, wherein he particularly presided, and whereof he had
the principal government under the Auspicious Planets of his master; I say
then, that it had been much to make a great Army subsist in Piedmoat, if the
Country had been favorable to us, if abundance had been in all places, and in
a season when the passages had been easy to us. But to make it live in the
enemies Country, and where all men and all things were Contrary to us. In a
season when Barrenness was in France, and provisions were to pass the
Mountains, when snows were at the highest; It must be acknowledged that it
belongs not to a vulgar Providence to strike such strokes. It was to supply by
his Wit and Conduct what was wanting to the nature of things. And the Marquis
of Spinola who never thought it, seemed to have Reason to say, that he who had
most provisions would remain victorious in that war. He believed infallibly
to have that advantage over us, having the Earth, and Sea for him, knowing that
our Country Men are enemies t'orders, without which armies suffer in the midst
of abundance, and wherewith they subsist entirely in the midst of want. He
remembered that at the war of Genes, the army of the dead Constable was vexed
with hunger though it was small. Though it had Piedmont in its favor and made
war only for the Interests of the Duke of Savoy; But when he saw, that we
resisted those great incommodities; That we had found Remedies against those
evils and new Inventions to carry the provisions; It Is then he confessed the
French had changed their humors, or at least that the sheep were the same, but
governed by other Shepherds. These things truly are great, and have been
worthy of admiration from our enemies and of them wh'admire not much but
themselves. But they are not nevertheless the Masterpiece of Sr. the
Cardinals industry, nor the great effect of his prudence. The preparatives for
the release of Casal are a piece most Illustrious and Magnificent. And as the
works of the least eize are more ingenious then the other, and that it is more
difficult for an artificer to make a work of a small volume to prosper then a
greater. In like manner the foresight which operates much in little time, and
in a short intervall displayes a very large Matter; is of a price, and
Gonsideration more exalted then that which is acted at great leisure, which
has a free field t'extend itself, which has no bounds to Constrain it, and
which is not oppressed by the brevity of time, and by the greatness of its
object. To raise thirty thousand men in less then six weeks; Make them March
through France and over the Mountains during that time; Give order for all
necessaries; TO enable them to live, and subsist; To send them to a Country
spoiled with Contagion, and into places where the plague might give fear to
them, that did not fear men; against powerful Enemies covered with
Retrenchments and strong holds; defended by a castle, and a Town; In a time
when the disgrace the Venetians received at Valese, ad the unhappy success of
their Arms. The surprise of Mantova which had somewhat of fatal, and
inimaginable. The rendering of the Town and Castle of Casall; had put all our
friends into despair, and the greatest part of the French into astonishment.
Add to that the Artifices used by some ill Frenchmen to ruin the Kings
designs and the honor of France. The traverses they raised within; which were
the more dangerous that they were secret and silent, and resembled the Mines,
which make them leap who march upon them without suspicion or defiance. And
what was most fatal and of ill augury the Kings sickness and the despair of
his recovery. This sad accident which might alone have troubled a weaker spirit
then the Cardinal's, for the unhappy State of our affairs, and of our Allies;
and for the revolution it had caused in the general order of the World, and in
his particular fortune. That this black Conjunction and so many Inconveniences
linked together did not disturb his judgment nor abate his action. That the
necessary provisions for the Relief fo Casall were provided. That Casall was
relieved; If th'unhappinesse of this time permitted me to speak a bold truth,
and if his modesty of whom I speak would not be offended, I would say that
since Caesar's time the world has not seen a stronger Conduct, more resolute
or wiser; and if that had happened in the time of the Commonwealth of Rome or of
old Greece, that it had been one of the fairest Monuments of their History, and
one of the most famous Instances of their policy.

I will not conceal a very remarkable Condition in the Conduct of Sr. the
Cardinal. It Is that he prepares always, if he be not hindered, meaner which
seem immeasurable and too powerful to produce The End which he proposes to
himself. It Is properly t'employ Excess t'hinder defect. It Is to part very
early not to fail the arrival at the journeyes end. It Is to have a remainder,
to avoid having too little It Is not to act singly, but infallibly. It Is in a
word the Country Custom of the ordinary humor of the French. To whom th'heat
of temper and vivacity of imagination always represent th'Enterprizes more
easy and of less durance they they are in effect. Moreover the preparations
they make are ever less and weaker then the nature of the Enterprise requires,
according also to the proportions they have imagined, and according to the
Measure of their apprehension. Wherefore they are constrained to retire in the
midst of their Course, and all things fail them, when they have most need, and
in the strength of th'Affaire.

This indiscreet proceeding and tumultuary fashion of acting has been cause of
infinite evils which have vexed France. That they have often stirred ill
humors which were left be hind without purging of them away; that so many
fair Beginnings we have had in the wars, had not' answerable ends; And in a
word, that we have not known to conserve th'advantages we had gained, nor keep
the Conquests which we had made. Sr. the Cardinal carried himself in another
manner and kept another way, when it was necessay to force the Alps, and to
break the Barricado's, which opposed the safety of Casal and the liberty of
Italy; He advised the King to march thither with an army, capable to subdue all
Italy, and to pass from Suza to Ofrante. So truly the Reputation of those
great forces, did impart the effect which we aimed at: It acted far off, and
all alone; it began't overcome so soon as it began to march; and the Spaniards
who it may be had marched to meet us, and had disputed all the passages with
us, if we had been weak; durst not attend us in their trenches of Casal, and
did not believe that there was safety for them in the Castle of Milan but by a
treaty of peace. This served to pull up by the roots the Rebellion of Languedoc
and to lay flat a Party, which had long Rooting in this Province; six armies
were seen at one instant to be drawn out against them; and that division of
Forces which took away the springs of Relief, and Communication to the
rebell-townes. In short the Cardinal knew that the first Maxim of war is,
That who lays out most, lays out least. That the petty frugalities which are
made out of time, are certain losses of what is advanced, that it is not to sow
with hope to gather, but not to seem to do nothing; and that they who give such
covetous Counsels in necessary occasions, seek not so much the good of the
affairs of their Master, as not to lose the matter of doing their own
business.

The End.
THE TABLE OF THE MINISTER of STATE.
BOOK. I.
First Discourse. THat, An Excellent Minister of State is an Evidence of the
Fortune of a Prince, and the Instrument of the happiness of a State. Page. 1.
The Second Discourse. That the Art to govern is doubtful, and difficult; and
receives a great relief from Learning. P. 6. The third Discourse. That the
knowledge of the Moral, is a necessary preparation for the Politic. p. 9.
The fourth Discourse. How that saying of the Philosopher's is to be understood,
that, Who commands ought to be wiser and better then the person that obeys. p.
12. The fifth Discourse. That good Ministers of State have not always the
Recompense which they deserve; and that their Services are often paid with
Ingratitude. p. 15. The sixth Discourse. The Artifices used by Ferdinand to
destroy the great Captain. p. 19. The seventh Discourse. Of the disgrace of
Duke of Alva. p. 23. The eighth Discourse. That in the affairs of State, men do
that sometimes which they would not do, and that there are inevitable Faults.
p. 25. The ninth Discourse. Where the precedent Discourse is confirmed by the
Example of the Spaniards. p. 28. The tenth Discourse. That Princes do approve
but of the Services they Command, and punish oftentimes them that are done
against their Orders. p. 31. The eleventh Discourse. That a Minister of State
ought to regulate his Demeanor by the interest of the State, and of his
Prince; Provided that he offend not Justice. p. 36. The twelfth Discourse. That
a Minister of State ought endeavor to make his Deportments more Profitable
than Eminent. p. 40. The thirteenth Discourse. That it is of Importance that a
Minister of State be Learned. p. 46. The fourteenth Discourse. That it is of
importance that a Minister of State be Eloquent. p. 49. The fifteenth
Discourse. That the Council of a Prince ought to be composed of a few persons.
p. 31.
BOOK. II.
First Discourse. THat a Complete Minister of State ought to be able for
Counsel, and for Execution; and ought to have a free power particularly for the
War. p. 57. The second Discourse. Whence the Virtue of keeping a Secret
proceeds, and how necessary it is for a Minister of State. p. 61. The third
Discourse. That a Minister of State cannot have an equal Soul, unless he has
made trial of Good and Bad fortune. p. 64. The fourth Discourse. That the
Science to discover the merits of Men, and t'imploy them, is necessary for a
Minister of State. p. 69. The fifth Discourse. Of a Fifth temper, which
comprehends the perfections of all the others. p. 73. The sixth Discourse. That
a Minister of State ought not to form his Conduct by the Example of strangers;
and that he ought to treat with them after a Different Manner. p. 78. The
seventh Discourse. That a Minister of State ought to treat in a different
Manner with strangers, as they are powerful and free. p. 87. The eighth
Discourse. That a Minister of State ought not inviolably t'act that which has
been always practiced in the State. p. 90. The Ninthe Discourse. That the
Counsels of strangers ought to be suspected by a Minister of State. p. 94. The
tenth Discourse. How advices from Rome, and from the Mediation of the Pope, are
to be entertained. p. 101. The eleventh Discourse. Considerations upon the
precedent Discourse p. 107. The twelfth Discourse. Considerations upon the
Behaviors of Popes and their Agents, which may serve for forewarnings to the
Ministers of State of other Princes, who shall have occasion to treat with
them. p. 111. The thirteenth Discourse. That the Mediation of Popes is very
profitable in the differences of Christian Princes, and in the Affairs of
Christendom. p. 117. The fourteenth Discourse. Of the Prudence which ought to
be observed in treating with the Agents of the Pope, and whether it be Lawful
t'use dissimulation, and How. p. 123. The fifteenth Discourse. Whether it be
law full to make War with the Pope; Wherein the Demeanor which Philip the
second, observed in the War he made is Commended, and that of Charles the
fifth Condemned. p. 128. The Sixteenth Discourse The defense of Gaston of Foix
against them, who say that God punished him for making War to Julius
th'eleventh; with the comparison of that Prince, and of the great Captain. p.
136.
BOOK. III. Considerations upon the principal things which the King has done,
since the Landing of The English th'Ile of The which will declare some
Conditions necessary for a Minister of State.
The First Discourse. OE what Importance, Care and Vigilance are, for a
Minister of State; and that nothing is to be neglected, principally in War. p.
141. The second Discourse. That the true exercise of Politic Prudence,
consists in the Knowledge of Comparing things with things, and to choose the
greatest Good, and to avoid the greatest Evil. And to consider whether the
Counsel Sr. the Cardinal gave to pass into th'Iland of The, was grounded upon
the Rules of Prudence; And, if the King did well to march into Languedoc after
the taking of Suze. p. 147. The third Discourse. That one and the same Conduct
in War is not to be observed. p. 153. The fourth Discourse. Of the Alliances of
blood which are practiced amongst Princes; and whether the King was well
advised, when he made that Alliance with England. p. 158. The fifth Discourse.
Of the Greatness and Importance of the Siege of Rochelle. p. 169. The sixth
Discourse Of the Instructions may be drawn from the siege of Rochel; and from
what the King did, after the Reduction of that Town. p. 172 The seventh
Discourse. That the General of an Army ought always t'Intend The End of an
Enterprise; and that Foresight serves more then Courage t'attain it; and
whether the King had Reason to make the Truce, was made at Carignan. p. 178.
FINIS
THE SECOND PART OF THE MINISTER OF STATE.

Written by Monsieur de SILHON, Secretary to the late Cardinal RICH LIEU.
Englished by H.H.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at his Shop at the George
in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstan's Church. 1663.


