THE HYDROSTATICKS; OR, The Weight, Force, and Pressure of FLUID BODIES, Made
evident by Physical, and Sensible Experiments.

TOGETHER With some Miscellany Observations, the last whereof is a short
History of Coal, and of all the Common, and Proper Accidents thereof; a Subject
never treated of before.

By G. S.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Swintoun, James Glen, and Thomas Brown: Anno DOM.
1672.

G. SINCLARI P. Professoris, Hydrostatica

EDINBURGI, Ann. Dom. 1672

Intus se vasti Proteus tegit obice saxi.



To my very Honorable, and Noble LORD, ROBERT VISCOUNT of OXFUIRD, LORD
MACKGILL of COUSLAND, etc.
My Noble Lord,
THe first application I make, is for pardon, that I have adventured to prefix
your name to the Frontispice of this Work, which in it self, cannot be thought
worthy of your Trust and Protection; there being no proportion between the
greatness of your Merit, and so mean an Oblation; save what flows from the
Nobleness of the Subjest, and the sincerity of his respects who presents it. It
is truly a part of Philosophy, that was never much Cultivated, but of late,
except in a more abstract and subtle way, which did render it less useful; but
is now more improven by sensible Manifestations of the Sovereign Mistress of
Arts, NATURE her self. There are indeed (my Lord) many excellent Sciences,
which do merit the favor of your Lordships studies, and by which your Noble
Accomplishments might be more improven; yet I am bold to affirm, you cannot
apply your Noble Mind to any part of Philosophy, where you will find more
Pleasure, with less Pains; more evidence of Reason, with less Difficulty.

The famous Gregorio Leti, was so much an admirer of your Virtues, that he
sheltered under your Patrociny, his Vita Di Sisto quinto Pontefece Romano. And
if you were able to protect an envyed Italian in Italy, much more may I expect
full security from your Name in Scotland, where your interest and relations are
so considerable. And if he, who only looked upon your Virtuous Mind, while it
was but blossoming, was so much persuaded to judge none more fit to Receive,
Protect, and Claim his Labors, much more I, who have seen the accomplishment
of your Virtues at home. I have likewise very much confidence of your Noble and
Candid Disposition to admit this into your Favor, and assurance of your
Affection and Skill, to Love it, and Understand it; both which are conspicuous,
the first in your encouragement to all Learning, the other in your Capacity and
Understanding to comprehend, whatever you encourage.

Though (my Lord) I have been much emboldened to offer this Dedication to your
Lordship, upon the account of your own Heroic Virtues, yet I must not pass
over in silence, a most special Motive, which to me shall be the last, sparing
to express all the great Causes oblieging me so to do, and that is, the Memory
of your Worthy and nearest Relations, who are, my Lord your Father,
Grandfather, and Great-Grand-father, not only memorable for their Virtue and
Learning, and peculiar Endowments, whereby they were thought worthy to serve
their King and Country, in Council, and Honorable Courts of Justice for these
many years, but for the Dignity, and Antiquity of their famous Ancestors. How
old your Lordships Name is, Buchanan testifies in the close of the Second Book
of his History, who writes thus, Certe Gildus vetus est in Scotia Nomen, ut
vetus Mackgildorum, sive Mackgillorum gens indicat: e cujus posteris honestae
adhuc in Scotia and Anglia sunt familiae. That is, Surely Gild is an ancient
Name in Scotland, as witness the old Family of Mackgilds, or Mackgills: of
whose Posterity there are yet in Scotland and England many Families of good
account. And as an instance of this, the same Author tells us of the Great
Thane of Galloway, Mackgillum Gallovidiae long Potentissimum, in the life of
Mackbeth, who by this Usurper was put to death for his adherence to his Prince,
from whom your Lordship, and your worthy Progenitors are Lineally descended,
and of whom Buchanan meant in the foregoing passage, since our Predecessors
flourisht in his time; your Great-Grand-Father having then been His Majesty's
Advocat, his Brother Lord Register.

Having now (my Noble Lord) laid before you so many considerable Motives, which
I humbly desire may prevail, I cannot but make my next Application for
Acceptance, and seriously entreat this Work may be received into the Tuition of
your Favor, and get a full Protection from the Censorious, and being
enlightened with the splendour of your Name, and receiving the impression of your
Authority upon it, may safely pass through the World, for which singular
Favor, I shall fervently wish to your Self and Noble Family, all Prosperity,
and Happiness, and shall think my self very happy under the Character of,

Edinburgh, May 20. (the day of your Lo. Birth and Majority) 1672. My Noble
Lord, Your Lo. most humble and much obliged Servant, GEORGE SINCLAR.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Shall not detain thee entry with a long Preface, but give a short account of
what is needful to be known, of the Cause, Occasion, and Matter of the
following Treatise. After the publication of my last Piece, about the Weight
and Pressure of the Air, I found it needful to treat of the Pressure of the
Water, because of the near relation between the two: the operations, and
effects of both depending almost upon the same Principles and Causes. And that
there are many things, which cannot thoroughly be understood, of the Pressure of
the Air, without the knowledge of the Pressure of the Water: therefore to make
the first the more evident, I have spoken of the second: the effects and
operations of Hydrostatical Experiments, being more conspicuous and sensible,
then the effects and operations of the other.

The Occasion was some spare time I had now and then, for making some Trials:
part whereof are published here; the rest being rather some productions of
Reason, attentively exercised on that Subject; which notwithstanding may be
called Experiments, though never actually tried, nor happily can be, because of
some accidental impediments: yet supposing they were, I make it evident, that
such and such Phenomena would follow, whence many necessary conclusions are
inferred.

As for the subject matter, there are first, more then thirty Theorems in order
to the Pressure of Fluid Bodies, as Air, Water, and Mercury, which in effect
are nothing else, but so many conclusions rationally deduced from various and
diverse effects of Aerostatical, Hydrostatical, and Hydrargyrostatical
Experiments, which for the most part, I have tried my self.

There are next twenty Experiments briefly described, by their own distinct
Schematisms: their Phenomena, according to the Laws of the Hydrostaticks are
salved, and several new conclusions inferred. A Proposal is likewise made of a
more convenient Engine for Diving. Here, several difficulties are proposed, and
answered, and all the obvious Phenomena of Diving explicated. If the Lead which
sinks the Ark, be judged too weighty, and big, which may render it not so
tractable, and likewise hinder the Ark from going so near to the ground, as is
desirable, and in some measure stop the sight, (which troubles are (I suppose)
incident to the Bell also) it may be reduced to a far less weight, and
quantity, and the overplus being made ^quare and thin pieces, may line the
mouth of the Ark without, between P Q and L M, according to the Figure 25, or
may be put to, or taken away at pleasure. The Bell may have likewise in stead
of this troublesome Foot-board, a weighty Ring of Lead, or two, to go round
about the orifice without, in form of a Girth, or Belt, which may slip off and
on at pleasure, and will as conveniently sink it, as if it had a weight
appended: the Foot-board then may be of any form, quantity, or weight you
please.

There are thirdly some Miscellany Observations, the design of which is only
Philosophical. Some of them are Experiments made with the Air-pump, which I
have adventured to insert here, even though the Noble Mr. Boil has given an
account of many. But because the Engine was offered to me by the Lord of
Salton, a Gentleman of a choice Spirit, I could not, but in obedience to his
commands make use of it, and show him the Product. There are also two or three
Observations in the close, as that of the Primum vivens in Animals: of the
Aliment, and growth of plants: and of the motion of the Aliment in Trees. To
all which is added a short History of Coal, which I hope will be acceptable to
some; this so needful a subject, never being treated of before by any. In it,
mention is made of things common to Coal in general, as Dipps, Rifings, and
Streeks. Next, of Gaes, or Dykes, which prove so troublesome sometimes to the
working of Coal. Thirdly, of Damps, and Wildfire. Next, a method is taught for
trying of Grounds, where never any Coal was discovered before. And lastly, the
manner how Levels, or Conduits underground, ought to be carried on, for
draining the Coal, and freeing it of Water.

When this Book was first committed to the Press, I sent an intimation thereof
to some of my friends, for their encouragment to it, a Practice now common, and
commendable, which has not wanted a considerable success, as witness the
respect of many worthy persons, to whom I am oblidged. But there is a
Generation, that rather, than they will encourage any new Invention, set
themselves by all means to detract from it, and the Authors of it: so grieved
are they, that ought of this kind should fall into the hands of any, but their
own. And therefore, if the Author shall give but the title of New to his
Invention, though never so deservedly, they fly presently in his throat, like
so many Wild-Catts, studying either to Ridicule his work altogether a trade
that usually, the person of weakest abilities, and most empty heads, are better
at, than learned men, like those Scholars, who being nimble in putting tricks,
and impostures upon their Condisciples, were dolts, as to their Lesson, or else
fall upon it with such snarling, and carping, as discover, neither ingenuity,
nor ingeniousness, but a sore sickness, called Envy.

In the Intimation, I affirmed, that the Doctrine concerning the Weight, and
Pressure of the Water was New. This one word, like a spark of Fire falling
accidentally among Powder, has been the occasion of so much debate. Their
ground is, because they look upon the Hydrostaticks, as a Science long ago
perfected, seeing Archimedes 2000 years ago has demonstrat the Water to have a
Pressure, and some others since, as Stevinus. They affirm likewise, that all
the Theorems, and Experiments, that are here, are either deduceable from
Archimedes, and Stevinus, or are the same with theirs. If these Gentlemen had
suspended their judgment, till this Book had been published, I suspect they
would not have spoken so confidently. For Archimedes his proposition; they are
but few, and proven (as Mr Boil says) by no very easy demonstrations, which
have more of Geometrical subtility, than usefulness in them. But these, which
are here proposed, are not only useful, but evidently evicted by reason, and
sensible Experiments, even to the meanest capacities. And though some of mine,
may (perhaps) co-incide with some of his, which to me is but accidental, yet
our way of procedour is toto Coelo different. His way is more Speculative: this
is more Practical. His demonstrations are Geometrical: these are Physical. His
propositions are but for the use of a few: these are for the use of all. His
are not illustrated, and confirmed by Hydrostatical Experiments: these are.

Stevinus a late Writer keeps that same method. Yet I judge it easy to let
see, even in the entry, how little cogent some of his demonstrations are,
without derogating from such a Learned Man. He has indeed some Pragmatical
Examples (as he calls them) for illustrating some of his Geometrical
Propositions, anent the Pressure of the Water; but I leave them to be
considered by the judicious and understanding. Again, in this Method, I am yet
as much different from others, who have written lately, as from these I have
been speaking of. For, I not only treat of the Pressure of the Water, but takes
in with it, the Pressure of the Air jointly; since to explicat sufficiently the
Phenomena of the Hydrostaticks, without it, it is impossible. And yet fu^der, I
not only counterpoise Air with Water, but Air with Mercury and Water with
Mercury, by which means several mysteries, and secrets in this Art, are
discovered.

There are several Inventions found out of late in the Hydrostaticks, whose
events and effects, cannot be clearly deduced from the grounds of Archimedes,
and Stevinus, who had not that clear discovery (for (...) we know) of the
Pressure of the Air, that some now have, without which, these effects can never
be sufficiently explained. And who doubts, but others afterward, may make
farther discoveries, and profit the world yet more, with their Inventions, then
any have yet done. Is then the Hydrostaticks, a Science long ago perfected? To
this Pedantick Conceit, I must again oppose the judgment of Mr. Boil, who says
moreover, that the usefulness of this part of Philosophy has been scarce known
any farther than by name, even to the generality of learned men.

But let us suppose, that the notion of the Pressure of the Water, is of an old
date, even as old as the Flood (for Noah surely knew, that the Pressure of the
Water, would sustain the Ark) and (giving, but not granting) that Archimedes
2000 years ago has written all the Principles of the Hydrostaticks, does this
hinder any man now, from deducing new Conclusions from these old Principles?
But there is here, no such thing* for neither in this, nor in my last Piece,
are my Adversaries able to trace me. It Is like the purposes would have been so
much the better, if I had followed other men's foot steps: and it is like they
might have been so much the worse. I doubt not, but I have lighted upon other
men's thoughts in some things: and others writting on this same subject, who
perhaps are my Antipodes, may fall upon mine. My Antagonists affirm, they are
able to deduce all my Theorems, and the events of all my Experiments from the
grounds of Archimedes and Stevinus. If they take not their word again, I hope
they will do it; for now I put them to it. And though they should, (which I am
not afraid they shall do in haste) yet they must prove next, that these
Theorems and Conclusions, so deduced, are not new, which all their Logic will
not prove. But what if we do more, ( say they) even overthrow many of all your
Aerostatical and Hydrostatical Experiments, in this, and in your last Piece? I
give you liberty, and for your hire, a Guiny for each Theorem, or Experiment,
you are able to ransack, in either of the two Books, though they come near to
an hundred. But, ye must oblige your selves ( my Masters) to do it with Reason,
laying aside your Sophistry and Canina eloquentia. And this I offer, Reader,
that I may reduce them, to a better humor, and encourage them to leave off
flyting, and only use reason. Neither must they be like the Wasp, that only
lights upon the sore place. But if they love to kindle any more fire, they will
find me proof against it. If it burn them, it shall not heat me. Nevertheless,
if they love to juik under deck, like Green-horns, having no courage in
themselves, or confidence in their cause, they must excuse me, if at last, I
write their names upon a Ticket, and bring them above deck. This is all I have
to say, at present ( Reader) and I bid thee farewell.

ERRATA.
Page 22. lin. 8. for weight read ben^il. Page 185. lin. 24. for E H, read F H.
Page 235. lin. 24. for 500. read 5000. Page 307. lin. 26. read promoting. Page
313. lin. 22. read reflection. Ibid. lin. 25. read elaborarint. Page 317. lin.
2. read and magna.

Note, that in placing the Figures, the 12, that should have the fourth place
in the third Plate, has the first place in the fourth.

Contents of the EXPERIMENTS.
THe first, second, and third Experiment, touching the rising and falling down
of Water in Tubs of different sizes. Page 37. 41. 44. The fourth is a
Hydrostatical Experiment, showing the Reason why the Mercurial Cylinder rises,
and falls, in the Torricellian Experiment, as it is carried up, or down through
the Air. page 46. 50 The fifth, showing the reason, why the Mercurial Cylinder
rises and falls in the Baroscope, as the Pipe is reclined and erected. p. 51
The sixth, touching the suspension of Liquors in Pipes, either closs or open
above, not only of Water by Water, but of Water by Air. page 55, etc. The
seventh, touching the Cause of the suspension, and keeping up of Water in
Weather-glasses. page 59. The eighth, touching the reason, why a Stone weighs
less in Water than in Air. page 71. etc. The ninth, touching the reason, why
under a Water 34 foot deep, the hight of the Mercury in the Baroscope, is 58
inches. page 77. etc. The tenth, touching the reason, why a man gripping with
his fingers the Torricellian Tub, seems to find the weight of the Liquor
within, and yet finds it not. page 82. etc. The eleventh, touching the
counterpoising of Mercury in Glass-pipes under-water, by the help of a Balance
above, adduced to prove that a heavy Body weighs as much in Water, as in Air.
page 86. The difficulty answered, page 87. etc. The twelfth, touching the
reason, why a Cylinder of Brass, may be suspended by a Surface of Water, before
it touch the bottom, that is 100 foot deep. page 101. etc. The thirteenth is,
touching two plain heavy Bodies suspended under a Water 34 foot deep. page 109
Doctor Mores Argument against the Pressure of the Air, answered. page 117 The
fourteenth, touching the counterpoising of Mercury with Water: of Mercury with
Air and Water; whence some notable Phenomena appear. page 120. etc. The
fifteenth, touching an Experiment tried in a Water 72 foot deep. page 127. etc.
The sixteenth, touching the reason, why the different wideness of Tubs, makes
no alteration in the hight of the Liquors suspended in them. page 133. The
seventeenth, a notable trial for proving the Pressure of the Water. page 137.
etc. Mr. Boyls Experiment in sufficient. page 146. The eighteenth, touching the
Diving-Ark. page 153. etc. The nineteenth, touching a Siphon made to work under
Water with Mercury, by the Pressure thereof, as a Siphon operats with Water, by
the Pressure of the Air. p. 180. The last is for demonstrating the precise and
just weight of any Pillar of Air, Water, or Mercury. p. 183. etc.
Contents of the MISCELLANY OBSERVATIONS.
Observation 1 Anent the killing of Animals in Coal-sinks, by the power of
Damps and Ill Air. page 197. Observe. 2. Touching the position of Jupiter, with
the Stars of Gemini, November. 24. 1669. p. 201. Observe. 3. For knowing the
motion of the Sun, or Moon, in seconds of time. ibid. Observe. 4. Touching an
Experiment made on the top of Cheviot. p. 207. Observe. 5. Touching the
oval-Figure of the Sun, at his setting. p. 209. Observe. 6. Touching a
considerable Thunder, with great Lightnings, in East-Lothian, in July 1670. p.
210. Observe. 7. A method for finding out the true South and North Points. p.
212. Observe. 8. Touching the reason, why a dead body of a man, or beast, rises
from the ground of a Water, after it has lien there three or four days. p.
216. Observe. 9. Is a second Experiment made in a Coal-sink, for knowing the
power of Damps and Ill-Air. p. 217. Observe. 10. An account of Experiments tried
with the Air-pump. p. 218. Observe. 11. An Experiment made, for knowing the
reason, why a round heavy Body, as a Bullet of Iron, falls not off a plain
Body, under motion, but lies dead. p. 224. Observe. 12. Showing the reason why a
stone demitted from the top of a Ships-Mast under Sail, falls directly upon the
place it hang over. p. 226. Observe. 13. Touching the hight of the Mercury in
the Baroscope, observed by D. Beal. p. 228. Observe. 14. Touching the variation
of the Magnetic Needle here. p. 228. Observe. 15. Touching the Elevation of the
Pole here. p. 228. Observe. 16. A second method for finding the Meridian. p.
229. Observe. 17. Touching a considerable shower of Hail, with Thunder, and
Rain. ibid. Observe. 18. Touching a curious Experiment made lately in Germany,
for showing the wonderful force of the Air. p. 230. Observe. 19. Touching some
proposals of new Engines for War. p. 233. Observe. 20. Touching a sad trial one
Mr. Campbel suffered in his Family for many days from the Devil. p. 238.
Observe. 21. Touching a large Horn cut off a Woman's head lately. p. 248. Observe.
22. Touching the Primum vivens in Animals. ibid. Observe. 23. Touching the
Aliment and growth of Plants p. 252. And touching the motion of the aliment in
Trees. p. 254. Observe. 24. Touching a History of Coal. p. 258.
In Auctorem and Opus ENCOMIASTICON.
AETheris expansi, vitrei Maris Antitalanton,
Peroledos, Elasin, Fluidarum rite videntes,
Ingenio patefacta tuo, Magnalia rerum,
Laudarunt alacres Galli, Belgaeque sagaces.
Aggrederi^ nunc Art Nova, trutinare profundi
Corpora, submersas quondam producere Gazas,
Tollere demersis ingentia pondera Cupis.
Gas fracidum in Cryptis ortum Fossorib^s atrox,
Submisso in Fundos Aurae renovante Flabello,
Propulsare doces, Lithanthracumque Cavernae
Queis foveantur Aquis, quo tendant, unde oriantur,
Ordine quo circum Saxorum strata recumbant.
Quodbene coepisti Naturae cuncta foventis
Munera solerti perge Illustrare Mathesi.
GEORGIUS HEPBURNUS, M. D. a Monachagro.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THat thou may know, by one word more, how useful this part of Philosophy
is, and how far from being a Science long ago perfected, take but this
following proposal, lately, since my Book came to a close, communicated to me
by a Friend, which, by his allowance, I have published, reserving the Answer to
himself, the Author thereof.

Brother,
BY what you have published in your Ars Nova and Magna, and this Book, I have
been led to this Invention, to beget within the Bowels of the Sea, a Power, or
Force, which with great safety, and ease, shall bring up the greatest weight,
that can be sunk therein: ad data quaecunque pondera demersa, in Ma^isv^
scer^bus Potentiam producere, quae mo^^ securo, and i^cili, e tun lo cujusv^s
altitudinis ad summum, ipsa (...) I drew a Letter one night, sh^wing the way
how this might be done, which I communicated to you, that it might have been
Printed with your Books but after second thoughts, I judged it more meet to
keep it up for a time, and that it should be set forth by way of Proposal only
at the first, by

O miston* May 20. 1672. Your Brother, Mr. John Sinclar.


This New Invention; though Hydrostatical, is truly Mechanical there being here
a ^ondus and a Potentia, whose ope^ations depends upon Mechanical Principles.
But in several respects it is far more admirable, than the most part of the
Mechan^cal Engines, which are looked upon as stupendous. Many things, almost
incredible, are reported of Archimedes, which he admirably brought about, by
his Mechanical Powers; but I am confident, that by this Invention, as great a
weight may be lifted, if not greater, as the Power of any Mechanical Faculty
can be able to move. I know, the greatest conceivable weight, may be
demonstrat, to be moved by the least conceivable Power, as the Earth, by the
force of a man's hand. But how is it possible to contrive Artificially, an
Engine for that purpose, which will do that by Art, which the demonstration
makes evident by reason? It was thought a great enterprise, when Pope Sixtus
the fifth, transported an Obelisk, which had been long since dedicated to the
memory of Julius Caesar, from the left side of the Vatican, to a more eminent
place, 100 foot distant; but to raise a Ship of 1000 Tun entirely, nay, a
weight 100 times greater, is surely a far greater enterprise. This Invention is
so much the more admirable, that not only by it, any supposed weight may be
lifted, but from any deepness. Though this (perhaps) cannot be done
Mechanically, because of some Physical, or Moral impediment, yet according to
the Laws of the Hydrostaticks it can be demonstrat, and made evident by reason.
And if this be, then surely, when the Weight is determinat, as the burdens of
all Ships are, and the deepness known to be within so many fathoms, this
Invention cannot but be successful.

Though the strength of Mechanical Inventions, may be multiplied, beyond the
bounds of our Imagination, whereby the greatest Weight, may be moved, by the
least Power; yet the Wisdom of God, has thought it fit, so to confine that
knowledge, that it cannot teach, how both of them, can move with the same
quickness and speed. For, if that were, the very works of Nature might be
overturned. Therefore, it is observable, that when a great Weight is moved by a
small Power, the motion of the one, is as much slower than the motion of the
other, as the Weight of the one, exceeds the Force of the other. If it were
possible Mechanically to move the Earth with the Force of a man's hand, the
motion thereof would be as much slower, than the motion of the hand, as the
Weight of the one, exceeds the Force of the other, which is a great
disadvantage. And as the Weight and Power do thus differ, as to swiftness, and
slowness in motion, so also, as to Space. For, by how much the Power is in it
self less, than the Weight, by so much will the bounds or Space, the Weight
moves through, be less than the Space, the Power goes through. If it were
possible (keeping the same instance) to move the Earth with a man's hand, the
Space through which it passes, would differ as much from the Space the hand
goes through, as the one exceeds the other; which is another disadvantage.

It may be thought, that if this Invention depend upon Mechanical Principles,
it may be obnoxious to these abatements. I answer, though there be in it a
Po^dus, and a Potentia, a Weight, and a Power, this moving the other, yet it
will evidently appear from Experience, that the motion of the one, is as swift
as the motion of the other, and that the one moves as much Space and bounds in
the same time, as the other, which is a great advantage. In this, it excells
all the Mechanical Powers, and Faculties, that have ever yet been invented and
practiced. If any think, that such a device cannot be effectuat, without a
considerable expense. I answer, the expense is so small, that I am ashamed to
mention it. The method and manner of doing this, is most easy likewise.
Neither ought this to be a ground, why any man should contemn it; since the
most useful Inventions ordinarily are performed with the greatest facility.

As it commends this part of Philosophy to all ingenious Spirits, as most
pleasant, and most profitable, so it gives a check to the ignorant, who look
upon it as a Science long ago perfected.

In praise of the AUTHOR, and his WORK.
1.
WHilst Infant-Art no further did pretend
Then to flat notions, and ^ bare desire;
What by small toil we now do comprehend,
Our Pred^cessors only did admire.
2.
Now fruitful Reason, armed with powerful Art,
Uncovers Nature to each knowing eye:
Our Author to the World does here impart
What was before esteemed a mystery.
3.
The various motions of that Element,
Whose liquid form gives birth to much debate;
By demonstration he does represent,
Unfolding th'intrigues of that subtle state.
4.
The Wate^s Course, and Sourse, from whence they flow,
By him to th'sense so clearly are displayed
Their current ^eight, and Measure now we know,
It Is no more secret, but an open Trade.
W. C.

Hydrostatical THEOREMS, Containing some useful Principles in order to that
excellent Doctrine, anent the wonderful Weight, Force, and Pressure of the
Water in its own Element.
THEOREM I.
In all Fluids, besides the first and visible Horizontal surface, there are
many more imaginary, yet real. Figure 1.
FOR the better understanding the following Experiments, it is needful to
premit the subsequent Theorems; the first whereof is, that in all Fluid bodies,
such as Air, Water, and Mercury, or any other liquid, there is besides the
first and visible surface, innumerable more imaginary, under that first, yet
real, as may be seen from the following Schematism, which represents a Vessel
full of Water, where besides the first surface A B C D, there is a second E F G
H, and a third I K L M, and so downward, till you come to the bottom. This
holds true, not only in Water, but in Air also, or in any other Fluid body
whatsoever. I call the under-surfaces imaginary, not because they are not real;
for true and real effects are performed by them; but because they are not
actually distinguished amongst themselves, but only by the Intellect.

THEOREM II.
In all Fluids, as it is needful to conceive Horizontal Plains, so it is
needful to conceive Perpendicular Pillars, cutting these Plains at right
Angles. Figure 1.
THis Proposition is likewise needful for understanding the following Doctrine,
anent the Pressure of the Water: for in it, as in all Fluids, though there be
not Columes or Pillars actually divided, reaching from the top to the bottom,
yet there are innumerable imaginary, which do as really produce effects by
their pressure, as if they were actually distinguished. These imaginary Pillars
are represented in the first Schematism, one whereof is A E I N O P Q, the
other B F K R T, and so forth.

THEOREM III.
There is a twofold Balance, one Natural, another Artificial.
BY the Artificial Balance, I understand that which the Mechanics call Libra,
which Merchants commonly use. By the Natural Balance (which for distinctions
cause I so nominat) I mean, v. g. a Sipho^, or crooked Pipe, wherein water
naturally ascends or descends, as high or low in the one Leg, as in the other,
still keeping an evenness, or likeness of weight.

THEOREM IV.
Fluid bodies counterpoise one another in the Balance of Nature, according to
their Altitude only.
THis Theorem will appear afterward most evident, while we pass through the
several Experiments; and it is of special use for explicating sundry
difficulties that commonly occur in the Hydrostaticks. The meaning of it is
shortly this: while two Cylinders of Water are in the opposite Scales of the
Natural Balance, they do not counterpoise one another according to their
thickness: for though the one Pillar of Water be ten times thicker, then the
other, and consequently heavier, yet is it not able to press up the other,
that is more slender, and so lighter, beyond its own hight: and therefore they
weigh only according to their Altitudes.

THEOREM V.
In all Fluids there is a Pressure. Figure 1.
THis is true not only of the Elements of Air, and Water, while they are out of
their own place (as they speak) but while they are in it. For Air and Water,
being naturally endued with weight, the second foot cannot be under the first,
unless it sustain it: if this be, it must necessarily be pressed with its burden.
So this Water being naturally a heavy body, the foot I cannot be under E,
unless it sustain it, and be pressed with the burden of it; the foot N, being
burdened with them both. From this Pressure, which is in Air, arises a certain
sort of force, and power, which may be called Bensil, by virtue whereof, a
little quantity of Air, can expand and spread out it self, to a very large
quantity, and may be extrinsick force be reduced to that small quantity again.
Though this expansive faculty be evident in Air, yet it is scarcely discernable
in Water, unless it be in very deep parts, near the bottom, where the Pressure
is great. This Pressure is not of the same Degree in all the parts, but is
increased and augmented, according to the deepness of the Air, and Water: for
the Air upon the tops of Mountains, and high places, is thought to be of a less
Pressure, then in Valleys: and Water is of a less Pressure, ten or twelve foot
from the top, then twenty or thirty. So is the Water N, under a far less
Pressure, then the Water, P or Q.

THEOREM VI.
The pressure of Fluids is on every side. Figure 1.
THe meaning is, that Air and Water presses not only downward, but upward, not
to the right hand only, but to the left also, and every way. So the foot of
water K, not only presses down the foot R, but presses up the foot F, yea
presses the foot I, and the foot L, with the same weight. And the first
imaginary surface, is as much pressed up, by the water I K L M, as it is pressed
down by the water E F G H. Upon this account it is, that when a Sphere, or Glob
is suspended in the middle of Water, or Air, all the points of their surfaces
are uniformly pressed. After this manner, are our bodies pressed with the
invironing Air, and the man that dives, with the ambient and invironing Water.

THEOREM VII.
All the parts of a Fluid in the same Horizontal Line, are equally pressed.
Figure 1.
THe meaning is, that the foot I, is no more pressed, then the foot K: neither is
the foot L, more burdened, then the foot M. The reason is, because each of
these feet, sustains the same weight: for E F G H are all of them, of the same
burden: therefore all the parts of a Fluid in the same Horizontal surface, are
pressed most equally. This holds true in Air, and Mercury, or in any oth^^ Liquid
also.

THEOREM VIII.
The Pressure of Fluids seem to be according to Arithmetical Progression.
Figure 1.
THe meaning is, that if the first foot of Water, have one Degree of Pressure
in it, the second must have only two, and the third must have only three, and
so forth, which appears from the Schematism: for the first foot E, having one
Degree of weight, and the second foot I, having of its self as much, and
sustaining E, it must have two Degrees, and no more. So the foot N, sustaining
two Degrees of Pressure from I and E, must have the weight only of three
Degrees, O of four, P of five. It Is evident also from Experience, for while by
the Pressure of Water, Mercury is suspended in a glass tub, we find, that as
the first fourteen inches of Water, sustains one inch of Mercury, so the second
fourteen inches sustains but two, and the third, but three. But if the Pressure
were according to Geometrical progression, the third foot of Water ought to
sustain four inches of Mercury, the fourth, eight; the fifth, sixteen, etc.
which is contrary to Experience.

THEOREM IX.
In all Fluids there is a twofold weight, one Sensible, the other Insensible.
THe first is common to all heavy bodies, which we find in Water, while we lift
a Vessel full of it from the ground. The Insensible weight of Water, and Air,
or of any other Fluid, can scarcely be discerned by the senses, though it be as
real, as the former, because the Pressure is uniform. By virtue of the second,
bodies naturally lighter than Water, are driven from the bottom to the top, as
Cork. So, a man falling into a deep Water, goes presently to the bottom, and
instantly comes up again. Here is a natural effect, which cannot want a natural
cause; and this can be nothing else, but the Pressure of the Water, by virtue
whereof he comes up, and yet he finds nothing driving him up, or pulling him
up. Therefore, there is in all Fluid bodies, an Insensible weight, as there is
one Sensible; seeing the man that (perhaps) weighs seventeen Stone, is driven up
fifteen or sixteen fathom by it. And it must be very considerable, and exceed
the weight of the man, seeing it is able to overcome such a weight. So are
vapors and smoke driven upward by the Insensible weight of the Air, and by
that same weight, do the Clouds swim above us.

THEOREM X.
The Insensible weight of Fluids, is only found by sense, when the Pressure is
not uniform.
FOr understanding of this Proposition, I must suppose somethings that are
possible, but not practicable. Put the case then, while a man opens his hand,
the Air below were removed, he would scarce be able to sustain the weight of
the Air, that rests upon the Palm above: or if the Air above were annihilated,
he would not be able to bear down the weight that presses upward. Or, while a
Diver is in the bottom of the Sea, if it were possible to free any one part of
his body from the Pressure of the Water, suppose his right arm, I doubt not,
but the blood would spring out in abundance from his finger-ends: for the arm
being free, and the other parts extremely pressed, the blood of necessity must be
driven from the shoulder downward, with fo^ce, which cannot be without
considerable pain. It is evident also, from the application of the
Cuppin-glass, which being duly applied to a man's skin, causes the Air to
press unequally, the parts without, being more pressed, than the parts within, in
which case the unequal Pressure causes the pain, and so is found by sense.

THEOREM XI.
A Cylinder of Water, or of any other Fluid body, loses of its weight,
according to its reclination from a Perpendicular position, toward an
Horizontal or level situation.
FOr understanding of this, consider that while a Pipe full of Water stands
perpendicular, the lowest foot sustains the whole weight of the Water above it:
but no sooner you begin to recline the Pipe from that Position, but as soon the
Pressure upon the lowest foot grows less; So that if the lowest foot, in a
perpendicular position, sustained the burden of ten feet, it cannot sustain
above five or six, when it is half reclined. A certain evidence whereof is
this, the more a Cyilnder of Water is reclined toward the Horizon, or Level,
it takes the shorter Cylinder of Water to counterpoise it, as is evident in
Siphons. For, though the one Leg, be sixteen inches long, and the other but
six; yet a Cylinder of Water six inches long, will counterpoise a Cylinder of
sixteen. But this cannot be, unless an alteration be made in the Pressure. For,
how is it possible, that a Cylinder of Water can sometimes be in aequilibrio
with a lesser, and sometimes with a greater weight, unless the Weight, and
Pressure of it, be sometimes more, and sometimes less? When I say a Cylinder of
Water loses of its weight by reclination, it is to be understood only of the
Insensible Weight: for the Sensible Weight is unchangeable, seeing it is always
a Pillar of so many inches, or feet. Now the true reason, why the Pressure upon
the lowest foot grows less, is this; the more the Pipe is reclined, the more
weight of the Cylinder rests upon the sides of the Pipe within; by which means,
the lowest foot is eased of the burden, and is altogether eased, when once the
Pipe lies Horizontal.

THEOREM XII.
All motion in Fluids, is from the unequal Pressure of the Horizontal surface.
Figure 1.
FOr understanding this, I must distinguish a twofold motion in Fluids; one
common, another proper, by virtue of the first, they incline, as all other
heavy bodies, to be at the center of the Earth. It is evident in the motion of
Rivers, which descend from the higher places to the valleys, even by virtue of
that tendency they have to be at the center. By virtue of the second, they
incline to move every way; not only downward, but upward, hither and thither.
This sort of motion is peculiar, and proper only to Fluids; and it is that
which is spoken of in this Theorem. I say then, that all motion in Fluids, is
from the unequal Pressure of the Horizontal surface. For put the case A, were
more pressed then B, e. g. with a stone, then surely as the part A descends, the
other part B will ascend, and so will C and D rise higher too. Suppose next,
the part A were fred of the Pressure of the Air, then surely in the same
instant of time, would the part A ascend, and the parts B C D descend. As this
Proposition is true in order to the first and visible surface A B C D, so it is
true in order to the imaginary surface I K L M; for put the case the space I,
were filled with a body naturally heavier then Water, as lead or stone, then
behoved that part of the surface to yield, it being more pressed, then the part
of the same surface K. Or if the space K were filled with a body naturally
lighter then water, as Cork, then ought the water R to ascend, it being less
pressed, then the water N or S.

THEOREM XIII.
A body naturally heavier then Water, descends; and a body naturally lighter,
ascends. Figure 1.
FOr understanding of this, let us suppose the quadrat space E, to be filled
with a piece of Lead or Iron. I say then it must go down to I; and the reason
is, because the quadrat foot of Water I, is more pressed then the quadrat foot
of Water K. To illustrat this, let us suppose that each quadrat foot of this
Water weighs a pound, and that the heavy body existing in E, weighs two pound.
If this be, the foot of Water I, must yield, seeing it is more pressed then K:
upon the same account must the Water N yield, and give way to the Stone, seeing
it is more pressed then R. For according to the twelfth Theorem, There cannot be
unequal Pressure upon a surface, unless motion follow.

For understanding the second part, let us suppose the space R, to be filled
with a piece of Cork, that is specifically or naturally lighter then Water. I
say then, it must ascend to the top B; and the reason is, because the quadrat
foot of Water K, is more pressed upward, then the quadrat foot of Water I, or L
is: but this cannot be i^ Fluid bodies, unless motion follow thereupon. I say,
it is more pressed up, because R being lighter then N, or S, it must press with
greater force upon K, then S can do upon L, or N upon I. It is still to be
remembered, That Fluids presses with as much strength upward, as downward,
according to the sixth Theorem; and that an Horizontal surface^doth as really
suffer unequal Pressure from below, as from above.

THEOREM XIV.
Bodies naturally lighter then Water, swim upon the surface and top. Figure 1.
THe reason of this Proposition must be taken from the nature of an
equipondium, or equal weight. For without doubt, there is a counter-ballance
between the Pressure of the Water, and the weight of the body that swims. To
make this probable, let us suppose there were a piece of Timber in form of a
Cube, six inches thick every way, without weight. In this case, the
under-surface of that four-squar'd body, being applied to the surface of the
Water A, would ly closs upon it, as one plain Table lies upon the face of
another, without any pressure: and it being void of weight, the part of the
surface A, would be no more burdened, then the next part B adjacent, whence no
motion would follow. Here is no equipondium, or counter-ballance.

Secondly, let us suppose the said body to acquire two ounces of weight, then
it follows, that it must subside, and sink two inches below the surface A B C
D; and that so far, till it come by virtue of its new acquired weight, to a
counter-ballance with the Pressure of the Water. Which Pressure is nothing
else, but as much force or weight, as is equivalent to the weight of Water,
that is thrust out of its own place, by the subsiding and sinking of that body,
two inches.

Thirdly, let us suppose the same body to acquire other two ounces of weight,
then must it subside other two inches. Lastly, let us suppose that it acquires
six ounces of weight, then it follows that the whole body sinks, so far, I
mean, till its upmost surface be in an Horizontal line with the surface of the
Water A B C D. Here it swims also, because the weight of it becomes just the
weight of so much Water, as it has put out of its own place. I say, it must
swim, because if the Water I, was able to sustain the Water E, which is put
from its own place, surely it must be able to sustain that body also, that did
thrust it from its own place, seeing both are of the same weight, namely six
ounces. In this case, the body immerged, and the water wherein it is drowned,
become of the same weight specifically, seeing bulk for bulk is of the same
weight. To make this body specifically, or naturally heavier then Water, and
consequently to sink to the bottom, nothing is required, but to suppose that it
acquires one ounce more of weight; which done, it presently goes down, I, being
more burdened then K. Note by the way, a twofold weight in heavy bodies, one
individual, the other specific, and that two bodies agreeing in individual
weight, may differ in specific weight. So a pound of Lead, and a pound of
Cork, agree individually, because they are both 16. ounces: but they differ
specifically, because the one is naturally heavier then the other.

THEOREM XV.
No Body that flots above Water, even though its upper surface be level with
the surface of the Water, can ever be made to swim between the top and the
bottom. Figure 1.
FOr clearing this Proposition, let us suppose F to be a apiece piece of
Timber, of the same specific and natural weight with Water, and consequently
its upper surface to be level with the surface of the Water A B C D. I say
then, if it be pressed down to R, it shall arise thence, and never rest till it
be where it was, namely in F. The reason seems to be this, because the
four-squar'd body of Water R, is really heavier, then the four-squar'd piece of
Timber F. If this be true, it follows of necessity, that it must ascend: for if
the Timber existing in R, be lighter then the Water R, the Water T must be less
pressed, then the Water O, or the Water V; whence (according to the twelfth
Theorem) motion must follow. Again, if the Timber R, existing in the Water R,
be lighter then the same Water is, then must the Water K, be more pressed up then
the Water I, or L; whence yet, according to the same Theorem, motion must
follow. If it be said, that the Timber F, is of the same weight with the Water
R, because, it being equal in weight with the Water F, which it has thrust out
of its own place, it must also be equal in weight to the Water R, seeing F and
R being of the same dimensions, are of the same weight. There is no way to
answer this difficulty, unless I say the four-squar'd body of water R, is
really and truly heavier then the four-squar'd body of Water F. The reason
seems to be, because the Water R, is under a greater Pressure, then the Water
F; and by virtue of this greater Pressure, there are really more parts of Water
in it, then in F; therefore it must be heavier. Even as there are far more parts
of Air, in one cubick foot near the Earth, then in six or seven near the
Atmosphere. Hence it is, that a pint of Water taken from the bottom of the Sea,
forty fathom deep, will be heavier, I mean in a balance, then a pint taken
from the surface. Take notice, that when the vessel is once full at the bottom,
the orifice must be closely stopped, till it come to the top: otherwise the
parts that are compressed at the bottom, namely by the weight of the superior
parts, relaxes themselves, before they come to the top.

THEOREM XVI.
It is not impossible for a body to be suspended between the surface and the
bottom. Figure 1.
FOr understanding this, suppose F to be a apiece piece of Timber, which
though it will not rest but at the surface, A B C D, yet may be made to go down
of its own accord, and rest at T, namely, by making it so much heavier, as the
Water T is heavier then the Water F. To know this difference, which is not very
practicable; the Cube of Water T, must be brought from its own place, under the
same degree of Pressure it has, and put into the Scale of a Balance, and
weighed with the Cube of Water F, put into the other Scale. Now if the Water T,
be half an ounce heavier, then the Water F, then to make the Timber F hing in
T, it must be made half an ounce heavier. There seems to be reason for it also;
for if a Cube of Timber resting in the space T, be just the weight of the Water
T, the imaginary surface O T V, is no more pressed, then if T were Water, and so
it cannot go downward: neither can it go upward, seeing the under part of the
Water R, is no more pressed up by the Timber T, then if the space T were filled
with Water. If it be said, according to this reasoning, a Stone may be
suspended in a deep Water, between the top and the bottom, which is absurd. I
answer, such a thing may happen in a very deep Water: For put the case a Cube
of Lead twelve inches every way, were to go down twelve thousand fathom, it is
probable, it would be suspended before it came to the ground. For coming to an
imaginary surface far down, where the Pressure is great, a Cube of Water twelve
inches thick there, may be as heavy (even specifically) as the Cube of Lead is,
though the Lead be ten times heavier specifically, then any foot of Water at
the top. If Water suffer compression of parts, by the superior burden; it is
more then probable, that the second foot of Water burdened with the first, has
more parts in it, then are in the first, and the third more, then in the second,
and so forth; and consequently, that the second is heavier, then the first, and
the third heavier, then the second. Now, if this be, why may not that foot of
Water, that has sixty thousand foot above it, by virtue of this burden, be so
comprest, that in it may be as many parts, as may counter-ballance a Cube of
Lead twelve inches every way? If then, that imaginary surface, that is sixty
thousand foot deep, be able to sustain the said foot of Water, which perhaps
weighs twenty pound, why may it not likewise sustain the Lead, that is both of
the same dimensions with it, and weight? Hence it is, that the Clouds do swim
in the Air, by virtue of a counter-ballance: And we see, which confirms this
Doctrine, that the thinnest and lightest are always farthest up; and the
thickest and blackest, are always farthest down.

THEOREM XVII.
The lower the parts of a Fluid are, they are the heavier, though all of them
be of equal quantity and dimensions. Figure 1.
THis follows from the former, which may appear a Paradox, yet it seems to be
true: for though the Water Q at the bottom, be of the same dimensions with the
Water E at the top, yet it is really heavier, which happens (as I said) from
the superior Pressure. It is clear also from this, namely the Cube of Timber
E, which swims upon the surface, being thrust down to Q, comes up to the top
again, which could not be, unless the Water Q, were heavier then the Water E. I
suppose the Water E, and the Timber E, to be exactly of the same specific
weight, and consequently the surface of the Timber, to ly Horizontal with B C
D. Now the reason, why the Timber ascends from Q to E, is no other then this,
namely that the one Water is heavier then the other; for the under part of the
Water P, being more pressed up with the Timber existing in Q, then with the Water
Q it self, it must yield and give way to the ascent: for if the Cube of Timber
existing in Q, were as heavy as the Water Q it self, it would no more press
upon P, or endeavor to be up, then the Water Q does.

THEOREM XVIII.
A heavy body weighs less in Water, then in Air. Figure 1.
THis is easily proven from experience; for after you have weighed a stone in
the Air, and finds it two pound, and an half, take it, and suspend it by a
thread knit to the scale of a balance; and let it down into the Water, and you
shall find it half a pound lighter. The question then is, why does it lose half
a pound of its weight? I answer, the stone becomes half a pound lighter,
because the surface of Water on which it rests, sustains half a pound of it:
For put the case a stone were resting in R, that weighed two pound and an half
in the Air, it behoved to weigh but two pound in this Water; because the Water
T sustains half a pound of it. For if this Water T be able to sustain the Water
R, that weighs half a pound, it must be also able to sustain half a pound of
the stone, seeing half a pound of stone is no heavier, then half a pound of
Water. Note, that when a heavy body is weighed in Water, it becomes so much
lighter exactly, as is the weight of the Water it thrusts out of its own place.

THEOREM XIX.
A heavy body weighs less nigh the bottom of the Water, then nigh the top
thereof. Figure 1.
FOr clearing this proposition, I must suppose from the 17. Theorem, that the
lower the parts of Water be, they are the heavier, though all of them be of
equal dimensions. If then the lowest foot Q be heavier, that is, have more parts
in it, then the foot N, it of necessity follows, that a stone suspended in Q,
must be lighter then while it is suspended in N or I. Because, if a stone be
lighter in Water then in Air, as is said, even by as much, as is the weight of
the bulk of Water, that the bulk of the stone expells, then surely it must be
lighter in the one, then in the other place; because suspended in Q, it expells
more parts of Water, then while it is suspended in N or I. For example, let us
suppose the Water N, to weigh eight ounces, and the Water Q to weigh nine, then
must the stone suspended in Q, weigh less by an ounce, then suspended in N,
seeing as much is deduced from the weight of the stone, as is the weight of the
Water it expells: but so it is, that it thrusts nine ounces of Water out of its
own place in Q, and but eight in N or I; therefore it must be one ounce lighter
in the one place, then in the other. This may be tried, with a nice, and
accurat balance, which will bring us to the knowledge of this, namely how much
the foot of Water Q is heavier, then the Water N or O.

THEOREM XX.
One part of a Fluid, cannot be under compression, unless all the parts next
adjacent, be under the same degree of Pressure. Figure 1.
THis proposition may be proven by many instances: for when the Air of a
Wind-gun, is reduced to less quantity by the Rammer, all the parts are most
exactly of the same Bensil. So is it in a Bladder full of wind. It Is true, not
only in order to this artificial Pressure, but in order to the natural
Pressure, and Bensil of the Air likewise. For the Air within a parlour, has
all its parts, under the same degree of natural compression: so is it with the
parts of the Air, that are without, and immediately under the weight of the
Atmosphere. Its evident also in the parts of Water: for the foot of Water R,
cannot be under Pressure, unless the Water S, and N, be under the same degree
of it. Though this be true of Fluids, while all the parts lie in the same
Horizontal surface, yet to speak strictly, it will not hold true of the parts
situated under diverse surfaces; for without question, the foot of Water T,
must be under four degrees of Pressure, if the Water R, be under three. And if
the Air in the lowest story of a building, be under six degrees of Bensil, the
Air in the highest story must be under five. If a man would distinguish
Metaphysically, and subtly, he will find a difference of this kind, not only
between the first, and second fathom of Air, nearest to the Earth, but between
the first, and second foot; yea, between the first and second inch, and less;
much more in Water, as to sense. However it be, yet the Theorem holds true; for
we find no difference sensible, between the compression of Air in this room;
and the compression of Air in the next room above it, no not with the
Baroscope, or Torricellian Experiment, that discerns such differences
accurately. I judge it likewise to be true, in order to the next adjacent parts
of Fluids of different kinds; for while a surface of Mercury, is burdened with
a Pillar of Water, or a surface of Water, with a Pillar of Air, whatever degree
of weight and Pressure, is in the lowest parts of these Pillars, the same is
communicated entirely, to the surfaces, that sustains them. So then, there is
as much force and power, in the surface of any Water, as there is Weight and
Pressure, in the lowest foot of any Pillar of Air, that rests upon it:
otherwise, the surface of Water would never be able to support the said Pillar:
for a surface of six degrees of force, can never be able to sustain a a Pillar
of Air, of eight, or ten degrees of weight.

THEOREM XXI.
The Pressure of Fluids, may be as much in the least part, as in the whole.
Figure 1.
THis Theorem may seem hard, yet it can be made manifest, by many instances:
for albeit the quantity of Air, that fills a Parlour, be little in respect of
the whole Element, yet surely, there is as much Pressure in it, as in the
whole; because Experience shows, that the Mercurial Cylinder in the Baroscope,
will be as well sustained in a Chamber, as without, and under the whole
Atmosphere directly; which could not be, unless the small portion of Air,
that is in this Parlour, had as much Pressure in it, as in the whole Element.
Besides this, it will be found in a far less quantity: for though the Baroscope
were enclosed, and imprisoned so closs, within a small Vessel, that the Air
within, could have no communion with the Air without, yet the Pressure of that
very small quantity, will sustain 29. inches of Mercury, and this will come to
pass, even though the whole Element of Air were annihilated. This Proposition
is likewise evident in order to the Pressure of the Water: for put the case,
the Baroscope, whose Mercurial Cylinder is 29. inches, by the Pressure of the
Air; were sent down to the bottom of a Sea 34. foot deep, within a Vessel, as a
Hogs-head, and there exactly enclosed, that the Water within, could have no
commerce with the Water without, yet as well, after this shutting up, as
before, other 29. inches would be sustained, by the Pressure of this imprisoned
Water, which proves evidently, that there is as much Pressure in one Hogs-head
full of Water, at the bottom of the Sea, as in the whole Element of Water,
above, or about: for an Element of Water never so spacious, if it exceed not
34. foot in deepness, can sustain no more Mercury, then 29. inches by its
Pressure. Yea, though the Vessel with the Baroscope, and imprisoned Water in
it, were brought above to the free Air, yet will the Water retain the same
Pressure, and will de facto sustain 29. inches of Mercury, provided the Vessel
be kept closs. It is therefore evident, that as much Pressure may be in one
small quantity of Water, as in the whole Element, or Ocean. It Is to be
observed, that this Theorem is to be understood chiefly of the lower parts of
Fluids; seeing there cannot be so much Pressure in the Water P, as in the
Water Q; for in effect, there is as much Pressure in the Water Q, as is in
the whole Water above it, or about it. From this Theorem, we see evidently,
that the Pressure, and Bensil of a Fluid, is not to be measured, according to
its bulk, and quantity, seeing there is as much Bensil in one foot, nay, in one
inch of Air, as is in the whole Element, and as strong a Pressure in one foot
of Water, or less, as there is in the whole Ocean: therefore the greatest
quantity of Air, has not always the greatest Bensil, neither the greatest
quantity of Water, the greatest Pressure. But this will appear more evident
afterward.

THEOREM XXII.
The Pressure, and Bensil of a Fluid, is a thing, really distinct from the
natural weight of a Fluid. Figure 1.
THis may be easily conceived; for as in solid bodies, the Bensil, and natural
weight, are two distinct things, so is it in Air, and Water, or in any other
Fluid, The weight of a Bow, is one thing, and the natural weight of it, is
another. The weight of the Spring of a Watch, and the Bensil of it, are two
distinct things. The weight (perhaps) will not exceed two ounces: but the
Bensil (may be) will be equivalent to two pound. Though these may illustrate,
yet they do not convince: therefore I shall adduce a reason, and it is this. The
natural weight of a Fluid is less, or more, as the quantity is less or more;
but it is not so with the Pressure, because there may be as much Pressure in a
small quantity, as in a great, as is evident from the last Theorem, therefore
they may be different. The first part of the Argument is manifest, because
there is more weight in a gallon of Water, then in a pint. A second reason is,
because a Fluid may lose of its pressure, without losing of its weight. This is
evident from the Schematism, for if you take away the four foot of Water E F G
H, and consequently make the four Pillars shorter, the foot of Water Q becomes
of less Pressure, but not of less Weight, seeing the quantity still remains the
same: at least, the loss of weight is not comparable, to the loss of Pressure.
I say, it becomes of less Pressure, because there is a less burden above it.
Thirdly, the Pressure and Bensil may be intended, and made stronger, without
any alteration in the weight: so is the Bensil of Air, within a Bladder, made
stronger by heat, without any alteration, in the weight of it. Likewise, the
Pressure of the foot of Water Q, may be made stronger, by making these four
pillars higher, without any alteration, at least considerable, in the weight;
for it still remains a foot of water, whatever be the hight of the pillars
above it. Lastly, the weight of a Fluid is essential to it, but the Pressure is
only accidental; because it is only generated, and begotten in the inferior
parts, by the weight of the superior, which weight may be taken away.

THEOREM XXIII.
Though the Bensil of a Fluid, be not the same thing formally with the weight,
yet are they the same effectively.
THis proposition is true in order to many other things, besides Fluids: for we
see that the Sun, and Fire, are formally different, yet they may be the same
effectively; because the same effects, that are done by the heat of the Sun,
may be done by the heat of the Fire. So the same effects, that are produced by
the weight of a Fluid, may be done by the Pressure, and Bensill of it. Thus,
the Mercurial Cylinder in the Torricellian Experiment, may be either sustained
by the Bensil of the Air, or the weight of it. By the Bensil, as when no more
Air, is admitted to rest upon the stagnant Mercury, then three or four inches,
the rest being secluded, by stopping the orifice of the Vessel. By the weight
of it, as when an entire Pillar of Air, from the top of the Atmosphere, rests
upon the face of the stagnant Quicksilver. It is also evident in a Clock, which
may be made to move, either by a weight of Lead, or by the force, and power of
a Steel Spring.

THEOREM XXIV.
The surfaces of Waters, are able to sustain any weight whatsoever; provided
that weight press equally, and uniformly. Figure 1.
THis is evident, because the imaginary surface of Water O T V X, does really
support the whole sixteen Cubes of Water above it, yea, though they were
sixteen thousand, And the reason is, because they press most equally, and
uniformly. What I affirm of the imaginary surface, the same I affirm, of the
first and visible. For let a plain body of lead, never so heavy, be laid upon
the top of the Water A B C D, yet will it support it, and keep it from
sinking, provided it press uniformly all the parts of that surface. It is clear
also, from the subsequent Theorem.

THEOREM XXV.
The surfaces of all Waters whatsoever, support as much weight from the Air, as
if they had the weight of thirty four foot of Water above them, or twenty nine
inches of Quicksilver pressing them.
THis Proposition is evident from this, that the Pressure of the Air, is able
to raise above the surface of any Water, a Pillar of Water thirty four foot
high. For, put the case there were a Pump forty foot high, erected among
stagnant Water, and a Sucker in it, for extracting the internal Air, a man will
find, that the Water will climb up in it four and thirty foot; which Phenomenon
could never happen, unless the surface of the stagnant Water, among which the
end of the Pump is drowned, were as much pressed with the Air, as if it had a
burden of Water upon it thirty four foot high. The second part is also evident,
because if a man drown the end of a long Pipe, in a Vessel with stagnant
Quicksilver, and remove the Air that is within the Pipe by a Sucker, or more
easily by the help of the Air-pump, he will find the Liquor to rise twenty nine
inches, above the surface below, which thing could never come to pass, unless
the Pressure of the Air, upon the surfaces of all Bodies, were equivalent to
the Pressure and weight of twenty nine inches of Quicksilver.

THEOREM XXVI.
All Fluid Bodies have a sphere of Activity, to which they are able to press up
themselves, or another Fluid, and no further, which is less or more, according
to the altitude of the pressing Fluid. Figure 2.
FOr understanding this Proposition, let us imagine G H C D to be a Vessel, in
whose bottom, there are five inches of Mercury E F C D. Next, that above the
stagnant Mercury, there are thirty four foot of Water resting, namely A B E F.
Lastly, that upon the surface of the said Water, there is resting the Element
of Air G H A B, whose top G H, I reckon to be about six thousand fathom above A
B. Besides these, let us imagine, that there are here three Pipes, open at both
ends, the first whereof C A G, having it is lower orifice C, drowned among the
stagnant Mercury E F C D, goes so high, that theu pper orifice goes above the
top of the Air G H. The second, whose lower orifice I, is only drowned among
the Water A B E F, reaches to the top of the Air likewise. The third, whose
open end K, is above the surface of the Water A N B, and hanging in the open
Air, goes likewise above the Atmosphere. These things being supposed, we see
that no Fluid can, by its own proper weight, press any part of it self, higher
then it is own surface, seeing the stagnant Mercury E F C D, cannot press it self
within the Pipe C G, higher then E. Neither can the Water A B E F, press it
self higher within the Pipe I L, then the point N. Lastly, neither can the Air
G H A B, press it self within the Pipe K M, higher then M. But when one Fluid
presses upon another, as the Water A B E F, upon the Mercury E F C D, then
does the said Mercury ascend higher than it is own surface, namely from E to O,
which point is the highest, to which the thirty four foot of Water A B E F,
can raise the Mercury, which altitude, is twenty nine inches above the surface
E I F. But if a second Fluid be superadded, as the whole Air G H A B, then must
the Mercury, according to that new Pressure, rise by proportion; so rises the
Mercury from O to P, other twenty nine inches. By this same additional weight
of Air, the Water rises thirty four foot in the Pipe I L, namely from N to R.
Now, I say, the outmost and highest point, to which the Element of Air G H A B
can raise the Mercury, is from O to P; for by the Pressure of the Water A B E
F, it rises from E to O. And the highest point, to which the said Air can raise
the Water, is from N to R. The reasons of these determinate altitudes, must be
sought for, from the altitudes of the incumbing and pressing Fluids: for as
these are less or more, so is the altitude of the Mercury, and of the Water
within the Pipes more or less. The hight therefore of the Mercury E O, is
twenty nine inches, because the deepness of the pressing water A B E F is
thirty four foot. And the hight of the Water N R, is thirty four foot, because
the hight of the Air G H, above A B, is six thousand fathom, or thereabout. And
for the same reason, is the Mercury O P twenty nine inches.

THEOREM XXVII.
A lighter Fluid, is able to press with as great burden, as a heavier. Figure 2.
THis Proposition is true, not only of Water in respect of Mercury, but of Air
in respect of them both: for albeit Air be a thousand times lighter then
Water, yet may it have as great a Pressure with it, as Water; as is evident
from this second Schematism, where by the Pressure of the outward Air G H A B,
twenty nine inches of Mercury O P are supported, as well as the twenty nine
inches E O, by the Pressure of the Water A B E F. So does the same Air,
sustain the thirty four foot of Water N R, which are really as heavy, as the
twenty nine inches of Mercury O P. Now, if the weight of the Atmosphere, be
equivalent to the weight of thirty four foot of Water, or of twenty nine inches
of Mercury, it is no wonder to see Water press with as great weight as Mercury;
which is likewise clea^ from this same Figure, where by the Pressure of the
Water A B E F, twenty nine inches of Mercury E O are suspended, as truly as the
Mercury C E, within the lower end of the Pipe, is supported by the outward
invironing Mercury. The reasons of these Phenomena, are taken from the
altitudes of the pressing Fluids: for though a Body were never so light, yet
multiplication of parts makes multiplication of weight; which multiplication of
parts in Fluids, must be according to altitude: for multiplication of parts
according to thickness and breadth will not do it. Observe here, that if as
much Air, as fills the Tub between N and L, were put into the scale of a
Balance, it would exactly counterpoise the thirty four foot of Water N R,
poured into the other scale. Item, that as much Water as will fill the Tub
between E and A, is just the weight of the Mercury E O. Lastly, that as much
Air as will fill the Pipe, between O and G, is just the weight of the Mercury O
P.

THEOREM XXVIII.
The Pressure of Fluids, does not diminish, while you subtract from their
thickness, but only, when you subtract from their altitude. Figure 1.
FOr understanding this, let us look upon the first Schematism, where there are
four Pillars of Water. Now I say, though you cut off the three Columes of
Water, upon the right side, yet there shall remain as much Pressure, in the
quadrat foot of Water Q, as was, while these were entire. But if you cut off
from the top, the Water E F G H, then presently an alteration follows, not
only in the lowest parts, nigh to the bottom, but through all the intermediat
parts: for not only the Water Q loses a degree of its Pressure, but the
Waters P and O suffer the same loss. This Theorem holds true likewise in order
to the Element of Air. For if by Divine Providence, the Air should become less
in Altitude, than it is; then surely, the Bensil of the ambient Air, that we
breath in and out, should be by proportion weakened also. And contrariwise, if
the Altitude became more, then stronger should the Bensil be here, with us, in
the lowest parts: both which would be hurtful to creatures, that live by
breathing. For if the Altitude of the Air, were far more then it is, our bodies
would be under a far greater Pressure, which surely would be very hurtful. And
upon the other hand, if the Altitude of the Air, were far less then it is, we
should be at a greater loss; for then, by reason of the weak Bensil, we would
breath indeed, but with great difficulty.

THEOREM XXIX.
A thicker Pillar of a Fluid, is not able to press up a slenderer, unless there
be an unequal Pressure. Figure 3.
FOr understanding this, let us suppose this third Schematism to represent a
vessel with Water in it, as high as A B, among which is thrust down to the
bottom, the Pipe G H, open at both ends. I say then, the two thicker Pillars of
Air E A, and F B, pressing upon the surface of the Water A B, are not able to
press up the Water H I, or the slender Pillar of Air I G within the Pipe, the
one higher then I, the other higher then G. If it be said, they are heavier,
because they are thicker. I answer, they are truly heavier, for the Pillar of
Air F B apart, will be thrice as heavy, as the slender Pillar of Air I G. But,
if you reckon the Pillar of Air E A, upon the left hand, both together, will be
six times heavier, then the Air I G: yet are they not able, either severally,
or conjunctly, to press up the Water H I, higher then I, or the Air I G, higher
then G. For solving this difficulty, I must say conform to the fourth Theorem,
that Fluid Bodies, counterpoiseth one another, not according to their
thickness, and breadth, but according to their altitude only: therefore, seeing
the slender Pillar of Air I G, is as high, as either F B, or E A, it cannot be
pressed up by them. For by virtue of this equal hight, all the three press
equally and uniformly, upon the surface of Water A B; and therefore according
to the twelfth Theorem, there can be no motion. But if so be, the Pillar F B,
were higher then the Pillar I G, then surely would the Water H I, be pressed up;
for in such a case, there is an unequal Pressure. Or if the Pillar I G, were
higher then the Pillar F B, then surely would the Water I H be pressed down,
there being again an unequal Pressure: the Water within the Pipe, being more
burdened then the Water about the Pipe. In a word, there is no more difficulty
here, then if the Pipe were taken away: in which case, there would be but one
Pillar of Air, resting upon the surface of Water A B. If it be said, the Pipe
being thrust down, makes of one Pillar, three distinct ones, and consequently a
formal counter-ballance, or mutual sustentation. Be it so, yet because all
these press uniformly, there can be no motion.

THEOREM XXX.
Fluids press not only according to perpendicular Lines, but according to
crooked Lines. Figure 4.
FOr proving this Proposition, let us suppose A B C D, to be a large Vessel
full of Water, as high as A N B, and a little Vessel lying within it, near to
the bottom, closs above at M, but with an open orifice downward, as G, and
having other two passages going in to it, upon the right, and left side, as E
O, and F P. Now, I say, the Pressure of this Water, is not only from N to M,
in a Straight line downwards, but from E to O, and from F to P, by crooked
lines. Nay, put the case this Vessel had no passage in to it, but by a
Labyrinth, or entry full of intricate windings, yet the Pressure will be
communicated, through all these, even to the middle of it: and which is more,
the Water H or I, within the Vessel, would be under the same degree of
Pressure, with the Water E or L, without, or with the Water K or F. And which
is strange, let us suppose both the entries E and F stopped, and nothing
remaining open, but the hole G, which I judge no wider, then may admit the hair
of ones head, yet through that small hole, shall the Pressure be communicated, to
the parts of the Water within, in as high a degree, as if the upper part of the
Vessel E M L, were cut off, to let the Pressure come down directly. What is
true in order to Water, the same is true in order to Air, or Mercury, or any
other Fluid. For, though a house were built never so closs, without door, or
window, yet if there remain but one small hole in it, the Pressure of the whole
Atmosphere, shall be transmitted through that entry, and shall reduce the Air
within the house, to as high a degree of Bensil, as the Air without.

THEOREM XXXI.
The Pressure, and Bensil of a Fluid, that is in the Lowest foot, is equivalent
to the weight of the whole Pillar above. Figure 5.
FOr understanding this Proposition, let us suppose E F to be the lowest foot
of a Pillar of Air, cut off from the rest, and enclosed in the Vessel E F, six
inches in Diameter, or wideness, and twelve inches high. Now I say, the Bensil
and Pressure, that is in that one foot of Air, is exactly of as great force and
power, as is the weight of the whole Pillar of Air, from which it was cut off.
Let A B be that Pillar of Air, which I suppose is six inches thick, and six
thousand fathom high. Take it, and weigh it in a Balance, and say it weighs
500 pound, yet the Pressure, and Bensil, that is in the Air E F, is of as much
force: and if the one be of strength by its weight, to move, v. g. a great
Clock, the other by its Bensil, will be of as much. This proposition is true
also in order to Water. For put the case E F, were the lowest of 34 foot of
Water: in it will be found as much Pressure, and force, as will be equivalent
to the weight of the whole thirty three foot, from which it was cut off. But
here occurreth a difficulty; for if the Pressure, and Bensil of the foot of Air
E F, be equivalent to the weight of the whole Pillar of Air A B, which weighs
500 pound, then must the slender Pillar of Air C D, that is but two inches in
diameter, be as heavy weighed in a balance, as the thicker Pillar A B, which
is absurd. I prove the connection of the two parts of the Argument thus: as the
Bensil of the Air G H, is to the Bensil of the Air E F, so is the weight of the
Pillar C D, to the weight of the Pillar A B: but so it is, that the Bensil of
the Air G H, is equal in degree to the Bensil of the Air E F, according to the
Theorem 21. Where it is said, that the Pressure of Fluids may be as much, in the
least part, as in the whole: therefore the Pillar C D, and the Pillar A B, must
be of equal weight, when both are weighed together in the opposite scales of a
Balance, which is false, seeing the one is far thicker, and so heavier then the
other. There Is no way to answer this objection, but by granting the Air G H,
and E F, to be equal in Bensil, and yet the two Pillars unequal in weight,
because according to the 22 Theorem, the Bensil of a Fluid is one thing, and
the natural weight is another.

THEOREM XXXII.
In all Fluids there is a Pondus and a Potentia, a weight and a power,
counterpoising one another, as in the Staticks.
THat part of the Mathematics, which is called Staticks, is nothing else, but
the Art of weighing heavy Bodies; in which, two things are commonly
distinguished, viz. the pondus and the potentia, the weight and the power. It Is
evident, while two things are counterpoising one another in the opposite scales
of a Balance, as Lead and Gold, the one being the pondus, the other the
potentia. The same two are as truly found in the Hydrostaticks: for while the
Mercurial Cylinder is suspended in the Torricellian Experiment, by the weight
of the Air, the one is really the pondus, the other the potentia. Or while into
a Siphon, with the two orifices upward, Water is poured, there arises a
counterpoise, the Water of the one Leg counter-ballancing the Water of the
other; this taking the name of a pondus, the other the name of a potentia. It Is
evident also, while a surface of Water, sustains a Pillar of Water, this being
the pondus, that the potentia: Or, while a surface of Water sustains a Pillar
of Air, the Pillar of Air being the pondus, and the surface of Water the
potentia. Or, while a surface of Quicksilver sustains a Pillar of Water or
Air; the surface is the power, and either of the two is the pondus, or weight,
as you please.

THEOREM XXXIII.
Fluid Bodies can never cease from motion, so long as the pondus exceeds the
potentia, or the potentia the pondus.
THis is a sure Principle in the Hydrostaticks, which will appear most evident;
while we pass through the subsequent Experiments, I shall only now make it
appear by one instance, though afterward by a hundred. In the Torricellian
Experiment, lately mentioned, it is observed, that though the Pipe were never so
long, that is filled with Mercury, yet the Liquor subsides, and falls down
always till it come twenty nine inches above the surface of the stagnant
Mercury below. The reason whereof is truly this, so long as the Mercury is
higher then the said point, as long does the pondus of it exceed the potentia
of the Air; therefore the motion of it downward can never cease, till at last
by falling down, and becoming shorter, it becomes lighter, in which instant of
time, the motion ends, both of them being now in equipondia, or in evenness of
weight.

THEOREM XXXIV.
When two Fluids of different kinds are in aequilibrio together, the height of
the one Cylinder is in proportion to the height of the other, (...) the natural
weight of the one is to the natural weight of the other.
FOr understanding this Theorem, we must consider, that when two Cylinders of
the same kind, as one of Water with Water, or as one of Mercury with Mercury,
are counterpoising one another, both are of the same altitude, because both are
of the same natural weight. But when the two are of different kinds, as a
Cylinder of Air with Mercury, or as a Cylinder of Air with Water, or as a
Cylinder of Water with Mercury, then it will be found, that by what proportion,
the one Liquor is naturally heavier or lighter, then the other, by that same
proportion, is the one Cylinder higher or lower then the other. For example,
because Air is reckoned 14000 times lighter then Quicksilver, therefore the
Pillar of Air that counterpoiseth the Pillar of Quicksilver in the
Torricellian Experiment, is 14000 times higher. The one is 29 inches, and
therefore the other is 406000 inches: which will amount to 33833 foot, or about
6766 fathom, counting five foot to a fathom. And because Air is counted 1000
times lighter then Water, therefore the Pillar of Air that sustains the Pillar
of Water is 1000 times higher. The hight of Water by the Pressure of the Air is
34 foot, and therefore the hight of the Air is a thousand times 34 foot. And
because Water is reckoned 14 times lighter than Mercury, therefore you will
find, even by experience, that the Pillar of Water, that counterpoises the
Pillar of Mercury, is 14 times higher. For if the Mercury be ten inches, the
Water will be exactly 140. If it be 29 inches, the Water will be thirty four
foot. The reason is evident, because if one inch of Mercury be as heavy
naturally as 14 inches of Water, it follows of necessity, that for making of a
counterpoise, to every inch of Mercury, there must be 14 of Water, and these in
altitude, each one above another.

Hydrostatical EXPERIMENTS, For demonstrating the wonderful Weight, Force, and
Pressure of the Water in its own Element.
EXPERIMENT I. Figure 6.
IN explicating the Phenomena of the Hydrostaticks, and in collecting
speculative, or practical conclusions from them, I purpose to make choice of
the plainest, and most easy Experiments, especially in the entry, that this
knowledge, that is not very common, and yet very useful, may be communicated to
the meanest capacities. For, if at the first, any mystical, or abstruse
Experiments, should be proposed with intricate descriptions, they would soon
discourage, and at last hinder the ingenuous Reader from making progress, For,
if a man do not take up distinctly, the Experiment it self first, he shall
never be able to comprehend next the Phenomena, nor at last see the inferences
of the conclusions. Next, though some of the trials may seem obvious, yet they
afford excellent Phenomena, by which many profound secrets of Nature are
discovered. And if that be, it is no matter what kind they be of. Then, the
grand design here, is not to multiply bare, and naked Experiments; for that is a
work to no purpose, for it is like a foundation without a superstructure: but
the intention is, not only to describe such and such things, but to build such
and such Theorems upon them, and to infer such and such conclusions, as shall
make a stately building, and give a man in a short time a full view of this
excellent Doctrine.

For the first Experiment then, prepare a Vessel of any quantity, as A B C D,
near half full of Water, whose surface is M H. Prepare also two Glass-pipes,
the one wider, the other narrower, open at both ends, which must be thrust down
below the Water, first stopping the two upper orifices E and F. This done, open
the said orifices, and you shall see the Water ascend in the wider to G, and in
the narrower to H. Now, the question is, What Is the reason, why the Water did
not ascend, the orifices E and F, being stopped, and why it ascends, they being
opened? To the first part I answer, the Water cannot ascend, because the
imaginary surface of Water L K is equally and uniformly pressed: for with what
weight the outward Water M L, and H K press the said surface, with the same
weight, does the Air within the two Pipes press it. To the second part I
answer, the Water ascends, because the same surface (the orifices E and F being
opened) is unequally pressed: for the outward Water M L, and H K, press it more,
then the Air within the Pipes do. The difficulty only is, why it is equally
pressed, the orifices E and F being stopped, and why it is unequally pressed, the
said orifices being once opened. To unloose the knot* I must show the reason,
why the Air within the Pipes, press the surface L K, with as great a burden, as
the outward Water press it. For understanding this, you must know, that when
the orifice I is thrust down below the Water, there arises a sort of debate
between the lower parts of the Water, and the Air within the Pipes, the Water
striving to be in at I, and the Air striving to keep it out: but because the
Water is the stronger party, it enters the orifice I, and causes the Air
retire a little up, one fourth part, or sixth part of an inch, above I, and no
more, which is a real compression it suffers. For the orifice E being stopped,
hinders any more compression, than what is said; in which instant of time the
debate ends, the Air no more yielding, and the Water no more urging; by which
means the Air having obtained a degree of Bensil, more then ordinary, by the
Pressure of that little quantity of Water, that comes in at I, presses the
part of the imaginary surface, it rests upon, with as great weight, as the
outward Water presses the parts it rests upon. But when the orifice E is
opened, the outward water M L, and H K, press the imaginary surface L K more,
than the Air within the Pipe can do. And the reason is, because by opening the
orifice above, the internal Air, that suffered a degree of Bensil more then
ordinary, presently is freed, and consequently becomes of less force, and
weight; which the Water finding, that has a little entered the orifice I,
instantly ascends to G, it being less pressed, then the Water without the Pipe.
Now the reason, why it ascends no higher then G, is taken from the equal
Pressure of the Body that rests upon the surface M G H: For, as soon as it comes
that length, all the parts of the horizontal Plain of Water, is uniformly pressed
with the incumbing Air, both within the Pipe, and without the Pipe. The Water
in going up, cannot halt midway between I and G, for then there should be an
unequal Pressure in Fluids without motion, which is impossible; for the Water
is still stronger then the Air, till once it climb up to G.

From this Experiment we see first, that in Water there is a Pressure and
Force; because having opened the orifice E, which is only causa per accidens of
this motion, the Water is pressed up from I to G. We see secondly, that Fluid
Bodies, can never cease from motion, till there be an equal Pressure among the
parts, which is evident from the ascent of the Water from I to G, which cannot
halt in any part between I and G, because of an unequal Pressure, till it once
climb up to G. We see thirdly, that Fluid Bodies do not sustain, or
counterpoise one another according to their thickness and breadth, but only
according to their altitude; because there is not here any proportion between
the slender Pillar of Water H K within the Pipe, and the outward Water that
sustains it, I mean as to the thickness; therefore it is no matter, whither the
Glass Tubs be wider or narrower, that are used in counterpoising Fluid bodies
one with another. And this is the true reason, why it is no matter, whither the
Tub of the Baroscope be a wide one, or a narrow one, seeing the Air does not
counterpoise the Mercury, according to thickness, that is to say, neither the
thickness of the ambient Air that sustains, nor the thickness of the Mercury
that is sustained, are to be considered; but only their altitudes. It Is true,
the element of Air is fourteen thousand times higher, then the Mercurial
Cylinder, yet there is a certain and true proportion kept between their
heights; so that if the element of Air, should by divine providence become
higher or lower, the height of the Mercury would alter accordingly.

EXPERIMENT. II. Figure 6.
TAke out of the Water, the wide Pipe E G I, and stopping the orifice I, pour
in Water above at E, till the Tub be completely full. Having done this, thrust
down the stopped orifice I to the bottom of the Vessel, and there open it, then
shall you see the Water fall down from E to G, and there halt. The reason is
taken from unequal Pressure; for the Tub being full of Water from E to I, that
part of the imaginary surface, upon which the Pillar of Water rests, is more
burdened than any other part of it, namely more then L or K; therefore seeing
one part is more burdened than another, the Cylinder of Water that causes the
burden, must so far fall down, till all the parts be alike pressed, in which
instant of time, the motion cease. This leads us to a clear discovery of the
reason, why in the Baroscope, the Mercury falls from the top of the Tub of any
height, always to the twentieth and ninth inch, above the stagnant
Quicksilver. For example, fill the Pipe N Q, which is sixty inches high with
Mercury, and opening the orifice Q, the Liquor shall fall out, and fall down
from N, till it rest at R, which is twenty nine inch above the open orifice Q.
The reason is the same, namely unequal Pressure, seeing one part of the
imaginary surface of Air X S, upon which the Cylinder of Mercury stands, is
more burdened then the other next adjacent: therefore, so long and so far must
the Mercury subside and fall down, till the part Q, upon which the Basis of the
Pillar rests, be no more burdened, than the rest of the parts; in which
instant of time, the motion cease, and there happens an equal balance,
between the Silver within the Tub, and the Air without. If it be said, I see a
clear reason, why the outward Water M L, ought to sustain the inward G I, but
cannot see, why the outward Air T Z S and V R X, ought to sustain the inward
Mercury R X: neither do I see a reason, why it should halt at R, as the Water
rests at G. I answer, though sense cannot perceive the one, as evidently as the
other, yet the one is as sure as the other. For taking up the reason why it
halts at R, 29 inches above X, you must remember, from the 25 Theorem, that the
Pressure of the Air upon Bodies, is equivalent to the weight of 34 foot of
Water perpendicularly, or 29 inches of Quicksilver. The Pillars of Air then T
Z S, and V R X, being as heavy each one of them, as two Pillars of Mercury,
each one of them 29 inches high, it follows of necessity, that the Mercury
within the Tub, must be as high as R. It Is no wonder to see the Silver halt at
R, provided R X, and Z S, were two bulks of Mercury, environing the Pipe, as
the outward Water environs the wider and narrower Pipe. Neither ought any to
wonder, when the Silver falls down, and rests at R, nothing environing the Pipe
but Air, seeing the Pressure of the Air is equivalent to the weight of 29 inches
of Quicksilver. This Experiment is easily made: take therefore a slender
Glass-pipe of any length, beyond 30 inches, open at both ends; but the lower
and Q, must be drawn so small by a flame of a Lamp, that the entry may be no
wider, than may admit the point of a small needle, or the hair of ones head.
Then stopping the said orifice, pour in Mercury above at the orifice N, till
the Pipe be completely full. Next, close the said orifice with wet Paper, and
the pulp of your finger; and opening the lower orifice, you shall find, (which
is very delightful to behold) the Mercury spring out, like unto a small silver
thread, and falling down from the top N, shall rest at R, the motion ceasing at
the narrow orifice Q. This shows evidently, that there is not need always of
stagnant Mercury, for trying the Torrieellian Experiment; but only when the
mouth of the Pipe below is wide: for being narrow, the silver runs slowly out,
and consequently subsides slowly above, and coming down slowly to R, there
rests. But when the mouth is wide below, the silver falls down so quickly, that
it goes beyond R, before it can recover it self, which recovery would never be,
unless there were stagnant Mercury to run up again.

From what is said, we see first, that when one part of a surface of Water or
Air, is more burdened than another, the burdened part presently yields, till
it be no more burdened than the other. This is clear from the falling down of
the Water from E to G, which cannot be supported by the part I, because more
burdened than the rest. We see secondly, that the element of Air, rests upon
the surfaces of all bodies with a considerable weight; otherwise it could not
sustain the Water, before it fall down from E to G: for if it did not left upon
the surface M H, with weight, the Water could never be suspended; seeing the
application of the finger to the orifice E, is only the accidental cause of
this sustentation. We see thirdly, that according to the difference of natural
weight, between two Fluids, so is the proportion of altitudes between two of
their Cylinders: therefore Air being reckoned 14000 times lighter then Mercury,
it follows that the Cylinder of Mercury sustained by the Air, must be 14000
times lower and shorter, than the Cylinder of Air that sustaines it; which
appears from this experiment to be true, seeing by the Pressure of the Air,
which is thought to be about 7000 fathom high, 29 inches of Mercury is
supported between R and X. In a word, if Air be naturally 14000 times lighter
than Mercury, which is very probable; then must the altitude of it, commonly
called the Atmosphere, be fourteen thousand times, nine and twenty inches, that
is 406000, or of feet 33833.

EXPERIMENT III. Figure 6.
WHile the outward, and inward Water are of the same altitude, withdraw the
inward Air E G by suction, or by any other device you think fit, and you will
find the Water rise as high as E, which I suppose to be 34 foot above M G H.
The same Phenomenon happens, in taking the Air out of the narrow Pipe F K. The
reason is still unequal Pressure; for in removing the Air, that is within the
Pipe, the part of the surface M, and the part H, remains burdened, while the
part G is freed of its burden: therefore this part of the surface, being
liberated of its burden, that came down through the Pipe, instantly rises, and
climbs up as far, as the outward Air resting upon M and H, can raise it, which
is to E 34 foot: for the Pressure of the Air upon the surfaces of all Waters,
according to the 25 Theorem, being equivalent to the weight of 34 foot of
Water, must raise the said Water in the Pipe 34 foot. You do not wonder, why it
rises from I to G, as in the first experiment; no more ought you to wonder, why
it rises from G to E, seeing the weight of the Air, does the same thing, that 34
foot of Water resting upon the surface M H, would do.

From this experiment we see first, that the Pressure of the Air, is the proper
cause of the motion of Water, up through Pumps and Siphons, or any other
instrument, that is used in Waterworks of that kind; for if the weight of the
Air, resting upon the surface M H be the cause, why the Water climbs up from G
to E, the same must be the cause, why the stagnant Water follows the Sucker of
the Pump, while it is pulled up. And the same is the cause, why Water ascends
the Leg of a Siphon, and is the cause, why motion continues after suction is
ended. We see secondly, that every Pressing Fluid has a Sphere of activity, to
which it is able to raise the Fluid, that is pressed. This is evident in this
experiment, because the Pressure of the Air resting upon M H, is able to raise
the Water, the hight of E in the wide Pipe, and the hight of F in the narrow,
and no further, even though the said Pipes were far longer: and this altitude
and highest point is precisely 34 foot between Air and Water. We see thirdly,
that it is all one matter, whether Pumps and Siphons be wider or narrower,
whether the tub of the Baroscope be, wherein the Mercury is suspended, of a
large Diameter, or of a lesser Diameter. This is also evident from the same
experiment; seeing there is no more difficulty in causing the Water ascend the
wide Pipe, than in causing it ascend the narrow one. And the reason is, because
the pressing Fluid repects not the pressed Fluid, according to its thickness
and breadth; but only according to its altitude. Therefore' its as easy for
the Air, to press up Water through a Pump four foot in Diameter, as to press it
up through a Pump, but one foot in Diameter.

EXPERIMENT IV. Figure 7.
THis Schematism represents a large Vessel full of Water, whose first and
visible surface is D E H K. The second, that is imaginary is, L I, six foot
below it. The third of the same kind, is M G, six foot lower. The fourth, is N
F O, six foot yet lower. The last, and lowest, is A B C. There are here also
four Tubs, or rather one Tub under four diverse positions, with both ends open.
After this Tub D A is thrust below the Water, till it ascend, as high as D in
it, lift it up between your fingers, till it have the position of the second
Pipe E F, and then you shall see, as the orifice of the Pipe ascends, the
Cylinder of Water fall out by little and little, until it be no longer than E
F. Again, lift it further up, till it have the position of the Pipe H G, then
shall you find the Cylinder of Water become yet shorter. Lastly, if it be
situated, as the Pipe K I the internal Water becomes no longer than K I. The
reasons of these Phenomena are the same; namely unequal Pressure; for the
Orifice A being lifted up as high as F, it comes to the imaginary surface N O,
which is not under so much Pressure, as the other is; therefore one part of it
being more burdened, than another, namely the part upon which the Cylinder of
Water rests, it presently yields, and suffers the Cylinder to become shorter,
and lighter, till it become no heavier, then is proportionable to its own
strength. To make this reason more evident, it is to be noted, that no surface
of Water is able to support a Cylinder higher then its own deepness, that is to
say, if a surface be 40 foot deep, it is able to sustain a Cylinder 40 foot
high, and no more: therefore the surface N O, being but 18 foot deep, it cannot
sustain a Cylinder 24 foot long: for if that were, then the Potentia, should be
inferior to the Pondus, which is impossible in the Hydrostaticks. In effect,
it were no less absurdity, then to say, 18 ounces are able to counterballance
24. For a second trial, lift up the same Pipe higher, till it acquire the
position of the Tub G H; in this case, the Cylinder of Water within it, becomes
yet shorter, even no longer, than G H. The reason is the same, namely unequal
Pressure; for when a Cylinder of Water 18 foot high, comes to rest upon this
surface, that is but 12 foot deep, it makes one part of it more burdened then
another; therefore the part that is more pressed, presently yields, and suffers
the Cylinder to fall down, till the Pondus of it, become equal to its own
Potentia. For the last trial, lift up the Tub, till it acquire the position of
the Pipe K I: in this case, the Water within it becomes no longer then K I, the
surface L I, that is but six foot deep, not being able to sustain a Cylinder 12
foot high.

From this Experiment we see first, that in all Fluid Bodies there is a
Pressure, which is more or less, according to the deepness of that Fluid; this
is evident from the four several surfaces; there being more Pressure and force
in the lowest A B C, then in the next N O; and more in this, then in the
surface M G; and more in this, then in L I. We see secondly, that in all
Fluids, there is a Pondus and a Potentia; which two are always of equal force,
and strength; the Potentia is clear and evident in the surface, by supporting
the Pillar; which Pillar is nothing else, but the Pondus supported. And that
they are always of equal strength, is most evident also; for when you
endeavor to make the Pondus unequal to the Potentia, in making a surface 18
foot deep, to support a Pillar 24 foot high, they of their own accord become
equal; the Pillar becoming shorter, and suitable to the strength of the surface
that sustains it. We see thirdly, that it is impossible for one part of the same
Horizontal surface, to be more burdened then another: for when you endeavor to
do it, by setting a longer Pillar upon it, the part burdened instantly yields,
till it be no more pressed, then the next part to it. We see fourthly, that the
inequality, that is between the Pondus and the Potentia in Fluids, is the
proper cause of the motion of Fluids. For when you endeavor to make a surface
30 foot deep, sustain a Pillar 40 foot high, this inequality is the true cause,
why the Pillar subsides, and falls down, and why the surface yields, and gives
way to it. And this inequality is the true cause, why the motion of Water
through Siphons continues. For understanding this, you must conceive a Siphon,
to be nothing else, but a crooked Pipe with two legs, the one drowned among
Water, the other hanging in the open Air. The use of it is, for conveying Wine
or Water from one Vessel to another, which is easily done by suction. Now after
suction is ended, the motion of the Water continues, till the surface become
lower, then the orifice out of which it runs. The true reason then, why the
Water flows out, is the inequality between the Potentia of the Air, and the
Pondus of the Water; the Pondus being stronger then the Potentia. For in Air
as in Water, we must conceive Horizontal surfaces; and these surfaces to be
endowed with Pressure and force, as are the surfaces of Water. Now when the
leg of a Siphon is hanging in the Air, it must rest upon one surface or
another, and consequently the Water in it, must rest upon the same surface. If
the Potentia of the surface be stronger, then the Pondus of the Water; the
Water is driven backward, which always comes to pass, when the orifice is
higher, then the surface of the Water of the Vessel, among which the other leg
is drowned. If the Potentia of the surface of that Air, be of equal power and
strength, with the Pondus of the Water, the Water goes neither backward, nor
forward, but stands in equilibrio: this happens, when the orifice is neither
higher, nor lower, than the surface of the Water in the Vessel. But if the
Potentia of the surface of the Air be weaker, than the Pondus of the Water; in
this case, the Air yields, and suffers the Water to run out, even as a surface
30 foot deep, yields to a Pillar of Water 40 foot high. The same inequality is
the reason, why Water climbs up the Pump; why Water climbs up a Pipe, when a
man sucks with his mouth. Before suction, the Potentia that is in the surface of
Water, among which the end of the Pipe is drowned, is of equal force with the
Pondus of the Pillar of Air, that comes down through the Pipe, or Pump; but
as soon as a man begins to suck, the said Pillar of Air becomes lighter; and the
Water finding this, presently ascends. The same is the reason, why the Mercury
falls down to 29 inches in the Baroscope, and no further: for as long as the
Pondus of the Pillar of Mercury, exceeds the Potentia of the surface of Air, so
long does the motion continue; and when both are become equal in force, the
motion cease. When the Glass-tub is 40 inches long, and filled with Mercury,
and inverted after the common manner, you are endeavoring as it were, to cause
a surface 29 inches deep, sustain a Pillar 40 inches high, which is utterly
impossible in Fluids* It is judged by many a wonder to see the deflux of the
Mercury in the Baroscope; but in effect, there is no more cause of admiration in
it, than to see the Cylinder of Water grow shorter, by lifting the Pipe up from
one surface to another.

From this Experiment, we see the true reason, why the Mercurial Cylinder of
the Baroscope becomes shorter and shorter, according as a man climbs up a
mountain with it. For at the root of the hill, the surface of Air, that
sustains the Pillar of Mercury, is of greater force, than the surface at the
middle part: and this is stronger than any surface at the top. The Pipe
therefore being carried up from one surface to another, the Mercury in it, must
subside, and fall down, even as the Water falls down, and becomes shorter, by
lifting the Pipe from the surface A B C D to the surface N O. And as the whole
Water would fall down, if the orifice I, were lifted above the surface D E H
K, so if the Baroscope could be carried so high, till it came above the top of
the Air, the whole Mercurial Cylinder would surely fall down. And as by
thrusting down the said Pipe to the bottom of the Vessel again, as the Pipe D
A, the Water ascends in it; so by bringing down the Baroscope to the earth
again, the whole 19 inches would rise again.

EXPERIMENT V. Figure 8.
FIll the Vessel A D G H with Water to the brim. Next, thrust down the open
orifice of the Tub D A, to the bottom, and you shall see the Water ascend in
it, as high as D, according to the first experiment. When this is done, recline
the said Pipe, till it ly as B E, and you shall find the Pipe, completely full
of Water. Next, erect the same Tub again as D A, and you shall see the
Cylinder of Water fall down, and become shorter, as at first. For salving this
Phenomenon, and such like, I must suppose this Water to be 50 inches deep, and
the Tub I A, and B E 90 inches long: and the said Tub in reclining, to describe
the quadrant of a Circle F E G. Now the question is, why there being but 50
inches of Water in the Tub, while erected, there should be 60 in it, when it is
reclined? Secondly, why there should be 90 inches of Water in the Tub B E, and
but 50 in it, when it stands Perpendicular, as D A? If you reply, because there
are 90 inches in recta linea between the point B, and the point E, and but 50
between A and D. But this will not answer the case; because, if you stop the
orifice E, with the pulp of your Finger, before it be erected, you will find
the Tub remain full of Water, even while it stands Perpendicular; and fall
down, when the orifice is opened. Or, while the Tub stands Perpendicular, stop
the orifice I, and recline it as B E: yet no more Water will be found in it,
than 50 inches: but by unstopping the said orifice, the Water climbs up from R
to E, and becomes 90 inches. Now, what is the reason, why it runs up from R to
E, and why it falls down from I to D? I answer then, the Water must run^up
from R to E, because of the inequality, that is between the Pondus of the
Cylinder B R, and the Potentia of the surface of Water A B C, that supports
the said Cylinder. For understanding this, know, while the Tub is erected,
there is a perfect equality, between the weight of the Pillar A D, and the
force or Power of the surface that sustains it, seeing a surface 50 inches deep,
supports a Pillar 50 inches high. But as soon as the Tub is reclined, there
arises ane inequality between the said two parties, the Pondus of the Cylinder
becoming now less than before. If you say the quantity of the Water is the
same, namely 50 inches, in the reclined Tub, as well as in the Perpendicular. I
grant the quantity is the same, but the weight is become less. Now the reason,
why the same individual Water, is not so heavy as before, is this; there are
40 ounces of it, supported by the sides of the Tub within; which were not,
while the Tub was erected: for in this position, the whole weight of the
Cylinder rests upon the surface: but while the Tub is reclined, the said
surface is eased, and freed of 40 ounces of it; this 40, resting and leaning
upon the sides of the Pipe within. The surface then, finding the said Cylinder
lighter now than before, instantly drives it up from R to E, 40 inches. And
likewise, when the reclined Pipe is made Perpendicular, the Water falls down
from I to D, because of the inequality, that is between the Pondus of the
Pillar, and the Potentia of the surface; this surface 50 inches deep, not being
able to support a Pillar 90 inches high; for if this were, then one part,
should be more burdened than another, which is impossible.

It is to be observed, that by how much the more, the Tub is reclined from a
Perpendicular, toward the horizontal surface A B C, by so much the more grows
the inequality, between the Pondus and the Potentia, and that according to a
certain proportion. Hence is it, that the Tub being reclined from 60 degrees
to 50, there arises a greater inequality between the Pondus of the Cylinder,
and the Potentia of the surface, than while it is reclined from 70 to 60: and
more yet in moving from 50 to 40, than in moving from 60 to 50, and so
downward, till it be horizontal, in which position, the whole Pondus is lost.
And contrariwise, while the Pipe is elevated, the Pondus begins to grow; and
grows more, being lifted up from 10 to 20, than from 1 to 10: and yet more in
traveling from 20 to 30, than from 10 to 20, and so upwards; till it be
Perpendicular, in which position, the Cylinder regaines the whole Pondus and
weight, it had. This proportion is easily known, for its nothing else, but the
proportion of Versed Sines upon the line F B; for according to what measure,
these unequal divisions become wider, and wider from 90 to 1, according to the
same proportion does the Pondus of the Cylinder become less and less: and
contrariwise, according to what proportion the said divisions become more and
more narrow from 1 to 90, according to the same measure and rate, does the
Pondus of the Cylinder become greater and greater.

From this experiment we see first, that two Cylinders of Fluid bodies,
differing much in quantity, may be of the same weight: because though the
Cylinder B E 90 inches long, be far more in quantity, than the Cylinder D A,
that is but 50, yet both of them are of the same weight, in respect of the
surface that sustaines them. If it be said, the one is really heavier, than the
other, notwithstanding of all this. I answer, it is so indeed, in respect of
the Libra, or Artificial Balance, that we commonly use in weighing of things:
but it is not so in respect of this Natural Balance, if I may so speak,
wherein Fluid bodies are only weighed after this manner. We see secondly a
clear ground for setting down the ninth Theorem, namely, that in all Fluid
bodies a twofold weight may be distinguished, one Sensible, another Insensible:
because the Sensible weight of the Cylinder of Water B E, remains still the
same, even though it should be reclined to G; for take it out, and weigh it in
a Balance, it will be as heavy the one way as the other. But it is not so with
the Insensible weight; seeing the Tub begins no sooner to recline, but as soon
it begins to diminish, and grows less. This Insensible weight is nothing else,
but the sensible weight considered after another manner. For look upon the
weight of the Pillar of Water B E, as it weighs in a pair of Scales, it is then
Sensible, and weighs so many ounces, and cannot be more or less: but look upon
it in reference to the Potentia of the surface, that sustains it, it is then
Insensible as to us: for though a man should put his hand below the Water, and
endeavor to find the weight of the said Pillar, yet he shall not find it,
though that part of the surface upon which it rests, does really (if I may so
speak) find the weight of it. And as it is Insensible, so is it sometimes more,
and sometimes less, according as the Tub is elevated, or reclined: now these
two being put together, gives a very probable ground for this distinction. We
see thirdly, that the Pondus or weight of Fluids, does not only press according
to Perpendicular lines, but according to lines falling obliquely upon the
imaginary surface; so does the weight of the Pillar of Water B E, press the
surface A B C. We see fourthly, that Fluid Bodies, do counterpoise one another,
according to Altitude only: for put the case, the Pipe B E, we^e ten times
wider then it is, yet will the surface sustain the Water in it, provided the
Pipe keep still the same position of Altitude, namely 50 degrees: the reason
seems to be this; for if the Base of the Pillar become more in Diameter, it
necessarily requires a larger part of the surface to rest upon; which larger
part is really stronger than the lesser part, as will be showed afterward.
From this Experiment we see lastly, an evident reason, why the Mercurial
Cylinder in the Baroscope runs up, and fills the empty space, when the Pipe is
reclined, and why it runs down, when the Tub is erected again. In effect, the
reason is the same, namely, an inequality between the Pondus of the
Quicksilver, and the Potentia of the surface of the Air: for when the Tub
begins to recline, the Pondus begins to rest upon the side of the Tub within;
by which means the Potentia of the surface finding the burden less, instantly
thrusts up the stagnant Mercury to supply that loss, seeing two Fluids cannot
counterpoise one another, unless they be in aequilibrio. And contrariwise,
as soon as the Tub begins to be erected, the Pondus of the Mercury begins to
grow, and so overcomes the Potentia of the surface, till by falling down it can
do no more.

EXPERIMENT VI. Figure 9.
THis Schematism represents a Vessel fall of Water, whose first and visible
surface is H I K; the second, which is imaginary, is E F G: the third, A B C D.
Besides these three in Water, conceive a fourth in the Air, above the Water,
namely L M N. Upon this aerial surface, rests the orifice M, of the Tub T M,
open above. Upon the surface E F G, is standing the mouth F, of the Pipe S F.
And upon the surface A B C D, stands the Pipe R B, open at both ends. After the
orifice B is drowned below the Water, you will find the Liquor rise from B to
H. Then close with the pulp of your Finger the mouth R, and lift the Pipe so
far up, till it have the Position of the Pipe S F; and you shall see the Water
hing in it between F and O. Lastly, bring the said orifice completely above the
Water, till it have the position of the Tub T M; yet shall the Water still
hing in it, as M P. The first question is, what sustains the Water I O; for
the part F I, is sustained by the ambient Water? I answer, it cannot be the
pulp of the Finger closing the orifice S; for though, by taking away the
Finger, the Water O I falls down, and by putting to the Finger, it is kept
up, yet this proves not the pulp of the Finger to be the principal, and
immediate cause. I say then, the Water O I is suspended by the weight of the
incumbing Air, resting upon the surface H I K. For understanding this,
consider, as I said before, 25. Theorem, that the Pressure of the Air upon all
Bodies, is just equivalent to the weight of 34 foot of Water. Hence then is
it, that if the Air be able to sustain a Pillar of Water, 34 foot high, it
must be able to sustain the short Pillar O I, that exceeds not four foot. The
second question is, whether the part F, be equally burdened with the part E,
or G; for it would seem not, seeing the Water O I F, is but four foot high;
whilst upon E or G is resting, not only more then a foot of Water to the top
H I K, but the whole weight of the Atmosphere upon the said top is resting,
which is equivalent to the burden of 34 foot of Water. I answer, there is more
to be considered, than that four foot of Water, which in it self is but of
small burden, therefore to this we must add the weight of the Air between O and
S, within the Pipe (remember that the orifice S is stopped with the pulp of the
Finger) which in effect will be as heavy as 31 foot of Water. Put the case
then, F, to be one foot below the first surface H I K, and the Water O I to be
three foot, then ought the Air O S, to have the weight of 31 foot, because the
surface E F G is able to support a Pillar of 35 foot. This I prove, because the
part E, de facto, sustains 35 foot, because the Air above is equivalent to 34
foot of it, and there is a foot of Water between it and the top, namely
between E and H. The third question is, how it comes to pass, that the Water
still remains in the Pipe, after the orifice M is brought above the surface of
the Water; for there is here no stagnant Water guarding it, as guards the
orifice F. I answer, that the base M, of this Pillar of Water P M, as really
rests upon the horizontal surface of this Air L M N, as a Cylinder of Brass or
Timber rests upon a plain Marble Table, and after the same manner. Remember
that the orifice T is stopped all this time, with the pulp of the Finger. If it
be said, that the part M, is more burdened then the part N, seeing it sustains
four foot of Water, which the part N supports not, and the Air P T within the
Pipe also, which is of as much Bensil and Pressure, as the Air N Y is of. For
clearing of this difficulty, consider, that the Pillar P M is shorter now than
before; for the orifice M coming up from D, some inches of Water falls out, as
will be found by experience. Suppose then, that of four foot, six inches fall
out; if this be, then the enclosed Air between P and T, must be (...) inches
longer, if this be, then of necessity the Bensil of it must be proportionably
remitted and slackened: whence follows by Metaphysical necessity, that it
cannot burden the Water P M, with as much weight as it had, and consequently
the surface of Air cannot be so much burdened. It must then be no more bu^dened
with them both together, than it is with the single Pillar of Air Y N. If then
the Water P M, be three foot and an half, the weight of the enclosed Air T P,
must be exactly the weight of thirty foot of Water and an half.

From this experiment, we see first the Pressure of the Air, for by it the
Water O I is suspended, and by the same pressure is the Water P M suspended. We
see secondly, that in Air, there is a power of dilating it self, and that this
dilatation never happens, without a relaxation of the Bensil. We see thirdly,
that one Fluid cannot sustain another, unless the Potentia of the one, be equal
to the Pondus of the other, as is clear from the Aerial surface, that cannot
sustain the whole four foot of Water, but suffers six inches of it to fall out,
that the Pondus of the rest, and the Air above it, may become equal to its own
Potentia. We see fourthly, that Fluid Bodies have not only a power of pressing
downward, but of pressing upward likewise: as is clear from the Water O I,
that is suspended by the Air pressing down the surface of Water H I K. It
presses upward also, while it supports the Water P M. This Experiment also
answers a case, namely, whether or not, it is always needful to guard the
orifice of the Tub of the Baroscope with stagnant Quicksilver? I say then, it
is not always needful, provided the orifice be of a narrow diameter; for
experience tells, that while it is such, the Mercury will subside, and halt at
29 inches above the orifice, though no stagnant Mercury be to guard. In making
this trial, the orifice must be no wider, than may admit the point of a needle.
Or suppose it to have the wideness of a Tobacco-pipe, yet will the Mercury be
suspended, though the end be not drowned among stagnant Quicksilver, even as
the Water P M, is kept up without stagnant Water about it. For trial of this,
you must first let the end of the Pipe, be put down among stagnant Mercury, and
after the Cylinder is fallen down to its own proper altitude, lift up the Pipe
slowly, till the orifice come above the surface, and you will find, provided
you do not shake the Pipe, the Cylinder to be suspended after the same manner,
immediately by the Air, as the Water P M is.

EXPERIMENT VII. Figure 10, 11.
TAke a Vessel of any quantity, such as A B C D E, and fill it with Water. And
a Glass-pipe, such as G F D, of 15 or 20 inches long, of any wideness, closs
above, and open below. Before you drown the open end among the Water, hold the
Glass before the fire, till it be pretty hot, and having put it down, you will
see the Water begin to creep up till it come to F, where it halts. The
question now is, what is the reason, why the Water creeps up after this manner,
10 or 12 inches above the surface A B? I answer, the heat having rarefied the
Air within, and by this means, having expelled much of it, and the Air now
contracting it self again with cold, the Water ascends, being pressed up with
the weight of the incumbing Air, resting upon the surface of Water A B. There
is here surely an inequality between a Pondus and a Potentia, that must be the
cause of this motion. I judge then the inequality to consist between the weight
of the Air within the Pipe, and the surface of Water C D E. To explicate this,
I must suppose the Pipe to be thrust down cold; in this case, little or no
Water can enter the orifice D. And the reason is, because the Pondus of the Air
within the Glass, is equal to the Potentia of the surface C D E. But when the
Pipe is thrust down hot, much of the Air having been expelled by the heat, and
now beginning to be contracted by cold, the Pondus of the Air becomes unequal
to the Potentia of the surface, and therefore this, being the stronger party,
drives up the Air within the Glass, till by this ascent, the Pondus of the Air
G F, and the Pondus of the Water F D together, become equal to the Potentia of
the surface C D E, that sustains them. For a second trial; bring a hot coal
near to the side of the Glass, between G and F, and you will find the Water to
creep down from F toward the surface A B; and if it continue any space, it will
drive down the whole Water, and thrust it out at D. To explicate this, I must
suppose that heat, by rarifying the Air within the Glass, intends and
increases the Bensil of it, and the Bensil being now made stronger, there must
arise an inequality between the Pondus of the said Air, and the Potentia of the
surface C D E; the Air then, being the stronger party, causes the surface to
yield.

By comparing this Experiment with the former, we see a great difference
between the dilatation of Air, of its own accord, and by constraint. For while
it is willingly expanded, the Bensil begins to grow slack, and remiss, and
loses by degrees of its strength; even as the Spring of a Watch by the motion
of the Wheels, becomes remiss. But when the dilatation is made by heat, and the
Air compelled to expand and open it self, the Bensil becomes the stronger, and
the Pressure the greater. Notwithstanding, though the Bensil of this enclosed
Air G F, may be made stronger by heat, to the expulsion of the Water F D, yet
if this rarefact on continue any time, the Bensil becomes dull and slack. And
the reason is, because Air cannot be expanded and opened to any quantity; an
inch cannot be dilated and opened to an hundred, or to a thousand: neither can
the Bensil of it be intended, and increase to any degree, v. g. from one to 20,
30, or 100. And therefore, as the expansion grows, the Bensil must at length
slacken. But if so be the Air were enclosed, as in a bladder knit about the
neck with a string, then the more heat, the more Bensil: for in this case there
is a growth of Pressure, without dilatation. And sometimes the Bensil may be so
intended with the heat, that the sides of the bladder will burst asunder.

From this Experiment we see first a confirmation of the 21 Theorem, namely,
that there may be as much Bensil and Pressure, in the smallest quantity of a
Fluid, as in the greatest; as is clear from the Bensil of the Air G F, which in
effect counterpoiseth the weight of the whole Atmosphere, resting upon the
surface of Water A B. We see secondly, that when the pondus, and the potentia
of two Fluids, are in equilibrio, or of equal strength, a very small addition
to either of them, will cast the balance. For if a man should but breath
softly upon the side of the Glass between G and F, or lay his warm hand to it,
the said Air will presently dilate it self, and by becoming thus stronger,
thrust down the Water, and so overcome the potentia of the surface. We see
thirdly a confirmation of the sixth Theorem, namely, that the Pressure of
Fluids is on every side; as is clear from the enclosed Air G F, that not only
presses down the Water F D, but with as great force presses up the top of the
Glass within, and presses upon all the sides of it within, with the same
force. This Experiment also, leads us to the knowledge of two things: First, of
the reason, why with cold the Water ascends in the common Weather-glasses; and
why in hot weather the Water descends. Secondly, from this Experiment we may
learn to know, when the Air is under a greater Pressure, and when under a
lesser: because when the Air becomes heavier, as in fair weather, the Water
creeps up in some measure, it may be two or three inches; when there is no
alteration as to heat and cold: and in foul weather, or in great winds, when
the Air is really lighter, the said Water creeps down as much. If it be asked,
how shall I know, whether it be the cold of the Air, or heaviness of the Air,
that causes the Water to ascend; and whether it be the heat of the Air, or the
lightness of the Air, that causes the Water to descend? I have proposed this
question of purpose, to let you see a mistake. Many believe, that the ascent
and descent of Water in common Weather-glasses, is allanerly from the heat and
coldness of the Air; and therefore they conclude a cold day to be, because the
Water is far up: whereas the Water has ascended since the last night, by
reason of a greater weight in the Air, which always is, when the weather is
dry, and calm, though there has been no alteration of heat to cold. If it be
asked, how come we to the knowledge of this, that the pressure and weight of
the Element of Air, is sometimes less, and sometimes more? I answer, this
secret o Nature, was never discovered, till the invention of the Torricellian
Experiment, otherwise called the Baroscope. For after the falling down of the
Quicksilver to 29 inches: if you suffer it to stand thus in your Parlour or
Chamber, according as the Pressure, and weight of the Element of Air, becomes
more or less, so will the Altitude of the Mercury become less or more, and vary
sometimes above 29 inches, and sometimes below. This alteration is very
sensible, which is sometimes the tenth part of an inch, sometimes the sixth,
and sometimes the third, according as the weight of the Air is less or more.
From December to February, I found the alteration become less and more from 30
inches to 28, which will be three fingers breadth. The common Weather-glasses
then are fallacious, and deceitful, unless they be so contrived, that the
Pressure of the Air cannot affect them, which is easily done by sealing them
Hermetically, and in stead of common Water, to put in Spiritus Vini
rectificatissimus, or the most excellent Spirit of Wine, and strongest that can
be made.

It may be here inquired, whether or not, Mercury would ascend in this Glass,
as the Water does? I answer it would; because the ascent depends only upon the
Pressure of the Air, incumbing upon the stagnant Liquor in the Vessel, that is
able to drive up Mercury as well as Water. It may be inquired secondly, how far
Mercury will ascend, and how far Water will creep up? I answer, Mercury can
ascend no higher in a Tub, than 29 inches; and Water no higher, than 34 foot;
and this only happens, when there is no Air above the tops of the Cylinders to
hinder their ascents. But when there is Air, as G F above the liquor, it can go
no higher, than the point to which the cold is able to contract the enclosed
Air, which is in this Glass, the point F. It may be inquired thirdly, which is
the greater difficulty, whether or not Mercury, will rise as easily in a Tub as
Water; for seeing, its 14 times heavier, it seems the Air should have greater
difficulty to press it up, than to press up Water? I answer, it is greater
difficulty for the Air to press up 20 inches of Mercury, than to press up 20
inches of Water; yet its no greater difficulty, for the Air to press up 20
inches of Mercury, than to press up 23 foot of Water, because the burden and
weight is the same. It may be inquired fourthly, whether or not, it be as easy
for the Air, to press up a thick and gross Cylinder of Water, as to press up a
thin and slender one? For example, whether is it as easy for the Air to press
up a Cylinder of Water 10 inches in Diameter, and 10 foot high, as it is to
press up one, two inches in diameter, and 10 foot high? I answer, there is no
more difficulty in the one, than in the other: and the reason is, because Fluid
bodies do not counterpoise one another according to their thickness, but only
according to their altitude, according to the fourth Theorem. Therefore seeing
the slender Cylinder is as high as the grosser, it must be no more difficult to
the Air, to press up the one then the other.

There is one difficulty yet remaining, which is truly the greatest of all;
namely what is the reason, why its more difficult to the Air, to press up 20
inches of Mercury, than to press up 20 inches of Water: or more difficult to
the Air, to press up 20 inches of Mercury, than to press up 10? I answer, this
comes to pass, because the Air is more burdened with 20 inches of Mercury,
than with 10. Now, if this be, then surely it must be more hard to the Air, to
do the one, than to do the other: even as it is more hard; for a man, to lift
up from the ground, 20 pound of iron, than to lift up 10 or 15. The case may be
better illustrated after this manner. Suppose a man standing on the ground,
with a rope in his hand, coming down from a Pulley above, drawing up a weight
to the top of the house: put the case likewise, the weight be a stone of 20
pound, and the weight of it, to increase successively, as it is pulled up. Now
its easy for the man to pull up the stone the first fathom; because it is but
20 pound weight: but the stone becoming 40 pound in the second fathom, and 60
in the third, and 80 in the fourth and so forth, until it become 1000, he will
find the greater difficulty, the longer he pulls. It Is just so with Air, or
Water, raising Mercury in a Tub; for as the Cylinder of the Mercury grows
higher by rising, so it becomes heavier, and consequently the imaginary
surface, upon which the Base of the Pillar rests, is more and more burdened,
and so becomes less and less able to press it up. This leads us to a clear
discovery of the reason, why it is more difficult by suction, to pull up Mercury
in a Pipe, than to pull up Water; and more hard to suck up ten foot of Water,
then to suck up five. For trial of this, which is soon done, take a slender
Glass-pipe 30 or 40 inches long, open at both ends, and drown the one end among
Quicksilver, and put your mouth to the other, and having sucked, you will find
greater difficulty to pull up through the Pipe 15 inches of Mercury, than to
pull up 10, or 8; and far greater difficulty to suck up 20* than to pull up 15.
It may be objected, that if a man had strength sufficient in his Lungs, to suck
out the whole Air of the Pipe, thirty inches of Mercury would come as easily
up, as three, which seems to prove, that the difficulty of the Mercurie's
up-coming, depends not upon the weakness of the Air, but upon the weakness of
the Lungs, and want of strength to suck. I answer, though a man were able to
suck out the whole Air of the Pipe, yet 30 inches, will never ascend so easily,
as ten, nor ten so easily as three, and that for the reasons already given. But
why is it then, (say you) that the stronger the suction be, the higher the
Mercury ascends in the Pipe? I answer, the suction serves for no use, but to
remove the impediment, that hinders the Mercury from coming up, which is
nothing else, but the Air within the Pipe. Now, the more of this Air that is
taken away by suction, (the stronger the suction is, the more Air is taken
away) the ^arder up comes the Mercury. But why ought there to be difficulty in
the suction of Mercury, to the altitude of 15 or 20 inches, more than in the
suction of Water to that altitude? I answer, when I suck Water up through a
Pipe, the suction of the Air above it, is easy; because the ascending Water
helps much to drive it up to the mouth, the outward Air driving up both, But
the suction is difficult in Mercury, because the ascending liquor, does not
help so much, to drive up the Air to the mouth, as the Water does. And the
reason is, because the Air, being more burdened with 15 inches of Mercury, than
with 15 inches of Water, cannot so easily drive up the one as the other, and so
Mercury cannot so easily drive up the Air of the Pipe to the mouth, as Water
does. In a word, according to the difference of specific weight, between Water
and Mercury, so is the difficulty of suction; therefore, because Mercury is 14
times heavier than Water, there is 14 times more difficulty, to pull up the
one, than the other. Note, that suction is not taken here strictly, as
contradistinguished from pulsion; but in a large sense, as it may comprehend it.

To proceed a little further, let us suppose the Pillar of Mercury (see the 11.
Figure) G H, that is raised by the surface of Air F G, to be 29 inches, and
every inch to weigh one ounce. Secondly, that the said surface has 29 degrees
of power or force in it: for in all counterpoises the Pondus and the Potentia
are equal; therefore, if the Mercury be 29 inches, the Potentia of the surface
must have 29 degrees of strength or force in it, to counterballance the Pondus.
These things being supposed, which are evident, let us imagine the surface of
Air, to raise the Mercury one inch above F G. In this case, the surface is
weaker than it was; which I prove evidently, because it is now but able to
raise 28 of Mercury. Imagine next, the said surface to have raised the Mercury
two inches above F G, then it follows, that it must be yet weaker, because it is
now but able to raise 27 inches: for by supporting two ounce of the Pondus, it
loses two degrees of it is own Potentia. In rai^ing three inches of Mercury, it
is three degrees weaker; and in raising four, it is four degrees weaker, and so
forth; therefore, having raised 28 inches, there is but one degree of force
remaining in the surface. And when it has raised the whole, namely 29, it is
no more able, and can no more press. For confirmation, put the case that the
surface of Air F G, were as able, and had as much Pressure in it, after it has
raised 29 inches of Mercury, as it is after the raising of 10; then it follows
of necessity, that after the raising of 20, it shall raise 19 more, which is
impossible, seeing the greatest altitude is 29. It follows of necessity, (I say)
because after the raising of 10, it is able to raise 19 more: therefore if it be
as able after 20, as after 10, it must raise 19 after 20. Yea, if it be as able
after 20 as 10, it must be as able after 29 as 10. If this be, then it may
raise other 29, and a third 29, and so in infinitum. Therefore, I conclude,
that when two Fluid Bodies are in equilibrio one with another; or when the
pondus is equal to the potentia, none of them does actually press upon another,
at least the surface has lost all its Power and Pressure, which is also
evident in the Pillar. For understanding this, let us suppose A C B (Figure
11.) to be a Pipe 58 inches long, and full of Mercury, and every inch of it to
weigh one ounce. Now, when the orifice D is opened, there is here as great an
inequality, between the pondus and the potentia of the surface of Air E B, on
which it rests, as was between the surface F G, and the pondus of Mercury H G.
For as F G had 29 degrees of power to raise G H, so the Pillar A B has 29 ounce
of weight, to overcome the surface E B. And as the surface F G, became one
degree weaker, by raising one inch of the Mercury H G, and two degrees weaker,
by raising two inches, and so forward, till it lost all its Pressure; so the
Pillar, by falling down one inch, loses one ounce of the weight; by falling
down two, it loses two ounce, and so forward, till by falling down from A to
C, it loses all its Weight and Pressure.

But here occurreth a difficulty; for if the surface F G, has lost all its
Pressure, by raising the Mercury from G to H; and if the Pillar C B, has lost
all its Pressure, by falling down from A to C; it follows, that when a Pillar
of a Fluid, and a surface of a Fluid are in equal terms, or brought to an
equipondium, there is no Pressure in them at all. For answer, consider first,
that in all counterpoises, there are necessarily two things, the movens and the
motum, the thing that moves, and the thing that is moved. Secondly, you must
consider the motum, to have a pondu^ or weight in it, and the movens to have a
potentia, or power, wherewith it moves that weight. Thirdly, that as the thing
that moves, has a power or force in it self, whereby it moves, so the thing
that is moved has a power or force in it self, whereby it resists the motion.
Fourthly, that sometimes the resistance of the thing moved, may exceed the
power of the movent, as when a Quarrier with a Leaver, endeavors to prize up a
stone too heavy for him: or the power of the movent, may exceed the resistance
of the weight; or both may be of equal power. Consider fifthly, that as the
pondus of the thing moved, begins to grow more and more, so the power of the
movent decreaseth proportionably; not absolutely, as heat is extinguished in
Water by the cold Air, when it is removed from the Fire, but respectively. For
example, when a man holds a balance in his hand, with six pound in the one
scale, and but one pound in the other, if you add another pound, the weight
grows more, and the power and force of the opposite scale grows less
proportionably; not absolutely, for it still remains six pound, but
respectively: that is to say, six pound is less in respect of four, than in
respect of five; or the resistance of six pound is less, two counterpoising it,
than being counterpoised by one. When a third is added, the weight grows yet
more, and consequently the resistance of the opposite scale becomes yet less,
till by adding the sixth and last pound, you augment and increase the pondus to
that same degree of strength, that the resistance of the opposite scale is of.
From these considerations, I say, the surface of Air F G, has not lost all its
Pressure absolutely, by raising the Mercury from G to H, but only respectively,
because it still retains 29 degrees of force in it self. I say respectively,
because when the Mercury is raised ten inches, the power of the Air which is of
29 degrees of force, is less in respect of ten ounce, then in respect of five;
or the power of 29 degrees of force is less, being counterpoised by ten ounce,
than being counterpoised only by five. And when it is raised 20, it is yet less
in this respect, than in respect of ten. And when it has raised the Mercury to
the greatest altitude H, it may be said to have lost all its Pressure, seeing it
is not able, by virtue of a counterpoise, to do any more. Even as six pound in
this scale, may be said to have lost all its resistance and weight, by putting
in the other scale, first one pound, next two pound, and then three pound, till
the last be put in, at which time it has no more resistance. Though this be,
yet it still remains six pound. Even so, the Air F G still remains of the same
force and power, while it suspends the Mercury G H, that it was of before.
Likewise, the Pillar A B, cannot be said to have lost all its pressure
absolutely, by falling down from A to C, but only respectively, because the
said Pillar C B, is still 29 ounce weight. I say respectively, because in
falling down ten inches, or in losing ten ounce, the weight that is now but 48,
is less, in respect of 29, than while it was 58. It is yet less, when it has
fallen down other ten, because being now but 38, it must be yet less in respect
of 29, than 48. And when it has fallen down to C 29, it may be said to have
lost all its weight, because it can do no more, having respectively lost all
its Pressure.

From what is said, we see a clear ground to distinguish in Fluids a pondus and
a potentia. Secondly, that the potentia may sometimes exceed the pondus, and
contrariwise the pondus may exceed the potentia. Thirdly, that inequality of
weight, between the pondus and the potentia, is the cause of motion of Fluids.
Fourthly, that the motion never cease, till the pondus and the potentia
become of equal force. This conclusion is not so universal as the rest, because
the motion may sometimes cease, before this be. For example, when the Air is
p^^^^ing Mercury up through a Tub shorter then 29 inches, the motion ends before
there be a perfect counterpoise; for 20 or 15 inches of Mercury, can never
counterballance the force and power of the Air. In such a case then, there is
an unequal Pressure, the Air pressing the Mercury more, than the Mercury does
the Air.

EXPERIMENT VIII. Figure 12.
TAke the Vessel A B C D, and fill it with Water, as high as H I. Take next a
Cylinder of stone F G, and drowning the half of it among the Water, suspend it
with a chord to the beam N O, with a ring at E. Now in this case, though the
stone do not touch the bottom of the Vessel, yet the Water becomes heavier,
than before. For discovering the true reason of this, I suppose first, the
weight of the Water, before the stone be drow^ed, to be 40 pound. I suppose
next, that after the stone is drowned, the said Water to weigh 50 pound. And
lastly, the stone to weigh 60 pound. I say then, the Water must be 10 pound
heavier than before, because it supports 10 pound of the stone. It Is certain
the beam is less burdened by 10 pound than before. If this be, then surely the
Water must sustain it. It were great temerity and rashness, to averr that
neither the Beam, nor the Water sustains it, which is really to say, it is
sustained by nothing. It cannot be said without ignorance, that 10 pound of the
stone is evanished, and turned into a Chimera. If it be said, how can such a
Fluid Body as Water, be able to support any part of the weight of the stone,
that is such a heavy Body? I answer, there is here no difficulty, for if the
imaginary surface K L, upon which the 10 pound of the stone rests, be able to
sustain 10 pound of Water (I suppose the stone taken away, and the place of it
filled with Water) then surely it must also be able to sustain 10 pound of the
heaviest metal; seeing ten pound of Lead, or Gold, or Stone, is no heavier than
10 pound of Water. If some say, this rather seems to be the reason, why the
Water becomes heavier, after the stone is drowned, because it possesses the
place of as much Water, as would weigh 10 pound; not (as was said) because the
Water supports 10 pound of it. Therefore it may be judged, and thought, that
if the space that the stone occupies, were filled with Air, or some light Body,
without sensible weight, the Water would become heavier than before. For
example, if instead of the stone, there were placed a bladder full of wind,
within the Water, and tied to the bottom with a string, that the surface might
swell from H I to A B, the Water of the Vessel would become as much heavier
than before, as is the bulk of Water, equal to the quantity of the bladder.
Therefore, the Water becomes heavier, not because it supports any part of the
stone, but because the stone occupies as much room and space, as would contain
10 pound of Water: for by this means the drowned stone raises the Water from
H I to A B; and so the Cylinders A C, and B D, being higher, press with greater
weight upon the bottom C D, even with as much more weight, as if the space that
the stone occupies were filled with Water.

For answer to this, we shall make this following Experiment. Take the Vessel M
P V X, and fill it with Water to Q R. Next, take a large bladder W Y full of
wind, and tying the neck with a thread, thrust it below the Water, and fasten
it to the bottom, with a string, to the Ring Z. This done, the Water swells,
and rises from Q R, to M P. Now, if it be true, that the Water in the Vessel
becomes heavier, not because it supports 10 pound weight of the stone, but
because the stone occupies the room of 10 pound of Water; then it ought to
follow, that after the bladder is tied below the Water, the said Water should
become heavier, than before, even by three pound; for I suppose a bulk of
Water, equal to the bulk of the bladder, to weigh as much. And the reason is,
because (as you say) the quantity of the bladder W Y, makes the water swell
from Q R to M P, by which means the Pillars of Water M V, and P X becomes
higher, and so presses with greater weight upon the bottom V X. For clearing
this difficulty, I say, when a bladder is thus below the Water, tied to the
bottom, the Water becomes not three pound heavier: for when you place the
Vessel with the Water and bladder, in the Scale of a Balance, the said Water
weighs no more, than if it wanted the bladder: therefore the Water becomes not
heavier, because the stone possesses the room of 10 pound of Water, but
because the Water sustains 10 pound of the stone. Now the reason, why the
bladder makes not the water heavier, though it raise it from Q R to M P, is
this; because though verily there be a greater Pressure then before, even upon
the bottom of the Vessel, yet because more parts are not added, the natural
weight cannot be augmented, which essentially depends upon the addition of
these parts. If it be replied, the Experiment of the bladder is to no purpose,
because it being knit to the bottom, pulls up the Vessel, with as great force,
as the growth of the Pressure bears it down, and so the Bladder cannot make the
Water heavier. But, if so be, it were possible, that the Bladder could remain
within the middle of the Water, without being knit to the bottom, and
consequently without pulling up the Vessel, then surely the Pillars of Water M
V, and P X, being higher, would press with greater weight upon the bottom, and
so make the Vessel, and the Water weigh more in the balance: for it is to be
supposed, that during all this time, this Vessel with the Water, is in one
scale, and a great weight of stone or lead, in the other. So would the Water A
B C D become heavier likewise, provided the space and room, that the stone
fills among the Water, remained entire, after the stone is taken away: because
that room and empty space remaining, would keep the surface, as high as A B, by
which means, the Pillars A C and B D, being higher, would press with greater
weight upon the bottom, and cause the Water weigh more in the balance. I
answer, though by some extraordinary power, the bladder could remain below the
water, of its own accord, as it were, and though the space and room, by that
same power, which is left by the stone, were kept empty, yet shall they never
be able to make the Water heavier. As to the reason, that is brought, I answer,
the rising and swelling of the Pillars, will make indeed a greater Pressure
upon the bottom of the Vessel, but because this Pressure may be produced, and
generated without the addition of new parts, therefore, it can never make the
Water heavier: for if this were true, then it would follow, that the more a
body is comprest, it should be the heavier, which is contrary to sense, and
experience. This Pressure is like unto Bensil, that cannot weigh in a balance,
though the thing bended do weigh; as a Bow that weighs so many pounds, but the
Bensil of it weighs nothing: Next, will any man think, that a Cub of Water six
foot high, and six foot thick, will weigh more in a balance, then it did,
after it is turned into a long square Pillar 216 inches high? I grant, there is
near 60 times a greater Pressure, upon the bottom of the Vessel, yet because
this Pressure is generated, without the addition of new parts, it cannot make
the Water heavier. Moreover, it is mechanically possible to keep the Water S T
V X, under that same degree of Pressure it has, though the rest above were
taken away: if this be, then it ought to be as heavy, as the whole, seeing it
still Presses the bottom, with that same degree of Pressure, it had from the
whole: but what is more absurd, than to say, one part of Water, is as heavy,
as the whole? e. g. a pint as heavy as a gallon. If it be said, the Pressure,
and the weight, are but one thing, at least effectively, which is sufficient to
the purpose in hand, as is clear from the Theorem 23. I answer, they are but
one thing indeed, in order to the Balance of Nature, but they are neither
formally, nor effectively the same thing in order to the Libra or Artificial
Balance, whereof we are now treating. I shall conclude with this; while the
Vessel with the Water, is thus placed in the Scale of the Balance, and in
equilibrio, with the opposite Scale, cut the string that ties the bladder to
the bottom, and when it comes above, you will find the Water, just of the same
weight it was of: for though the surface M P, by taking out the bladder, settle
down to Q R, yet there is no alteration made in the weight. From this I gather,
that if the swelling of the Water should make it heavier, then the subsiding
and falling down of it, ought to make it lighter.

From these Experiments we gather first, that in Water there is a Pressure,
because it sustains 10 pound of the stone F G. Secondly, that whatever heavy
body is weighed in Water, it loses just as much of its weight, as the bulk of
Water weighs, it puts out of its place. This is evident, because the stone is
10 pound lighter in Water, than in the Air, because the Water that would fill
the room of the stone, is just of that weight. We see thirdly, that the
Pressure of Water, and the natural weight of it, are two things really
distinct; because the Pressure may be augmented, without any increment of the
natural weight. We see fourthly, that the Pressure, or Bensil of a Fluid,
cannot affect the Scale of a Balance, but only the natural weight. We see
fifthly, that a body naturally heavier than Water, weighs in Water, because the
stone F G, makes the Water about it, 10 pound heavier. If it be inquired,
whether bodies, that are naturally lighter, will weigh in Water? I answer, if
they be of any sensible weight, they weigh, as well as the other. For this
cause, I except Air. For though they were never so light, in respect of Water,
yet if they have any considerable gravity with them, they will make the Water
heavier, they are among. Put the case the Body were a Cube of Timber of six
inches, weighing sixteen ounces, and that a Cube of Water of that quantity,
weighed 112 ounces. Here Is a great inequality, between their natural weights:
yet if that piece of Timber, were made to exist in the middle of Water, as the
Bladder does, it would make it 16 ounces heavier. The reason is this; these 16
ounces are either supported by a surface of Water, or they support themselves.
This last is impossible. If the Water support them, then must they make the
said Water 16 ounces heavier. Note, that though a Body naturally lighter then
Water, as Cork, may be said to weigh in Water, that is to say, to make it
heavier, in which sense Water weighs in Water, because if you add a pint to a
gallon, it makes it heavier; yet if you take a piece of Cork, and knit it to
the Scale of a Balance, by a thread, the Cork hanging among the Water, the
Scale hanging above in the Air, it will not weigh in Water; because in this
sense, no Body weighs in Water, but that which is naturally heavier then
Water, as Lead, or Stone. In this sense, Water does not weigh in Water, as
will be seen in the 17 Experiment.

EXPERIMENT IX. Figure 13.
Take a Glass-pipe 70 inches long or there-about, and of any wideness, having
the upper end H, hermetically sealed, the lower end C completely open, and fill
it with Mercury, and cause a Diver carry it down to the ground of the sea M N,
where I suppose is standing the Vessel A B D E with stagnant Mercury, and drown
the end below the surface A B. This being done, the Mercury falls from the
upper end H, to the point G, and there halts; the space H G being empty. For
understanding this Experiment, I shall propose several questions, and answer
them. First, what is the reason, why the Mercury subsides, and sinks down from H
to G? I answer, as formerly in the like cases, inequality of weight between the
Pondus of the impending Quicksilver, and the Potentia of the surface, of the
stagnant Quicksilver D C E. For while the Tub is completely full, the weight
is so great, that the surface D C E, is not able to sustain it, therefore it
must fall down, seeing motion necessarily follows in Fluids, upon inequality of
weight. It may be inquired secondly, why it halts at G, 58 inches from A B, and
comes no further down? I answer it halts at G, because when it has fallen down
to that point, there happens equality of weight, between the suspended Pillar,
and the foresaid surface: for whatever weight the said Pillar is of, the
surface on which it rests, is of the same. In a word, the Pondus of the one,
and the Potentia of the other are now equal. For understanding this, consider
according to the 25 Theorem, that the weight of the Element of Air, upon the
surfaces of waters, is equivalent to the burden of 34 foot of water, therefore
the first and visible surface of this Water L I K, is really as much pressed,
with the burden of the Atmosphere, as if it had 34 foot of Water upon it.
Consider next, that between the said surface, and the ground M N, are 34 foot
of Water indeed. Consider thirdly, that a Pillar of Water 34 foot high, is
exactly of the same weight, with a Pillar of Mercury 29 inches high; for if
Water be 14 times lighter than Mercury, then they cannot be of equal weight,
unless the one be 14 times higher than the other. Now, supposing the weight of
the Air upon the surface L I K, to be equivalent to 34 foot of Water, or (which
is the same thing) to 29 inches of Mercury, the surface of the stagnant Mercury
A B, must be as much burdened with the incumbing Water, and the Air together,
as if it had really resting upon it, a Pillar of Mercury 58 inches high. If
this be, then it follows by necessity, that there must be an equality of
weight, between the pondus of the Mercury in the Tub, and the potentia of the
surface D C E; Or (which is all one thing) that the part C, on which the Pillar
rests, is no more burdened, than the part D or E. For if 34 foot of Water, and
34 foot of Water, be equivalent for weight, to 58 inches of Mercury, then must
the part D and E, be as much burdened with the said weight, as the part C is
burdened with the Pillar within the Tub, seeing both are of the same height:
therefore the power, and force of the imaginary surface of the stagnant Mercury
D C E, is of the same strength, with the weight of the Pillar G F B. And this
lets us see the reason, why the whole 70 inches cannot be suspended; for if the
outward Pressure that is upon A B, be but equivalent to the Pressure of 58, it
can never make the surface D C E able to support 70.

To make it evident (if any doubt) that the Mercury is suspended by the weight
of the Water, and the weight of the Air superadded, let a Diver bring up this
Engine to the top of the Water, and he will find the one half to have fallen
down, namely from G to F, the other half F B remaining. And if it were
possible, to convey this Experiment to the top of the Air, the Bearer would
see, the remaining half to fall down likewise, and become level with A B; for
where no Pressure of Air is, there can be no Mercury suspended. This falling
down, is not all at once, but by degrees, and keeps a proportion with the
Pressure of the Air, that grows less and less, from the ground to the top.

From this Experiment we see first, the great Pressure and weight, the Elements
of Air and Water are under, seeing this Water, that is but 34 foot deep, sustains
the Mercury between G and F, 29 inches, as much between F and E, being kept up
by the Pressure of the Air. We see secondly, that this Pressure is according to
Arithmetical Progression, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. because in going down the first 14
inches, the Mercury rises one inch; in going down the second 14 inches, it
rises two; in going down the third 14 inches, it rises three, and so forward.
We see thirdly, though a Water were 100 fathom deep, yea 1000, yet the
Pressure of the Air above is found at the bottom: for supposing this Experiment
were 100 fathom deep, yet would the Air from above have influence upon it, to
sustain so many inches of the Mercurial Cylinder. A Diver then, 10 or 15 fathom
under the Water, must be burdened with the weight of the Air, as well as with
the weight of the Water, so must the Fishes, though never so deep. We see
fourthly, that the parts of a Fluid cannot cease from motion, so long as there
is an inequality of weight between the pondus and the potentia. This is clear
from the falling down of the Mercury from H to G. And as soon as equality of
weight happens, the motion ends. This is clear from the Mercurie's halting at
G. Fifthly, that in Mercury, as well as in Water, or Air, surfaces may be
distinguished, and that these surfaces, are endowed with a Potentia or power,
begotten in them by superior and extrinsick weight. This is clear from the
imaginary surface D C E, that is made powerful to support 58 inches of Mercury
in the Tub, and that by the weight and Pressure of the Air resting upon A B.
Sixthly, that, as two Fluids differ in specific and natural weight, so they
differ in altitude, when they counterpoise one another. This is clear from the
disproportion that is between the altitude of the Mercury suspended, and the
height of the Water, and Air suspending. G F then is 29 inches, and the
deepness of the Water from K to N is 34 foot, because Water is naturally 14
times lighter than Mercury. F B is likewise 29 inches, and the hight of the
Air, that rests upon the surface of Water is six or seven thousand fathom high;
because Air is 14000 times naturally lighter than Mercury. Seventhly, that
Fluid Bodies counterpoise one another, not according to their thickness and
breadth, but only according to their altitude. This is evident; for though this
Tub were never so wide or narrow, yet the altitude of the Mercury is
unchangeable. Hence it is, that the thickest. Pillar of Water in the Ocean, is
not able to suspend more Mercury, than the slenderest, I mean as to altitude.
And hence it is, that the smallest Cylinder of Mercury, no thicker than a silk
thread, is able to counterpoise a Pillar of Water, of any thickness whatsoever.
We may conclude lastly, that when a Diver is 20 fathom under the Water, he is
under as much burden, as if he were under 14 or 15 foot of Quicksilver.
Suppose a man lying on his belly, within a large Vessel, and 14 or 15 foot of
Mercury poured in upon him, surely it may be thought, that such a burden were
insupportable. But put the case, the Diver were down 40 fathom, then must the
burden be doubled. This follows, because if a Pillar of Water 34 foot high,
with the weight of the Air superadded, be as heavy, as 58 inches of Mercury,
then surely a Pillar 20 fathom high, or 100 foot, must be as heavy as 170
inches, which is more than 14 foot.

EXPERIMENT X. Figure 14.
AGainst the former Experiment, there occurres some difficulties, which must be
answered. As first, if it be the Pressure of the Water, that sustains the
Mercury in the Tub (see the 13. Figure) then the weight of the said Mercury
ought not to be found, while the Tub is poi^ed between a man's Fingers. But so
it is, that when a Diver grips the Tub about the middle, and raises it a little
from the bottom of the Vessel, he not only finds the weight of the Tub it self,
but the weight also of the 58 inches of Mercury that is within it. But this
ought not to be, if the said Mercury, be sustained by the outward Water. In a
word, it ought not to be found, because the said Pillar of Mercury, as really
stands, and rests upon the imaginary surface D C E, as a Cylinder of Brass or
Stone, rests upon a plain Table of Timber or Stone. If then, it be supported by
the said surface, why ought I to find the weight of it, when I lift up the Pipe
a little from the bottom of the Vessel? For clearing this difficulty, consider,
that when the Mercury falls down from H to G, it leaves a so^^ of vac^ity
behind it, wherein there is neither Air nor Water. Consider secondly, that for
this cause, there happens an unequal Pressure; the top of the Tub without,
being burdened with the Pillar of Water I H, which actually presses it down,
and nothing within between G and H, that may counterballance that downward
Pressure. These things being considered, I answer to the difficulty and say, it
is not the weight of the suspended Mercury that I find, but the weight of the
Pillar of Water I H, that rests upon the top of the Tub. If it be said, the
Pressure of a Fluid is insensible, and cannot be found. I answer, it is true,
when the Pressure is equal and uniform, but not when the Pressure is unequal,
as here. If it be asked, how comes it to pass, that the Pillar of Water I H, is
exactly the weight of the 58 inches of Mercury? I answer, besides the said
Pillar, there is another of Air, that rests upon the top of it, which two
together are exactly the weight of the suspended Mercury; I H being of the same
weight with the Mercury G F, and the foresaid Pillar of Air, being of the same
weight with the Mercury F B. To make it more evident, remember that one inch of
Mercury, is exactly the weight of 14 inches of Water; and that one inch of
Mercury, is of the same weight with 14000 inches of Air. If this be, then must
the Pillar of Water I H, that is 34 foot high, and of the same thickness with
the 29 inches of Mercury G F, be of the same weight with it, seeing 29 inches
are to be found 14 times in 34 foot. For the same reason, is the Pillar of Air,
namely S I, that rests upon the top of the Pillar of Water I H, of the same
weight with the 29 inches of Mercury F B. For after a just reckoning, you will
find, that 29 inches will be found 14000 times in the Pillar of Air, that rests
upon the Pillar I H. Or in a word, the hight of the Air is 14000 times, 29
inches.

But here occurrs another difficulty. Let us suppose there were a Tub six foot
high, one inch wide, having the sides, 3 inches thick. Imagine likewise the
said Tub to be under the water 34 foot, with 58 inches of Mercury in it, as is
represented in this 14 Figure. This being supposed* the Pillar of Water E A F C
G D, must be far heavier, than the 58 inches of Mercury H B. The reason is
clear, because the said Pillar, is not only 34 foot high, but as thick, as the
Diameter of the Tub, whose sides are three inches thick. I answer, the whole
weight of that Water E A F C G D is not found, while a man poises the Tub
between his fingers, but only the weight of the part G A, which is exactly the
weight of the Mercury H B. But here occurrs the great question, namely, why I
find only the weight of the Water G A, and nothing of the weight of the Water,
C E, or D F? I answer, I cannot find the Pressure of the Water C E, because it
is counterpoised with the upward Pressure of the Water I K. And for the same
reason, I cannot find the weight of the Water D F, because it is counterpoised
by L M; but because there is nothing between H and A, to counterpoise the
downward Pressure of the Water G A, therefore I find that. If it be objected,
that the Water I K, cannot counterpoise the Water C E, because the one is
farther down than the other, and consequently under a greater Pressure, than the
other. I answer, though I K be stronger than C E, yet a compensation is made by
the weight of the Tub. For understanding this, let us suppose the Water C E,
and D F, to press downward with the weight of six pound, and the Water K I, and
L M, to press upward with the weight of ten pound, there being four pound in
difference. Suppose next, the Tub to weigh in the Air ten pound, and in the
Water only six pound. If this be, then according to the eighth Experiment, and
eighteenth Theorem, four pound weight of the Tub must rest upon the surface I
L. And if this be, then must the Water I K, and L M, be four pound weaker with
the Tub, than without it, and must only have six pound of upward Pressure.





From these Experiments we conclude first, the truth of the tenth Theorem,
namely that the weight of a Fluid is only found by sense, when the Pressure is
not uniform, and equal. This is evident from our finding the weight of the
Pillar of Water I H, as in the 13 Figure. We conclude secondly, that in all
Fluids, there is a pondus and a potentia; as is clear from the pondus of Water
E A F C G D; that presses down the Tub, and the potentia of the Water I K L M,
that presses up the same Tub. We see thirdly, that there cannot be two
surfaces of Water differing in altitude, but they must differ in degrees of
Pressure: because the surface E A F, is weaker, than the surface I L, that
being higher than this. We see fourthly, that two surfaces differing in
strength, may be made equal by some Body or other interveening; because, though
I L be stronger than E A F, yet seeing it supports four pound of the Tub, it
presses up with no more force, than E A F, presses down with. We see fifthly,
that a Body suspended in a Fluid, as in Air, or in Water, may have one part of
it pressed equally with that Fluid, and another part unequally: this is evident,
because the parts E and F, are equally pressed with the Pillars C E, and D F,
seeing this Pressure is counterpoised with the Pressure of Water, I K, and L M.
But the middle part of the Tub A, is unequally pressed, seeing it is pressed
downward, with the Water G A, but not pressed upward with the Mercury B H. We
see sixthly, that whatever be the thickness of a Pillar of a Fluid; yet no more
of its weight is found, or is sensible, than the part, which presses
unequally: for though E A F C G D, be a Pillar six or seven inches thick, yet
no more of the Pressure is sensible, than what comes from G A. We see
seventhly, that a Body equally pressed with a Fluid, weighs less, but a Body
unequally pressed* weighs none at all. This is clear in many particulars; for a
Stone weighed in Water, loses not all the weight, but a part, because it is
equally pressed. But a Body unequally pressed, as is the Mercury H B, has no
weight at all, as it now stands. For understanding this, you must consider,
that the whole weight of it tests upon the surface of Water I L. Therefore
though it could be weighed by a string, passing from the top H, to a Balance
existing in the Air; yet the said Balance would find none of its weight, seeing
it is wholly suspended by the Water; but a Stone so weighed, is only suspended
in part, by the Water.

EXPERIMENT XI. Figure 15.
A M Z C is a Water 15 foot deep. A B a Glass-tub 14 inches long, and full of
Mercury. B C a Pillar of Water 13 foot, 10 inches high, through whose middle
goes a string to the scale of the Balance K, existing in the Air. D E is a Tub
full of Mercury 28 inches long, with a Pillar of Water above it E F, 12 foot
and eight inches. G H a Tub 42 inches long, with a Pillar of Water above it H
I, 11 foot and six inches high. And lastly, A D G S M an imaginary surface, 15
foot deep. This Experiment is brought hither, to demonstrate that a heavy Body,
weighs as much in Water, as in Air, which is point blank to the common received
opinion, and destructive of the 18 Theorem. To evince this, I must suppose the
14 inches of Mercury in the Tub A B to weigh 14 ounce; and the 28 inches of
Mercury D E, to weigh 28 ounce; the 42 inches G H to weigh (I mean in the Air)
42 ounce. Now I say, to make a just equipondium between the two Scales K and L,
there must be 14 ounce put into the Scale L. If after this manner you weigh the
Tub and Mercury D E, 28 ounces will be required in the Scale L, and 42, if you
weigh the Tub and Mercury G H. For proving this Doctrine, I must appeal to
Experience, which will not fail in this. If you reply, and say, upon
supposition the Tub and Mercury G H, were a solid piece of brass, or iron thus
suspended in the Water, ought it not to weigh less here than in the Air, even
as much less, as is the weight of the quantity of Water, it puts out of its
place: why then should not the Pipe H G, with the Mercury in it, do the same,
seeing there is no apparent difference between them, as to this?

But to leave this, which will appear afterward, and to let the Reader see the
truth of the 18 Theorem, I affirm, it is not the weight of the 14 ounces of
Mercury A B, that burdens the scale of the Balance K, and that makes a
counterpoise with the 14 ounces of Stone, or Lead, that's in the scale L. What
then is it, you say? I answer, it is 14 ounces of the Pillar of Water B C that
does this. Neither does the weight of the 28 ounces of Mercury D E burden the
Balance, but only 28 ounces of the Water E F. Neither does the Balance
support the weight of the 42 ounces of Mercury G H, but it is only burdened
with 42 ounces of the Water H I. The reason is most evident, because according
to the Principles of the Hydrostaticks already laid down, the Cylinder of
Mercury A B, within the Tub A B, rests immediately upon the imaginary surface of
the Water A D G, and therefore cannot burden the scale in any wise. The same is
true of the other two Cylinders of Mercury. But in this I find small
difficulty. The greater is, how to make it out, that the scale K, supports 14
ounces of the Water B C, and 28 of the Water E F, and 42 of the Water H I. To
make this seem probable, consider first, as was noted, that this Water is 15
foot deep, and consequently the Pillar of Water B C, 13 foot 10 inches. The
Water E F 12 foot eight inches. And H I, 11 foot and a half. Consider
secondly, though this be true, yet we must count the Pillar of Water Z M 49
foot high. The reason is evident, because the Pressure of the Air, upon the
surface of all Waters (according to the 25 Theorem) is equivalent to 34 foot of
Water: this then being added to 15, makes 49, and by this reckoning the Water B
C is 47 foot ten inches: the Water E F 46 foot eight inches: And lastly, the
Water H I 45 foot six inches. Thirdly, for easy counting, I must suppose the
whole Cylinder Z M to weigh 42 ounces, every 14 inches one ounce: and
consequently the Water B C to weigh 41 ounces; the Water E F to weigh 40
ounces; the Water H I 39 ounces. Note, that in Physical demonstrations, it is
not needful to use Mathematical strictness in counting; and so leaving out
fractions, we shall only use round numbers. Consider fourthly, that in all
Fluids, as has been frequently marked, there is a pondus and potentia, the
Water B C being the pondus, and the Mercury A B the potentia, the one striving
to press down the Tub, the other striving to press it up. Consider fifthly,
that by how much the more a Body suspended in a Fluid is pressed up, by so much
the less the weight that presses it down is fo^nd: and contrariwise, by how
much the less it is pressed up, by so much the more the Pressure above is
found. Consider sixthly, the less that a surface of Water is burdened, the more
able it is to counterballance the opposite Pressure, and the more it is
burdened, it is the less able. Consider seventhly, that the Mercury A B, (which
is evident in all Fluids) not only presses downward, and burdens the surface A
D G, but also presses upward, and therefore actually endeavors to th^ust up
the Tub; and so it is, that the Tub is pressed between two, namely between the
Water C B, and the Mercury within it.

Now from these considerations I say, the scale K, must support, and bear up 14
ounce of the Water B C: for seeing the Mercury is supported by the surface of
Water on which it rests, it cannot by any means burden the balance with its
weight; and seeing it actually presses up the Tub, (according to the seventh
consideration) it must so much the more counterpoise (according to the sixth)
the opposite Pressure of the Water B C, and consequently diminish the weight
of it: so that the Balance cannot support the whole, but a part. For according
to what degrees of force, the Mercury presses up the Tub with, according to
the same, must the Pressure upon the top of the Tub be diminished, and so if
the Mercury press up the Tub with the force of 27 ounce, the Water B C must
press it down with 14 ounce only, and so the Cylinder B C, that weighs really
41 ounce, must press the top of this Tub only with 14, which 14 ounce really
counterpoiseth, the 14 ounce of Stone in the Scale L. But how is it made out,
that the Mercury A B, presses up with 27 ounce? For understanding this,
remember, that the Water is 49 foot high, taking in the Pressure of the Air,
and that a Water of that deepness is able to support 41 inches of Mercury,
every inch weighing one ounce. For if 14 of Water, be able to support one of
Mercury, 49 foot, or 567 inches, must support 41. If then, the part of the
surface A, be able to weigh 41, it must have of upward Pressure 27 ounces,
seeing it is counterpoised de facto only with 14. Take notice, that in the
Hydrostaticks, the word pressing, or weighing, as really and truly signifies a
weighing up, as a weighing down, seeing it is no less essential to Fluid Bodies
to move upward, than downward, and that with equal force, and weight. According
to this reasoning, the Balance supports 28 ounces of the Water E F, (Imagine
the second Tub to be suspended as the first) seeing the Cylinder of Mercury D E,
presses up the Tub only with the weight of 12 ounce, which 28 ounce, really
counterpoiseth the 28 ounce of Stone in the Scale L. But why does the Mercury A
B press up with 27 ounce, and the Mercury D E with 12? For answer, remember,
(according to the sixth consideration) the shorter a Cylinder of Mercury is,
the surface upon which it rests, is the stronger, and more able to press it up;
and contrariwise, the longer it is, the surface is the more unable and weak:
therefore. A B being shorter, and lighter than D E, the surface of Water must
press it up with greater force: so that if the said surface A M, be able to
press up the Mercury A B with 27 ounce, it must press up the Mercury D E only
with 12 ounce. According to this rule, if the Mercury A B were 15 inches high,
it would press up only with 26 ounce, if it were 16, with 25: if 17, with 24:
if 18, with 23, and so forward. This leads us to a clear discovery of all the
secrets here: for if the Mercury A B, thrust up the Pipe, with the weight of 27
ounce, then must the Scale K, be eased of so much weight, and so much must be
subtracted from L. Now let us imagine the Pipe A B, to be empty both of Air,
Water, and Mercury: in this case 41 ounce must be in the Scale L, to
counterpoise it, seeing the whole Cylinder B C, that weighs so much, does now
really counterpoise it. Let us imagine next, these 14 inches of Mercury to
rise, and fill the Tub A B: in this case, there happens a great alteration;
because the rising of them, are really equivalent to the subtracting of 27
ounce from the Scale L; and the reason is, because by so rising and filling the
Tub, they thrust up the said Tub, and by this means eases the Scale K, of so
much weight. Now this Scale being eased, you must of necessity take out from L
27 ounce for making a new counterpoise.

And lastly, the Scale K must support the whole weight of the Water H I, which
is 39 ounce, nothing remaining to counterballance this downward Pressure, and
consequently to ease the Balance. How then is it counterpoised? For clearing
this, you must remember that this Water, that is really 15 foot deep, must be
reckoned (as I said) 49, because of the Pressure of the Air upon the top,
that is equivalent to 34. If then it be so, it cannot raise Mercury higher in a
Tub than 42 inches; the one being 14 times heavier than the other: so that if
14 inches of Water, cannot raise Mercury higher than one inch, 49 foot cannot
raise it higher, than 42 inches: for as 14 inches, are to one inch; so is 49
foot to three foot and an half, which is 42 inches. Now I say, the whole weight
of the Water H I, rests upon the top of the Tub, and so presses down the Scale
K, to which you must imagine this Tub, knit by a string, as the former was,
nothing remaining to counterpoise this downward Pressure: for the top of the
Mercurial Cylinder being raised as high within the Pipe, as the surface of
Water D G S, is able to raise it, the said top can impress no force upon the
Tub within, to thrust it up, and so to ease the Scale K. For example, when a
man erects upon his hand a Cylinder of Timber, or any such like thing, which is
the outmost he can support, he will not be able to impress any impulse, upon
the seiling of a room above his head; but if so be, in stead of that taken
away, there be one lighter erected, which he is able to command, he can easily
thrust up the seiling at his pleasure. Just so it is here; for the 42 inches of
Mercury, being the outmost, that the surface of Water D G S is able to bear, it
cannot impress any impulse therewith upon the top of the Tub within: but easily
can the Cylinder D E impress an impulse, and more easily the Cylinder A B,
seeing they are lighter, and so more powerful. To evidence this a little more,
let us imagine two things, first, the Tub G H to be empty, as if vacuity were
in it. In this case the top of the Tub ought to bear the whole burden of the
Water, and consequently the Balance to bear it also: because there is not a
potentia within the Tub, to counterpoise this pondus. Next, let us imagine the
Tub to be only full of Water: according to this supposition, the Balance
cannot be in the least part burdened; because the Water within the Pipe,
presses it up with as much force, as the Water I H presses it down: and if
any thing should burden the Balance, it would be only the weight of the Pipe,
that is not considerable.

From what is demonstrated, we see first, that though this Experiment would
seem to prove at the first, that a heavy Body weighs as much in the Water, as
it does in the Air, because the whole weight of the Mercury A B is found in the
scale L, yet it is not so, because the 14 ounce of Stone L, does not
counterpoise any of the Mercury A B, but 14 ounce of the Pillar of Water B C.
Secondly, there is here a clear ground, for asserting a pondus and a potentia in
Fluids; because this Tub A B, is pressed down with the Water B C, and pressed up
with the Mercury within it. Thirdly, there is here a clear ground for asserting
the Pressure of Water, even in its own place; because the Water B C,
counterpoises by it is weight, the 14 ounce of Stone L. Fourthly, we see an
excellent way for finding the weight of any Cylinder of Water; for whatever be
the weight of the Mercury in the Tub, the Cylinder of Water, that rests upon
the top, will be of the same weight exactly; this is evident in comparing the
weight of the Mercury G H, with the weight of the Water H I. Fifthly, that
whatever be the height, and weight of a Pillar of Water, yet the Balance can
sustain no more of it, than the just weight of the Mercury: this is also
evident, because the scale of the Balance, supports no more of the weight of
the Water B C, than the just weight of the Mercury A B. We see sixthly, the
further down a Pipe with Mercury goes through Water, the greater is the
Pressure it makes upon the top of the Tub within: for put the case, this were
100 foot deep, the Mercury G H, that wants all upward Pressure now, would press
up the Tub with 40 ounce: the Mercury D E with 55, and the Mercury A B with 70.
We see seventhly, the shorter a Cylinder of Mercury be, it is the stronger in
pressing; and longer it be, it is the weaker; for there is more strength in A B,
than in D E. We see eighthly, that the strength decays, and grows, according
to Arithmetical progression, as 1, 2, 3, 4; because if you make the Cylinder G
H 41, that is now 42, it presses up with one ounce. Make it 40 inches, it will
press up with two ounces of weight. Make it 39, it presses up with three. And
contrariwise, make the Cylinder D E 29 inches, that is now but 28, it will press
up with 11 ounce only. (With 28 it presses up with 12.) Make it 30 inches
high, it will press up with 10. If it be 31 inches, it presses up with nine,
and so forward. Lastly, make the Cylinder A B 15 inches, that is now but 14, it
presses up with 26 (with 14, it presses up with 27) make it 16, it presses
up with 25; make it 17, it presses up with 24. We see ninthly, that in Fluids,
we may make a distinction between a sustentation, and an equipondium. It Is
evident here, because there is a perfect equipondium between the 42 inches of
Mercury G H, and the outward Water that is 49 foot deep. But it is not so,
between the said Water, and the Mercury D E; because the said Water is able to
raise the said Mercury 14 inches higher: therefore the Water only sustains the
Mercury D E, but counterballances the Mercury G H. We see tenthly, that the
pondus of the pillar of Water B C is counterpoised by two distinct powers
really. The one is the 14 ounce of Stone in the scale L, the other is the 14
inches of Mercury A B, that as really thrusts up the Water, as the scale K
pulls it up, by virtue of the opposite weight. Eleventhly, take away the Stone
L, and you will find the Pipe with the Mercury A B sink down: this happens, not
because the surface of Water on which it rests is not able to sustain it, but
because the 14 ounce of the Water B C, that was supported by the Stone, does
now press it down. Twelfthly, the more a Body is unequally pressed by a Fluid,
the more of the weight of that Fluid is sensible; and the more equally a Body
is pressed, the less sensible is the weight of that Fluid: this is evident,
because there is a greater weight of the Water H I found in the Balance (it
takes 42 ounce to counterpoise it) than of the Water E F, which is
counterpoised with 28 ounce: and the reason is, because the top of the Tub H,
supports the whole 39 ounce of Water H I, the Mercury within the Tub, not
being able in the least to counterpoise it, or thrust it up. But because the
Tub D E, is more equally pressed (the Water E F presses down with 40, and the
Mercury D E presses up with 12) therefore less weight of the Water E F
burdens the Balance, only 28 ounce. Hence it is, that because the Tub A B, is
more equally pressed, than either D E or G H, there is less of the weight of the
Water B C, found in the Balance, only 14 ounce. Thirteenthly, if in the
instant of time, while the Tubs are thus suspended in the Water, the Pressure
of the Air above were taken away, and annihilated; then first, the 42 inches of
Mercury G H would fall down, to about 13 inches. Secondly, the 28 inches of
Mercury D E, would fall down to as many. And lastly, the 14 A B, would sink
down to the same height. The reason is, because the Pressure of the Air being
equivalent to 34 foot of Water, no more would remain but 15 foot, which is the
real height, according to Z M. But 15 foot of Water, cannot sustain more inches
of Mercury than about 13. And consequently, first, 14 ounce of Stone in the
Balance, would counterpoise the whole Water B C. The reason is, because the
Water B C is but of 14 ounce; and the Mercury A B, being but 13 inches high,
could impress no impulse upon the top of the Tub within, that is 14 inches high.
Secondly, 13 ounce of Stone in the Scale L, would counterpoise the whole Water
E F, seeing E F is but 13 ounce. Thirdly, the same weight (one ounce being
deduced) would counterpoise the Water H I, because in this case, it weighs but
12 ounce,

To proceed a little further, imagine the Pipe G H to be suspended by the
balance, as the Pipe A B is; and then a little hole opened in the top H, to
suffer the Water to come in, till the Mercury subside 14 inches, namely from Q
to O (imagine this Tub to be the other) and then stop it. The reason why the
Water rusheth in, and presses down the Mercury, is the force and Pressure of
it: for the said Water, finding the Cylinder in equilibrio with the outward
Water, presently by its own weight, casts the scales, which is easily done,
seeing the surface G S M supports as much burden as it can. But that which is
more considerable is this; after the subsiding of the Mercury from Q to O; the
equilibrium that was between the scale of the balance, and the Water Q R is
destroyed: for whereas 42 ounces were required before; 29 will now do it. For
understanding the reason of this, consider that between Q and O, are 14 inches
of Water rushed in, which are equivalent to one inch of Mercury. Next,
according to former reasonings, the balance must support 29 ounces of the
Water Q R; because in this case, the top of the Pipe within, is pressed up
with the weight of 13 ounces; which in effect, diminishes as much of the
downward Pressure of the Water R Q, which before had the burden of 39 ounces.
But why is the Tub pressed up with 13 ounces? I answer, because the Mercury, that
before was 42 inches, is now but 28, or having the 14 inches of Water Q O above
it, it is 29, therefore being shorter, the surface G S M is the more able to
Press it up, even with as much more force, as it is in inches shorter.

In the second place, let in as much Water more, as will depress the Mercury
other 14 inches, namely from O to P. In this case, 16 ounce of stone will make
an equipondium; because, the 14 inches of Mercury P S, and the 28 inches of
Water P O Q, being a far lighter burden by 26, than the 42 inches of Mercury,
the surface G S M must be far abler to press them up now, than before: and
therefore, must diminish as much of the downward Pressure of the Water Q R,
that burdens the Balance, as themselves wants of weight: seeing then, the whole
Cylinder of Mercury, and Water together, are but equivalent for weight to 16
inches of Mercury, the top of the Tub within, must be pressed up with 26 ounce;
and therefore they by their upward Pressure, must diminish 26 ounce of the
weight of the Water R Q, that weighs 39. Lastly, let in so much Water, as will
depress the last 14 inches P S; and you will find no more weight required in
the Balance to make an equipondium, than counterpoiseth the simple weight of
the Tub, which is not considerable. The reason is, because, the part S, of the
surface G S M, being liberated of the burden of Mercury, and sustaining only
the Water within the Tub, in stead of it, this surface presses up the Water
within the Tub, and consequently the top of it, with as great force, and
weight, as the top of the Tub without is depressed, with the outward Water R
Q: therefore, 39 ounce depressing the Tub, and 39 ounce pressing it up, the
Balance must be freed of the whole weight of Water R Q. If it be objected,
that the 42 inches of Water Q S, are equivalent in weight to three inches of
Mercury; therefore the part of the surface S, being burdened with this, cannot
press up, with as great force, as the Water R Q presses down. For answer,
consider, that the part S, is able to support 42 ounce of Water, and next,
that the Water R Q weighs but 39. Then I say, seeing the 42 inches of Water
within the Tub, weighs only three ounce, the part S, that is burdened therewith,
being able to support 42, it must press up with the weight of 39, and so
counterballance the Water R Q.

If it be in^uired, whether or not, would the 14 inches of Mercury A B fall
down, a small hole being made in the top of the Tub at B? I answer, they would,
If it be objected, that these 14 inches of Mercury, are not in equilibri^, with
the Pressure of the ambient Water, as the Mercury G H, and therefore they
cannot be so easily depressed by the Water, that comes in at the said hole. I
answer, they must all fall down, and as easily, as the other, and that because
of inequality of weight between the Potentia of the surface of Water, and the
Pondus. It Is certain, the part A of the surface, cannot support more weight of
any kind, than 42 ounce; but when a hole is opened in B, and the Water co^es
in, it is then burdened with the weight of 14 ounce of Mercury, and with the
weight of 41 ounce of Water; so much the Water B C weighs, which is 55 ounce:
but a surface that has only the Potentia of 42, can never support a Pondus of
55, no not of 43.

It may be objected thus: Put the case a Cylinder of Gold, or Brass were
suspended in this Water; as the Pipe and Mercury G H are suspended by the
Balance, would not the Balance support the whole weight of it, without
supporting any part of the weight of the Water I H, that rests upon the top of
it. I answer, there is a great difference between the two; because a Cylinder of
Gold or Brass, suffers both the upward and downward Pressure of the Water; but
the Mercury G H, suffers only the upward Pressure, being freed of the downward,
by the top of the Tub. From this Experiment of letting in the Water upon the
top of the Mercury, we see first, that when two Fluids are in equilibrio one
with another, a very small weight will cast and turn the Scales, because, if
the sixth part of an inch of Water come in at Q, it presently alters the hight
of the Mercury from 42 inches to less. Secondly, it is impossible for a surface
of Water, to support more weight, than its own proper burden; because the part
S, cannot support more, no not a grain, than 42 ounce. We see thirdly, that it
is as impossible for a surface of Water, to support less, than its own burden;
because whatever loss of weight the Pillar of Mercury S Q suffers, by the
ingress of the Water Q O, its made up again by the same Water. If it be
objected, that the 14 inches of Water Q O, are not so heavy by far, as the 14
inches of Mercury, that fell down. I answer, its true, yet the part S, is as
much burdened as before, because what is wanting in weight, its made up, and
compensed by Pressure. We see fourthly, that the Pressure of a Fluid is a
thing really distinct from the natural weight, according to the 22 Theorem:
because though the 14 inches of Water Q O, are not so heavy naturally as the 14
inches of Mercury that fell down, yet the Pressure of them upon the surface S,
is as much. We see fifthly, that 14 inches of Water, that is ^ body fourteen
times lighter than Mercury, may have as much weight with them, as 14 ounce of
Mercury. We see sixthly, that a Cylinder of Mercury cannot be suspended in Air,
or in Water unless it be guarded with a Tub, to preserve it from the downward
Pressure of that Air or Water: for by opening an hole in Q, the Me^cury
subsides. We see seventhly, that it is impossible (...) Fluids to suspend one
another mutually, unless there be a sort of equipondium between them; because
no sooner you destroy the equipondium, between the 42 inches of Mercury Q S,
and the part of the surface S, by the ingress of the Water Q O, but as soon
there arises a new one. We see eighthly (as we noted before) the nearer a Body
comes to be equally pressed with a Fluid, the less is the Pressure of that
Fluid sensible: because less weight is required in the Balance, to
counterpoise the Pressure, and weight of the Water R Q, after the ingress of
the Water Q O P, than after the ingress of the Water Q O. We see ninthly, that
when a Body is equally, and uniformly pre^^ed with a Fluid, the Pressure is
insensible; because, after the Water has thrust down all the Mercury from Q to
S, there is no more weight at all of the Water R Q found in the Balance. We see
tenthly, that not only in Water, the Pressure of Water may be found, but out of
it, namely in the Air; as is clear from the Balance, that supports the
Pressure of the Water R Q. We see eleventhly, a ground to distinguish between
the natural Balance, and the artificial Balance. The artificial Balance, is
the Balance K L: the natural, is the Pipe Q S. We see twelfthly, that they
keep a correspondence between themselves, or some Analogy: for by what
proportion the Water thrusts down the Mercury, by that same proportion the
pondus L, of the Balance is lessened: and by what proportion the Mercury rises
in the Pipe, by that same, is the weight L augmented in the Scale. We may
subjoyn lastly, that the easiest way of explicating the Phenomena of Nature, is
not always the best, and truest. For some may think, it were far easier to say,
that the Balance supports the Mercury A B, or D E, and not any part of the
Water B C, or E F. But such a way would be false, and absurd, and contrary to
all the former Doctrine.

EXPERIMENT XII. Figure 16.
THis Schematism represents a Water 100 foot deep, whose first and visible
surface is I H K. And L M is the ground of it. C D is a piece of brass 30
inches high, and 12 inches in diameter, suspended upon the imaginary surface of
Water A N B, which is distant from the top I H K, 25 foot. This Brass cannot go
farther down, when demitted from H; because it is kept up, by the Force and
Pressure of the surface of Water A N B, which I prove thus. The part B sustains
de facto, a Pillar of Water K B 1400 pound weight: therefore the part N is able
to sustain as much. I suppose here, the said piece of Brass to weigh 1400
pound. The Water K B is 1400 pound, because its a Pillar 25 foot high, and 12
inches thick, for one cubical foot weighs 56 pound Trois. The connection of the
argument is evident, because it is as easy for a surface of Water, to sustain
a solid Body, as to sustain a Fluid Body: therefore, if the part B, support the
Fluid Pillar K B, the part N must be able to support likewise the solid Pillar
C D, which is of the same weight. I^ it be objected, that the part N, sustains
besides the Brass C D, a Pillar of Water E F 22 foot high, and a half, which
two will weigh 2260 pound. I answer, upon supposition, that neither Water nor
Air succeeded, the space E F being void of both, the Brass would be suspended
with the force and power of the Water N. And though this cannot be made
practicable, yet the Theory of it may conduce much for explicating the secrets
and mysteries of the Hydrostaticks. But why ought the Brass to be suspended at
25 foot from the top? I answer, because the potentia of the surface A N B, is
equal to the pondus of the Brass. To evidence this, consider that Brass is a
Body naturally heavier then Water, I shall suppose ten times, that is to say,
one inch of Brass will counterpoise ten inches of Water. If this inequality be,
then must this Pillar of Brass go so much farther down, than the first surface I
H K, as the one is heavier in specie, or naturally, than the other: therefore
it must sink 25 foot exactly; seeing a piece of Brass 30 inches high, requires
400 inches of Water, or 25 foot to counterpoise it: for if one inch of Brass
require ten inches of Water, then surely 30 inches must require 300. Yet it is
no matter, what the thickness be, provided it be no higher than 30 inches.

To advance some farther, let us make a second supposition, namely, while the
Brass is thus suspended upon the surface A N B, suppose the Air to come down,
and fill up the imaginary space E F, then must the Brass be thrust down as far
as the surface O P, that is 34 foot below the surface A N D, and 59 from the
top. The reason of it is this, because the weight of the Air superadded, is
equivalent to the Pressure of a Pillar of Mercury 29 inches high, and 12 inches
thick: therefore the Brass being burdened with this, it must go so farther down,
till it meet with a surface, whose potentia is equal in weight, to the pondus
of both, which is precisely 59 foot from the top: for if one inch of Mercury
require 14 of Water, then 29 inches must require 405 inches, or 34 foot. In a
word, it must go as far down, as that surface, that sustains a Pillar of Water,
that would counterpoise in a Balance, the Brass C D, and a Pillar of Mercury
29 inches high, and 12 inches thick, both which weighs 3290 pound.

From what is said, we see first, that of two heavy bodies differing in weight,
the lighter may go further down than the heavier. This is clear, because a
slender Cylinder of Gold, in form of an Arrow, half an inch thick, and 28
inches long, weighing 28 pound ('it is no matter, though the just weight of it be
not determined) will go down 35 foot in Water, before it meet with a surface,
whose potentia is equal in weight to its own pondus; for if Gold be 15 times
heavier naturally than Water, then the said Cylinder must go down before it
rest, 420 inches, or 35 foot. But a piece of Gold 12 inches long, and six
inches thick, that perhaps will weigh 208 pound, will sink no further than 15
foot. And the reason is, because, if one inch of Gold require 15 of Water to
counterpoise it, then 12 must only require 180, or 15 foot. Note, that both the
bodies must go down Perpendicularly, and not as it were Horizontally, with
their sides downmost: for if they go down after this manner, they cannot sink
so far. The reason of this is also evident, because a heavy body goes so far
down, and no further, till it has thrust ^s much Water out of its place, as
will counterpoise it self in a Balance. That Is to say, if an heavy body weigh
100 pound, it must go no further down, than after it has thrust out 100 pound
of Water. But so it is, that a piece of Gold, in form of an Arrow, going down
side-wise, or with the two ends parallel to the Horizon, will thrust as much
Water out of its place, as will be the weight of it self, before it can go down
15 or 16 inches from the top: because for every inch it goes down side-wise, it
expell^ 28 inches of Water. In going down two inches, it expells 56. In going
down three inches, it expells 84, and so forward, till it go down 15 inches,
where it expells 420 inches: but 420 inches amounts to 35 foot. Now, take a
Cylinder of Water 35 foot high, and just the thickness of the Cylinder of Gold,
which I supposed to be of half an inch, and put them in a balance, and you
will find the one just the weight of the other. Neither can the piece of Gold
go so far down as before, if it go down side-wise; because for every six inches
it is drowned, it expells a bulk of Water 12 inches long, and six inches thick;
therefore it must be suspended, before it go beyond 90 inches, or seven foot
and an half: now, if six inches give one foot, 90 inches will give 15 foot: but
15 of Water in hight, and six inches thick, is the just weight of it in a
balance, viz. 208 pound. We see secondly, the broader and larger the surface
of a Fluid be, it is the more able and strong to support an heavy burden:
therefore the part of a surface of Water six inches square every way, will
carry a far greater weight, than a part four inches square. Though a surface of
Water 34 or 35 foot deep, be not able to sustain a Cylinder of Gold. if it
exceed 28 or 29 inches in hight, yet take a Cylinder of Gold, 10 foot high, and
reduce it, by making it thicker, to the hight of 20 inches, a surface of Water
little more than 24 foot deep will sustain it. Or reduce a Cylinder 10 foot
high, which requires a surface more than 100 foot deep, to a Cylinder six
inches high, a surface little more than seven foot deep will support it. We see
thirdly, the reason why bodies that are broad and large, move ^lowlier through
Air and Water, than bodies that are more thin, and slender, though both be of
the same weight in a balance. For example, 20 pound of Lead, long and slender
like an Arrow, will go sooner to the ground of a deep Water, than a piece of
Lead of the same weight, in form of a Platter or Basin. The reason is, because
as the body is broader, so it takes a broader part of a surface, which broader
part is stronger and abler, than a narrower part, and so makes the greater
resistance. The same is the reason, why a Bullet six inches in Diameter, moves
^lowlier through the Air, shot from a Cannon, than a Bullet one inch in
Diameter. For the same reason, Ships of seven or eight hundred Tun, move far
slowlier through the Air, and Water, than Vessels of less burden. Item, large
and big Fowls, as Eagles, move slowlier, than small Birds, as Swallows. Yea, of
Fowls of the same quantity, one may move quicklier than another, as is evident
in long-wing'd Hawks, as Falcons, that by the sharpness of their Wings, move
far more space in half an hour, than Kites, or Gose-Hawks, whose wings are
rounder. We see fourthly, that there is no body how heavy soever, but it may be
supported by the surface of a Fluid, either in Air or in Water. I grant, the
strongest surface of Air, that can be had, is not able to support more weight,
than a Cylinder of Gold 28 inches high: yet though it were as large, and broad,
as a Millstone, if it do not exceed the said hight, the Air is able to sustain
it. For the same cause, if it were possible to free a Millstone of the Air,
that rests upon it, the Air below would lift it from the ground, and carry it
up many fathoms, even till it came to a surface, equal in power to the weight
of the Stone. Or, if a large Millstone were demitted from the top of the
Atmosphere, toward the Earth, it could hardly touch the ground, being detained
by the way, by a surface counterpoising it. Or if it did touch, through the
swiftness of the motion, it would surely* as it were, ^rebound, and be carried
up again. It is always to be remembered, that in such trials, the Air is
supposed not to follow, or to be united, after the Stone passes through. Now if
the Air be able to do this, far more the Water, that is a body a thousand times
heavier. We see fifthly the reason, why heavy bodies move so easily through Air,
and Water, namely because the parts that were divided, by the body that is
moved, are presently reunited, and closed again, by which means it is driven
forward, the Pressure upon the back, being as much as the Pressure before. If
this were not, no body whatsoever would be able to move it self one foot
forward. For example, if, when a man has advanced one step forward, the Air
did not close again upon his back, the force of the Air upon his belly and
breast, would not only stop him, but violently thrust him backward. We see
sixthly, the reason, why the same body descends with more difficulty through
Water, than Air, because a surface of Water is far stronger, than a surface of
Air. We see seventhly, that a heavy body is never suspended by a surface of
Water, or Air, in going down, till once it has displaced, as much Water or
Air, as will counterpoise it self in a balance. This is clear from the Brass C
D, that goes always down, till it expel its own weight of Water. For this
cause, if a Millstone were demitted, or sent down from the top of the Air, and
never rested, till it came within 40 fathom of the Earth, then so much Air, as
is expelled by the descent, is the just weight of the stone. We see eighthly,
the heavier a body be naturally, than Water, it goes the further down, and the
lighter it is, it sinks the less. For if C D were of Gold, it would go further
down, than being of Brass or Iron: and if C D were a stone, that is lighter in
specie than Brass, it would not go so far down. This lets us know the reason,
why thicker, blacker, and heavier clouds comes nearer to the Earth, than
thinner, whiter, and lighter. We see ninthly, that the Pressure of the Air is
determinable, even in its heighest degree, and seems to be the same in all
places of the world; but the Pressure of the Water is not so. The reason of the
first part is, because the Element of Air seems to be of the same hight in all
places, and therefore we may know its outmost Pressure, which is just
equivalent to the weight of 28 or 29 inches of Gold, or Mercury. But because
the deepness of the Sea is variable, therefore the Pressure is variable
likewise. Yet if the exact deepness, of the deepest place were known, it were
as easy to determine the greatest Pressure of it, as to determine the greatest
Pressure of the Air. We see tenthly, that a very small weight added or
subtracted in height, will change and alter the counterpoise of a Fluid.
Because if you lay but one ounce upon the top of the brass at F, it presently
subsides accordingly: or take one ounce from it, and it rises. But though never
so much weight be added to it, or subtracted from it in thickness, no
alteration follows. Therefore, though this piece of Brass C D, that is now but
12 inches in thickness, were made 24, by which means the weight would be
tripled and more, yet the same surface A N B would sustain it: yet, add to it
in altitude, but one inch, and presently it sinks down proportionably. This
evidently discovers the reason, why its as easy for the Air, to support a
Cylinder of Mercury 3 inches thick, as to support a Cylinder half an inch
thick: and why it cannot support more in height than 29 inches, and why it
cannot support less. Now the reason, why a thicker Pillar, is as ^asily
suspended, as a thinner, is this, because if a Pillar of Mercury be thicker,
and consequently heavier, than it takes a broader, and consequently a stronger
surface of Air to rest upon: if it be but slender, and so but light, then it
takes a lesser part of a surface to bear it up, and consequently a weaker; by
which means the Pondus of the one, is always proportionable to the Potentia of
the other. Is it not as easy for a Pillar of stone, 6 foot in Diameter, to
support another six foot in Diameter; as it is for a Pillar one foot in
Diameter, to support a Pillar one foot in Diameter? But as a Pillar one foot in
Diameter, cannot support a Pillar 6 foot in Diameter, neither can a surface of
Air, one inch in Diameter, support a Pillar of Mercury 6 inches in Diameter.
But why should a larger part of a surface be stronger than a narrower part? I
answer, the one is stronger than the other, for that same reason, why a thicker
Cylinder is heavier than a thinner: for what I call strength in a surface, its
nothing else but weight, and what I call weight in a Cylinder, its nothing else
but strength. The same thing has two names; because the pillar of a Fluid
presses down, and the surface supports: therefore, in the one its called
pondus, in the other potentia. As when two scales are in equilibrio, either
this, or that may be called the pondus; or either this, or that, may be called
the potentia. Now I say, if a part of a surface four inches broad, have as much
weight or force in it, as a Pillar of Mercury four inches thick; then surely, a
part of a surface eight inches broad, must have as much weight and force in it,
as a Pillar of Mercury eight inches thick. But why ought a surface to succumb,
when the Pillar grows in hight, and not to fail when it grows only in breadth?
Ans. When it grows in breadth, the pondus never exceeds the potentia; but when
it becomes higher, then it becomes heavier. That Is to say, when a Pillar grows
broader, there is not one part of ^he surface that sustains it, more burdened
than another; seeing the part eight inches broad, is no more pressed with a Pillar
eight inches thick; than the part four inches broad, is pressed with a Pillar
four inches thick: as eight ounce of Lead in this Scale, is no more
counterpoised with eight ounce in the other Scale, than four ounce in this
Scale, is counterpoised with four in the other. But when a Cylinder grows in
hight, the pondus exceeds the potentia; one part of a surface being more
burdened than another. We see eleventhly, that in a large surface of a Fluid,
wherein are many parts; each part is able to sustain its own proper burden. So
a part eight inches in Diameter supports a Pillar eight inches thick; and a
part four inches, supports a Cylinder four inches thick; but cannot support a
Pillar six inches thick. But this seems rather to flow from the disproportion
of Magnitudes, seeing a circular plain 4 inches in diameter, cannot receive a
Base of a Pillar 6 inches in diameter. But this is certain from the very nature
of Fluids, that in a deep Water, wherein may be distinguished 100, or 1000
different surfaces, each one is able to support his own burden, and no more.

EXPERIMENT XIII. Figure 17, 18, 19.
FOr making this Experiment, take two plain Bodies of Brass, or Marble well
polished. Make them of any quantity; but for this present use, let each of them
be four inches broad square-wise. Upon the back part, let each one have an
handle about six inches long, of the same metal, formed with the plain it self,
in the founding (if they be of Brass) as is represented in this Schematism.
When they are thus prepared, anoint their inner-sides with Oil or Water, and
having thrust the one face along upon the other, with all the strength you
have, till all the four edges agree, two whereof are represented by A B, and C
D, you will find them cleave so closs together, as if they were but one Body.
The effect is this, that ordinary strength will not pull them asunder; and that
under a surface of Water, a stronger pull is required than in the Air.

That we may deduce some Hydrostatical conclusions from this Experiment, let us
suppose these two plain Bodies to be united in the middle of the Water I K P
Q, that is 34 foot deep, and suspended by a beam or long tree T V existing in
the Air, near the top of the Water, by a chord S E passing between the middle
of the beam, and the end of the handle at E. Suppose next a great weight of
Lead R, 350 pound, to be appended to the end of the handle at H, of the under
plain Body C D N O. This done, I affirm, that the beam T V, neither sustains
the under plain Body C D N O G H, not the 350 pound weight of Lead R, that
hangs down from the handle G H. If it be objected, that the beam supports the
upper plain Body A B L M F E; therefore it must bear the weight also of the
under plain C D N O G H, with the weight R; seeing they are both united
together, and cleave so closs, as if they were but one Body. I answer, it
supports the one unquestionably, but not the other. To explicate this
Hydrostatical Mystery, I must aver three things; first, that the inferior plain
is supported by the upward Pressure (...) the lower Water P Q N O. Secondly,
that the burden which the beam sustains, is not the weight of the under plain,
but the weight of the 34 foot of Water I K L M. Thirdly, that this weight is
exactly the weight of the inferior plain, and Lead R. But is it not more easy
to say, that the beam supports both the plains? I answer, if I say so, I can
neither affirm truth, nor speak consequentially, But may it not be said, that
the inferior plain is supported both by the beam, and the lower water P Q N O?
I answer, this is impossible; because one and the same weight, cannot be
supported totally, by two distinct supporters.

For making these assertions evident, I must suppose the superior Water I K L M
to be 34 foot deep, and to weigh, if it were put into a balance, 400 pound:
and which is unquestionable, that the said Water rests upon the back of the
superior plain L M. I suppose secondly, that the lower Water P Q N O weighs as
much, and thrusts up the inferior plain with as great weight, as the superior
plain is pressed down with, by the superior Water. This is evident from former
Experiments. And lastly, I suppose each plain to weigh two pound, and the
weight of Lead R 350. It is to be observed here, that no mistake may arise in
the calculation afterward, that though it be said, this 34 foot of Water
weighs 400 pound, yet in it self it weighs but 200: but considering the
Pressure of the Air upon I K, which is as much, it may be truly said to weigh
400. These things being premitted; I say the weight that the beam T V sustains,
is not the weight of the inferior plain, and the Lead R, but 352 pound of the
superior Water I K L M, and consequently, that the inferior plain is supported
by the lower Water P Q N O. The reason is, because the lower Water presses
up ^^th the weight of 48 pound. It is in it self 400 pound: but being burdened
with 352, it cannot thrust up with more weight than 48. Now, it pressing up
with 48, must ease the beam of 48, and counterpoise so much of the superior
Water, and consequently the beam must support only 352 pound of it. But put
the case (you say) the weight R, were 130 pound, 160 pound, or 180 pound, would
the beam be less or more burdened with the superior Water? I answer, if R be
130 pound, then the beam supports only 132 pound of the superior Water; for if
the inferior be only burdened with 130, the weight of R, and with two the
weight of the inferior plain, then must it press up with 368, and by this
means, must ease the beam of so much, it sustaining 132 pound only. According
to this compting, when the Lead R weighs 160 pound, the beam supports only 238
pound of the superior Water. If it weigh 180 pound, it sustains 218. And if the
weight R were taken away, the beam supports no more of the superior Water than
two pound.

To proceed a little further; imagine the two Plains to be drawn up 17 foot
nearer the first surface I K, namely as high as Z W. This done, the union
breaks up, and they presently fall asunder. The reason is, because* the surface
Z W is not able to support 352 pound, but only 300, which I prove thus. If 68
foot sustain 400, then 51 foot must sustain 300. I say 68, and not 34, because
as was noted, the Pressure of the Air upon the surface I K, is equivalent to
other 34 foot: and therefore though the deepness of this Water, between I K
and L M be but 34 foot really, yet it is 68 foot virtually, and in effect.
Imagine secondly the surface I K to subside 17 foot, namely to Z W. In this
case the union is broken also, and the lower Plain falls from the upper. The
reason of this, is the same with the former; because by what proportion you
diminish the high of the superior Water, by that same proportion you diminish
the upward Pressure of the lower Water. Therefore, if you subtract from the
superior Water 17 foot, that weighs 100 pound, you subtract likewise 100 pound
from the inferior Water, and consequently, you make it press up only with 300,
but 300 is not able to counterpoise 352.

Let us suppose thirdly, the superior Plain, and the superior Water to be
annihilated; then I say, the Pressure and force of the under Water would thrust
up the inferior Plain and the weight R about eight foot higher then X Y and
there suspend them. The reason is, because the surface X Y, being able to
sustain 400, and being burdened only with 352, must have the weight of 48. Now
the upper Plain being taken away, and the upper Water also, and the empty space
of both remaining, the said weight of 48 pound, must carry the under Plain as
high as is said. Let us suppose fourthly, the Pressure of the Element of Air,
that rests upon I K, to be taken away, then must the two Plain bodies be
disunited, the inferior falling from the superior. The reason is, because in
this case, the superior Water would have but the weight of 200 pound, and
consequently the inferior, would press up only with as much: but 200 is not
able to counterpoise 352.

From what is said we see first, that in all Fluids there is an upward
Pressure, as well as a downward; and that the one is always of equal force to
the other: because the inferior Plain is pressed up with as great force, as the
superior Plain is pressed down with. We see secondly, that in Fluids, there is
a Pondus and a Potentia. The Potenti^ here is the inferior Water, and the
Pondus is the superior. Or, the 350 pound of Lead R, may be called the Pondus,
which counterpoiseth the Potentia of the surface of Water X Y. We see thirdly,
that though the Pressure of a Fluid, be not the same thing with the natural
weight, yet it is equivalent to it: because the 352 pound of Lead R, is
sustained by the Pressure of the inferior Water, which could not be, unless
they were virtually the same. We see fourthly, that there may be as much
Pressure in one foot of Water, as there is weight in 100, or in 1000 foot, or
in 1000 fathom, For put the case, these two plain bodies were suspended, 100
fathom below the surface of the sea, and within a foot or two of the ground, as
much weight would be required to pull them asunder, as is the weight of a
Pillar of Water 100 fathom high, and 4 inches thick every way, which will be
more then 3000 pound weight, besides the weight of the Air above, that will
weigh 200 pound. This could not be, unless there were as much Pressure in the
lowest foot of this Water, that is 100 fathom deep, as there is weight in the
whole Pillar above. We see fifthly, the more the potentia of a surface is
burdened, the more sensible is the pondus: because the heavier you make the
Lead R, that burdens the inferior Water, the more weight of the superior Water
rests upon the Beam. We see sixthly, the more unequally a body is pressed, the
more the Pressure is sensible. For understanding this, consider that the
under-face of the superior Plain, is more and less pressed, according to the
more and less weight the Lead R is of: for put the case, the inferior Plain
were taken away, the face of the superior Plain, would be equally pressed with
the back of it. But ^hen the inferior Plain is united to it, the Pressure of
the Water is kept off; by which means the back is pressed more than the face.
Now, as the inferior Plain becomes heavier and heavier, by making the weight R
more and more weighty, the less and less is the face of the superior Plain
pressed up. Hence it is, that as this inequality of Pressure becomes greater and
greater; so the weight of the superior Water, affects the Beam more and more.
Or, if the superior Plain were a sensible body, as Animals are, it would find
the back of it more and more burdened, according as the weight R, becomes
heavier and heavier. We see seventhly, that Water weighs in Water: because all
the weight the Beam supports, is the burden of the superior Water, and not the
burden of the inferior Plain, or of the weight R. It supports the weight also
of the superior Plain, but this is not considerable. This is only to be
understood, when the Pressure is unequal; for if the upper Plain were as much
pressed up, as it is pressed down, the weight of the superior Water would not be
found by the Beam. We see eighthly, that the higher a surface be, it is the
weaker; and the lower it be, it is the stronger: because when the two plain
bodies are pulled up, 17 foot, they fall asunder. We see ninthly, the vanity of
the common opinion, that maintains two plain bodies to cleave closs together
for fear of vacuity; and that neither Humane not Angelick strength is able to
break this union, without the rupture and fracture of them both.

It may be enquired, upon supposition, that the inferior plain had four holes
cut through the middle, square-wise, as A B C D in the 18 Figure, what Phenomena
would follow? Before I answer, consider that this Figure represents the inner
face of the Brass-plate C D N O, of the 17 Figure, which as was supposed, is
four inches from (...) to side, and consequently contains 16 square inches.
Now, imagine the under plain C D N O, while it is united to the uppermost, to
have four square inches cutted out of it, as A B C D. These things being
rightly conceived, and understood, I say, when the said holes are cutted
through; the beam T V, that now sustains 350 pound, shall by this means, only
sustain 250 pound. To make this evident; consider that the under plain (as was
said) contains 16 square inches. Next, that the top of the inferior Water upon
which the plain rests, contains as many, and that every inch of the Water
weighs 25 pound, seeing the whole, as was supposed before, weighs 400 pound.
Now, I say, the beam must support only 250 pound of the Water I K L M; because,
these holes being made, the top of the inferior Water comes through them, and
presses up the face of the superior plain with 100 pound, and so eases the
beam of so much. I affirm next, that though the inferior Water N O P Q be in it
self 400 pound, and consequently able to support the inferior plain, with the
weight R, albeit they weighed so much, yet the said holes being cut out, it is
not able to support more burden than 300. The reason is, because of 16 parts
that did actually bear up before, there are only 12 now that sustains. And
every one of these twelve, being but able to support 25 pound, it necessarily
follows, that the greatest weight they are able to sustain, is 300 pound. I
affirm thirdly, that if a fifth hole were cut through, the under plain would
fall from the upper; because in this case, the inferior Water is not able to
support 350 pound as before, seeing of 16 parts, there are five wanting, and
eleven remaining, cannot support more weight than 275 pound. More questions of
this kind might ^e proposed; as first, what would come to pass, if the the
upper plain had as many holes cut through it, answering to the four of the
nether? Secondly, what would follow* if the nether plain were entire, and four
bored through the upper? But I shall supersede, and leave these to be gathered
by the judicious Reader.

From this Experiment we see first, that the broader and larger a surface of a
Fluid be, it is the more able to sustain a burden, and the narrower it be, it is
the less able. Secondly, that each part of a surface, is able to sustain so
much weight, and no more, and no less.

Before I put a close to this Experiment, it will be needful to answer an
objection, proposed by Doctor More in his Antidote against Atheism, against the
Pressure of the Air, which in effect militats, by parity of reason, against the
Pressure of the Water likewise. He argues thus. If the Air were endowed with
so much Pressure, as is commonly affirmed, then it ought to compress, squeez,
or strain together, any soft body that it environs, as, v. g. Butter. Put the
case then, there were a piece of Butter, four inches broad every way, and one
inch thick, containing 16 square inches, upon every side; as may be represented
by the Figure 19. In this case, there is a far greater Pressure, upon the two
faces, than upon the four edges; and therefore, it ought to be comprest, and
strained together, to the thinness of a sheet of Paper. For answer, let us
suppose the piece of Butter, to be 30 or 40 foot below the surface of a Water,
where it ought to suffer far more Pressure, than above in the Air. Next, that
it lies Horizontal, with one face upward, and the other downward. Thirdly, that
the upper face supports a Pillar of Water 200 pound weight, and consequently,
that the under face is pressed up with as much. And lastly, that every edge is
burdened with 50. It may be represented, with the hel^ of the fancy, in the 19
Figure, where A B is a piece of Butter four inches square, and one inch thick.
Only take notice, that nothing here is represented to the sight, save one of
the four edges, namely A B; the other three, and the two faces being left to
the fancy: Yet, the upper face may be represented by F H K M, and the under by
N O P Q. These things being rightly understood, it is wondered, why the two
great and heavy Pillars of Water, the one E G I L F H K M, that presses
downward, and the other N O P Q R S T V, that presses upward, do not strain
together the sides of the Butter; seeing the Pressure of the Water B C, and the
Pressure of the Water D A, are far inferior to them for strength, even by as
much difference, as four exceeds one. Though this objection seem somewhat, yet
it is really nothing, which I make evident after this manner. First, I grant
that the upper face F H K M is burdened, with 200 pound, and the nether face N
O P Q with as much. Secondly, that the edge B, is only burdened, with 50 pound,
as is the edge A. The other two edges, sustains each one, as much. Secondly,
though this be, yet I affirm the two sides to be no more burdened, than the
edges: that is to say, the Pressure upon the sides, is equal to the Pressure
upon the edges, which I prove thus. The Pressure upon the part M, is equal to
the Pressure upon the part K, but the Pressure upon the edge B, is equal to the
Pressure upon the part M: therefore the Pressure upon B, is equal to the
Pressure upon K. The major Proposition is evident, because the Pillar of Water
L M, is of the same weight, with the Pillar of Water I K. The Minor is also
evident, because, the Pillar B C, is of the same weight, with the Pillar L M.
Now, if the Pressure upon the edge B, be equal to the Pressure upon M and K, it
must be likewise equal to the Pressure upon H and F. If this be, then the edge
of the Butter B, must be no more pressed, than the side F H K M: therefore the
Water B C, can no more yield to the Water E F G H I K L M, and suffer the
Butter to be squeezed out at B, than the Water L M, can yield to the Water E
F G H I K, and suffer the Butter to be squeezed out at M. If any man shall
insist and say, that the upper face bears the weight of four Pillars, which
weighs 400 pound; but the edge B is only burdened with 50: therefore 50 ought
to yield to 400. I answer, according to the 29 Theorem, namely, that a thicker
Pillar of a Fluid is not able to press, or move a slenderer, unless there be an
unequal Pressure, therefore the thick Pillar, that presses the face, cannot
move the slender Pillar, that presses the edge: but there is here no unequal
Pressure, seeing the Water X Y Z V, is of the same hight with the four Pillars
that rests upon the face of the Butter. I grant, if the said Water were not so
high, as the other is, by the one half; then surely the Butter would be
squeezed out at B; because the shorter a Pillar be, the less Pressure is in the
surface under it; therefore, there must be less Pressure, according to that
supposition in the Water B C, then now is. Or put the case, the Pillar I K were
shorter then G H, or L M, the same effect would follow, namely, a squeezing out
of the Butter from K. Or, let us suppose the Pillar I K, to be higher than G H
or L M. In such a case, the weight of the said Pillar would press through the
Butter.

From what is said, we shall only in^err this conclusion, that equality of
hight between Pillars of a Fluid makes equal Pressure, and inequality of hight
makes unequal Pressure. Therefore it is no matter, whether they be gross or
small, thick or slender, provided they be all of the same Altitude.

EXPERIMENT XIV. Figure 20.
THis Schematism represents a Vessel full of Water 8 foot deep. E F is a
Glass-Pipe, open at both ends, about 9 foot high, and one inch in Diameter. A B
C D is a Vessel of Glass, or of any other metal, through whose orifice above,
the said Pipe comes down. B H I is a Pipe going out from the said Vessel,
crooked with a right angle at H, that the orifice I may look upwards. That some
Hydrostatical conclusions may be inferred from this Experiment, fill the lower
Vessel A B C D with Quicksilver almost; then pour in as much Water above it,
as will fill the space A B H, leaving from H to I full of Air. Next, thrust
down the orifice of the Pipe E, below the said Water and Mercury, till it rest
upon the bottom C D. Lastly, stop well with cement the passage of the lower
Vessel, through which the Pipe came down, that neither Air nor Water may go
out, or come in. These things being done, let down this Engine to the bottom of
the large Vessel, which, as was noted, is full of Water from M N to K L, 8
foot, and you will find the Mercury to rise in the Pipe from A B to G, 6
inches, and more. The reason is, because there is a Pillar of Water K I, that
enters the orifice I, and presses down the Air, from I to P, 3 inches, which
before was 6. This Air being so burdened; instantly presses forward the Water
H B A: and this pressing the surface of the stagnant Mercury A B, causes the
liquor run up the Pipe from A B to G, 6 inches: The reason, why it rises 6
inches, is this: between the surface of the stagnant Mercury A B, and the top
of the Water L O K, are 84 inches. Now Water being 14 times naturally lighter
then Mercury, there must be 14 inches of Water, required for sustaining one
inch of Mercury, and consequently 84, for supporting 6. For a second trial,
lift up the whole Engine to the top of the Water, and you will find the 6
inches of Mercury B G sink down, and become no higher within the Pipe, than the
surface of the stagnant Mercury A B without. The reason is, because by coming
up above the Water, the Pressure of the Water K I, is taken away from the
orifice I, by which means the comprest Air H P, extending it self to I,
liberats the Water A B H of the Pressure it had, and this freeth the Mercury of
its Pressure, and so the 6 inches falls down. For a third trial, stop closely
the orifice I, and let all down as before. In this case, you will find no
ascent of Mercury from B to G: because the Water K I cannot have access to
thrust down the Air from I to P, as formerly.

For a fourth, open the said orifice I, while the Engine is below the Water,
and you will find the Mercury rise from B to G: because the Pillar of Water K
I, has now access to press. For a fifth trial, stop the orifice I, and bring
up all to the top, and you will find the six inches of Mercury B G suspended,
as if the Engine were under the Water. The reason is, because the stopping of
the orifice, keeps the enclosed Air P H, under the same degree of Pressure it
obtained from the Water K I. For a sixth proof, open the same orifice I, while
the Engine is above the Water, and you will find the six inches of Mercury fall
down, because the imprisoned Air H P, obtains now its liberty; and expanding it
self from H to I, eases the Water B H of the burden it was under. For a
seventh, pour in 14 inches of Water at the orifice F, till it rest upon the top
of the Mercury at G, and you will find one inch fall down. Pour in as much, and
two inches falls down. In a word, pour in as much Water, as will fill the Pipe
to O, and you will find the whole six inches fall down. The reason is, because
the Water K I, is not able to sustain, both the six inches of Mercury and the
Water, that is poured in; any one of them being able and sufficient to
counterpoise it, For an eighth trial, empty the Pipe of the said Water, and
after the Mercury is ascended from A B to G, as formerly, suck out the whole
Air between G and F, and you will find the Mercury to rise from G to R 29
inches. The reason of this is evident from the Pillar of Air S K, that rests
upon the top of the Pillar of Water K I: for by sucking out the said Air, you
take away the pondus or weight, that counterpoised the weight of the Pillar S
K, therefore it finding its counterpoise removed, presently causes the Water K
I, to enter farther within the crooked Pipe, till it has pressed up the liquor to
R. For a ninth trial, take the six inches of Mercury B G, and put them into the
scale of a balance; then take as much Water, as will fill the Tub between A B
and O, and put it into the other scale, and you will find a most exact
counterballance between them. The reason is, because if the Water K H, or a
Pillar of that hight, be able to raise and counterpoise the Mercury B G; then
must as much Water, as fills the Pipe between B and O, be the just weight of it.
The reason of this consequence is, because these two Waters are of the same
weight: therefore, if the one be the just weight of it, the other must be so
too. If it be said, that the Water, that fills the Pipe between B and O, is far
thicker, then the Water K H; therefore they cannot be both of one weight. I
answer, equality of altitude, in this Balance of Nature, is equality of
weight: therefore seeing the one Water, is as high as the other, they must be
both of one weight. If it be said, that a Pillar of Water between K and H,
cannot counterpoise the six inches of Mercury B G, both being put into a
balance: and the reason is, because the one is thicker than the other. I
answer, this only proves that two Pillars differing in weight in the Libra or
Artificial Balance, may be of one weight in the Natural Balance: because in
the Artificial Balance, bodies counterpoise one another, according to all
their dimensions, but in the Natural Balance, such as this Engine is, Fluids
counterpoise one another, according to their altitude only.

From the first trial, we conclude first, that Water even in its own place
gravitats and weighs, because this Water by its Pressure, de facto thrusts up 6
inches of Mercury. We see in the next place, that the Pressure of a Fluid, is
as easily communicated Horizontally; as Perpendicularly; because the Pressure
runs along from H to B. We see thirdly, that Fluids; may have as much
Pressure begotten in them, even while they are environed about closely with
solid bodies, whereby the superior Pressure, immediately and directly by
perpendicular lines is kept off, as if they were immediately under the
Pressure: because the Mercury A B C D, is as much burdened with the Pressure,
that comes from H, as if the upper part of the Vessel A B, were open to let in
the superior Pressure, by perpendicular lines. The Air then under the roof of a
house, is under as great a Bensil and Pressure, as the Air without, that is
directly under the Pressure of the Atmosphere. We see fourthly, that the
Pressure of a Fluid, may be as easily communicated through the parts of
Heterogeneous Fluids, as through the parts of Homogeneous; because the Pressure
of the Water K I, is as easily communicated through the Air P H, through the
Water H B, and through the stagnant Mercury* B D to the orifice E, as if nothing
interveened but Water. We see fifthly, that Mercury can suffer a Pressure, as
well as Water or Air; because the six inches cannot rise from B to G, unless
the stagnant Mercury A B C D were compressed, even in all the parts of it.

From the second trial, we see, that there cannot be a Pondus in a Fluid,
unless there be a Potentia, to counterpoise it: for when you take away the
Water* R I, by lifting up the Engine to the top of the Water, the Mercury B G
presently falls down. From the third trial, we conclude, that the Pressure of a
Fluid, cannot be communicated through solid Bodies: for when the Engine is
drowned below the Water, with the orifice I, stopped, no ascent of Mercury
follows. We conclude from the fourth trial, that it is impossible for two
Fluids to counterpoise one another, unless they be in Equilibrio; because the
Water K I cannot sustain the Mercury B G, unless it be of the same weight. From
the fifth, we conclude, that a Fluid may be kept under the same degree of
compression, after the superior weight that begat it, is taken away: for after
the Engine is brought above the Water, with the orifice I stopped, the Mercury
B G is still suspended, even by virtue of the Pressure, that is in the stagnant
Mercury. This tells us, that a sphere of glass full of Air, may retain its
Bensil, even though the whole Element of Air, that begat it, were destroyed.
From the sixth we gather, that a Fluid cannot abide under Pressure, when the
burden is taken away that begat it, or that kept it under Pressure: for by
opening the orifice I, the Air P H extends it self: and so are the Water, and
Mercury within the Vessel freed of their Pressure likewise. We gather from the
seventh trial, that in the Balance of Nature, one Scale cannot be more
burdened then another; or that two Fluids cannot counterpoise one another,
unless they be in equilibrio: for when you pour in 14 inches of Water, upon the
top of the Mercury at G, they thrust down one inch, that there may be a just
equipondium, between them, and the opposite weight K I. We gather from the
eighth trial, which was observed before; first, that there cannot be a Potentia
in a Fluid, unless there be a Pondus to counterpoise it: for when you suck out
the Air G O, which was the Pondus, that counterpoised the Air S K, this
presently in stead of it, raises 29 inches of Mercury from G to R. We see
secondly, that one pillat of Air can counterpoise another, Fluids of diverse
kinds interveening: because the Air S K, counterpoises the Air within the Pipe
G O, the Water K P first interveening; the Air P H next interveening, and the
stagnant, and suspended Mercury interveening also. We see thirdly from this
eighth trial, that the Pressure of the Atmosphere, may be communicated through
diverse kinds of Fluids, without the least diminution of its weight: because
the weight of the Pillar of Air S K, is communicated, and sent down through the
Water K I, through the Air P H, through the Water H B, through the stagnant
Mercury B D, and up through the suspended Mercury B G, till it suspend the 29
inches between G and R, which is the just counterballance of it. We see
moreover, that Fluids counterpoise one another, according to altitude only, and
not according to thickness and breadth; by comparing the Water K I, that is but
half an inch thick, to the Mercury B G, that is a whole inch thick. We see from
the last trial, that when a Fluid is necessitated, to counterpoise a Fluid of
another kind, in stead of a Fluid of its own kind, it sustains no more of it,
than what is the just weight of the Fluid of its own kind, because the Water K
I, being under a necessity to counterpoise the Mercury B G, in stead of so much
Water as would fill the Tub, it sustains no more of it, than the just weight
of so much Water, as is said. We see secondly, that when two Fluids of diverse
kinds, do counterpoise one another, that which is heaviest in specie, has
always the shortest Cylinder. Next, that the difference between their
altitudes, is most exactly according to the difference between their natural
weights, therefore B G is 14 times lower than B O; because Mercury is 14 times
heavier than Water. We see moreover, that though two Cylinders of a Fluid, can
counterpoise one another in the Natural Balance, such as this Engine is, yet
they will not do it in the Artificial Balance: because though B G counterpoise
K I in this Balance, yet in a pair of Scales, the Mercury will be as heavy
again as the Water. We see lastly, that notwithstanding of this, yet such a
thing may be; for if the orifice I, were made as wide as the orifice F, that
the Cylinder K I might be equal to the Mercury B G in thickness, then surely
the one would counterpoise the other in the Libra or Artificial Balance.

EXPERIMENT XV. Figure 21.
THis Schematism represents a Water 72 foot deep, as C D A B, together with a
crooked Pipe of glass I N H, the one half whereof is I P, 56 inches high, and
one inch wide, the other half is P N R H, of a far narrower diameter, with an
orifice H. There is also an orifice at L, with a neck, about which is knit a
small chord M L, for letting down this Engine to the bottom of the Water A B.
For trials cause, fill the wide glass with Mercury from P to K, and you will
find it rise in the narrow Pipe, as high as the orifice H. This being done,
close hermetically, or with good cement the orifice L; then by help of this
chord, let all go down from the surface C D, till it be exactly 17 foot from
the top, and you will find the Mercury thrust down in the narrow Pipe, from H
to R, 14 inches and an half. Let it down next, as much, and the Mercury will be
yet further thrust down, namely from R to N, the part H R N being full of
Water. For understanding the reason of this, consider that between N and E, are
34 foot: for so high is the slender Pillar of Water, that comes from the top,
and entering the orifice H, comes down through the Pipe to N. Consider next, that
between the said Pillar of Water, and the Mercury N P K, there is a
counterpoise: but this counterpoise cannot be, unless the Pillar of Water be 34
foot high, seeing between N and K are 29 inches of Mercury; for each inch
thereof requires 14 of Water. Upon this account it is, that when the glass is
17 foot drowned, 14 inches and an half are thrust down from H to R. If it be
objected, that the Pressure and Bensil of the enclosed Air I K; is equivalent
to the weight of other 29 inches; and therefore the Pillar of Water E H R N,
must be 68 foot high, before a counterpoise can happen. I answer, it is true
that is said, but you do not consider, that there is a Pillar of Air F E,
resting upon the top of the Pillar of Water, that makes a compensation exactly.
To speak then truly and really, the 29 inches of Mercury N P K, have the
weight of 58 inches; and the 34 foot of Water E H R N, have the weight of 68
foot.

For a third trial, let down the glass 6 foot further, and you will find the
Water pierce up through the thick Cylinder of Mercury P K, and rest upon the top
K. The only difficulty is to determine, how much will spring up before the
motion of it cease? It Is evident, that the Water will ascend, because coming to
the Base of a thick and gross Cylinder, that it cannot entirely lift, it must
pierce through it, seeing the force of such a Pillar of Water, is now much
stronger, than the Mercury: for in effect, the glass being drowned 6 foot
further, the Pillar that comes down through the slender Pipe, has the just
weight of 34 inches of Mercury: but 29 cannot resist 34: therefore the Water
not being able to lift it, by reason of the disproportion that is between the
thickness of the one, and the slenderness of the other, it must pierce up
through it. For clearing this difficulty, consider, that this glass cannot go
down from one imaginary surface to another, v. g. from 34 foot, where it was,
till it come to 40, where it now stands, but there must be an alteration in the
equipondium, seeing by going down, the Pillar of Water E H R N grows higher, and
consequently heavier; and therefore, some Water must pierce up through the
Mercury, for making a counterpoise; for it is impossible for two Fluids to
counterpoise one another, unless they be in equilibrio. Consider secondly, that
after the Water is come to the top of the Mercury at K, it will find difficulty
to find a room for it self, seeing the space between S and I is full of Air.
Notwithstanding of this, it must ascend. I say then, after the glass is gone
down from 34, to 40 foot, there will be about four inches of Water above K,
which have reduced the 29 inches of Air K I, to 25, S I.

If it be asked, between what two things is the equipondium now? I answer, the
first was at R, between E H R, and R N P K. The second was at R, between N R H
E, and N P K. The third is now at S, between the 25 inches of enclosed Air I S,
as one Antagonist, and the four inches of Water S K, with the 29 inches of
Mercury K P, and the Water P N R H E, as the other. To make a fourth
equipondium, sink the Glass other six foot, till it be 46 foot from the top C
D, then must some more Water spring up through the Mercury; this of necessity
must be, seeing the Cylinder of Water N R H E, is six foot higher, and so far
heavier, than it was: if this be, then must the 25 inches of Air I S, be
reduced to less quantity; seeing it is impossible, for one Fluid to become
heavier, unless its opposite and antagonist become heavier too, for an
equipondiums sake. Note, that the Air I S, will not lose other four inches,
with this six foot of Water, as it did with the former. The reason is,
because, if for every six foot the Glass goes down, the Air were comprest four
inches, it were easy at last to reduce it to nothing: for if six reduce it to
four, and 12 to eight, 38 ought to reduce it to no inches, which is impossible.
Therefore I judge it must suffer compression, by a certain proportion, as we
see upon a Scale, the divisions of Artificial or Natural Sines grow less and
less, there being more space between 1 and 2, than between 2 and 3; more
between 2 and 3, than between 3 and 4, and so upward till you come to 90.
Therefore the second six foot, must reduce the 25 inches, not to 21, but to 23
circiter, and so forth. By the which means, though the Glass should go down in
infinitum, yet the Air shall never be reduced to nothing, and there shall still
some small quantity of Water come up. Or in such a case, the Air may be so
comprest, that it can be no more, all the disseminate vacuities being expelled.
But suppose this to be at 1000 fathom, then at 1500, where the Pressure is
stronger, there can be no equipondium, which is absurd, for where the pondus
becomes stronger, the potentia ought to grow stronger likewise. I answer, the
motion of condensation cease indeed; but there still remains a potentia, or
rather in such a case, a perfect resistentia, whereby the Air is able to resist
the greatest weight imaginable, before it can be reduced to nothing, or suffer
a penetration of parts, that is to say, two parts to be in one space.

From the explication of these Phenomena we conclude first, that in Water there
is a considerable Pressure, seeing in letting down the Glass 17 foot, the
Mercury is pressed down from H to R, and from R to N, in going down other 17
foot. Secondly, that 29 inches of Mercury are as heavy as 34 foot of Water:
because the Mercury K P N makes a just equipondium with the Water E H R N.
Thirdly, that Fluids not only of the same kind, but of different kinds, do
counterpoise one another according to altitude, and not according to thickness;
because though the Mercury K P N be far thicker, than the Water E H, yet they
counterballance one another, because a proportion is kept according to their
altitudes. Fourthly, that a Fluid naturally lighter, may move a Fluid naturally
heavie^, and thrust it out of its own place, because the Water coming in at H,
thrusts down the Mercury to R, and from R to N, and so forth. Fifthly, that of
two F^uids unequal in strength, debating together, the weaker of necessity must
yield to the stronger, though the weaker be far heavier naturally than the
stronger, as is evident in the Mercu^y, that yields to the Water. Sixthly, that
it is impossible for two Fluids, so long as they are unequal in strength, to
cease from motion, till they come to an equipondium; because the Water always
springs up through the Mercury, till an equal Balance happen. Seventhly, that
one Fluid of this kind, can counterpoise another Fluid of the same kind, though
there be diverse Fluids interveening: because the Air F E, counterpoiseth the
Air I K, or I S, notwithstanding of Water and Mercury interveening. Eighthly,
that there may be as much Pressure in one inch of a Fluid, as in a million;
because the 29 inches of Air I S, have as much Bensil in them, as is in the
whole Pillar of Air E F, that goes up from the top of the Water, to the top
of the Atmosphere. Ninthly, that when one Fluid is under Pressure, the next
must be under the same degree of Pressure, though they be not of the same kind,
but of different sorts; because the Air I S, the Water S K, and Mercury K P,
are surely under the same degree of Pressure; otherwise the motion could not
end. Tenthly, that when two Fluids of diverse kinds do press one another, that
which is naturally lighter, ascends always to the higher place, and the
heavier to the lowest: because the Air I S, is above the Water S K, and the
Water S K is above the Mercury. Note, that this is not universal, but only
happens when the lighter Cylinder, is slenderer than the other, for if the
Mercury K P, were no thicker than the Water P N R H, this would raise it
entirely. Eleventhly, that the compression of Air to less space, is not
according to Arithmetical progression, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, but according to some
other proportion, which may be called Uniform-difform. Note here, that though
this be true of the Air, while it is comprest from a more quantity to a less,
as here, or in a Wind-Gun; yet it is not true of the Pressure of the Element of
Air, which is more and more from the top of the Atmosphere to the Earth,
according to Arithmetical Progression, as in Water. We see lastly, that the
heaviest of Fluids, such as Mercury, press upward, as well as downward; because
the top of the Mercury K, thrusts up the Water K S, as well as it thrusts down
the Water P N R H. It may be enquired here, how far this Glass would go down,
before the 29 inches of Air I K were reduced to one inch? I answer, its hard to
determine; but it seems it ought to go down more than 300 fathom. In this case,
there would be 28 inches of Water above K. Let us suppose the orifice H to be
stopped at that deepness, and the Glass brought above the Water; then, when the
said orifice is opened in the Air, you will find the whole Water P N R H
thrust out: and not only this, but the whole Mercury P K, spring out at the
orifice H likewise, except a little that remains between N and H: the reason
is, because the 29 inches of Air, being reduced to one, would be under a very
great Bensil; therefore the weight being taken away that begat it, of its own
accord, it would expand it self to its old dimensions; which it could not do,
unless both the 28 inches of Water, that is supposed to be above K, and the
Mercury K P were thrust out of their places.

EXPERIMENT XVI. Figure 22.
THis Schematism represents a vessel full of Water 84 inches deep, namely from
L N the first surface, to M R the bottom. From M to R in breadth are 20 inches.
There are here also two Glass-Pipes open at both ends; the one, two inches
wide, the other half an inch wide. Both of them are 85 inches long. X Y O is a
surface of stagnant Mercury, among which the two ends of the Pipes are drowned.
E C is a Pillar of Mercury six inches in height, and so is G D, both of them
raised to that altitude, by the Pressure of the Water upon the surface X Y O.
The Pillar E C A is supported by, and rests upon, the imaginary Pillar A P. And
so is the Pillar G D B, supported by the Pillar B Q. There are three things
that occurres here from this operation of nature to be enquired after. First,
why ought the Mercury to rise in the two Tubs, after the Vessel is filled with
Water? Secondly, why rather six inches, then seven or eight? Thirdly, what is
the reason, why it rises as high in the wide T^b, as in the narrow? I answer,
the Mercury rises from C to E, and from D to G, by the Pressure of the Water,
that rests upon the surface X Y O. Before that the Water is poured into the
Vessel, there is here a most equal and uniform Pressure upon the surface X Y O,
both without and within the Tub, namely from the Air that rests upon it. But no
sooner is the Water poured in, but as soon the Pressure becomes unequal; the
parts of the surface without the Tub, being more burdened, then the parts C and
D within. Therefore, the part that is less pressed, must rise and climb up, till
the Pressure become equal: for it is impossible that a Fluid can cease from
motion, so long as there is inequality of weight between the pondus and the
potentia. If any doubt, let him pie^ce the side of the Vessel, and when the
whole Water is run out, he will find E C and G D to have fallen down, which
clearly proves the climbing up of the Mercury, to depend upon the in-pouring of
the Water. For understanding the reason of the second, remember that Mercury
(as we have often noted) is counted 14 times heavier then Water; therefore E C
must be six inches, seeing X Y O is pressed with the altitude of 84 inches of
Water. It would be judged no marvel, to see the Mercury rise from C to E, and
from D to G, provided the face of the stagnant Mercury were as high as Z F. No
more strange it is, to see the two Mercuries rise, with the Pressure of the
Water; for in effect and really, the said Water is the just weight of as much
Mercury as would fill between X O and Z F. For understanding the third,
remember (as was noted before) that Fluid Bodies counterpoise one another, only
according to altitude: therefore it is no matter, whether the Tubs be wide or
narrow. If it be enquired, how can one and the ^ame Water, counterpoise two
Fluids of different weights? To say, that Fluids counterpoise one another
according to altitude, does not clear the difficulty; for it still remains to
be asked, why they counterpoise one another after this manner? Therefore it
seems, that if the Water raise the Mercury from C to E in the wide Pipe, it
must raise it in the narrow one from D to K. For answer, consider first, that
as there are here two Pillars of Mercury C E, and D G within the two Tubs, so
there are here also two Pillars of Mercury A P and B Q, under the two orifices,
upon which the said two Pillars stand, and rest. Consider secondly, that the
Potentia or force of the Pillar A P, is just equal to the Pondus of the Pillar
E C A: Item, that the Potentia of the Pillar B Q, is equal to the Pondus G D B.
Thirdly, that the Potentia of A P. is most exactly equal to the Potentia of B
Q; and the reason is, because their tops A and B, are parts of the same
horizontal surface. I say then, if A P be equal to E C A, and B Q equal to G D
B, and A P, and B Q, equal among themselves, then must E C A be equal to G D B.
The same Water then, does not counterpoise two Bodies of different weight. I
grant E C A to be far heavier, than G D B, while they are weighed in a pair of
scales, but the one is not heavier than the other, as they are weighed in this
balance of nature.

From what is said, we see first, that in Water there is a Pressure, and a
considerable weight. This is evident from the rising of the Mercury. We see
secondly, that Fluids counterpoise one another, only according to Altitude.
Thirdly, that when a lighter Fluid presses up a heavier, there is no more
pressed up of it, than is the just weight of the pressing Fluid, because the
Mercury E C, is just the weight of the Water that presses upon X Y O. That Is
to say, the part of the surface C, is no more pressed with the Mercury E C, than
the part X, is pressed with the Water L Z X. Fourthly, if Mercury were 28 times
heavier than Water, only three inches would be pressed up: if it were but seven
times heavier, the altitude would be at S, 12 inches above C. Fifthly, it is as
easy for a large part of a surface, to sustain a large Pillar, as it is for a
narrow part, to sustain a narrower Pillar: because A P sustains E C A, as
easily, as B Q sustains G D B. Sixthly, that in Fluids there is a pondus and a
potentia: as is clear from the potentia of A P, that sustains the pondus of E C
A. The Water likewise that sustains, has a potentia, and the Mercury E C is
the pondus of it. Seventhly, that there is always equality of weight between
the pondus and the potentia. So is the potentia of A P, equal to the pondus E C
A. Eighthly, that the pondus begets the potentia. So the weight of the Water,
begets the potentia that is in A P. For make this Water deeper, and you augment
the potentia of A P. If you subtract from it, the potentia of A P grows less by
proportion. Or the weight of E C A, may be said to beget the potentia of A P.
To proceed a little further, let us suppose the Air H E to be removed. In this
case, the Mercury rises 29 inches higher than E, or 35 above C; even as high as
S. In the narrow Tub it will climb up to K, if you take away the Air I G. This
comes to pass, by virtue of the Pressure of the Atmosphere, that rests upon L
N. From this we gather ninthly, that there is a counterpoise between the Air H
E, and the weight of the Air that rests upon L N; and that a slender Pillar of
Air, is able to counterpoise a thicker: for H E is far narrower than L N.
Tenthly, that the Pressure of the Air, can be communicated through diverse kinds
of Fluids; because the weight that rests upon L N, is sent down through the
Water L Z X, and down through the stagnant Mercury, and thrusts up the Liquor
from A to S, 35 inches. Eleventhly, that a lighter Fluid may be made to press
with greater burden, than a Fluid naturally heavier; because the weight of the
Air upon L N, raises 29 inches of Mercury, but the Water raises only six. We
see twelfthly, that Fluids have a sphere of activity, to which they are able to
press up themselves, or Fluids of different kinds: because first, the stagnant
Mercury can raise it self no higher within the Pipe, than it is without. Next,
the 84 inches of Water, can raise the Mercury no higher than E. Lastly, the
weight of the Atmosphere, can raise the Mercury no higher than S, 29 inches
above E.

For another trial, take out from among the Water, the two Pipes, and stopping
closely the two under orifices, fill them with Mercury to the brim. Then thrust
them down as before, and open the said two orifices, while they are below the
surface X Y O, and you will find the whole Cylinder fall down from H to E, and
there halt: and the whole Cylinder in the narrow Pipe falls down from I to G.
Or, if you please, before this be done, stop closely the orifice H, and the
orifice I, and you will find the Mercury go no further down than S, by opening
the orifice A; and no further down than K, by opening the orifice B. This leads
us to a clear discovery of the reason, why the Mercury subsides, and sinks down
from the top of the Tub in the Baroscope, to the 29th inch, whatever the
diameter of the Pipe be. And this lets us see, that the Mercurial Cylinder is
suspended by the Air, after the same manner, that the Mercury E C is suspended
after: and that there is no more difficulty in the one, than in the other.

EXPERIMENT XVII. Figure 23, 24.
THis Schematism represents a Water 30 fathom deep. Under the first surface A,
there are six imaginary, as B C D E F G, every one whereof, is five fathom
below another. There are here likewise two Glasses, each one 12 inches high,
and 5 inches broad, like unto these, wherein Wine, Sack, or Brandy is
preserved. The Glass G M has its orifice G upward. The other Glass is
completely open below, without a narrow orifice. For making Experiment, take a
long chord, as long as the Water is in deepness, and knit the end of it round
about the neck of the Glass at G. Take another line of the same length, and
fasten it to the bottom of the other Glass at L. Next, for sinking the two
Glasses, take two weights of Lead, and fasten the one to the bottom at M, and
the other to the open part of the Glass at S, and T. The two weights then, are
P and Q, each one of them about 10 or 12 pound weight. These things being done,
let first down the Glass G M, till the weight Q sink it five fathom, namely
from A to B, and if you pull it up, you will find the bottom covered with
Water, from M to I, about four or five inches. Let it down next, from A to C,
ten fathom, and you will find more Water in it; even as much as fills it from M
to 2, about seven or eight inches. In passing from C D, the Water rises from 2
to 3. If you sink it, from D to E, the Water rises from 3 to 4. The Water
rises from 4 to 5, when the glass is come the length of F. And lastly, when the
Glass is at G, the lowest fathom, the Water is as high as K. Let down next,
the other Glass from A to B, and you will find the Water rise in it from H to
I, four or five inches, as in the other Glass. In going down from B to C, it
rises from 1 to 2. From C to D, it rises from 2 to 3. From D to E, it rises
from 3 to 4, and so forward, till the Glass come to the lowest fathom, where
the Water rises as high as I.

There are here several Phenomena to be considered. First, that the Water
creeps in at the orifice G, and fills the under part of the Glass from M to K.
Secondly, that not one particle of Air comes out, all the time the Water is in
going in. Thirdly, that this Air is comprest from M to K, nine inches. Lastly,
that the ingress of the Water, is according to unequal proportion: because
while the Glass passes from A to B, more Water creeps in at G, and fills the
bottom, then in passing from B to C. And more in going down from B to G, than
in going down from C to D, as is clear from the unequal divisions 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, For understanding the reason of the first, remember that in this deep
Water, there is a Pressure, and that this Pressure grows, as the Water grows
in deepness. It is then by virtue of this, that the Water creeps in, and fills
the bottom of the Vessel: for in effect, every part being under a burden, and
being therefore desirous to liberat themselves from it, they take occasion to
thrust in themselves, finding, as it were, more ease here, than without, the
Air within the Glass, being under less Pressure, than the Water without. The
second Phenomenon is caused by the straitness and narrowness of the hole G: for
this entry being no wider, than the thickness of a Sack-Needle, the Air cannot
go out, while the Water is coming in; that is, the passage is so strait, that
the one cannot go by the other. This leads us to the reason of the third, for
if not one particle of Air go out, all the while the Glass is in going down,
then surely, the Water filling between M and K, must compress the Air, and
reduce it from twelve inches to three. But the greater difficulty is, why the
ingress of the Water is according to unequal proportion. For understanding
this, consider, that this inequality, is not caused by any unequal Pressure
that is in the Water; for if this were true, then there ought to be less
Pressure in the surface F, than in the surface E, and less in E, than in D,
which is false and absurd. This inequality then, must flow from the nature of
the Air it self, that naturally suffers compression after such a manner. It Is
evident from the compression of Air in Wind-guns; for less force is required to
compress the first span, than to compress the second: or contrariwise, more
strength is required, to compress the third span, than the second; more to
compress the fourth, than the third, and so forth. It Is evident in all bodies
endowed with Bensil, as in the Spring of a Watch, that requires more strength
to bend it. in the end, than in the beginning.

For a second trial, pull up from the bottom of the Water the Glass L I H, and
when it comes above, you will find nothing in it. The reason is, because the
Vessel being open between T and S, the whole Water I H, falls down by degrees;
but in effect, is really thrust out, by the strong Bensil of the comprest Air I
L, that now expands it self, when it finds the Glass go up through the Water,
whose Pressure is less, and less from the bottom to the top. but the contrary
effect follows, when the other Glass is pulled up; namely, the Water remains
within the Glass, and the Air above it, is thrust out by degrees, as the Glass
comes nearer to the top. For understanding the reason of this, consider first,
that while the orifice G, is level with the lowest surface, where it now is;
that is supposed to be 30 fathom deep, there is a real counterpoise between the
enclosed Air G K, and the ambient Water without: for with what force the one
strives to be in, with the same force the other endeavors to be out; and
because they are in equal terms, therefore the one cannot yield to the other.
If you please to give the victory to the Water, then let the Glass go further
down: but if you desire the Air to overcome, then must the Glass be pulled up.
Pull it then up from the place it is in, till it come to F, and you will find a
considerable quantity of Air come out at G, and after 2 or 3 minutes of time,
emerge and come to the top A, in form of round Bells, or Bubbles. The deepness
and groseness of the Water through which the Bubbles come, makes their motion so
slow. The reason of this eruption, must be less Pressure of Water in the
surface F, than in the lowest G, from whence the Glass came. Suppose then, the
lowest to have six degrees of Pressure, F to have five, E to have four, D
three, C two, and B to have one: and supposing the enclosed Air K G, to be
equal in force to the Pressure of the lowest fathom, it must then have six
degrees of Bensil in it. Put the case then, that with six degrees of Bensil, it
come to the surface F, that has but five, it must surely break forth, and
overcome the force and power of that surface: for it is impossible that two
Fluids can be unequal in force and power, but the strongest must overcome, and
the weakest yield: therefore, when the orifice comes to F, the Air being
stronger than the Water, breaks forth; and as long does this eruption continue,
as inequality of power continues between the one and the other. In pulling up
the Glass from F to E, other five fathom, more Air comes out. The reason is the
same, namely less Pressure in E than in F: therefore, when the enclosed Air,
that has five degrees of Bensil, comes to E, that has but four, it must
overcome, and so long must it be victorious, till by expanding it self, it be
reduced to the Bensil of four. In pulling up the Glass from E to D, more Air
yet breaks out, because a surface of three degrees of Pressure, is not able to
resist four degrees of Bensil. In passing from D to C, more Air comes yet out
for the same reason, till in going up to the top, where there is no Pressure,
no more Air breaks out.

It Is to be observed first, that the motion of the Air up through the Water is
but slow, the medium being thick, and gross. Secondly, that if the Glass be
pulled up quickly, from one surface to another, or contrariwise, let down
quickly, it presently breaks in pieces. This comes to pass through the strong
Bensil of the enclosed Air, that must have time to expand it self, otherwise it
breaks out at the nearest: for it being of six degrees of Bensil, and coming
quickly to a surface of five, there happens an unequal Pressure, the sides of
the Glass being thrust out, with greater force, than they are thrust in with.
But if so be, the Glass move slowly up, the enclosed Air gets time to thrust it
self out by degrees, so that whatever surface the Glass comes to, there is
little difference between the Pressure of the Water, and the Bensil of the Air.
The reason why the Glass breaks in pieces, while it goes quickly down, is
likewayes unequal Pressure upon the sides: for in passing quickly from a
surface of five degrees, to a surface of six, the sides are pressed in with
greater force, than they are pressed out with, and the reason is, because through
the straitness of the hole G, the Water cannot win in soon enough, to make as
much Pressure within, as there is without. It Is to be observed thirdly; that if
the orifice G be stopped, before that the Glass be sent down, it will not go
beyond three or four fathom, when it shall be broken in pieces; though the
motion were never so slow: and this comes to pass, through the strong Pressure
of the Water. Fourthly, the stronger the Glass be in the sides, it goes the
further down without breaking: therefore a round Glass Bottle, will sink 20 or
30 fathom, before that it be broken with the Pressure of the Water. If a Vessel
of iron were sent down, it ought to go much further. An empty Cask, or
Hogsh^ad, will not sink beyond seven or eight fathom, without breaking, or
bursting; yet a Bladder full of wind, knit about the neck with a Pack-Threed,
will go down 100 fathom, yea 1000 without bursting.

It may be here inquired, what sort of proportion is kept by the unequal
ingress of the Water? I answer, it may be known after this manner. Let first
down the Glass one fathom, and having pulled it up again, measure the deepness
of the Water in the bottom, of it. Next, having poured out that Water, let it
down two fathom, and pulling it up, measure the deepness, which you will find
more, than before. Do after this manner, the third time, and the fourth time,
till you come to the lowest fathom, and you will find the true proportion.

From what is said we see first, that in Water there is a Pressure, because
through the force and power of this Water, the 12 inches of Air that filled the
Glass, are reduced to three. Secondly, that this Pressure grows, as the Water
grows in deepness: because there is more Pressure in B, than in A, more in C,
than in B; and Io downward. Thirdly, that when Air is comprest, by some
extrinseck weight, the Bensil is intended, and grows stronger by unequal
proportion, as is clear from the unequal divisions, 1, 2, 2, 4, 5, 6. Fourthly,
two Fluids cannot cease from motion, so long as the potentia of the one, is
unequal to the po^d^s of the other: this is evident from the Water's creeping
in at G, all the while the Glass is in going down; and from the Air's coming
out, all the while the Glass is in coming up. Fifthly, that no sooner two
Fluids come to equality of weight, but as soon the motion ends: because, if the
Glass halt at D, E or F, in the going down, upon which follows a counterpoise,
then does the creeping in of the Water cease. Sixthly, there may be as much
Pressure in a small quantity of a Fluid, as in the greatest: because there is
as much Bensil in the small portion of Air, included between K and G, as there
is of Pressure, and weight, in this whole Water, that is 30 fathom deep.
Seventhly, that the Pressure of a Fluid, is a thing really distinct, from the
natural weight: this is evident from the Pressure of the enclosed Air G K,
that is more and less, as the Pressure of the Water K M, is more and less, but
the natural weight is still the same, seeing the same quantity remains.
Eighthly, one part of a Fluid, cannot be under Pressure, but the next adjacent,
must be under the same degree of Pressure: this is also clear, because what
ever degree of bensil the included Air K G is under, the Water K M is under the
same. Therefore, when the one is under six, as in the lowest fathom, the other
is under six likewise. And when the one is under five degrees of Pressure, as
in the surface F, the other is under as much. Ninthly, Bensil and Pressure are
equivalent to weight: because the Water K M, is as much burdened with the
Bensil of that small portion of Air above it, as if it had a Pillar of Water 30
fathom high upon it. Tenthly, that the Pressure of Fluids, is most uniform and
equal, and that two Fluids of different kinds, may press as uniformly, as if
they were but one: this is evident from the sides of the Glass, that are not
broken in pieces, by the strong Bensil of the enclosed Air, and heavy Pressure
of the enclosed Water; and this happens because the Pressure without, is as
strong as the Pressure within. We see lastly, that Water does not weigh in
Water, because when a man lets down this Glass by the chord, to the lowest
surface, he finds not the weight of the Water K M, that is within the Glass, but
only the weight of the Lead Q. It Is certain, he finds not the weight of the
Water I H; because it rests not upon the Glass within, but is sustained by 'its
own surface, the mouth of the Glass being downward, and open. When I say Water
does not weigh in Water; the meaning is not, that Water wants weight or
Pressure in it, but that this weight and Pressure is not found, as the weight
and Pressure of other bodies are found, while they are weighed in Water. For
example, a piece of Lead or Gold, hung in the Water by a string, the other end
being fastened to a Balance in the Air, gravitats, and weighs down the Scale;
and the reason is, because Lead and Gold, are naturally and specifically
heavier than Water; but a piece of Metal of the same specific weight with
Water, or Water it self, cannot gravitat in Water, or weigh down the Scale of
a Balance; and the reason is, because the surface of Water upon which they
rest, bears them up with as great weight and force, as they press down with. If
it be said, that the Water K M, rests upon the bottom of the Glass within; and
therefore, if the man above, find the weight of the Glass, he must find the
weight of the Water within it. I answer, the consequence is bad, because the
weight of the Water within, is sustained, and counterpoised by the weight of
the Water without, whereupon the bottom of the Glass rests. That Is to say, as
there is a Pillar of Water K M within the Glass, that presses down the bottom,
so there is a Pillar of Water without the Glass, whereupon the bottom of the
Glass rests, and which bears up both. But the greater difficulty is this, the
further down the Glass goes, it grows the heavier, because of more and more
Water, that creeps in at G. Now it is certain, the weight Q grows not heavier,
therefore it must be the Water within the Glass, that makes the increase of the
weight; and therefore Water must still weigh in Water. If this argument had
any strength in it, it would prove the weight of the Water I H to gravitat and
weigh likewise; because the further down this glass goes, it grows the heavier,
because of more, and more Water, that creeps up from H to I. Now it is certain,
the weight of Lead B grows not heavier. Behold, the difficulty is the same in
both, and yet it were rashness to affirm the Water I H to be found by a man's
hand, when he pulls up the Glass with a string, seeing it is sustained by its
own surface, and not by any part of the Glass. Though this might suffice for an
answer, yet because the contrary is mantained by some, and that with a new
Experiment to prove it, I shall be at some more pains to vindicat the truth of
what I have said.

This new Experiment to prove that Water weighs in Water, I found in a
Philosophical Transaction, of August 16. Anno 1669. Numb. 50, the Invention
whereof is attributed by the publisher, to that honorable and worthy Person Mr.
Boil, whose conclusions and trials, I never much called in question, but
finding this opposite, and contrary to what I have demonstrated, I shall crave
liberty to say, amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas; and
shall therefore examine it as briefly as may be. The words of the Publisher are
as follows.

The Author of this Invention is the Noble Robert Boil; who was pleased to
comply with our desires, of communicating it in English to the curious in
England, as by inserting the same in the Latin Translation of his
Hydrostatical Paradoxes, he has gratified the Ingenious abroad. And it will
doubtless be the more welcome, for as much as no body, we know of, has so much
as attempted to determine, how much Water may weigh in Water; and possibly, if
such a Problem had been proposed, it would have been judged impracticable.

The Method or Expedient, he made use of, to perform it, as near as he could,
may easily be learned by the ensuing account of a Trial or two, he made for
that purpose, which among his Notes he caused to be registered in the following
words.

A Glass-bubble of about the bigness of a Pullets egg, was purposely blown at
the flame of a Lamp, with a somewhat long stem turned up at the end, that it
might the more conveniently be broken off. This Bubble being well heated to
rarify the Air; and thereby drive out a good part of it, was nimbly sealed at
the end, and by the help of the Figure of the stem, was by a convenient Weight
of Lead depressed under Water, the Lead and Glass being tied by a string to a
Scale of a good Balance, in whose other there was put so much weight, as
sufficed to counterpoise the Bubble, as it hung freely in the midst of the
Water. Then with a long Iron Forceps, I carefully broke off the sealed end of
the Bubble under Water, so as no Bubble of Air appeared to emerge or escape
through the Water, but the Liquor by the weight of the Atmosphere, sprung into
the un-replenish'd part of the Glass-Bubble, and filled the whole cavity about
half full; and presently, as I foretold, the Bubble subsided, and made the
Scale 'twas fastened to, preponderate so much, that there needed 4 drachms, and
38 grains to reduce the Balance to an equilibrium. Then taking out the Bubble
with the Water in it, we did, by the help of a flame of a Candle, warily
applied, drive out the Water (which otherwise is not easily excluded at a very
narrow stem) into a Glass counterpoised before; and we found it, as we
expected, to weigh about four drachms and 30 grains, besides some little that
remained in the Egg, and some small matter that might have been rarefied into
vapors, which added to the piece of Glass that was broken off under Water and
lost there, might very well amount to 7 or 8 grains. By which it appears not
only, that Water has some weight in Water, but that it weighs very near, or
altogether as much in Water, as the self same portion of Liquor would weigh in
the Air.

The same day we repeated the Experiment with another sealed Bubble, larger
then the former (being as big as a great Hens-egg) and having b^oken this under
Water, it grew heavier by 7. drachms and 34 grains; and having taken out the
Bubble, and driven out the Water into a counter poised Glass, we found the
transvasated Liquor to amount to the same weight, abating 6 or 7 grains, which
it might well have lost upon such accounts, as have been newly mentioned. Thus
he.

Figure 24.

THe design then of this Experiment is to prove that water weighs in Water;
but, it seems, there is here a very great mistake, which I shall make out after
this manner. For which cause, let this Schematism 24 represent the Experiment
already described. The ^lass-bubble then is E P F R. The stem is H C: the
weight that sinks the Glass is B. The surface of Water under which it is
drowned, is A D. The Balance to which the Glass is knit by a string is N O.
And lastly E F R is the Water that came in, and filled the half of the Bubble.
Now I say, it is not the weight of the Water E F R, that turns the Scales
above, and makes an alteration in the Balance, but 'its only the weight of the
Lead B, that does it. For evincing this, consider that all heavy bodies, are
either lighter in specie than Water; as cork^ or of the same specific weight
with it, as some Wood is, or last^y heavier in specie than Water, as Lead or
Gold. Now it is certain, that bodies of the first sort cannot weigh in Water,
and the reason is, because they being naturally lighter, their whole weight is
supported by the Water, and therefore not one part of them, can be born up by a
Balance above. A piece of Cork that weighs 12 ounces in the Air, weighs
nothing in Water, because as soon as it touches the surface, the whole weight
of it is supported, and therefore cannot affect the Balance above. But bodies
of the third sort, as is clear from experience and reason, does really weigh in
Water: And the reason is, because they being naturally heavier than water,
their whole weight cannot be supported by it, and therefore some part of them
must burden the Balance, to which the body is knit. A piece of Lead, that
weighs 12 ounces in the Air, will not lose above 2 ounces, when 'its weighed in
Water; or may be less. But here there is no difficulty. The question then is,
in order to bodies of the same specific weight with Water, as some Wood is, or
as Water is. I say of such also, that they cannot weigh in Water; and the
reason is, because they being ^ust of the same weight, must have their whole
weight supported by it; even as one foot of Water, supports the whole weight of
the foot above it. It may be evidenced after this manner. Take a piece of Wood,
that is lighter in specie than Water, and add weight to it by degrees, till it
become of the same weight with Water. Knit it with a string to a Balance, and
weigh it in Water, and you will find the whole weight supported by the Water.
And the reason is, because, being left to it self, it can go no further down,
than till the upper part of it, be level with the surface of the Water. Now,
the whole weight being thus supported, not one ounce of it can burden the
Balance. In a word, the Balance can never be burdened, unless the body that is
knit to it, have an inclination to go to the ground, when left to it self,
which a body of the same weight with Water can never have. I conclude then, if
a body of the same weight with Water, cannot weigh in Water, neither can Water
weigh in Water, seeing Water is of the same weight with Water. And Therefore the
Water E F R, that is now within the Bubble, cannot in anywise burden the
Balance above; but must be supported wholly by the Water I K G H, upon which
the bottom of the Glass rests. If it be said, that the Glass it self is
supported by the Balance, because 'its heavier in specie than Water; therefore
the Water within that rests upon the sides of it, must be supported likewise
by it. I answer, the whole weight of the Glass is not supported, by the
Balance, but only a part; the Water I K G H supporting the other part. And
this part is just as much as is the weight of Water, that is expelled by the
Glass. Now, if the said Water support so much of the Glass, because it is the
just weight of so much Water, why should it not also, support the Water
within the Glass? Seeing the Water within the Glass, is just the weight of as
much Water, as will fill the space E F R.

I come in the next place to show, that it is the weight of the Lead B that
turns the Scales, when the Water comes in at C, and fills the half of the
sphere. For understanding this, let us suppose first, the weight that is in the
Scale O to weigh six ounces. Secondly, that the Glass takes 12 ounces to sink
it completely under the surface A D. Thirdly, the weight B to be 18 ounces;
namely for this cause, first, that 12 of it may sink the Glass; next, that the
other six may counterpoise the six in the Scale O. Lastly, that the Water
within the Glass weighs six ounces. I abstract from the weight of the Glass it
self, which is not considerable, seeing the most part of it, is supported by the
Water, and not by the Balance. Now, I say, it is six ounces of the weight B
that makes this alteration, and turns the Scales. For if 12 ounces sink the
Glass below the Water, when 'its full of Air, and no Water in it, then surely
^ix are sufficient to sink it, when it is half full. And the reason is, because
there is a less Potentia or force in six inches of Air, by the one half, to
counterpoise a weight of 12 ounces, than in 12 inches of Air. Therefore this
Air, being reduced from 12 inches to six, it must take only six ounces to sink
it. If this be, then the other six ounces that now wants a party to
counterpoise them, must burden the Balance, and be supported by the Scale: and
therefore, to make a new equipondium again, you must make the weight O 12
ounces, by adding six to it, that it may counterpoise 12 of B, the other six
being counterpoised by the Air E P F. Let us suppose next, this Glass to be
completely full of Water, and the whole Air expelled. In this case the Scale
O, must have 18 ounces in it, for making a new equip^ndium. The reason is,
because there being no Air in the Glass to counterpoise any part of B, the
whole weight of it must be sustained by the Balance, and therefore in the
Scale O, there must be 18. Now, I enquire, whether these 18 ounces, are the
equipondium of the Water within the Glass, or of the weight of Lead B? It Is
impossible it can counterpoise them both, seeing the Water is now 12, and B 18.
It must then either be the counterballance of the Water, or the counterballance
of the Lead. It cannot be the first, because 12 cannot be in equipondio with
18, It must then be the second. Or if these 18 ounces in the Scale O, be the
counterpoise of the Water within the Glass, I enquire what sustains the weight
of the Lead B? The weight of it, cannot be sustained by the Water, because it is
a body naturally heavier than Water, it must therefore be sustained by the
Balance, I conclude then, that Water cannot weigh in Water. If it be objected,
that this conclusion seems to contradict, and oppose the Pressure of the Water,
that is been hitherto confirmed with so many Experiments. I answer, the Pressure
of the Water is one thing, and Water to weigh in Water is another. The first
is, when one Pillar of Water counterpoises another, or when a Pillar of Water
counterpoises a Pillar of Mercury, or is counterpoised by a Pillar of Air, all
which is in order to the Natural Balance, wherein bodies weigh only according
to altitude. The second is, when Water is not counterpoised by Water, or by
Mercury, or by Air, or by any other Fluid; but when 'its weighed by a piece of
Lead or stone in an Artificial Balance, for knowing how many ounces or pounds
it is of, as if a man should endeavor to weigh the Water E F R by help of the
Balance above, which in effect is impossible.

EXPERIMENT XVIII. Figure 25.
MAke a Wooden Ark after this following manner. The Planks must be of Oak, an
inch thick. The height 40 inches. The breadth 36. Closs on all sides, and
above, and open below. And because the form is apiece, there must be four
Standarts of Timber, in each corner one, to which the Planks must be nailed.
Four likewise upon the top, crossing the other four at right angles, to which
the cover must be joined. The sides must be plained, and the edges both plained
and gripped in all the parts, that the joynings may be closs. Upon the top
fasten a strong Iron Ring, as at N, through which must be fastened a Rope, of so
many foot or fathom. And because the use of this Engine is for Diving under the
Water, it must therefore be all covered over with Pitch within and without,
especially in the couplings. And because this Instrument cannot sink of its own
accord, it must have a great weight of Lead appended to it, for that cause,
whereupon the Diverse feet must stand, while he is in going down. The precise
quantity and weight of it cannot be determined; because it depends upon the
quantity of the Ark, which if large, requires a great weight: if of a lesser
size, requires a lesser weight. But whatever the dimensions of the Ark may be,
the weight of the Leaden-foot-stool can easily be found out by trial. This
Invention then, is for Diving, a most excellent Art, for lifting up of Guns,
Ships, or any other things, that are drowned below the Water. And it is in
imitation of the Diving bell, already found out, and made use of with success.
It is called a Bell, because of the form, that represents a Church-bell indeed,
being round, wide below, and narrower in the top: only, the matter is of Lead.
It seems, it is of this metal, first, because Lead is weighty, and will
therefore easily sink: secondly, because it is easily founded, and will by this
means, being of one piece, be free of rifts, and leaks: thirdly, it being of
Lead, will be of a considerable strength for resisting the force of the Water,
that ordinarily breaks in pieces Vessels that are weak. I cannot well divine
and guess the reason, why first it is round, and next narrower above, than
below, unless, because its more easily founded after this way, than after
another. This device here described is named a Diving Ark; first, because it is
of Timber, and next, because it saves a man from being overwhelmed with the
Waters. I prescribe it of Wood, because of less trouble, and expense in making
of it. It Is four square, because it contains under this Figure, far more Air,
than if it were round; even as much more, as a square Vessel 30 inches wide,
contains more than a round Vessel 30 inches wide. Now, the more Air, that is in
the Vessel, the easier is the respiration, and the longer time is the man able
to abide under the Water, which two things are of great advantage to this Art.
For if by a guess we reckon, how much more Air is in the one, than in the
other, we will find in the Ark, as before it is described, 30 square foot of
Air, but in the Bell, though it be 36 inches wide, as well above, as below, yet
little more than 23 will be found, which is a considerable difference. But far
less must be in it, seeing it is narrower above, than below. Besides this
advantage, there are others very useful: for being of Wood, it is more
tractable. Next, several Knags of Iron may be fastened conveniently to the
sides within, to which a man fastening his hands, may keep his body fixed and
sure in going down, and coming up. Moreover, if a man were in hazard to be
confounded with fear, or lose the right exercise of his senses, and so be in
danger of falling out of the Ark; or if his feet should slide off the
footstool, and his hands fail him too, a chord knit to one of those, and
fastened about his wast or middle, might bring him up, though he were dead.
Then, its far easier to cut out a window or two in the sides of it, not very
large, but little, as K and I, whereby, they being covered with Glass, a man
may see at a distance, what is upon the right hand, and what is upon the left,
and what is before. This device is of excellent use, for through the want of
it, the Diver sees no more, but what is just below him, which sometimes, when
he is near the ground, will not exceed the compass of a large Mil^wheel. But if
so be, three holes be cut through, one on every hand, and one before, he may see
as much bounds, and all things in it, as if he were not enclosed, and environed
with a cover. A little schelf likewise may be fixed upon the one side or the
other, for holding a Compass with a Magnetical Needle, for knowing how such and
such a thing lies in the ground of the Sea. In one of the corners may hing a
little bottle with some excellent spirits, for refreshing the stomach, under
Water. Many more advantages I might name, this Engine being of Timber, but
shall forbear; leaving the collection of them to the ingenious Reader, and
proceeds to answer some objections, that may be made against it.

First, if this Engine be made of Wood, it will not sink so easily, as being
made of Lead. I answer, this difficulty is soon overcome, namely by making the
Footstool the heavier: therefore how light soever it be, a weight may be found
to counterpoise it in the Water. If it be judged too light in Timber, it may
be lined with Lead, especially without. Secondly, if it be of VVood, there must
be couplings and joynings in it, and so rifts and leaks in it, through which
the Water may come. I answer, there is less difficulty here, than in the
former; because the joints may be made so closs in all the parts, and may be so
covered over with pitch, or with some such like matter, that it may defy
either Water to come in, or Air to go out. Thirdly, if it be made of VVood, it
will be in hazard of breaking by the force of the Water: for often times its
found, that the strongest Hogshead will burst asunder by the Pressure of it, if
they go but down 7 or 8 fathom. I answer, this objection flows from the
ignorance of the nature of Fluid bodies. If so be then, that a man knew, that
the Pressure of Water is uniform, most equal, and presses upon all the parts
of a body within it alike, no such scruple would occur. I say then, the Ark,
though no thicker in the sides, than a thin sawen dale, will go down, in spite
of all the Pressure that is in the Water, not only 10, but 20, or 30 fathom,
without all hazard. And the reason is, because what Pressure soever is without,
to press in the sides, the same degree of Pressure is within to press them out.
By this means, there is not one part of the Water, how deep soever, to which
the Ark may come down, but there will be found as much force in the Air within,
as will counterballance the whole weight without, as will be infallibly
demonstrated afterward. This answers a fourth objection, namely if holes be
cut out in the sides of the Ark, in stead of windows, the force of the Water
will break the Glasses in pieces, that covers them. There is here no hazard,
though the said windows were 12 inches in Diameter: but its not needful they be
so large. It Is sufficient, if they be 2 inches wide: for a man's eye near to a
hole, 2 inches wide, will see a great way about him. There Is a necessity the
Glasses be joined in with cement, that Water may not have access to come in, or
Air to go out. In such a case there is no hazard, that the Pressure of the
Water, will break through the windows, or break the Glasses; because the
Pressure of the Air within, being of the same force with the strength of the
Water without, the Glasses are kept entire. It may be enquired, what hazard
would follow, upon supposition a small hole were pierced in the head of the Ark
above, when it is going down? I answer, there is not so much hazard, as a man
would think; provided the hole be not wide, but narrow. If it be wide, not only
the Water comes in, but the Air goes out, the one thrusting it self by the
other. If the hole be no wider, than the point of a bodkin is in thickness;
there is no danger at all: for by reason of the strait passage; the one cannot
thrust it self by the other, and therefore neither the Water can come in, nor
the Air go out. And this comes to pass, by reason, that the Air within, is as
strong as the Water is without. Now, if they be both of the same strength and
force, why ought the Air rather to go out, then the Water to come in; or the
Water rather to come in, then the Air to go out? I am confident, though the
hole were as wide, as a man might thrust in his little finger, yet no irruption
of Water, or eruption of Air would follow. This demonstrats clearly, that
though a small rift, or leak should happen in the Ark, yet no hazard or danger
would follow thereupon. If it be inquired, whither the greatest hazard is from
the ingress of the Water, or from the egress of the Air? I answer, there is no
danger from the coming in of the Water from above; because as it comes in, it
falls down, and so mingles with the rest below. But if the Air should go out,
the Ark fills presently full of Water, and drowns the man that is in it.

The next thing considerable in this Diving Instrument, is the footstool of
Lead C D, that is not only useful for a man to set his feet upon, when he dives;
but especially for sinking of the Ark. For this being made of Timber; and full
of Air, cannot of 'its own accord go down, unless it be pulled, and forced by
some weight. It may either be broad and round, or square: if square, a large
foot over from side to side, or 16 inches will determine the breadth. By this
means, it will happen to be pretty thick, seeing a great quantity of Lead is
required. In each corner, there must be a hole, for four chords, by which it is
appended to the mouth of the Ark. Between it, and the roof within, must be the
height of a man and more. The weight of it, cannot be well determined without
trial; seeing it depends upon the dimensions of the Ark. First then try, how
much weight, will bring the top E F G H level with the surface of the Water.
When this is found, add a little more weight till it begin to sink, and this
will surely take it to the ground, though it were 40 fathom. It Is to be
observed, that when the top E F is level with the surface, there is here a just
counterpoise, namely between the Lead footstool on the one part, as a pondus,
and the Ark on the other part, as a potentia; for with what force the Ark
endeavors to pull up the Lead; with the same force strives the Lead to pull
down the Ark. Hence it is, that as a small weight will turn a pair of Scales,
when they are in equilibrio; so a small weight added to the footstool will
sink the Ark. Though it may seem difficult to determine the just weight of the
footstool, without trial as I said, yet I purpose to essay it. For this cause
consider that there is no Vessel of VVood almost, if it be once full of Water,
but the orifice of it will ly level with the surface of the Water, wherein it
sweems. This proposition is so evident from experience, that it needs no
confirmation. From this I gather, that as much weight of Lead or Stone will
bring the top of the Ark E F G H, level with the surface of the Water, as is
the weight of the Water, that fills it. If you suppose then the Ark to be 36
inches broad, and 40 inches high, it must contain 30 cubique foot of Water.
Now, supposing each square foot of this Water to weigh 56 pound, 30 foot must
weigh 1680 pound. This is gathered from trial and experience, for after exact
search, I found a cubique foot of Water, in bulk about 16 pints of our measure,
to weigh 56 pound. Take then a piece of Lead of that weight, and you will find
it make a just counterpoise with the Ark. If any be desirous to know the
quantity of it. I answer, if lead be 13 times naturally heavier then Water, you
will find that a piece of Lead about 16 inches every way will do it. If it be
objected, that when a man's body is within the Ark, the weight of the footstool
must be less, even as much less, as is the weight of the man, whom I suppose to
weigh 224 pound, or 14 stone. I answer, the whole weight of the man is not to
be deduced from the footstool, but the one half only, and the reason is,
because a man's body being of the same specific and natural weight with Water,
it cannot preponderat or weigh in Water, because magnitudes only naturally
heavier then Water weigh in Water, as Lead, or Stone; therefore seeing the one
half of the man is within the Ark, and the other without among the Water, that
part only must weigh, that is environed with Air. This may seem a plausible
answer, and might do much to satisfy these, that are not very inquisitive, yet,
being examined, it will be found unsufficient. Therefore, I say, there is not
one part of the man's body, that weighs within the Ark, or makes it heavier.
Yet, I affirm, that when the man's body is within the Ark, a less weight will
sink it, then when his body is out of it, even as much less than before, as is
the just weight of the one half of the man. For example, if 1680 pound be the
just counterpoise of it without the Man, then after the Man is in it, it will
take only 1568 pound to counterballance it, supposing the one half of the man
to weigh 112 pound, or seven stone: yet it is not the weight of the man that
makes this difference. For understanding what is the cause of this alteration,
consider, that when a man's body is within the Ark, there is less Air in it,
then while his body is out of it, even as much less in quantity, as the bulk of
the parts are, that are within. If this be, then must the Ark become heavier,
not because the man's body makes it heavier, but because there is less Air, in
the Ark, then before, and therefore, there arises an inequality between the
weight of the footstool and the weight, or rather lightness of the Ark. For if
1680 pound of Lead, was the just counterballance of it, when it had 30 cubique
foot of Air within it, it must exceed, when there is less Air in it. But there
occures, here two difficulties, the first is, what is the reason, why as much
weight must be deduced from the footstool, as is the the precise weight of the
one half of the man? Secondly, how shall we come to the true knowledge of that
weight; that is, to know distinctly how many pounds or ounces it is of? For
answer, let us suppose, that the one half of the man, is just as heavy, as so
much Water equal in bulk to his own half. This may be granted without scruple,
seeing a man's body is judged to be of the same specific, and natural weight
with Water: and though there should be some small difference, yet it will not
make, or produce any insufficiency in the argument, for these demonstrations,
are not Mathematical but Physical. Therefore, as much Water in bulk, as is
equal to that part of the man, that is within the Ark, must be as heavy, as the
half of the man. Now supposing the half of the man, to weigh 112 pound, and
consequently that Water, to weigh as much, I affirm the said Water to contain
3456 cubique inches: but 3456 cubique inches, makes exactly two cubique feet,
which I gather thus. Seven pound of Water requires 216 cubique inches, because
a Cube of six inches, weighs exactly seven pound, therefore according to the
rule of proportion, 112 pound will require 3456 inches, which amounts to two
cubique foot. The Ark then by receiving the one half of the man's body, loses
two cubique foot of Air, therefore if 30 foot of Air, require 1680 pound weight
of Lead to counterpoise it, 28 foot of Air, must require only 1568 pound:
therefore to make a new counterballance, you must deduce 112 pound from the
footstool. This answers both the difficulties. If it be said, that the
footstool weighs less in Water than in Air, therefore it must be heavier,
then 1680 pound. I answer, it is needful to abstract from that difference, till
the just calculation be once made, and that being now done, I say, that a Cube
of Lead 16 inches weighing 1680 pound, (If Lead be 13 times heavier than
Water,) will lose about 130 pound. The reason is evident, because a heavy body
weighs as much less in Water than in Air, as is the weight of the Water it
expells. But so it is, that a Cube of Lead of 16 inches expells a Cube of
Water 16 inches: But a Cube of Water 16 inches weighs 130 pound, which I
gather thus. 216 inches, or a Cube of six inches, weighs seven pound, therefore
4032 inches, must weigh 130 pound. For if 216 give 7,4032 must give 130. But to
return. Though there be small difficulty to let it down and to sink it 20 or 30
fathom, yet there is no small difficulty to pull it up again. And the reason is
this, because the further down it goes, the Air within, is the more contracted,
and thrust up, by the Pressure of the Water, toward the roof. By this means,
though near the top of the Water, there was little difference between the
weight of the Lead and the Ark; yet 9 or 10 fathom down, the difference is
great, the weight of the one, far exceeding the weight of the other, and
therefore there must be greater difficulty to pull it up from 10 fathom, than
from 5: and yet more difficulty from 20 than from 10. However, yet it is
observable that, as the Ark in going down, becomes heavier and heavier, so in
coming up, it grows lighter and lighter: therefore less strength is required,
in pulling it up from the tenth to the fifth fathom, than from the fifteenth,
to the tenth: the reason is, because in coming up, the Air within expands it
self, and fills more space in the Ark, which in effect makes it lighter, and
more able to overcome the weight of the Lead. To make these things more
evident, let us suppose, that when the Ark is down 18 or 20 fathom, the Air to
be contracted by the force of the Water, from L M to P Q 12 inches. Next, that
the weight of the footstool is 1680 pound. Now, if this weight was the just
counterpoise of the Ark, at the top of the Water, then surely it must far
exceed it now, when it is 20 fathom down, because the Air that was 30 foot, is
now reduced to 21. Count then, and you will find, that if 30 require 1680, 21
will only require 1176: therefore the weight of the Lead, will exceed the
weight of the Ark, at 20 fathom deep, by 504 pound. This will be yet more
evident, if we consider, that while the top of the Ark E F G H, is level with
the surface above, the Water thrust out of 'its own place by this bulk, is
just the weight of both Lead and Ark. But when 'its down 20 fathom, and the Air
reduced from L M to P Q, there cannot be so much Water expelled now as before,
seeing the space L M P Q is full of Water. Now, I say, the Lead at 20 fathom,
must be exactly so much heavier than the Ark, as is the weight of the said
Water L M P Q, which in effect will be 504. pound: for 'its a square body, 36
inches in thickness and 12 in deepness. The weight of the rope is likewise to
be considered, that lets down the Ark: for the longer it be, and more of it
goes out, it is the heavier, and more troublesome to pull up.

There is no way to cure this difficulty, but by finding out a way, how to keep
a just counterpoise between the Lead and the Ark, all the time it is in going
down. If the Air within did not contract it self, no difference would happen:
but this is impossible, so long as the Water is under a Pressure. The expedient
then must be found out another way, namely by kniting a small rope to the iron
ring N, in length with the other, to which at certain distances, relating to
the fathoms the Ark goes down, must be fastened empty little Vessels of Wood, or
bladders, which by their lightness, may compense the decrement and decreasing
of the Air. First then, let down the Ark three fathom, and see how much it is
heavier than before: and as you find the difference, so fasten to R one
Bladder, or two, till the Ark be brought near to a counterpoise. Secondly, let
it go down other three fathom, and observe that difference also, and
accordingly fasten to T as many, as will reduce the two to a counterpoise
again. Do after this manner, till it sink 15 or 20 fathom. It Is to be observed,
that the further down the Ark goes, the difference is the less: therefore less
addition will serve: and the reason is, because there is less Air contracted,
in passing between the fifth and the tenth fathom; than in passing from the
first to the fifth. The proportion of contraction is represented by the unequal
divisions within the mouth of the Ark, as 1. 2. 3. 4. In a word, by what
proportion the decrement of the Air is, by that same proportion must the
addition be, upon the rope S N. Suppose then, the Air to be diminished four
inches, in going down four fathom, which will be 5184 square inches, or three
square foot, then surely as much Air must be added to the rope S N, by
bladders. In going down as far, let us suppose three-inches to be contracted;
then less will suffice. Though it cannot be determined without trial, how much
Air is contracted in three fathom, and how much in six, and how much in nine;
yet this is sure, that the decreasing is according to unequal divisions, that is
to say, less in six than in four, less in 8, than in six, and less in 10, than
in 8, and so downward: and that this is the rule, namely according to what
quantity, the Air within the Ark is contracted, according to that same measure,
must the addition of Air be to the rope. If it be said, that Bladders full of
wind, cannot go down through the Water without bursting. I answer, it is a
mistake, because their sides being pliable, and not stiff like the sides of a
Timber Vessel, they yield, and therefore cannot burst. It Is observable that
when a bladder goes far down, the sides becomes flaccid and flagging. In this
case, the Air, that before, had the form of the Bladder, and was somewhat
ovall, must now become perfectly globular, and round: for it is sure, that the
dimensions of it are altered by the Pressure of the Water, namely from more
quantity to less: if this be, then the form must be round, seeing the Pressure
of the Water is most uniform; even as drops of Water, or Rain from a house
side are round upon this account. This second way, may be thought upon also.
Make the Leaden footstool that sinks the Ark, not of one piece, but of many,
that so, when the Air within it, begins to be contracted by degrees, in going
down, a proportionable weight may be subtracted, for keeping a just
counterpoise, all the while of the descent. Or because the greatest trouble is
in bringing of it up, let the Diver, when once he is at the bottom, subtract so
much weight from the footstool, as he thinks will go near to make a
counterpoise, at that deepness. For example, if the weight of the footstool be
40 pound heavier than the Ark, then let him subtract 30 or 36, which may ly,
and rest upon the ground, till it be drawn up, at a convenient time, by a
chord. By his means it will be easy to move the Ark, from one place to
another. Next, there shall be little or no difficulty to pull it up. Nay, upon
supposition, the rope were broken, by which it was let down, yet if the Diver
please, he may come up without any man's help. And this is most easily done,
namely by subtracting as much weight, as will make the Ark the stronger party.
It Is to be observed, that when you are at the bottom, and if you make the Lead
but one pound lighter than the Ark, it will surely come up, and cannot stop by
the way. The reason is, because a very small weight will turn the Scales,
between two bodies, thus weighing in Water. Next, the further the Ark comes
up, it becomes the lighter, because the Air within it, expands it self the
more. But leaving this, let us come to explicat the reason, why the contraction
of the Air is not uniform, but rather difform. For if in going down three
fathom, three inches be contracted, there will not be other three contracted in
going down the second three, but less: and yet less in going down the third
three. Two things then are to be explicated here. First, why there is a
contraction. Next, why it is after such a manner. As for the first; the
contraction is caused by the Pressure of the Water, which gradually increases
from the top to the bottom; as is clear from the last Experiment: therefore,
there being a greater Pressure in a surface six fathom deep, than in a surface
three fathom deep, the Air within the Ark, must be more contracted in passing
between the third and sixth, than in passing between the first and third. When
I say more contracted, the meaning is, that more quantity is contracted to
less, whereby the Bensil of it is more intended; or that the Air is more
bended. As for the second, we must remember from the last Experiment, that the
cause of this, is not from the Water, as if forsooth the Pressure of it, were
according to unequal proportion, but from the Air it self, whose kind and
nature it is, to suffer compression after such a way. It Is evident in
Wind-guns, whose second span of Air is comprest with greater difficulty, than
the first: and the third with greater difficulty, than the second. It Is so with
all bodies endowed with Benfil: for ay the longer you bend, you find the
greater difficulty. As there is a great disadvantage to the man that Dives,
from the contraction of the Air, so there is a great advantage to him, from
this manner and way of contraction; for if it were uniform, according to the
Pressure of the Water, then if three fathom comprest three inches, six fathom
ought to compresse six inches, nine fathom nine inches, and so forward, till by
going down, either the whole Air, should be comprest to no inches, or else very
little should remain for respiration.

The next thing to be taken notice of, is that all the while, during the down
going of the Ark, there is still equality of weight, between the Pondus of the
Water, and the Potentia of the Air, for with what degree of weight, the Water
presses up the Air, with the same degree of force and power, does the Air
press down the Water. If this were not, it would be impossible for a man to go
down; because of pain. For when one part of a man's body, is less pressed than
another, there arises a considerable pain, which sometimes is intolerable, as
is evident from the application of Ventoso-glasses. This equality of weight, is
the true reason, why respiration is so easy. Yet it is to be observed, that a
man cannot breath so easily in the Ark, under the Water, as above in the Air*
not because there is any inequality, between the weight of the Water, and the
force of the Air; but only because the quantity of it is little. For when a man
sucks in as much Air, as fills his lungs, the quantity must be diminished: if
this be, the Water must ascend by proportion, though insensibly. When a man
thrusts out the same Air again, the quantity is increased; if this be, then the
Water must subside a little; both which cannot be, without difficulty, seeing
there is a sort of ebbing and flowing both of the Air and of the Water, in
every respiration. But it rather seems (you say) that this difficulty flows
from the strong, extraordinary bensil, that the Air is under. I answer, as long
as the pressure of a Fluid is uniform, though in a high degree, yet there can
be no trouble in respiration; because with what force soever, it is driven in
upon the lungs, with the same force it is driven out again: therefore, though
the Air we live in, were as much again bended as it is, yet (as is probable) we
would find no more difficulty in breathing than now. There is one thing makes
breathing easy under the Water, in the Ark, namely this; when a man sucks in
the Air to his lungs, his breast and belly goes out, and so fills the space
deserted by the Air, that goes in. This makes the ebbing and flowing far less.

From this equality of weight between the pressure of the Water, and the
pressure of the Air, we see good ground to say, that though the Ark, were no
thicker in the sides, than a thin sawed dale, yet there would be no hazard of
breaking. I am confident, though it were no stronger in the sides, than a
wine-glass, that is soon broken; yet it might go down 40 fathom without hazard,
or danger of bursting. This affords good ground likewise to make windows in the
Ark covered with glass: for if the Pressure be uniform, and equal, its
impossible they can be broken. The Water cannot thrust them inward, because
the Pressure of the Air, is as able to thrust them outward.

It Is certain, the more Air be in the Ark, the more easy is respiration:
therefore its more easy to breath, when the Ark is but down 5 fathom, than
when it is down 10 or 15. It Is probable a man might live within the Ark, it
being 40 inches deep, and 36 inches wide, at the deepness of ten fathom, near
two hours; whereas if it were round, and narrow above in form of a Bell, he
could not continue an hour. It were very easy to try how long other creatures
might live in it, for example dogs, and such like, or fowls, as hens, pheasants
or doves. They might easily be enclosed from coming out; for though the whole
mouth of the Ark were shut up, except as much passage, as would receive a man's
fist, yet it will operate, as well that way, as the other. And there, a little
door might be made to open, and shut at pleasure. It Is observed, that by long
tarrying under the Water in the Bell, the Air becomes gross and misty, which
hinders a man from seeing about him. The cause of this, are vapors that come
from the stomach, lungs and other parts of the body, especially from the
stomach, when the ventricle is full of meat. It Is not fit then, that a man
about to dive, should eat too much, or drink too much, especially such liquors
as Sack or Brandy, that beget many fumes and vapors. If a man were necessitated
to tarry a pretty while below, fresh Air might be sent down from above, in
bottles or bladders, even as much as might fill up the place deserted by the
contracted Air. It Is observed by some, that have been under the Water, that
their ears have been so troubled, that for a long time, they have found
difficulty to hear distinctly. The reason of this must be from the great
Pressure, the tympanum has suffered from the imprisoned Air of the Bell. The
Organ of hearing is soon troubled, especially when a man is near to a great
gun, when it is fired. And surely, when a man is but 34 foot down, the Air
within the Ark, will be of double Bensil: put the case the man go down 68 foot,
or 13 or 14 fathom, the Bensil is tripled: that is to say, if the Air above have
five degrees of Pressure in it, the Air of the Bell, at 68 foot deep, will have
15 degrees of Pressure; therefore the tympanum of the ear that is but a small
and thin membran, must be sore distressed; that is overbended, and pressed
inward; even as, while a man sets upon a drum head a great weight, v. g. a
Bullet of Lead or Iron, of 20 or 30 pound, the skin by this, suffers an
extraordinary Pressure, whereby it is in hazard to be rent. It Is probable, if a
man should go very far down, the tympanum might be in hazard of breaking, or
being rent in two pieces, there being a greater Pressure upon the one side from
the Air without, than upon the other side, from the internal Air within, which
is thought to be within the tympanum.

There remains another Phenomenon to be explicated, and it is this: the further
up the Ark comes from the ground of the Water, toward the top, the Water
within it, subsides and settles down more and more, toward the mouth. The
reason of it is, because the further up, the Pressure of the Water is the less;
and therefore the contracted Air gets liberty to expand, and dilate it self,
and so thrusts down the Water from P Q to L M. In a word, by what proportion
the Air is contracted in going down, by that same proportion it dilates, and
opens it self in coming up. This lets us see, as there is disadvantage in going
down, from the contraction of the Air, so there is advantage in coming up, from
the dilatation of it. Some think, that the coldness of the Water is the cause,
why the Air is contracted in the Ark, such are those, who deny the Pressure of
it. But this fancy is easily refuted; because in asserting this, they must
maintain, the further down, the cold is the greater. If this be, then far more
Air must be contracted, in going down from 10 to 15 fathom, than in passing
from 5 to 10; seeing as they say, the further down, the cold is the greater; and
therefore the contraction of the Air must be the greater; that is to say, there
must be more quantity of Air contracted in the one space, than in the other.
But so it is, that the further down, the contraction is the less. They judge
likewise the coldness of the Water to be the cause, why the sides of empty
Vessels are broken in going down. But if this be, then a strong Vessel should
go no further down than a weak Vessel; seeing cold can pierce through the sides
of the one, as well as through the sides of the other. And why is it, that a
bladder full of wind will go down 40 or 50 fathom without bursting, yea 100,
and yet a stone-bottle or glass-bottle, cannot go beyond 20 or 30? If cold have
in it, that power to break the sides of a strong bottle, it must be far more
able to burst the sides of a thin Bladder. This difference is clearly
explicated from the Pressure of the Water; but I defy any man to show the
difference from the coldness of it. It Is to be observed, that in all such
Experiments of sinking of Vessels, as Hogs-heads, Barrels, and Bottles, they
must be closs on all sides. Therefore, if a man desire to know, how far down a
Glass-bottle is able to go without bursting, he must stop the mouth of it
exactly, with a piece of wood, and cement.

In setting down the dimensions of the Ark, I have restricted them to 40 inches
high, and 36 inches wide. But if any man be desirous to enlarge them, or make
them less, he may do it. Only it is to be observed, that the larger the Ark be,
the Footstool that sinks it, must be the heav^er. Yet it has this advantage,
that it contains much Air, which is the great perfection of it. One of a lesser
size has this advantage, that it is more tractable, and easier to let down, and
to be pulled up. But these things are best known from Experience, or if a man
please, he may calculate.

As the Ark is a most useful device for profit, so it is excellent for pleasure,
and recreation, if a man were disposed to see the ground and channels of deep
Waters, or were inclined to find out Hydrostatical conclusions, a knowledge
very profitable, and which few have attained to. Though it seem somewhat
difficult to enter the Ark, and go down below the Water, yet a little use will
expel all fear. Then, a man may go down with less hazard, and fear in the Ark,
then in the Bell, because he may conveniently fasten his hands, to each side of
the Ark, if need were. He may conveniently sit, as in a Chair, all the time of
down going, and up-coming, by fixing a little seat in it: he may have windows
to look out at: his body may be so fixed, that there needs be no fear of
falling out.

If a man were desirous to make Hydrostatical conclusions, by Diving under the
Water, the dimensions of the Ark might be enlarged, so that it might
conveniently cover a man's whole body, by which means, having much Air in it, a
Diver might continue under Water half a day, if need were. Let us suppose then,
the hight of it to be 8 foot, and the breadth 3 foot, or more. In such a case,
a man might continue under the Water many hours; and yet not one part of his
body wet: for if the Ark be 8 foot high, and the man 5 foot in stature, at the
deepness of 10 fathom, the Water can scarce rise 3 foot in it. But why may not
a man come up every half hour, when he finds difficulty to tarry down in a
little Ark? I answer, he may; but it is trouble and pains to pull him up, and
let him down so frequently. And it may so happen, that through want of Air in a
small Ark, he be necessitated to come up before he end his work. And leaving
the work imperfect, he may find difficulty in the second down going, to find
sometimes the place where he was, or the thing he was about to lift, v. g. a
chest of Gold. If it be said, that a great weight of Stone or Lead is required
to sink an Ark 8 foot high, which will amount to 4032 pound weight. I answer,
it is so indeed: but here is the advantage; when it is once below the Surface,
there is little more trouble, then with an Ark of lesser dimensions; because of
the equipondium that is between it, and the weight, that sinks it.

In such a Vessel many trials might be made. As first, that of the
Torricellian-Experiment, which is nothing else, but a Glass-Tub so many inches
long, with a Mercurial Cylinder in it of 29 inches high, that is supposed to be
kept up at that hight by the Pressure of the Air. If this were taken down about
34 foot, it is very probable the Mercury would rise other 29 inches. The reason
is, because the Air within the Ark, that presses upon the Surface of the
stagnant Mercury, must be under as much pressure again, as the Air above; but
the Air above, is able to support 29; therefore this Air must sustain 58. The
reason why the Bensil is exactly doubled is this, 34 foot of Water has exactly
as much Pressure in it, as the whole element of Air; therefore, the Air within
the Ark, being 34 foot down, must not only have in it the Pressure of the Air
above, but the Pressure of the Water likewise: this necessarily follows,
because when two Fluids touch, or are contiguous to other, the one cannot be
under five degrees of Pressure, unless the other be under as many. According to
this reasoning, if the Ark go down 68 foot, the Mercury will rise from 58 to
87. If to 102, it rises 116. This reckoning is founded upon this, namely that
Water is 14 times lighter than Mercury; and therefore one inch of Mercury
requires 14 of Water to support it in a Tub, and therefore, before Water is
able to raise 29 inches of it, the Pipe must be 34 foot deep.

For a second trial, blow a Bladder as full of wind as it can hold, and having
knit the neck about with a Pack-threed, place it in the Ark, and you will find
the sides, that has been stiffly bended become flaccid and feeble, as if the
one half of the Wind had gone out, and this will come to pass, before the Ark
can go down eight or nine fathom. The strong bensil of the Air within the Ark
is the cause of this: for as the Ark goes down, the Air grows stronger, and so
at length becomes of that power and force, that it easily overcomes the force
and Bensil of the Air of the Bladder, and reducing it to less room, causes the
sides become flagging. In this case, the said Air, that was oval, and had the
form of the Bladder, must become round in form of a Globe, because of the
uniform Pressure, that it suffers from the Air of the Ark. When once the Ark is
down 14 or 15 fathom, take the same bladder, and blow it stiff with Wind, and
knit the neck as before. And you will find that in the up-coming, the sides of
it will burst asunder with a noise. When the Bladder is thus full of Wind, it is
supposed, that there is a sort of counterpoise between it, and the Air of the
Ark. But as the Ark ascends, the Air of it, becomes weaker and weaker, while in
the mean time, the Air of the Bladder suffers no relaxation; therefore, when
the Ark comes near the surface, there arises a great disproportion between the
one Air and the other, as to strength, and therefore the Air of the Bladder
being the strongest, rents the sides in pieces, and comes out with a noise. Or,
blow it but half full of wind, and you will find before, the Ark come near to
the top, the said Bladder to be bended to the full.

For a third trial, take a Glass, such as they use in Caves, for preserving of
Brandy, and stopping the mouth closely, take it down with you in the Ark; and
you will see, the sides of it break in pieces, before you go down four or five
fathom. The strong Bensil of the ambient Air, is the cause of this. If you take
it down with the orifice open, no hurt shall befall it. Or if you stop the
orifice in the up-coming, you will find the same hurt come to it. But here is
the difference, in the first bursting, the sides are pressed inward, by the
ambient Air; in the second, the sides are pressed outward, by the Air within the
Glass.

For a fourth trial, take a round Glass-bottle, pretty strong in the sides, and
when it is down with you in the Ark 14 or 15 fathom, stop the mouth of it
exactly, and when it comes above, you will find a considerable quantity of Wind
come out of it, when the orifice is opened. This evidently demonstrats, that
the Air within the Ark, 12, 13, or 14 fathom down, is under a far stronger
Bensil then the Air above.

For a fifth trial, let a man apply to his skin a cold Cupping-Glass, when he
enters the Ark; and he will find such a swelling arise within it, as when it is
applied hot by a Chyrurgion. This tumor begins to rise, as soon as the Ark
begins to go down. The reason is evident from unequal Pressure, the parts
within the Glass being less pressed, than the parts without.

For a sixth trial, take a common Weather-Glass, and Place it in the Ark, and
in the going down, you will see the liquor creep up in it, by degrees, as the
Ark goes down, as if some extraordinary cold, were the cause of it. And as the
Ark comes up by degrees, the said liquor creeps down by degrees. The cause of
this Phenomenon is not cold, as some might judge, but the strong Bensil of the
Air within the Ark, that so presses upon the surface of the stagnant Water,
that it drives it up. If you take with you, a Weather-Glass, hermetically
sealled, no such thing will follow; because the outward Pressure is kept off.
It Is not then cold, that is the cause, but weight. By the way take notice, that
all common Weather-Glases are fallacious and deceitful; because the motion of
the Water in them, is not only caused by heat, but by the weight of the Air,
which sometimes is more, and sometimes less, as frequently I have observed, and
as has been observed by others. This difference is found, by the alteration of
the altitude of the Mercurial cylinder, in the Baroscope, which is more and
less, as the Pressure of the Air changes. In fair weather, and before it
comes, the Mercury creeps up. In foul and rainy weather, and a pretty while,
before it fall out, it creeps down. Because in fair weather, the weight of the
Air is more, than in rainy and dirty weather. December, 13. 1669. I found the
altitude 29 inches, and nine ten parts of an inch: at this time the heavens
were covered with dry and thick clouds, and no rain followed. March 26. 1670. I
found the altitude no more, than 27 inches, and nine ten parts, at which time,
there was a strong Wind with rain. Between these two terms of altitude, I have
found the Mercury move near a twelve month. It Is a most sure prognosticator,
for if after rain, you find the Mercury creep up in the morning, you may be
sure, all the day following will be fair, notwithstanding that the heavens
threateneth otherwise. If after fair weather, the Mercury subside, and fall
down a little, you may be sure of rain within a short time, though no
appearance be, in the present. It falls down likewise, when winds do blow. What
the true cause is, why there is such an alteration in the Pressure of the Air,
before foul weather, and fair, and in the time of it, it is not easy to
determine.

But we proceed. Trial likewise might be made, by fiting a great piece of
Ordnance above, whether the report would be heard below the Water or not? This
would determine the question, whether Water be a fit medium for conveying sound
as Air is. Item, whether or not, the Sea water be fresher at the bottom, than
near the top, which is affirmed by some. Item, whether sounds be as distinct in
such a small portion of Air, as they are above. This might be tried with a Bell
of a Watch. If need were, a little chamber Bell might be hung within the Ark,
and a small chord might pass up from it, through the cover, whereby the persons
above, might by so many tingles, speak such and such words to the Diver. I have
demonstrated before, that though there were a little narrow hole made in the
cover above, yet neither Air would go out, nor Water come in. If a man were
curious, he might have a window not only in the sides, but in the roof above,
covered with a piece of pure thin Glass, through which he might look up, after
he is down two or three fathom, and see whether there appeared any alteration
in the dimensions of the body of Sun or not, or seemed nearer.

We now come to infer some Hydrostatical conclusions, as from former
Experiments. We see then first, that in Water there is a pressure; namely from
the strong Bensil of the Air within the Ark, that grows stronger, and
stronger, as the Water grows deeper, and deeper. We see next, that the
pressure of the Water has an increment: because the further down the Ark
goes, the Air is the more bended. Thirdly, two Fluids cannot be contiguous one
to another, unless both of them be under the same degree of pressure: because
the Air of the Ark, and the Water that creeps up within the mouth of it, are
perpetually under the same degree of power, and force, whatever the deepness
be. Fourthly, that in Fluids the pressure is uniform; because the Air of the
Ark, and the Water without, press most equally, one against the other. Fifthly,
the more that the Air is bended, it is the more difficult to bend it; and
consequently, that the diminution of the quantity, is according to unequal
proportion. Sixthly, that when the Ark is down 34 foot, the Bensil of the Air
is doubled: and tripled, when its down 68 foot: because the pressure of 34 foot
of Water, is as much as the whole pressure, that is from the Atmosphere. If it
be enquired, how much weight rests upon the palm of a man's hand, when the Ark
is down about 68 foot? I answer, the pressure of the Water upon a man's hand, at
that deepness with the pressure of the Air above, will be equivalent to the
weight of a pillar of Mercury 87 inches high, and three inches thick, which
will exceed in real weight 200 pound. If so much rest upon the palm, how much
must rest upon the rest of the parts of the body? Let us suppose then, the
quantity of the palm, to be found in a man's skin, 200 times, then must he
suffer as much pressure, and actually support as much burden, as will amount to
40000 pound weight. Seventhly, our bodies may be under a huge pressure, and yet
that burden not perceptible; as is evident from the Diver, who finds little
or no weight, while he is under the Water. Or if there be any Pressure found,
it is not comparable to that, which really is. Eighthly, when a man is 14 or 15
fathom down, at every inspiration and expiration, his breast and belly must
lift up the weight of 1800 pound: because, if the whole burden be 40000, the
weight that rests upon the breast, and belly, will be about 1800. Ninthly, that
between every inspiration, and expiration, there happens a perfect
counterpoise, namely by the Air, that goes into the lungs, and the outward Air
of the Ark: for if the Pressure of the one, were more, than the Pressure of the
other, there could be no motion of the lungs. Tenthly, when a man draws his
breath, the Air comes not in by suction, but by pulsion. For this cause,
though the VVind-pipe were stopped, yet a man might live by having a hole in
his side, going into the lungs. Lastly, that there is no such thing as suction
properly; and therefore the motion of all Fluid bodies, is caused by Pressure
and weight. The motion of the blood then through the heart, is driven, and not
sucted. Infants properly do not suck, but have the milk squeezed into their
mouth. It Is evident from the sucking-glass that some women use for milking
their own breasts: for by help of this, the Air that guardeth the head of the
Pap is removed, and so the Air, that presses the parts about, and without,
squeezes out the milk.

EXPERIMENT XIX. Figure 26.
THis Figure represents a deep Water, whose first and visible surface, is F G.
The imaginary surface, is E L C, 34 foot below it. A D B is a Siphon, working
below this Water with Mercury. A E L is a Vessel with stagnant Mercury, among
which the orifice A is drowned, the other orifice B existing among the Water, D
M is the hight of the Siphon above the line of level, which I suppose is 58
inches. For making it work, stop the two orifices closely, and pour in as much
Mercury at a hole made at D, as will fill both the legs. Then stopping the said
hole, open the two orifices A and B, and you will find the liquor run as long
out at B, as there is any almost in the vessel A E L. For evincing this, which
is the only difficulty, consider, that if this Siphon, were filled with Water,
and made to work only with Air, (as is clear from daily experience) the liquor
would run out constantly at B. Because there is here an unequal Pressure; the
surface of Air N B, being more burdened, than the surface E L C, but where
unequal Pressure is in Fluids (according to the 12th Theorem) motion must
follow, I prove the surface N B to be more burdened, than the surface E L C,
because the Water B D, is heavier than the Water L D, as is evident to the eye.
The Air B therefore, sustaining far more weight, than the Air E L, must cede
and yield. Next, there is here a pondus and a potentia, the pondus is the
Water L D; the potentia by which it is counterpoised, is the Water B D; but
these are unequal, B D being heavier, than L D; therefore according to the 33
Theorem, these two Fluids cannot cease from motion. If it be said, that the
surface N B is stronger, than the surface E L C, seeing it is lower. I answer,
the difference is so unsensible, that they may be judged but one. Now, I say,
if this Siphon work in Air, with Water, it must likewise, work in Water with
Mercury. Therefore, this Siphon being 34 foot below the first surface F G, the
liquor must run out constantly at B. Because, there is here, an unequal
Pressure, the surface of Water N B, being more burdened, than the surface E L
C. Though there be more weight in N B, than in E L C, because it is lower, yet
because the difference is not so much, as is between the weight of B D, and the
weight of L D, it proves nothing. Note here, that so long as D, is within 58
inches of E L C, this Siphon will work. The reason is, because the Pressure of
34 foot of Water, with the Pressure of the Air, upon F G, are able to raise
Mercury exactly 58 inches. But if D exceed that hight, no Art will make the
liquor run out at B. Note secondly, that this Siphon will operate with Air and
Water, though the top D were 34 foot above M; and the reason is, because the
Pressure of the Air, is able to raise a pillar of Water to that hight. Note
thirdly, that if there were an orifice opened at C, upon the level line E L C,
the two Waters would become of the same weight, the one not being able to move
the other. If you bore a hole at R, the liquor ascends from R to D, and goes
down from D to A, and so the motion ends. But, if the leg A D were six times
wider, than B D, the liquor would not run out at B. I shall answer this in the
close.

From this Experiment we see first, that the motion of Fluid Bodies up through
Pumps, and Siphons is not for shuning vacuity, but because they are pressed up
violently. We see next, that when the Pressure is uniform, there is no motion
in Fluids; but as soon, as one part is more pressed, than another, motion begins:
because, this Siphon will not operate, if the orifice be made in C; but if so
be, it be in D, then the motion begins; because there is here an unequal
Pressure, which was not in the other. We see thirdly, that Fluids have a
determinate Sphere of activity, to which they are able to press, and no
further: because this Water, is not able to press Mercury higher than 58
inches. So the Air cannot raise Water higher than 34 foot. If this Water were
68 foot deep, the Sphere of it is activity would be 116 inches. We see fourthly,
that in Fluids there is a Pondus and a Potentia; and that the inequality of
weight between the two, is the only cause of motion. We see fifthly, that as
long as this inequality of weight continues, as long continues the motion,
because, as long as B D, is heavier than L D, the motion perseveres. We see
sixthly, the possibility of a perpetual motion in Fluids; because the liquor
runs perpetually out at B. If it be said, the motion ends, when the stagnant
Mercury A E L fails. I answer, this stop is only accidental, and not
essentially from the nature of Fluids. If it be enquired, whether or not, would
the Mercury run out at B, upon supposition, the shank L D were twice as wide,
as the shank B D? I answer it would. If it be said that the one is far heavier
than the other, namely L D than D B. I answer, weight in Fluids is not counted
according to thickness, but according to altitude.

EXPERIMENT XX. Figure 27.
THis last is for demonstrating the precise and just weight of any Pillar of
Air, Water, Mercury, or of any other Fluid body, if some of their dimensions,
be but once known. A B then is a square Pipe 12 foot high, and six inches in
wideness, full of Water, resting upon the surface of Air A C. And E G is a
square Pipe 12 foot high, and 12 inches wide, full of Water, resting upon the
surface of Air E F. None needs to doubt, but the two Waters, will be suspended
after this manner, even though the orifices A and E were downward, especially
if they be guarded with Water, but the demonstrations, will be the more
evident, that we suppose the two Pillars of Water to be suspended as they are.
From this Experiment I say first, that the Pillar of Air C D is 168 pound
weight, at least; which I prove thus. The Water A B is 168 pound: therefore
the Air C D, must be as much. I prove the Antecedent, because it is a Pillar of
Water 12 foot high, and six inches thick: but every half cubical foot of
Water, that contains 216 inches, weighs seven pound: therefore seeing the
Pillar is 12 foot, it must contain 24 half feet; but 24 times 7 is 168. The
only difficulty is to prove the Connection, which I do thus, from the seventh
Theor. all the parts of a Fluid in the same Horizontal line, are equally pressed,
but so it is, that the part A, and the part C, are in the same horizontal
surface; therefore the part A, and the part C, are equally pressed. But if the
part A, and the part C, be equally pressed, the Pillar of Air C D, must be as
heavy, as the Pillar of Water A B. I say secondly, that the Pillar of Air F H,
weighs 672 pound, I prove it thus. The Water E G weighs 672 pound; therefore
the Air F H, weighs as much. The Antecedent is clear, because E G, is a square
Pillar of Water 12 foot high, and 12 inches thick; but every cubical foot of
Water weighs 56 pound: but 12 times 56, is 672. I prove the connection, as
before. All the parts of an horizontal surface, are equally pressed; therefore
the part F, must sustain as much burden, as the part E.

To proceed a little further, let us suppose the Pipe A B to be 34 foot high,
and the Pipe E G to be as much. I assert then thirdly, the Pillar of Air C D to
weigh 476 pound, which I prove as before. All the parts of the same surface,
are burdened with the like weight, but the part A sustains 476 pound, therefore
the part C must support as much. The Connection is evident, and the Antecedent
is so too, because the Water A B being 34 foot high, and six inches thick,
must weigh 476 pound: for, if 216 inches, weigh seven pound, 14688 inches, must
weigh 476 pound. I assert fourthly, the Pillar of Air F H to weigh 1904 pound,
which I demonstrat by the former Medium. All the parts of a Fluid that ly in
the same horizontal surface, are equally pressed; but so it is, that E and F, do
so ly; therefore F must be as much burdened as E; the Water therefore E G,
weighing 1904 pound, the Air F H, must weigh as much. For if 216 inches of
Water weigh seven pound, 58752 inches (for so many are in the Water E G) must
weigh 1904 pound.

Let us suppose secondly, the Tub A B to be only 29 inches high, and the Tub E
G, of the same hight, and that six inches wide, and this 12 inches wide. I
affirm then fifthly, the Air C D to weigh yet 476 pound, and the Air F H, to
weigh 1904 pound. Because the Pillar of Mercury A B, weighs 476 pound, and the
Pillar of Mercury E G, weighs 1904 pound: therefore, if A B be 476, C D must be
as much. And if E G be 1904; F H, must be of the same weight. I prove the
Mercury A B to weigh about 476 pound, though it be but 29 inches high; because
it is 14 times heavier than Water. For the same cause, does the Mercury E G
weigh about 1904 pound. I say about, because 34 foot, contains 29 inches, more
than 14 times.

Let it be supposed thirdly, the Pipe E G, (being 34 foot high,) to have the
one half of it I G, full of Air, and the other half E K full of Water, I
affirm then sixthly, the part E, and the part F, to be yet equally burdened.
That Is to say, the Water E K, that is now but 17 foot, makes as great a
Pressure upon E, as when it was 34 foot. The reason of this, is surely the
Pressure of the Air I G, that bears down the Water K E, with the weight of 952
pound, the half of 1904 pound. If it be said according to the Theorem 21, that
there is as much Pressure and weight in the least part of a Fluid, as in the
whole; therefore the Air I G, must be as heavy as E H. I answer I G, is not so
heavy as F H, because the Water E K impending in the lower part of the Tub,
has occasioned the Air I G, to expand it self so many inches, by which means,
it loses so many degrees of it is Bensil. If you remove the Water E K, then
will the Air I G, be as heavy, as F H; because E K being Air, it reduces I G
to that same degree of Bensil with it self; but when the Air E is burdened with
the Water E K, it cannot make the Air I G, of that same weight with it self.

Let us suppose fourthly, that only eight foot and an half of Water, are in the
Tub, namely between E and N. I say then seventhly, that the part E, is as much
burdened with it, as when the Pipe was full; because the 25 foot, and an half
of Air N G, is exactly as heavy, as the 25 foot and an half of the Water that is
gone. I prove it thus. The Air E has the weight of 1904 pound in it self,
seeing the weight of the surface, is always equal to the weight of the Pillar,
but being burdened with the Water E N, that weighs 476 pound, it cannot press
up with more weight then with 1428 pound: and therefore the top of the Water N,
must press upon the under part of the Air, that is contiguous with it, with
1428. If this be, the Air N G, must press down with as much, seeing according to
the 20 Theorem, it is impossible, that one part of a Fluid, can be under
Pressure, unless the next adjacent part, be under the same degree of Pressure.
Therefore I conclude, that the 25 foot and an half of Air N G, is as heavy, as
the 25 foot and an half of the Water that is gone. This makes it evident also,
that when the Pipe is half full of Water, as E K, the Air I G, has the weight
of 952 pound. Because E being in it self 1904, but being burdened with E K 952,
it cannot make the top of the Water K, press upon I with more weight than 952;
and therefore (by the 20 Theorem,) the Air G I, must weigh 952 likewise.

I affirm eighthly, that, when the Pipe is full of Water, from E to G, if a man
poise it in his hand, he does not find the weight of the Water E G. And the
reason is, because it is sustained by the part of the surface E. But if the Air
E sustain it, my hand cannot sustain it. I find then only the weight of the
Tub, but not the weight of the Water within it. I say ninthly, that when I
poise the said Tub, I find the whole weight of the Pillar of Air L M, which is
exactly 1904 pound. I prove it thus. The pondus of a Fluid is then only found,
when there is not a potentia to counterpoise it, or at least, when the potentia
is inferior to the pondus: but there is here no potentia, counterpoising the
pondus of the Air L M. Therefore, I must find the weight of it, when I lift up
the Tub. The major proposition is clear from the tenth Theorem. It Is evident
also, from common experience; for while a balance is hanging upon a nail, with
six pound in the one scale, and nothing in the other, you will find the whole
burden, if you press up that one scale with the palm of your hand. But if so
be, there were six pound in the opposite scale, you will not find the first
six; and the reason is, because it is in equilibrio with other six. It Is just
so here, I must find the weight of the Air L M, while I poise the Tub, because
it wants a weight to counterballance it. I prove the minor proposition thus. If
any thing counterballance the Air L M, it must either be the Air below, namely
the part E; or the Water E G: but neither of the twain can do it. Not the Air
E, because it has as great a burden upon it, as it is able to support, namely
the Water E G, that weighs 1904 pound. And for this cause, not the Water it
self, seeing all the force it can have to counterballance L M, is from the
surface of Air E; but this is in equilibrio with it already. I said that the
Air L M, was exactly 1904 pound weight. This also is evident, because it is
just of these same dimensions, with the Air F H. If it be said, the Air L M
must be thicker; seeing it is equal to the Tub without; but the Air F H, is only
equal to the Tub within. I answer, it is so indeed; but here is a solution to
the difficulty. I do not find the whole weight of the Air L M, but only as much
of it, as is equal to F H. Suppose the Tub to be 12 inches within, from side to
side, and 16 without, from side to side. I say then, I find only the burden of
so much Air, as answers to the cavity of the Tub, because the rest of these
inches, are counterpoised, by as much below, namely by the Air, that environs
the orifice E: for it is supposed, that if the Tub be two inches thick above, it
must be as thick in the lips. So that the whole Tub, is not unequally pressed,
but only so much of it within upon the top, as answers to the cavity. Tenthly,
that when the Pipe is but half full of Water, namely from E to K, I find only
952 pound of the Air L M, though before I found 1904. The reason is, because
the one half of it is now counterpoised by the Air I G, and therefore the
weight of it becomes insensible. It Is clear from the sixth assertion, that the
Air I G, presses down with 952; therefore it must press up with as much, seeing
according to the sixth Theorem, the Pressure of a Fluid is on every side.
Eleventhly, that when there is only eight foot of Water and a half in the Tub,
namely between E and N; I find only 476 pound of the Air L M. Because in this
case, the Air N G counterpoiseth 1428 pound of it. For if the said Air, burden
the Water N E, with 1428 pound, as is clear from the seventh assertion, it must
likewise press up the Tub with as much, and so counterpoise as much of the Air
L M. Twelfthly, that when there is nothing within the Pipe but Air, the whole
weight of the Air L M becomes insensible to me. The reason is evident, because
it is wholly counterpoised by the Air within the Pipe. I affirm thirteenthly,
that the Water E G, is in equilibrio with the Water A B: that is to say 1904
pound, is in equilibrio with 476 pound. I prove it evidently, by the first
medium; all the parts of an Horizontal surface, are equally pressed; therefore
the part A, sustains no more burden, then the part E, therefore A B, is as
heavy as E G, and consequently, the Air C D, must be as heavy, as the Air F H.
Lest this proposition may seem to contradict what is already said, I must
distinguish a twofold Balance, according to the third Theorem, one Natural,
another Artificial. In the Artificial Balance, where magnitudes do weigh
according to all their dimensions, viz. Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity,
the Water A B, and the Water E G, are not in equilibrio together, seeing the one
is 1428 pound heavier than the other. But in the Balance of Nature, such as
these Pipes are, all the four makes an equipondium together; because they do
not weigh here, according to their thickness, but only according to their
altitude. Therefore seeing A B is as high as E G, and seeing C D is as high as F
H, they must all be of the same weight.

From the first assertion I infer, that one and the same Fluid, even in the
Balance of Nature, may sometimes be in equilibrio with a lesser weight, and
sometimes with a greater, because the Air C D, that weighs really 476 pound, is
in equilibrio with the Water A B, that weighs but 168. This is, when A B is
supposed to be only 12 foot high. It Is likewise in equilibrio with it, when its
34 foot high. But how can A B, that is 12 foot high, press A, with as much
weight, as when its 34 foot high? I answer by a similitude, when a Cylinder of
Wood 12 foot high stands upon a Table, it may burden it as much, as if it were
a Cylinder 34 foot high. For, supposing it to be thrust in, between it, and v.
g. the ceiling of the room above, it must press down with more weight, then if
it were not thrust in. So, this Cylinder of Water A B, that is but 12 foot high,
being pressed between the surface A, and the top of the Tub within, must burden
A, as much, as if it were 34 foot high; for being of this hight, it only stands
upon the surface, without pressing up the top of the Tub.

I infer from the second assertion, that each Pillar in a Fluid has a
determinate weight. This is evident from the determinate weight of A B, that
weighs first 168 pound, being 12 foot high, and 467 pound, being 34 foot high,
and so of the rest. I infer secondly, that the thicker, and grosser a Pillar of
a Fluid be, it is the heavier, (even in the Artificial Balance) and
contrariwise, the more slender and thinner it be, it is the lighter. This is
evident from the Water A B, six inches thick, that weighs 476 pound, and from
the Water E G, 12 inches thick, that weighs 1904 pound. So does the Pillar of
Air C D, weigh less, then the Pillar F H. Here is ground for knowing the
certain and determinate weight of a Pillar, in any sort of a Fluid whatsoever.
As to Air, its clear and evident, that a apiece Pillar thereof, 12 inches
every way, weighs 1904. That Is to say, if it were possible, to take the Pillar
of Air F H, in its whole length, from the surface of the earth, to the top of
the Atmosphere, and pour it into the Scale of a Balance, it would be exactly
the weight of 1904 pound. Here is a secret: though that same Pillar of Air,
were no longer, than 6 or 10 foot, yet the Pressure of it, upon the body, it
rests upon, is equivalent to 1904 pound. If this be, (you say) what is the
weight of Air, that rests upon this Table, that is 36 inches square? I answer,
it must be as heavy, as a Pillar of Water 34 foot high, and 36 inches thick,
which will, by just reckoning, amount to 17136 pound, or to 1071 stone weight.
It may be inquired next, what is the weight of the Air, that burdens the
pavement of this parlour, that is 16 foot square? I answer 487424 pound. Because
it is exactly the weight of a bulk of Water 34 foot high, and 16 foot thick.
It Is to be remembered, that though the Pressure of it, be so much, yet being
poured into the scale of a Balance, it will not weigh so much: for not only as
much as fills the room must be taken, but as much as passes from the pavement
to the top of the Atmosphere. According to this method it is easy to determine
the weight of any Pillar of Air whatsoever, provided a man but once know the
thickness of it, both the ways, e. g. there is a planum 12 inches long, and six
inches broad, upon which rests a Pillar of Air. The weight of it then is, just
the burden of a magnitude of Water 34 foot in hight, 12 inches in length, and
six inches in breadth.

Though the weight of any Pillar of Air may be known, by knowing only the
dimensions of it, in breadth and length; yet the weight of a Pillar of Water
cannot be known, unless all the three common dimensions of it, be first known.
The reason is this, the Pillars of Air, are all of the same hight, but the
Pillars of Water in the Ocean, are of different hights: therefore, not only
must they be known, secundum longitudinem, and latitudinem, in length and
breadth, but secundum profunditatem, that is, according to deepness. It Is easy
to know then, what each particular Pillar weighs. First then, try how much
weight is in a cubical foot of Water, and having found this to be v. g. 56
pound, you may determine, that a Pillar of Water 34 foot high, and 12 inches
thick, weighs 1904 pound. A Pillar 34 foot high, and six inches thick weighs
476 pound. Note, that in a Cube of Water six inches thick, there are 216
inches, which weighs seven pound. In a Pillar 12 inches thick, and 20 fathom,
or 100 foot high, you will find 5600 pound weight. In one, of the same
thickness, but 200 fathom high, there are 56000, fifty six thousand pound
weight. In a Pillar three foot square, and 20 fathom deep, there are 50400,
fifty thousand, and four hundred pound weight. Make it 800 fathom high with
that thickness, and it will weigh 504000, five hundred and four thousand pound.
But, if according to the Theorem 25, you consider the weight of the Air above,
it will weigh 521136, five hundred, twenty and one thousand, one hundred thirty
and six pound. A Pillar 12 foot square, and 300 fathom deep, weighs 12096000,
twelve million, ninety and six thousand pound, Lastly suppose there were a bulk
of Water 500 fathom deep, and 500 fathom thick, such a magnitude would weigh
8750000000, eight thousand seven hundred, and fifty million of pounds. But if
the Pressure of the Air, that rests upon a surface of Water 500 fathom in
breadth and length, be taken in, that weighs 119000000, a hundred and nineteen
million of pounds, the total, that the bottom of the sea sustains, must be
8940000000, eight thousand, nine hundred and forty million of pounds, or
558750000 five hundred fifty and eight million, seven hundred, and fifty
thousand stone weight.

I infer from the fifth assertion, that the lightest of Fluids may be brought
to an equilibrium with the heaviest. For though Mercury be 14000 times heavier
than Air, yet the part of the surface A, is no more pressed with the Mercury A B,
then the part C is pressed with the Air C D. Secondly, that 29 inches of Mercury,
are of the same weight with 34 foot of Water. Thirdly, the heavier a Fluid be
naturally, it has the less altitude in the Natural Balance; and contrariwise,
the lighter it be, it has the more altitude. This is clear from the Mercury,
that is 29 inches, the Water that is 34 foot, and the Air, that is counted 6867
fathom.

I infer from the sixth assertion, that two Fluids of different gravities, may
make an equilibrium with a third of the same kind. Because the 27 foot of Air I
G, and the 17 foot of Water E K, are in equilibrio with the Air F H. I infer
secondly, that 17 foot of Air, may be as heavy as 17 foot of Water, because the
Air I G, is exactly as heavy, as the Water E K. I infer thirdly, that the
Bensil of a Fluid, is a thing really distinct, from the Natural weight of it:
because the Pressure of the Air I G, is 952 pound; but the natural weight of it
will not exceed, if it were weighed in a Balance, two or three ounces. I infer
fourthly, that Air cannot suffer dilatation, but it must lose of it is Pressure.
Because the Air I G, that ought to weigh 1904 pound, weighs only 952. For
understanding this, you must know, that when a Pipe is about half full of Air,
and half full of Water, and inverted, so much of the Water falls out, and
consequently so many inches does the Air above it, expand it self. So to make
this Pipe that is 34 foot high, half full of Air and half full of Water, you
must pour in about 19 foot of Water, and the 15 foot of Air that is in it
besides, will, when the Pipe is inverted, go up and expand it self to 17 foot,
two foot of Water falling out.

I infer from the seventh assertion, that when there are two Fluids of
different gravities, and weights counterpoising a third, by what proportion the
one grows lighter, by that same proportion the other becomes heavier. For, when
the Water E K, that weighs 952 pound, becomes E N, that weighs 476, the Air
above it, that weighed 952, becomes now 1428 pound.

I infer from the eighth, that the pondus of a Fluid, cannot be counterpoised,
by two distinct powers. Because the 34 foot of Water E G, cannot be both
sustained, by the part of the surface of Air E, and my hand. I infer from the
ninth, that the Pressure and weight of a Fluid, may be found, even in its own
Element, by sense. Because in poising of the Tub, I find the weight of the Air
L M. I infer secondly, that the weight of a Fluid is only found in its own
Element, when there is not a potentia to counterpoise the pondus of it, because
I find only the weight of the Air L M, because it wants a potentia to
counterpoise it. I infer thirdly, that it is very possible even in the
Artificial Balance, to weigh a Fluid in its own Element, and to know the
precise weight of it, to a grain. For this cause, take a small chord, and
fasten therewith the top of the Pipe G, to the Scale of a Balance, and the
Lead or Stone that makes the counterpoise in the opposite Scale, is the just
weight of the Air L M.

I infer from the tenth, that by how much the nearer, the potentia of a Fluid,
comes to the pondus, by so much the less, is the pondus found, or is sensible.
This is clear, because I find less of the weight of the Air L M, it being
counterpoised with the Air I G, than before. This follows likewise from the
eleventh assertion. I infer from the twelfth, that when the pondus of a Fluid,
is counterpoised, by an equal potentia, it becomes altogether insensible. I
infer from the last, that two Fluids differing in weight, according to the
Libra or Artificial Balance, may agree in weight, according to the Natural
Balance. I infer secondly, that Fluids in the Balance of Nature, do not
counterpoise one another according to their thickness, but only according to
their altitude.

To put a close to this Experiment, let us suppose the Pipe E G to be 68 foot
high, and void of Air. If then the orifice E be drowned among stagnant Water,
the Liquor of its own accord (as it were) will rise from E to K 34 foot, the
other half I G remaining empty. This evidently shows, that the Pressure of the
Air, has a Sphere of Activity, beyond which it is not able to raise or press
up a pillar of Water. It Is folly then to think that Water may be conveyed over
high places by the help of a Siphon, v. g. from the one side of a Hill over the
top, to the other side. For, if that hight exceed perpendicularly 34 foot, no
Art will do it. Yet contrariwise, it is possible to transport Water, by Pipes
and Siphons, not only 34 foot below the source, but 3400. Nay, if there were a
Siphon passing from the surface of the Earth to the Center, and thence rising
to the surface again, it would convey Water from the one place to the other.
For it is a certain and infallible rule in the Hydrostaticks, that Water will
rise as high in this place, as the hight of the place is, from whence it comes,
even though the windings and turnings of the Lead-Conduits underground were as
a Labyrinth, and though this place, were not only 1000, but 5000 pace distant
from the other. It Is to be observed, that if the mouth of the Conduit here, be
exactly as high as the other end at the Fountain, the Water stands still. And
the greater the difference be, the Water flows out with the greater force. By
the help of such Conduits, it is easy to convey Water to a City many miles.
Such Pipes are ordinarily made of Lead. But for saving expense, they may be
made of Timber, or Clay well burnt in an Oven.

AN ACCOUNT OF Miscellany OBSERVATIONS, Lately made, by the Author of the
foregoing EXPERIMENTS.
OBSERVATION I.
IN May 1669, there was need of a new Sink, on the east side of Tranent, for
winning of Coals. But while the Coalhewers were in digging down, and had come
the deepness of 13 or 14 fathom, they were stopped from working by Damps, or
ill Air, that flowed out plentifully from the sides of the sink, wherein there
were a great number of Cutters, or rifts, out of which that ill Air came. To
try the nature and power of Damps, I took a dog, and fastened him in a bucket,
with a small roap, that he might not leap over, and when he had gone down 7 or
8 fathom, he presently begins to howl, and cry pitifully, as if he had been
beaten sore with a rod, and a little after, he begins to stagger, and his feet
failing him, he falls down, as one overtaken with the Epilepsy, and in going
down to the bottom, his eyes turning in his head, they appeared very shining
and clear like two large bright Diamonds. Fearing, that the Damp should have
killed him out of hand, he was instantly pulled up from the bottom, where he
had not tarried 15 seconds of time. And when the bucket had come to the mouth
of the sink, he was pulled out, and laid upon the ground, to get fresh Air.
When he had lien a while as dead, he begins at last to gape, and gasp, and
makesome respirations, as if he had been rather expiring, than recovering.
Next, he began to stir and move his feet, and after, to raise himself upon his
knees, his head staggering and wavering from side to side. After a minut or
two, he was able to stand upon his feet, but so weakly, that he was not in
capacity to walk or run. Yet at last, being much refreshed, he escaped from us,
and ran home, but slowly. In the afternoon, the same Experiment was repeated,
with another dog, whose case was the same in all things. But after he was
perfectly recovered, for a further trial, we let him down the second time, and
suffered him to tarry in the bottom of the sink, about the space of three
minutes: but when he was pulled up, and taken out, we found no symptoms of life
in him; and so after half an hour and more, his body began to swell, which
ordinarily befalls such, who are killed after this manner. After this, we sent
down in the Bucket, a little Chicken, which, when it came near the Damp,
presently flapped with the wings, and falling down, turned over and over for a
pretty while, as if it had been taken with a vertigo, or giddiness. But by
drawing up the Bucket in haste, and bringing the Bird to the fresh Air, it
recovered. In the evening, we let down a lighted Candle, but it was soon
extinguished, when it came near mid-sink; for here, rather than in the bottom,
was the strongest Damp. Lastly, we let down by a chord, a Brand-iron, with
burning Coals, whose flame was soon put out, and after a little while, we
perceived the red Coals to be extinguished by degrees; yet not totally,
because, as the Coal-hewers observed, the power of the Damp was not so strong,
as before. These Damps then have their ebbings and flowings, which seem to
depend upon the weather, or rather upon the situation of the winds, and their
force. For it is observed, that a high South-west wind causes ill Air in this
place; and that, by reason of much wast ground, that lies upon the South, and
South-west hand of this Sink, whence are conveyed under ground by secret
passages, which are nothing else but so many rifts and openings, commonly
called by the Coal-hewers, Cutters, corrupted and rotten Air, full of
sulphurious stems. The reason why these passages are open, and replenished with
nothing, but corrupted Air, is this, the Water, that is ordinarily called the
Blood of the Coal, being withdrawn with subterraneous Gutters (commonly called
Levels) that are dug, and wrought under ground, sometimes a very long way,
for drying of the Mines, and the veins of the earth being now empty, there
succeeds Air; which Air, by process of time, and long standing, rots, and
contracts a sulphurious quality, which causes sudden death. Now, when the wind
is high, and strong from the South or South-west, that sulphurious Air is
driven through the ground, and coming to Sinks and Mines, where men are
working, presently infects the place, and hinders the work. It Is often
observed, that the wind and Air under ground, keep a correspondence in their
motion, with the wind above ground: and therefore, when the wind is in such a
point above, it is found, that the motion of the Air below runs such a way, and
the contrary way, when the wind above ground, is in the opposite point. When
there is a free passage between the bottom of the two Sinks, you may observe
the wind come down through the one, and running along under the ground, rise
up through the other, even as Water runs through a Siphon. For this cause, when
the Coal-hewers have done with such a Sink, they do not use to stop it, or
close it up, but leaves it standing open, that the Air under ground may be kept
under a perpetual motion and stirring, which to them is a great advantage. It Is
very strange to see sometimes, how much Air, and how fresh it will be, even at
a very great distance, namely four or five hundred pace, from the mouth of the
Sink. This could never be, unless there were a considerable Pressure and weight
in it, whereby it is driven forward, through so many Labyrinths. And even in the
utmost room, where the Coal-hewers are working, the Pressure is as great, as it
is above ground, which is found by the Torricellian Experiment. In such a case,
the Air cannot press down through the Earth and Metalls, therefore the Mercury
must be suspended, not by a Pillar from the Atmosphere, but by the Bensil of
it. Nay, put the case, that the whole Element of Air were destroyed, and this
remaining, yet would it be able to support 29 inches. To shut up this
discourse, it is observed by the Coal-hewers, that when there is ill Air in a
Sink, a man may perceive distinctly, what is lying in the bottom, so clear and
transparent is the Air of it: but when the Damp is gone, the Medium is not so
clear. In temperat and cold weather, the Damps are not so frequent. From this
Sink, in soft winds, or in Northerly winds, or when it blows from East or
North-east, the Damps are driven away.

OBSERVATION II.
JUpiter upon Wednesday night, at eleven a clock, being 24 of November, 1669,
had the following position with the stars of Gemini. He was so near to the Star
C, that to appearance, the points of his rays did touch it. This Star by
looking upon the material Glob, is fixed in the very Zodiac, and in the 13
degree of Cancer, and is the very navel of the following Twine. The Star A is
Castor. The Star B is Pollux. The star D, is fixed in the forefoot of the
following Twine. From this place he moved, with a retrograde motion, till he
came to the 5 of Cancer, about the 20 of February, 1670, and from that time
became Direct in his motion, and so upon the 27 of March, 1670 at 9 a clock, he
was in a right line with Canis minor, and the brightest Star in Auriga, and was
in a right line with the eastmost shoulder of Orion, and Castor in Gemini, or
with that Star, when South-west, that is highest, and West-most.

OBSERVATION III.
IT is written in the History of the Royal Society, that such a member of it,
whose name I have forgotten, has found out, among many other curious
inventions, this, namely a way for knowing the motion of the Sun in seconds of
time: but is not pleased to reveal the manner how. Because such a device may be
useful in Astronomy, and likewise for adjusting the Pendulum Clock, I shall
therefore briefly show, the manner and way how such a thing may be done, as I
have tried it my self. I took an Optic Tub, about 12 foot long, only with two
Convex-glasses in it, and did so place it in a dark room, by putting the one
end, in which was the Object-glass, without the window, and keeping the other
within, that I caused the beams of the Sun shine through it, which were received
upon a white wall four or five foot from the Tub. This image, which was
perfectly round, and splendid, did move along the wall very quickly, so that
in a minut of time, it did advance seven inches and a half, which will be the
eight part of an inch in a second, a motion very sensible. Now, this beam that
came through the Tub, and lighted upon the wall, would not have moved one inch
in a minut, if it had wanted the two Glasses; for as they magnify, and seem to
bring nearer the Object, so they quicken the motion of it. In a word, by what
proportion the Object is made more, by that same proportion is the motion
quickened. It Is to be observed, that the longer the Tub be, the motion is the
swifter: for as the longest Tub does ordinarily most magnify the object; so
does it most quicken the motion. Next, the farther distant the white wall is
from the end of the Tub, the larger is the image; and contrariwise, the nearer
it be, it is the less. Thirdly, the farther the wall be from the end of the
Tub, the circumference of the image is the more confused, and the nearer it be,
it is the more distinct. Fourthly, the darker the room be, it is so much the
better. Lastly, this trial may be made with ordinary Prospects, of a foot, two
foot, or three foot long, which will really do the thing, but not so sensibly,
unless the glasses be very good.

As to the use of this device in Astronomy, I shall not say much. But shall
only mention what it may serve for in order to the Pendulum Clock. For this
cause, let a man choice a convenient room, with a window to the South, wherein
this Tub may be so fixed, that it may^ly just, or very near to the true
meridian, and may move vertically upon an axil-tree, because of the Suns
declination every day. Then at a certain distance from the end of it, fix and
settle a large board of timber, smooth, and well plained, and well whited, for
receiving the image. In the middle of this board, draw a circle with Charcoal,
equal in diameter to the circle of the image. Now, this being done, you will
find that as soon as the west side of the Sun, begins to come near to the
Meridian, the image begins to appear upon the board, like the segment of a
circle, and grows larger, and larger, till it become perfectly round. Now in
the very instant of time, wherein the image, and the circle are united, set the
wheels of your Clock a going, from the hour, minut, and second of XII. To
morrow, or 3 or 4 days after, when you desire to make an examination, wait on
about 12 a clock, when the Sun is coming to the Meridian, and you will find
what the difference is. If the Clock go slow, observe, as soon as the image is
united with the circle (which you will perceive in a second of time) the
variation, that is to say, how many seconds interveens between that second,
wherein the union fell, and that second, that closes XII hours in the Clock. If
it go fast, observe how many seconds passes from that second, that ends XII
hours, and that wherein the image of the Sun is united with the circle, which
if you do, you will know exactly, what the difference is, even to a second. But
without this, you will find great difficulty to know the variation in 15 or 20
seconds, especially in a common Dial. But here, you will see distinctly the
image of the Sun move every second of time, the eighth part, or the sixth part,
or the fourth part of an inch, according to the length of your Tub, and
goodness of your glasses. It Is to be observed, that in adjusting the Pendulum
Clock, respect must be had to the table of Equation of days, commonly known in
Astronomy. For if this be not, it is impossible to make it go right, and that
because all the natural days of the year, are not equal among themselves:
that is to say, the time that is spent by the Suns motion from the Meridian this
day, to the same Meridian, the next day, is not equal, but is more or less,
than the time spent betwixt Meridian and Meridian, a third or fourth day after.
For instance, the Sun this day being 11 of July, comes sooner to the Meridian
by three seconds of time, than he came yesterday. Within 9 or 10 days,
(suppose the 22 of July) he will be longer in coming to the Meridian by 4
seconds, than upon the 21. This difference I grant, in short time is not
sensible, yet once in the year, it will amount to more than half an hour. This
inequality of days arises from two causes. First, from the Suns eccentricity,
whereby he moves slowlier in one part of the Zodiac, than in another: for in
Summer when he is furthest from the Earth, he goes slowlier back in the
Ecliptic, than in Winter, when he is nearer to it. The second cause, which is
truly the far greater, is this, because in the diurnal motion of the Sun, equal
parts of the Equator, does not answer to equal parts of the Zodiac. Hence it
follows, that if the natural days be not equal among themselves, the hours
must be unequal also: but this is not considerable.

By help of such a Tub placed in a dark room, it is easy, when the Sun is
under Eclipse, to enumerat distinctly the digits eclipsed. Likewise, if you
take out the object Glass, and cover a hole in the window board with it, you
shall see distinctly upon a white wall, the species and true representations of
all objects without. And by comparing the quantity of the object without, with
the quantity of it within, you may know the distance of it from the window,
though it were many miles. For as the one quantity, is to the other, so is the
distance between the Glass and the object on the wall, to the distance between
the Glass and the object without.

It may be inquired whether or not, the retrograde, as well as the diurnal
motion of any of the Planets, may be discerned, in minutes or seconds, by the
help of a long Telescope? In answer to this, we must suppose the Planets only
to have a retrograde motion, and consequently to move slowly from West to East,
Saturn once in 29 years, or 30, to run about the Zodiac; Jupiter in 12, Mars
in 2 years, the Sun in one year, Venus and Mercury in less time, and lastly the
Moon in a month. Now I say, it is impossible by the longest Tub, that the
greatest Artist can make, to discern the motion of the inferior Planets, far
less the motion of the superior, either in Minutes or in Seconds, and that by
reason of the great ta^dity, and slowness of the motion. Notwithstanding of
this, I am induced to think, that the retrograde motion of the Moon might be
discerned, at least in Minutes. For evincing of this, let us suppose which is
true, that the Sun runs from East to West half a degree in two Minutes of time,
seeing in an hour he runs 15 degrees. Next, that the Moon goes about the Zodiac
in 27 days and 7 hours, namely from that same point, to that point again, and
consequently runs back every day 13 degrees and about 10 Minutes. By this
account, she must retrograde half a degree, and about 2 minutes of a degree
every hour. The Sun then runs half a degree in two Minutes, and the Moon half a
degree in 60 Minutes; therefore the Moon must be 30 times slower in her
retrograde motion, than the Sun is in his diurnal motion. Let us suppose next,
as I observed with a Tub 12 foot long, that the image of the Sun runs the
eighth part of an inch every second, and consequently, seven inches and an
half, in a Minut: then must the image of the Moon with that same Telescope, run
the thirtieth part of seven inches and a half in a Minut, seeing she runs 30
times slowlier; therefore in every Minut of time she must advance the fourth
part of an inch, which will be very sensible. Though we grant, that the Moon
has no retrograde motion properly, yet by comparing the diurnal Motion of the
Moon, that is slower, to the diurnal motion of the Sun, that is swifter, we shall
really find the thing it self. Therefore in the time of a Solar Eclipse, this
retrograde motion is conspicuous, which by an ordinary Telescope may be
discerned in Minutes. As Soon then as the East side of the Moon, begins to enter
upon the West side of the Sun (the greater the Eclipse be, it is the better)
observe, and you will find the one image, which will be black, cover the other
by degrees, that is splendid, and run in every minut of time, the fourth part of
an inch of the Suns diameter, provided always, that the Sun run the eighth
part of an inch in a second.

OBSERVATION IV.
UPon Tuesday the 19. of July 1670, the following Experiment was made. In the
middle Marches between Scotland and England, there is a long tract of Hills,
that run from Flowdon, many miles South and South-west, amongst the which, the
Mountain Cheviot is famous beyond, and conspicuous above all the rest for
altitude, from whose top a man may discern with one turning of his eye, the
whole Seacoast from New Castle to Berwick, much of Northumberland, and very
many Leagues into the great German Ocean: the whole Mers and Teviotdale, from
the foot of Tweed, to very near the head of it: Lauderdale, and Lammer-moor,
and Pentland-hills above Edinburgh. The North side of this Mountain is pretty
steep, yet easy to climb, either with men or horse. The top is spacious, large
and broad, and all covered with a Flow-moss, which runs very many miles South.
When a man rides over it, it rises and falls. It Is easy to thrust a Lance over
the head in it. The sides of this Hill abounds with excellent Well-springs,
which are the original of several Torrents, amongst the which Colledge-Water is
famous, upon which, not a mile from the foot of this Mountain is White Hall.
The adjacent Hills are for the most part green, and excellent for the pasturage
of Cattle. Not many years ago, the whole Valleys near the foot of Cheviot, were
Forests abounding with Wild-Deer.

Upon the highest part of this Mountain was erected the Torricellian Experiment
for weighing of the Air, where we found the altitude of the Mercurial Cylinder
27 inches and an half. The Air was dry and clear, and no wind. In our
Valley-Countreys, near to the Seacoast, in such Weather, we find the altitude
29 inches and an half. When this difference was found, care was taken to seal
up closly with Bee-wax, mixed with Turpentine, the orifice of the Vessel, that
contained the stagnant Mercury, and through which the end of the Pipe went down.
This being done with as great exactness as could be, it was carried to the foot
of the Mountain in a Frame of Wood, made on purpose, and there opening the
mouth of the Vessel, we found the Mercury to rise an inch and a quarter higher
than it was. The reason of this strange Phenomenon must be this, namely a
greater Pressure of the Air at the foot of the Hill, than upon the top: even as
there is a greater Pressure of Water in a surface 40 fathom deep, than in a
surface 20 fathom deep. It Is not to be doubted. but if the root of the Mountain
had been as low as the Sea Coast, or as the surface of Tweed at Kelso, the
Mercurial Cylinder would have been higher. This way of observing, seems to be
better than the common: for while the Baroscope is carried up and down the
Hill, without stopping the orifice of the Vessel, that contains the stagnant
Mercury, the Cylinder makes such reciprocations, by the agitation of a man's
body, that sometimes abundance of Air is seen to ascend up through the Pipe,
which in effect makes the Cylinder shorter than it ought to be. But if so be,
the end of the Pipe be immerged among Quicksilver, contained in a Glass with a
narrow orifice, so that it may be stopped completely, you will find no
reciprocations at all. And to make all things the more sure, the Glass may be
filled up either with Mercury, or with Water above the Mercury; by which means
the Cylinder in the down-coming, or in the up-going shall remain immovable.
Besides the stopping of the orifice of the said Glass, you may have a wider
Vessel, that may receive the same Glass into it, and it being full of Water,
may so cover the sealed orifice, that there shall be no hazard of any Air
coming in. Or this Experiment may be first tried at the root of the Hill, and
having stopped completely the mouth of the Vessel, the whole Engine may be
carried up to the top, where you will find the Mercury subside and fall down so
much; namely after the said orifice is opened: for as the stopping of the
orifice at the root of the Hill, is the cause, why that same degree of Pressure
remains in the stagnant Liquor; so the opening of it upon the top of the Hill,
is the cause why it becomes less.

This Experiment lets us see, that the Pressure of the Air seems to be as the
Pressure of the Water, namely the further down the greater; and the further up
the less: and therefore, as by coming up to the top of the Water, there is no
more Pressure, so by coming up to the top of the Air, there is no more weight
in it; which in effect says, that the Air has a determinat hight, as the
Water has. From this Experiment we cannot learn the determinat hight of the
Air, because the definit hight of the Mountain is not known. I know there are
some, who think that the Air is indefinitly extended, as if forsooth, the
Firmament of fixed Stars were the limits of it, but I suppose it is hard to
make it out.

OBSERVATION V.
JUne 5. 1670. I observed the Sun within 3 minutes of setting, to have a perfect
oval figure, the two ends lying level with the Horizon. His color was not red
as ordinarily, but bright and clear, as if he had been in the Meridian: neither
was the Sky red, but clear also. And by the help of the Pendulum Clock, I have
observed his body to be longer in setting than it ought, by eight minutes, and
sometimes by ten, and his Diameter longer in going out of sight than it ought,
by two, and sometimes by three minutes. The reason of these Phenomena, must be
the Refraction unquestionably.

OBSERVATION VI.
UPon Saturday evening the 30 of July 1670, and the night following, till about
two a Clock in the Sabbath morning, there fell out a considerable rain, with
great thunder, and many lightnings. About Sunset, the convocation of black
clouds appeared first toward the Horizon in the South-west, with several
lightnings; and the wind blowing from that point, carried the clouds and rain
over Mid and East-Lothian, toward the Firth and Seacoast. About 9 a clock,
the whole Heavens almost were covered with dark clouds, yet the rain was not
very great, neither were the thunder claps frequent, but every fifth or sixth
second of time, a large and great lightning brake out. But before the thunder
crack was heard, which happened every fourth or fifth minut, the lightning was
so terrible for greatness, and brightness, that it might have bred
astonishment. And because the night was very dark, and the lightning very
splendid, a man might have perceived houses and co^n-fields at a great
distance. And if any had resolved to catch it, in the breaking out, it did so
dazzle the eyes, that for half a minut, he was not able to see any thing about
him.

Sometimes the lightning that went before the thunder, brake forth from the
clouds, like a long spout of fire, or rather like a long flame raised high,
with a Smiths Bellows, but did not continue long in sight. Such an one above
the Firth was seen to spout downward upon the Sea. Sometimes there appeared
from the one end of the cloud to the other, an hiatus, or wide opening, all
full of fire, in form of a long furrow, or branch of a River, not straight, but
crooked. I suppose the breadth of it, in it self, would have been twenty pace
and more, and the length of it five or six hundred pace: the duration of it,
would have been about a second of time. Sometimes a man might have perceived
the nether side of the cloud, before the crack came, all speckled with streams
of fire, here and there, like the side of an Hill, where Moor-burn is, which
brake forth into a lightning. But there was one, after which followed a
terrible thunder crack, which far exceeded all the rest, for quantity and
splendour. It brake out from the cloud, being shot from North to South, in form
of fire from a great Cannon, but in so great quantity, as if a Gun ten foot
wide, with 500 pound weight of Powder in it, had been fired. And surely the
lightning behoved to be far greater in it self, seeing it appeared so great, at
so great a distance. It did not evanish in an instant, like the fire of a Gun,
but continued about a second and an half; by reason (it seems) that it could
not break out all at once. This did so dazzle the sight, that for half a minut
almost, nothing was seen, but like a white mist flying before the eyes. The
whole Country about was seen distinctly.

All these great lightnings were seen a considerable time, before the crack was
heard. Sometimes 30 seconds numbered by the Pendulum Clock interveened, namely
when the thunder was at a distance, about 7 or 8 miles. Sometimes 15 or 16 only
interveened. But when the thunder was just above our head, no more passed, than
7 or 8, which seems to demonstrat, that these thick black clouds, out of which
the thunder breaks, are not a Scottish mile from the earth, when they are
directly above us.

It Is observable, that in all lightnings, and thunderings, there is no smoke to
be seen, which seems to evince, that the matter whereof they are generated,
must be most pure, and subtle. Who knows, but this Country, that abounds with
Coal, may occasion more thunder and lightnings, than other places, namely by
sending up sulphurious exhalations to the middle region of the Air, wherewith
the Coalmines abound.

OBSERVATION VII.
THis is a method for finding out the true South and North Points, which are in
effect very difficult to know. Take therefore four pieces of Timber, each one
of them five foot long, and about six inches thick, squarewise. Sharpen their
ends, and fix them so in the ground, that they may stand Perpendicular, and as
near to South and North, by a Magnetic Needle, as may be. The place would be
free of Trees, or of any such impediment, that it may have a free prospect of
the Heavens. As for their distance one from another, let the two North-most,
and the South-most be two foot asunder: let the two East-most, and two
West-most, be but one foot, making as they stand, an oblong quadrangle. For
keeping them equidistant above, as well as below, take four bars of Wood, about
three inches broad, and one inch thick, and nail them round about upon the four
sides, on each side one, so that being nailed on Horizontally, they may make
right angles, with the tops of the standards above. There are then for
distinctions cause, the North-bar, and the South-bar, that runs East and West,
and the East-bar, and the West-bar, that runs South and North, There is here no
difficulty in the thing it self, but only in the fancy to conceive it. Besides
these four, there must be other four of the same form and fashion, nailed on
^arder down about the middle of the four standards. Take next some small Brass
Wyre strings, such as are used in Virginals, and fix one from the middle of the
South-bar, that is upmost, to the middle of the South-bar just under it. Fix it
so, that it may be exactly Perpendicular, which may be done, with a great
weight of Lead. Take a second Wyrestring, and hang it plumb from the West end
of the North-bar, and another from the East end of the same Bar, I mean the Bar
that is nearest to the top. These three strings so fixed, will go near to make
an equilateral triangle.

Now because the device is for finding out the Meridian by the Stars in the
night time, not by any indifferently, but by these that are nearest to the
Pole, therefore observe in July and August, when the Guard-stars in the evening
begin to come down toward the West, and keeping closs one eye, bring the other
somewhat near to the South-most string, and order your sight so, that this
string, and the West-most string upon the North side, may catch the foremost
Guard-star in the down-coming, when it is furthest West, and there fix it. When
the same Star is turning up toward the East, catch it by the South-most
string, and the East-most string on the North side, and your work is done, if
so be, you divide exactly, between the East-most and West-most, and there hang
a fourth string, which with the string upon the South Side, gives you the true
South and North. For better understanding, note first, that, when the
Guard-stars are coming down, or going up, the Altitude varies quickly, but the
Azimuth, or motion from East to West, will not vary sometimes sensibly in two
hours almost, which is a great advantage in this case. But when you find out
the Meridian with a Plain, and a Perpendicular Stilus, by the shadow of the
Sun, if it be not when he is about East and West, the Azimuth alters mo^e than
the Altitude, which is a great disadvantage. Now its certain, the slower the
motion be from East to West of any Star, it is the easier to observe, and it is
the more sure way. Note secondly, that special care must be had, to cause the
strings hang Perpendicular. Note thirdly, that before you begin your
Observations, the South-most string must be made immovable, but the East-most,
and West-most, on the other side, must not be so, because as the Stars in going
about move from East to West, so must the said two strings be left at liberty,
to move a little hither and thither, till the Observations be ended. Note
fourthly, that as soon as you perceive sensibly, the foremost Guardstar to
decline toward the West, then you must begin to observe, which is nothing
else, but to fix your eye so, that the South-most and West-most string, may
cover the said Star. And because in coming down, it goes West, therefore, let
the West-most string move toward the left hand by degrees, following the Star
to its utmost, till it be covered by them both. Follow the same method, in
observing the same Star in going up toward the East. Note fifthly, that when
you make the two strings cover the Star, that which is nearest to the eye, will
appear transparent, and of a larger size, so that you may perceive distinctly
through it, not only the Star it self, but the other^string also, which is a
great advantage. This is evident to any, who holds a bended silk thread between
their eye and a Star in the night time; for when you direct your sight to the
Star, the string appears like the small string of a Virginal when it trembles.
Note sixthly, that in observing in a dark night, you must have a Cutthroat,
that by the light of the candle you may perceive the strings. Some other things
might be noted, but you will find them better by experience, than they can be
expressed here.

I named July and August in the evening for observing the Guard-stars, when
they are West-most, but there are several other seasons, when this may be done
as conveniently. They are East-most in the latter end of October, and beginning
of November about 5 or 6 a clock in the morning. If a man were desirous to make
this observation quickly, I suppose he might in the end of October, find the
said stars West-most in the evening, and East-most the next morning. Besides
the Guard-stars, a man may make use of the Polar-star; for as it goes higher,
and lower than the true Pole, by 2 degrees and 26 minutes, so it goes as much to
the East, and as much to the West, once in 24 hours. In the end of July, you
will find the Polar-star East-most, about 9 a clock at night, and in the end of
January West-most at 9 a clock. Note, that every month, the fixed stars come
sooner to the same place by two hours: therefore in the end of August the
Polar-star must be West, at 7 a clock at night, and East at 7 a clock in the
morning. When the Meridian is found out after this manner, there is no Star or
Planet can pass it, but you may know exactly when, be it never so high, or
never so low. For there is nothing to be done, but to wait, till the South-most
and North-most most string cover the body of the Star. If it be the Sun, hold
up a white Paper, behind the two strings, and when their shadows do co-incide,
and are united, then is his Center in the Meridian. I^ the Sun do not shine
clear, as when he is under mist, or a thin cloud, you may exactly take him up
in the Meridian, with the two strings. This Frame will serve as well, to know
when any of the North Stars comes South, or North, and consequently when they
are highest, and when they are lowest: for being fixed in an open place of the
Orchard, there is no Celestial Body can pass the Meridian, either on the one
side, or the other, but it may be catched, what ever the Altitude be, and that
most easily.

OBSERVATION VIII.
THere has been much inquiry made by some anent the reason, why the dead body
of a man or beast, rises from the ground of a Water, after it has been there
three or four days. But though many have endeavored to solve the question, yet
the difficulty remains; and in effect it cannot be answered, without the
knowledge of the foregoing Doctrine, anent the nature of fluid Bodies. To find
out the reason then of this Phenomenon, consider, that all Bodies, are either
naturally heavier then Water, as Stone and Lead, or naturally lighter, as Wood
and Timber. If they be heavier, they sink: if they be lighter, they swim. Now I
say, a man's body immediately after he is drowned, his belly being full of Water,
must go to the ground, because in this case, it will be found specifically or
naturally heavier then Water. That Is to say, a man's body, will be heavier, than
as much Water, as is the bulk of a man's body. For pleasing the fancy, imagine a
Statue to be composed of Water, with all the true dimensions of the person
that is dead, so that the one shall answer most exactly to all the dimensions of
the other. In this case, if you counterpoise them in a Balance, the real body,
that is made up of flesh, blood, and bones, shall weigh down the other. But
after this dead body has lien a short time among the Water, it presently
begins to swell, which is caused by the fermentation of the humors of the
blood, which goes before putrefaction, and after three or four days swells so
great, that in effect, it becomes naturally lighter than Water, and therefore
rises. That is to say, take that body, that is now swelled, and as much bulk
of Water, as will be the precise quantity of it, and having counterpoised them
in a Balance, you will find the Water heavier than the body.

OBSERVATION IX.
UPon Thursday the 25 of August 1670, the following Experiment was made in a
new Coal-sink, on the West side of Tranent. When the Coal-hewers had dug
down about 6 or 7 fathom, they were interrupted sometimes with ill Air:
therefore to know the power and force of the Damp, we let down within the
Bucket a Dog. When he had gone down about 4 fathom, or middle Sink, we found
little or no alteration in him, save only that he opened his mouth, and had
some difficulty in breathing, which we perceived evidently: for no sooner he
was pulled up to the top, where the good Air was, but he left off his gaping.
We let him down next to the bottom, where he tarried a pretty while, but no
more change we found in him than before. After this we let down a great
quantity of Whins, well kindled with a bold flame, but they no sooner came to
the middle of the sink, but the flame was in an instant extinguished: and no
sooner was the Bucket pulled up, but they took fire again. This was 5 or 6
times tried, with the same success. If we compare this Observation with the
first, we will find, that all Damps are not of the same power and force; but
that some are stronger, and kills men and beasts in an instant: and that others
are less efficacious, and more feeble, and does not so much hurt, and that men
may hazard to go down into a Sink, where ill Air is, even though fire be
sometimes extinguished. We see next, that these Damps does not always infect
the whole Air of a Coal-pit, but only a certain quantity: for sometimes it is
found in the bottom, sometimes in the middle. And we see lastly, that they are
not always of long continuance: for it is found, that though the Air be ill in
the morning, yet it may be good ere night; and totally evanished ere the next
day. We may add, as was noted in the first Observation, that these Damps depend
much upon the situation of the winds, seeing in strong Southerly winds, they
are frequently in these places.

OBSERVATION X.
OF these many excellent devices, that have been found out of late, the
Air-pump is one, first invented in Germany, and afterward much perfected in
England by that Honorable Person Mr Boil, who for his pains, and industry in
making Experiments therewith, deserves the thanks of all learned persons.
Several trials has been made of late by it, some whereof, are as follows. I
took a slender Glass-tub about 40 inches long, closs above, and open below, and
filled it with Water. I next inverted it, and set the orifice of it, just upon
the mouth of the Brass-pipe, that bends upward through the board, whereon the
Receiver uses to stand, and cemented them together. At the first exsuction,
the whole Water in the Pipe fell down, and ran through the Brass-conduit to the
Pump. Having for a short while stopped the passage, and thrust down the Sucker,
I next opened it again, and the Pump being full of Water, it was driven with a
considerable force up through the Pipe; yet was it not completely filled as
before, by reason of some Air, that I saw in the top. After this was done, with
pleasure five or six times, I opened the Stopcock more quickly, than I had
used, but the Water, by this means, was so furiously driven up through the Tub,
that in effect, it broke the end of it, that was Hermetically sealed; and the
piece that flew off, did hit the seiling so smartly, that it rebounded a very
far way. From this we see the reason, why Water falls not down from Vessels
that have narrow necks, though they be inverted, because it is kept in by the
force and power of the environing Air. It Is observable, that though this Pipe
had been 30 foot high, yet the whole Water in it would have subsided, and
fallen down, with one exsuction.

The next trial was with the help of a small Receiver, which in effect was a
real Cupping-glass. This had a hole made in the bottom of it, and was cemented
to the Brassplate, and the mouth of it looking upward, had a lid for covering
of it. I took next the lately mentioned Glasspipe, and filled it with good
Brandy, and having drowned the end of it among stagnant Brandy, I set the
Vessel wherein it was within the Receiver, the Pipe coming up through the lid,
and having cemented it closly, I made the first exsuction, and found no descent
of the Liquor from the top of the Tub. At the second, it fell down about an
inch. At the third, it fell down four or five. But here appeared a great
multitude of small Bubbles of Air, like broken Water, near the top of the Pipe
within. And besides this Phenomenon, there ascended from the stagnant Liquor up
through the Pipe, an infinite number of small Bubbles, no bigger than Pin-heads,
for a very large time. With a fourth exsuction, it fell down within two or
three inches of the stagnant Brandy. And thinking to make the one level with
the other, I made a fifth; but here appeared a strange effect, namely, not only
the whole Brandy in the Pipe subsided, and was mingled with the stagnant
Brandy, but at this exsuction, there came a great quantity of Air from the
mouth of the Pipe, and rose up through the stagnant Liquor in Bubbles. Having
made another exsuction, there came yet more Air out, and so copiously, that I
thought there had been some leak in the Tub, through which the outward Air had
entered; but knowing the contrary, I continued Pumping a very long time, till I
found less and less come out, and at length, after near 30 exsuctions it
ceased. This Air to appearance, was so much as might have filled twenty Tubs,
every one of them as large, as the Tub it came out of. And surely all of it
came out from among the small quantity of Brandy that filled the Pipe, and that
environed the mouth of it, I mean the stagnant Brandy, both which would not
have been eight spoonful. After this I opened the Stop-cock leasurely to let in
the Air to the Receiver; then did the Brandy climb up the Pipe slowly, till it
came near to the top, and there made some little halt, by reason of half an
inch of Air that appeared there. But more and more Air coming into the
Receiver, that half inch in the top of the Pipe, did so diminish, that it
appeared no bigger than the point of a Pin, and was scarcely discernable to the
eyes. What a strange and wonderful faculty of dilatation and contraction must
be in the Air, seeing that which presently had filled the whole Tub, that was 40
inches long, and the sixth p^rt of an inch wide, was contracted to as little
room, as the point of a Needle. And by making some new exsuctions* that small
Atome of Air did so dilate it self again, that ^t filled the same Tub, and not
only that, but, as formerly, it bubbled out from the mouth of the Pipe several
times.

It Is to be observed, that though at the first falling down of the Brandy, it
appeared like broken Water, near the top of the Pipe within, yet no such thing
was seen the second time it fell down; the reason is, because by the first
exsuctions, it was well exhausted of its aerial particles. Once or twice I
found, after the Brandy within the Pipe was well freed of Air, that no
exsuctions could make it move from the top of the Tub; and observed a round
Bubble of Air to march up, which when once it came to the top, did separate the
one from the other. If this hold good, it seems to prove, that neither Mercury,
nor any other Liquor would fall down in Pipes, unless there were Air lurking
amongst the parts to fill up the deserted space.

From this Experiment we learn, that no person can well apprehend or conceive,
how far, and to what bounds the smallest part of Air is able to expand it self.
And it proves evidently, that when the Receiver is as much emptied as it can
be, by the Art of man, yet it is full of Air completely.

The third trial was after this manner: I set within the Receiver a little
Glass half full of Brandy, and the lid being cemented on, I began to pump, but
there appeared no alteration at the first exsuction. At the second, I perceived
a great company of very small Bubbles, that for a long time ascended from the
body of it, and came to the surface. At the third, they were so frequent, and
great, that the Brandy appeared to sees and boil, and by reason of the great
ebullitions, much of it ran over the lips of the Glass, and fell into the
bottom of the Receiver. This boiling continued for the space of 7 or 8
exsuctions, and by process of time, the Bubbles grew fewer and fewer, and when
about 30 or 40 exsuctions were made, no more appeared. With this same sort of
Brandy, I filled the forenamed Pipe, and set it within the Receiver, the mouth
of the Tub being guarded with the same sort of Liquor. When it began to
subside, there appeared no Bubbles near the top as before: the reason seems to
be, because the Brandy was well exhausted from its aerial particles. For a
fourth trial, I filled the same Tub with Ale, that was only 5 or 6 days old,
and drowning the end of it among stagnant Ale of the same kind, I began to
Pump, and found, that as soon as the Liquor began to subside, from the top of
the Pipe, the whole Ale within the Pipe, almost turned into Air, and Froth, and
so many large Bubbles came up from the stagnant Liquor that I thought the whole
was converted into Air. It was most pleasant to behold their several forms and
shapes, their order and motion. This same Tub being filled with sweet milk, I
found very few Bubbles in it, when by the exsuctions, it began to subside. I
likewise took a little Glass-viol, and filled the half of it full with common
Ale, and set it within the Receiver. At the first exsuction, Bubbles of Air
began to rise out of it. At the second and third, they did so multiply, that
they filled the other half of the Glass, and ran over, as a Pot does when it
boileth. And before I could exhaust all the Air out of it, more than 20
exsuctions passed.

For a fifth trial, I filled the often mentioned Pipe with Fountain Water, and
when it began to subside by Pumping, I found it leave much Air behind it. But
all the exsuctions I made, could not make the Water of the Pipe go so low, as
the stagnant Water, by which impediment, I could Pump no Air out of the Pipe,
as I did, while I made use of Brandy. This tell us, that either there is not so
much Air lurking among Water, as among Brandy, or that the Air among this, has
a more expansive faculty in it, than the Air that lurks among Water. If any
think, that it is not true and real Air, which comes from the Brandy, but
rather the Spirits of it, which evaporats. I answer, if a man taste this Brandy
that is exhausted of its aerial particles, he will find it as strong, as before,
which could not be, if the Spirits were gone,

For a sixth trial, I took a Frog and enclosed her within the Receiver. But all
the exsuctions I was able to make, could not so much as trouble her. Only, when
the Receiver was exhausted, I perceived her sides to swell very big, and when
the Stop-cock was turned, to let in the Air again, her sides clapped closs
together. I observed likewise, when the Air was pretty well Pumped out, that
the Frog had no respirations, or if there were any, they were very insensible.
The next day, after she had been prisoner in the Receiver 24 hours, I began
again to Pump, and after several exsuctions, her sides swelled pretty great,
and I perceived her open her mouth wide, and somewhat like a Bag endeavoring
to come out, which surely has been some of her noble parts, striving to dilate
themselves, the body being freed of all Pressure from the ambient Air.

OBSERVATION XI.
TAke a slender chord, about 4 or 5 yards in length, and fasten the middle of
it to the seiling of a Room with a nail, so that the two ends of it may hang
down equally. Take next a piece of Wood, two or three foot long, two inches
broad, and one inch thick, and boring an hole in each end of it, put through
the two ends of the chord, and fasten them with knots; but so, that the piece
of Wood may ly Horizontal, and be in a manner a Pendulum to swing from the one
end of the Chamber to the other. Take next a Bullet of Lead or Iron, about 20
or 24 ounces, and lay it upon the said piece of Wood: but because it cannot
well ly, without falling off, therefore nail upon the ends, and the sides of
the Timber, four pieces of Sticks, on each end one, and on each side one, as
Ledgets, for keeping the Bullet from falling off. All things being thus
ordered, draw up the piece of Wood toward the one side of the Room, by which
means losing its horizontal position, it will ly declining-wise, like the roof
of an house. In this position, lay the Iron Bullet in the upmost end of it, and
then let them both pass from your fingers, the one end of the Wood going
foremost, and you will find it swing toward the other side of the house, and
return again, as a Pendulum. This motion, if the Wood be well guided in its
vibrations, will last perpetually, because in its moving down, the Bullet is
hurled from the one end of the Wood, to the other, and hits it so smartly, that
it begets in it, an impulse, whereby it is carried farther up, than it would be,
without it. By this means, the vibrations get not liberty to diminish, but all
of them are kept of the same length. In the second vibration, the same Bullet
is hurled back again to the other end, and hiting it with all its weight,
creats a second impulse, wherewith the Wood is carried, as far up as the point
it was first demitted from.

Though this may seem a pretty device to please the fancy, that is many times
deceived, while things are presented to it, by way of speculation, yet upon
trial and experience, there will be found, an unspeakeable difficulty: and it is
such an one, that a man would not readily think upon. I said, that when the
Wood was let go, and was in passing down, the Bullet in it, would hurl down,
and hit the oppsite end, and beget an impulse; but there is no such thing, for
verily, though the Bullet be laid upon a very declining plain Board, whereupon
no man could imagine a round body could ly, yet all the time the Board is in
swinging, from the one side of the Chamber, to the other, and consequently,
sometimes under an horizontal, and sometimes under an declining position, the
Bullet lies dead in the place, where you first placed it. This Observation is
not so much for a perpetual motion, as for finding out the reason of this
pretty Phenomenon, namely, what is the cause, why the Bullet, that cannot ly
upon a reclining Board, while it is without motion, shall now ly upon it, while
it is under motion? What is more difficult, and nice, to ly upon any thing, that
declines from a level, than Quicksilver; yet lay never so much of it upon
this Board, while it is swinging, it shall ly dead, and without motion. But no
sooner you stop the motion of the wood, but as soon, the Bullet, or the
Quicksilver, is hurled, either this way, or that way.

OBSERVATON XII.
I Find it mentioned by some learned persons, that when a Ship is under Sail,
if a stone be demitted from the top of the Mast, it will move down in a line
parallel with it, and fall at the root. Some might think, it ought not to fall
directly above the place it hang over, but rather some distance behind, seeing
the Ship has advanced so much bounds, in the time, wherein the stone is coming
down. Likewise, while a Ship is under Sail, let a man throw up a stone never so
high, and never so perpendicular, as to his apprehension, yet it will fall down
directly upon his head again, notwithstanding that the Ship has run (perhaps)
her own length in the time, while the stone was ascending and descending. This
experiment I find to hold true, which may be easily tried, especially when a
man is carried in a Boat upon smooth Water, drawn by a horse, as is done in
some places abroad. Let him therefore throw up a little Stone, or any heavy
Body, and he will find it descend just upon his head, notwithstanding that the
Horse that draggs the Boat, be under a gallop, and by this means has advanced
ten or twelve paces in the time. Or while the Boat is thus running, let a man
throw a stone toward the brink of the Water; in this case he shall not hit
the place he aimed at, but some other place more forward. This lets us see,
that when a Gun is fired in a Ship under Sail, the Bullet cannot hit the place
it was directed to. Neither can a man riding with a full Career, and shooting a
Pistol, hit the person he aims at, but must surely miss him, notwithstanding,
that though in the very instant of time wherein he fires, the mouth of the
Pistol was most justly directed. For remedy whereof, allowance must be granted
in the aiming at the mark.

While a man throws up a stone in a Ship under Sail, it must receive two
distinct impulses, one from the hand, whereby it is carried upward, the other
from the Ship, whereby it is carried forward. By this means, the stone in going
up, and coming down, cannot describe a perpendicular, but a crooked Line,
either a Parabola, or a Line very like unto it. Neither can it describe a
perpendicular Line, in coming down from the top of the Mast, though in
appearance it seem to do so, but a crooked one, which in effect must be the
half of that, which it describes in going up, and coming down. For this same
cause a stone thrown horizontally, or toward the brink of the Water, must
describe a crooked Line also. And a Pistol Bullet shot, while a man is riding
at a full Carreer, must describe a Line of the same kind. Note, that a man
walking from the Stern of a Ship to the Head, walks a longer way, than in
walking from the Head to the Stern. Secondly, a man may walk from the Head to
the Stern, and yet not change his place. It Is observable, that a man under
board, will not perceive whether the Ship be sailing, or not, and cannot know
when her Head goes about. And it is strange, that when a man is enclosed in a
Hogs-head, though he have light with him, yet let him be never so often whirled
about, he shall not know, whether he be going about, or not.

OBSERVATION XIII.
I Found in a Philosophical transaction lately Printed, that December. 13. 1669,
one Doctor Beal found the Mercury in the Baroscope, never to be so high, as it
was then. That same very day, I found the hight of it 29 inches, and nine ten
parts, which I never observed before. And though the day here was dark, and the
Heavens covered with Clouds, yet no rain for many days followed, but much
dryness, and fair weather. On Saturday night, March 26, 1670, I found the
altitude no more than 27, and nine ten parts. This night was exceeding windy,
with a great rain. On February 1, 1671. I found the altitude 30 inches, and the
Heavens most clear. But in the most part of May following, I have found the
hight but 27 inches, and five ten parts, in which time there was abundance of
rain.

OBSERVATION XIV.
NOvember 7. 1670. I made exact trial, with the Magnetic Needle for knowing
the variation, and I found it vary from the North, three degrees and a half,
toward the West. Hevelius writes from Dantzick to the Royal Society at London,
July 5. 1670, that it varies with him seven degrees twenty minutes, west.

OBSERVATION XV.
DEcember. 17. 1669, I observed with a large Quadrant, half 9 a clock at night,
the foremost Guard-star, when it was in the Meridian, and lowest, to have 41
degrees 22 minutes of altitude. And on January 7. 1670 at 7 a clock in the
morning, I found it, when it was in the Meridian, and highest, to have 70
degrees, 27 minutes. Hence I conclude the elevation of the Pole here to be 55
degrees, 54 minutes, 30 seconds: and consequently as much at Edinburgh; because
both the places are upon one and the same Parallel.

OBSERVATION XVI.
FOr finding the true Meridian, follow this method. In some convenient place
fix two Wyre strings with weights at them, that they may hang perpendicular.
Then in the night time, observe, when the fourth star of the Plough begins to
come near to the lowest part of the Meridian, at which time you will find the
Polar star highest. Then, so order the two strings, by moving them hither, and
thither, till both of them cover both the said Stars, then shall they in that
position give you the true South and North. This observation is the product of
the seventh.

OBSERVATION XVII.
THere fell out in Mid and East-Lothian, on Thursday May 11, 1671, in the
afternoon, a considerable shour of hail, with thunder and rain. It came from
the South-west, with a great blast of wind, and ran alongs from
Picts-land-hills North-east, toward the Sea coast. The hail were big in
several places, as Musket Ball, and many of them rather oval than round. Some
persons suffered great loss of their young Pease; others of their Glass
Windows. Eight or ten days before, there was a considerable heat, and dry
VVeather. For 20 days after, cold Easterly winds, with rain every day, but
especially, in the end of the Month, extraordinary rain and mist. This is so
much the more to be observed, because in this Country, seldom such
extraordinary hail falls out. This year the Agues and Trembling Fevers have
been most frequent, and to many deadly.

OBSERVATION XVIII.
I Did hear lately of a curious Experiment in Germany, made by a Person of
note, which I shall briefly in this Observation, let the Reader understand. And
though I have heard since, that it is now published in Print, yet I hope it
will not be impertinent to mention it here, especially for their cause, who
cannot conveniently come to the knowledge of such things. And for this reason
also, that I may explicat the Phenomena thereof, from the foregoing doctrine,
and demonstrat particularly the true cause of that admirable effect, that is
seen in it, which I desiderat in the publisher. The Auctor then takes two
Vessels of Brass, each one of them in form of half a sphere, of a pretty large
size. Nothing can more fitly represent them for form and quantity, than two
Bee-skeps. Only, each of them, has a strong Ring of Brass upon the Center
without: and they are so contrived by the Artist, that their orifices agree
most exactly, so that when they are united, they represent an entire Sphere
almost. In one of the sides, there is a hole, and a Brass Spigot in it, through
which the whole Air within, is exsucted, and drawn out, namely by the help of
the Air-pump. And, when by several exsuctions the Vessels are made empty, the
Stop-cock is turned about, by which means, no Air can come in. And, they
remaining empty, are taken from the Pump, and do cleave so fast together, that
though a number of lusty fellows, 12 on each side, do pull vigorously, by help
of ropes fastened to the Rings, yet are they not able to pull them asunder. And
because this will not do it, he yokes in 12 Coach Horses, six on every side,
yet are they not sufficient, though they pull contrariwise to other, to make a
separation. But to let the Spectators see, that they may be pulled asunder, he
yokes in 9 or 10 on every side, and then after much whipping, and sweating,
they pull the one from the other.

The cause of this admirable effect, is not the fear of vacuity, as some do
fancy, for if that were, all the Horses in Germany would not pull them asunder,
no not the strength of Angels. It must then be some extrinsick weight and
force, that keeps them together, which can be nothing else, but the weight of
the invironing Air. Because, no sooner a force is applied, that is more
powerful, than the weight of the Air, but as soon they come asunder. And so
neither six men, nor six horses on each side are able to do it: but nine or ten
on each side makes a separation. For understanding the true cause of this
Phenomenon, we must consider that the Vessels are 18 inches in diameter. I^
this be, then according to the last Experiment, there are two Pillars of Air,
each one of them as heavy as a Pillar of Mercury 18 inches thick, and 29 inches
long, by which they are united. Or, each Pillar of Air, is as heavy, as a
Pillar 0^ Water 34 foot high, and 18 inches in diameter. For finding the weight
of it in pounds, and consequently, the weight of each Pillar of Air, by which
the two Vessels are united, follow this method* First, multiply 9 the
semi-diameter of the Pillar, by 54 the circumference, and this gives you 486,
the half whereof is the bounds of the Area, namely 243. And because 34 foot
contains 408 inches, I multiply 408 by 243, the product whereof is 99144; so
many square inches are in a Pillar of Water 34 foot high, and 18 inches thick.
Now seeing there are 1728 inches in a cubical foot, I divide the number 99144,
by this number, and I find 57 square foot of Water, and more. And because every
square foot weighs 56 pound Trois, I multiply 56 by the number 57, and the
product is 3192 pound, which is the just weight of a Pillar of Water 34 foot
high, and 18 inches in diameter, and which is the just weight also of each
Pillar of Air, by which the two Vessels are kept together, which will be more
weight than seven Hogs-heads full of Water. This is easily known; for seeing a
quart of our measure weighs seven pound, (or to speak strictly six pound
fourteen ounces, seeing the Standard-jug of Striviling contains three pound
seven ounces of Water) a gallon must weigh 28 pound: but 16 times 28, is 448. A
Puncheon then full of Water, weighs 448 pound. If then you divide 3192 by 448,
you will find more than 7. The 9 horses then upon this side have 3192 pound
weight to draw, or 199 stone, or the weight of seven Hogs-heads full of Water.
The other 9 horses upon the other side, have as much to pull. It Is no wonder
then to see so much difficulty and pains to make a separation. It is observed,
that before the Air be exsucted and drawn out of the two Vessels, one man is
able to pull them asunder with his hands only. Nay, which is more, if he but
blow into them, as a man does into a Bladder, he will separat them. The reason
is, because the Air within, is of as great force, as the Air without. It Is
observable next, that the larger the Vessels be in diameter, the more strength
is required to pull the one from the other. Upon supposition then, they were 4
foot wide, I verily believe 30 yoke of oxen, upon every side, would hardly
disjoyn them; because the weight of each Pillar of Air, would be no less, than
22844 pound, which would take 63 strong horses to overcome the force of it. To
pull the one Vessel therefore from the other, there must be 126 horses, that
is, 63 on every side.

OBSERVATION XIX.
THough this Observation may seem useless, because the Proposals, that are
mentioned in it, cannot be made out, and brought to pass, the Author having
died, before he had encouragment to prosecute them: yet for these following
reasons, I have adventured to insert it here. First, that others, may either be
minded to find out (if possible) his inventions, or set a work to find out
somethings, that may be as useful. Next, because, he was one of this same
Nation, and a great Master of the Mathematics, not only in the Speculative,
but in the Practical part chiefly, and admirable for invention. And for this
cause principally I have presumed to mention his designs, and proposals, which
were found among his Notes, after his death, which are here insert, as they
were written with his own hand, and offered to the public, not only at home,
but abroad to strangers. There have been men in all ages famous, for some one
Art and Science beyond others, as Apelles for Painting, Hippocrates for
Medicine, Demosthenes for Oratry, but who have been more famous in their time
than some persons for their profound knowledge in Astronomy, Geometry, and the
other parts of the Mathematics. What an admirable person was Archimedes for
his divine knowledge, both in the Speculative, and Practical part. Yet, it was
not his speculations simply, though excellent, that did so much commend him, as
his Inventions, and admirable Engines for peace and war, as is clear from the
Roman Histories, and others. I confess the Students of these Arts, are not so
much in request now, at least amongst some, and that knowledge is not so much
esteemed; and the reason may be; because some who profess themselves great
Masters, study nothing but the pure speculations, which sometimes are to small
purpose, others before knowing the same, unless for perfecting of the mind, and
giving to a man some private satisfaction. But such things will never commend a
man so much as the practical part, and new Invention will do. It Is surely a
small business for one to do nothing, but to nibble at some petty
Demonstration. But when such speculations are joined with invention and
practice, for the profit, and use of men, among whom they live, then are they
far more to be commended. And if this be not, such knowledge is of small
advantage to themselves or others. Many of the Ancient, and late Astronomers
have been, and are famous for practice, as witness the indefatigable pains they
have been at in making their Observations. What has so highly commended
Merchiston over all Europe, as his inventions, especially his Logarithmes? And
if all be true, that is reported (which I am apt to believe) he might have been
more renowned, for his many excellent Engines, which though useful, yet because
hurtful to mankind, he buried with himself. I am confident, if the Author of
these proposals had had time to have prosecuted them, he would have been
celebrated in the Catalogue of the most famous Mathematicians of his time. But
leaving this, I shall give you them in his own words: but first his Apology.

These bold proposals will need perhaps an apology to such, to whom the causes,
and circumstances are unknown. Let it suffice, that the Proposer finding
himself between two extremes, either to leave unprosecuted this affair, for
fear of being mistaken by some, as impudent, or to commit himself openly to the
charitable judgment of others, who will suspend their censure, till they have
seen what his endeavors will produce. He has rather chosen this last,
especially considering, that his silence could not answer to his duty, which he
owes to his Countries service, seeing the following Engines may be so useful to
it. A deduction of the fabric, causes, and occasions of these new Engines,
that set the Inventer a-work, would take a long time to discourse upon. This
Paper therefore is only destined for a short information of their use, the
rest, which could not here be insert without impertinency, may be supplied
afterward (if need be) either by a discourse, or by a particular
demonstration. The Proposer then is of opinion, (if self-love of his own
Inventions do not blind his Judgment) that these paradoxes may be truly
affirmed.

That if it shall please His Majesty to arm with these new Arms, and Engines,
500 Foot, or fewer, this small number shall be Masters of the Fields in France,
Germany, Spain, or where else it shall please His Majesty, however encountered
by the most powerful Army of Horse or Foot, armed with ordinary Arms, of
Pistol, Carabine, Pike, Musket, which Europe can bring to the Fields.

The cause of this admirable effect, is in the quality of these new Arms, by
which, the whole Horsemen and Footmen of the enemy are rendered useless, and
unservicable; neither can they do any offense to these, who are so armed.

The Musquetteers, who can only serve against these Machins, shall be put to
such disadvantage, as it is impossible they can stand, the least time, in the
common way of service with the Musket, it not being able to make one shot for
twenty, which shall be made from these new Engines.

These new Arms, have this advantage likewise, that these who are so armed, can
by no force of Horse or Foot be broken, or put to disorder. The Soldiers are
also by them put to a necessity of keeping together, and fighting, and by them,
they are so Baricado'd, and strongly defended, that if they leave them not,
they cannot be exposed to danger. This contributes much to good Discipline,
when the Soldiers shall by necessity be tied to his duty, and fear, which
otherwise makes him run away, shall here for his safety make him stand.

These new Arms are useful, as well in Marching, as in Combating, for with
them, we may march securely two in front, through the straitest passages, and
be able to force with them any advantage a strait passage can give to an enemy.
Besides, for a long hasty march, where Victuals cannot be well carried, the
Soldiers are able with these Arms to carry their own provision for eight
days, with more facility, then they can now carry one days provision.

To lodge in the open fields, these Arms shall need no Intrenching, for they
sufficiently both Arm and Baricade the Soldiers.

And as they are useful in Service, so are they a great deal cheaper than the
ordinary Arms. For although with 5 thousand men so armed, the service of 100000
armed with common Arms may be done, yet the whole price of them will not amount
to that which will be required for arming 20500 Corrassiers, as may be
particularly deduced, from the particular prices of the Arms, and Engines
fitted for the service of 5000 men. The Proposet does offer to show, that these
Arms will not surmount 40000 pound Sterling. The Artillery will amount to 4500,
and the payments of this number of men so armed, yearly to 70000 pound. Yet all
these are taken in so large a latitude of reckoning, as the sum of Arms,
Artillery, and payments, will not be much above 130000 pound Sterling.

The Arms from which this effect is promised, are new Engines, with which one
man is able to do the service of a great many Musquetteers. And those are of
two sorts, either to be used upon a small Wagon for Footmen, or on a greater
for a Horse, with either of which, one hand is able to make the fire of 100
Musquetteers, and so much better, by how much it is more regularly, and fitly
done for execution and offense. The new Cannon shall have the like advantage
above the old, both for easy carriage, being lighter, and for greater
execution, shooting six, nine, or twelve Bullets for one. These Arms give not
only this advantage at Land in the field, but also in Ships, and places of
defense.

These nine following propositions he likewise offered to make good,

First, With one shot of Cannon, to do the execution of five shot of the same
Cannon, in the common way of Battery.

Secondly, to disable any Ship or Galley with one shot of Cannon.

Thirdly, to fire any combustible matter with the shot of a Cannon.

Fourthly, to make an Machin or Engine for transporting an Army, which may be
carried without the incommodity thereof.

Fifthly, to make a flotting Fortress for defense of Rivers, and prohibition of
Passages.

Sixthly, to make a Mortar that has a directory Stell upon the Carriage.

Seventhly, to make Petards of diverse forms, that shall be able to do twice as
much execution, as those that contain as much Powder.

Eighthly, to make small Petards of great effect.

Lastly, to make Bridges, and Scaling Ladders of easy Carriage.

OBSERVATION XX:
THese Observations being Miscellany, require not a formal connection between
themselves, and therefore it is no matter what method I keep in setting them
down. And though this may seem not so pertinent, as others, yet because the
design of it is only Philosophical, and for advancing the Historical part of
Learning in order to Spirits, upon which the Scientifical part does so much
depend, I have presumed to insert it here, considering also that there are
some, who have adventured to deny their existence. and being; which from such a
History as this, may be more than probably evicted. I find likewise, that
several Writers have remarked such strange accidents, and have transmitted them
to posterity, which may serve for good use. The subject matter then of this
Observation, is a true and short account of a remarkable trial, wherewith the
Family of one Gilbert Compbel, by Profession a Weaver in the old Paroch of
Glenl^^e in Galloway, was exercised. Though the matter be well known to several
persons at that time, and since too; yet there are others, eighteen years
interveening, to whom (perhaps) such a relation will not be unacceptable, who
have either not as yet heard of it, or at least, have not gotten the true
information, which is here set down, as it was Written, at the desire of a
special Friend, by Gilbert Campbel's own Son, who knew exactly the matter, and
all the circumstances, whose words are as follows.

It happened in October 1654, that after one Alexander Agnew, a bold and sturdy
Beggar, who afterward was hanged at Dumfreis for blasphemy, had threatened hurt
to the Family, because he had not gotten such an alms as he required: the said
Gilbert was oftentimes hindered in the exercise of his Calling, all his
Working-Instruments being some of them broken, some of them cutted, and yet
could not know by what means this hurt was done; which piece of trouble did
continue, till about the middle of November, at which time the Devil came with
new and extraordinary assaults, by throwing of Stones in at Doors and Windows,
and down through the Chimney-head, which were of great quantity, and thrown with
great force, yet by Gods good providence, there was not one person of the
Family hurt, or suffered damage thereby. This piece of new and sore trouble,
did necessitat Mr. Campbel to reveal that to the Minister of the Paroch, and to
some other Neighbors and Friends, which hitherto he had endured secretly. Yet
notwithstanding of this, his trouble was enlarged; for not long after, he found
oftentimes his Warp and Threeds cut, as with a pair of Sizzers, and the Reed
broken: and not only this, but their apparel cut after the same manner, even
while they were wearing them, their Coats, Bonnets, Hose, Shoes, but could not
discern how, or by what mean. Only it pleased God to preserve their persons,
that the least harm was not done. Yet, in the night time, they wanted liberty
to sleep, something coming, and pulling their Bed-cloaths and Linnings off
them, and leaving their bodies naked. Next, their Chests, and Trunks were
opened, and all things in them strawed here and there. Likewise, the parts of
the Working Instruments, that had escaped, were carried away, and hid in holes
and bores of the house, where hardly they could be found again. Nay, whatever
piece of Cloth, or Household Stuff, was in any part of the house, it was
carried away, and so cut and abused, that the Good Man was necessitated with
all haste and speed, to remove, and to transport the rest to a Neighbors
house, and he himself compelled to quite the exercise of his Calling, whereby
only he maintained his Family. Yet, he resolved to remain in the house for a
season. During which time, some persons about, not very judicious, counseled
him to send his children out of the Family, here and there, to try whom the
trouble did most follow, assuring him, that this trouble was not against all
the Family, but against some one person, or other in it, whom he too willingly
obeyed. Yet, for the space of four or five days after, there were no
remarkable assaults, as before. The Minister hearing thereof, showed him the
evil of such a course, and assured him, that if he repented not, and called
back his children, he might not expect that his trouble would end in a right
way. The children that were nigh by, being called home, no trouble followed,
till one of his sons, called Thomas, that was farrest off, came home. Then did
the Devil begin afresh; for upon the Lords Day following, in the afternoon, the
house was set on fire, but by his providence, and the help of some people,
going home from Sermon, the fire was extinguished, and the house saved, not
much loss being done. And the Monday after, being spent in private Prayer and
Fasting, the house was again set on fire upon the Tuesday about nine a Clock in
the morning, yet by providence, and the help of Neighbors, it was saved,
before any harm was done.

Mr. Campbel, being thus wearied, and vexed, both in the day, and in the night
time, went to the Minister, desiring him, to let his son Thomas abide with him
for a time, who condescended, but withal assured him, that he would find
himself deceived, and so it came to pass: for, notwithstanding that the child
was without the family, yet were they, that remained in it, fore troubled both
in the day time, and in the night season, so that they were forced to wake till
midnight, and sometimes all the night over. During which time, the persons
within the Family, suffered many losses, as the cutting of their Clothes, the
throwing of Peits, the pulling down of Tu^ff, and Feal from the Roof, and Walls
of the House, and the stealing of their Apparel, and the pricking of their
flesh and skin with Pins. The Presbytery having conveened at the place, for a
solemn Humiliation, persuaded Gilbert Campbel to call back his Son Thomas,
notwithstanding of whatsoever hazard might follow. The Boy returning home,
affirmed that he heard a voice speak to him, forbidding him to enter within the
house, or into any other place where his Fathers Calling was exercised. Yet he
entered, but was sore abused, till he was forced to return to the Ministers
house again.

Upon Monday the 12 of February, the rest of the Family began to hear a voice
speak to them, but could not well know from whence it came. Yet, from evening
till midnight, too much vain discourse was kept up with the Devil, and many
idle and impertinent questions proposed, without that due fear of God, that
should have been upon their Spirits, under so rare and extraordinary a trial.
The Minister hearing of this, went to the house upon the Tuesday, being
accompanied with some Gentlemen, who after Prayer was ended, heard a voice
speaking out of the ground, from under a bed, in the proper Country Dialect,
saying, Would ye know the Witches of Glenluce? I will tell you them; and so
related four or five persons names, that went under an evil report. The said
Gilbert informed the company, That one of them was dead long ago. The Devil
answered, and said, It is true, she is dead long ago, yet her spirit is living
with us in the world. The Minister replied, saying, (though it was not
convenient to speak to such a person) The Lord rebuke thee Satan, and put thee
to silence; we are not to receive any information from thee, whatsoever fame
any persons go under. Thou art but seeking to seduce this Family: for Satan's
Kingdom is not divided against it self. After which all went to Prayer again,
which being ended (for during the time of Prayer no trouble was made) the Devil
with many threatenings boasted and terrified the Lad Thomas, who had come back
that day with the Minister, that if he did not depart out of the house, he
would set all on fire. The Minister answered, and said, The Lord will preserve
the House, and the Boy too, seeing he is one of the Family, and has Gods
warrant to tarry in it. The Devil answered, He shall not get liberty to stay:
he was once put out already, and shall not abide here, though I should pursue
him to the end of the world. The Minister replied, The Lord will stop thy
malice against him. And then they all prayed again, which being ended, the
Devil said, Give me a Spade and a Shovel, and depart from the house for seven
days, and I shall make a grave, and ly down in it, and shall trouble you no
more. The Good Man answered, Not so much as a Straw shall be given thee,
through Gods assistance, even though that would do it. The Minister also added,
God shall remove thee in due time. The Devil answered, I will not remove for
you, I have my Commission from Christ to tarry, and vex this Family. The
Minister answered, A permission thou have indeed, but God will stop it in due
time. The Devil replied, I have ( Mes. John) a Commission, that (perhaps) will
last longer than your own. After which, the Minister and the Gentlemen arose,
and went to the place where the voice seemed to come from, to try if they could
find any thing. And after diligent search, nothing being found, the Gentlemen
began to say, We think this voice speaks out of the children, for some of them
were in their beds. The Devil answered, You lie, God shall judge you for your
lying, and I and my Father will come and fetch you to hell, with
Warlock-theeves; and so the Devil discharged the Gentlemen to speak any,
saying, Let him speak that has a Commission ( meaning the Minister) for he is
the Servant of God. The Gentlemen returning back with the Minister, they sat
down near to the place whence the voice seemed to come from, and he opening his
mouth, spoke to them, after this manner. The Lord will rebuke this Spirit, in
his own time, and cast it out. The Devil answering, said, It is written in the
9 of Mark, the Disciples could not cast him out. The Minister replied, What the
Disciples could not do, yet the Lord having hightned the Parents faith, for his
own glory did cast him out, and so shall he thee. The Devil replied, It is
written in the 4 of Luke, And he departed, and left him for a season. The
Minister said, The Lord in the days of his humiliation, not only got the
victory over Satan, in that assault in the wilderness, but when he came again,
his success was no better, for it is written, Joh. 14. Behold the Prince of
this world comes, and has nothing in me; and being now in glory, he will
fulfill his promise, and God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans
16. The Devil answered, It is written, Mat. 25. There were ten Virgins, five
wise, and five foolish; and the Bridegroom came: The foolish Virgins had no Oil
in their Lamps, and they went unto the wise to seek Oil; and the wise said, Go
and buy for your selves: and while they went, the Bridegroom came, and entered
in, and the door was shut, and the foolish Virgins were sent to hells fire. The
Minister answered, The Lord knows the sincerity of his servants, and though
there be sin and folly in us here, yet there is a fountain opened to the house
of David for sin and for uncleanness, and when he has washed us there, and
pardoned all our sins, for his Names sake, he will cast the unclean spirit out
of the land. The Devil answered and said, That place of Scripture is written in
the 13 of Zechariah, In that day I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean
spirit, pass out of the land; but afterward it is written, I will smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. The Minister answered and said,
Well are we, that our blessed Shepherd was smitten, and thereby has bruised
thy head; and albeit in the hour of his sufferings, his Disciples forsook him,
Mat. 26. yet now having ascended on high, he sits in glory, and is preserving,
gathering in, and turning his hand upon his little ones, and will save his poor
ones in this Family from thy malice. The Minister returning back a little, and
standing upon the floor, the Devil said, I knew not these Scriptures, till my
Father taught me them. I am an evil Spirit, and Satan is my Father, and I am
come to vex this house; and presently there appeared a naked hand, and an arm,
from the elbow down, beating upon the floor, till the house did shake again;
and also the Devil uttered a most fearful and loud cry, saying, Come up Father,
come up: I will send my father among you. See, there he is behind your backs.
The Minister said, I saw indeed an hand, and an arm, when the stroke was given,
and heard. The Devil said to him, Saw you that? It was not my hand, it was my
fathers; my hand is more bl^ck in the loof. Would you see me? Put out the
candle then, and I shall come butt the house among you like fireballs. After
which all went to Prayer, during which time, it did no harm, neither at any
other time when God was worshipped. When Prayer was ended, the Devil answered
and said, Mes John, if the Good-mans sons prayers at the College of Glasgow,
did not prevail more with God, than yours, my father and I had wrought a
mischief here ere now. To which one of the Gentlemen replied, though a check
had been given him before, Well well, I see you confess there is a God, and
that prayer prevails with him, and therefore we must pray to God, and will
commit the event to him. To which the Devil replied, Yea Sir, you speak of
prayer, with your broad lipped Hat (for the Gentleman had lately gotten a new
Hat in the fashion with broad lips) I Will bring a pair of Shears from my father,
that shall clip the lips of it a little.

The night now being far spent, it was thought fit every one should withdraw to
his own home. Then did the Devil cry out fearfully, Let not the Minister go
home, I shall burn the house if he go; and many other ways did he threaten.
And after the Minister was gone forth, the Good Man being instant with him to
tarry, whereupon he returned, all the rest of the company going home. Then said
the Devil to the Minister, You have done my bidding. Not thine, answered he,
but in obedience to God, have I returned to bear this man company, whom thou
do afflict. Then did the Minister call upon the Name of God, and when Prayer
was ended, he discharged Mr. Campbel, and all the persons of the Family, from
opening their mouth, in one word to the evil spirit, and when it spoke, that
they should only kneel down, and speak to God. The Devil then roared mightily,
and cried out, What? Will ye not speak to me? I shall burn the house, I shall
strike the bairns, and do all manner of mischief. But after that time, no
answer was made to it, and so for a long time no speech was heard. After this,
the said Gilbert suffered much loss, and had many sad nights, not two nights in
one week free; and thus it continued till April. From April to July, he had
some respite, and ease. But after, he was molested with new assaults: and even
their Victuals were so abused, that the Family was in hazard of starving; and
that which they did eat, gave them not the ordinary satisfaction they were wont
to find.

In this sore and sad affliction, Mr. Campbel resolved to make his address to
the Synod of Presbyters, for advice and counsel what to do, which was appointed
to conveen in October 1655, namely whether to forsake the house and place, or
not? The Synod by their Committee, appointed to meet at Glenluce in Feb. 1656,
thought fit, that a solemn Humiliation should be kept through all the bounds of
the Synod, and amongst other causes, to request God in behalf of that poor
afflicted Family, which being carefully done, the event was, through the
Prayers of his People, that his trouble grew less till April, and from April to
August, he was altogether free. About which time, the Devil began with new
assaults, and taking the ready meat that was in the house, did sometimes hide
it in holes by the door-posts, and at other times did hide it under the beds,
and sometimes among the Bed-cloaths, and under the Linnings; and at last, did
carry it quite away, till nothing was left there, save Bread and Water to live
by. After this, he exercised his malice and cruelty against all the persons of
the Family, in wearying them in the night time, with stirring and moving through
the house, so that they had no rest for noise, which continued all the month
of August after this manner. After which time, the Devil grew yet worse, and
began with terrible roarings, and terrifying voices, so that no person could
sleep in the house, in the night time, and sometimes did vex them with casting
of stones, striking them with staves on their beds in the night time: and upon
the 18 of September, about midnight, he cried out with a loud voice, I shall
burn the house; and about three or four nights after, he set one of the beds on
fire; which was soon extinguished, without any prejudice, except the bed it
self: and so he continued to vex them.

OBSERVATION XXI.
I Need not make any apology for inserting this Observation, even though it be
well known upon the matter in this place. But because the thing is
extraordinary, and that there are many who have not so much as heard of it, I
have therefore presumed to mention it here. The matter is shortly this. There Is
a certain Woman, named Mistri^ Low, who had a real and true Horn, growing upon
the right side of her Head, three inches above her righ (...). The length of it
is eleven inches, and two inches about. The form is crooked spirally. It is
unequal on the outer side, and somewhat guttered in the inner side. It is hard
and solid, and all very near of the same greatness. It is not hollow within, as
horns are ordinarily, but full, yet it seems to be spongious as a Cane is. It
was seven years in growing, and was cut off in May 1671, by Mr. Temple, an
expert Surgeon here at Edinburgh.

OBSERVATION XXII.
THis Observation is for finding the Primum vivens in Animals. Albeit I doubt
not but the red Spirit, or Blood, in most Terrestrial Animals, is the first
product of the Primigenial juice, and therefore not improperly named the true
Callidum Innatum of these Creatures, by the Noble and Ingenious Harvey, in his
Book de Generatione. Neither do I scruple to yield, that the Heart, and
appendent Vessels, are the first formed, and perfected parts in the hotter kind
of Animals: yet I am confident to affirm, that in many of the colder, and
moifter kinds of Aquaticks, if not in all, neither the redness and heat of the
Vital Spirits, nor the formation of the Heart, Liver, etc. are previously
requisite, to the structure and existence of the other parts; seeing the light
of life, which at first inhabited the clear and Cristalin radical moisture,
before the formation of any particular part, does always move in every living
creature, according to their particular exigency, without any absolute
dependency upon any one part, or member (excepting singular conditions, wherein
they may be stated) as to its substance, light, and motion: there being in some
Animals a simple undulation, in others a slow creeping, but in the more
perfect, an impetuous running, or rather flying of the Vital Spirits,
necessarily required for illumination and vivification of the whole.

For confirmation, I shall give you this singular Experiment. About the middle
of March, the sperm of Frogs (according to the number of Prolifick Eggs therein
contained) sends forth a multitude of small round Creatures, covered with a
black, and moveable Frock, which about the end of March, and beginning of
April, by the Gyrations of a Tail behind, like a Rudder, do slowly move their
bodies in the Water. At this time having opened severals of them, I found
nothing (apparent to the naked eye) but a clear thin Membran, under the
forenamed black Frock, within which were contained a clear Water, and some
small Fibers like Intestines, and in the forepart a small orifice like a
mouth. About the middle of April, its motion is more vigorous, and the Tripes
within are most evident, lying in a very fine circular order, but as yet, there
is no Vestige of Heart, Blood, or Liver, etc. About the middle of May, the feet
formed like small threeds, appear through the black Coat: within the Breast, the
Heart is then visible, of a white and Fibrous substance, the Liver is white,
and the Gall therein easily discerned. But (which is the head of this
Experiment) the Vital Spirit, in form of a clear and pure Water, is manifestly
received by the Nervous Heart, and by the contraction thereof transmitted to
all the Body, through white transparent Vessels, which being full of this
Liquor, do represent the Lymphatick, rather than the Sanguiferous Veins. Last
of all do the Pneumatick Vesicles (which in this Amphibium supply the place of
the Lungs) arise in the Breast, after whose production, the Lympid and
Crystalin Liquor, while the Heart is turgid therewith, seems to be red and
fiery, but in the other Vessels, it is of a faint pale color, until (about,
or near the end of June) the Frock being cast off, and a perfect Frog formed,
the whole Vessels are full of Blood, or a red substance very thin, and clear:
the Liver, and Pneumatick Vesicles, etc. become red, and Rosy; so that the
Blood in this Amphibium (which in the more perfect Animals is first complete)
seems to be the last part in attaining its perfection.

That Salmonds, and great Trouts have an aqueous liquor which runs through their
Arteries, and Veins, before their Blood attain the true consistency, and
saturat tincture I am certain: whether it hold in many others, I suspect, but
dar not affirm. Hence it may be (if men's observations, were frequent in all
kind of Anatomical inspections, in several Embryo's of every species) it would
be found evident, that the Blood in all these, called (...) has its immediate
original from a simple homogeneous, and uniform liquor, and does by gradual and
frequent influences of the vital ferment of the heart, receive at length the
full tincture, essence, and subsistence requisite for vivification, and
illumination of the whole members.

Whether this Experiment does not sufficiently impugn the universality of the
hearts first living, the original of the Gall from the fervor, and ebullition
of the Blood, the production of the Blood by the Liver, and many other ancient
errors, let any judge, who will but take pains to make and compare Harveys
trials de ov^, with this of the Porwigl or Gyrinus, ab ovo.

Yea, if the aqueous liquor, be not one with the vital Spirit, and subsequent
Blood, then my eyes, and taste are altogether erroneous.

Moreover, it were to be wished, that Physicians would not simply stand upon
the Galenick suppositions of the four alleged Components of the Blood, nor any
such, or equivalent fancies of the latter Chemists; but that they would
seriously examine the first original, and rise thereof from the Primigenial
juice, or liquamen, the progress, and perfection of its tinctures, how many
renovations, or new tinctures it is capable of; the vast difference between the
Blood of old and young Animals, (though, it may be, they are both univocal
substances, while in their integrity within the Vessels) with the specific
discriminations, not only of that of any one Aquatick, from any Volatile, or
Terrestrial, but likewise of any one Species living in the same Element, with
these that enjoy the same Aliments, but of a different Species. And lastly, the
variety of particular constitutions, and singular properties of individual
Animals, radicated in the fountain of life, or first original of the Blood. If
these things, and many more, were truly inquired after (though the Cook be
sometimes necessitated to throw away some of the Broth with the Scum) I doubt
not but the Neoterick Invention of Transfusion of Blood, would prove altogether
ridiculous, and the ancient mistake of too much Profusion of this treasure by
Phlebotomy, might suffer some reasonable checks from infallible Experience, and
sound reasons, not here to be mentioned. There are truths in Natural
Philosophy, which (I doubt not) but sound reason and experience will convince
the vain world of in due time.

OBSERVATION XXIII.
THis Observation is concerning the aliment and growth of Plants. The
inquisitive wits of this, and the last age, having rejected the old opinion of
the earths nourishing of Plants, or being converted into their aliment, have
made many laudable Experiments for finding out the materials, and means of
their growth, and vegetation, such as Sir Francis Bacon's Observe of
Germination, Helmonts of a Willow, and the Noble Mr. Boyl's of a Gourd, etc.
For though a Tree be cut down, and the root thereof wax old in the earth, and
the stock die in the ground, yet through the sent of Water, it will bud, as Job
speaks, Chap. 14. 7, 8, 9. I shall add a short remark of a Willow growing
without earth. Upon the 13 of April 1662, I set a top branch of the
Peach-leaf'd Willow in a Glass-viol, among 12 ounces of pure Spring Water, with
three small buds upon the top thereof, scarce yet discernable. The first ten or
twelve days, little white specks appeared upon the sides of the Willow, like
small drops of Quicksilver, or like the first Bubbles that arise upon the
fermentation of Ale or Wine, but no consumption of the Water all this time.
Indeed the Gemms, which stood three inches above the Water, did visibly swell
about the twelfth day. About the fifteenth day, I perceived small white roots
within the Water, upon several places of the Plant, and observed the Liquor
grow somewhat thick, and decay in bulk considerably. Having perceived this, I
took another Glass of the same bigness, with that wherein the Willow grew, and
having filled both top-full with Spring Water, I observed clearly the
consumption of the Water wherein the Plant stood, to be so great, that during
May, June, and a great part of July, every week (at least) an ounce and an
half, or two ounces of it were insensibly spent: whereas the other Water,
standing by in an open Vessel of the same size, made not waste of one spoonful
in a whole month. About the middle of August, the Water turned very thick, and
green, like that whereon Duck-weed uses to grow, and the fair white roots were
all obscured from the sight, although the Vessel by the multitude of roots was
not capable of the third part of Water it received at first. At this time the
branches were advanced to half the bigness, and a much greater length, than the
whole stock, at its first planting; and the leaves of as fresh a verdure, as
any Willow in the fields. Thus, having observed, that a tree of four ounces
weight, could in three months time, and little more, consume insensibly, seven
or eight times its own weight of pure Water, without the warm preservation of
the earth, and by its own proper digestion, to thicken the remnant of the
Water, that it might serve for lorication of the tender fibers of the roots, I
took the Glass, the Tree, and all, and threw them over a Window, supposing it
needless to recruit the Water any more, and judging it impossible without the
warm guard of the earth, that the naked Tree could be preserved in Winter: yet
it had the good fortune to fall among some thick Herbs in the corner of a
little Garden, where (after it had lien all Winter) it was found, and brought
back to me, the branches fairly budding in April, the whole Tree fresh and
green, yet very little Water was left in the Glass, by reason, as I judged, it
had fallen upon its side. Then I endeavored to keep Water about it, but the
Stock filling the neck of the Viol, and the Roots the whole body thereof, the
starved Plant died in May, after it had lived a whole year without earth. From
this it would seem, that this kind of Tree, (and it may be, many more) does
dissipat insensibly six times more Liquor, than it does assimilar, and by
consequence, that a great quantity of moisture is necessary for maintenance of
great Woods. Neither is there any way so advantageous for draining moist
ground, where there are no living Springs, as that of planting abundance of
Timber, which will best agree with that kind of soil: for by this means, what
was formerly noisome, and superfluous, is now converted partly into the useful
aliment of the Timber, and partly sent abroad in insensible exhalations, which
(according to the nature of the emitting Plants) prove either very noisome, or
wholesome to the Neighbour-Inhabitants. Great care therefore would be had in the
choice of such Trees, as are to be planted in such moist ground, as are near to
men's dwellings, or places of concurse. They are not fools, who prefer Firs, and
Lime-trees in their Avenues to Oak and Elm. Let the effects of the Atomical
exhalations of Alder and Oak upon fine Linen, and white Skins be more
particularly noticed.

Having spoken somewhat of the aliment and growth of Plants, I shall in the
next place give a short hint at the motion of their aliment, especially of
Trees. That the alimentary juice of Plants, is much thinner, than that of
Animals, no man, I suppose, will deny, seeing that is conveyed through the
trunck, or body of the Plants, by inperceptible pores; but this (for the most
part) is sent through all the members, through patent and manifest Vessels. But
how the nourishing, and vital juice in Plants does move, and by what passages,
has not yet been made known, by any that I have seen. I made once a few
Observations, for trying of the motion of the aliment of Trees, which bred in
me this conjecture. The nutritive juice of Trees is transmitted both to the
roots and branches, through the heart, or pitch, and woody pores of the Timber,
and when it is come to the extreme parts, it returns again from the tops of the
roots and branches, between the bark and timber, into these forenamed interior
passages, and so back to the extremities again, and that continually, so long
as the life remains. And because the substance of that skin, or bark, which
invests the fibers of the root, is more open and porous, than that which is
upon the outward branches: therefore it seems, that so much as is superadded to
the stock of the former aliment, from the earth, is conveyed to the heart and
pitch, by means of, and together with, that part of the retrograd juice, which
returns from nourishing, and enlivening the timber of the root-branches, (for
it is an easy Experiment, to make the top of any Tree become root, by laying
it down) and receives the impressions of the life of the Tree, common to the
whole mass of alimentary juice, like the Chyll in Animals mixed with the blood
of the Veni-cave, before it come to the heart.

This motion is not to be thought always alike swift, or of equal celerity:
for the vital juice of the Tree becomes so thick and oleagenous in the Winter,
that the motion thereof to the outward, is scarce discernable (though the
preparation of the Gemmes, both for leaves and flowers, are observed by the
curious, and can be distinguished, even in the coldest seasons) and the returns
inward are in so small quantities, that they are rather like vapors, than
liquid juice. Indeed, some Trees, when their root-branches are cut (even in
Winter) will yield no small quantity of an acid liquor, which by addition of
the recent Leffas from the earth, smells evidently of the Matrix, from which it
did proceed. Moreover, the passages especially from the branches to the Trunk,
are so straightened and contracted, that the bark cleaves to the Timber, as every
Wood-man knows. But so soon as the warm Spring has attenuated the ever-flowing
juice in the whole Tree, then does it become turgid, and more aqueous over all:
the passages, and channels both in the trunk, and among the tunicles, and
particular skins, are so palpably filled with this vital juice, that having
no sufficient place to be comprehended in, it puts forth new growths both in
the top, and in the root, which may be easily seen to have more pitch than
wood, and to be sealed on the extremity, with the vestiges of a future Gemm;
that by the former, they may the more freely receive the vital influences from
within, and by the latter, may be secured from the depredation of the external
Air.

To prove the motion ad extra, or to the extremities of the branches; take the
branch of any ordinary Tree, about the bigness of a man's wrist; make it bare
near the body of the Tree of all bark, and subjacent tunicles (for every Tree
according to its kind, has more or fewer skins, which serve for Veins, within
the strong outmost Cortex) at least for the breadth of a span, or two
hand-breadth. Then tie up the place, so excorticated with a compost, made of
horse-dung mixed with earth; let it stand so from May, till November. Then cut
off the branch, a little above the Compost, near the body of the Tree, and you
shall find it living and fresh, like the rest of the branches: yea, small roots
shall evidently appear to have come forth under the Compost near the bark, but
not under the bared place. This branch in many kind of Trees being planted,
will hold, though not in all. I say then, seeing the foresaid bough is nourished
from May till November, it is necessary, that it receive nutriment from the
body of the Tree, by the internal porosities thereof: for the bark being
discontinued by excortication, can send nothing upward toward the top of the
bough; and if it received nothing from the root, it would wither in a few
days. Yea, leave the discovered part naked, but for a few days, and of
necessity the branch dies, the aliment thereof being exhausted by the Air,
before it can reach the extremities of the bough.

That the Vital Balsome of the Tree returns from the extremities by the
internal bark, and inward superfice of the external, together with the smooth
outward part of the t^unck, although the necessity of both timber and bark in
all Incisions, and Inoculations, might persuade the judicious, and the visible
course of the juice of the Sycamor in February, and of the Birch in March, upon
the cutting of any small branch, might convince any curious beholder; yet the
knot or callus, that is made upon grafted Trees, will better inform the
ignorant: for this knot being always upon the shoulder, or root of the Graff,
and never upon the top of the Stock, does evince clearly, that it is made by
restagnation, of the descending, and not of the ascending juice: otherwise, why
does it not swell the top of the Stock, as well as the root of the Graff? Or
why does it not extuberat in any other place of the Graff? These are accidental
varices, which can hardly be shunned in Imping, seeing the top of the Stock
(except when it is very young and succulent) does not receive so kindly, as it
ought, the retrograd sap, although all that is sent out to the Graff must
ascend through the pores of the Stock. Hence many times a considerable part of
the Stock is mortified, because although abundance of aliment ascends to the
head or top thereof, yet no more of it goes to the branches, but what is
bestowed upon the Graff, a great part of the rest being exhaled by the Air
(especially in big Stocks) and consequently, the place defrauded of its
nourishment: no other ways than when the motion of the vital sap fails,
either in the whole, or in part, a total decay or particular mortification of
some part necessarily follows, as in the Stemms of annual Plants, and mortified
tops of the Ectrapelous branches (that I may so call them) of Willows, Plumbs,
etc. we may observe every Autumn.

OBSERVATION XXIV.
Sir,
I Was not a little surprised, at the receipt of yours, when I had considered
your desire in it, being pressed with two difficulties, which seemed equally hard
to evite. The one, to give you my judgment in a matter wherein I have been so
little conversant my self, and have had the steps of no other to follow, never
one having hitherto touched that subject in writting; I mean of Coals, and
other Minerals of that nature, their Course, and other things relating
thereunto; the observation whereof (I grant) wants not its own pleasure, and
usefulness. The other, to refuse the desire of a friend, when importuned, to
whom I owe my self, by many obligations. This last having prevailed, has
determined me to assay the overcoming of the first. And though I am confident,
what account I can give you, shall give but very little satisfaction: yet I
adventure to offer it, such as it is, very freely in the following discourse,
wherein you are not to expect, that I will meddle with some questions,
thereanent, which might be more curious, and pleasant, then profitable, or
satisfying, such as, if Coal, and Freestone, which keep one course, and have
the same accidental qualities, have been created in the beginning, in their
perfection, as we now find them, and since that time only preserved, as they
were created for the use of men, to whom all sublunary things were made
subfervient? Or, if they have been but produced gradually, as they speak of
Gold, and other Minerals, by the influence of the Sun, in the bowels of the
Earth? And if their production be of that nature, out of what matter they are
formed? These things being above my reach, I shall leave their inquiry, to
those that are knowing in the secrets of Nature, and shall therefore give you a
narration, of what either I have observed of these things, which occurr in the
Winning of Coal in my own experience, or by conversing with others of more
experience than my self, in doing whereof, I shall follow this Method.

First, I shall speak of these things that are common to all Coal, wherein they
all agree, and which are, as it were, essential to all, and of there
differences, which are but accidental, and gradual sometimes, and yet are
abundantly conspicuous, and causes different effects in the working; as their
Dipps and Rise, and Streek, for so are they termed.

Secondly, of some things, which are but accidental to Coal, and yet so
ordinary, that scarcely any is found without them, in lesser or greater
degrees; such are Gae's, and Dykes, that alter the natural Course of the
Metalls, very incident to every Coal, though in some less frequent, conform to
the nature and kind of the ground, where the Coal is.

Thirdly, I shall speak something of Damps, and of their different causes, and
effects: of Wildfire, and other such like things, which are met with in the
working of Coal.

And lastly, of the best way for trying grounds to find Coal, where never any
has been hitherto discovered: of carrying on of Levels, for draining the water
of Coal and making it workable.

It is to be considered, that all Freestone, though of different natures, has
the same course, with the Coal, that ly either above them, or below them,
except it be accidentally, interrupted: therefore, whatsoever is spoken of the
one, is applicable to the other. And so we find in Digging or Sinking, that
after the Clay is past, which keeps no course, all Metals, as Stone, and Tilles
(which are Seems of black Stone, and participat much of the nature of Coal) ly
one above another, and keep a regular Course; wherein the three things most
remarkable are their Dipp, and Rise, and their Streek, as it is termed.

The Dipp, and Rise, are nothing but a declining of the whole body of the
Metalls. And this general holds, that all of them from their Center rises, till
they be at the very surface of the Earth; some only at a foot or two foot, some
at an else distance from the surface, which is here termed a Cropping: and
whether Coal or Stone, the nearer they come to the surface, the softer they
become, till at last they are converted, if it be a Stone, to a very Sand, and
if Coal, to a Dross, which will not burn.

This d^clining or Dipping, of the Coal, is sometimes greater, and sensible,
sometimes lesser, and almost insensible. There being some, that if you consider
the declination, it will not be found one foot in ten; some one foot in twenty,
or one in thirty. Whereas in others it will be one foot in three, or one in
five. And sometimes it has its Course from the Center of the Earth, almost in
a perpendicular to the surface, it cutting it, near to a right Angle. The first
sort, they term Flate-broad-coal, in regard of the plainness, and evenness of
its Course. The next, they call Hinging-coal. The last is called Edge-Coal. The
first is the most profitable, in regard, that it is long before the Coal-hewers
can reach the Cropp, and consequently the more of it is workable. The second
and third sort, are sometimes of their own nature, more firm, and fitter for
burning, but less of them can be reached in working. The Course of all the
three is most perceptible in the three following Schematisms.

Figure 1.


In all the three Figures, the point B is the Cropp of the Coal. The Line B C
is the body of the Coal declining or the Dipp from the Cropp. A C is the
perpendicular, falling from the Horizontal Line, whereby the true declination
or Dipp of the Coal is found. So that after you have found your Coal at B, you
must set down your Sink at the point A. In the Flat-broad-Coal, which we
suppose only to decline, three fathoms in sixty; the Sink, that answers to the
perpendicular A C, will be of deepness three fathoms. If the distance B A, be
supposed to be 120 fathoms along the Grass, or surface, then will the
deepness of the Sink be six fathom, and so forth. In the second, if the Coal be
supposed to decline one fathom in three, the Sink A C, being set down at the
same distance from the Cropp B, with the former, it will prove thirty fathom
deep. If the said distance be doubled, it becomes sixty fathom deep, and so
forth. In the third, keeping that same distance along the surface, you shall
not encounter the Coal with a Perpendicular Sink, because of its great
declination, and therefore through want of Air, and other difficulties, you
cannot dig so deep, as is necessary to that effect, except the Sink should be
made to decline, as does the Line A D. All these Dipps are to be seen in
several places of Lothian. The first is most conspicuous in the Earl of Wintons
ground at Tranent, where the Coal, and other Metals are extraordinary flat and
even. The second is within the said Lordship of Tranent, in a piece of ground,
called Wester-Fauside. The third in Lonhead of Laswaid, which pertains to Sir
John Nicolson of Nicolson: and in many other places, one may see very different
declinations, who is curious to observe them.

From this general position of the Dipp, and Cropp of all free Metals, there is
one consequent, which is no uncouth Observation, namely that these Metals
rising from their Dipp to a Cropp, every one of them rises in their proper
course, if none of these things whereof we shall treat hereafter interveen, and
make an alteration, that is the Coal or Stone, which is lowest, comes farrest
out in its Cropping, which is easily understood by the subsequent Schematism.

Figure 4.


Wherein the Line A M represents the surface of the Earth. C D. E F. G H. I K.
L M, are so many several Metals, lying in course one above another. Suppose C D
were a Stone, and the Roof of the Coal E F (for so they term the Stone,
immediately next above the Coal) and G H, I K, were other two Stones,
interveening between the Coals E F, and L M, then if the Cropp of the uppermost
Coal be found at F, the Crop of the Stone above it, must be found back, at the
point D, and the Cropp of the Coal under it, which is L M, must be found at M.
And this distance of Cropp is proportioned by the length of the perpendicular
between them, and the quantity of their declination. For, the more even and
flat a Coal is in its course, and other Metals, above and below, the farther
does the Cropp of the lowest Coal advance before the Cropp of the uppermost.
For illustration whereof, let us suppose in two several grounds, two Coals,
between which, there is an equal distance of perpendicular. And suppose the
Metals in the one ground to decline at 13 to 24, the other at 13 to 16, then
will the distance between the Cropps in the two grounds be very considerable,
as may be represented by the two following Figures.

Figure 5.


Suppose then, that D I, is of equal length in both Triangles, which is the
perpendicular, between the two Coals: yet D F in the fifth Figure, is much
longer than D F in the 6. And the reason is evident, because the Angle D I F,
in the 5, is greater then the Angle D I F in the 6: and therefore the Base D F,
which is subtended by the greater Angle in the 5, must be greater then the Base
D F, which is subtended by the lesser Angle in the 6, which Euclide proves in
his 24 Proposition of his first Book, and is demonstrat by Proclus in the
Scholium to the 4th Proposition of the same Book.

By this is made to appear the profitableness of a Flat-Coal, beyond a
Hinging-Coal, which was touched before, in regard that having the Sinks of
equal deepness in both, there is much more of the Flater-Coal to be wrought,
before it Cropp out, then of the Hinging, as there is a difference between the
Lines D F in the first and second Figure, or between the Lines I F, in the same.

If it be enquired, if in rising grounds, where there is a considerable ascent
above ground, the Coal keeps a proportion in its Rising and Dipping with the
ascent and descent of the ground above? I answer, there is no certain and
constant proportion kept, whatever sometimes may happen. For I have observed
some Coals upon grounds of a considerable ascent, and their Dipp run quite
contrary to the descent of the Hill: and others have had a quite contrary
course to that, and have declined, or dipped with the declination of the ground
above. But in the Streek (whereof I shall speak a little hereafter) there is
more proportion ordinarily to be remarked.

There remains only one Question about the Dipps, and Risings of Coals, which I
shall a little consider, having encountered different judgments anent it, in
conversing with persons, who had experience in Coal, viz. whether Coal and
other Metals, after they have declined such a length from their Cropp, suppose
from West to East, take another course, and rise to the same point, to which
formerly they dipped?

Figure 7.


As if the Coal dipped from A, which is the Cropp, to B, which should be the
Center of that Body; and after that rise to C? Or if it should continue its
declination through B to D, which is Antipodes to us? I shall not offer to
determine in a matter wherein there can be so little certainty attained, but
shall give my opinion, which is founded upon the experience I have had, and
Observations I have had occasion to make on that Head. And first, I find in all
these Coals, wherein no contrary Cropp or Rising could be visible, there are
invincible obstructions; as either, they have been near the Sea, and have
dipped that way; and so if they took any contrary course, the cropping behoved
to be in the deeps, and so no access to trace them. Or next, they have dipped
toward the foot of a Mountain, and so the ground above rising the same way
which they declined; their course could not be pursued, till a contrary rising
should be discerned. Or thirdly, they have encountered some Gae, or Dyke, which
has cut them off, before they came to their full dipp, and thus their course
was obstructed. Now, those that have been acquainted with no other Coals but
such, I think it not strange, if it be hard to persuade them of those things
they have not seen. But besides all those kinds, I have seen others, whose
contrary rising and dipping have either been visible to the eye, or
demonstrable by reason. For example, I have entered under ground, as it were at
the point C, at the very Grass-cropp, and have gone following the dipp of that
Coal to the point B, at which the course has altered, and carried me out at
the Grass at A, which are two contrary points of the Compass. And that
alteration of course was not occasioned by any Gae, or trouble, which sometimes
have that effect, the ground being very clean, and good Metals, keeping their
course most regularly.

There are other instances for confirming my experience, in fields, which are
so large, that it is impossible to work the Coal so far to the Dipp, it falling
deep, and so wants Level for conveying water from it, or wants Air, for
following it to such a deepness, as to overtake its Center, where it takes a
contrary course, and yet the contrary Cropp has been wrought in several
places, which is evident to be a part of the same body, with the other, both by
the nature of the Coal it self, by the Metals lying above it, and the Coals
below it, all which keeping the same Course, except when they encounter
troubles, which are incident to some parcels of ground, more than to others.
The greatest field I know wherein this is conspicuous, is in Mid-lothian where
is to be found, the cropping of a Coal of a considerable thickness, which is
termed their great-seam, or Main-coal, and the other Coals lying below it,
which may be traced in the order following. At Preston-Grange these Coals are
found dipping to the N W, and rising to the S E, which have been wrought up to
Wallifoo^d: from that along by the foot of Fa^side Hill, the dipp lying in the
Lands of Inneresk, which marches therewith on the North. From thence it runs
through the ground of Carberry, every one of these grounds from Preston-Grange,
Giving Level to another. From thence, through a part of the Lands of Smeaton,
and next through a piece of ground belonging to the Family of Buccleugh, called
Coudon: and through West-houses, which belongs to the Earl of Lothian, and at
Cockpen, and Stobhill, from thence runs through to Carington-Mill; all which is
a course, which in Streek lies near to S W, and N W, and will be in length
about eight miles. From thence, the course of the Coal turns, and is found in
the Barony of Carington, White-hill Ramsay, Gilmerton, and from thence taking
its Dipp, quite contrary to what it had before, the other Dipping N and N W, or
N E, according to the turn of the Streek, it Dipps there S, S E, etc. and from
Gilmerton, it is found at Burntstone, a piece of ground belonging to the Earl
of Lauderdale: and from thence at the Magdalen Pans, where the turn of the
cropp being within the Sea, is not seen, till it be found at Preston-Grange,
where we began to remark its course. The parcel of ground, under which this
great body of Coal lies, is of a considerable extent, it being eight miles in
length, and five or six in breadth; in regard whereof many other Coals are
found lying above the great Coal, the cropps whereof does not come near the
Cropp of it, by a considerable distance.

Though this instance alone, may sufficiently convince, yet I shall not be
unwilling to give another. The parcel of ground, in which this Coal is found,
is not of so great an extent, as the other, and therefore its course may be the
more easily traced. For the greatest part, it belongs to the Earl of Winton,
and lies within the Lordship of Tranent, whose contrary Cropps, are most
conspicuous. This great Coal, which is 10, or 12 foot thick (beginning at the
head of the Town of Tranent) where it has been wrought, runs S W toward the
march of the Lands of Elphingston, belonging to the Lord Register, and
continues in that same course, till it come near to the house, and for the most
part dipping to the S E. And near the house, the Cropp is turned downward
toward the march between Elphingston and Ormiston, where the dipp is contrary
to the former. And from Elphingston-mains, it takes its course almost round,
through the Lands of Panston, and returns to the Town of Tranent where it
began, which body of Coal will be in length two miles, and in some places, as
much in breadth. Now, I leave it to the judgment of any person, if there be
not more reason to persuade, that this should be the natural course of these
Minerals, where such pregnable instances, to evince it, are found; then to
conclude the contrary from these Coals, the course whereof cannot be followed,
because of the invincible impediments, I mentioned before. However, I leave
every one to be determined, by his own opinion, and shall be satisfied to enjoy
my own, till these of more experience convince me of the contrary.

There are some other things farther to be remarked about the Dipp, and Rise of
Coals, which (possibly) every one has not seen, they being so very rare, and
therefore are not fit here to be passed without being considered. One is, of a
Coal, which having that contrary Dipp and Rise, (whereof I have been speaking)
in one of the cropps, has not come out to the Grass, and terminat; but after
it has risen a considerable way in its contrary course, in stead of Cropping
out, has taken a Dipp toward the same point, to which it dipped first, and so
having dipped to the Center of its course, it has risen again, and cropped to
the contrary point, as is to be seen in this eight Figure.

Figure 8.


Where A B is the surface of the Earth. The point B is the Cropp of a Coal
dipping from N W, to the S E. From C it takes its rise, and course to a
contrary Cropp, toward the point F, where the dead Cropp ought to be found.
But in stead of going that length, it takes another course from the point E,
dipping S E toward D, from which it takes its rise, and continues it to the
point A, where it terminats, and where the dead Cropp is found. I grant, that
it meets with a trouble, or Gae, at the point E, which seems to be the cause,
why its natural course is changed. But its very extraordinary to see such an
effect. But of this afterward, in its own place.

There is yet another thing to be remarked, in the dipps, and risings of Coals,
which is this. In the most part of Coals, that have their course from dipp to
cropp, without the intervention of a dyke or gae, the declination is straight
down, from the horizontal line drawn from the point of the cropp, to the
fardest point of the dipp. That is, the Coal declining from that point in a
right line, makes with the horizontal line, a right lined angle, angulus
rectilineus, though in some the angle is more acute, and in others less, as is
to be seen in the first, and second figures, where A B being the horizontal
Line, and B the cropp, B C is the body of the Coal declining, which meeting
with A B in the point B, constitutes a right lined angle, and where A B C in
the second figure, is a greater angle, then A B C in the first. Yet I have seen
a Coal, the body whereof from the dipp, or fardest point of declination, had
its rise toward the cropp very insensibly, it being Flatt, and then began to
be more sensible, till at last coming near to the surface of the Earth, it
takes in a sudden such a rise, that from declining one foot of 12 or 14, it
declines now one foot of three, as may be made evident from this following
Figure.

Figure 9.


Where A B is the Line drawn from the extreme points of the Cropp, right
horizontal. The body of the Coal rising insensibly, is D C. But as soon as it
comes to C, it rises with a great ascent till it Cropp out at A. Here you see,
that in stead of one side of a Triangle, which the course of other Coals in
their rising, or in their declination makes; this Coal in rising makes two
sides, namely D C, and C A, the Figure D B C A being quadrilateral. The Coal of
this course was really wrought, and is yet visible in its waste, where there is
found no Gae or Dyke to make this alteration.

These are the chief things that I have thought worthy of Observation in the
Dipps, and Risings of Coals, and therefore I come now to touch a little the
other part of their course, which is commonly termed the Streek of a Coal. To
make intelligible to those, who are not experimentally acquainted with Coal,
this term, or what the Streek is, we must lay this foundation, that the Coal is
a Physical Body, and so has its three principal dimensions, which do
constitute it so, viz, Longitude, Latitude, and ^rofundity. 'Its Latitude, is
that part contained between its extreme lines, which is measurable by its
surface, to which its dipping and rising, though always incident, yet is but
accidental. Its Profundity is to be measured by the distance, between the two
surfaces, immediately next to it, above and below: which are termed in Coallery
its Roof and Pavement, because of the resemblance they have to the Roof, and
Pavement of a house. The Longitude is nothing else but what is termed by the
Coal-hewers, the Streek. For if you imagine a Line drawn along the extreme
points of the Rise, or Cropp of the Coal, that is properly the Streek of the
Coal.

There are but few things to be remarked, as to this part of Coal: only first
to find how it lies, to what points of the Compass it moves. For knowing
whereof, there is this general Rule, that, having found your Dipp and Rise, to
what ever Points that Course is directed, the Streek is to the quite contrary.
For supposing a Coal Dipp S E, the two points, that respect the Dipp and Rise,
must be S E, and N W, being the points opposite one to another. Then it must
needs follow, that the Streek must run S W, and N E, which two courses divides
the Compass, at right Angles. And therefore, where a Coal is found to have
contrary Dipps, and Risings, they declining sometimes to all the Points of the
Compass (whereof there has been given two notable instances before) it must
needs follow, that there be also contrary Streeks, and so the Streek of a Body
of Coal is sometimes found to describe a round figure, though not perfectly
circular, and sometimes a multangular figure. For it cannot be supposed that the
Streek makes always a right Line, between the two points, from which it is
reckoned. For example, between the Lord of Preston-grange his house at
Preston-pans, and the Stob-hill, there are the Streeks of several Coals, lying
one above another, which will be of length, about seven or eight miles, lying
near upon S W, and N E; yet the Cropps of the said Coals (their dipp, and rise,
being N W, and S E) are sometimes farther advanced toward the S E, sometimes
farther back toward the N W, by the difference of a mile, and this generally
occasioned by the encounter of a Dyke or Gae, whereof hereafter.

The same question, that occurred in the Coals dipping toward a Hill, or
rising above ground, comes to be inquired into here; viz. If a Coal
encountering an ascent, or Brae above ground in its Streek, rises also with the
ground, and keeps its ascent? I answer, I have found it so in all the Coals I
have ever seen of that nature. GOD in his providence, having so ordered it,
that thereby it may be the more useful, in regard more thereof may be wrought
by one Level or Aquaeduct, by which the Water is conveyed away, as afterward
will be observed in speaking to Levels. For confirmation whereof, I shall bring
instances both of Coals, that declines toward the Hill, and of others that
declines with the same dipp, the Hill has it self. In the Coals of B^nhard,
Grange, Kinglassy, and Kinneil, which keep all one general course, the ascent
above ground is from the Sea, (which lies North) toward the South, or
thereabout; the Coal dipps or declines toward the N W, and so consequently
rises to the S E. The Streek of these Coals, is from the N E to S W, which
slops alongs the Hill, and comes up to the top thereof to the Westward of the
House of B^nhard. Now, in sinking in that ground, if an equal proportion be
kept, in all the Sinks from the Cropp, and a just allowance given for the
different Rising above ground, the Sinks will be near of an equal deepness
along all the Streek. So that a Sink upon the same Coal near to the Sea, which
is the N E point of the Streek, at equal distance from the Cropp, will be as
deep as a Sink upon the top of the Hill, being the S W point of the Streek at
the same distance from the Cropp, allowing always the different rise above
ground, and excepting some particular troubles falling in upon the Metals of
one Sink, and not of another, and so making them dipp more, which will occasion
a difference of the deepness. The same is also found in the Coals of Dysart,
and Weems. As also in that great body of Coal before mentioned, between
Preston-grange and Stobhill, the declination whereof is to the N E, which is
also the course of the descent above ground.

Another instance is from the Coals within the Lordship of Tranent, the dipp
whereof is of another course, being contrary to the descent of the Hill, viz.
the Coal dipping to the S E, and consequently the Streek running S W, and N E,
where the same is to be observed that was seen in the other, anent the equality
of the deepness of Sinks along the Streek, with the same allowances, and
exceptions before mentioned.

Some have been of opinion that Streeks of Coals ly generally South and North,
or to some of the points near to these two Cardinal ones, between South and S
W, and North and N E, as South and by West, and North and by East, etc. To
which general I cannot agree, in regard of what I have before made evidently
appear, viz. that some Coals have their croppings toward all the points of the
Compass, and the Streeks being regulated by the Cropps, they must necessarily
be judged to have their courses proportioned to theirs: so that if a Coal dipp
to the true North, and rise to the South, the Streek must be East, and West.
However, I acknowledge two things, for confirming that opinion.

First, that of all the Coals I ever have seen, where these contrary dipps and
risings, could not be traced, and made visible, the Sreek has inclined to
those points of South and North. But I must also confess, that they are but few
I have seen, in respect of what I have not seen, and so if any others
experience, who have seen more, contradict mine, I shall willingly yield, and
not be tenacious.

Next, in these Coals, which I instanced, that have their Cropp to all the
Points, and consequently their Streeks, and in others of the same nature, which
I have seen, and not instanced, I found that part of the Streek, which lies
toward these Cardinal points, to be the greatest, being double, or triple to
the other Sreeks in length. So that when the Streek, that lies either along the
one Cropp, or the other, toward the S W, and N E, will be seven miles in
length, that lying S E, and N W, will be but four, and sometimes less. And this
is all the account I can give, of that part of Coal, called the Streek.

The second thing I promised to speak of, was of some things, which are but
accidental to Coals, and yet so ordinary, that hardly are any found without
them in lesser, or greater degree, such are Gae's, and Dykes, which alters
their natural course, and they being the occasion of so much Trouble, in the
working of Coal, and following its course, the Coal-hewers call them ordinarily
by^that name Trouble. This Trouble or Gae then, is a Body of Metal-falling in
upon the course of the Coal, or Freestone, obstructing, or altering their
kindly and natural course, keeping no regular course it self, and being of
nature always different from the Metal, whose course it interrupts. And these
Gae's differ also among themselves, in their nature, and in their course they
keep: or more properly in the way wherein they encounter other Metalls, and in
their effects. In their nature, for some of them con^ists of an impregnable
Whin-Rock, or Flinty-Stone, through which it is almost impossible to work: and
if there be a necessity to cut them through, it is done at a vast expense, and
takes a long time, and must be cut open to the surface of the earth, it being
impossible to Mine it under ground. Some of them are again of Stone, like a
Freestone, but seems rather an abortive of nature, they having no rule in
their course, by which a man can follow them, nor can their stone be useful.

In their encountering of Coals, or Freestone, sometimes they encounter them
in the Dip, and sometimes in the Streek, and sometimes between the two. These
that are met with in following the Dipp of the Coal, ly along the Streek
thereof. For example, if the Coal Dipp S E, the Gae lies N E, and S W. These
that are encountered in the Streek, lies to the Dipp and Rise: so the Coal
Streeking N E, and S W, the Gae is found to ly S E, and N W. Others of them,
lies between Streek and Dipp, that is to some point between the two: as the
Streek being S W, and N E, and the Dipp and Rise S E, and N W, there may be a
Gae found lying W S W, and E N E. Now, when I speak of a Gae's lying to such
Points of the Compass, this does not contradict what was said before, that they
had no regular course themselves. My meaning being, that though they have a
certain length, lying between two points, and a thickness between two Metalls,
yet by the Metal of the Gae it self, it is impossible to know its course, as it
is in other Metalls of Coal or Freestone, whose courses are discernable at the
first view.

Their effects are different, as their nature and course are different: only
they agree in these two generals. First, that all of them renders that part of
the Coal, that comes nearest to them, unprofitable and useless, though some
less, and some more, they being unfit for burning. And it is remarked, that
these Gaes that consists of Whin-rock, renders the Coal next to it, as if it
were already burnt, being so dried, that it moulders in handling it. In others,
the Coal is not altogether so ill, and yet its nature is altered, from what it
is at a distance from the Gae. The next general is, that all of them alters the
natural course of the Coal in less or more, some of them making it Dipp much
more then its ordinary course, which they call Down-gaes: Some again making
their rise much more than their course, which they call Up-gaes. Others making
an alteration as to the Streek, causing it go out beyond its ordinary bounds,
as we observed before in that great Streek of Coal between Preston-Grange and
Stobhill.

Now it is to be considered, that when in working of a Coal, whether to the
Dipp, or Rise, or Streek, one of these Gaes is encountered with, the Coal is
quite cut off, and as it were terminat: so that you see nothing where the Coal
should be, but either a Stone, or Clay, or rotten Till, or some such thing. And
the practique of Coallery is to trace the course of the Coal through that, till
you overtake it in the other side. And before any thing be said to that part,
you must notice, that some Gaes are of greater force than others, and their
influence upon the course of other Metalls greater, whence you shall see a
threefold effect. One is, that by some great Gaes, which a Coal meets with
(...) is quite cut off, so that in the other side thereof, there (...) not a
vestige of that Coal, or of any other Metal that wa^ above it, or below it, to
be seen. And if there be any other Coal, as sometimes there are, they are quite
different from them of the other side. I said by some, because there is one
instance to the contrary, which is somewhat singular. In the Earl of Winton's
ground at Cockeny, there is found a course of Coals and Freestone, dipping to
the S E in the Links; and upon the full-sea-mark, there is a tract or course of
Whin-rocks lying E and W, underneath which these Coals and Stones comes through
without alteration of course, and are found I within the Sea-mark, with the
same Dipp and Rise upon the North side, they had upon the South side of the
said Rocks: and yet the Coal is encountered upon the South hand by a Gae under
ground, through which it passes, not without a considerable alteration.

The greatest of these Gaes, that I know, is that which takes its beginning,
that we see on Land, at the Harbor of the Pans, called Achisons-Haven, which
has been cut by Preston-Grange, for Level to his Coal, and goes from that to
Seton, which may be traced above ground, almost the whole way; and has been
cut at Seton; for serving the Level of that Coal now wrought at Tranent. From
thence it passes through the fields of Long-Niddry, a place pertaining to the
Earl of Winton, and through the Coats, which pertains to the Earl of Hadington,
till it join with Pancreck-hills, a tract of Rocky Mountains, from whence it is
traceable to Linton-bridges, where it is visible in the Water, the Water of Tyn
falling over it, and making a Lin, which they call Linton-Lin; from thence to
the East-sea. And it is known by Seamen, that it keeps a course through the
Firth from Achisons-haven, (whence we reckoned its beginning upon Land) toward
the West and N W, it being found to the Southward of Inch-keith, and before
Leith, where stands a Beacon, and so can be traced to the North Shore.

The second effect of Gaes, is to cut off the Coal quite, as to a part of the
field, so that in the other side, having pierced the Gae, you shall not find
the Coal, and possibly not within a quarter of a mile of the Gae, which cuts it
off, and at that place shall only find the Cropp and the Body Dipping, as it
did before it was cut off; and if you shall measure between that side of the
Gae, where you lost your Coal (I suppose the Coal then being 24 fathom from the
Grass) to the place where the Coal in the other side of the Gae shall be found
at the same deepness, it will be near 500 paces. For making this more
intelligible, let us suppose a Coal Dipping S E, and in working to the Dipp,
there is a Gae encountered with (This was really done in a piece of ground I
know, and so it is no mere supposition) at which Gae the Coal is cut off; for
finding whereof the Gae is pierced, and nothing found in the other side, viz.
in the S E side of the Gae, but at more than 100 paees distant, the Crop of a
Coal, which lies under the Coal, that was lost, was found, after which it was
easy to find the other. Now, that it was the same Coal, that was lost, upon
the North side of the Gae, is not only evident, by the kind of Coal, and all
the Metals above, and below keeping the same course, but by this, that the Gae
wearing out toward the West, the two parts of the Coal that was separated by
it, joins themselves again, and continues in one body, as they were before
separation.

The last effect of the Gae is, that it does not quite cut off the Coal from
the other side of it, but makes an alteration in the course, either in the
Dipp, or in the Rise, or Streek, as was before noted: so that in meeting with
one of these Gaes, having considered its nature, and pierced it, the Coal will
be found in the other side, immediately touching the Gae, but with an alteration
of course. Now, in these two last effects, since the Coal is not totally cut
off, it will be worth the inquiry, to find the surest way of recovering the
Coal after it is lost. Therefore, where the Coal is not cut off, by a
considerable distance, and having pierced the Gae, it is not to be found in the
other side, you are to consider well the nature of the Metals you find approach
to the Gae, and if they be such, whether Stone, or Coal, as you know to ly
under the Coal that you have lost, then you may be sure the Coal is to be found
above in its course, which is to be traced by the Dipp of the Metals you find.
As sometimes I have seen, when a Coal has been cut off by a Gae, happly there
is another Coal under it 12 fathom, after the Gae has been pierced, and the
lost Coal not coming near to it in the other side, that has been found there,
by which it was certainly concluded, that the uppermost Coal behoved to be
there also, though a little back, conform to its course. But, if the Metals or
Coals, under the lost Coal, has not been known, then you are to take notice of
the Dipp and Rise of these Metals, you find on the other side of the Gae, which
you have pierced, and making that your rule, range back over the Metals,
conform to the direction to be given afterward, and you shall find the Cropp
of the Coal you want, and after which you were inquiring.

Where the Coal is not quite cut off by the Gae, but has its course only
altered, you are to consider, in searching for it, before you pierce your Gae,
that which the Coal-hewers term the Vise, or some of them the Weyse of the Gae,
which in effect is nothing else, but a dark vestige of the Dipp or Rise, that
the body which now constitutes the Gae, should have had naturally, if it had
been perfected; which when it tends downward, then must the Gae be put over
that way, and in the other side shall the Coal be found, and Down, as they term
it; that is, the Dipp which it had naturally, augmented. And, if the Vise be
Up, the same way must be taken for piercing the Gae, and the Coal will be found
Up, that is, its Rise augmented. But these things cannot be made so
intelligible, as by seeing, there being many things in the alteration of the
course of Metals very curious, and worthy of Observation: as when a Coal is
cast down out of its natural course by a Gae, and so made sometimes
under-Level, it rises as much to another hand, and the Cropps go so much
farther out, which still makes the Level useful, the use whereof would have been
judged lost by the down-casting. Sometimes a Coal made to have four contrary
courses, as is evident from the eighth Figure, where there being a Gae at E,
makes it take such another course, in stead of coming out to the grass.
Sometimes, before the Metals overtake the Gae, they are made to ly like a Bow;
one instance whereof is visible above ground in some Metals lying between
Bruntiland and Kinghorn, at a place called the Miln-stone, where there is a
small Coal with Freestone above it, all Dipping to the S E, and Rising to the
N W. Upon the Rise they meet with a gae, which is a great Whin-rock. In their
course to the grass, before they touch the said Rock, they take a contrary
course, and dipps into it, and are there quite cut off. The manner whereof is
to be seen in this tenth Figure following.

Figure 10.


Where A B is the Rock: E F the Coal: C D the Freestone. Now, whereas they
should have risen toward A, they turn at D, and dipps into the Rock, which any
may observe in passing that way. Many other such motions are observable, which
I pass, and leaves them to the observation of the curious.

The third thing I promised to speak of, was of Damps, and as they are termed
by the Coal-hewers, Ill Air. These do deserve a more accurat inquiry into their
kinds, their causes, and effects; then I am capable to make, there being many
things in them very considerable, and worthy of a narrow search: therefore
following the course I have hitherto observed, I shall show my own Observations
thereof, and leave the more curious search to the spirits fitted for that
purpose.

This Damp then makes an obstruction of respiration in Men, or other living
Creatures, in Subterraneous spaces, as Caves, Coal-rooms, Levels, Sinks, and
such like; which obstruction proceeds principally from two causes, both which
goes under the name of Ill Air, among the vulgar. The first is the corruption,
or putrefaction of the Air, whereof there are two sorts; one is in places where
has been fire kindled, which burns the Coal under ground, the smoke whereof,
being full of Sulphur, and other Bituminous matter, and not having free passage
to come above ground, fills all the waste Rooms under ground, and infects the
Air so, that the smell of it, even at a distance, is intolerable, and amongst
it no living Creature is able to breath. Of this there are examples in Dysert
in Fife, and Fauside in East^Lothian. This was kindled on design by a Fellow,
who for his pains was hanged in the place, and has burnt these 50 years, and
more, the fire whereof is sometimes seen near the grass, with abundance of
smoke, as it runs from one place to another. The second, where the Air is
corrupted without the mixture of smoke, or any other gross corrupting body,
which is the most considerable of all Damps, and has the strangest effects, in
killing Animals in an instant, and so has been always most prejudicial in the
works, where it is found, many persons having thereby lost their lives, without
access to cry but once Gods mercy, to some instances whereof I have been
witness. I shall not offer to determine about the cause of this Damp, but shall
give an account of somethings I have observed about it, which when duly
pondered, may happily lay a foundation, at least of a probable conjecture, whence
it may proceed.

This kind of Damp then, and Ill Air, is never found in Coal, or other Metals,
where there is Water to be found; I mean, whence the Water has not been drawn
away by a Level, or Aquae-duct: as in Coals, where there is a necessity to lave
the Water from place to place, or to pump it along the ascent or rise of the
Coal, to the bottom of the Sink, from which it is drawn out above ground, this
Ill ^ir is not ^ound. Nor is found frequently, if at all, in these Coals where
the Water is drawn from the Coal by a Level, or Aquae-duct under ground, till
it come of its own accord to the bottom of a Sink, which is in place of a
Cistern, out of which it is forced also above ground, and differs only from the
other, that the Water runs here of its own accord by a descent to the Sink,
which is termed a drawing Sink: in the other it must be forced by the Rise of
the Coal, because happly, a Sink upon the Dipp would be of such a deepness,
that no force could draw it up in a perpendicular.

But this kind of Damp is found ordinarily in these Coals from which the Water
is drawn by a Level, the beginning or mouth whereof is above ground, and
carried along by a right Line under ground, till it overtake the Coal, which it
is to dry: so that the Water which comes from the Coal, runs without being
forced, and is sometimes so considerable, that it makes Mills go, without any
other addition, as is to be seen in the Earl of Wintons Lands of Seton, where
four Mills goes with the Water that comes from under ground, out of the Coal;
which kind of Levels are only found where the Coal lies in a Field, which has
a considerable Rise, or ascent above ground; there being a necessity to make
use of the other two ways spoken of, for drying the Coal, when the Field in
which it lies is a Plain.

Further, of these Coals, which are dried by the Free-level (for so they term
the Level that runs unforced) there are some to which this kind of Damp is more
incident, than to others. The cause of which difference is found to be, the
solidity and clossness of the Metals, whether of Coal or Stone, wherein some
exceeds another. There being some, that are full of rifts, or empty spaces (I
mean empty of any part of the same body where they are) which will sometimes
serve, to convey a considerable quantity of Water in place of an aquae-duct or
level; which spaces are termed by the vulgar, Cutters, which sometime^ proves
very profitable in the ground where they are found, both in regard of the use
they serve for, in stead of Level, and for rendering the Metals wherein they are
found, more easy to work, in making them yield easily to the force of the
wedge and leaver. Other Metals there are, wherein few of these Cutters are to
be found, and if water be to be conveyed through them, there is a necessity of
cutting a passage through them for that effect. Now, this Damp, whereof we
speak is found most frequently, and most violent in the first sort of Metals,
viz. in these which are full of Cutters or Rifts, which gives some ground to
this conjecture of its cause. These Spaces which are found in Coal, or other
Metals, as Stone or Till, before the Coal begin to be dried by a Level, are
full of water, which is still in motion, as are all subterraneous springs,
whereof some are more violent, some more slow, conform to the passage they have
to the fountains above ground, where they discharge themselves. Now, for drying
these Coals, and rendering them workable, there is a necessity to cut a passage,
through which that water discharges it self quickly, it being large, and
admitting a great quantity at once, by virtue whereof; a great field is drained
at once, and the Sourse not being able to furnish so much water, as the Conduit
is able to convey, these Spaces in the body of the Metals, being emptied of
Water, must needs be filled with Air, which Air having little contact and
commerce, with the great body of Air above ground, and so has little or ^o
motion, corrupts in these places, and thereby becomes poisonable, so that when
any Animal is necessitat to draw it, and respire by it, it choaks them on a
sudden, just as standing Water, which being without motion corrupts, and
becomes poisonable, though happily not in so great a degree as the Air: the Air,
being a body much ^iner and purer, than Water, that holding good in it,
corruption optimi pessima. This is much confirmed by what is before asserted,
that in the Coals, whence the Water is drawn, and they drained, but not by
free-course, but by Force, as Pumping, and drawing by buckets, these Damps are
seldom or never found: because the passage of the Water being forced, it does
not so suddenly dry the Metals, as the other, whereby there is always left in
these Spaces some Water, which being it self in motion, keeps the Air also in
motion with it, and thereby the Air is kept from corruption, at least in such a
degree, as it is in the other. Hence we find, that in these kinds of Coals, the
Rooms underground are always wet, or for the most part they are so: whereas
in the other, there will be no Water found to wash a man's hands: and sometimes
the Coal through want of Water, becomes so dry, that it cannot be wrought in
great pieces, as others, but crushes in the very working, and when wrought, is
rendered useless, and will not at all burn. This puts me in mind of a very
pleasant conception of a worthy and learned Person, Doctor George Hepburn of
Monk-ridge, with whom I had occasion one day to discourse on this Subject. He
is of opinion that the Water is the Mother of the Coal, whereby it is preserved
fresh, and incorrupted, and that when the Water is drawn off, and this Damp
follows, it is not the Air, which succeeds in place of the Water, and is
corrupted for want of motion, that occasions it. But as we see, when the
corruption of a Liquor within a Vessel, when the Mother is gone, corrupts the
Vessel it self, and occasions an ill savor or taste in the Vessel; so that the
Coal being corrupted by the want of its Mother, the Water; corrupts the Air in
the subterraneous Spaces, as in Coal-Mines, Sinks, Caves, and other such like.
He had likewise another pleasant conception about the generation of Coal,
judging it to be formed gradually out of another Metal, as of Till, by the help
of Water, of which he himself may perhaps give an account* And though I be not
of his opinion in that matter, yet I must acknowledge, I was taken with it, and
shall be glad to see a more full account of it from him, than he had access to
do in the short conference we had.

The effects of this Damp are first, it hinders the burning of all combustible
matter, as Candle, Coal, Pitch, Sulphur, etc. so that if you take a Torch
lighted, and let it down to a Sink, where the Ill Air is prevalent in the time,
it shall straightway extinguish it. Or take a Coal, which is burning, and let
it down, it shall not only extinguish the Flame, but shall make the Coal in an
instant dead, and as cold as never heat had been in it. But the most dangerous
effect is, its killing of living Creatures, whereby many persons have been
suddenly killed. Some in going down to a Sink, where it has been powerful,
have fallen out of the Rope, and perished. Others have been choked, and yet
have gotten out by the help of others in a sudden, and have remained a
considerable time without the least appearance of life, but yet have at last
recovered. Yet it has been observed, that some of these persons that have been
so struck with the Damp, and recovered, have had always some lightness of
Brain thereafter, and never so settled as formerly. This I know to have
happened to one, whom I have seen so, many times thereafter.

What has been its effects on some Animals, whereof you have made Experiment,
I leave to the account you have given. One thing I shall only mention, which to
me seems somewhat strange, that notwithstanding these Damps are so effectual,
and causes so suddenly the death of Animals, yet the Ratts, which are in some
of these places, where the Damps are most violent, are not reached by them. For
sometimes, when they are so powerful, that nothing that lives can enter under
ground, without sudden death, yet they continue there, and are not found to
diminish, even where they have no access to escape, by coming above ground. Or
if it should be imagined, they removed to some other place of the ground, where
the Damp is not, how is it, they are not as quickly choked with it, as Dogs
are, and other Animals, which at the first encounter are killed?

If it be inquired, how comes it to pass, that in these Fields of Coals, which
are dried fully (as was said) and to which these Damps are incident, because of
corrupted Air that remains within the Body of the Coal, or other Metals, how
comes it to pass (I say) that they are but sometimes incident, and are not
always found? For clearing this, it is certain, that even in the grounds,
where these Damps are most frequent, for the reasons abovementioned, yet they
are only powerful when the Wind blows from such a certain Point, as some
Chimneys, that do only smoke, when the Wind is in such an Airth. This is so
generally, and well known, that the Workmen observe it, and when they find the
Wind in such a Point, whence they fear the Damp, they will not enter under
ground, till trial be made of the Air, which they do in Sinks, by first letting
down a lighted Candle, or some burning Coals: which if they do not burn, then
there is no access to enter.

Secondly, the wind in which this Ill Air is most noxious, and hurtful, blows
from that Point, where the Field of Coal lies, that is not yet wrought, which
seems somewhat strange, and yet when duly considered, it will appear
abundantly consonant to reason. An example of this is to be found in the Coal
of Tranent and Elphingston, the Streek whereof goes to the rise of the Hill
above ground, from N E to S W, as has been formerly observed. So that the
beginning of their Level, is at the N E point of the Streek, from which the
Coal has been wrought up along the Streek toward the S W, the Wastes lying
all toward the N E. Yet when the Wind blows from N E, or N, or almost from any
other Point of the Compass, they are not troubled with this Damp. But if it
blow from S W, and blow hard, they are in hazard to encounter it. And though
the Damp is not always found when that Wind blows (whereof there may be some
particular cause) yet it is never observed in another Wind, whether it blow
less or mo^e: the reason whereof may probably be, that the Wind blowing from
other Points, as from N, or N E, has more access to enter the Wastes under
ground, and move the Air that is in them, toward the face of the unwrought
Coal, whence is supposed to proceed the corrupted Air, that lurks in the Rifts
and Cutters thereof, (from which the Water is drawn away,) and occasions the
Damp* Now this Air being moved by the force of the Wind, keeps the corrupt Air
from coming out, it being stronger then the other. Whereas, upon the contrary,
while the Wind blows from S W, it entering the empty Rooms, drives the Air
under ground from the face of the unwrought Coal, down toward the old wastes,
which have their course from the beginning of the Level. By which means, the
Air, that is corrupted within the bowels (to speak so) of the Coal, comes out
to the Wastes, without resistance, it being certain, that Fluid Bodies, as
Water, and Air, inclines to move toward that place, where they meet with the
least resistance. Hence is it, that the more direct the Wind be, in blowing
against the ^ace of the unwrought Coal, as is the Wind from N E, the Ill Air is
the more repelled and driven back, but the more oblique it be, as are the Winds
from these Points, that are nearest to S W, the Air is not so good and free:
which difference is known by the burning of Candles, they burning with greater
difficulty in these Winds, than in others, which blow from these Points nearest
to N, and N E. Some are of opinion, this Ill Air (in those places we have been
speaking of) comes from the great Wastes, that ly above the un-wrought Coal,
and by strong S W Winds is driven through the Cutters thereof. Or the Wind
blowing from that Point, and coming through these Cutters, brings the corrupted
Air alongs with it, even as, after a shower of Rain, a spait of Water comes, and
carries alongs with it, both the foul Water and the clean, it meets with.
Though this may be probable, which seems to be your own opinion, yet the other
seems to be more probable.

The other sort of Damp, is that which they call want of Air; and though the
term be not altogether proper (there being no space without some Air) yet there
is a want of Air, which is sufficient for respiration of Animals, or for the
burning of fire. This is ordinarily ^ound in the vunning of Mines under ground,
for co^veying of Water from Coal, or other Metals, or in the waste Roo^s of
Coals, where the Sinks are very deep, and to evite the charge thereof, there is
some necessity to work as far under ground for winning of Coal, as is possible,
without new Sinks. The cause seems to be, that the Air under ground, in such
cases, wants communication with the Air above ground, because it is found, that
by giving more communication, the evil is cured. Whence comes the necessity of
Air-holes in Levels, which are so many Sinks set down, for no other use, but
for giving Air to the Workers. Some are of opinion, that this defect might be
supplied by the blowing of Bellows, from above ground, through a Stroop of
Leather, or of some other thing, which must run along to the end of the Level,
for keeping the Air there^in motion. But I have not yet heard, that it has
been made practicable.

The effects of this Damp are not so dangerous, as these of the other. It Is
true, it will kill Animals, and extinguish burning Coals and Candles, but not
so suddenly as the former; and so people are not so readily surprised by it.
The other seems to kill by some poisonous quality: in this Animals dies for
want of sufficient Air for respiration. Therefore in advancing in a Coal Room,
or Level where this is, you shall see the flame of the Candle grow less and
less by degrees, till at last it be totally extinguished, and the person
entering, shall find the difficulty of breathing grow greater, as he advances
forward, till at last he cannot breath at all. Hence it is, that few or none
are killed by this kind of Damp, and all its prejudice is, that it renders the
work more chargeable, when there is a necessity to remove it.

For that, which they call Wildfire, it being a thing not incident, but to
very few Coals, is less known, than any of the rest of the accidents that
follows Coals. The account I have heard of it, is, that in some Coals, which
naturally are full of Oil, and that are (as they call them) fatt Coals, there
is a certain Fire, which is as a Meteor, and I judge, that from its resemblance
to Ignis fat^^s, which the Vulgar terms Wild fire, it has the sa^e name. It
seems to be composed of some fatt oily vapor, that goes out of the Coal, the
Pores thereof being once opened, which is kindled after the same manner, as
those fires above ground are, which are most ordinarily found in fatt, and
marrish ground. Of this fire it is reported, that in the day time, while the
Work men, are working in the Coal-roomes, it comes to no height, though it be
sometimes seen in little holes of the Coal-wall, shining like kindled sulphur,
but without force: but when the Workmen are once removed, and have stayed out
all night, it gathers to such a strength, that at its first encountering with
fire, which the Coal-hewers are necessitate to have, by taking in of light, it
breaks out with such a violence, that it kills any person, it finds in its way.
The reason, why it is without this force, while the Workmen are in the place,
seems to be this, that they working with such violence, and motion as they do,
do certainly move the Air considerably, it being contained in so narrow a
place, as a Coal-room. And this Air being violented by motion, moves that oily
vapor, whereof the fire is formed, so that it gets not liberty to unit it
self, being dissipated by the motion of the Air. But so soon, as the Air is
still, and quiet, after the Workmen are gone home, it units it self, and
gathers force, and therefore, so soon, as it meets with fire, which is more
forcible, than the flame that is kindled in it, it rarifieth; the sulphurious
parts being kindled, and forces it self out, as powder out of a Gun. For it
has been observed, that if any person stay in the Coal-sink while it breaks
within the Coal-room, they are in danger of being killed. The ordinary way by
which the hurt of it is prevented, is by a person that enters, before the
Workmen, who being covered with wet^sack-cloath, when he comes near the
Coal-wall, where the Fire is feared, he creeps on his belly, with a long Poll
before him, with a lighted candle on the end thereof, with whose flame the
Wildfire meeting, breaks with violence, and running alongs the roof, goes
out with a noise, at the mouth of the Sink, the person that gave fire, having
escaped, by creeping on the ground, and keeping his face close to it, till it
be over-passed, which is in a moment.

The place, where this was most known, was in a Coal be-west Leith, in a piece
of Land called Werdy, which for want of Level, and the violence of that Fire,
the Owners were forced to abandon.

I come now to the last part, which I promised to speak of, namely of the best
way for trying of grounds, to find Coal, where never any has hitherto been
discovered, and of carrying on of Levels, for draining the Water of Coals and
making it workable. As to the first part, there are but three ways. First by
sinking, which is most chargeable, in regard, that in such grounds, where the
Metals are all entire* Water abounds, and this does not only bring the Master
under a necessity of great expense for drawing the Water, but also rendereth it
impossible to get sinked to any deepness, which may suffice, for giving an
account of all the Metals to be found, within the field, that may be rendered
workable. There was a second way invented to supply this defect, which is by
boaring, with an instrument made of several Rods of Iron, which boareth through
the Metals, and tryes them. This way in my opinion, is worse then the former.
For first, if the Coal ly deep, in the place where you try by boaring, it
becomes almost as tedious, and expensive, as sinking, the drawing of the ^odes,
consuming so much time, in regard it must be frequently done. Next, in boaring,
suppose the nature of the Metals, be found, yet thereby their course can never
be known, till they be sinked, which is one of the things most considerable in
the search of a Coal, because thereby is known, whether it be workable, with
advantage or not, and whether it be possible to draw Water from it by a Level,
or otherwise. Lastly, this way leaves the Master at an uncertainty
(notwithstanding the Coal had been found) of its goodness, as to its nature,
and as to its thickness. As to its goodness, because all that is found of the
Coal, by this boaring instrument, is some small dr^ss, which remains after the
washing of the thing that is brought up in the wumble, by which none can judge
of its goodness, or badness. As to its thickness, because it is impossible to
discern exactly, when the boaring-instrument has passed the Coal: all the rule
for trying thereof, being the kind of Metal that is brought up in the wumble.
Now, I have known in my experience a Coal boared, which the Boarer by that rule
has judged four foot in thickness, yet when it came to be sinked, has not
proven one. The reason whereof, is obvious, because the boaring-irons, being
long, and weighty in lifting them up, and down, they break the Coal, already
pierced; and this falling down among the Metals, they are piercing, and being
found in the wumble with them (especially when the Metal under the Coal, is a
black Till) gives ground to imagine, that all that time, they have been
peircing a Coal, and so consequently, the Coal must be of such a thickness.

The last, and best way of trial, is that which is termed an ranging over the
Metals. For doing whereof, this method, is to be observed. Suppose there be any
place within the ground to be searched, where the course of Metals can be seen,
as in the banks of a River, or Rivolet, or Sea-banks, when the place is near
the Sea, then consideration must be had how far the lowest of these Metals, can
go before they Crop out to the Grass, which will be known by observing the Dipp
or declination of the Metals, and the Rise of the ground above, whereof a just
allowance must be given, and having dug before the said Crop, you shall
certainly find, the Metal, that is next under it, and if that prove not Coal,
keeping the former proportion, you must advance, and digg before its Crop, and
so shall you find, the next Metal under it, and so still, till you have tried
your ground, and found the Crops of all your Metals within it. But if there be
no Water-banks, or such like, to give you the first view, of the course of your
Metals, then must you sink first at random, and having once past the Clay, you
will readily overtake some Metals, whereby you will know the course of the
rest, and having once found the Dipp and Rise, you must follow the method of
ranging already prescribed, except the ground so to be tried, contains not
within it self the Crops of the Metals, the body whereof lies in it, whether of
Coal, or Stone, in that case, there is no way to try, but by sinking, or
boaring. The way of ranging is conspicuous in the following figure.

Figure 11.


The piece of ground to be tried, is P N, where there are several Seams of
Metals, that Cropps out at the Points K L M N. Suppose the lowest to be the
Coal, viz. I N, for which you are to make trial. You Digg first at K, without
the Cropp of the Seam F K, and you dig till you find the other Seam of Stone G
L, at the Point C. Following the Rule before given, you advance before its
cropp, and diggs at L, and finds the other Seam of Stone H M, at the point D:
from which you also advance, and diggs before its cropp, at the point M, and
finds your Coal at the point E. But, if by advancing over the cropps of these
Metals, which comes out from under one another, you find no Coal; then you are
to range backward, for the cropps of Metals lying above these, where happily the
Coal may be, as at O, and P. This in my opinion, is the most certain and exact
way of trying Fields for Coal, or any other Metal of that nature, and least
chargeable of all others.

The second of this last part, I promised to speak of, was in order to Levels,
or Coal-Mines, which are nothing else, but Conduits or Gutters made under
ground, for conveying of the Water from the Coal, and so rendering it workable.
It seems that a very little time before this, that way of Mineing under ground
has not been fallen upon. For there are to be found Coals wasted in their
Cropps only; for conveying the Water whereof, they have made a Conduit, or
Level, which has been open to the Surface, like a great Ditch, some whereof
have been ten or twelve fathom in their deepness.

The beginning of the Level (to keep the term used) must always be at the
lowest part of the Field, where the Coal lies to be dried. Some whereof, by the
rising of the ground, and the Streek of the Coal rising that way (as we show
before) gives the advantage of a Free Level, that is, when the Water comes
above ground of its own accord, without being forced by drawing. In others,
there is a necessity of Engines to draw the Water from the lowest part of the
Level, and bring it above ground; which Engines are of several sorts. As when
men drew with ordinary Buckets, or when there is a horse-work, or water-work,
and that either by a Chain with Plates, and a Pump, or with a Chain and
Buckets; all which are very common, especially those we have in Scotland, they
being capable to draw but a very small draught, making only use of one Sink for
that effect. But there are to be seen in the North of England, in Bishopric,
Waterworks, by which Water is drawn above 40 fathom in perpendicular, but not
all in one Sink. The manner whereof is thus, there being a Sink from the end of
their Level, to the surface of the earth, where their Works are going, 40
fathom deep, which must dry the Coal-Sinks at 60 or 70, which ly above the
Banks of the River, where the Waterworks are situated, there is first one 40
fathom deep from the Grass. Another in a right Line from that, of 24. Another
of 12; upon all which there are Waterworks. In the first Sink the Water is
drawn from the bottom 12 fathom, and thence conveyed into a Level or Mine,
which carries it away to the second Sink. By the second ^ork, the Water is
drawn out of the second Sink 14 fathom, from the bottom, and set in by a Level
to the third Sink, which being only 12 fathom deep, the Water-work sets it
above ground. The form of the Engine is after this manner. In the first Sink
there is an Outter-wheel moved, as other Milns are, by the Water of the River:
upon the end of the Axle-tree of which Wheel, there is a Ragg-wheel, turning
vertically, as does the Outer-wheel* This Ragg-wheel by a Nutt, or Trinle turns
another, which moves horizontally, the Axle-tree whereof goes right down in the
Sink, and may be is 8 or 10 fathom; at the end whereof there is another Ragg,
which by a Nutt turns another Wheel, which goes vertically as the first Ragg,
and causes another Wheel with a long Axle-tree turn as the first, and so down
till it come to the Wheel, which turns the Axle-tree, by which the Chain is
drawn. The second Sink, has such another Engine, but not so many Wheels, in
regard it is not so deep. The third, has only one single Wheel, whereby the
Water is drawn above ground.

The most curious of these Engines, that are to be seen, are at Ravensworth
near to Newcastle, which belongs to Sir Thomas Liddel, a most ingenious
Gentleman, who, for procuring a Fall of Water, which may serve the Wheels of
all the three Sinks, has erected the first work upon Pillars like a Windmill,
pretty high above ground, from which the Water falling, makes the second go
closs above ground. And to make the Water fall to the third, the whole Wheel is
made go within the surface of the ground, which terminats at a River under the
Works, which Mine is of a considerable length. Where Water cannot be had to
make such Works go, they use Horse-works, but not with so good success, being
more chargeable, and not having so much force and power, as the Waterworks.
But I am of opinion, that Wind-works might serve well, where Water cannot be
had; and when no Wind should happen to blow, the same Works might be supplied
by Horse: and that the Wind, when it blows but ordinarily, has as much force,
as so much Water, which is made use of for turning such Wheels, is to me
unquestionable. For I have seen in Holland, a Windmill, that by the motion of
the Outter-wheel, caused seven pair of Millstones to go at once, besides
another motion for bringing the Victual from the ground, four or five Stories
high, to be Grund. And several Saw-Mills, which besides six or seven great
Saws, they caused go, did by another motion bring up from the Water great Trees
like Ship-Masts, to be fawen, and placed them right against the Saw; all which
could not be but of greater weight, than 10 or 12 fathom of Chain with Buckets,
or Plates for drawing of Water.

But to return, for the right making of a Level, the true hight of the ground,
where the Coal lies must be first taken, that it may be known, how much of the
field can be drained by it; which must be done, either with a Quadrant, or with
an Instrument made express. Then care must be taken, to take the lowest part
for the mouth of the Level, that the field can afford, and from that it must be
carried in a straight line toward that part of the field, where the Coal is
thought to be encountered by the Mine. In working whereof, two things are in a
special manner to be reguarded. First, that the Level be wrought without
ascent, or descent: the best way for trying this, being by the surface of the
Water passing through it, which ought to be as little moving, as can be: for
the loss of one foot of Level, which the ground gives, is a loss of a
considerab^e parcel of Coal to be dug, especially if it be flate. It there
occur any Metals, which are impregnable, in the course of the Level, so that it
is impossible, to follow so straight a line, in regard the Mine must be wrought
over the top of that stone, which is unworkable, in that case, there is but one
of two to serve the loss of Level; either the Coal rises i^ Streek toward
which the Mine is carried, and if that be, then after that stone is past, the
Level must be carried, as low, as it was before it encountered the same, and
the course of the Water shall not be obstructed, because the sourse, viz. the
Coal from whence the Water comes, rising higher than the Stone, the Water shall
easily pass over that hight. Hence it is, that we see in some Coals, that have
been wrought, at the lowest point of their Streek by a drawing-sink, and the
Streek rising from that point, the Water that has come off the Coal, being in
its Sourse higher, than the mouth of that drawing-sink, has mad^ it to
overrun, and serve to discharge all the Water, that comes therefrom. But, if
the Mine be run to a Coal, that after it has overtaken it, rises no higher in
Streek, than the Mine it self, the Water that comes from it, will not pass over
any hight in its way, but will be unquestionably stopped. Therefore, in case
such an impediment could not be removed, as many times such Metals will fall
in, which are unworkable in a direct line, the use of a Siph^n might be tried,
which would unquestionably supply the loss of about 32 foot of Level, this
being the hight in Perpendicular, to which the Pressure of the Air, is able to
raise Water up through a Siphon.

The next thing to be observed in carrying on of Levels, are the Air-holes, for
which there is a necessity indispensable. In setting down whereof, care must be
had, that they be not directly upon the Mine, lest rubbish falling through from
above ground, should stop, and obstruct the same, and so obstruct the course of
the Water; and therefore it is better they be set down at a side, their only use
being to communicate fresh Air to the Workmen, which if it could be otherwise
supplied (as I think it not utterly impossible) would render the charge of the
Coal-works a great deal more easy.

Other things might be spoken to of Levels, as that some run with the course of
Metals, they pass through; and that some run against that course; and of
bringing Level from the Dip of an upper-Coal, which has a Level of its own, to
dry a Coal lying under it, which cannot be otherwise done. But these things
being common and obvious to any, who have but the smallest skill and
experience, I shall forbear.

This confused account, your importunity has drawn from me, for which if your
Book suffer censure, which I grant it may do, as to this part of it, you are to
blame your self, and so I rest and am, etc.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
THat thou may know the rise, and occasion of this Postscript, which I have
subjoyned, I shall give thee this short account. When this Book was first
committed to the Press, I sent an intimation thereof to several persons, whom I
judged would encourage it, yet to none, but to such, in whose kindness I had
confidence, and whom I judged my real friends. Among others, I sent over to
Saint Andrews one of my Edicts, to one or two there, in whom I trusted, but in
stead of a kindly return from them, to whom I had written most affectionatly,
they wrote back a Letter, wherein they superciliously condemn the purposes of
this Book, before ever they had seen them, which is as follows.

Sir,
I Received yours on Saturday last, and having occasion the same night to be in
company with many of the Masters of the University, I made known your
resolution to them, showing them your Edict, and desiring their Contributions:
some were not pleased, that ye call the Doctrine concerning the weight and
pressure of the Water in its own Element, new, seeing Archimedes has affirmed,
and demonstrated in his Books de infidentibus humido the same Geometrically
2000 years ago; others affirmed that it was so far from being new, that they
would undertake to demonstrat the event of any of all your Experiments a priore
from Archimedes his grounds, yea, in general of any Hydrostatical Experiment,
seeing they look upon it, as a Science long ago perfected. Some said, as to
Diving, that they imagined any method better then that of Melgims, which is now
v^lgar, to be impossible. As to the Observation of the Sun, or Moons motion in
a second of time, yea, or much less, it can be done most exactly by a
Telescope, and a Pendulum, but serves to no purpose, seeing that same motion can
be had infinitely more exact by preportion, from observations of a considerable
interval; for so the Astronomers collect all the mi^dle motions of the Planets.
As for the Observations of Coal-sinks, latitude of Edinburgh, and its variation
of the Needle, they may assuredly increase the Historical part of Learning: yet
many of the Masters here imagine themselves concerned in credit not to promote
the publication of any thing, which seems to declare our Nation ignorant (by
calling them new, and unheard of) of these things known over all the World
these many years among really Learned Men, albeit they be debated amongst
ridiculous Monkish Philosophers. I conceive, ye would do best to undeceive this
University, by sending us some of your most abstruse Theorems, and surprising
Experiments; which if they be not evidently and clearly deduceable from
Archimedes, or Stevinus, who did write long ago, or rather, if they be not the
same with theirs: ye may assure your self that this University will take away
at least all the obligations ye have sent here; otherwise, I am afraid, I
shall not be able to prevail with them. I hope ye will pardon this my freedom I
use with you, and return an answer with the first occasion, to

St. Andrews, December. 27, 1671. Sir, Your most humble Servant.


After the receipt of this, being unwilling to make it a ground of debate, I
returned a most discreet answer, thinking to conquer their humor with
civility, and kindness, but not long after, hearing of their clamor against
the Intimation, and of their dissuading others, who would willingly (I suppose)
have condescended, I was necessitated to send this return, for a joint answer
to them both, for besides this, another of the same kind came also, of which
hereafter.

Sir,
I Received yours, of the Date of December 27. 167^. and though it was a little
unpleasant, yet I took it very kindly from (...) from a person I judged
ingenuous, as my return of January 9. 1672. (...) witness, wherein I did not in
the least resent any thing you wrote; neither would I ever have done, if you,
and some others especially with you, had not proclaimed publicly, what you and
they had written to me privately, the noise whereof, I have heard here, by
several persons who came from the place. Therefore, Sir, you must pardon me, if
now at last, after so much silence, I return you this answer, for no other end,
but for my own vindication, in what I have lately Printed, and am about to
Print. I am very much then surprised with the answer, that^ you and they have
returned, such a rank smell of preju^i^e and envy, I find in it. I am rewarded
evil for good; for I minded nothing but good will; else, you and they should
never have been troubled with my proposal. If they had affected the reputation
of Learning, there was another way to it, then the course they have taken;
namely to condemn with such a deal of superciliousness, as derogatory to the
credit of the Nation, forsooth, the labors of one, that has done more for the
credit thereof, then they have done as yet. They might have minded the saying
of the grave Historian, Nam famam atque gloriam, Bonus atque ignavus aeque sibi
exoptant: ille vera via n^titur, huic, quia Bonae ^tt^s desunt; dolis atque
fallaciis contendit. And for undeceiving of the University, as I am very far
from counting such persons the University, so have I more respect for it, and
all Learned Persons in it, then to account their deed, the deed of the
University. As for what they can do; for promitting the work I have now at the
Press, I value it not at the rate of showing them so much as one of my
The^rems: for, if they have ^narled so much, (...) but at one word, in the
intimation of the work; what would they do, if they had more of it? which yet
must stand firm, unless they (for it is a matter of fact, and cannot be
contradicted with Sophistry and Nonsense) overthrow it, which I little fear,
as Cicero did Verres, Tab^l^s and Testibus ad singula indicia prolatis. Neither
will their imagination do it, for that cannot make factum infectum. It seems
to be a great weight, that they lay upon the force of their imagination, since
they are so confident, as to say, they imagine any method of Diving better then
that of Melgims, to be impossible, adeo familiare est hominibus supra vires
humanas credere, quicquid supra illorum captum sit. As for these others, that
would demonstrat a priori, the event of all my Experiments from the grounds of
Archimedes, as I doubt not, but they would, if they could, so in this they
bewray their want of skill: for Archimedes wanted a necessary requisite, which
I go upon for my deductions. And though it were true (which they say) that all
my Theorems were demonstrable a priori from the grounds of Archimedes, yet this
does not hinder them to be both new, and un-heard-of, as if new, and
un-heard-of conclusions, might not be deduced from old principles. In this they
are so much the better, and not the worse. And whereas they say, they look upon
the Hydrostaticks, as a Science long since perfected, in this they do yet more
discover their weakness: for what one Science has yet come to its perfection?
Nay, has not this Pedantick humor been the great bane of good Learning, that
Sciences were already perfected? So that Se^eca said truly, Puto multos
pervenire potuisse ad sapientiam, nisi putassent se pervenisse. As for the
representing of the Sun or Moons motion to the eye (^or that should surely have
been taken in) that you say, serves to no purpose, to me is a little uncouth,
considering how much it conduces to the accuracy of Astronomical Observations,
beyond what the former Ages could attain to. And whereas you say, it can be had
infinitely more exactly by Observations of a considerable interval, as
Astronomers collect all the middle motions of the Planets, but I say, even
those intervals should have been far better known, if they had by this mean,
and the Oscillatory Clock been observed; so whatever arguing by the rule of
proportion, may do for showing the Suns motion in seconds, and thirds, it
reaches not these accuracies, that are reached by this inv^ntion, so long as
the Sense cannot deprehend, and six them. As for the Observations of
Coal-sinks, etc. which you say, may assuredly increase the Historical part of
Learning; are they not for this the more useful, since the Scientifical part of
Learning depends so much on the Historical part, and which conduces more
thereto, then all the precario^s principles of Cartesius, Epicurus, and the
like; who in stead of giving us an account of the World that God made, have
given us imaginary ones of their own making: so that such a History, as Natural
Philosophy requires, is wisely accounted among the desiderata in Learning by
all sound Philosophers to this day. So much in answer to yours, and I rest

Edinburgh, Feb. 22. 1672. Your Servant.


IN answer to this last, there came to my hands from St. Andrews a Letter
unsubscribed by any Master, full of barbarous railings, passing all bounds of
civility, against my self, friends, and works, which, if the Contrivers had not
been more galled with reason, then injuries, I suppose they would have forborne.
And thinking this not sufficient, they would needs aggravate the wrong, by one
circumstance more, which they either did out of disdain, or fear, not daring to
own what they had contrived, in making the Bedale of the University subscribe
it. And to give a further proof of their insatiable malice, they must needs
distribute copies thereof, as glorying in their shame, one whereof was sent
over to Edinburgh unsubscribed also. Now, let any indifferent person judge,
whether or not, I have not reason to do what I have done. They have been the
first proclaimers, though in a clandestine way, and why not I next, in this
way. But lest, they think, they have marred as much the tranquillity of my mind
therewith, as they have their own. I shall answer in the words of the Moralist,
Eleganter Demetrius noster solet dicere, eodem loco sibi esse voces
imperitorum, qu^ventre redditos crepitus. Quid enim inquit, mea refert, sursu^
isti, five deorsum sonent. And let this stand, for the railing part of the
letter.

But first, whereas he should have spoken to the contents of thi^ Book, he
falls foul upon my last Piece, entitled, Ars nova, and magna, gravitatis,
and levitatis, snarling eight or nine times, at the bare title, like a C^r at
the horse heels, when he cannot reach the rider. This lay not in his way, doing
herein like Vejento the blin^ Courtier of Domitian, who, when he should have
turned his face to the right hand, where the Sturgeon lay, turned it to the
left.

-- Nam plurima dixit
In laevam conversus: at illi dextra jacebat
Bellu^.
So that concerning all these invectives, I may say, sed quid ha^ ad Rhombum.
But what other can be expected, ubi furor arma ministrat. But seeing his Letter
shows, how sick he is of the plague of malice, and envy, I am so far from
storming at him, that I pit^ him, though he may be a Master, and teacher of
others, and wish him to teach himself.

-- Servitium acre
Te nihil impellit? nec quicquam extrinsecus intrat
Quod nervos agitet? Sed si intus and jecore agro
Nafcantur domini, qui tu impunitior exis
Atque hic, quem ad strigiles scutica and metus egit herilis.
That I do not interpret this (Reader) excuse me, for I am speaking (I suppose)
to a Master of an University, and a gentleman too, of very high pretenses, as
to learning. And yet I cannot but think strange of two things. F^rst, that he
returns not the least Latin sentence in answer to mine, no not so much as
pertinent language in his Mother Tongue. What? An Universityman, and no return
in Latin to these sayings, of so grave Authors, or at least in pertinent
English. The other, that he no more understands, these words, as Cicero did
Verres, tabulis and testibus ad singula indicia prolatis, than the Curat did
the Modicum bonum that he was desired to prepare for the Bishops dinner. For,
whereas he says, as for your Latin sentences, where ar our doli, and
fallaciae, tabulae and testes, sapientia ad quam putamus nos pervenisse. To
pass the first and last question, of which anon, the second was most ^mproper
for him to ask at me, who did put him to it, to overthrow the title of my
Experiments, to wit New, not by Sophitry, and Nonsense, but as Cicero did
Verres, tabulis and testibus, ^y proof and Witnesses; this he should not have
asked, but an^wered. I am confident a Boy in the second Class, could better
^ave understood these words, than this man. And for the first ^uestion, where
are our doli, and fallaciae? Why should he ask it, seeing the design of his
Letter may be evidently seen, to put Royal Societies, and Universities between
him and me, in the front, whom I have not made my party, but to whom I owe all
due respect; and such a poor pitiful fellow as the Bedale in the Re^r, in
causing him subscribe his letter thus,

March 14. 1672.

Mr. Patrick Mathers, Arch-bedale to the University of St. Andrews.

Is not this to do, as the Butcher did, who sought his knife, when it was
sticking in his teeth. If the University ordered this subscription, it would
have been said, at the command of the University. If not, it cannot be purged
from a false insinuation: and the University may justly resent it, that their
public servant, has been so abused. If the fear of a counterblow has made
him afraid, to put his hand to it, he has done as the Ape did, that thrust the
Cats foot into the fire, because he durst not do it himself, and given a
palpable discovery of the diffidence he had of his cause. If he has done it,
to put indignity on his adversary, he has missed his mark, for as a certain
Writer says well, Infamy is as it is received. If thou be Mud-wall it will
stick: if Marble it will rebound: if thou storm at it, it is thine: if thou
despise it (as I do this) it is his. But besides this, he endeavors to put
Mr. James Gregory between him and me also, and brings him in speaking of my
writings, with such a deal of disdain and sauciness, ut nihil supra. What? was
Mr. James Gregory such an eminent person, that he could not speak his thoughts
himself, but needs you Sir, for a Proxy, and Chancellor to speak for him. If
Mr. James Gregory will speak to me, what you have spoken in his name, he shall
have an answer* But I have no mind to gratify so far your doli, and fallacia,
as to fall on any man upon your word, having so little confidence of your
common honesty. This were perversam gratiam gratificari. Wherefore passing his
impertinent railings, I come to answer, what he has returned to my purposes in
my last. And that he may get no wrong, I shall set down the very words of his
Letter, viz; (...) to what you write concerning the imperfections of Sciences:
the Scientifical pairt of Geographie is so perfected, that there is nothing
required for the projection, description, and situation of a place, which
cannot be done, and demonstrat. The truth is they have overshot themselves in
this, though they be ashamed to acknowledge so much; for what a pitiful shift
is it, to bring Geography for an instance of a perfected Science, when so much
of the Earth remains to this day unknown altogether, as the Universal Mapps
testify. Of the known parts, how little is there to this day sufficiently
described by the exactest Mapps, that time, and labors of men have yet
produced. And now to retort your own question upon your self, ubi est sapientia
ad quam putatis vos pervenisse? O but says the Author, it is perfected as to
its scientifical part. But I pray you Sir, what is this, though you may be a
teacher of Logic of no small esteem with your self, and disdain of others, but
to play the Sophister, by the Fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter: Geography is perfected as to its scientifical part, therefore it
may be called a perfected Science, when it is so defective as to the Historical
part. If Astronomy to this day be a Science not perfected, through want of its
Historical part, shall not Geography be so likewise. But further Sir, for the
Scientif^cal part of Geography, which you allege to be perfected, in this also
you argue against the rules of Logic, in committing that same Fallacy over
again, for giving and not granting what you say, that the Scientifical part of
Geography were perfected, as to the projection, description, and situation of a
place, is it for this perfected as to the Scientifical part simpliciter, which
you are obliged to prove, else you say nothing to the purpose. And what I pray
you, is that poor alleadgence you make, in comparison of these things, wherein
Geography is defective, even as to the Scientifical part? Who has spoken yet
sufficiently to the surface, and hight of the Sea above the Earth, the hight of
the Hills, and Mountains, Longitude of places, nay the circumference of the
Earth it self? Answer this question, if you can, Have thou perceived the
breadth of the earth, declare if thou know it all? Job. 38. 18. And now Sir,
I must put you to it again, ubi est sapientia ad quam putatis vos perverisse.

His next answer runs thus, The Scientifical part of the Optics is so
perfected, that nothing can be required for the perfection of the sight, which
is not demonstrat, albeit men's hands cannot reach it. And these being the
objects, of the foresaid Sciences (you should Sir, have said, the whole objects
of the foresaid Sciences, else you still play the Sophister) your authority
shall not persuade him, or us, that it is altogether improper to call them
perfect. But mark Reader, how the force of reason makes these Authors to
succumb^ for whereas they should have said, that it is not improper to call
them perfect, they qualify it thus, it is not altogether improper. And again,
your authority shall not persuade us, that it is altogether improper. But ( my
Masters) I do not crave that my authority may persuade you, but reason.
Wherefore to return: the Scientifical part of the Optics (say they) is so
perfected, that nothing can be required for the perfection of the sight, which
is not demonstrat, albeit men's hands cannot reach it. But where Sir, and by
what person is this done? Show me the man, (if you can) that has done it. But
though all this were true, were therefore, either the Optics, Dioptricks, or
Catoptricks perfected Sciences? Who has yet sufficiently explained the manner
how we see, far less how Birds, and Fishes, Beasts, and Insects see? How the
Eagle mounting aloft spyeth her prey from a far. Who has spoken sufficiently
to the nature of colors? For these also belong to the Optics, or of light,
and of the infraction, and refraction thereof. The learned Lord Verulam was not
of your mind Sir, when he wrote thus, De forma lucis, quod non debita (...)
facta fuerit inquisitio (praeserti^^ cum in Perspectiva strenue elabor^nt
homines) stupenda quaedam negligentia censeri possit. Etenim, nec in
perspectiva, nec alias, aliquid de luce, quod valeat, inquisitum est.

If Mr. Newton has been of this Authors mind, he should not have attempted the
late invention of his Span-long Dioptrical-catoptrical Prospect, whereby
Jupiter his Satellites, and Venus horned are to be seen. And if Mr. Hook, had
been of his mind, he should not have made his late Proposal of Telescopes,
Microscopes, Scotoscopes, by figures as easily made, as those that are plain
and spherical, whereby the light, and Magnitude of Objects, may be prodigio^sly
increased, and whatsoever else has hitherto been attempted, or almost desired
in Dioptricks, may be accomplished. Where observe (Reader) how that ingenuous
person, is so far from the windy language of this Author, that he does not say,
whatsoever can be required for the perfection of sight is demonstrat, or any
thing like it, but whatsoever has been hitherto attempted, or almost desired.
For who can tell, what shall be found out hereafter, even in these things. To
them we may borrow the words of the Poet, Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus.
So, Sir, I still put you to that question, Ubi est sapientia ad quam put at is
vos pervenisse?

In the next place he falls upon the Hydrostaticks, which formerly he looked
upon as a Science perfected long ago. But because in his answer, he in effect
yields the cause, I pursue him no further. Habemus confitentem reum, while he
expressly grants, there are many things yet (says he) relating to the
proportion and acceleration of the motion of Fluids, which are yet unknown. As
for his reflections upon what I have written in my Ars Nova, concerning a
perpetual motion, which I never intended to demonstrat, I leave them as indicia
agri and impotent is animi. I proceed to answer him i^ what he adds thus.
Only we cannot but admire your simplicity in this, Astronomy seeks always to
have the greatest intervalls betwix observations, and ye take that ye will give
an excellent way for observing the Sun or Moons motion for a second of time,
that is to say, as if it were a great matter, that there is but a second of
(...) betwix your observations. I wonder you say the eye should be added, for
the invention had been much greater had that been away. But what is this Sir,
but still to play the Sophister? Is not this the S^phism, ab ignor atione
Elenchi? for it does not contradict my conclusion, which is, that Astronomical
Observations, by this mean, and the Oscillatory Clock, may be made to a second
of time, which is of so great importance in Astronomy. But mark the Nonsense
(Reader) the invention (says he) had been much greater, if the eye had been
away: that is, the invention of this Observation had been much greater, if the
eye, that is, the Observation had been away. In this they have outshot
themselves also; and what they spoke unadvisedly before, they will now speak
deliberatly, and defend it rather by Sophistry and Nonsense, then yield to the
truth.

Has toties optata exegit gloria P^ena^. The Author adds, None will denay but
tha^ an g^id history of nature is absolutely the most necessary requisite
thing for learning, yet it is not like, that you are fit for that purpose, who
so fermelie believes the myrakles of the Vest, as to put them in Pre^t, and
records the semple Meridian Altitudes of Comets, and that only to halfs of
degrees, or little maire, as worthy noticing. If it were needful, I could
produce the passages of some of the most Learned Writers, of these last times,
that have recorded the like. Were they therefore unfit to write History? A
person of this Authors reading and learning, will soon find them out. If he do
it not, let him know, that I keep them for a reserve. To speak nothing of
Aristotle, who wrote a Book (...), extant to this day: was he therefore unfit to
write his Natural Histories? Prodigious relations, when the memory of them may
be found credible, and maintainable, such as mine are, ought not to be excluded
from a Natural History, or else the Learned Lord Verulam is much mistaken in
the third Aphorism of his preparatory to Natural and Experimental History: Nor
had he reason to carp at my Observations of the Comets, as long as he made none
himself. But they will speak for themselves to any that read them. Neither need
they him for a Common Crier, either to commend them, or discommend them; who,
when I was at these Observations, he possibly has not been so well exercised.

He sub^oyneth, However if you do this last part concerning Col^inks weill, and
all the rest be but an Ars Magna and Nova: ye may come to gain the repute of
being more fit to be as Collie^, than a Skollar. I must tell this Pedant, that
a Coal-hewer is a more useful person in his own station, to the Country, than
he is; and that the Science of Coal, and other Minerals, is far beyond any
knowledge this man has, or can teach. But, my Lords and Gentlemen, who are
Coal-Masters, mark this: if ye stand to the judgment of this Pedant, though ye
had never so much skill in these things, ye may come to gain the repute of
being more fit to be Coal-hewers, than Scholars; as if the knowledge of such
things were not a part of Natural Philosophy. It seems he has either forgotten
the common definition, or else has never known it, that Physica est Scientia
Co^poris Naturalis.

He sub^oyneth, Ye might have let alane the precarious principles, and
imaginary Worlds of Descartes, till yowr new inventions had made them so: for
it man be telled you Descartes, valued the History of Nature, as much as any
experimental Philosopher ever did, and perfected it more with judicious
Experiments, than ye would do by all appearance in ten ages. But I pray you,
Sir, did Descartes, and Epicurus, and the like, found their Philosophy on
Natural History, and not rather upon their own precarious principles: and
therefore have quite missed the mark, and method, that was requisite for the
advancement of Learning, and have been so far from grasping Nature, that it
has flowen out from among their hands. As for what he talks of Descartes,
perfecting Natural History by Experiments, if he had done it, as the Poet says
in another sense, Non mihi res, sed me rebus componere conor. he had done
right. But when he took pains on these; to force them to a compliance with his
own fancies, was not this to study Natural History, as Heretics do the
Scripture, and to be a Fanatic Philosopher, and a fit Master for the like of
you. The Proteus of Nature, must be bound with stronger Chains, then the
fantastic Nugae of Descartes, before he will tell his secrets. The vanity of
whose method may be seen in the Epicureans, who having laid down this
precarious principle, that the sense cannot err, do turn themselves into so
many shapes, to prove that the Sun is no bigger than a blew Bonnet.

In end, after he has given a Fling at my labors in Glasgow College, about
Universale, and Ens rationis, which I am not afraid he shall come the length of
in haste, for ought I can learn, he falls foul upon the two Lines I cited out
of Iuvenal, in the close of my answer to a passage in a Philosophical
Transaction: the Lines are. -- C^jus sapientia m^nstra^
Summos posse viros, magnaque exempla dat^ros
Vervecum in patria crassoque sub aere nasci.


Of these Lines, he writes thus, Of which (says he) the sense is not
understood^ except ye make your self the summus vir, and us all Verveces. I
suppose this may be the great credit, that ye say, ye have labored to gain to
your Nation, viz. to get us all the honorable Title of Weathers. But (Reader)
had these Learned Clerks been as skilful in Rhetorical Composition, and
Resolution, as in Algebraical, they would not have made such an Inference: for
the Argument is a minori ad majus. Nor was it ever intended for another end. As
for the honorable Title of Wedders, which they allege I have gained to them,
I cannot indeed affirm it; for if I should, some surely would judge me to have
wronged them as much in this, as I have done them right all alongs.

But, that thou may know (Reader) something more of the temper of those
persons I have to do with in this matter, take but the following words of one
of them, as they are transcribed out of a Letter written with his own hand to
me, after I had written to him a friendly Letter for obtaining the concurrance
of his acquaintance for advancing my Book, And they promise (to wit the Masters
promise) ye shall not want their concurrence, whereof ye may be sure,
especially having here your friend Mr. Gregory, your Cousin, and me here to put
them in mind. This is all at present, from, Sir, your real friend and servant.

Now, what shall be thought of one, who will speak so fair to your face, and
yet cut you with so many invectives behind backs, let any man judge.

Astutam vapido servat sub pectore vulpem
-- Hic niger est, hunctu Roman caveto.
But to give a further discovery of him, in the year 1661, a certain ingenious
Gentleman, that had not been bred a Scholar, by his own industry advanced so
far in the Mathematics, that he was able to set forth an Almanac, for which,
ingenuous and ingenious men should have commended him. But this Author, with
another, though he had never injured them, and without advertisement, fell upon
him like a couple of Mastives, upon a harmless Passenger, as if they would have
worried him in his reputation, in a Pr^gnostication they set forth, rateing and
abusing him out of measure: all the cause being some alleged mistakes, they
thought they found in some of his calculations, and in a Table in the end of
the Almanac, which he calls perpetual, and which they say, though falsely,
that it will not hold. What had that righteous man deserved at their hands, to
be so abused in Print by them? But that the desig^ is palpable, the raising of
reputation to themselves, upon the ruin of the names of others? And yet one of
them many years after, was necessitat, for fear of bodily harm, to crave him
pardon, with humble offer to his knee. In the Prognostication, he would needs
play the Poet in his Chronology, which the person whom he wronged, might have
found more fault with, with better reason, than he could do with him, for his
Calculations. What a stranger he is to the more polished part of Learning, for
all his high pretenses, these Verses will abundantly testify, some whereof
follow, that thou may know the rest, Tanquam ex ungue leonem. Since that the
Julian period first^began.
Since that of naught the Lord created man.
He should have said, Since that of dust the Lord created man. He adds, Since
Israel from Egypt Land did flee.
Since in Canaan, he made Hams sons to die.
Since Romulus did build his stately Roma.
Since Nabonassar, hence is that ancient ara.
Since Gregory helped the Calendar forlorn, etc.
Mark Reader: these Verses are of five feet, at least they should be so: but
how far he is from observing the Precept of that great Master of Poets, Primum
ne medio, medium ne discrepet imo. Will appear from his close, Since fair
Lucina fulfilled the Golden Number.
Since glistering Phoebus augmented Sundays Letter.
Euge Poeta.


It may be he will say, every man is not born to be a Poet. I answer, If the
Gentleman, whom he reviled, failed in a calculation, he ought to have been born
with, and encouraged: for there are many things that even a mediocrity is
commendable in; but Poesy is none of these. -- Mediocribus esse Poetis
Non Dii, non homines, non concessere Columnae.
However, for this, he may assure himself, that Perque Po^tarum n^nquam
celebrabere fastos.

But I leave him to the S^ty^ists of the time, Quo illustrius vapulet, for his
never being seen farther in Print, than by a railing Almanac, and ridiculous
Verses, the better whereof, might have been made by the Lord of Dysert.

It Is like this Antagonist, will set his Plumbeous Cerebrosity a work to rifle
some of my Writings, and shake his head, when he is put to a demur, as ever a
man did a bottle for Sack; but though he should, and I have nothing of his, but
an old Prognostication of the Year, 1661, to ripe up, yet who knows, but I may
meet with some of his Bajan-notes, or some of his wonders about Ens Rationis,
and Genus Logicae, that he is now sweating at. I am indeed at some
disadvantage, while he only lets a flisk at me, from under deck. Though I
have been a little s^ell in this reply, yet it is no wonder, considering what a
barbarous, and uncivil Pisle I met with, which I shall keep for a reserve. I
desire to live peaceably with all men. Neither shall I be soon provoked, so
long as they keep within the bounds of civility. If that be observed, I shall
thank them, for any mistake they shall let me see in my writings, if done with
reason, and without railing.

FINIS.

